A TREATISE OF SALOMONS MARRIAGE, OR, A CONGRATVLATION FOR THE HAPPY AND
HOPEFVLL MARRIAGE between the most illustrious and Noble Prince FREDERIKE the
V. Count Palatine of Rhine, Elector of the Sacred Roman Empire, and
Arch-Sewer, and in the vacancie thereof Vicar General: Duke of Bauaria, etc.
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter. AND THE MOST GRACIOUS AND
EXcellent Princess, the Lady Elizabeth, sole daughter unto the High and
Mighty Prince James, by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France and
Ireland. Joyfully solemnized upon the 14. day of February, 1612. In the Kings
Palace of White Hall in Westminster.

CANTICLES 6. 2. I am my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine. AT LONDON
Imprinted by F. K. for Thomas Man the elder, and William Welby, and are to be
sold at the Swanne in Paul's Churchyard, 1613.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND RIGHT NOBLE PRINCE, THE LORD FREDERIKE THE V.
County Palatine of Rhine, Elector of the Sacred Empire, and Arch-Sewer, Duke
of Bauaria, Knight of the most Honorable order of the Garter:
AND TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND virtuous Princess, the Lady Elizabeth his
wife: sole Daughter of the High and Mighty Prince, James, by the grace of God,
of great Britain, France and Ireland King: Increase of piety with prosperity
in this life, and true happiness and felicity in the next.
MOst illustrious and Gracious Princes, Solomon whose marriage song this
Treatise does as it were descant upon, thus says in the Canticles: Behold
winter is past, the rain is gone away, Cantic. 2. 11. 12
the flowers appear in the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come,
and the voice of the Turtle is heard in the land, etc. Arise my fair one, and
come away. This your Highness joyful day, happily, by Gods grace
accomplished, as the springtide does refresh us all: The chaste Turtle dove
has lovingly called to his fellow: the other singing birds do follow: then I
trust, your excellencies will give me leave in this common joy, as one of the
silly, yet cheerful birds sitting in the branches, to cherpe forth and
express my gladsome note among the rest: This happy day who could behold
without delight? Pulchrum mihi spectaculum dies illa atribuit. Hieron. vit.
Malchi.
those triumphant acclamations, and showtings forth of all well affected, who
could hear without great joy? which may be compared to the crowing of the
cock, Hexem. lib. 5. 24
which Ambrose thus describes: Hoc canente suas latro relinquit insidias, hoc
ipse Lucifer excitatus oritur, hoc canente deuotus affectus exilit ad
precandum: At his singing the thief does leave his lurking, the Sun does
hasten his rising, the devout affection betakes it to praying etc. So the
joyful voice of Gods people, for this princely marriage, as it shows the
sunshine of the Gospel, and by Gods grace promises continuance of true
devotion: so we trust it shall discover all treacherous practices seeking for
innovation: Others to express their joy, and profess their duty, bring great
and rich presents, gold, jewels, precious stones, goodly trapped horse,
massiepieces of plate, only I crave leave among the meanest of the Ministers of
the Bride and Bridegroomes Friends, amid those costly ornaments to thrust in
this simple gift: that as Nobles by their chivalry, Courtiers by their Maskes
and bravery; Heralds by their heraldrie, Poets by their verses and poetry,
have striued to set forth the joy of this day: so it is fit that Divines should
not be behind with their parts, some by their speech and Sermons, others by
their pen and writings, concurring in this solemnity.

Augustine has an excellent saying: De diverse. ser. 43.
Habet hortus ille dominicus non solum Martyrum rosas, sed and lilia Virginum,
and coniugatorum violas: The Lords garden has not only the Roses of Martyrs,
but the Lilies of Virgins, and the Violets of married persons. The Lords garden
in England has afforded all these: Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, Queen
Elizabeth was a Queen of Virgins; and now the sweet marriage bed of Violets
has given a pleasant sent: That marriage is honorable, which virtue
commends, and not only outward, but inward beauty graceth: as he
excellently says, Solus formae arbiter petatur Deus, Ambros. lib. de virgini^.
qui etiam in corpore minus pulchro animas diligit pulchriores, hoc ipsum quod
vos non ornatis, ornatus vester est: God must be consulted with, as the only
judge of true beauty, who loves fair souls in bodies not so fair: that is
your ornament, which your selves put not on, but God gives. That wise saying
of Olympias Alexanders mother is much commended, who thus said of a Courtier,
which had married a fair wife, but not virtuous: if he had bin wise, (...).
Plutarch.
he would not have married by his eyes: for it is not fit either to marry by
the eyes or fingers; that is, chiefly in marriage to respect outward fashion, or
the greatness of the portion: his counsel is good, that says, Amor sit in
causa non census, venustatem eligas non vestitum, Vaeler. ad Ruffin.
animum, non aurum, tibi nubat vxor non dos: Let affection be the cause, not
the consideration of wealth; choose virtue, not the vesture; the mind, not the
gold; marry the woman, not her dowry. This, is evident, was the respect,
which was had on both sides in this royal marriage; which religion began, and
piety and virtue has knit. Blessed of God are those thrice renouned parents,
which have not sought out a match for their daughter from among the Canaanites,
but with faithful Abraham, from the kindred and household of faith: which have
married religion to religion, and have matched the Gospel with the Gospel, and
have set more by the pious education of both, then by the promised mountains
of gold. Ambrose writes thus of the Nightingale, Luscinia dum oua gremio
fouet, insomnem longae noctis laborem cantilenae suauitate solatur, Lib. 6.
Hexem. c. 24.
vt mihi videatur haec summa eius esse intentio, quo possit non minus dulcibus
modulis, quam fotu corporis, oua animare in foetus: While she sits upon her
eggs, she allayeth the laborsome watch of the night, with sweet melody: that
she seems to me as well by her sweet singing as bodily cherishing to hatch
her young etc. The pious education of princely youth, which on both parts has
been performed, is like this melodious modulation, whereby those sweet birds are
brooded: An happy thing in all, but twice blessed is it, when Princes from the
cradle are brought to know the Prince of princes, as Hierome writes of Paula
that noble matrone, that ioyed in nothing more, then Quod Paulam neptim
audierat in cunis balbutiente lingua halleluia cantare: That she heard her
niece Paula even in the cradle with a pretty stammering tongue to sing
halleluia, etc. This has bin (God be blessed) the good beginning of both your
Excellencies: the continuance and increase whereof by Gods goodness we
nothing doubt of: and so let me humbly recommend to each of your highness that
exhortation of Hierome, Nunc stude, Ad Demetriad.
vt calentem recentis fidei conuersionem, nouus semper ardor accendat: Study,
that a new heat of zeal, may stillkindle the warmth of your growing faith.
And now nothing remains, but that with our earnest prayers and desires we
help forward this joyful entrance into so great expected happiness. This
famous kingdom of our nation, has joined in matrimonial affinity diverse
times, with other adjoining countries, with Germany, France, Spain: but with
the two latter unhappily: Out of France came that manlike Lady, King Henry
the 6. his Queen.
which was the firebrand of the civil wars between the houses of York and
Lancanster: Out of Spanish blood budded that branch, Q. Marie.
that ouershadowed the Gospel in England; but with the other the nuptial
conjunction has bin prosperous: the valiant Germans have taken wives from us:
as Henry the fifth Emperor, married Maud King Henry the first his daughter;
and our Kings have taken wives from them. Edward the third took to wife Queen
Philip the Earl of Henaults daughter, that fruitful Lady, that bare unto the
King diverse sons. Richard the second had to wife Queen Anna, Act. and
Monument. p. 467 edit. 1610.
the sister of Wencelaus King of Bohemia; a religious Lady, whom Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canturburie preaching her funeral sermon, commended for her
piety, that she had the four Evangelists in English, with the Fathers
expositions upon them: And we see to all our comforts, the hopeful fruit of
matrimonial amity with Denmark, which is part also of Germany. This
conjunction with France and Spain was like to that mixture of clay and iron,
wherewith the toes of the image which Nabuchadnezzar saw in his dream, Dan. 2.
42.
were tempered: but it would not hold, though they were by humane seed, and
carnal affinity joined together: But this matrimonial combination contracted
with Germany does represent unto us, the two tallies or pieces of wood which
the Prophet put together: Ez^k. 37. 13.
whereby he signified, that Israel and Judah should grow into one people. This
former experience of such loving conjunctions bids us by Gods grace to hope
well of this. God for his mercy sake heap and accumulate all his graces upon
your Princely persons; and give you the blessing of Solomon, that obtained
together with wisdom, honor and riches. The Lord give unto your Highness
(most worthy Princess) the devotion of Which was most liberal toward the
Church.
Helena, Constantine the Emperors mother: the courage and magnanimity of Who,
her husband being dead, did resist the Goths.
Dominica, wife to Valens the Emperor, the The wife of Theodosius the elder,
and used her self to visit the sick.
charity of Placilla, the fruitfulness of Which bare many children to Arcadius.
Eudoxia, the favor of Who was most dear unto* Theodosius the younger.
Eudocia, the piety of The sister of Theodosius junior, a zealous promoter of
the Orthodoxall faith.
Pulcheria, the wisdom of The wife of Justinius the younger, a wise woman*
according to her name.
Sophia: And to come nearer home, the honor of Maud the Empress, the
godliness of Queen Anne, and goodly increase of Queen Philip before
mentioned; and the prosperity and long life of Noble Queen Elizabeth. Unto
your excellency (Right worthy Prince) we wish the like happiness: the
piety of Who used to stand and hear the Sermons.
Constantine, devotion of Whose custom was to communicate with his soldiers
in the camp.
Constantius, victory of Who going before his army, would leap down from
his horse, and say, where is the God of Theodosius.
Theodosius the elder, zeal of Who alone, against the mind of his Counselors,
rejected the petition of the Romans, for the restitution of Idolatry.
Valentinian, clemency of Who was w^nt to say when any should be put to death:
I would rather I might restore them that are dead, to life
Theodosius the younger: and to give instance of your own nation, The
victorious success of Henry Who entered Rome by force, and compelled the the
Pope to consecrate him Emperor.
the fifth, that married Maud, the daughter of King Henry before named.

The blessing of God rest, and remain with you both: even that blessing
pronounced in the Psalm, thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine, Psalm. 128.
2. whereupon Iustine Martyr gives this good note: alleging that saying in the
law, how every one should sit under his own vine; that is, (...). Dial. cum
Tryphon.
every one should be content with his own married wife, as Fuit castus corpore,
qui praeter coniugem, nesciret foeminae alterius consuetudinem. In obit
Valentin. (...). Plutarch.
Ambrose writes of the Emperor Gratianus. Such loving contentment, and
pleasant repose, we assuredly trust God will give unto each of your Highness,
under your vine. In the vine three special things excel, the tenderness
thereof, the pleasantnes, fruitfulnes, as was excellently observed by that
learned The B. of London, who preached before the King. Febr. 16. upon that
text, Psalm. 128. 2 Thy wise as a fruitful vine.
Bishop in his sermon: for the vine every way easily windeth and turns, with
the grateful shadow delights, and with the fruit thereof cheareth: the like
flexible disposition, and mutual delectation, and fruitful propagation the
Lord grant unto your Excellencies: The Lord Christ turn your water into wine
(with which miracle the Lord sometime graced the marriage in Cana of Galile)
that is, all sorrow and heaviness into joy and gladness, The B. of Bath, who
preached at the marriage of these Princes; Febr. 14. being the Lords day, upon
that miracle done at the marriage in Cana John 2.
as that place of scripture was well applied by another reverend Bishop to that
present occasion.

Among the Grecians, it was a fashion, when they sacrificed to Juno, their
Goddess of marriage, they took away the gall from the rest of the sacrifice,
signifying thereby that there should be no bitterness in marriage. But our holy
Apostle much better directs husbands not to be bitter to their wives, Coloss.
3. 19. Such pleasing contentment and amiable grace God will send, we trust, to
this sacred marriage. Lastly, this most happy marriage we hope to see furnished,
and accompanied with store and plenty of all blessings: which Christ our Lord
decreed in heaven: the King our Sovereign ratified in earth: The most worthy
Archbishop as a spiritual father in the royal Chapel consecrated and
blessed, The L. Archbishop of Canturburie joined together this Princely couple
in marriage.
and two learned and pious Bishops, as the most loyal and loving friends of
the honorable Bride and Bridegroom, by their pithie exhortations and prayers
in the sacred pulpit dedicated.

And so I conclude, wishing unto both your Excellencies that blessing, which
the Elders of Israel gave unto Boaz and Ruth, The Lord make thy wife, that
comes into thine house like Rachel, and like Leah, which both did build the
house of Israel, Ruth. 4. 11. And as the Lord promised that Abraham's seed
should be as the stars of heaven, Genesis 22. 17. as Hierome well says, Abraham
pro filijs claritas ostenditur astrorum: Abraham in stead of children is showed
the stars of heaven: So God make your Highness seed, as the stars of
heaven, in glory and multitude, and your princely persons, De vera
circumcision.
as the Sun and Moon, to give light and shine many days in the Church of
God: and after to be as bright and glorious stars in the kingdom of heaven,
through Jesus Christ the only Son of God, and true Sun of righteousness;
to whom be praise for ever.

Your Highness in all duty and service ready to be commanded in the Lord,
Andrew Willet.

SALOMONS MARRIAGE
Song out of the 45. Psalm.
The translation of the Psalm.
Verse. 10.
NOw hearken daughter and consider,
thy heedfull ear incline:
Thy fathers house no more remember,
count it no longer thine.
11
So in thy beauty only shall
the King much pleasure take:
Therefore thy Lord thou must him call,
and t'him obeisance make.
12
The city Tyrus of such fame
shall presents to thee bring:
The rich people eke of the same,
shall give each costly thing:
13
The Kings daughter within behold
with glory bright does shine:
14
Her garments are all of wrought gold,
and needle work so fine:
The Virgins in her company,
do follow after fast:
15
The Kings palace most chearefully
to enter they make have.
16
In stead of fathers unto thee
thy children up shall stand:
Which may renowned Princes be
even throughout every land.
THE EXPLICATION OF the Psalm.
THe Church this daughter is, to cleave
to Christ, she friends forsakes:
Christ her to favor does receive,
and she her Lord him makes.
Tire shall bring gifts, with the rich rout,
the truth shall Gentiles win,
Prosperity is the robe without,
the glory grace within.
The Virgins, that is faithful men,
Christ's Temples do frequent,
For fathers to the Church, children
Kings of the earth are sent.
The application.
The wife the parents must forget,
and yield obedience:
The man in's wife his love must set,
and she him reverence:
Friends celebrate the marriage feast
with gifts sent to the Bride,
The inner parts must not be least,
whatsoever is beside.
The Bride is brought home chearefully,
with Virgin many one:
To her is given posterity,
for fathers, which are gone.
The Conclusion.
So fruitful be these Princes wed,
long life to each we pray:
And mutual i^y in marriage bed,
to them God grant for ay.
THE CONTENTS OF this Treatise.
In the first part.
Under whose person the Prophet speaks. sect. 1 Whether the sense of the
Psalm be historical only, or beside mystical. sect. 2 When allegories may
be followed. ibid. The method of the Psalm, 3 Of the duty of wives to their
husbands. 4 Examples of obedient wives. 5 In what things a woman should be
subject. 7 What manner of subjection the wives ought to be. ibid. When wives
ought to be heard. 8 The Church how the daughter of Christ, sister and Spouse.
9 The Scriptures contain al things necessary to salvation. ibid. Husbands
should not suffer their wives to be of a strange religion. 10 The love of the
husband greater, then of the parents. 11 Parents yet not altogether to be
neglected. 14 How the Church must forget her father. 15 The Romanists retain
the superstitious rites of the old Pagans. ibid. The man and wife equally
bound the one to the other. 16 Love between man and wife must be mutual, and
reciprocal. 17 Examples among the Heathen of most loving Husbands and Wives.
18 The inward beauty to be preferred before the outward. 20 The inward beauty
not graft by nature, but wrought by grace. 21 How the man should err in the
love of his wife. 22 Too much fondnes in married persons not commendable. ibid.
How the man is the image of God. 24 Of two kinds of worship, religious and
civil. ibid. How they are distinguished. ibid. The religious only due to God.
27 One adoration due to Christ as God and man: against Bellarmine. 28 The
natures of Christ not to be severed. ibid. The application of the Psalm to the
present occasion. 30
THE CONTENTS OF THE second part.
OF the rich city Tyrus. sect. 1 A k^ngdome prospers more by clemency, then
tyranny. 2 The description of a merciful and good Governor: such as by Gods
goodness the Church and Commonwealth of England at this present enjoys, our
gracious King James: and long may we enjoy him. 4 Of diverse kinds of gifts. 5
Against briberie and corrupting of Justice by gifts. ibid. A false religion
enemy to peace. 6 The peace of England for 55. years, how it may be
continued. 8 The chief ornaments of women. 9 The vain care and study for
adorning the body. 10 Against Iesabels painted face and borrowed hair. 11
Against the gorgeous adorning of outward temples, and neglecting the inward. 12
Against the whore of Babylons costly robes. 13 That it is lawful for Nobles to
use costly garments. ibid. Against sumptuous garments. ibid. Why the Church is
likened to a Virgin. 14 The first fruit^ of all our acts must be consecrated
to God. 15 Of diverse kinds of Virgins. 17 Spiritual virginity preferred
before carnal. 18 Modesty and chastity required specially in noble Virgins.
ibid. Public solemnities lawful 19 Diverse kinds of processions. 20 Against
popish processions. 21 The Church must be frequented in public processions.
23 Against the pride of virgins and women in their apparel. 24 Against
affected nicenes in shoes and in going. ibid. A man is not to wear the woman's
apparel. ibid. How a Virgin by putting on a soldiers apparel saved her
virginity. ibid. Of the great increase of the Church. 25 Kings both the
fathers and children of the Church. ibid. How children are borne to the Church,
in stead of her fathers. 29 The chief regiment of the Church belongs to
secular Princes. ibid. The Virgin Mary cannot be said to be our hope. ibid.
The application of the Psalm to the present honorable marriage of the
illustrious Princes. 30
THE FIRST PART OF THE DVTIE OF THE CHVRCH TO CHRIST, AND OF THE Wife to the
Husband.
PSALM. 45. Verse. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 10 Hearken O daughter, and see
(or consider) incline thine ear: forget also thine own people, and thy
fathers house.

11 So shall the King delight in thy beauty, for he is thy Lord, and Heb. Bow
thy self unto him.
reverence thou him.


TWo things are first briefly to be touched, before I descend to the content
of these verses: of the author or writer of this Psalm, and of the matter: who
speaks here, and of what: In whose person the Psalmist speaks.
for the first, there are diverse opinions. 1. Some think that God the Father
thus speaks of his Son: my heart will utter a good word: verse. 1. Which
they understand of the ineffable generation of the Son, the eternal word of
God: so Exposit. in Psalm. 44.
Augustine and Cont. Iudae^s lib. 1. c. 1.
Isidore with other. 2. Some think that Christ speaks here of himself: My
tongue is the pen of a ready writer: which Ex apolog. Pamphil. In Psalm 44.
tom. 4.
Origin understands of the swift preaching of Christ, who taught but a short
time in earth, and vniuersus orbit praedicatione eius impletur; and all the
world is filled with his preaching: Hierome gives this sense, Christus
euangelij strictum sermonem exarauit in tabulis cordis, Christ did grave the
compendious speech of the Gospel, in the tables of the heart* but neither of
these opinions can stand, because of these words, verse. 7. God, even thy God
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows: for this
neither the Father can utter of his Son, nor Christ the Son of himself. Lib.
3. contr. Marcion. Lib. de. 2. nature.
3. Tertullian takes David to be the writer of this Psalm, accingere (inquit
David) ense, etc. be girded with a sword upon thy thigh, says David: so also
Isychius: David patrem vngentem dixit: David calls the Father the anointer,
etc. But the Prophet speaks of a Kings daughter which should be brought unto
the King, verse. 14. now in David's time Solomon his son was not married to
Pharaoh the King of Egypts daughter: and he speaks not of himself, as the
words show. 4. Their opinion then is rather to be received, that think this
Psalm to have been endited by the sons of Korah, or some one of them, as
Lyranus: or some other Prophet that is not named, as diverse of the Psalms are
by such composed.

2. Now concerning the argument, and matter of the Psalm, the question is,
whether it only speak of Christ, and of his spiritual marriage with the
Church: as most of the ancient writers do apply it, as Dialog. non Tryphon.
Iustine Martyr, Exposit. in Psalm. 44.
Augustine, In Psalm. 44. tom. 4.
Hierome, and before them Lib. 4. cont. Marcion.
Tertullian, Lib. 1. cont. Celsum.
Origin with others: or whether it historically only describe the prosperity
of the Israelites under David, when he took Bathsheba to wife, or under
Solomon, whose marriage with Pharaohs daughter should be here solemnized: or
under Assuerus the great King of Persia, when he married Queen Ester: as diverse
of the Rabbines entertain these several opinions: or whether this Psalm
historicallie describe the marriage between Solomon and the King of Egypts
daughter, The sense of this Psalm Whether historical only, or mystical beside.
but spiritually between Christ and his Church: which latter interpretation is
to be preferred before the rest: for here is both somewhat typical, which
cannot be understood but of Christ, as v. 6. Thy throne O God is for ever and
ever: which place the Apostle only applies to Christ, Heb. 1. 8. and somewhat
also here is historically and literally to be understood, as where mention is
made v. 8. of Mirrh, Aloes, and Cassia, of the yuorie palaces, v. 12, or
temples, of the daughter of Tyrus: so that here we may say with Tertullia^ of
the like place: Haec aut nega scripta, aut quis es vt non putes accipienda,
quemadmodum scripta sunt, maxim, quae non in allegorijs, and parabolis, sed in
definitionib. and certis and simplicib. habent sensum. aduers. prax. Either
deny these things to be written, or who art thou, not to think that they are
so to be taken as they are written, which have a ready and plain sense, not
in allegories and parables, but in plain definitions? Iun. Pelican. annot.
Geneuens. Vatab^ns.
So that this Psalm does under the type of Salomons marriage, set forth the
spiritual conjunction between Christ and his Church, When allegories may be
followed.
as many of our orthodoxall expositors have well observed: so then, like as a
foundation must first be placed, and then it must be builded upon, and in a
picture the ground is first laid, and then the other colors added: so in
Scripture, the truth of the history must first be supposed, and then the type
of the allegory supplied: Lib. 1. cont. Celsum.
Non posse allegoriam suscipere istos sermones Celso videtur and Epicureis: cui
(id est Marcioni) nihil per allegoriam placet exponi. Origin. We then neither
with Celsus, Lib. 2. in epist. ad Roman.
the Epicures, or wicked Marcion, reject all allegories: Ne quis me vim facere
scripturae putet, and sic amare Christum vt auferam historiae veritatem.
Neither yet will I force the Scripture, and so be thought to love Christ, as I
should take away the truth of the history: as Hierome says: De vest. sacerd.
But I say and resolve with Origene: Manente prius historiae veritate,
spiritualis etiam recipiendus est sensus: Ex apolog. pamphyl.
Although these things have a spiritual sense, yet the verity of the history
remaining, the spiritual sense is to be retained, etc.

3. This then is the order of the Psalm: The method and order of the Psalm.
beside the prologue or entrance into the Psalm contained in the first verse,
and the epilogue or conclusion in the last verse. The body of the Psalm
contains an excellent description: first of the Bridegroom to verse. 10. and
then of the Spouse and Bride, verse. 10. to verse. 16. the Bridegroom is set
forth, first, by his beauty and eloquent speech, verse. 2. then by his power
and good success, verse. 3. 4. 5. thirdly, by the eternity of his Kingdom,
with the cause, the righteousness thereof, verse. 6. 7. fourthly, by his
glorious unction and inauguration, verse. 7. 8. fifthly, by his honorable
company and attendance, verse. 9.

In the second part, first, the duty of the Bride is prescribed, verse. 10. 11.
with the effect thereof, so shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty.
Secondly, her glory is described 1. by the subjection of some, and their
presents, verse. 12. Secondly, by her apparel, and ornaments, verse. 13.
Thirdly, by her company and attendants, verse. 14. Fourthly, by her progress,
and other complements, verse. 15. Fifthly, by her issue and incrementes, verse.
16. The duty of the Spouse here set forth is threefold: her loyal obedience
in harkening, verse. 10. her faithful remembrance of her spouse in forgetting
her fathers house, verse. 10. her seemly reverence in doing obeisance unto her
Lord, verse. 11.

Hearken O daughter, and consider, incline thine ear. 4. The first thing,
Wives obedidience to their husbands.
which the wife must yield to her husband, is obedience, as the Apostle
exhorts, Wives submit your selves unto your husbands, Ephesians, 5. 22. it is
their duty, they must do it, as to the Lord: and it is a comely thing as it
is comely in the Lord, Coloss. 3. 18. it is both profitable and seemly, or
pleasant, that there should be amity and concord between the man and wife:
as it is in the Psalm: ecce quam bonum and iucundum: Behold how good and
pleasant a thing it is brethren to dwell together in unity, Psalm. 133. 1. many
things are good and profitable, but not pleasant, as affliction and
chasticement, which at the first seems not to be joyous, but grievous, but
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, Heb. 12. 11. But this
domestical concord, is both fruitful and delightful, profitable and amiable, it
brings gain without pain. This was imposed as a perpetual law in the
beginning upon we man, Thy desire shall be subject to thine husband, and he
shall rule over thee, Genes. 3. 16. Those women then inuert the order of
nature, which deny subjection to their husbands.

5. Leah and Rachel were obediente unto Jacob, Examples of dutiful wives.
both in civil things, in that they went away with him, being sent for into
the field, not returning to take their leave of their father, Genes. 31. 3. and
in spiritual, in giving unto Jacob their images and strange gods with the rest
of the family, (as is most like) to be made away, Genes. 35. 2. Zipporah,
though very loath, yet was content, by direction from her husband (as is most
probable) to circumcise her child, Moses being weak, and not able himself to
do it, Exodus 4. 25. But Jobs wife seems to have been a perverse and
refractarie woman, who despised his counsel in framing her self to patience,
(wishing her husband to curse God and die) that he was feign to take her up
roundly, giving her the term of a foolish woman, Job 2. 10.

6. The man is the woman's head, How unseemly a thing it is for wives not to be
obedient.
2. Cor. 11. 3. as if the body should spurn against the head, so is the
opposition and gainesaying of a woman to her husband: as the Moon applies it
self, and turns to the Sun, and borrows of his light; so should a woman
be guided by her head: as the earth drinks in the rain, that falls from
heaven; so should the wife receive the good counsel of her governor. And as
she is compared to a vine, Psalm. 128. 2. so should she show her self as
pliable and tractable, as the vine, which is apt to be bowed and turned every
way: (...). Plutartch. de praecept. coniug.
as wine mingled with water, though the water be the greatest part, is called
wine still: and as where two voices concur together in singing, the tune or
song is carried chiefly by the base and greater voice: so should the man in
domestical affairs bear the chiefest stroke, (...) Plutarch. ibid.
and be most regarded: the man and wife should be as when two parts are sung in
one, so should they accord, as a melodious harmony together: Tertulliane
speaking of the sweet exercises, which men and wives among the Christians used
together, says: Sonant inter duos Psalmi and hymni and mutuo prouocant, Lib.
^. ad vxor.
quis melius Deo suo canet: Psalms and Hymns give a sound between two, and
they strive, who should sing best unto God. And again, a little further to
insist in this similitude, a woman should herein be like unto a Musician, which
not pleasing himself in his own voice, (...) 1. Cor. 14. 35.
sounds out the harmony by the help of a pipe: so should a woman speak by
an others (that is her husbands) tongue, as a piper by his instrument: which is
the Apostles precept to women, not to speak in the congregation, that is in the
presence of men.

7. But though obedience be required in wives, yet it is with a double
limitation: both for the matter, wherein, and the manner how this obedience
should be performed: Wherein a wife ought to be obedient.
for first a woman is bound but only in things lawful: if any thing be
commanded, either against charity or piety, this bond holds not: Abigaile is
a president for the one, and Michol for the other: for the one sent relief
unto David, against churlish Nabal her husbands mind, 1. Sam. 25. and the other
saved her husbands life against her Father the Kings mind, 1. Sam. 19. 17. And
the like case is, if the husband should enjoin his wife any thing against the
worship of God: for if in the case of wilful desertion, when the husband
departs from his wife, she is no longer bound. 1. Cor. 7. 15. Much less is
she in subjection, when as the man manifestly forsakes God: and so Hierome
says well, In coniugio constituta non solum conings placere debet, sed ei, qui
indulsit coniugium: Ad Celantiam.
She that is settled in the married state, must not so much please him that is
married, as him that instituted marriage: Again for the manner: the subjection
of the wife must not be slavish, or servile, as the Turks and Moors at this
day use their wives as their slaves, but it must be sociable and amiable. God
made woman to be helping unto man. Genesis 2. 18. not to be an underling, to be a
guide in the house to save, not to be a drudge and a slave: Ambrose hereof
writes well: Mulier deferat non seruiat, regendam sepraebeat non co^rcen^m,
indigna est coning to, quae digna est iurgio: What manner of subjection is to
be performed by the wife.
The woman must observe, not serve; and yield her self to be ruled, not
constrained, she is not meet for marriage bedding, that has need of
continual chiding: Neither let the woman think, that in this manner to be in
subjection is an hard condition, but it is rather a benefit for the weaker
vessel to have a stronger to defend her, and the more simple to have a wiser
to direct her: Plutarch in precept. coniug. (...).
and therefore the husband is called the guide of her youth, Proverbs. 2. 17.
Like as he observes well, that mothers love their sons best, as most able to
help them, and Fathers their daughters, as most needing their help: So women
should yield to their husbands obedience, because of their protection and
defense. This kind of service is a freedom rather then a thraldom; a liberty,
not a captivity: De paradis. c. 14.
as Ambrose observes well. Haec seruitus Dei donum est, et in loco
benedictionis Isaac eam dedit Esau. vt seruiret fratri suo, benedictionem enim
poscebat a patre. This kind of service, is the gift of God, and Isaac gave
this as a blessing to Esau, to serve his brother, for he asked a blessing of
his Father. Wives then must not be used as hirelings and mercenaries, but as
fellows and partners; nor commanded imperiously as servants, but entreated
lovingly as joint tenants: Even the heathen Roman Emperors thought it
reasonable, that such a loving fellowship should be between man and wife, as
may appear by their favorable Laws made in that behalf: as if a man married
his maid, Non cogenda est tibioperas praestare Alexand^. ^od. lib. 8. tit. 3.
leg.
the law says, she is not to be compelled to do thy drudgerie. And again,
against the wife of him that is dead, the heirs cannot have an action for
wasting of the inheritance, the reason of the law is, the wife is taken as a
partner both of humane things, So^ia^ei humana, et diuinae domus suscipitur.
lib. 9. tit. 32. l. 4. Gordian.
and of the Divine house: that is a partaker of humane society and fellowship,
and of divine community and worship.

8. Now further, as the wife is bound to listen to her husband, as her
domestical instructor; so the husband is to give care also to his wife as a
mutual comforter: true it is, that where the wife advises ill, her speech is
to be rejected, as Job put off his wife, that tempted him to blaspheme God,
with the reproachful term of a foolish woman: as Origin brings in Job thus
speaking to his wife. Tu facta es deterior Eua in insipientia, When wives
should be heard.
sed ego non effectus sum Adam in stultitia. Thou art become worse then Eua in
foolishnes, but thou have not made me as Adam in sottishnes: Lib. 2. in. 2.
cap. Job.
yet where the wives counsel is wholesome and reasonable, it is fit the man
should regard it as fit and seasonable: The Lord said unto Abraham, in all that
Sara shall say unto thee, hear her voice, Genesis 21. 12. The Shunamites husband
followed her advice in making provision to entertain the Prophet, 2. Kings 4.
10. But the fashion of many unwise and unthrifty husbands is contrary in these
days, who if in time they would have given ear to the friendly advise of
their wives, which of a stubborn and wilful mind they scorned, would have
salued their credit, saved their estate, and preserved their health: This then
makes a good medlye, and sounds forth a sweet melody, (...).
when man and wife do one embrace the others loving counsel: it is like as
bands being twist one about an other, are the stronger: so are they by their
mutual instructions strengthened.

9. But seeing that Pharaohs daughter here being spoused to Solomon bears a
type and figure of the daughter the Church: The Church how the daughter of
Christ, sister and mother.
We must not dwell wholly in the literal sense, but leave some place also for
the spiritual: for as Tertullian well says: Res in literis tenentur, vt
literae in rebus legantur. lib. de resurrec. The things are contained in the
letters that the letters may bring us to read the things. The Church then is
this daughter, here spoken unto: she is Christ's daughter, as he is God the
everlasting Father, Isay. 9. 6. So Pharaohs daughter was as Salomons daughter
in respect of his princely government: she is also his sister. Cant. 5. 1. As
he is man and took our nature, so he is not ashamed also to call us brethren.
Hebr. 2. 11. The Church also is a mother in respect of the faithful which are
begotten to the faith: so Jerusalem which is from above is the mother of us
all. Galat. 4. 26. Now then the Church must hear Christ's voice: Christ's sheep
will hear his voice. John. 10. 16. they will neither hear nor follow a
stranger. ver. 5. Christ's voice is not to be heard but in the Scriptures:
therefore other doctrine must not be received of the Church, then is taught and
delivered in the Scriptures. The scriptures contain all things necessary to
salvation.
This directly impugneth the popish opinion of unwritten traditions: which they
bring in beside, yea contrary to the scriptures, which they hold, not to
conteyne all things necessary to salvation. But the Apostle says otherwise,
that the Scriptures are able to make one wi^e unto salvation: and to make the
man of God perfectly prepared to every good work, 2. Timoth. 3. 15. 17. If
perfect wisdom then be found in the scriptures, what need is there of any
other additions: whatsoever is added to that which is perfect, shows a defect
and is superfluous: Therefore Tertullian says excellently, Nobis curiositate
non est opus post Christum Iesum, nec inquisitione post Euangelium: Praescript.
aduers. haeretie.
We need no curious invention after Christ, nor no inquisition after (or
beside) the Gospel. If any will search further, he is like a way^aring man
without a guide in a desert country, and as a ship on the sea without a
Pilot: to leave the scripture is a way to error, not a stay from erring as he
again worthily says. Credunt sine scripturit, vt credant aduersus scripturas:
They believe without Scripture, that they may believe against Scripture.

10. Then to conclude where I began, the duty of the wife, is to be directed
by the husband, being a man of understanding as in all other civil matters,
so specially in religious exercises: Those wives are to blame that refuse
herein to be guided, and those husbands more, which do not use herein to
direct their wives, but suffer them even under their nose, as we say, to
practice a contrary and the same a false religion: As many, themselves
protestants (but cold ones, you may well think) do suffer their wives to be
popish recusants: it is an excellent saying of Ambrose, In mulurum insolentia
etiam mariti notantur. Ambrose in 1. Cor. 1. 14. Even the husbands are noted in
the insolent behavior of their wives. A wife suspected in religion, makes
also her husband to be suspected; Some women may be so wilfully bent, and so
frozen in their superstitious dregs, that they will not be removed: Husbands
should not suffer their wives to be of a strange religion.
I therefore only speak against such careless husbands, as make no great
conscience what religion their wives be of, neither take any great care to
have them better instructed. They remember not that saying of the Apostle: What
concord has Christ with Beliall, or what part has the believer with the
Infidel. 2. Cor. 6. 11. And what true love can there be between a protestant
and a Papist, a professor of the true faith, and a detester thereof. Lib. 2. ad
vxor.
Tertullian says right, Domino non potest pro disciplina satisfacere, habens
in latere diaboli seruum: One cannot satisfy the Lord for religion, having the
devils servant lying by his side. That Heathen Moralist spoke divinely; That a
woman should have no friends, but such as are her husbands, Plutarch. (...)
and because the Gods are the chiefest friends, the wife should acknowledge no
other Gods but those which her husband worshippeth: and so he concludes; That
no sacred duty performed secretly and by stealth by the wife, is acceptable to
any of the gods. But our ancient Christian writer much better; In Ecclesia Dei
pariter, In connubio Dei pariter: Tertul. ibid.
They must be in the Church of God together, and in Gods marriage bed together.
Thus while they accord in religion, and the wife follows her husbands pious
direction, all other things shall prosper, and unity in religion will bring
forth cheerfulness and alacrity in every action: Eleemosynae sine tormento,
sacrificia sine scrupulo, cotidiana diligentia sine impedimento. Their alms
shall be without grudging, Tertul. ibid.
their spiritual sacrifice without offending, their daily diligence and
endeavor without hindering, etc.

Forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house 11 First touching the
literal and historical sense, here is expressed the fidelity and near
conjunction of the wife to her husband, that in regard thereof even the father
and fathers house must be forgotten: therefore at the very first institution
of marriage this rule was given: For this cause shall a man leave father and
mother, The love of the husband greater then of the Parents
and clea^e to his wife, Genesis 2. 25. The wife must not for any others sake,
forsake the guide of her youth; nor forget the covenant of God, Prou. 3. 17.
Where two reasons are given; because her husband, though now old, was sometime
young, and a guide to his wife in her youth, when she could not govern her
self; as he pleased then so must he still: and the other reason is, because a
covenant was made between them before God, which must not be broken. Thus
Sarah first, and afterward Rebeccah; Leah also and Rachel, left their country,
father, and fathers house, and did follow their husbands, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob.

12 Michol Saul's daughter hearkened not to her father, but against his mind
preserved the life of David her husband, 1. Sam. 19. 12. Yea the Heathen women
by the light of nature were taught to prefer the love and life of their
husbands before all other: as Cleopatra Antiochus daughter the great, being
given in marriage to Ptolomeus Epiphanes, with an intent to make away her
husband, yet took her husbands part against her father, which is thus briefly
touched in Daniel, Heathen women faithful toward their husbands.
She shall not stand on his side, neither be for him, Dan. 11. 17. Diverse such
examples of noble women, that were faithful to their husbands, and kept
continual remembrance of them, are alleged by Hierome, Lib. 1. aduers.
Iouinian.
as Bilia the wife of Duellius, when her husband being cast in the teeth, that
he had a strong breath, and was angry with her that she told him not of it,
made this modest answer: Fecissem, nisi putassem omnibus viris sic os olere: I
had done it, but that I thought every man's breath to smell so. Martia Cato his
daughter mourning for her husband, being asked, Quem diem haberet luctus
vltimum ait, quem and vitae: What day shall be the last of her grief: the same
says she, that shall be of my life. Valeria, the wife of Seruius, would not
consent to marry any other, saying, Seruium semper viuere: That her husband
Seruius lived still.

13 For such is the ordinance of God, that man and wife are counted one flesh,
Genes. 2. 24. To divide then and sunder the affection between man and wife,
were all one as to rent one member from another. Like as then in a picture, the
first colors, which are drawn over with new, are forgotten, The reason why
there should be such afirme conjunction between man and wife.
and no more appear: And as a plant graft into a new stock, knows his
former place no more, but is incorporated into the other: and as a piece of
cloth taken to mend a garment, is now become a part of the same: so the near
conjunction of the woman with the man, does obscure all other kindreds, even as
the sun does darken the stars: and as Abimelech said to Sarah of Abraham,
that he was the veil of her eyes, Genes. 20. 16. that she should not look
upon any other: so mutually the husband and wife are each to other, both a
veil to their eyes, and a cover to their affections, not with the eye to face
or fancy, or with the heart to embrace any other. Among the Romans the custom
was, Quaestion Romans ^. 29. Plutarch.
that the Bride coming home was not suffered to go over the threshold her
self, but was carried over: and the Boetians had the like fashion, to burn
the axeltree of the cart before the door; to signify, that the wife was to
keep home, not to gad abroad, or think of her remove; but to settle her
affection upon her husband, and house affairs: and the same may seem to be
the meaning of the word husband: as if you would say, an houseband: he is as a
band to hold and keep his wife at home.

14 But though the woman must forget her fathers house, in comparison of her
new house and husband; yet her duty to her parents must not be forgotten: It
is then spoken comparatively, as many like places are frequent in Scripture,
not uttered simply and absolutely. Indeed it is the fault of many, that are
preferred in marriage, who seem to forget their poor parents: Parents not
altogether to be neglected for the husband or wife.
For which cause our blessed Savior finds fault with the Jews Corban, in
giving to the altar, and neglecting their parents, Marc. 7. 11. So did not
Joseph, who being married in Egypt, and advanced to great honor, forgot not
his aged father Jacob: nor yet was David careless of his Parents, but in the
midst of his troubles committed them to the custody of the king of Moab, 1.
Sam. 22. 4. Ambrose does well tax such forgetfulness in children of their
parents: Non pudet te filia, si te ingrediente in ecclesiam, alienis manus,
pretermissa filia, anus matter extendat, (...) Luc. c. 18.
dum tu transeas sublimi callo, etc. Art not thou ashamed O thou daughter, that
when thou entrest into the Church, thine aged mother should put forth her hand
to an other, omitting her daughter, while thou passest by, with thy neck
stretched out, wearing iew^ls and rings, etc. So then the husband must be
preferred, and yet the parent not neglected: the one in the first place must be
remembered, but the other not altogether forgotten and rejected. So Hierome
shall shut up this place, who thus writes: Seruite patribus futuri patres,
seruite matribus vt and coni^ges vestrae mereantur matres nuncupari: Lib. de
hon^ra^nd. (...) ^ib.
Observe your fathers, you that hope to be fathers, and be serviceable to your
mothers, that your wives also may be thought meet to be called mothers.

15 Now the spiritual sense of these words does lead us to understand it of
the Church: How the Church m^st forget her father.
she must forget her people and fathers house: either the idols which she
worshipped in the time of Pagan idolatry; for so they called their idols their
fathers, Ierem. 2. 27. saying unto a tree, thou art my father, Cat^ch^s. 7.
and to a stone thou have begotten me. Thus Cyril: or the devil may be
understood, who is the father of the wicked, as Augustine, Vndecunque venerunt
gentes a patre diabole venerunt, sed patri renuntiauerunt: From whence soever
the Gentiles came, Exposit. in Psalm* 44.
they came from their father the devil, but they have renounced their father:
or the Jewish rites and ceremonies are here insinuated, which must be left and
forgotten under the Gospel, as Lyranus, or generally, as Justinius Martyr
interprets, these words do teach us to forget our oldcountries manners what
soever: which sense is more full then the rest. (...). Dial. cum Tryphon*
The Church of God then is admonished, that being called from Iudaisme and
Gentilisme, she should retain neither, their superstitions in religion, nor
error of life and conversation: here then the Pseudo-Christian Romanists may
justly be taxed, who in their superstitious service, do retain many rites of
the old Pagan Romans their predecessors: and maintain many of their points of
doctrine: The new Romanists retain the superstitious rites of the old Pagans.
As in their fasts and abstinence from meat, their festiuals, idols, multitude
of saints, censings, purgatory, free will, and in many such like they revive
the old Pagane fashions and opinions: And this their corrupt imitation of them
is justified by one of their own Bishops, and not one of the meanest of them;
namely, Gregory the first, who gives this advice: Festa paganorum sensim in
Christianae esse commutanda, and quaed^m ad eorum similitudinem facienda, vt
facilius fides Christianae accederent; Lib. 9. Epist. 71.
The Pagane feasts must be by little and little changed into Christian
festiuals, and some things must be done like unto them, that they may the more
easily be brought to the Christian faith. But S. Paul has given us another
rule, not to do evil that good may come thereof, Romans 3. 8. And herein I
prefer Tertullians judgment, who gives this caveat touching the doctrine of
the Heathen Philosophers. Quid Athenis and Hierosolymis, quid Academie and
Ecclesiae, De prescript. aduers. haeret.
quid h^reticis and Christians? What has Jerusalem to do with Athens, the
Church with (Plato his) Academie, Christians with heretics? And of Plato the
best and most divine of all the Philosophers, Lib. de anim.
he says: Doleo bona fide Platonem omnium haereticorum condimentarium factum:
I am sorry in very deed, that Plato has given the taste and assay to all
heretics. And concerning other Heathenish rites and fashions he gives this
rule: Vt nihil dandum idolo, sic nec sumendum ab idolo: As nothing must be
given to an idol, so neither must any thing be taken from an idol.

16 And to return to the duties of carnal marriage, as this last point
concerns the spiritual; as wives are taught to have their husbands bed in
remembrance, and to keep themselves true and faithful unto them: so men must
also to their wives fidelity be answerable in the like chastity again: every
man must keep him to his wife, as the woman must hold her self to her
husband, The man and wife equally bound the one to the other.
according to the Apostles rule, 1. Cor. 7. 3. Augustine says well to this
purpose, Intactam quaeris, intactus esto, puram quaeris, noli esse impurus?
etc. tu exigis hoc ab vxore, and non vis reddere hoc vxori; and vis vxorem tuam
victricem esse, and tu victus iaces, Sermon. 46. de verb. D^m. De december chord.
cap. 3*
etc. Do thou seek a wife untouched of others, be not touched thy self:
would thou have her pure, be not thou impure: And again, Do thou require
this of thy wife, and wilt not thou render it to thy wife: will thou have thy
wife a conqueror, while thou art conquered? Whence then is it that men herein
take unto themselves greater liberty then women? Among many Nations, as the
Italians, Spaniards and Turks, it is counted a capital crime in the wife to
tread awry, Men and their wives must be mutually content one with another.
but in the husband it is usual and venial: the Scriptures give them no
warrant thus to presume: they are both under the same law of wedlock, and must
both draw in the same yoke. Likewise women must learn here not to be weary
of their husbands, he that pleased them being young, now must not dislike the^
being old. Ambrose here writes excellently, who shall speak in his own
words: Hexemer. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Horrendus, and incultus est vir, semel placuit, nunquid vir est frequenter
eligendus? comparem sui bos requirit, and equus diligit, and si mutetur alius,
ingum trahere nescit compar alterius, tu iugalem tuum repudias? Is thy husband
grown unhandsome and uncomely, be once pleased thee, would thou ever be
choosing of an husband? the Ox and Horse like their mate, and if he be
changed, they know not how to draw the yoke; and do thou refuse thy
yoakefellow?

Verse. 11. So shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty. 17. As the wife must
show her self dutiful, so the husband must be regardeful: she must be lovely,
and he loving: she amiable, and he pliable unto her love. Thus the Preacher
advises, Rejoice with the wife, whom thou have loved all the days of the life
of thy vanity: Eccles. 9. 9. So also the Wise man in the Proverbs, Rejoice
with the wife of thy youth, let herb as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe* Love
between man and wife must be mutual and reciprocal.
let her breasts satisfy thee at all times: Prou. 5. 19. Even as the Roe Buck
is noted to be most loving and fond upon his Hind; so should the husband be
addicted to his wife: as the infant is tied to his mother breasts; so the man
should be wedded in affection to his wife. There should then be a reciprocal
and mutual love between them: as of the husband it is said: The heart of her
husband trusts in her: and of the wife, She will do him good, and not evil
all the days of her life, Prou. 31. 11. 12. So Cantic. 2. 16. My well-beloved is
mine and ^am his.

18. So the Scripture gives testimony of Isaac, that he loved Rebeckah his
lovely wife, Genes. 24. 67. and Jacob was so affected to Rachel, that he was
contented to serve for her seven years: and, they seemed unto him but a few
days, because he loved her, Genes. 29. 20. When David heard that the
Amalekites had burned Ziglag, and carried away his two wives: Ahinoam and
Abigaile, he was in great sorrow, and adventured his life to encounter (having
only four hundred men) with all the host of the Amalekites to rescue and
recover his wives, 1. Sam. 30. 6. 10. yea this entire affection of the man and
wife is so agreeable to nature, that even the Heathen, being but natural men,
herein may make Christians ashamed: Examples among the Heathen of most loving
husbands and wives.
Tiber. Gracchus was so affected to his wife, that two snakes being taken in
his house, the male and the female, and being told by a southsaier, that if the
he were let go, his life were saved, if the she, his wives: he spared the
female, and so preferred his wives life before his own. Ex Valor. Maxim. lib.
4. c. 6.
But the Heathen could find no measure in their affections: Marcus Plautius
hearing of the death of his wife Horestilla, ran upon his own sword, and so
died with her. So Portia, the wife of Brutus hearing that he was killed,
swallowed down burning coals, and ended her life: Such immoderate passions of
unbelievers, at the least should teach Christians to have moderate affections.

19. For where there is not a reflection of love, it cannot continue: the wise
man says, A man that will have friends must show himself friendly. Prouer.
18. 24. according to that saying, ^t ameris, amabilis esto, He that would be
loved, must show himself lovely: The spouse says, Set me as a seal on thy
heart, Cantic. 6. 6. like as a seal leaves the like print to it self, where
it is stamped: so the heart of two lovers and friends must one answer another:
Even as the face answers to the face in water: The sweet society between man
and wife.
so is the heart of man to man, Prou. 27. 19. As it is a bad looking glass,
(...), etc. Plutarch.
if it make a cheerful countenance look sad, and a sad cheerful: so is it
when the countenance of the man and wife are not alike one to the other, when
the one smileth, the other frowneth, where as the one should be as the looking
glass of the other: The Wiseman says, drink the water of thnie own
cisterne: Prou. 5. 15. As a man will delight in his own springs, and solace
himself in his own house: so should the man be linked to his wife: the King
is tied in the rafters: Cantic. 7. 5. where should a man sport and recreate
himself, but in his own garden of pleasure. So is it in the Canticles c. 5.
1. I am come into my garden, my sister, I gathered my mirrhe with my spice, I
ate my honey comb with my honey, I drank my wine with my milk: such pleasure
and delight should the man take in the beauty and virtue of his wife.

20. But does the Prophet here mean only external beauty? no verily: there
is an inward beauty of the mind far surpassing the other: for outward favor
without good behavior is nothing, and a comely face, that has not a seemly
grace is not to be set by. The inward beauty is to be preferred before the
outward.
We know what the Wise man says, As a jewel of gold in a swines snout, so is
a fair woman, which lacks discretion, Prou. 11. 22. Some have the outward,
but not the inward beauty, as painted Iesabel, some have the inward only, as
Zipporah, Moses wife, that was an Ethiopisse: some have both, as Sarah and
Rebeckah: But virtue is more to be respected then feature, and faithfulness
then finenesse, and good conditions, then goodie shows and fashions: Valor. ad
Ruff.
as he well says: Nolo te sponsum Veneris fieri sed Palladis: I would not
have thee an husband to Venus, (whom the Poets made the goddess of love) but
of Pallas, to whom they attributed wisdom: beauty age decaieth, sickness
wastes, and care empaireth: but virtue none of these abateth. And love
grounded upon that which fades, will soon fade, but settled upon virtue it
never vanishes. Let Hierome also here conclude: Amor formae, rationis obliuio
est, and insaniae proximus; the affection to beauty is the oblivion of reason,
and the occasion of madness.

21. The King shall take delight in thy beauty. This being in the spiritual
sense applied to the Church shows, that God takes pleasure in his Saints,
being regenerated by grace, and washed white in the blood of the lamb: Revel.
7. 14. And so wisdom says, My delight is with the (...) dutiful carriage of
the wife, both her obedience in action and endeavor, and her obeisance in
fashion and behavior toward her husband. A wife must be obseruant in word and
deed.
And to this purpose Saint Peter alleges the example of Sarah, that used
Abraham most respectively in speech, calling him (...) adonai, Lord, 1. Pet. 3.
6: as we read, Genes. 18. 12. So did Bathsheba to King David, calling him
Lord, and bowing unto him: 1. King 1. 16. 17. And if it be here said, that she
did this reverence to him as King, not as her husband (though it were, I
confess so much the greater, because he sustained both persons) yet that some
honor is due unto the single person of the husband, look upon Abigails
example, who bowed her self to the ground, when David sent to take her to his
wife, being not yet King: 1. Sam. 25. 41.

24. For the man is the image and glory of God, 1. Cor. 11. 7. and after a
more special manner; and therefore to be reverenced of the woman: How the man
is the image of God.
there is an image of God, common both to the man and woman: they were both
created according to Gods image, Lib. de creat. cap. 23.
Genes. 1. 27. whether we understand this image with Gregory Nyssenus, of
man's excellency: Omnis boni factam esse participem humanum naturam. That man's
nature is made partaker of every good thing, having a mortal body and an
immortal soul. Or with Ambrose, of the mind and understanding; wherein was man
created according to the image of God, nisi in animae substantia, but in the
substance of the mind? Or with Theodoret of the principality of man: Exhortat.
ad virgin.
he is created according to the image of God, quoad imperium and principatu^;
in respect of his dominion and principality over the creaures. In 11. cap. 1.
Epi. ad Corinth.
Or with Cyrillus of Alexandria, of righteousness, and holiness; Quod diuinan
efficit effigiem, Lib. 6. dialog.
vtique sanctificatio est: That which makes the shape of God in man, is
sanctification, etc. as the Apostle, Wherein the image of God in man consists.
the best enterpreter of Moses expounds it, Ephesians. 4. 24. This kind of image
is common both to the man and woman. But there is a peculiar kind of image of
God, which is more in the man, then the woman. Tertullian refers it to the
body: God, says he, Christum sermonem hominem intuens futurum, etc.
foreseeing Christ the Word to be made man, Lib. 5. aduers. Marcian.
said, Let us make man according to our image, etc. Ambrose understands it
thus: that as ex Deo omnia, Excitation. gloss ordin, in 1. Cor. 11. ^. 7.
all things are of God, so al men came of Adam, Augustine thus: Quia in homine
plus viget ratio, reason bears more sway in man, then woman; and therefore he
is said more principally to be made according to the image of God: But
Theodorets exposition is most agreeable, mulier viro subiecta est, Ibid. vbi
supra.
and ei parere iussa: the woman is subject to the man, and willed to obey him,
etc. so man is appointed to be her ruler, and therein is the lively image of
God, who rules all things.

25. The woman then must apply her self to her husband, seeking by her humble
and meek behavior to content him: as the Wise man says: A soft answer
puts away wrath: Prou. 15. 1. even as soft things do daunt the force of
hard and violent, so does gentleness assuage fury: even as the soft water
breaks the hard stones, Job 14. 19. as the bulrush by bending it self, How
the wife ought to apply her self to her husband.
scapeth the violence of the stream, Isay 58. 5, when the strong Cedars are
broken: so should a woman by her discreet behavior discern how to calm
domestical storms: as Abigaile did forbear to speak to her husband till the
drink was over: 1. Sam. 25. 37. Women must not seek to be cross and
contrary to their husbands; to frown when they fawn, and to be merry when
they are heavy: but like as Physicians say, that the blows on the left side
are felt on the right: and they use to let blood on the contrary side, so
should the man and wife be continually affected one with another grief: They
should each take heed of another offense, and specially beware that they
provoke not by hasty and unadvised speech. Ambrose notes well upon those
words of the Psalm: (...).
I thought I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my tongue; Aliae
sunt viae, quas debemus sequi, aliae, quas custodire, sequi vias Domini,
custodire nostras: There are some ways which we must follow, some that we must
keep; we must follow Gods ways, I^ Psalm. 38.
and observe and keep our own, etc. So the way of the tongue must be
carefully kept, for in this way it is an easy matter to trippe and stumble.

26. Now whereas, as is before observed, this incuruaton and bowing of the body
was used both in religious adoration of God, and in the civil observation of
men: as here this text first historically was verified in Salomons Queen, that
showed reverence unto him, so is it spiritually performed in the Church, in
adoring of Christ. Hence is it gathered, that there are two kinds of adoration,
one that is civil yielded to the creature, the other religious only peculiar
to God the Creator: this distinction is taken out of the Scripture: for Peter,
when Cornelius fell down at his feet and worshipped him: Act. 10. 25. forbad
him to do it: But when the Shunamite took Elisha by the feet, falling down
before him, Of two kinds of worship religious and civil.
2. King. 4. 27. as Abigail did at David's feet, 1. Sam. 25. 24. he did not
forbid her so to do, but checked his servant for thrusting her away from his
feet: the reason of this difference is, that the one was a religious worship,
which is not to be accepted, the other civil, which cannot be excepted
against, Gregory notes this difference well, upon those words, Genes. 49. 8.
Thy fathers son shall worship thee. Iste sermo paulo durius refertur ad
Iudam, nisi abusiue dicamus, adoratos esse quasi reges afratrib. This is
somewhat harsh, if it be referred to Judah, unless we say, Homil. 17. in Genes.
that abusiuely, the Kings were adored of their brethren. Adoration then is
either properly so called, and it belongs only unto God, or it is so called
by a certain abuse of the word, and so it may be given unto men. These two
kind of worships are distinguished three ways: by the conception of the
understanding, the intention of the will, and the disposition of the body: so
in divine worship, first, the judgment is informed of some divine presence,
How the religious and civil worship are distinguished.
as Joshua was, after he understood who it was that appeared unto him, Josh. 5.
14. then he framed his affection to an humble kind of reverence. And lastly his
devotion showed it self in the outward action, he fell on his face to the
ground. But they are not so well discerned, by the outward gesture of bowing,
kneeling, falling down, and such like, as by the other two: for these
external actions are indifferently used in both kinds of worship, saving that
in the divine, the more devout the mind is, the more lowly the body strives
to show it self: as both S. Peter, Act. 10. and the Angel, Revel. 21. knew by
the outward preparation of the body, what Cornelius and John intended to do.
This difference in the outward behavior is well observed by Origin out of the
parable Mat. 17. how that the servant that ought so many talents (...),
procidens adorauit; falling down worshipped ver. 26. Tract. 7. in Mat.
but the fellow servant (...), procidens rogauit, falling down entreated only.

27. Here then we refuse the popish curious distinction of religious worship,
Bellar. lib. ^. de Sanct. c. ^2.
the higher, and lower, that due only unto God, this given unto Saints: and
the civil honor they make a third kind. But the Scripture acknowledges but
one only kind of religious worship, and that due only to God: Religious
worship only due to God.
the Angel simply forbids John to worship him, and bids him to worship
God. Revel. 22. 9. The Angel would not simply have refused religious worship,
if any part of it had been due unto him, upon the which place Ambrose thus
infers: In 9. c. ad Romans part. 3.
Nec Dominus vtique se adorari pateretur, nisi quia Deus est. Neither the Lord
would have suffered himself to be worshipped, but that he is God: Augustine
also so understands that place. De ver. relig. cap. 55.
Recte scribitur hominem ab Angelo prohibitum, ne se adoraret, sed vnum Deum.
It is well written, that man was forbidden by the Angel to worship but God
only. And further the same father shows what manner of worship is due to
Saints. Honoram^s eos charitate non seruitute etc. We honor them by charity,
not by service: And again as he is cited in one of their own Councels: Ibid.
Eo societatis et dilectionis cultu (honoramus) quo in hac vita sancti homines
a nobis colipossunt. Cited. Council. Moguntin. c. 45.
We honor them with that fellowship and loving reverence (or worship)
wherewith holy men may be worshipped in their life: What is that else but a
civil kind of worship although in a higher degree, as the King and his
counselors are reverenced with a civil honor, yet one more then another: the
worship then which is given to the creatures admits diverse degrees, but not
other kinds. Lib. 6. contr. Julian.
And so Cyrill shall conclude this place: Sanct^s Martyrs (...) adorare
consuenimus: laudamus eos potius summis honoribus, quod proveritate strenue
certarunt. Neither use we to adore Saints, we set them forth rather with
great honors, because they did strive valiantly for the truth:

28. But to add somewhat of the spiritual sense: the Church is here taught
to adore Christ in his humanity, as being her most high and mighty Lord: the
Apostle says, alleging a place out of the Psalms: when he brings in his
first begotten son into the world, he says, let all the Angels worship
them, Hebr. 1. 6. He is worshipped with Divine worship, One adoration due to
Christ as God and man, against Bellarmine.
as God and man: whereby the way I will give a touch of that notable error of
Bellarmine, who affirms directly, that the Divine worship called latria is
not due unto Christ's humanity, but the inferior religious worship which is
given unto creatures as Angels and Saints called dulia: Lib. 1. de sanct. c 12.
ss^e^tia.
but yet there is a higher degree called Hyperdulia, a Superseruice as we may
call it; which he says their Divines do attribute, soli humanitati. Christi
et matri eius, only to the humanity of Christ, and to his Mother etc. But if
two kinds of adorations belong unto Christ, one, as he is God, an other as he
is man, how far will this be from the heresy of Nestorius, who affirmed two
persons to be in Christ, and so consequently two Christ's: for adoration is a
duty given unto the whole person, if two adorations, two persons: and
therefore the Fathers assembled in the Ephesine synod against Nestorius, did
labor to prove, that Christ God and Man was to be worshipped with one entire
adoration: as Cyrill proves it by that place, John. 9. 33 37. De incarnat.
vnigenit. c. 26.
Vnum filium adorauit caecus a natiuitate: quis est Domine filius Dei, vt
credam in eum, Christus vero seipsum cum corpore ostendebat, qui loquitur tecum
ipsa est. The man which was blind from his birth did worship one son, who is
the son of God, Lord says he, that I should believe in him: but Christ
shows himself with his body, he that speaks with thee, (...) he, etc.
And in the other place the same Cyril directly thus affirms with the rest of
the Fathers of the Ephesine counsel: Epist. de Synod.
Vnus intelligitur Christus vna seruitute cum carne adorandus. One Christ is
understood to be adored with one service together with his flesh: and hereupon
they made this Canon, Si quis audet dicere assumptu^ homine^ coadorandum Deo
verbo et conglorisicandum -- ac non potius vna supplicatione veneratur Emanuel,
Ephesin synod. can. 8.
vnamque glorificationem dependit anathema: etc. If any dare say, that the man
assumed is to be worshipped and glorified together with the word, and does not
rather with one supplication worship Emmanuel, and give unto him one
glorification, let him be an anathema, that is, accursed. Now that devise of
Bellarmine cannot serve his turn, that this kind of worship is to be given
to Christ. Si seorsim humanitas Christi consider^tur: If the humanity of Christ
be considered apart: for this is a mere imaginary supposition, for then is it
not Christ's humanity, if it should be severed from him: The divine and humane
nature in Christ cannot be ^euered.
adoration is a thing in act: that also must be in act, to the which adoration
is given: but such an humanity as Christ's is, severed, in Christ cannot be. I
omit here that other error, in that he joins Christ's humanity, which is
united in one person to his Godhead and the Virgin Marie to be fellows together
in this kind of Worship: but I leave this as impertinent to our purpose, only
I send him away with that saying of Tertullian against Marcion: Non valebit
blasphemiae surculus, Lib. 2. cont. Marcion.
arescet cum suo artifice. This branch of blaspemy shall not prosper, it shall
wither with the author.

29. Now to conclude, and to end, where I began, with the reciprocal and
mutual duty, that ought to be between man and wife: as she is to observe her
husband, so he must be kind and loving: Husbands must not be bitter to their
wives. Coloss. 3. 19. They must dwell with, them as men of knowledge, and give
honor to women as unto the weaker vessel. 1. Pet. 3. 7. A brittle vessel, if
it be not handled charily, will easily be broken, and so a woman, not
discreetly used may soon be spoiled: much may by gentleness be obtained on
each side, Married couples must one bear with another.
which by rigor and churlishnes cannot be compassed. That fable has here a
good use: how the Sun with his still heat caused the wayfaring man to lay
aside his garments, which the wind with his boisterous blasts could not pluck
from him. So married couples should seek to win one another by lenity, not to
weary them by extremity. But as it is said of Cyrus soldiers, Plutarch de
precept. coniugal.
that they were charged, that if their enemies came upon them with clamor,
they should receive them with silence, and if they were silent to set upon them
with noise, so should man and wife, with comfortable speech, refresh one
another sad silence: and they should observe that rule which Ambrose
prescribes to be followed in friendship: Neque monitio aspera sit, neque
obiurgatio contumeliosa: sicut enim adulationis expers amicitia, sic aliena
insolentiae. Let not admonition be rigorous, nor reprehension contumelious:
Lib. officior. 3. c. 16.
for as friendship is void of flattery, so is it far off from insolency.

30. Now for the shutting ^p of all; to apply this to the present occasion,
namely this honorable marriage now solemnized between the most noble Prince
Lord Frederick, and the most excellent princess the Lady Elizabeth in this
princely couple is now this Scripture verified: in her Highness, this; Hearken O
daughter and consider, forget thine own people and thy Fathers house; The
application of the text to the present marriage of these excellent Princes.
the Lord has provided for her a comforter in steed of her worthy brother
departed, he shall be a solace unto her, and bring her to forget this
hea^inesse of her Fathers house: she need not to complain as he does, that
lost one of his friends: Ex duobus oculis vnum perdid^; Hieron, ad Ruffine.
Innocentium enim partem animae meae repentinus febrium ardor abstraxit, nunc
vno et toto mihi lumine Euagrio fruor; Of my two eyes I have lost one,
Innocentius even a part of my soul, a burning fever has suddenly taken him
away, now I only enjoy Euagrius my sole and only light: for although in like
manner that cruel fever did as it were put out one of her eyes for the time,
in the death of Prince Henry, yet is it renewed again, in her noble spouse:
that now she sees again with both her eyes; Prince Charles, her dearest
brother, and Prince Frederick her amiable spouse: of this virtuous Princess
we may say in the words of Solomon: many daughters have done virtuously, but
thou surmountest them all: favor is deceiptfull, and beauty is vanity, but a
woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. Prou. 31. 29. 30. And on the
other side, in this illustrious Prince, that other saying we doubt not but is
fulfilled: the King shall delight in thy beauty: God has we trust so
provided, that they shall be each to other a mutual comforter. In consilijs
fidel^s, in prosperis laeta, in tristibus masta. Ambr. lib. offic. 1. 34.
Faithful in counsel, to rejoice together, when things are happy, and grieve
together, when matters fall out somewhat heavy. This loving conjunction and
society is increased by their consent in religion and piety. This knot shall
surely hold, which not only a natural affection, but a spiritual disposition
has tied: Non vehementior est natura ad diligendum, quam gratia: For nature is
not more forcible to beget love, then grace: where one of them is, there may be
love, where the better, there is greater love, where both, there is a perfect
love, as he again says: Ad cumulandam spectat beneuolentiam necessitud^
gratiae. A^b. l. 1. offic. c. 7. Where grace makes affinity there is nothing
contrary to love and amity. This double bond of matrimonial affinity and
religious fidelity, so happily begun, God grant it may faithfully hold to their
lives end, to Gods glory, the Churches good, their own comfort, the wealth of
both kingdoms: through the gracious benedicton, and mighty protection of our
ever Blessed Savior and redeemer Christ Jesus the spouse of his Church, the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, to whom be praise for ever. Amen.

So ends the first part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE GLORY AND HONOR OF SALOMONS SPOUSE REPREsenting the
Church of God.
12. The daughter of Tyrus with a present, shall make Heb. shall entreat thy
face.
supplication unto thee, even the rich of the people.

13. The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of broydered
gold.

14. She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: the
Virgins after her, her companions, shall be brought unto thee.

15. With joy and gladness shall they be brought, and shall enter into the Kings
palace.

16. In steed of thy Fathers shall thy children be: thou shall place them for
Princes in all the earth.


THE first sign and argument of the great glory of this honorable spouse is
the great presents, and costly gifts which the rich city of Tyrus should
bring, and solemnize this marriage with: what the glory and wealth of this
City was, the Prophet shows. Isai. 23. 8. Whose Merchants were Princes,
whose chapmen are the Nobles of the world: What a rich city Tyrus was.
and what rich Merchandise Tyrus had, having traficke and intercourse with all
nations of the world, Ezechiel sets forth. chap. 27. thoroughout. Thus Tyrus
among others should send their presents, not so much to have the favor of the
King, as afterward, they desired peace of King Herod, because their country
was maintained by the Kings land. Acts 12. 20. for from thence they had their
provision of corn: as to show their voluntary subjection, and congratulation
in that solemnity. The like is prophesied. Psalm. 72. 10. The Kings of
Tarshish, and of the Istes shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba
shall bring gifts. This was so accomplished when Hiram King of Tyrus sent
presents unto Solomon. 1. King. 4. 10. And when the Queen of Sheba presented
Solomon with rich gifts of gold, sweet odors, and precious stones. 1. King.
10. 10.

2. Hereby is signified the prosperous and peaceable government of Solomon, who
for his wisdom was honored, and all countries adjoining yielded obeisance
unto him: not by compulsary subjection, but by voluntary submission: which
shows, that Kings then are most famous, and prosper best, when by justice
they maintain tranquillity at home, and amity abroad, not oppressing their
subjects by tyranny within, nor encroaching upon their neighbors by rapine
and injury without. This was historically prophesied of Solomon. In his days
shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace. They that dwell in the
wilderness shall kneel before him, his enemies shall lick the dust. Psalm. 72.
79. And this was fufilled accordingly. 1. King. 4. 24. Solomon ruled over all
the Kings on the other side of the river, and he had peace round about him on
every side: he had peace not by violent compulsion, or fraudulent
circumuention, but rather by friendly contentment, and as it were composition:
as Ambrose testifies of Theodosius the Elder, A kingdom prospers more by
clemency, then tyranny.
that clement Emperor. Maluit sibi homines religione, quam timore astringere
etc. de obit. Theodos. He had rather bind men unto him by the fear of
religion, then by a servile condition. Foreign histories make honorable mention
of Agesilaus the Lacedemonian, (...) apotheg. (...) -- (...). Plutarch.
and Pericles of Athens: the first, hearing of a great slaughter of the
Grecians having civil war among themselves, cried out, fie Graecia which
has slain so many as sufficed to ouerrunne all the Barbarians. And Pericles,
when the Athenians would have gone out to fight with their enemies, sealed up
the Armorie, and keys of the gates, and would not suffer them to go out: such
moderation was in these valiant Captains, and so auerse were they from the
effusion of blood.

3. Now, if we will know the reason of this voluntary subjection of Tyrus and
other countries unto Solomon, Whence it was that nations subjected themselves
voluntarily to Solomon. ser. 40.
it was his wisdom, and care at that time to please God: as the Lord said to
Elie, They that honor me will I honor, and they that despise me shall be
despised. 1. Sam. 2. 30. as Ambrose excellently says. Quanto Deo viciniore
fuerimus, ta^to aduersarij a nobis longius repellentur: The nearer we are unto
God, the further are our enemies from us. And on the contrary, he brings in
the example of Valens the Arrian Emperor, a great persecutor of Gods Church,
who was overcome of the Barbarians, wherein the Lord showed his just
indignation: Vt ibi primum fides Romano imperio frangeretur, vbi fractum est
Deo. lib. 2. de fid. 4. That there first faith should be broken with the Roman
Empire, The description of a merciful and good governor, such as by Gods
goodness, the Church and common wealth of England and Scotland this day
enjoys, our gracious King James and long may we enjoy him.
where they had first broken it with God.

4. A righteous and peaceable King then, is like the rain that comes down
upon the mowen grass, to make it to grow, Psalm. 72. 6. whereas bloody
governors are like fithes which cut down the grass: as the cutting King of
Ashur is compared to a sharp rasor, that shaueth the head, beard and hair of
the feet, Isai. 2. 20. The one is as an hiding place from the wind, and as a
refuge from the tempest, Isai. 32. 2. Whereas the other is as a stormy wind
and tempest: the one as waters in a dry ground to refresh it, Isai. 32. 2. The
other as ouerflowing waters, that run over all, Isai. 87. The one as
comfortable, as when Nilus ascendit in arua, Nilus in Egypt by the ouerflowing
makes the fields fruitful.
the river Nilus rises up to water the fields, the other terrible, as when
Tyberis ascendit in m^e^^a, the River of Tyber swells up to the walls: like a
careless inhabitant, by whose negligence the house droppeth thorough, Tiber by
the ^^undation sometime rises to the walls of Rome.
Eccles. 10. 15. So is the commonwealth, when as by tumults and troubles, all
things seem to be turned vpside down: the other, which preserves peace, is
as one that heals up the breach, and as a repayrer of ruin, Isai. 58. 12. So
that it is most true, which he says: Miserecordia facilius liberat quam
rap^^a, oration long (...), quam sagitta. Sermon. 86.
Ambros. Mercy does more easily deliver then cruelty, and prayer wounds
further off then an arrow.

5. Now whereas Tyrus sends gifts: Of diverse kinds of gifts.
here it is to be remembered, that there are diverse kinds of gifts: there is
munus gratulatorium, a gratulatory gift, when one friend sends to another to
testify their love and joy, as Esther. 9. 19. There is compensatorium munus, a
compensatory gift, when one gives by way of recompense for some wrong formerly
done, as Zacheus did Luke 9. 8. There is donum opitulatorium, a releeuing and
helping gift, as to the poor: and honorarium, a gift of honor, as presents
sent to great persons, as Jacob thereby made a way with his brother. Genesis.
33. 8. And of this kind are the presents which the daughter of Tyrus here
offers: and such honorable gifts, no doubt, this Princely marriage, shall be
honored with, both by noble persons at home and abeoad: Beside these, there is
another kind of gift, not worthy to be named, donum corru^pen^^t
destructorium: a corrupting and destroying gift, which is by bribing, and
blinding the eyes: such as Felix looked for at Paul's hand, but because none
came he left him bound still: Against bribery and corrupting of justice by
gifts.
Acts. 24. 28. Such gifts, it is to be feared, fly abroad too fast: but they
have the The Raven came to the Arc, but not into it to Noah.
ravens not the doves wings, to carry men from the Arc, not to bring them to
it: Many a poor man's cause lies bound with Paul, and cannot be loosed, nor
set free, because it wants a silver key to unlock the bolts: but let men
take heed, how with Esau for a mess of pottage, they sell their eternal
inheritance. Let men beware of such gifts. Vbi ditior est largitore, cui
largiendum est -- pars sacrilegij est rem pauperum dare non pauperib. Hier on,
ad Pammach. Where he to whom one gives, is richer then the giver, it is a
part of sacrilege, to bestow the poores gift on them that are not poor, etc.

Now touching the mystical sense: Christ's kingdom is here signified to be a
kingdom of peace: it brings both internal and external peace; as it is
prophesied, Esaias 2. 4. They shall break their swords into matt^ckes, and their
spears into sithes: Nation shall not lift up a sword against nation: It is a
false religion, that is an enemy to peace.
The Church was increased, by prayer not by war, by the word, not by the
sword, by persuasion, not invasion. Then it is easy to judge who they are, and
what that company is, which grows fat by blood: and builds upon others
ruins: It is that Babylon-Rome, that red scarlet whore, that is drunk with
the blood of the Saints, Revel. 17. 6. Which has been a firebrand of the
world, and the very Vulcans forge of rebellion, and bellows of sedition: of
whose bloody exploits, we may say as Tertullian of the Pagane Romans: Quomodo
ob religionem magni, Tertul. Apologet.
quibus magnitudo ob irreligiositaetem prouenit? tot sacrilegia Romanoru^, quot
trophaea: religione^ aut laedendo creuerunt, aut crescendo laeserunt: How can
they be said to be great for religion, whose greatness comes by irreligion?
The Romans have committed as many sacriledges, as erected Trophies: they have
either increased by hurting religion; or by increasing have hurt religion.

7 As Salomons reign was peaceable, his clemency, equity and piety at the
first procured peace: so has the Gospel brought peace to this land, now full
55. years: all Queen Elizabeth's reign, and hitherto these ten years: The
great benefit of peace for 55. years in England, and how it may be continued.
God make them equal to Salomons peaceable reign, and to exceed them, under
the reign of our Solomon, and his seed, that presents of peace may be sent,
not proclamations of war, that hostility may cease abroad, treachery be
extinct at home: that prosperity and good success may flourish without; and
tranquillity and peace within: Which to obtain, let us humble our selves unto
God, and seek to please him by amendment of life. Some says Ambrose use to
dispatch Ambassadors for help to other countries: Nos quod est melius ad deum
legationem per ieiuniae destinemus: Sermon. 40.
cur petat ab altero, qui inter se inuentre potest, quod quaerat? But that
which is better, let us send an embassage by our prayers and fastings unto God:
why should one ask of another, when he may find in himself that which he
seeks? Thus shall we obtain continuance of peace by the force of prayers,
sooner then by the dint of sword; by tears and humility, then by armor and
chivalry. And so shall it come to pass, as Hierome says, Vt qui contemnunt
sceptra regalia and purpuras Caesarnm, Christianorum sordes and iemma
pertimescant: That they which care not for the kingly scepter and imperial
power, shall fear Christian fasting and prayers: Which I say not, as though
outward armor should be neglected, but spiritual only preferud; for
neecessary war provision must be made: as Augustine excellently says; Pacem
habere debet voluntas, bellu^ necessitas, vt liberet Deus a necessitate, and
conseruet in pace, etc. Our desire must be for tranquillity, and war for
necessity, that God may deliver us from the necessity, and keep us in
tranquillity. Which God for his mercy grant.

The Kings daughter is all glorious within, etc. 8 Here are two words to
express the glory of the brides apparel, Sermon. de nati^. Epist. 107.
which is the second argument for the illustration thereof: Of the
signification of the words here used.
the one mishbetzoth, of the word (...) Shabatz, which fignifieth properly to
work and embroyder a garment, with holes and eyes to set in precious stones,
so is the word used, Exodus 28. 11. Where the two precious stones are appointed
to be set, and embossed in gold: the other word is (...) recamoth, which
signifies Phrygian or needle work: rather then of diverse colors, as the
Septuagint translate it by the word (...), for there is an other word (...)
passim, which has that signification, and is expressed by the Greek (...):
such a coat of changeable or diverse colors Jacob made for Joseph, Genes. 37.
3. and Thamar David's daughter had such a garment, when her brother defiled her,
2. Sam. 14. 19. And this to be the true sense of the word, is evident. Exodus
26. 36. Thou shall make an hanging of blue silk, purple scarlet, wrought with
the needle, not of diverse colors: for they are set down before. And seeing
the costlinesse and glory of the Queens apparel is here set forth, rather the
working with the needle, then the view of diverse colors shows the richness
of the apparel: for such a coat Jacob made for Joseph, which was gay, rather
then glorious or costly.

9 This beautiful and goodly spouse, is both glorious within, and glittering
without: the external ornaments are nothing without the inward complements: a
woman should rather be decent within, then decked without, to have comeliness
of mind rather then costlinesse of apparel. So S. Peter advises, Whose
apparelling let it not be outward, with broidered hair and gold put about, but
let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt, with a meek and quiet spirit, which
is before God a thing much set by: for after this manner in time past did holy
women tire themselves, etc. 1. Pet. 3. 3. 4. 5. It is not unlawful for women
of state and honor to attire themselves according to their place but they must
labor more for the inward gifts, then outward fashions. The chief ornaments
of men and women.
Daniel and his other three companions, being called to place of honor,
refused not to wear the honorable Babylonish robes, as may appear, Dan. 3.
21. yet they more excelled in virtue: as Hierome says, Habitu Nabuchadnezor,
mente Deo seruiebant: they served Nebuchadnezzar in their habits, but God in
their mind: so Mordocheus and Queen Esther, Hieron. ad Saluinam.
Inter purpuram, superbiam humilitate vicerunt, did, in the midst of their
purple robes vanquish pride and vanity, with humility. Thus should inward
grace, and the outward shining face, the garnishing of the mind, and the
furnishing of the body go together: a fine garment, and a foul soul; a
comely feature, and uncomely behavior do not well suit together. Noble men
and women, that live in Princes pa^aces, and glitter in goodly garments, should
be like to Nebridius, whom Hierome so much commends.

Inter fulgorem palatij, and honorum culmina sic vixit, vt se crederet ad
Christum profecturum: nihil nocuit militanti paludamentum, quia sub habitu
alterius alteri militabat: He so lived in the glittering show of the palace
and in the height of honor, as one that was traveling to Christ: his
soldiers garment did not hurt him, ^bid.
for under the habit or liuerie of one he served an other.

10 We must then have a special regard to the heart: because that is it which
the Lord looks unto, The vain care and study for adorning of the body.
not to the outward appearance, 1. Sam. 16. 7. that which makes us without
spot and wrinkle before God is true holiness, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians.
5. 27. They then which make neat and trim the outward man, and suffer the
inward to be unclean and untrimmed, may well please the eyes of men, but they
are not pleasing unto God, they are as a sepulcher, fair without and shining,
but foul within and smelling: Matthew. 23. 27. As the fig tree which
flourished with leaves, but was without fruit, Mat. 11. 11. as the grass on
the house top, that shows green, but never comes to ripeness as wanting
root, Psalm. 129. 6. so is outward comeliness and conformity with inward
loathsomeness and deformity, so is a vesture without virtue, and shining
garments with shameful manners: as Bernard says well of such: mollia
indumenta animum molliorem indicant, non ta^to curaretur corporis cultus, nisi
prius neglecta fuisset men's inculta virtutibus: Apolog.
Soft raiment show a softer and more dissolute mind; neither would they be so
careful to pranck up their body, if they were not careless to adorn the
mind.

11. This glory of the spouse within may be understood two ways: either of
the virtues of the mind, as they are opposed to outward ornaments: or of the
true natural beauty and glory of the body, as it is set against painted and
deceivable favor, Against Iezabels painted face.
such as Iezabel counterfetted, 2. King. 9. 30. and it is the bad fashion of
many women in these days, who herein are Iesabels disciples: Tertullian says
here well, sit inter ancillas Dei and diaboli discrimen; there should be a
difference between the handmaides of God and the devil, etc. Iesabels
fashions do not beseem them, that abhor Iesabels conditions: he adds
further, quod nascitur Dei opus, quid fingitur diaboli, etc. that which is
given the body by birth, is the work of God, that which is counterfeit, is the
work of the devil: what a wickedness is it, to add the devils work unto
Gods, etc. The same author also speaks against the coloring and dying of the
hear, and making of it yellow, and the wearing of dead bodies hear: against
the wearing of borrowed hair.
which evil and corrupt vsages he thus severely and sharply taxes: pessime
sibi auspicantur flamme^ capite: ne exuuias capitis alieni, for^itan immundi
and gehenna destinati capiti tuo suppares: Lib. de cult. f^eminar.
They prognosticate unhappily to themselves by their flaming hear, a sign of
hell fire; put not on thy head the leauings of another head, that for ought thou
know, is appointed to hell.

12. The Church of Christ here signified by this beautiful spouse, is also
glorious within by faith in Christ: it has also exernall gifts, as Augustine
understands by these broydered garments of gold, varietates linguarum, decus,
etc. Variety of languages, the honor of the Church: sed quid ista prosunt,
etc. but what do these things profit, if that inward beauty be wanting:
these inward ornaments are those (...) shining garments, Praefat. in Catechis.
as Cyril calls them, which he wanted, that came to the wedding feast: then
it is an easy matter here to give judgment of that Church, Against the
gorgeous ornaments of outward Temples, and neglecting of the inward.
if it be a Church, that glories in golden outward garments, glittering with
pearl and precious stones, and outward pomp, wanting this true inward glory,
which consists in the right faith and doctrine of the truth: This is the
pompous synagogue of the Romanists; where are to be seen their Churches
glittering with gold, Of the whore of Babylons costly robes.
their images decked with jewels, their Popes riding in cloth of gold, scarlet,
pearls and precious stones; but no inward glory of true doctrine and piety
is there to be found. This is the right description, of that scarlet whore of
Babylon, as Tertullian thus sets her forth: Lib. de cult. faeminar.
Illa ciuitas, quae super septem montes etc. sedet in purpura, cum coccino and
auro, and lapide precioso, quae maledicta sunt, sine quibus non potuit
maledicta and prostituta describi: That city built upon seven hills, which
deserved the name of an harlot, sits in purple, scarlet, gold, precious
stones, which are accursed, without the which the cursed harlot could not be
described. This vain pomp of Churches, images, vestments, either they borrow
from the Gentiles, and then we say again with Tertullian: simus and moribus
ijsdem, si superficie eadem: Why should we not be of the same manners, if we
retain the same fashions: or else they have them from the Jews, and then
Bernard will tell them: that the Temple was then garnished with gold, Des^tmat.
when blood was sacrificed; Aurum igitur repudiemus cum caeteris superstiombus
Iud little: aut si aurum placeat, Bernard.
placeant and Iud^i: Therefore let us refuse their gilded ornaments with other
superstitions, or if we will have the Jewish ornaments, let us become jews.

13. To return to the historical sense, That it is lawful for noble persons
to use garments of price.
many things may here be observed for our instruction: first, that it is
lawful for honorable persons to use precious and costly garments befitting
their estate, as our blessed Savior says, they that wear soft raiment, are
in Kings houses: Matthew. 11. 8. wherein Tertullian seems to be somewhat too
strict, Tertullians singular opinion of purple garments.
for he allows not the use of purple, and such like robes at all, as a sign
of honor, but as a distinction of degree: Natiuitatis insigma, Lib. de
idolatat.
non potestatis, generis non honoris, ordinis, non superstitionis, caeterum
purpura, etc. habent profanationis suae maculam, etc. As a recognisance of
their nobility, not of magistracy, of their blood and stock, not of honor,
of their order, not of superstition: purple, and other ornaments consecrate to
idolatry have a mark of profaneness, etc. Against sumptuous and cost^lie
garments.
Secondly, though these ornaments of honor are seemly for Princes and Nobles,
yet are they not fit for mean persons, as now many of inferior order and
place, presume to iet in costly garments, as Lords and Ladies: who, as
Tertullian taxes the pride of his time, De habit mul^^br.
Saltus and insulas tenera fert ceruix: can have hanging at their necks whole
woods and countries: meaning in the price and costlinesse of their jewels: V^
Pauli.
and as Hierome says, Vno filo villarum in suunt praedia: they have whole
Manners hanging upon one thread, etc. to restrain such inordinate excess and
costlinesse of apparel, diverse imperial constitutions in times past have been
made: Cod. lib. 6. tit. 8. leg. 1. Di^^let, Marcian.
as aureorum vsus annulorum beneficio principis tributus: that none should
wear gold rings, Ced. lib. 4. tit. 40 log. 1. (...).
but by grant from the Emperor, etc. And in another law, distrahendi purpuram,
facultatem nullam posset habere priuatur: Every private man is forbidden to buy
any purple, and that none should buy any silk without license, Compara^di
series omnibus iubemus auferri facultatem. Ibid. leg. 2.
etc. Thirdly, they which are clad with such robes of honor, should seek to
be truly honored by their virtue, and to be all glorious within, as this
honorable spouse here described: for that is no comeliness, which is borrowed,
nor seemly grace, which is put off and on with the garment: as he well says,
Bernard. epi. 114.
Serica and purpura decorem habent, sed non praebent: decor qui cum vest,
induitur, and cum vest deponitur, vestis proculdubio est, non vestiti: Silk
and purple have a grace, but they give none: that comeliness, which is put off
and on with the garment, is of the attire, not of them that are attired, etc.
Even that Heathen governor Lysander, when the Ruler of Sicilie sent his
daughters certain precious garments, (...), etc. Plutarch.
refused them, saying, that those ornaments would rather disgrace, then grace
his daughters: but our Christian Cyrill much better, who would have men take
heed of superfluous, curious and costly raiment, lest under a pretense of
hiding one uncomeliness, (...). catech. 4. Hier. Ocean.
thou (says he) fall into another uncomeliness: for as Hierome well says;
istiusmodi ornatus and cultus sordib. turpior est: such kind of finenesse is
worse then sluttishnesse. And so Tertullian shall here conclude: Vestite vos
serico sanctitatis, byssino probitatis, purpura pudicitiae, taliter pigmentatae
Deum habebitis amatorem: Attire your selves with the silk of sanctity, Lib.
de cult. faeminar.
with the finenesse of fidelity, with the purple of piety; being so attired,
you shall have God for your lover.

The virgins after her, her companions shall be brought unto thee. 14. This is
the third argument, to illustrate the glory of the royal Queen, taken a
comitatu, from her company and attendants: the principal meaning hereof, does
lead us to consider of the vocation of the Church of the Gentiles, as
Augustine well expounds, Vere factum est, ecclesia credidit, facta per omnes
gentes; This was done in deed, the Church believed and is constituted among al
Nations, etc. Like as then a Queen is attended with maids of honor, as the
Queen of Sheba came to Jerusalem with a very great train unto Solomon, 1.
King. 10. 2. and noble Queen Ester had her maids that waited upon her, Ester
4. 16. Why the Church is likened to a virgin.
So the Church of the Gentiles being espoused and married to Christ, shall
bring a great company of virgins, that is, of faithful people and believers,
that shall also betroth themselves unto Christ, as chaste virgins renouncing
all other: in this sense Saint Paul says to the Corinthians: I have prepared
you for one husband to present you as a pure virgin to Christ: 2. Cor. 11. 2.
So in the godly reign of Hezekiah, when idolatry was expelled, and the true
worship of God maintained: Jerusalem is called a virgin; O virgin daughter of
Zion, 2. King. 19. 21. she is called a virgin, Propter integritatem fidei,
Lyran.
quae semper ibi remansit in aliquibus, etc. quod cunctis gentibus idola
adorantibus haec sola conseruat castitatem religionis vnius Dei: Gloss. ordinar.
Because of the integrity of faith, which always there remained in some, and,
because while other Gentiles worshipped idols, she only kept the chastity of
the religion and worship of one God.

15. So then the true worshippers of God must be as virgins, to refuse all
other lovers, and to keep them only to God; and the Lord must have the
virginity and first of their service: he will not take another leauings, but
will be the first: even as the Lord was first served under the law when they
brought unto him the first fruits of all things: so God will have the first
oblations of our service; Ambeos. lib. 3. de vergin.
primitias vigiliarum Christo dicato, primitias actuum tuorum Christo immola.
Offer to God the first fruits of thy watching: The first fruits of all our acts
must be consecrated unto God.
sacrifice unto him the first fruis of thy acts, etc. Christ was borne of a
Virgin, that was never known of man before nor after; he road upon the foale
of an ass, never used to the yoke: was laid in a sepulcher, wherein never any
lay before: so the Lord will have the virginity of the soul, and such
virgins the Lord should have brought unto him from the Gentiles, that would
consecrate their first beginnings unto God: as Hierome says of Hilarion, prius
calca^it diabolum, Vit^ Hilarion.
quam per aetatem ^alcare p^tuisset. He trampled upon the Devil before by
reason of his young age he knew how to trample, etc. Nouellas orbusculas in
quamlibet partem flecti facile est: tenera animaliae sine labor dom^ri solent:
optimi sunt ad institutionem morum primi quique anni. ad Demetriad, Young trees
are easily bowed every way and young beasts are tamed without any great
difficulty; so the fittest years for the institution of manners are the first:
Hierome.
etc. Such virgins then, which present unto God the first of their desires and
studies, are most acceptable, as the Prophet says: It is good for a man that
he bear the yoke in his youth. Ierem. Lamen. 3. 27.

16. We find diverse sorts of Virgins mentioned in the Scripture, and in
diverse senses: they are so called either in a metaphorical or litterall sense,
the metaphorical has either a spiritual respect (as they are Virgins, Diverse
kinds of Virgins.
with are wholly sequestered from the world, and dedicated unto God, forsaking all
idolatry and strange worship: so all faithful people are Virgins keeping their
faith only unto God, as this word is taken. 2. Cor. 11. 2.) or a temporal: as
Tyrus is called a Virgin Isai. 23. 12. because they had not been yet subdued
by any, and brought under the yoke of subjection: now in the litterall sense,
there are two sorts of virgins, either in the body, as they which are
unmarried. 1. Corinthians. 7. 37. or in mind, as they, whose chastity and virginity
is forced against their mind: they are virgins, though not both in body and
rit, as the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 7. 34. yet in spirit they are, of whom
Ambrose thus writes. Tolerabilus est mentem virginem quam carnem, habere;
vtr^nque bonum si liceat, si non liceat, saltem non homini casti, sed Deo
simus. lib. 2. de virgini^. It is better to have the mind a virgin then the
flesh, both are good if they may be had, if not, let us not be chaste unto men,
but unto God, etc. The virgins, which are here spoken of, are the virgins of
the first sort, which keep the virginity and integrity of their faith, sound
unto God.

17. But here we must take heed, that this express mention made of Virgins,
do not bring us to have such a conceit of carnal and external virginity,
with the Romanists, as to give unto it simply that preeminence and prerogative
before all other professions: Spiritual virginity preferred before carnal.
Against Bellarmine.
which seems to be Bellarmines opinion: who understands that place of
professed Virgins, Revel. 14. 4. These are they which are not defiled with
women, for they are Virgins, these follow the lamb, whether soever he goes,
whereupon he infers thus: Ex quo testimonio apparet, De Monarch. lib. 2. c.
q. ss. nouum.
singular praemium habere virgins: Out of which testimony it appears that
Virgins have a singular reward. etc. But this place will not serve his turn:
which Ambrose expounds, in this manner. In mulieribus errorem significauit,
quia per mulierem error caepit: nam si ideo putes virgins dictos, quia corpora
sua intaminata seruaru^t, excludes ab has gloria sanctos, quia omnes Apostoli.
etc. He signifies by women error, because error came by a woman, for if you
think they are called Virgins, because they kept their bodies undefiled, you
will exclude the saints from this glory, for all the Apostles except Paul and
John had wives, etc. This is Ambrose reason, taken from a great inconvenience,
the excluding of the glorious Saints: Hierome proves this not to be understood
of external virginity only, Ad Pammach.
by an other reason taken from the words following, verse. 5. In their mouths
was found no guile. Vides ergo, quod in vno virgins tantum membrorum dominicis
referantur inhaerere vestigijs, sed illi, etc. You see then, that virgins in
one only of their members are said to tread in the Lords steps: but they in
all which lead a life vncorrupt from every contagion of sin, etc. And
Augustine whom Bellarmine alleges, as favoring and fathering his
interpretation, grants that Coniugati fideles possunt ire per ista vestigia,
etsi non perfect in eadem forma ponentes pedem, veruntamen in eisdem semitis
gradientes. Even the faithful married persons may go by these footsteps, De
virginitat. c. 28.
though not, perfectly setting their feet in the same form, yet walking in
the same path, etc. To this purpose Augustine: add heereunto that if Virginity
of the flesh were only understood, then the virginity and the humility of the
mind should not be required, which Augustine denies: Obedientia coniugataminus
obedienti virgini praeponenda est: lib. de bon. coniugal. 1. 24. Obedience in
marriage is preferred before a disobedient Virgin. etc. And Bernard further
thus delivers his opinion concerning virgins, Homil. 1. super ^issus est.
that are puffed up in the opinion of their virginity. Potes sine Virginitate
saluari, sine humilitate non potes, sine humilitate audeo dicere, nec
virginitas Mariae profuisset: expedit tibi virginem non esse, quam de
virginitate insolescere: non omnium est virginitas, multo tamen panciorum cum
virginitate est humilitas. Thou may be saved without virginity, but not
without humility, I dare say, that virginity without humility, had not profited
the Virgin Mary, it were better for thee not to be a virgin then to be proud
of thy Virginity; all have not virginity, and yet fewer there are, that have
viginity with humility, etc. We see then that not corporal virginity, but
spiritual integrity, is here to be understood.

18. Here somewhat for the conclusion of this part also would be added
touching the literal sense; Modesty and Chastity specially required in noble
Virgins.
that here the attendants of this honorable Queen are said to be Virgins: no
Virgins like to noble Virgins: and maidenhood is no where more precious, then
in Princes Courts: other maidens loose their virginity only, if they step
aw^y: but these beside that loss do also stain their honor, and defile the
sacred palace of Princes: Maids then of honor, should seek to preserve the
honor of Virginity, to be examples of sobriety to others, as Queen Esthers
maids were: I and my maids (says that noble Queen) will fast. Esther. 4.
16. They of all other should not make themselves gazing stocks of pride,
Tertullian.
but mirrhors of maidenly modesty: he says well; Eiusdem libidinis est videre
et videri: omnis publicatio virginis bonae passi^ stupri est. It shows like
lust to desire to be seen as to see, every showing and setting forth of a
modest Virgin, is a step to adultery, etc. They must neither be tempted
themselves, nor be tempters of others: They must neither make themselves baits
of wanton Courtiers, and the other must take heed not to be caught by such
baits. Let worthy Alexander be herein remembered: who when as one Philoxenus
had sent him word of a fair youth, that he had found for him, craving to know
his mind further, Plutarch. orat. 1. de fortun. Alexandri. (...).
made this excellent answer. Thou wicked fellow, what such thing have thou
known by me, that thou should flatter me with such pleasures. I would wish
that Courtiers professing Christianity, would thus arm themselves against such
tentations as he did in the state of infidelity: But I need not send them to
Alexander, they have a domestical example, our noble King, as the treasurer of
bounty, the professor of piety, practiser of clemency, so the mirror of
Chastity: But here our gallant Ladies will say, that if they did not attire
themselves to the fashion, they should scandalize others and be counted odd by
themselves: here Tertullian shall make them an answer, who thus excellently
turns off this objection: What a scandale or offense is.
Scandalum nisi fallor non bonae rei sed malae exemplum est, aedificans ad
delictum: bonae res neminem scandalizant nisi malam mentem, si bonum est
modestia agnoscant, malum suum, quae de tali bono scandalizantur. lib. de
veland. virginib. A scandale if I be not deceived, is not an example of a good
thing, but an evil, building up unto sin: good things never scandalize any
but evil minds: if modesty be a good thing let them acknowledge their evil,
which are scandalized by such a good thing, etc. Thus then modesty should be
embraced of courtly Virgins, as the preserver of chastity, and chastity
desired, as a pattern of Angelical glory: For Chastity as Cyrill well says,
(...). Catechis. 2.
is an angelical Crown.

With joy and gladness shall they be brought and enter into the Kings
Palace. 19. The fourth part follows whereby the glory of this honorable
Lady is set forth, the solemn progress and pro^^ssion of this princely
company: first for the literal sense: the people of God always have had their
cheerful solemnities, Public solemnities lawful.
and used in their public joy, their joyful acclamations, and decent
deambulations: hereof evident mention is made in the Psalm, They have seen O
God, thy goings, the goings of my God, and my King in the Sanctuary: The
singers went before, the players of instruments after, in the midst were the
maids playing on timbrels. Psalm. 68. 24. 25. Thus Moses and the children of
Israel, made a solemn thanksgiving unto God, and M^riam with the women came
forth with timbrels and daunces, and answered them. Exodus 15. 1. 10. So the
women of Israel met King Saul and David coming from the slaughter of the
Philistines, with timbrels and other instruments of joy. 1. Sam. 18. 6.

20. For in these solemn assemblies of joy, they intended nothing but the
honor of God, The joy of Gods people described.
as the Psalm shows: Come let us rejoice unto the Lord, let us come before
his face with Praise. Psalm. 95. 1. 2. This solemn procession of the people of
God, David compares to a multitude that keeps a feast. Psalm. 42. 4. They
are like to an army marching on with banners displayed. Cantic. 6. 3. as a
flock of goats looking down from the mountains of Gilead. Cantic. 4. 2. as
a flock of sheep coming up in good order from the washing, every one having
twins. Cantic. 6. 3. Like as the beasts came in seemly order and array by two
and two into the Arc to Naoh, Genesis 7. 8. Such are the decent and comely goings
forth of the people of God unto his Temple.

21. We read of four kind of solemn processions, Diverse kind of processions.
two civil, and other two belonging to religion: and in each kind one lawful,
an other unlawful: the lawful civil, is seen in the public joy of the
people in their triumphs, at the coronation of Kings, celebrating of marriage
feasts and such like, as Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and
made a feast at Jacobs marriage. Genesis 29. 22. So the daughters of Shilo used to
come forth in daunces to keep a feast unto the Lord. Iud. 21. 21. The
unlawful civil procession is, when it is done only for vain pomp and
ostentation: as King Agrippa and his wife Bernice are said to come (...), with
great pomp and ostentation into the place of audience. Acts 25. 23. The lawful
religious kind is, when people are assembled to the praise of God as at the
dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, Nehemiah divided the people into two
companies to praise the Lord: the one went upon the wall at the left hand, the
other on the right. Nehem. 12. 31. The unlawful is that, which is used to
superstition: as the Israelites gathered together to keep a feast to the
goulden calfe: they sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Exodus
32.

22. Here fit occasion is offered to touch the popish solemnities, and
superstitious processions, which they use in the adoration of their new breaden
God, setting it forth with rich shows of gold and silver and precious stones,
causing the people to bow down and kneel to a piece of bakers bread:
according to that Prophecy of Daniel, he shall honor the god Manzzim (their
mass god) and the god whom his Fathers knew not, Against popish processions.
shall he honor with gold and silver, and with precious stones and pleasant
things: Dan. 11. 38. This glittering and gorgeous show in religious
processions, has been condemned in former times, as thus it was decreede in a
provincial synod: Caueant Leuitae gemino vti orario, sed vno tantum, et puro,
nec vllis colorib aut auro ornato. Toletan. 4. c. 34. Levites (that is
ministers or deacons) must take heed, that they use not a double
prayer-garment, but one, and the same plain, without any color or gold, etc.
The like was decreed in a general counsel in this manner: Eos, qui prae manu
vascula quaedam aurea, vel ex alia materia construunt, ad susceptionem diuini
doni, et per illa immaculatam communionem volunt, nullo modo admittinus, vt
praeferentes materiem inanimem hominique obnoxiam Dei imagini. Trullan. c. 101.
Those, which bear in their hand certain vessels of gold or of other matter, to
receive the divine gift, thinking by them the communion to be kept undefiled,
we by no means admit, as preferring a dead matter, and at man's command,
before the image of God, etc. What could be more directly said against the
carrying of their host in vessels of gold, under canopies of cloth of silver,
with rich and costly attire, and all to adore a wheaten cake: These gorgeous
shows they borrow of the heathen Romans their predecessors, as Tertullian
says: Hoc ritu habitu et apparatu idolis immolatur -- hae erant pompae diaboli
et angelorum eius, officia seculi, honores etc. de coron milit. In the same
habit rite and preparation, they sacrifice to their gods: and so he
concludes, these were the pomp of the Devil and his Angels, the service of
the world, vain honor, etc.

23. To add somewhat of the spiritual sense: by this entering of the Virgins
into the Kings palace is set forth, the flocking of the Gentiles to the Church
of God: and in this sense the vulgar latin reads templu^, the temple, for
palace, and so the Hebrew word (...) ^echal also signifies, as Psalm. 5. 8. and
so the septuagint translate it here (...) the temple of ye king: so Augustine
likewise expounds, Templu^ regis ipsa ecclesia, the temple of the King is the
Church of God: Thus christians should in their cheerful processio^s visit ye
Church of God: The Church must be frequented in public procession.
like as doves come flocking unto their windows. Isai. 68. and as sheep gather
together to their shepherd: ibid. v. 7. Some there are which will be in the
King and Queens train in their princely processions and shows, but will leave
them when they come to the Church: They will not do that service to a
Christian Prince in the worship of the true God, which Naaman did to an heathen
King in his idolatrous service of R^mmon; (...). Praef. in Cantic.
the king his master leaned upon his hand: but this is the true assembly and
procession of right Virgins, as Cyrill says, to come together into the Church
of God, to sing, read, or pray.

24. Now to return to the historical sense, here this goodly company of
virgins do accompany this glorious Queen into the Kings palace: they are
attired as virgins, their behavior, progress, walking is, as becomes
virgins. Here then such maids as do serve Princes, are admonished in all
their carriage and behavior to be virgin-like; Isay reprooueth the daughters
of Zion for three special faults, incessu, habitu, vestitu, in their gate,
habit of their body, strange fashions of apparel: for the first he says, they
minse as they go, Against the Pride of vain women in their apparel.
and make a tinckling with their feet: for the next, they walk with stretched
out necks, that their necks and breasts might appear: and for the third: he
names diverse strange forms of apparel, as their head-tyre, slops, headbands
and such like, Isay. 3. 16. 20. And this is the very fashion and guise of
wanton maids and Virgins in these times. First, concerning their minsing and
affected gate, see how Ambrose checketh the women of his time; Cernis vt
pomparum ferculis similis incedit, Lib. 1. de virgin.
quae se componit vt placeat, eo ipso, quo studet placere, deformior, etc. You
see how she goes, as they that carry stately dishes of meat; the so much
more disgraceful, as she affects a grace in going? etc. And concerning the
tinckling and creaking of their feet as they go, Hierome found fault with it
in his time: De suspect. contubern.
Caliga nigella and nitens stridore ad se iunenes vocat: Their black and neat
slipper, or stertup with the creaking allureth young men, etc. And before him
Tertullian thus elegantly reprooueth such niceness: Lib. de pallio.
Magnum incessui munimentum sutrina venerea prospexere, perones effaeminatos:
quem non expediat in algore rigere nudipedem, quam in calceo vnguipedem: A
goodly defense sure for the foot, shooemakers wanton skill has devised these
effeminate stertuppes, etc. And therefore a little before he said: Who had not
better go in the cold and heat barefooted, then to be so pinched, and as it
were hoof-footed in the shoe, etc. Concerning their habit, in baring, and
making naked their necks and breasts: the same ancient writer does note it to
have been a fault in his time: Lib. de velan^^. virginib.
Ipsa concupiscentia non latendi non est pudica, tegantur superiora, cuius
inferiora nuda non sunt: The very desire not to be hid is not seemly, seeing
their nether parts are covered, why should the upper be uncovered, etc. Hierome
pritilie taunteth maids for a certain wanton trick which they used: De
suspect, contuber.
Palliolum interdum cadit, vt candidos undet humeros, and quasi videri
noluerat, celat festina, A man is not* to wear woman's apparel.
quod volens detexerat: Sometime the cloak falls of purpose, to show her
white neck, and as though it were against her will, she quickly hides that
again, which she wittingly had uncovered, etc. But how much more unseemly is
it to uncover them of purpose, and make them bare altogether. Now for the third
use, the strange fashion of women's apparel, in conforming the same to man's
attire: but specially for women in maskes and shows to be apparelled as men,
and men as women, has always been a distasteful thing to them, which were
more sober minded: as Tertullian condemns it directly: Lib. de idolat.
Nullum cultum a Deo maledictum inuenio, nisi muliebrem in viro: maledictus
inquit omnis, qui mulie bribus induitur: I find no apparel cursed of God, but
a woman's in a man: for cursed, says he, is every one, which puts on woman's
apparel: Deuteronomy. 22. 5. etc. And lest we might think that he speaks only
against ordinary wearing of such apparel, and not in shows and plays, Lib.
de spectat.
he says in another place thus: No^ amat falsum auctor veritatis, adulterinum
apudeum est omne, quod fingitur: The author of verity, loves not falsity,
every thing that is counterfeite, before him is counted a kind of adultery
etc. And then alleging the former place out of Deutronomie he infers thus:
Quid de pantomimo iudicabit, qui etiam muliebribus curatur: What may one think
then of a player, that is trimmed with women's apparel, etc. Only I find one
occasion lawful for this changeable use of men and women's garments, which
Ambrose speaks of, and it was this: A certain virgin of Antioch being
condemned to the stews, because she would not sacrifice to the idols, prayed
thus unto God: Lord, which could stop the mouths of the Lions against
Daniel; thou also can bridle the raging lusts of men: A virgin putting on a
soldiers apparel saved her virginity.
and having thus prayed, there came in a soldier, and changed garments with
her, using these words; Quasi adulter ingressus, si vis, martyr egrediar:
vestimenta mutemus: tua vestis me verum militem faciet, mea te virginem, sum
tibi habitum, Lib. 2. de virgin.
qui abscondat faeminam, consecret martyrem: I came in as an adulterer, and if
thou will, will go out as a martyr; let us change garments, thy vesture shall
make me a true soldier, mine shall keep thee a virgin: take thee an habit,
which shall hide thy womanhood, and consecrate my martyrdom, etc. And by this
mean the virgin escaped, and saved her virginity. The sum is this, that our
virgins and maids of honor, and of all sorts, should in their solemnities
and feasts, be like unto these virgins, that is, in their behavior,
apparel, fashion, to carry themselves, as it becomes virgins attending
upon this Queen, that was all glorious within. Now I will come to the last
part.

Verse. 16. In stead of thy fathers, shall thy children be: thou shall place
them for princes in all the earth. 25. The last point, wherein the glory of
this Spouse is set forth, is the fruitful issue and happy posterity, which
this honorable Queen should be increased with, wherein spiritually, and more
specially is described, the wonderful increase of the Church of God, which
should be called of the Gentiles: as the Apostle to this purpose alleges the
prophecy of Isay 54. 1. Of the great increase of the Church.
Rejoice thou barren, that bear no children, break forth and cry thou
that trauellest not, for the desolate has many mo children, the^ she which
has an husband, Gal. 4. 27. And as this Psalm says, that her sons shall be
princes in all lands. So the Prophet Isay says: Kings shall be thy nursing
fathers; and Queens thy ursing mothers. cap. 49. 23. And again, Thou shall
suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breast of Kings: cap. 60.
16. The Church is nourished of Kings and Princes, Kings, both the fathers and
children of the Church.
in respect of their defense and protection, and they are also the sons of
the Church, in regard of their spiritual instruction and regeneration. This is
that, which was promised to Sarah, She shall be the mother of nations, and
Kings of people shall come of her, Genes. 17. 16. which was then fulfilled,
when the Kings of the Gentiles were converted to the faith of Sarah. So the
Apostle makes the earthly Jerusalem to answer unto Agar the bondwoman,
(...). Caeechis. 18.
and Jerusalem, which is above, the mother of us all; to Sarah the freewoman,
Galath. 4. 26. which Jerusalem, as Cyril says, was at the first barren, but
now has many children: So Heuah, being so called, because she was the mother
of all living, was a type of the Church, which should be the mother of all
those, that live unto God: as Ambrose well observes, Haec est Eua matter emnium
viuentium: veniat ergo Deus, In cap. 3. Luc.
aedificet mulierem illam quidem adiutricem Adae, hanc vero Christi, non quia
Christus adiumentum requirit, sed quia nos quaerimus ad Christi gratiam per
Ecclesiam peruenire: This is Eua the mother of all the living: come God, then,
and build that woman an helper unto Adam, but this unto Christ required an
help, but because we seek to come to the grace of Christ by the Church, etc.

26. For hereby is the glory of God set forth, and his name advanced, when
thorough the earth praise shall be given unto him: as the Prophet says, from
the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, my name is great among the
Gentiles: Malach. 1. 11. As the multitude of children are the strength of the
parents, like a quiver full of arrows, Psalm. 127. 4. and as the honor of a
King is in the multitude of people, Prou. 14. 28. so it is more to the glory
of God, when many Nations are converted unto him. And so Wisdom says, I
took my solace in the compass of the earth: Pro. 8. 31. As in heaven, the
Lord has an infinite army of holy Angels, The multitude of the faithful
diversely resembled in Scripture.
thousand thousands minister unto him: Dan. 7. 10. so is it his glory to have
multitude of servants in earth; who therefore are for number likened to the
drops of the morning dew: Psalm. 110. 3. and to an ouerspreading cloud, and
as a company of doves, which fly to their windows: Isai. 60. 8. And as the
hear and locks of the head, are an ornament to the body; so the numbers of
faithful people, which are as the hears of the Church, compared to flocks of
goats, Cantic. 6. 4. do make her amiable and lovely in the sight of God.

27. This plentiful increase of the Church of God was diversely prefigured in
the old Testament: Tertullian will have it set forth in the birth of Isaac and
Jacob, Lib. aduers. Iudae^s.
and minor populus Christianus superet maiorem, the elder people of the Jews
should serve the younger, and the younger Christian people should overcome the
elder, Types of the old Testament shadowing forth the Church of the Gentiles.
etc. Iustine Martyr picketh as much out of that prophecy of Moses concerning
Joseph: His horns as the horns of an unicorn, with them he shall smite the
people together: Deuteronomy. 33. 15. This unicorns horn he understands to be the
cross of Christ, which rises up in one shanke, but then brancheth out above:
and so says he, the Gentiles, by the mystery of Christ's cross, (...), etc.
Dialog. cum Tryph.
were smitten through as with horns, and so were converted unto God. Ambrose
to this purpose applies that saying in the Canticles; the Church of the Jews
says thus of the Church of the Gentiles; Our sister has little breasts: Moras
innectebant, Sermon. 22. in Psalm. 119.
quarum ecclesia Christi impatiens dixit, non parua vbera habeo, sed vt turres
vbera mea sunt: And so they sought delays, whereof the Church of Christ being
impatient, says, I have no small breasts, they are like unto towers: Cantic.
8. 10. etc. The Church of the Gentiles has store of milk to nurse up many
children: Augustine does fitly find out this mystery shadowed soorth by
Gedeons fleece; the wet fleece and dry floor shows the fruitfulness of the
Jews, In lib. Judic. qu. 49.
and barrenness of the Gentiles, the wet floor, and dry fleece the vocation
of the Gentiles, and reiection of the Jews, who were but as an handful to the
Gentiles, as the fleece is to the floor. And as in Araunah, the Iebusites
ground, David built an Altar unto God, in Iudaeorum terra non inuentus est
locus, Sermon. 198.
vbi altar Deiponeretur, sed in terra gentium locus eligitur: So there was no
place found in the land of the Jews where to set the Altar of God, but a place
is chosen from the Gentiles. But it were an infinite thing to show at large how
this mystery of the plentiful calling of the Gentiles is in Scripture
described, and by the ancient writers decyphered: I may say here with Cyrill:
If I should speak all hereof that might be said. I had need of many hours to
declare it. (...). Catech. 18.


28. There are three usual expositions of this place, which are received of
the fathers. The first is that of Ambrose, who by the fathers here
understands the Gentiles: Lib. 2. in luc. 2.
Relinquit parents Ecclesia, quae de gentilibus populis congregatae est: The
Church leaves her parents, which is congregate of the Gentiles, etc. And so in
stead of her former parents, the Philosophers and Pagans, she hathset up
Christian instructors of her own children. Ad principiam tom. 4.
The second is Hieromes, who by the fathers, understands the Patriarchs and
Prophets, by these sons the Apostles, which were sent to preach through the
world: he has other expositions, but he seems most to insist upon this,
which Lyranus follows. The third is Augustine, In Psalm. 44.
Pro Apostolis constituti sunt Episcopi; who by the fathers understands the
Apostles, and by the sons Bishops and Pastors: but all these expositions are
somewhat to straight, in restraining the name of children only to pastors and
teachers, whereas all the faithful are the sons of the Church; therefore
there is a fourth interpretation more agreeable to the Scriptures: that we
here understand all the faithful people and believers, which spiritually are
made Kings and Priests unto God by Christ, Revel. 1. 6. and in this number
specially are comprehended also such Kings and Princes, How children are borne
to the Church in stead of her fathers.
which through the world should profess the faith of Christ, and so Isay may
interpret this place, chap. 49. 23. 60. 16. which places are at large cited
before, where express mention is made of believing Kings and Queens. And lest
this exposition might be accused of novelty; Hierome allows of it; for thy
fathers Natisunt tibi Apostoli and de nationibus credentes quos constituisti
principes: Ad Princip.
there are borne unto thee Apostles, and believers out of the nations, whom
thou have appointed Princes, etc.

29. Therefore it is a weak collection, Lib. 1. de pontif. c. 7.. fit enim.
that Bellarmine would infer out of these words, that the Ecclesiastical
regiment, The chief regiment of the Church belongs to secular Princes,
against Bellarmine.
is not penes principes seculares sed Episcopos, is not in the power of secular
Princes, but of Bishops: whom he supposes here to be understood by Princes:
1. I have showed, that this is not the meaning of this Scripture: or if they
will needs have it meant of spiritual Princes, I say with Hierome, intelligamus
Apostolos, let us understand the Apostles, whom Christ sent to preach to the
end of the world: but ordinary Bishops have not such a large commission to go
over the world, neither can arrogace to themselves that authority which the
Apostles had. 2. Allow it to be understood of Bishops, how are they Princes? in
spiritualibus, in spiritual things, as their own Lyranus says, and as
Hierome well expounds, Thou have made them Princes, that is, in populis
fecisti praeceptores, thou have made them teachers among the people: who
denies, but that it belongs to Pastors to give precepts to the people? that
is not to reign as Princes in the Church, and so superior to Kings. 3. And if
Bellarmine may have his saying, then is every Bishop a spiritual prince, and
absolute in his Diocese: the Pope then shall not be; the only
Ecclesiastical Prince.

30. An other such like gloss they have, Quae de ecclesia generaliter hic
dicuntur, Gloss Ordina^.
ad Mariam specialiter referri possunt: The things that are here generally
spoken of the Church, may be more specially referred unto Marie: But if this be
applied to Marie it makes against themselves, their blasphemous adoration, and
idolatrous invocation o^ Marie will fall to ground: for here Christ is made
her Lord, and she is to worship him: but the Romanists grossly make her equal
to her son: as one says: Filij gloriam cum matre, non tam communem iudico,
quam eandem. I Judge the glory of the Son, not so much to be common with the
mother, Vega comment. in Apoc. 12. ss. 2. number. 3.
as the same, etc. yea they rather make her superior, as another says:
Possumus prouocare a foro iustitiae Dei ad curiam Beatae Mariae. Bernard^n in
Marial.
We may appeal from the Court of Gods justice unto Mary's Court. etc.

And Bellarmine the oracle of the rest is not far off from such blasphemous
speeches in extolling of the Virgin Marie: for he defends that she may be
called, our life, hope, mother of mercy, and that they may say unto her in a
good sense, as it is in their superstitious Antiphonie: Iesum benedictum
fructum ventris tui nobis post hoc exilium o^^ende. lib. 1 de. bon. oper. in
partic. c. 15. That the Virgin Mary is not to be called our life, hope, mother
of mercies, against Bellarm.
Show us after this exile, Jesus the blessed fruit of thy womb, etc. Whereas
the Scripture makes God our hope. Psalm. 40. 4. Blessed is the man that makes
the Lord his hope: and in many places of the Psalms the Prophet professes,
that the Lord is his trust. Psalm. 14. 6. 21. 9. 61. 3. 62. 8. 65. 5. 71. 5.
73. 28. 78. 7. 91. 9. 94. 22. and in diverse other places: yea he gives this
reason, why he puts his trust in God: I trusted in thee O Lord, I said
thou art my God, Psalm. 31. 14. Therefore our trust must be only in God: If
then they will make the Virgin Marie our hope, consequently she must be God.
And to be a Father of mercies, is a title peculiar to God. 2. Cor. 1. 3. They
then in calling the Virgin Mary the mother of mercies, therein make her equal
unto God. And Christ says of himself: I am the way, the truth and the life.
John. 14. 6. In making her then our life, they rob Christ of his due: And it is
his office also to show us the Father: John. 1. 18. and, 14. 8. 10. Now all
these blasphemous prerogatives which they ascribe unto the virgin Mary, their
own gloss upon this Psalm overthrows* applying it to the Virgin Marie:
for of Christ: it is said, he is thy Lord, and worship thou him, ver. 11. the
virgin Mary though she be to be honored of us as a blessed Saint, yet is not
to be worshipped together with Christ, but is together with the Saints to
worship Christ: her carnal prerogative in being the mother of Christ was not
so great, as her spiritual privilege of believing in Christ: as he himself
says: when a certain woman had cried out unto him, blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck, he answered, yea rather blessed
are they, that hear the word of God, and keep it. Luke 11. 28. So also in
another place he says: my mother, and my brethren are those which here the
word of God and do it. Luke 8. 22. upon which words Tertullian thus observes:
Non matris vterum et vbera negans, sed feliciores designans, qui verbum Dei
audiunt. lib. de carn. Christ. Not denying his mothers womb, and breasts, but
counting them more happy which hear the word of God, etc.

31. Now in the last place for the application of this text, both touching the
mystical, as also the historical sense: first we see all this here spoken of
by the Prophet, to be verified in the Church: In Psalm. 44.
The Lord has made the Princes of the world, The great munificence of
Christian princes and Nobles toward the Church.
the sons of the Church: and has given unto it the glory and riches of
Tyrus: As Augustine well understands thereby the gifts of charity, which the
rich among the Gentiles being converted should bestow upon the Church, this was
done, when by the bounty of Emperors and other Nobles, Churches, Colleges,
Almeshouses were founded: The like fruits the Gospel has brought forth in
England: where within the space of fifty years more charitable works in the
building of Colleges, Synops. in the end of the 4. Centurie.
free Schools, Hospitalls can be showed (as elsewhere I have declared more at
large) the^ were done in the like time under popery. Among which works of
charity, that worthy foundation of an hospital may be set in the first rank,
Master Sutto^s hospital.
which that late rich Esquire and prudent man Master Sutton by his last will
and Testament bequeathed to be erected: giving unto it for the maintenance
thereof, the yearly revenue of four thousand pounds, and twenty thousand
toward the building: which excellent work, so well by him intended, and
liberally founded, we expect in due time to be accomplished: that God thereby
may receive glory, who has made his Gospel to abound in such fruits, the
poor members of Christ may be comforted, and by this example others be
encouraged, whom God has thereto enabled, to show the like effects and
testimonies of their faith: But together let all such, as shall be by Gods
grace so minded, be advised to see such things (bequeathed to charitable uses)
disposed while they live, that there be no question, when they are dead: why
should a man put off that to be executed by others, which he may see done by
himself: the alms given by the own hand is most acceptable: and that one
shall reap most comfort by, which his own eye sees: And when a man willingly
leaves his goods in his life, before they leave him in his death, it is so
much more worthy of thanks: let every man then do good, while he may, and not
defer to give his alms, according to that saying of the wiseman: say not
unto thy neighbor go, and come again, and to motrow I will give thee, if
thou now have it: Pro. 3. 28. As manna was gathered in the six days against
the seventh: so we must finish all our works in this life for the next: Exodus
26. 23.

31. Now to shut up all in a word: and to apply this text briefly to this
present occasion: God grant unto this Honorable Marriage the like fruit and
joyful issue, which is promised here unto this princely spouse: in steed of
thy fathers shall thy children be, whom thou may make Princes etc. The
Psalmist says, children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the
womb is his reward. Psalm. 127. 3. The Lord add this inheritance also to the
goodly inheritance of these noble Princes: and seal unto them this fruit
among other rewards; whereof we all conceive great hope, seeing not the
augmentation of wealth, nor increase of dominion, but the combination of
religion, and propagation of the Gospel is principally sought in this hopeful
marriage: which is now happily con summate, (...). Cyrill catech. 4.
for procreating of posterit^, not satisfying of pleasure, where the intendment
is, y^ generation should but make a way for regeneration as Augustine says:
Esse debet ^^oru^ co^ugum i^e^tio, vt generatio regenerationi praeparetur. l.
4. cont (...). c. 1. Tradit. in Genesis
and this accession of marriage should serve for the succession of christian
Princes to be nursing Fathers unto the Church: like as then, Leah called her
son by Zilpah her handmaid Asher, which signifies happy, that is as Hierome
says, beatam se inde putauit, she thereby counted her self happy: so God
make these honorable Princes happy in their issue: and God make this virtuous
Princess a Sarah, which is, Princess, that she may be the mother of nations
and kings, as the Lord promised to Sarah, Genesis 17. 16. The Lord make her like
Rebecca, The blessing from God upon these Excellent princes desired.
that her ground may be fat and fruitful, to grow into thousand thousands, and
that her seed may possess the gate of her enemies: as Rebeccah was blessed:
Genesis 24. 60. Which the gracious Lord grant for his Christ's sake, (...)
rabach, signifies to be fat.
the spouse of his Church: who bless this princely spouse to be an ancient
mother in Israel, and this illustrious Prince to be a nursing Father to his
Church* God bless them both with joyful progeny, happy victory over their
enemies, perpetual prosperity but most of all with true Christian piety in
this life, and crown them with glorious eternity in the next, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom be praise for ever.

FINIS.

