MNEMOSYN^ EVCHARISTON: (...) A Treatise on the Supper of the Lord in
Commemoration of his death, and the manifold benefits thereby received;
wherein the monstrous transubstantiated Massy Idol of that seven-headed
enchanting whore of Rome is stamped to powder, to give al the^ to drink, which
make it their only pleasure to swill themselves in the dregs thereof: and
wherein also the doctrines and uses which arise from thence, are most soundly
and sincerely delivered. By JOHN WILLOUGHBY.

Exhomologesis: A prayer, or general confession of our manifold sins unto
the Lord.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be always
acceptable in thy sight: O Lord my strength and my redeemer.

Psalm. 19. Plurimi quotidie scriptis edificantur, qui verba non audiunt.

Johan. Gers. Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes and are to be sold in Paul's
Church yard at the sign of the Crown by Simon VVaterson. 1603.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND PVISSANT Prince, King James, by Gods grace King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland defendor of the Faith, etc. To the most
renowned and virtuous Lady our gracious Sovereign, Queen Anne his wife: both
their hearts desires in our Savior Christ whilst they live and reign upon
the earth, and afterward a Diadem of perfect glory.
MOST Noble Princes, such is the love which out of my souls humility I owe
unto your High nesses, that I may not but in conscience of all binding dutiful
allegiance express unto your Majesty's, moved so to do upon the first joyful
general good news of your Majesty's safe approaching, your happy welcomming,
and receiving both, (by so many thousands of your Loving Subjects,) into the
Garden-plotte of Albion the city of London, the most stately imperial throne
of your Excellencies. with who^ for so much as it fared not so well with me
the^ absent, to participate of their congratulating mirth, in behoulding with
the^, (which was a thing most comfortable unto all true English hearts,) of your
sacred Person, and at this instant to increase the word for the increasing of
our joy, of your Persons: I now according to my rank and place, a Scholar by
profession, (though the meanest amongst ten thousand) have thought it a matter
beneficial to many of the household of God, and not prejudicial (I hope) to
any which will be counted the friends of God, to offer this Glass and maine
point of Christianity, the very tutchstone and seal it self of our
profession, unto your Graces favorable Clemencies; so much the rather I say,
because we assure our selves that you are the Lords anointed, raised up and
preserved by the almighty Jehouah to sway the Scepter of this most happy Land,
in having your Royal presence to manage the affairs thereof: as eke more
specially to rear up and magnify his truth, which was likely to be thrust
unto the walls through the undermining and cankerlike fretting designements of
pestilent wicked men. Besides, after the smallenes of my talent, which the Lord
in mercy has lent me for a time to exchange unto his glory, I shall most
humbly beseech your High: favors to be invited by me, (the underling and
lowest one of all your subjects,) as the choicest and chiefest guestes, unto
the Lords own mystical and heavenly holy banquet. By means whereof others,
who as yet do keep a loofe without, by taking example from your Excellencies,
(which casts forth both light and life unto our selves, that are within) may
be at length allured from the hedges and high ways side, to draw still
nearer and nearer, and sit down as guestes with you at the self same
table, and so furnish up the empty rooms of Christ his kingdom, which remain
behind, and do continually wait and lie open night and day, for farther and
more frequent company.

Thus with all submission endeavoring to testify the inward loyalty and
soundnes of my obedient heart, which many others both of high place and low
have done before me: I will end with humble supplication for your Majesty's,
that it would please God of his mercy to be your mighty tower of defense
against all your enemies domestical and foreign, that he would extend your
days and renew your years, making you strong and lusty as an Eagle, for his
own glories sake, to both your own souls health and comfort, the good of the
Church, and the honor of England: lastly, that he would give unto you both
(...) Oxon: Iulij 26. 1603.

Your Majesty's most humble, and truly devoted Subject: JOHN VVILLOVGHBY.

The names of the special authors followed in this tract.
Musculus. Calvin. Zanchius. Beza. Vrsin. Hemmingius. Piscator. Polanus.
Marnixius. Mornay. Fr. Junius.
The sum of the book following contained in these words: This is my body.
THere is no man which sees not that all circumstances do make for us. For
the example of the Paschall Lamb, the nature of the rest of the Sacraments,
their respect, and the perpetual analogy, and the end it self of the
institution, namely the remembrance of Christ and the showing forth of his
death, and the repetition of the words varied somewhat by the Evangelists, the
Exposition of Paul himself, and the taking, the breaking, the giving of bread
and wine, and the rehearsal thereof iterated by Paul and the Apostles, which
were wont to cast doubts even in the least matters, the undoubted consent, and
the common and most known use both of the Hebrew and Syriak tongue, and the
most beautiful agreement of all the articles of our faith, and the very
condition and nature of the true body which Christ had, and the judgment of all the senses which Christ in searching out the nature of a body commands us to
have regard unto: besides^ the avoiding of infinite fictitiall and counterfeit
miracles against the order of nature, and lastly the conjunction of minds
wel-neere of all the ancient in the primitive church, do most plainly
declare, that those words are altogether true, but yet placed in the Sign and
Sacrament, and they must be expounded Sacramentally, that is, by such a manner
as is usual unto all the Sacraments.

A preparation unto the Lords Supper; out of which most comfortable doctrines
are offered unto every believing heart, and the errors of the Mass made odious
and detestable even to all, which are not already forestalled and wilfully
blinded in the dotages thereof.
The Supper, what it is.
A Seal of the promise of the Gospel, instituted by Christ himself, wherein
God does seal unto all those that do worthelie receive it, all the benefits
and blessings, which his own Son has merited for us through his obedience,
by giving up his body unto death, and by powering forth and shedding of his
blood.

In general, note from hence Viz.

1. The word or commandment of God the institutour hereof.

2. The external Sign:

3. The thing promised.

4. Faith answering thereto, and believing the promises.

The Institution, where taught:

Math. 26. cap. Mark. 14. Luke 22. According to the purity whereof, St. Paul
instructs the Corinthians: viz. 1. Epistle: 11. cap. verse 23.24. as
follows.

For I have received of the Lord that, which I also have delivered unto you, to
vvitte, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed took bread.

And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said: Take, eat: this is my
body which is broken for you: This do ye in remembrance of me.

After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped saying, This
Cup is the new testament in my blood: this do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me.

For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this Cup, ye shevve the
Lords death till he come.

Wherefore let a man therefore examine himself, etc.

Note here, how St. Paul says: For I have received of the Lord, which I also
have delivered unto you, etc.

Whereby it appears, that the form of celebrating the Lords Supper must be
taken from the institution thereof, whose parts are these.

1. First, on the behalf of the Pastor, to show forth the death of the Lord
by preaching his word: to sa^ctifie the bread and wine, the name of God being
called on, and his institution being explicated together with prayers; and then
to deliver the bread broken to be eaten: and the cup received to be drunken
with giving of thanks.

2. Secondly on the behalf of the People, to try themselves, that is, to
search our as well their knowledge, as faith and repentance, to show forth the
Lords death, that is, with a true faith, to yield their consent unto Gods word
and institution: and at length to eat the bread received from the hand of the
Minister, and to drink the wine with giving of thanks unto the Lord. This
was the Liturgy of St. Paul and the Apostles: which word, the Papists wrest
mightily, to bolster up their Mass.

The first Institution by Christ himself fully set down.

Math 26. cap 26. verse. And as they did eat, Jesus took the bread: and when
he had give^ * thanks, he brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said:
Take, eat. This is my body.

Also he took the Cup, and when he had * given thanks, he gave it them,
saying, Drink ye all of it.

For this is my blood of the new Testament, that is shed for many, for the
remission of sins.

I say unto you, that I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit of the
Vine until that day, when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers
kingdom.

And when they had song a Psalm, they went out into the mount of Olives etc.

* And when he had given thanks; [(...)] in steed whereof St. Mark. uses
[(...)] which a little after he expounds also by (...), gratias egi sset,
that is, had given thanks, according to St. Mathews words.

Therefore to bless [(...)] is not here taken for to consecrate with a
magical murmuring, by virtue of words: yet are the bread and wine changed,
though not in nature, but in quality. For they are made Symbols of the body and
blood of Christ, not by their own nature, nor yet by force of words, but by
the institution of Christ, which ought to be rehearsed and opened: that faith
may have what to embrace, both in the word, and in the Elements. Muscu. Loc.
com. 397.

Now when St. Austen says; Accedat verbum adelementum, and fiat sacramentum,
that is, Let the word be added to the Element, and it shall be a Sacrament.

He does not understand by it, the word rehearsed over the Signs to be a
certain Consecration of the Elements, as the Papists do cogge with their five
words of Consecration, barely though raptissime, that is, dromedarily as one
may say, or as it is commonly said, without any stop and turch of breath,
pronounced: viz. Hoc est enim corpus meum, that is, For this is my body, (and
yet I spare to tell, how they foist in [enim] prettily, as it were at the bynne
door to make up their quinarie number:) but Austen understands thereby the
word of God, who does, institute, promise, and require faith answerable to his
promise. And so indeed this word when it comes once unto the Element, it is
forthwith, of an Element, become now a Sacrament.

The Institution likewise out of Saint Mark.

Mark. 14, 22. And as they did eat, Jesus took the bread, and when he had
given thanks [(...),] he brake it, and gave it to them, and said, Take, eat,
this is my body. Also he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks (...)]
he gave it to them: and they all drank of it.

And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed
for many.

Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine,
until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God.

And when they had sung a Psalm, they went out to the mount of Olives, etc.

The Institution according to Saint Luke.

Luke 22. cap. 19. verse. And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave to them, saying, This is my body, which is given for you:
do this in remembrance of me.

Likewise also after supper he took the cup, saying, This * Cup is the new
Test. in my blood, which is shed for you.

(...).* that is, This cup (...) the. (...) new Testament in my blood, which is
shed for you.

Where a double figure called metonymia is to be observed. For first, the
continent or the thing co^teining, is put for the thing contained therein. As
the Cup is put from the wine.

Secondly the wine is called (...), foedus, that is, the Covenant or Testament:
whereas it is but only a Symbol and token of the Covenant, or of that thing
rather, namely the blood of our Savior, by which the Testament is confirmed.
And albeit it is a mark, sign, or token, yet is it true and nothing vain nor
idle, and must be distinguished from that very thing, which is represented by
it.

Wherefore by the Papists leave, (yea though they tugge and toil out their
very hearts about this point,) such speeches as these, viz. when Circumcision is
called the Covenant: Gen 17.10. Acts. 7.8.
when the Paschall Lamb is called the Passover: that Baptism is the Laver of
regeneration: that Baptism does save us: that sprinkeling of water is the
sprinkeling of the blood of Christ: Lastly, that this Cup is the new Testament,
etc. all these I say, are metaphoricallie and figuratively to be understood.
Now I pray, what sense have they that these words, This is my body (I leave
out [enim] for, because both Matthew, Mark, and Luke do leave it out) should
not be figuratively, sacramentally, and spiritually understood also?

But by this even the simplest may soon perceave, how they do nothing but
dodge herein, and most vilely play the patchpannels. Yea but some will say;
if so that the Sacraments be but signs and representations: what necessity
lies in the^; seeing the word of God it self does teach us as much, and
therefore without the other, were sufficient alone for us.

First, I answer that the necessity of the Sacraments stands upon this
ground, that is to say, on the ordinance of God, who will not be called to
account of us for any thing that he does.

Secondly, I answer, that the word indeed of God is all-sufficie^t by it
self, had not we bin insufficient by reason of our dulnes to believe the
same. And for this cause he ordained the Sacraments to help our weakness and
dulheartednes to believe any thing, unless we do with St Thomas both see and
feel him first, ( Job. 20.13.) though not corporally as he did the^, that is,
in his flesh and bodily presence: but Sacramentally and representorilie, that
is, by Signs. And therefore we are most highly bound unto God for the same,
seeing he does debase himself so far by these terrestrial creatures of bread
and wine, as there by to apply and make himself familiar to our feeble, to our
sle^der, and more the^ weak, yea childish capacity, reach, and understanding.

Here the^ we are to note that threefold difference betwixt the word and the
Sacraments, in the order of confirming faith. viz.

1. The word is offered and preached generally unto all: but the Sacraments are
singularly ministered to every of the faithful.

2. The word is offered in preaching to the ear only: but the Sacraments are
presented to all the senses: that so we may be every way sensibly affected,
and assured of the goodness, favor, and mercy of our God.

3. God by his word has revealed, expressed, and set down his will unto us:
by the Sign or Sacrament he has confirmed the same unto us. To the end, that
that thing which the mind did conceive out of the word, might after a sort
through the Sign, be presented to the senses, etc.

Now for so much as our Adversaries the Papists do still ba^gle about
mooneshining in the water by standing so stiffly upon the gross and literal
sense of these words; Hoc est corpus meum, that is, this is my body: (that
neither they may be their own carvers, nor we wax old in our opinion without
reason: reason (I say) such, as they never will have the like, unless they
have the same) I will oppose against that gross taking of the words, four
especial things to annihilate and infringe the same. viz.

1. The judgment and verdite of the learneder and sounder sort, touching the
true meaning of the words.

2. The authority of the Scripture, the best interpreters thereof.

3. Reasons, with the contrary Absurdities.

4. Lastly, if that none of these, the least whereof is sufficient, can
satisfy such unreasonable and flint-harted Papists, that do most obstinately
put away the true and sincere knowledge of these mysteries: I must be driven to
discover to their shame, had they any, the most impure and irreligious
doctrine, which they mordicus, tooth and nail defend, about their Mass.

First of the First, that is, the judgment of the Fathers.

1. The bread taken and given to his Disciples, he made that his body, saying
This is my body, that is, a figure of my body. Tertullian lib. 4. co^tra
Marcionem.

2. After such a manner he says, that the bread and wine are the flesh and
blood of Christ; as that, both the things signifying, and the things
signified, are judged or esteemed by the same words. Cyprian de Chrism.

3. The Lord, says Augustine, did not doubt to say. This is my body, when he
gave a Sign of his body. August. contra Adamant. chap. 12. Again Cyprian, he
calls it, panem sanctificatum, that is, hallowed bread.

4. The bread upon the Alter, only is a Sign, as Baptism is: and it
proffiteth nothing, unless the bread be now eaten within. Lut. in Sermon super
Johan. 6. Anno 1523.

5. The Latin Church speaks; Nulla rei fit scissura, signi tantum fit
fractura, qua nec status, nec statura signatiminuitur: that is, no re^ting is
made of the thing; only there is a breaking of the sign; whereby neither the
state not stature of the thing signified is diminished.

And they hold this to be the definition of a Sacrament: That it is a Sign of
an holy thing.

6. The destroying or taking away the Proprieties, is a denying of the
Nature. Theodoret. Dial. 3.

7. The natural and essential Propriety being cut of, the very whole
nature also it self is overthrowen therewith. For a nature cannot be found out
any way, but by the essential Propriety that does design and note out the
same. Vigilius in Epist. Synod. adversus Monothel.

He that denies the Proprieties, denies the nature. Luth. in lib. Council.

If then the body of Christ is not visible and circumscribed, it cannot be a
body. For take away the essential Adiunct, and take away the Subject also:
and once put the Adiu^ct, and forthwith add the Subject toe.

Vbiquitie therefore is not communicated unto the body: because it is a
Propriety of the divine Nature.

8. Do thou not (says Austen) doubt that the man Christ Jesus is there now,
from whence he shall come; and print it firmly in thine heart, and keep
faithfully the Christian confession: because he has risen from the dead, he
ascended up into heaven, he sits at the right hand of the Father, neither
shall he come elsewhere, then from thence to judge the living and the dead.
And he shall so come, the evangelicall voice ( Act. 1.) bearing witness heereto,
as he was seen to go into heaven, that is, in the same form and substance of
his flesh: to which flesh he gave immortality indeed, but yet took not away
the nature. According to this form he is not to be thought to be spredde
every where: For we must beware, that we do not so maintain the divinity of
man, that we should take away the truth of his body. Besides it fol^oweth
not, that that which is in God, should be every where so, as God. For the
scripture says most true things to us, that we live in him, move, and have
our being: yet are we not every where as he is. But that man is otherwise in
God, because God is also otherwise in that man, after a certain proper and
singular manner. For one person is God and man, and both is one Christ Jesus,
Every where by that that he is God: but (in Coelo) in heaven, by that that he
is man, August in Epist. ad Dardanum. Althique dicit Sacramentum premi dentibus.

In a word, all this contention (says Mulculus) stands on the right sense of
the words of Christ, viz. This is my body, where the true meaning of them is
held, there those arguments do make nothing at all to the purpose, by which
they labor in laying on Hampton load of sophismes and fooleries, to prove that
the body of Christ can be in many places at one time, yea vbique every where.

1. Sophisme.

The Vbiquitaries when they would prove that the body of Christ is in the
bread, they have nothing poor souls to bring but the literal words of Christ,
be cause he has said, This is my body. But in the mean time, petunt
principium, that is, they beg of us this favor to grant the whole matter
that is in controversy betwixt us. For who sees not that about these words
of Christ lies the whole question, how or after what sort they are to be
understood? Therefore the proof of this point cannot be taken from them. For
the approbation of the true sense is not to be drawn out of the very words
themselves, whose meaning we do explicate and seek for: but from that which
goes before and that which follows after, or else, from other like places,
that so the Analogy of faith may be observed.

2. Sophisme.

Again, will ye hear an other acute reason of theirs; acute did I say? one
may term it so, as well as some do mons a movendo, that is, fine cute and cote.
the body of Christ, say they, is every where, because the proprieties of the
divine nature, are communicated to it. But we find here petitionem principij,
that is, a begging of the argument: because the argument is as uncertain and
doubtful, as the thing it self, which is had in question. They must first
prove, and not as mendicant Friars beg, that it be freely granted to them.

1. Argument.

But one argument now against the^; viz. Whosoever do take away the proprieties
of the body of Christ, they do take away the body it self: They who say that
the body of Christ is every where, do take away the proprieties of the body
of Christ: therefore whosoever say that the body of Christ is every where,
they take away the body it self.

Here the Vbiquitarians deny the conclusion: but tell them of answering the
argument; and surdo narras fabulam, that is, it does please them so well, as
though you had broken both their shinns with a crab-tree cudgel.

2. Argument.

The bread is changed into the body of Christ, either substantially or
sacrame^tally: but not substa^tially; for Christ, according to Theodoret, has
honored the visible Symbols by the names of his body and blood, not changing
the nature, but adding grace unto the nature. Therefore it is changed only
sacramentally, that is, it is made and turned out of common bread into a
Sacrament of his body.

3. Argument.

The body is spoken de pane, of the bread, either properly or tropically: non
properly; because so al might be said of the bread properly and truly,
whatsoever are said of the body, (according to that axiom; Quicquid dicitur
de praedicate, dicitur etiam de subiecto:) which absurdity deserves an
hissing. Therefore it is of necessity spoken of the bread (...), that is,
tropically.

4. Argument.

Poison cannot be mingled with the natural body and blood of Christ: but it
may with the Eucharisticall bread and wine: as experience has taught. For a
certain Monk of the Iacobin order named Bernhard de monte Politiano de
Doncastro, gave unto the Emperor Henry. 7. an intoxicated or poisoned Host,
which having received he died. Therefore the Eucharistical bread is not made the
natural body, and the wine is not likewise the natural blood of Christ.

5. Argument.

This particle hoc (in the words of the Supper) which signifies this; either
demonstrateth bread: or the only accide^ts of bread: or else the body it self of
Christ: or lastly, (as Thomas Aquinas says p. 3. Q. 78. Artic. 5.) some
wandering and indeterminat kind of substance. For besides these, there was
nothing, of which Christ, touching his body, might be spoken.

1. First then this particle does not demonstrate substantiam vagam, that is, a
wandering or roaming substance: because, it was a determinate and settled
substance, (not a rouing substance) even that which Christ held in his hands,
which he brake; and which he gave to his Disciples.

2. Next, it does not demonstrate the body it self of Christ, neither visible
nor invisible. For the visible body Christ himself had on, but he gave unto
his Disciples, (after he had broken it,) a plain, evident, and demonstrate
thing. An Invisible or Vbiquitarie body in the Supper Christ had none: yea and
the Papists too do confess, that the body of Christ is not yet present under
the form of bread, when the Priest does begin to pronounce this Particle
[(...)] this, but then it is present at last cast, as they say, even after the
change is made: now they say that the immutation of bread into the body of
Christ is made, in the very last gasp of the co^secratio^, wherein the syllable
[VM] is pronounced in these fine words; Hoc est (yet the change is not,) enim
(nor yet) Corpus (nor yet) me- (now it is near,) um here it is, Lo now he has
stricken it dead, now in deed he has killed the cow, and never before, till this
syllable [VM] flue me out of his chaps.

Hence you may take a short surview of Popery in grain, that is, in his right
stamp, color, and cue, as men commonly say.

3. Thirdly and lastly, this particle (hoc) this, does not demonstrate the show
only or accidents of bread, as well because Christ held not in his hand neither
did he break bare accidents, but the very materiated thing it self clad and
bounded about with accidents: as also because it was false, that the show or
resemblance of bread should be the body of Christ. For this were to make a body
of the air, nay marry it is not so well by a great deal; because that the air
though it be (...), that is, a most moist and fluid body, yet it is a body: but
accidents are immateriall things and are no subject of themselves, but they do
inhaerere subiecto, that is, they are fastened in some Subject, which must
support and bear them up.

It is a common saying that beggars repeat their Pater noster so often, till at
length they clean forget it so the fabulous massing wittals do beat about the
bush of Sophistry and quirkes so long till at last they leese the bird it
self, that is, they forget the maine grounds and rules of Logike. Wherefore to
conclude; this Particle (Hoc) does demonstrat nothing else, then the bread
alone: neither do the words of Christ; this is my body sound any other thing,
then Hic panis, that is, this bread is my body.

Let this suffice for the first: the two other middle motives, (against that
gross interpretation of the words, this is my body,) namely the authority of
the Scriptures, and the reasons with the contrary absurdities, shall be set down
(as occasion offers) in the particular hand ling and discussing of this
Sacrament.

In the mean space you have heard the definition and nature of the Lords
Supper: you have heard how many things do generally belong thereto. you have
had and heard the sweet and harmonical institution out of the three former
Evangelists with some notes thereon; according to the truth whereof St. Paul
schooleth the Corinthians, and reformeth the corruptions which they used in
celebrating the Supper, by bringing them home again unto the first author and
institutour thereof Christ Jesus: you have likewise received the judgment of
grave and renowned learned men for the right understanding of these words; This
is my body: I have given you a little taste of their cunning shifts and false
arguing: that as men do usually see day through a little hole, so you also may
conceive and gather an huge mass of cogging, deceit, and iugling with fast
and loose, as it were, by the glimmering shine of two or three sophismes and
fallacies of theirs.

Lastly, I have opposed there against some few objections of ours, for a bone
unto them to gnaw upon, that so they may not escape scot-free away, but may have
an Oliver for a Rowland, that is, as good, nay better, then they bring.

Q. Now let us enter into the Particularities of this Sacrament: How many
things are specially to be observed in the Supper of the Lord?

A. Three things; as,

1. What it is in his nature and parts.

2. What the Analogy and what the conjunction is of the Sign with the thing
signified.

3. What the meditation hereof is.

First.

Q. First concerning his nature, it has already bin defined: tell now what are
the parts of the Supper?

A. Two, as; 1. The outward sign: 2. The indward holy thing.


Q. What is the outward Sign?

A. Bread and Wine, (annexed to the preaching of the Gospel:) which are
received by the mouth.

Q. Set down an evident place that the preaching of the word is to be joined
with the administration of the Supper.

A. Act. Apost. 20. ca. 7. verse. And the first day of the week, (which is
called the Lords day Apocal. 1. 10. and 1. Cor. 16.2.) the Disciples being come
together to break bread, Paul preached unto the^, ready to depart on the
morrow, and continued preaching unto midnight.

Q. What is the inward holy thing?

A. The body, and blood of Christ: which must be received by faith, the
spiritual mouth of our Souls: according to this rule; omnis promissio fide
accipitur, that is, every promise must be received by faith.

Q. Why were two Signs instituted?

A. The Lord did that to help our infirmity, signifying that he is as well the
drink as the meat of our soul, to the end we might be content to seek our
nourishment fully and wholly in him, and no where else.

Q. Does the Cup belong indifferently to all?

A. Yea, and that by express commandment of our Savior himself: contrary
to which, we may in no wise presume to do. For it is written Math. 26. chap.
v. 27. Bibite exeo omnes, that is, drink ye all of it. Item 1. Cor. 10. ca.
16. v. Yet for all this, the Papists forsooth are such brave Merchants in
chopping and changing what they list, that they come with a countermaund
against this, namely that the Priests lips alone must kiss the chalice: as
for Laymen, they may go with dry lips home.

Again, because they will not seem in each degree to countervaile their holy
Father the Pope, for whom it is sufficient and sound if he say no more but; Sic
volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione volu^tas: they have beaten their brains for
to search out many pretty reasons, why the laytie ought not to participate of
the wine: which one of their side commits to writing, whereof these
following are a few. viz.

1. The lay People, say they, do eat of the body of Christ, but the body has
blood also in it: therefore it is superstitious for them to have the Cup.

2. Wine, say they, is hard to be come by in many places, and yet when they
have it, all cannot drink or well away with it: and therevppon partly to save
charge, and partly to end strife, they have taken a good easy method; that
none shall drink it.

3. It is a dangerous thing for the Laity to have the cup, because of
infection: for what can one tell, what deseases his fellow communica^ts may
have. Whereupon in so much as Christ was not wise enough to foresee this deep
conceipte, they will like subtle whoresons prevent one mischief and broch a
worse that is, the overthrow of the very Institution it self, which is a
thing most vile and horrible.

4. Indecorum est propter barbas, that is, It is an unseemly matter for the
Laity to communicate in the wine, by reason of their beards: which being so
thick and bushie, would be an occasion that the blood might be wasted, by
sticking thereupon. Oh most block-headed grosnes and blasphemy.

To these add the rest, as; Periculum in effusione, that is, it is dangerous
in the powering forth, lest it should be shedd: In deportatione de loco ad
locum, that is, It is danger likewise in the carriage of it from place to place;
In vasorum sordidatione, that is, in the foulnes of the vessels, which should
be consecrated, and not so commonly handled by the Laity and clouted sort, and
much less ought the consecrate wine be sold in bottels: In conservatione pro
infirmis, that is, in keeping the same for the sick, which a biding some time
in the vessel might be turned into vinegar, and so might cease to be there the
blood of Christ, and therefore should not be taken, nor yet consecrated anew
without a mass: addito quod in aestate bibliones aut muscae generare^tur, that
is, in Summer, gnats and flies would breed therein, although the vessel were
stopped never so closely: besides, putresceret, that is, it would corrupt and
become a thing abominable to be drunk, Et haec ratio (says Gerson,) est
efficax valde, It is a right substantial and knocking reason, fear ye not.

There are more yet behind, but I had rather refer the reader unto Gerson
himself, who being for his time a very learned man, was thought to do this
Ironice, that is, closely girding at the council of Constance, who being there
in place, was enjoined by the Synod to set down his mind herein.

Q. Why did Christ institute the Sacrament of the promise of the Gospel under
the Signs of bread and wine?

A. Forsooth, that by comparing of their several effects together, (according
to their analogy,) the very force and strength of our faith might welneere
sensibly be perceaved, as whereby we take hold, apprehend, keep, and
possess in our hearts and minds, the promised good things thereof.

Secondly.

Q. What is the analogy, by which word is understood a likeness or proportion?

A. As bread and wine, when man is in case to die and perish for want of food,
do lift him up again, cherish, comfort, quicken and refresh his languished and
fainting body: so our faith, sure trust, and confidence reposed in Christ,
(who delivered his body, powered forth, and shed his blood for the remission of
our sins, when we were in case of misery, wholly trodden down and vanquished
of the Devil, and lying as it were grovelling in our filthiness) does raise us
up again, free us from death, nourish, comfort, refresh and quicken our far,
yea whole spent souls unto life not temporal but eternal.

Q. What is the Conjunction, namely of the Sign with the Thing signified?

A. It is a most true and spiritual conjunction, grounded on the promises of
Christ, and wrought by the holy Ghost.

Q. Is there no mutation then of the bread and wine: or at least no physical
copulation?

A. There is no change of the Elements in respect of their substance: but yet
there is a mutation of them, in respect of the end. viz.

The bread and wine are no more now profane or common meat and drink, but
do serve and are applied rather unto a proper, sacramental, and sacred use and
end.

And that learned and worthy man M. Beza. Dial. 2. says, that the mystical
Symbols bread and wine, even after the sanctifying of them, do not leese their
proper nature: For S. Paul, says he, even after the giving of thanks calls
bread still by the name of bread. 1. Cor. 11. vide locum.

Q. Can you instance in such a change?

A. Very well. For wax which is affixed to euide^ces differs nothing in
substance from that which is unsealed: but in the use there is such a change or
alteration, that the one does signify and confirm the writings whereto it is
annexed, whenas the other which is removed and not applied to that use, does
not.

Q. If there be no physical copulation or Consubsta^tiation as the Luthera^s
hold, neither mutation of the substance of the Signs, which the Papists call
transubstantiation: why does St. John Chap. 6. say that we must eat the flesh
of Christ, and drink his blood?

A. St. John does by this manner of speaking set down most perspicuouslie
unto the eyes as it were of our souls the very sum of the promise of the
Gospel, as namely, what faith is, by which we do enioie those promised good
things: to the end, we might understand how the virtue thereof does beareful
sway in our hearts cheering and lifting us up to buckle mightelie against the
frontiers of sin, the world, and the Devil.

Q. Then by this it seems, that to eat the flesh of Christ, and to drink
his blood, are taken for one and the self same thing, as to believe in Christ?

A. It is so. And therefore S. Austen says plainly; Creed, and manducasti,
that is, believe and thou have eaten.

Q. But can you prove that to eat, and to believe, are one thing in the
Scriptures?

A. Easily out of the sixth chap. of John and the 40. 47. verses: as, verily,
verily I say unto you, he that believes in me has everlasting life.

Now verse. 51. of the same chap. he expresses this another way, that is, by
eating of his flesh. As, I am that living bread, which came down from heaven:
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I
will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

Here you may see, that both these manner of speeches, though diverse in
words, yet al one in sense and meaning, do obtain likewise one and the
selfsame promise, even life eternal.

Moreover hence it rises, that the Fathers oftentimes treating upon the Supper
of the Lord, do cite those places out of the sixth of Ioh; not that they thought
the Lord to have spoken there precisely strictly or solelie of the Supper of
the Lord: but that rather, because in the right and lawful use of the Supper,
faith of the thing promised is there sensibly, as one may say, expressed by
the Lord under the names of eating and drinking: of which promise, the Supper
is a pledge and seal.

Q. Seeing there is now no physical application: do we receive only the
bare tokens of the things signified: or else are they effectually there given
us?

A. For so much as Christ is the very truth it self, and therefore most
faithful in all his promises: so undoubtedly according to his promise made at
his Supper, and as the Signs do represent, he makes us partakers of his very
substance, to make us grow thereby into one life with him. Calu.

Q. Christ is in heaven: (as, Act. 3. cap. 21. verse, sci. Whom the heaven
must contain until the time, that all things be restored, besides, look all
these places, as Hebr. 7.26. Ephesians. 4.10. Act. 1.11. Act. 7.56. Act. 1.9. Ioh.
6.62. Colloss. 3.1. Act. 2.33 Psalm. 110.1. Luke 22.69. Luke 24.51. Ioh. 12.8.
Heb. 10.12. 1. Tim. 3.16.) and we are here Pilgrims on the earth. How then can
this Union of substance be?

A. This Union is not in respect of the place; for so indeed is the body of
Christ in Heaven (...) or circumscriptible: but it is in respect of our faith,
by which we do worthily receive this holy mystery.

For Christ, although he be in heaven according to his humane nature, and so
sits glorified at the right hand ( John 17.5.) of his Father, both our
Mediator and Intercessour unto God for us: yet is he also these five ways
present in the earth with us. viz. 1. By his Godhead and Spirit. 2. By our
faith in him. 3. By mutual love. 4. By his union with humane nature, that is,
in Conjunction of his Soul and body with ours. 5. By hope of our Consummation
and glorification. Or,


According to others, thus; the presence of Christ now with us, is twofolde;
the one in respect of his person, the other in respect of his office.

In Person, he is with us as true God filling both heaven and earth.

In of fice, he is with us by his grace and Spirit. Math. 28.20. And lo, I am
with you always, until the end of the world. Amen. But Christ in his Humanity
is not with us, but so he sits at the right hand of the Father and of the
throne of his Majesty in Heaven. Heb. 8.1.

Q. So then this comes to pass by the wondrous and unsearchable working of
Gods Spirit pouring faith into us, which faith coupling us with the Son of God,
causes, that we are more nearly joined unto the flesh and blood of Christ,
then we are unto the bread which we eat, and the wine which we drink.

A. Just. For indeed such is the effectualnes of faith, which it has from the
powerful working of Gods holy Spirit: that it does most nearly co^ioine things,
which are in place farthest removed asunder.

Concerning this Conjunction therefore of ours with Christ, it is manifest that
the Fathers do all agree with this which has bin said, for the right
receiving and understanding of this Sacrament: and more especially for the
words of our Savior Christ, Ioh. 6. cap. verse 53.56. As, Then Jesus said unto
them, verily, verily I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. He that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.

And Corinth. 10. chap. verse. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the blood of Christ: the bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the body of Christ? For we that are many, are one bread and
one body because we are all partakers of one bread.

So ye see here, that St. Paul says that the bread, which we break, is the
Communion of the body of Christ, which is, it is the thing whereby we are
received into Communion and fellowship with the body of Christ, and do grow
together into one with him.

Therefore all the Fathers jointly teach, that the very true flesh of Christ, not
that which was feigned of the Heretics to be invisible, but that which is like
to ours in all things except sin, is truly eaten of us in the Supper of the
Lord: and is so eaten, that we wholly grow into one whole Christ, how great
soever we be, being made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. Ephesians. 5.30.
See Zanchius in his treatesse of spiritual wedlock.

Hereupon, says Zanchius: Cyrill, and other of the Fathers affirmed that
Christ dwells corporally and naturally in us. Which words, says he, must be
understood, not of the manner how Christ dwells in us, as if he were in us
in any natural and fleshly manner: but they are to be understood of the things
whereto we are united. For we are united to the true and natural body of Christ
and that by a true and real union, but yet if you respect the manner how this
is wrought; surely then it is accomplished and done by these two means, namely
by the spirit and by faith. Now this is far of, I think, from that carnal,
gross, and fleshly manner, which the Papists dream of.

This Doctrine, (touching our incorporation into Christ by a spiritual manner)
all the Fathers taught. Wherefore Augustine in his 50, tract upon John: Let
the^, says he meaning the Jews, hear and lay hold of Christ, who sits at
the right hand of God the Father in heaven. They answer; whom shall I lay
hold on? him that is absent? How shall I lift up my hand into heaven to lay
hold on him sitting there? lift up thy And in the Primitive church they used to
say these words unto the people. Sursum cor da in toke^ that they were to
pearce the very heavens, (with St. Steven Act. 7 56.) by their faith, and there
behold Christ as he is man: and not in the earth.
faith and thou have laid hold on him. Thy Fathers held him in the flesh, do
thou hold him in thy heart: because Christ being absent is yet nevertheles
also present. unless he were present he could not be held of us. Augustine
shows at large, that Christ is absent in the flesh, but is present with us in
Majesty.

Whence it is manifest, that this Union is essential and real, if we respect
the things that are united, and the truth of the union: but if we consider the
manner (...) vel (...), that is, how it is made, it is spiritual.

Q. What? is there no Conjunction the^, where faith is not?

A. Noe, doubtless; but a Sacramental Conjunction only: which returns into
judgment to him that does receine it.

Q. If it be so, why does St. Paul affirm those to become guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord, which do eat this bread, and drink the Cup
unworthily. 1. Corint. 11.27. and 1. Corint. 10.16.17.

A. This may easily be answered with the like, because he that believes not
the word of God, but hears it unworthily, is guilty of the word of God. For
why, whosoever believes not, shall be condemned. Look Mark, 16.16. Item
John, 12. ca. verse. 47.48.

Q. Yea St. Austen has the like kind of speech; As he which eats, (says
he) the body and drinks the blood of Christ vnvvorthely eats and drinks
his own damnation: so he, that receaveth Baptism vnvvorthelie, receaveth
judgment and not salvation.

A. Where this learned Father speaks sacramentally, attributing unto the
Sign, the name of the thing it self.

Q. How are the wicked then guilty of the body and blood of Christ: whenas
they receave but the bare Elements or Signs alone?

A. Because the disgrace and reproach, which they do to the sacred signs and
symbols, does redound even against the things themselves signified thereby.

Q. Can you make this plain and familiar by some instance or other?

A. Yes surely, it may be gathered from the experience of affairs in this
life. For whosoever does spue upon, does tear and trample under foot the
Image or Letters Patent of an Emperor and mighty Prince, is forthwith
adjudged guilty of hie treason: again the ill entreaty or usage of
Ambassadors does return and fall out unto the contempt and contumely of the
king that sent the^. But of how much sorer punishment suppose ye, (according
to the Apostles words Heb. 10.29.) shall he be worthy, which treads under
foot the Son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy
thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does despite the Spirit of Grace?
Look besides, 30.31. verses of the same chap. Item. Heb. 6.6. Item, 1. Cor.
11.7. where you shall find the like phrases.

Notwithstanding it is but absurdlie gathered out of 1. Corint, 11. chap. 27.
verse. that the unbelievers cannot therefore be guilty of the body and blood
of Christ, because they do not reallie eat Christ in the Sacrament; as though
they could no otherwise be guilty of it, and namely by their unbelief: whenas
yet St. Paul speaks not there of unbelievers, but even of the very
believers themselves, vnrevere^tly handling this Sacrament.

Thirdly.

Q. What is the Meditation of the Supper?

A. This is twofold; consisting 1. In the Ends. 2. In the Use.


Q. What are those special Ends?

A. They be five: as; 1. A remembrance of the Lords death. 2. A Sacrament of
our incorporatio^. 3. A Sacrament of our spiritual repast and nourishment. 4. A
pledge of forgivenes of sins. 5. A bond and true knotte of love.


Of these in order as they lie.

First.

The Supper of the Lord is memoria mortis, that is, a Sacrament ordained for a
remembrance of the body of Christ delivered up to death for us, and of his
blood shed for many for the remission of sins. St. Paul 1. Cor. 11. ca.
26, v. describes this end most perspicuouslie: For as often (says he) as ye
shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he
come.

And Christ himself. Luke 22 cap. 19. verse. Do this, says he, in remembrance
of me.

Iustine the Martyr (Colloq. cum Triphon. Apolog. 2.) says that the
Eucharisticall bread is committed to us ad recordationem passionis Christi,
that is, for a remembrance of the passion of Christ,

Now mark here, how shamefully the Papists are besides their beads in going
wide from the mark and end of the institution. For Christ wills us to take
this Sacrament, and to take bread and wine in remembrance of him.

Therefore the bread is called the body of Christ, not really, but in that it
is a memorial of his body, that is, the bread is a remembrance unto us of
Christ's body, even as it is also commanded in the words of the institution;
hoc facite in mei commemorationem. Do this in remembrance of me. According to
the truth whereof St. Paul is content to be ordered saying, 1. Cor. 11.26.
mortem domini annunciatis vsquequo venerit; that is, ye show the Lords death
till he come. Yea and in the two former verses; this do ye in remembrance of
me. But the Papists will not be tied to this with the holy blessed Apostle St.
Paul, and therefore they wisely invented another way, (which is a knacke more
then ordinary,) viz.

1 To make their Christ of bread.

2 To adore him in the bread: after they have once made him, to eat part of him
carnally, and grossly to reserve part of him in their Pixes, for other holy
uses etc.

3 To offer him up a Propitiatory sacrifice pro viuis and defunctis, both for
the quick and dead, as that pelting and peevish toy of theirs, Purgatory I
mean, an error, yea an heresy rather being flatly against the Articles of
our faith, does testify unto us.

It is a Proverb, that a man shall soon know a ratte by his clawing: so may one
as soon and sooner too smell out, (I will not say a knave, it is to good a
name for the^,) what madd shavers these Papists are, by their strange and
vncooth doctrines. But to our purpos^ again.

In the institution we read that Christ bidding his Apostles to do this in
remembrance of him, he did before very apparently break the bread. Wherefore
the breaking of bread, is a necessary ceremony for three causes, (for it
signifies the passion and separation of his soul from the body:)

1. Because Christ has commanded it: for it is a part of the Institution.

2. Because it tends to our Consolation, knowing that his body was bruised
(Crucifixum non fractum) thus for our sakes.

3. That this monster of transubsta^tiation may be taken away, according to
the judgment of Vrsinus, page 688. and thus much of the first end.

Secondly,

Sacramentum est incorporationis nostrae, that is, it is a Sacrament of our
incorporation into Christ's body. And this is that which has the promise, John
6.56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him. So Ephesians. 5. cap. 30. verse. For we are members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones.

Thirdly,

Sacramentum est spiritualis nutritionis nostrae, that is, a Sacrament of our
spiritual education and nutrition in the body of Christ. For as we are through
Baptism washed with the blood of Christ: so being washed and regenerated, we
are likewise continually nourished by the body and blood of Christ, as
appears John 6. cap. ver. 35, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, etc.

Q. For so much as this our continual nourishment in the body of Christ,
flows from himself the head thereof, and that by reason of our spiritual
marriage, conjunction, or vnio^ with him: set down directly for our stay and
comfort herein, places out of the holy scriptures for this so exceeding,
excellent, and heave^ly doctrine.

A. Look, 1, Cor. 10, cap. 15, 16, 17. John, 17, cap. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 21,
22, 23 26, verses, Item, John, 15.4, 5, 6, 7.1, Cor. 12.12, 13, 14, Item, 1.
Cor. 6.15, 16, 17 Item, 1, John, 4 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, Item Ephesians. 2, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, Item Rev. 21, 2, Item Isay, 54, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.

Moreover I will set down these underneath at large.

Hose, 2, cap. 16, 19, verses, And in that day (says the Lord) thou shall call
me (...), that is, my husband, and shall call me no more (...), that is, my
Lord or Master.

And I will marry thee unto me for ever: yea I will marry thee unto me in
righteousness and in judgment, and in mercy, and in compassion. And verse
20. I will even marry thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the
Lord. Item Hose. 3. cap. 2.3. verse. Item 2 Cor. 11. cap. 1.2. verses. viz.
Would to God, ye could suffer a little my foolishnes, and in deed, ye
suffer me.

For I am gealouse over you with godly gealousie: for I have prepared you for
one husband, to present you as a pure Virgin to Christ.

Look Ezech. 16.8. Ezech. 23.4. Ezch. 16. chapter but especially these verses
following 6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14. viz.

And when I passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in thine own blood, and I
said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, Thou shall live: even when thou
wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, thou shall live. I have caused thee to
multiply, as the budde of the field, and thou have increased and waxen great,
and thou have gotten excellent ornaments, thy breasts are fashioned, thine
hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and bare.

Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was as the
time of love, and I spredd my skirtes upon thee, and covered thy filthiness: yea
I swear unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, says the Lord God,
and thou becamest mine.

Then washed I thee with water: yea, washed away thy blood from thee, and I
anointed thee with oil.

I clothed thee also with broithered work, and shodde thee with badgers
skin: and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk.

I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thine hands, and
a chain on thy neck.

And I put a frontlett upon thy face, and earings in thine ears, and a
bewtifull crown upon thine head.

Thus wast thou deckte with gold and silver, and thy raiment was of fine
linen, and silk, and broidred work: thou did eat fine flower, and honey,
and oil, and thou wast very bewtifull, and thou did grow up into a kingdom.

And thy name was spread among the Heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect
through my bewty, which I had set upon thee says the Lord God. etc.

Item Zach. 1, chap: 14: Isay 62.1. Ier. 2.1: 2: 3: 32: Can a maid forgett her
ornament, or a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me, days
without number.

Item Salomons song, 2. cap. 5: verse. Stay me with flagons, and comfort me
with apples: for I am sick of love.

His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me.

Ibid. verse 15.16. Take us the foxes, the little foxes, which destroy the
vines: for our vines have small grapes.

My well-beloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the Lillies.

Item, Cant, 5, cap, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And Cant, 7, cap, 10, 12, verses,, I am
my welbeloueds, and his desire is toward me.

Item, John, 6.35, 47, 48, Coloss. 3.15, Heb, 3, 14.

Likewise Revelation, 3. cap, 20, verse as, Behold, I stand at the door, and
knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him,
and will suppe with him, and he with me.

Besides, Revel: 12: ca: 1, 2, verse. And there appeared a great wonder in
heaven: a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and
upon her head a Crown of 12 stars.

And she was with child, and cried traveyling in birth, and was pained
ready to be delivered. This is not properly meant (as some will) of the
Virgin Mary, but of the Chruch, for these reasons;

1 The Church is in this manner of speaking figured out aptly unto our
perceavance under the name of moon: as also Christ is by the word Sun, Mal. 4

2 From a certain relation betwixt the Sun and the moon. For the moon is a
lesser light, yea which borrows al her light from the Sun: so this woman or
church being the weaker vessel relieth upon Christ her strength and stay, from
whom as from a loving husband, she receaveth all her glory.

Furthermore, in this most sacred and inviolable marriage between Christ and
his Church, we must note three especial things; 1. The precontract: 2. The
solemnization: 3. The full accomplishment and vpstroke thereof.

First, the precontract is done by the immediate working of the holy Ghost,
pouring faith into our hearts, by which we willingly give our consent.

Secondly, the solemnizing hereof was and is celebrated both in the ceremonies
of the old and new law; as then by Circumcision, Paschall lamb: now by
Baptism, and the Lords Supper: where all the graces of Christ the true and
faithful husband of his church, are and were as in a rich Treasure-house most
firmly sealed, confirmed, and made unto us on his behalf: and where we again
our selves, do plight most inviolably, our own fidelity and obeisance to him.

Thirdly, the consummation or the accomplishment and vpstroake hereof is done
two kind of ways; 1. In the dissolution of this our earthly Tabernacle: 2. In
the full particular enjoying the presence of the lamb our Bridegroom, whenas
we shall behold him as he is, even face to face.

Then shall this woman (which is the Church) be truly and perfectly clothed
with the Sun, that is, she shall be clad about with the rich and glorious robes
of Christ's own righteousness. And this must be understood two ways as the
Schoolmen hold; tam privative quam positive.

The first, is a not imputing, that is, a pardoning and forgiveness of our
sins, by which we are let to go scotfree and are delivered as well from the
guiltines of sin, as from the punishment thereof, namely, death eternal.

The second is an imputatio^ of Christ his righteousness, by which even for the
righteousness of Christ attributed unto us through Faith and made ours by
imputation, we are allowed for just in the sight of God, and which is more, we
are accounted worthy to ascend up into the high habitation of the most
omnipotent and mighty Jehovah, even into that most holy hill of Sion and new
Jerusalem. Revel. 21.12. cap.

This thing does David point out unto us, when he says, Ps. 32.1, 2. verses
as, Blessed ((...)) is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered.

Blessed is the man, unto who^ the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
Spirit there is no guile.

Out of whence, behold (...), that is, a definitive, certain, and resolute
sentence: the sum whereof is, that the blessedness of man does consist in the
remission of sins and in the imputation of Christ's righteousness, whose
effect is sa^ctification, which is taught in the end of the second v: and
((...)) in whose spirit there is no guile.

Now Justification is here declared in a threefolde manner:

1 That our sins be so taken away, as that they are not.

2 That they are so covered, as not the prints and filth thereof may appear.
v. 7.

3 That God does not impute them, after he has taken them away, but imputes
only the righteousness in Christ by faith, as did unto our father Abraham, Genesis
15. ca. 6. v. And Abraham believed the Lord, and he counted that to him for
righteousness.

Well, we see now that by virtue of this our Marriage with CHRIST, we are
invested and covered with Christ's innocence, and clothed upon with the
garments ( Ezech. 16. read the chapter) of his righteousness. Look Ierem. 23.
c. 6. verse. 1. Cor. 1.30. Romans 4.6.7.8.

And hence is it, why St. Paul exhorts us so instantly to put on the Lord
Jesus Christ. As, Romans 13.14. Ephesians. 4.24. Ephesians. 6.11. Coloss. 3.10.12.
Again, 1. These 5.8. we are willed to put on the brestplate of faith, and love,
and the hope of salvation for an helmet. For by this faith we are mistically
inserted and united into Christ, seeing he is the vine it self, we are the
branches: he is the tree, we the fruit: he the Sun, we the beams: he is the
head, we the members: he is the Bridegroom, and we the Spouse.

This espousage and conjunction is so sure, as shall not, nay cannot be
dissolved. For the Spirit of GOD is the Scribe, which draws the bands
betwixt us: the word of God is the band: his mercy, the seal: the
deliverance, benefit, and freedom that we have by it, is our peace. Peace
with God, who has reconciled us to himself in Christ: peace with our
neighbor in showing all duties of Christian charity now unto him: peace with
our own selves, not daunted any more with the dreadful horror and power of
the Devil: Lastly, peace against our enemies, nothing apalled nor fearing,
what man can do unto us. For if God be on our side, who then can be against
us. Rom, 8. wherefore such and so great is this faith and the force thereof,
that it is called a brestplate, a shield, yea even victory it self. 1, Ioh,
5, Ca, 4, ver. And right excelle^tly speaks a learned man hereof: Fide,
inquit, tantum possumus, quantum credimus, that is, By faith we can do so
much, how much we do believe.

But whereas we are united unto Christ by faith, we must not misconceaue, and
understand presently a bare, historical, temporary, or idle faith, that is to
faie, dead in it self: but rather that which is accompanied or attended on
from every side by all good works, namely, a justifying, a lively, an
effectual, a working, and fruitful faith. It must not be like unto those appels
mentioned by St. Austin, which grew in the place of Sodom and comorrha: such
as showed fair without, but so soon as one touches them [tra^seunt in
fumum,] they vanish away to nothing. But, is vere credit (as a Father speaks)
qui vere exercet opera bona credendo that is, he does believe aright, who in
believing is careful to show forth good works with all.

It behooveth us therefore now, being received into the favor of God again by
and through Christ: that we leese not the same any more, but let us lay sure
hold on our Lord and Savior, and as Simeon Luc. 2.28. took him up in his
arms: so let us take him up also not in our arms without, but inwardly in our
hearts, and then may we boldly come before, and praise his holy name.

One sometime that could not tell how to escape loss of life from a certain
king, because the king was provoked against him, took up the kings son, who
was enwrapte with the love which he bare to his son, that he clean forgate
the hatred he bare to his enemy: so we must pray Christ Jesus to be our
advocate to his Father, being assured that God is well pleased in him, and we
must take CHRIST as it were in our arms, and then God looking on us,
forgets our sins. For by this means it will come to pass, that we shall
have just cause to rejoice at all times, yea even then, when God is said to
judge the world with righteousness. For though we be not righteous in our
selves: yet Christ's righteousness is imputed for ours.

And as Parents love their children, though they be never so deformed: so God
loving his Son looks on us, and loves us. This is called ( Romans 13, 14, Gal.
3, 27,) a putting on of Christ. And as Jacob having put on Esaues apparel
wan the blessing: so we putting on Christ's garments of righteousness shall
obtain the blessing and favor of God for evermore.

Lastly, unto this our spiritual marriage and conjunction, it shall not be
inconvenient to annexe three necessary observations, rules, or conclusions; as
follows.

First, this conjunction, here spoken of, must be substantial or essential,
and not only energeticall, that is to say, Virtuall: namely whole man with
whole Christ (yea and by means of him) even with the whole Trinity and
Godhead. See these places. 2, Epist, Pet, 1, cap, 4, ver, Ioh, 17, 22, 23, Ioh,
14, 23. 1, Ioh, 4, ca, 12, 13, 15, 16. v.

Secondly, it must be real and true, therefore not imaginatorie or accidental:
namely as the branches with the vine, as the stones of the wall with the whole
building, as the members of man's body with the head, and as the coupling of man
and wife [(...)] in one flesh (according to Gods ordinance) be they never so
far a sunder in respect of place. Ephesians, 5, cap, 29, 30.

Thirdly, which must ever diligently be marked; It must, ( quoad modum, that
is, in respect of the manner) be a spiritual, and no corporal or carnal
conjunction.

This is over hard to be comprehended of flesh and blood, nay it surpriseth
clean man's sense, his wit, and reason: in-somuch, that St. Paul himself,
calls it ( Ephesians, 5, 32. (...) a great secret,, which we cannot attain unto
but by a sure and lively ( Ephesians, 3, cap, 3, 9, v,) faith: yea which is more,
the very Angels themselves [1. Pet, 2, cap, 12, verse,] do desire (...)
introspicere, that is, to behold or (more nearly to the Greek word) to see
and pry into this mystery of the salvation of mankind, purchased and wrought
by Christ, whereof this spiritual union with him is the very su^me, interest,
and earnest of the holy Ghost give^ to his elect children for their most full
assurance, which they do enclose and lay up in their hearts by faith.

What shall one say then to these bussardly Papists, that be they convinced by
the scriptures never so plainly, yea though the Apostle St. Paul so
wonderfully endewed with the Spirit, does not omit to say and confess that
it is a great mystery: moreover that the holy Angels too themselves do even
long to know this secret: yet for all this they are nevertheless carried and
ledd away still with a carnal or fleshly understanding of this so spiritual
and deep a mystery, avouching that they do eat orally the transubstantiated
body of Christ made by the cunning slipper-devise and incantation (I should
have said consecration,) of the maskinglike attired massing-Priest.

Hitherto we have handled the three first special ends of the Lords Supper,
the two latter whereof tended to our mystical incorporation or inauguratio^
with Christ, as also unto a spiritual repast and food, whereby we gather
strength and grow up continually from faith ( Romans 1.7.) to faith, until we
be made a perfect man in him.

It rests now that we should declare the two other ends, but that present
occasion urges us to interlace certain reasons against the orall and fleshely
eating of Christ's body in the Sacrament, with the absurdities, that do rise
thereupon.

Q. You said before in the third special end, that this Supper is a Sacrament
of our spiritual nourishment: do you then make a difference of eating, seeing
you add, spiritual?

A. It is right meet so to distinguish, least we should be carried away with
the sweep of gross error, as to to many are. For ma^ducatio or eating is
sometime sacramental: sometime spiritual only: sometime both spiritual and
sacramental.

Q What is sacramentalleating?

A. It is the external and se^sible eating and drinking of the bread and wine,
without faith.

Q. What is spiritual eating?

A. It is that, which is done only by faith, and it answers (ex opposito)
unto that first: which is nothing else but a sign and symball hereof.

Q. Then these two are not always joined together.

A. No. For as the external and ceremonial eating may be without the
spiritual: so the spiritual also may be without the external. As says St.
Austen, de Ciuit lib. 21. cap. 23.

Q. What is the Sacramental and spiritual eating together?

A. It is the very right use of the Supper, which is required in the
institution of Christ.

Q. How is carnal eating convinced by the word?

A. Christ himself does overthrow it by two arguments, John 6. ca. 62.63. v.
The one drawn from the sign: the other from the use. viz.

1. A signo, or from the sign:

Does this offend? what then, says he, if ye should see the Son of man
ascend up where he was before? Signifying thereby (as Athanasius rightly
thinks) that his ascension and carnal eating of his flesh can in no wise
stand together.

2. Ah vsu, that is, from the use.

It is the Spirit, (says he,) that quickneth: the flesh profits nothing: the
words that I speak unto you are Spirit and life. That is, (as the natural
and proper sense of the Text infers,) earnall eating is unprofitable: but
the spiritual does give life and quickneth.

Now the Papists do check these words of Christ, and cavil stoutly, or
rather stubburnely and spitefully with us, that it is the orall and fleshly
chamming and grinding of Christ betwixt their teeth, that profits.

But it is in vain to reason the cause which these drawe-latches and
cornerlurkers. For as the Proverb goes; an Ape will be an Ape still, putt him
into a coat of velvet or what you will: so is a Papist no changling in
opinion, but will live and die a Papist, speak, write, read, reason, or do
what ye list, nay what you can.

Notwithstanding how obstinate and selfe-willingly wedded soever they be to
their opinions: yet it stands us greatly upon, to be obedient and yield unto
the truth, demonstrated unto us by undeniable testimonies out of Gods most holy
word, and let us pray the Lord both night and day to be constantly grounded and
established herein. And in deed it is a shame for us to be inferior to our
Adversaries herein, which are so purposedly and stiffely nailed unto their
imaginary devises and dreams of men; who after saying once, it is my
Conscience, look for no more, they have told you all: it is a shame, I say, of
all shames, that we should not most resolutely live and die herein. For we
have more to allege for our selves, then, It is my Conscience; (and who
knows not that conscience must be grounded on science, which science too
comes from the word of God, otherwise it will prove but a bare buckle and
thong, that is a very mere conceipte.) For we have these three things to
stand in our behalf.

1 First the word of God which is truth it self and cannot lie this they have
not, because they derogate therefrom, saying, that the authority of their
church is above the same, yea they stick not to make their trashie traditions
equal with it, yea they abuse it and blaspheme it with the rankest Atheistes of
our time, the one tearming it a nose of wax, a shipmans hose, a blackincky
Gospel: the other belching out this blasphemy, valuing it to be no more but a
witty policy of wise men to keep fools in awe: but let them walk together
as never a barrel of them better hering.

2. Secondly, Besides the word which is our warrant from God himself, we have
also his holy Spirit to ascertaine us therein, pouring faith into our hearts,
whereby we do assuredly believe it: this they have not neither, because they
rob him of his proper effect and operation, which is immediately from the Father
and the Son to illighten our minds giving to us the right meaning and
understanding of his word, which they most bastardly appropriate to their
Pope, whose power is such, as that he may rack the^ at his pleasure. And no
marveile, seeing they have made a quarter God of him, to rule the roast in the
world as his holiness lists, according to this blasphemous verse of him.
Oraclo voc is mu^di moderaris habenas,
Et merito in terris crederis esse Deus.
Yea, he is become such a saucy Sir, that he can change the Articles of faith
and give auctority to general councels, as it is said: Articulos soluit,
synodumque facit generalem

3 Thirdly and lastly, Besides the word and spirit of God, we have our own
spirit, that is, our whole soul and conscience to testify with us that what
we do, we do it as his adopted children, that is, not hypocritically, but
faithfully, truly, and sincerely.

This does St. Paul teach, To. 8.16. The same Spirit bears witness with our
Spirit, that we are the children of God.

Let them then cast of this deceaveable mask of a sleeueles and pretended
conscience of theirs, and let the^ soundly ground it on Gods word, desiring him
to vonchsafe them of his Spirit to illuminate their minds, now darkened with
errors and superstition, that so, they may join together in one with us, to
profess and believe the same. Which I pray God to grant, according to his
good pleasure and will.

But to the Purpose, where I do mean to show partly ab impossibili, that is
from the vnpossibilitie of the things partly a consequente absurdo, that is,
from the notorious absurdities which must follow: that this carnal eating may
not nor cannot at any rate stand with the analogy of faith, which was as
effectual unto the Fathers before Christ's coming: as it is to us since his
coming.

If Christ cannot be received or eaten but after a carnal and gross kind:
then I pray how did the Patriarchs and Fathers eat Christ? whenas Ioh. 6. c.
53. our Savior Christ says; Verily, verelie I say unto you, unless ye
shall eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you.

But the fathers had life in them, because they had an undoubted faith in
Christ to come; which was as effectual to them for their salvation and
receiving up into glory: (as was Enoch, Heb. 11, cap 5, verse. and Elias 2,
Kings. 2, cap. 11. verse.) as our faith is effectual in him, now that he is
come. For which cause they must needs grant another manner of eating,
differing altogether from carnal, which is spiritual only and done by faith.

Now, as they did eat Christ then being not yet come in the flesh so do, nay
so must we also eat him now, (for if there be any difference, it is in
circumstance and Signs not in Substance,) as St. Paul well declares, 1. Cor.
10 c. 1.2.3.4. verses: viz.

Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, that all our
Fathers were under the cloud, and al passed through the sea.

And did all eat the same spiritual meat, And did all drink the same
spiritual drink (for they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them:
and the Rock was Christ.

According to which spiritual kind of eating both ours and theirs, St. Austen
says thus; Vt quid dentes and ventre^ parasti: creed and manducasti, that is,
why have thou prepared teeth and a belly, believe and thou have eaten.

Ab Absurdo.

(...), says the Philosopher, that is, grant one absurdity, and others do
follow straight upon. Wherefore if the reprobate should eat the body of
Christ: al these and a great many more absurdities must needs follow; as that
the reprobate are made the members of Christ, that the reprobate are ingraffed
into the body of Christ, that Christ does dwell in the reprobate, that they
can be made partakers of Christ and Belial together, which is horrible to
speak. For which cause one says: Iudam panem Domini, sed non panem Dominum
comedisse, that is, Judas did eat the bread of the Lord, but he did not eat
bread the Lord.

Reasons against carnal eating.

To make short of the matter, these reasons following do all make against
carnal eating of Christ.

1. First, he took a true humane nature: so that we can eat him no otherwise,
then did his disciples in the first supper.

But here do the Vbiquitaries give us the slip, wringing themselves out of
the briars with a sophisme de falso subiecto elenchi; when they teach that
Christ in these words of the supper, take, eat: gave commandment for the
orall or fleshly eating of his body: and yet those words are not spoken of
the body of Christ, because he took not that into his hands, neither did he
break his body and give it to his disciples: but they are spoken de pane, of
the bread, which he took into his hand, over which he gave thanks, which he
brake and gave to his disciples.

But against this and such like dotages of theirs Christ himself forewarneth
his disciples, that they should not suffer themselves to be deluded therewith,
Math. 24. cap 23.24.25. verses. viz.

Then if any shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not.
For there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very
elect.

Behold, I have told you before. See 26, 27, 28, verses of the same Chap.

2. Secondly, he ascended visibly from the earth into heaven: where he
remains til the time that al things be restored, which God has spoken by the
mouth of al his holy Prophets since the world began. Act 3.21.

3. Thirdly, such is our eating of him, as his dweliing is in us: but he
dwells in us by faith. Ephesians. 3. cap. 17. As, That Christ may dwell in your
hearts, by faith.

4. Fourthly, all the Saints both of the old and new Testament have one and the
same union with Christ, which is spiritual.

5. Fifthly, Christ only is able to offer himself unto the Father for us, and
needs not the help of any man.

Blush then ye frapling massing-Priestes to offer him up so often by making it
a common art amongst you, and remember what a grievous account ye are to render
for thus crucifying again unto your selves the Son of God, and making a
mock of him. Heb. 6. cap. 6. v. Which place though it be directly spoken
against such as do malitiouslie and finally spurn at the truth of the good
word of God, after they have tasted thereof, and been once lightened and made
partakers of the holy Ghost: yet apply it to your selves, who though ye do
not quite forsake the word: notwithstanding ye do alter the word by glossing
and corrupting the perfect sense and meaning thereof, as your Rhemish Testament
can witness it here to your faces, and elsewhere (except yerepent) to your
endless derision and shame.

Well as you alter the word, so ye add and diminish too, the one by bringing in
an hundred knacks of knauerie, as Purgatory hole, prayer for the dead, praying
unto Saints; I will not speak of your paradoxes, scil. Children dying without
baptism are al condemned, ad paenam damni, as ye call it, but not ad paena^
sensus; of your Limbus Patrum before Christ's coming, of your innumerable
Masses, dirges, Trentals, Popes Pardons, Canons, Decretal Epistles which you
make to be authentical with the word of God. These be your own additions, we
cannot tell what to do with them, and therefore take them home to you and sweep
your chymnies with them.

Do ye ask me wherein ye do diminish? I need neither go far a field for
this; seeing ye diminish from the very institution it self of Christ, by
taking away the cup from the Laity: ye diminish it, when ye do so
impudentlie impair the credit and authority by captiving it to your own
hellish censures and most ouglie practices. But remember, (if ye be not void
yet of al feeling) what is denounced against al such wicked and heinous
practitioners, Revel. 22 cap. 18, 19, verses. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Deuteronomy. 12, 32, Prove.
30, 6. Joshua, 1, 7, 8, etc.

I will pass over to speak how the papists do diminish from the office of
Christ the one and only mediator between God and man, (1 Timothy 2.5.) by
imperfecting still of that, which he by one oblation and sacrifice of himself
upon the cross has made for ever perfect, Heb 7. cap. 25. Wherefore he is
able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives,
to make intercession for them. Again, that Christ's one only sacrifice is
sufficient without this toyish elevating him in their Host, look these places:
as,

Ioh. 10, 15, Heb. 2, 17, 18, Heb. 4, 14, 15, Heb. 5, cap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, verses, Heb. 9, cap. 11, 12, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, verses, Heb. 10.10,
14, Ephesians. 5, 2, Item Mark. 10, 45, Psalm. 110, 4, etc.

And Heb. 8, cap. 4, verse, It is most evidently taught, (which I would have
thoroughly and thoroughly to be marked,) that if Christ were on the earth, he
were not then a Priest, seeing (says he) there are Priests that according to
the law offer gifts, who serve unto the pattern of heavenly things, as Moses
was warned by God, when he was about to finish the Tabernacle: See, said he,
that thou make all things according to the pattern, showed thee in the mount.

Further, 2, Cor. 5, cap, 16, ver. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after
the flesh, yea though we had known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more.

First then by these two places we find, that if Christ were on the earth now
in his humane nature, he could be no Priest.

Secondly, that we may not henceforth know him any more after the flesh,
much less as Papists so grossly minded would, to eat him fleshly. But the
Papists being so slipper as any eele, do whip in and out by the back door,
saying: that Christ's body is upon the earth per modum invisibilem, that is,
after an invisible manner but this delusion is not worth the smoke of a ladle,
because Christ's body is not any where invisible, seeing it is wholly against
the nature of a body. For once take away the proper adiunct: and take the
Subject after. I hasten to the other reasons.

6 Sixthly The blessings promised in the Supper are spiritual.

7 Seventhly and lastly, The Analogy of the sign with the thing signified
does manifestly refell transubstantiation: because it were not a Sacrament at
all, did it not consist of these two things, the sign and the thing
signified. Wherefore most notable is that saying of Macarius the Moonke: Bread
and wine (says he) are a correspondent type of his flesh, and they who
receive the bread which is showed, eat the flesh of Christ spiritually.

Hither to of the reasons: I will return to the two other special ends of the
Supper yet remaining behind, namely the 4. and the 5.

The fourth End.

It is that, that stands us insteeed as a pledge of the new Testament, that
is, of the promise of forgiveness of sins. And so are the very words of the
institution. Math. 26. ca. 28. ver. For this is my blood of the new Testament,
that is shedd for many, for the remission of sins. So do the words implie,
Luc. 22. cap. 20. verse. This Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is
shedd for you: That is, This Cup is a pledge and seal of the promise of
remission of sins purchased for you by the shedding of my blood.

Places for remission of sins.

1. John 3. cap. 5. And ye know that he appeared that he might take away our
sins, and in him is no sin.

1. John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God but that he loved us, and
sent his son to be a reconciliation for our sins.

Isayas, 44. ca. 21.22. ver. Remember these (o Jacob and Israel) for thou art
my servant: I have formed thee: thou art my servant: o Israel forget me not. I
have put away thy transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a miste,
turn unto me, for I have redeemed thee.

1. Ioh. 1. ca. 9. v. If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Look these places: Micheas, 7. c. 18. v. 1. Pet. 3.18. Ephesians. 1.7. Act. 10.43.
Act. 13.31. Coloss. 2.13.14. Ioh. 1.29. 1. Ioh. 2.1.2. Psalm. 103.1.2.3.4.
verses.

The fifth end.

It is Vinculum dilectionis, that is, a Sacrament of our mutual society amongst
our selves, as the members of one and the same body, whose head is Christ;
(and not the Pope, as the Papists do paulter and keep an illfavourd coil
about it.) For these places commonstrate Christ to be our head alone.

1. Corint. 10. cap. 16.17. ver. Coloss. 1.18. Ephesians. 5.30. Ephesians. 4.15.16. As
for the Pope, let him be an head where he can currie favor best: we for our
parts are absolutely prohibited by Christ our only head, to become the members
of an harlotte according to the Apostle, 1. Cor. 6. cap. 15. v. much more are
we forbidden to make our selves the body of that spiritual stru^pet and whore
of Rome, that is, to receave the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number
of his name, Revel. 13. cap. 17. verse.

Now from hence, (by reason of that strict communion between all the Saints,
which comes wholly from the fountain of our conjunction with Christ,) is set
forth that Christian band of love between the Spouse and Christ, Cant. 1, cap,
3, v. Fide adhe remus Christo: dilectione tu^ Christo, tum nobis ipsis mutuo 1.
Cor. 10. ca. 16. 17. v. Ephesians. 4.3.4. 1: Cor. 12.12. ad finem cap. 13. Ephesians.
3.6.9. Romans 13.8. Colos. 3.14. Romans 8.17.
Draw me, we will run after thee. Where note presently upon the singular
number follows the plural. For the Church is as one building, but many
stones: one wine, but many grapes: one bread, but many grains: to be short,
one body and yet many members. Wherefore love is the very bo^d of our
Communion, that is, by which we both worship God in a liuly faith, and do
likewise love our selves most sou^dly and sincerely. Fran. Iun.

Lastly add this one End more: Testimonium Resurrection is est, that is, It
is a sure testification of our resurrection, by the virtue of Christ raised
again. For he is our head, and therefore will raise us up to bliss, which are
his members.

And in sooth unto this string or bra^ch tend all the former. For which cause
Christ says, Ioh 6. cap, 5^. ver. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

Q. Thus much of the ends, which are the first part of the Meditation of the
Lords Supper: wherein does the second consist?

A. In the right use thereof, viz.

A right and sincere examination of our own selves: by which we are either to
be received to it, or excluded from it.

That we may be admitted thereunto; we must consider whether we be the true
members of Christ, or no. Concerning which, St. Paul gives us this rule to
follow, 1. Corint. 11. cap, 28, ver.

Let every man therefore examine himself; and let him so eat of this bread,
and drink of this Cup.

For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body.

Observation.

He is said to discern the Lords body, who has a just regard of the
worthiness thereof: and therefore does with due reverence come and draw near to
eat the food of his Soul.

2, Corint, 13. ca, 5. verse, the Apostle does explain his mind perfectly,
how this examination should be had:

Prove your selves, whether ye are in the faith: examine your selves: know
ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobats?

By which words he does most pithilie exhort the people of Corinth, and in them
all Christians, that they would or should rather now, not only abstain from
schisms and vnreverent gurmandizing and feasting, as though this were
sufficient, (and no more a do to be made) unto the worthy receaving of the
Supper: but he proceeds a degree higher, and teaches how that every man
stands bound in conscience, to descend into the very depth and secrets of his
heart and thoughts, and in a most narrow and orderly sort, to sieft as it were,
to search, and try himself thoroughly; as namely, whether he does fully and
resolutely, (after he has sorrowed for his sins past) believe in Christ the
only Mediator and satisfier of Gods wrath for our wickedness committed:
whether he has an earnest intent and purpose to hate sin ever afterward, and
to live justly, holily, and purely, that he may show himself acceptable and
thankeful unto God for those his so many and inestimable benefits toward us in
his only begotten Son Christ Jesus.

This we shall perform, if we come prepared unto this spiritual repast and
banquet, having about us our wedding robes: as faith, repentance, love
unfeigned, thankfulness, etc. seeing indeed that the Eva^gelicall wedding
garment, (spoken of by our Savior himself, Mat, 22 cap, 10, 11, 12, ver.) is
principally decked and bewtified with these, that is to say, with faith and the
like.

The usual forms and names of faith.

It is called sometime (...): sometime scutum fidei, (...): that is, trust,
boldness, strength, shield of faith, confidence, Ephesians. 6. c. 10. 16. v. Ephesians.
3.12. Hebr. 10.21.22. 1 Ioh 3.19.20.21. 1 Ioh 4 17. 2. Ioh 5.14.
full assurance: which the Latins express fitly by fiducia and it does direct
ly answer unto the Greek (...); which is a Metaphore drawn from vessels or
ships upon the sea, that when they once have their just fraught, charg and
lading it is after still carried cum plenis velis, that is to say, more evenly
and sleddily then before it was, being empty: semblabelie our faith whilst it
is yet weak and little, or green in the blade as they say, it may be compared
in sort with an empty vessel; which after it has grown up in degrees and
increased from faith to faith, until it comes ad (...) ipsam, that is, to her
just and even weight: it after hoisseth it self up cum plenis velis with full
sails, and cutteth her way along most stedily, throughout all the dangerous
syrtes and gulses of this swelling and raging world, without ( Iac. 1.6.) any
farther scruple, The Papists teach men to be always doubtful of their
salvation: surely a comfortable, and pelting popish doctrine. But unless it
were so with these caterpillars of men's souls: how were it possible, that they
should pick up so many pe^ce as they do.
doubt, or wavering for the matter.

The subject or proper seat of which forenamed faith must be [(...)] the very
noblest part, the heart it self of man. Ephesians. 3. cap. 17. verse. And hence we
may know the cause, why the Lord requires it, and makes so often mention
thereof. As, Prove. 23.26. My Son give me thy heart. Besides, see these
places, Psalm. 119, 1, 2. Deuteronomy. 4, 29. Deuteronomy. 6, 5 6. 1, Sam. 16, 7. Romans 10,
cap. 10, verse.

In which faith of ours, before it takes deep root and so draws near unto
his ripenes; it does in the mean while some and some, as they say, grow up
by three stemmes or kinds of motions, that is:

1 First, Intellectus Cognitione by know ledge issuing from the understanding
part of the Soul. But we may not rest here only, for it is not enough to
know: because this is common to Devils and wicked men, as well as to our selves.
The Devils also believe it, (namely that there is one God,) and tremble. Iac.
2.19.

2 Secondly, voluntatis summo desiderio, studio, and assensu by an earnest
desire or longing, by a careful endeavor and assenting of the will: and this
only is proper to the Elect alone, Philip. 2, cap. 13, verse. Yea it is right
worthelie spoken by the Spouse Cant. Cantic. 1. cap. 2.3. verses, As. Therefore
the Virgins love thee. Draw me, we will run after thee. Where note a
co^formity of the Spouse the Church with Christ her husband, consisting in two
things:

1. An open and plain confession of her own weakness and infirmity, saying;
trahe me, draw me.

2 A readiness or willing mind and forwardnes of the Spirit, which says; post
te curremus we will run after thee. Thus speaks St. John: No man can come to
me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him.

3 Thirdly, Plena tum demum cordis fiducia, which is that (...), a most
anker-like, a sure, and unremovable confidence and settled persuasion in God
through Christ: against which, the gates of Hell shall never be able to
prevail, Math. 16, cap. 16, 17, 18, verses.

Q. Lastly, who must be excluded from this banquet?

A. All such, as are unworthy thereof.

Observation.

Those therefore are unworthy, that are without the covenant: as are Turks,
Jews persisting still in obstinacy. Atheists or the damned crew, as they
term themselves, (when this sect began, I think Hell was rakte for them:) to
who^ Papists also as birds of a feather, (quatenus inquam, Papistae, semper dum
viuant malitiosi ac pertinaces,) though after an odd kind of sort they belong
unto the visible Church, may be added, to make up the quaternitie of sworn
brothers in iniquity.

Besides, Children at no hand may come, because they yet want judgment to
try themselves.

Idiots also and fanaticall people must be put by, because they want the use of
reason, to examine themselves.

But for hypocrites; the Minister ought not to exclude them as unworthy: til it
pleases God to reveal their wickedness and make it known. For which cause
Judas was admitted by Christ, unto his Supper. For albeit his wickedness was
known well enough to the Lord himself: yet was it not notorious, and so
known unto men.

Recapitulation.

Thus much so briefly as I could of the three former general points, which I
promised at the entrance of this treatise, touching:

1 The judgment of the Fathers for the right exposition of the words of the
institution, This is my body.

2 The authority of the holy Scriptures, the very touchstone and trial of
truth to confirm the same by manifold and most manifest places.

3 The reasons such as the best writers do use to approve the same with the
absurdities likewise, that do follow in the contrary sense and taking of the
words. Which if none can go down nor make impression into their hearts, it
seems that they are ve^geably hard laced at the stomach; and I am sorry
withal to have had so much to do with them, as in the end to loose my
labor: though I am glad and do still rejoice to have spoken the truth, and no
more then the truth.

Now the fourth and last thing for which I am yet behind with them, is,
briefly to vnswathe unto the view of others (that will loath their shameless
shame,) even this detestable impuritie, prophanenes, with the most odious and
deformed monster of their homeborne brat and inbred Romish Mass. And so in the
end vnrolling one little clue of their paralogising arguments and crafty
co^veyances they use in smothering the matter and blearing the eyes of the
simple: whereof their Arch-leader Bellarmine has rolde up whole bottomes in
store for them of riffe-raffe and all other sircere-sorcere: I will conclude al
by praying unto the Lord both to amend them and turn their hearts (if it be
his will) from these dark and muddie errors: and also to defend us from them,
and from their wickedly intended complotments and whatsoever villainies else they
practice still against us. Which do, O Lord, of thy great and unspeakable
mercy, we beseech thee in Christ Jesus our only Savior and redeemer.

The fourth point concerning the deformed confusion and disorder in their Mass.
A right depicturation of the Popish Quintessenced Mass.
HOw slily the Papists deal with us, and what turne-skinnes they are, judge
with your self. For now at an instant they do audaciouslie affirm a thing,
which in the turning of an hand they will most retchleslie deny.

They do not kill (and they are men almost to be credited) Christ in their
Mass: no, what then? Marry forsooth they use him in a far more gentle sort,
that is, they do but sacrifice him, they do no more in the vvide world but
present him, and offer him up to God the Father. Surely a pretty dish of
birds, and fit to be served in, to such groutheades as without a quare will
believe it.

Ecce sacrificium hic, sed nullam victimam, that is, behold a sacrifice, but no
slain sacrifice. These are shrewde horsons. Why these, I say, make no bones
at the matter to reduce how and when they list a sacrifice into his
quintessence, which is to ordain and make a fantastical, a conceipted, and
an imaginatorie sacrifice, that is, to lead it so far a field from his own
nature, that at the last it shall wholly leese it self, and shall not have so
much as either matter or form to be left in it. As this their Massy sacrifice
has nor.

For first those (...) or sacrifices in the Levitical Law, which were wholly
burnt; the beasts thereof were slain before they could be laid upon the altar:
and were not only bare sacrificia, but also victimae too. Now these as types
did prefigure to them Christ Jesus both to be slain and so be made a
sacrifice once for all. And as then those typical sacrifices did consist both
of a visible matter and form: so did that true sacrifice Christ himself.

For he was visiblie put to death by wicked men and his body nailed unto the
Cross.

Now compare this true sacrifice of Christ with that bastardly one of the
Mass: and see whether it will hold stitch or not. Surely the Mass is such a
rotten relic, that it cannot. For,

1 Christ was both a sacrifice and also a slain sacrifice, and that no more
then once, for the sins of the world: In the Mass there is a sacrifice, but
they slay him not.

2 His was a propitiatory sacrifice once offered: but theirs (as they say) is
a propitiatory one too, continually offered.

3 Christ's body hanged visiblie upon the cross: In the Mass it is invisible,
or to follow them close at heels by using their own foppish terms, it is
there miraculously.

Examination.

But let them know, that their faith which is builded always thus on miracles
cannot be good nor pass for current in this place:

First, because it rests upon an external sign and miracle done, neglecting
the waightier matters which are required in the Sacraments, as to believe
[(...)] most assuredly the promises of God, (made unto us in his Son Christ
Jesus,) who is ever faithful and true and ready to perform on his behalf:
and therefore whosoever does apprehe^d them by a steadfast faith, he shall
obtain them suer enough without the help of miracles: whereof they have such
abundance, that they do even baske themselves therein. see, 2, Thessal, 2. cap.
9. ver. Math, 24. chap, 24. verse. Revel, 13. cap, 13. v. Revel. 16. cap. 14. v.

Secondly, Signs and especially miracles are long since out of date, and have
no longer use among Christians: and when they were in use, they showed forth
the glory of Christ, and likewise prepared a way unto faith: but faith it
self springs up by hearing of the word, ( Romans 10. cap. 17. v.) and by the
same, and the Sacraments, as here by the Supper chiefly, it is maintained,
bred, nourished, and preserved.

Thirdly, if this Massy Miracle were true, then should the body of Christ,
after their transubstantiated work once done by the Priest, be felt and
comprehended by the senses, that is, it might be seen, handled, tasted: so
that now the bread should no more be the object of the senses. This is proved
by his like, Ioh 2. cap. 5.6: verses, where Christ turned the water into wine,
after which transubsta^tiation, the wine was perceaved by the senses, and not
the water any more. Wherefore the co^paring of this true miracle of Christ
with that of theirs, does make the huge and mou^tainlike Massy miracle to
appear in his colors, that is, to be a trim devise, coined, and
counterfeicte. But return we to the comparison:

4 And lastly, Christ's body on the Cross or elsewhere soever, was
circu^scribed in place; For when he was in one place touching his body, he was
not at that instant in another, but Christ's body in the Mass is not
circumscribed in place; no, it is in many places at a nicke, nay, it is Vbique
every where.

Now behold here punctatim the guintessensed definition of this massy and
mouldie sacrifice: viz.

It is a sacrifice, and yet no sacrifice slain, very often and oftentimes,
still to be offered and continued, in visible or miraculouse,
incircumscriptible, and vbiquitarie.

Tell me whether these are not strippers or no, to disguize and turn a thing
clean out, as it were, into dublet and hose, in such a mimical and painterlike
manner as they do. I grant they may easily by snipping and clipping bring to
pass what they will, seeing they have all the tools of incredible cunning and
craft to work withal.

Here let us scan a little the 3. former branches of this quintesse^ced
sacrifice.

Examination.

First it is a Sacrifice, I grant, Eucharisticall; which is common to all
Christians, whereof are diverse kinds: as,

1 Of the lips. Hose, 14. cap. 3 ver. Hebr. 13.15.

2 Of the heart and spirit Psalm. 51.16.

3 Of the whole body. Romans 12. c. 1. v.

Observation.

Yet are Baptism and the Supper principally ordained by Christ himself to be
Sacraments, though in respect of our own selves they are sacrifices, by which
we do show our obedience and thankfalnes to God, for the incomparable benefit
of our redemption wrought by Christ, in offering up his body for us upon the
Cross once for all.

Nay, (say they,) it is a propitiatory sacrifice, or else it will not serve our
turn.

I see one had need of a ladle or a long spoone at least, that will eat out of
the devils dish. There is no striving at all with these coaps-mates: as good
give it them, for they will have it by hook or by crook.

But ask them a reason, why? they answer at first dash from the institution,
Hoc facite doc this, that is, (as they dream,) consecrate, offerte,
sacrificatote consecrate, offer, sacrifice etc. The use of which word [facio]
put for sacrifico for want of scripture, they are driven to a miserable
exige^t, to produce no worse auctor then a Poet: Cum faciam vitulos pro
frugibus etc. that is, cum sacrificabo. Well let this slide.

Ask them again, why they remembered not to allege that, which they were to
have done by special commandment of our Savior, that is, in remembrance of
him.

If they say that they do it for a remembrance of him; then why do they
alienate and improper thus the words from their own signification and nature,
as in steed of do this plainly and simply according to Christ's way: they
must needs have it their own way, or else it shall lie to doing for them, and
that is, consecrate, offer, sacrifice it. For by these words, say they, Christ
ordered his Apostles and made them Priests, to do as he did.

Confutation.

Against this false doctrine, we read very often in the Epistle to the
Hebrews that Christ was but once offered and that upon the Cross, which was
wholly and absolutely sufficient by it self, to wipe away the sins of all
that do believe in him. Yet these Tinker-budghets come in and say, that Christ
did, sitting at his last supper, even before his Passion, consecrate and offer
himself up a sacrifice, which must then be twice. What? do ye marveile so much
at this, say they again? why, we our selves blushe not to offer him up an
whole million of times at the least. Furthermore these choppers, (to set a
better face upon the matter then they have sound hearts in the matter) devide
the supper into two actions, the first and the last.

1 The first; Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for you: take,
drink ye, this Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you:
this belongs to all both Priest and people, yet they lie toe by their leave,
for they deprive the Laity of the Cup.

2 The second; do this in remembrance of me, pertains to the Priest alone.

O what horrible and most abominable renting and mangling of the Lords Supper
is this? Judge with your selves, whether this be to show the Lords death
till he come: or else, whether it be not rather to seek his death, and to
crucify him anewe.

For that, in memorial whereof we do any thing, is not it self present,
because we are not said to remember things that are present. But to do this
in remembrance of him, is, when we thinking and meditating on his benefits,
which he has done for us, and which are by these rites recalled into our
memory: and further, when we verily feeling and finding in heart, that he has
given us these his benefits: do celebrate them by public confession before
God, and Angels, yea before men also, and so do give thanks for them. So
(...) the sum of these words, is:

1 Faith in our hearts.

2 Thanksgiving joined with a public confession of him.

By this it is manifest enough, how these words here are to be taken, seeing
that Christ said not; do this (...) Upon my presence, but (...) Upon my
remembrance, or in recalling of me into your mind and memory by a strong and
lively faith. As if he should say; there is no cause of thinking on the
bodily presence of me in the bread and wine of the Supper: nay, there is great
cause rather of alienating your minds away from that terrene consideration
unto heavenly matters by the virtue of my remembrance. In token whereof they
used of old to say: Sursum corda habemus ad Dominum, that is, we lift up our
hearts unto the Lord.

Notwithstanding, these dreamers and long experienced fable-tellers, refer
this to none but to their Priests, who are their only sticklers of the
consecration and transubstantiation.

In which look, I pray, how profanely they use, nay abuse the words of the
institution as; for this is my body: likewise, this is my blood: which they
pronounce and utter over the bread and wine, that the breath of their own
mouths together with the sign of the Cross, may touch the bread and the
Cup, to the end, that by virtue thereof they may be transubstantiated into
the body and blood of the Lord: after which there remains but only the bare
accidents of bread and wine, as likeness, roundenes, whitenes, thinnes,
moystnes and color of wine.

And this transubsta^tiated body now made and fashioned by the Priest, taken
and eaten of them, descends carnally into their body, remains as long in
their bellies, as the forms themselves of bread and wine remain. Ask what
becomes of it afterward: these Owlards are at a nonplus even at their wits
end about it, and cannot tell.

Here ye see the brave skill of the massing Priest, how workma^ly he contriues
his matters, ye see again his Ordering (such as he ca^tinke up) from the
words, do this; that is, consecrate, trransubsta^tiate, offer Christ: when as
yet Christ says not, Hoc offerte Deo patri offer this to God the Father: but
Hoc facite, do this. For he had not as yet offered at the table his body and
blood, but he was himself about to offer it on the cross: Wherefore he
bids not that they should offer, but that which he had done at the table,
even that thing they should do themselves likewise. That which he was about
to do upon the cross, he was to do it himself alone: but that he had done
at the table, he would it should rather be our work, the^ his own.

And this he had done to the end he might ordain this rite of breaking
bread, and might commend the same unto his Church, to be kept and celebrated.

Thus we have heard why the Mass is a propitiatory sacrifice, pro vivis and
mortuis, with their reasons; I will help them to one more my self, and it is
this: seeing the necessity of their proud usurping catholic Romish church
does claim and require it to be so. Because indeed the Mass and Purgatory
vault (which depends thereon) are the Popes two dearling daughters of wealth
most detestably, vildly, iugglingly, and cunnycatchingly gotten under coulor
thereof. The excessive gains of which two arch toies and legerdemaines with
other sorceries by long custom, did heave them up into the height of pride,
that the holy scriptures grew into extreme contempt and obloquie amongst them:
as I might instance from diverse voluptuously forwaxen (and one especially
above the rest, Leo the tenth) diabolicalbelching Popes; whom partly for
brevitie and partly for modesty I disdain to nominate, least percase, I should
defile the readers chaste ears with their most lewd and stinking practices.

Wherefore, as I said so say I still, take away the Popish Mass and the Cabbins
of Purgatory from them, and take away the two maine props of popery: as
without which spolkes, their cartwheele which turns about so glibly in all
dusk errors, patcheries, and superstitions, would soon quite crack, and
shiuer it self into a thousand pieces. To proceed:

A second particle of the definition.
Ask them again about the second branch, how they prove it to be sacrificium
(...), that is, an unslain, or bloodlesse sacrifice: and ten to one, but they
will yield as wise and formal a reason as they did before.

Examination.

The burnt sacrifices could not be offered upon the altar, unless they had
been slain or killed before and they were such necessary and vicissitudinary
actions, that they could not be perfect the one without the other: as for
example, that which was offered up for a burnt sacrifice upon the altar, could
not or had not bin in that form and persection of an oblatio^, unless the
beast it self were first of al killed: and likewise being killed it is not in
the form of a burnt offering, until it be laid upon the Altar and there
consumed.

But our Sorbonistical Papists do take that as they think will serve their
turn and they discarde the rest: supposing thereby to strike the mark, when
as nevertheless they mar their market by it.

A provident Papisticall dread.
And this they do, as overtaken with a certain fear and terror of
conscience: least that by ioining of both these actions, that is to say, by
offering up victimam cruenta^ a bloody sacrifice, they might (as the Apostle
speaks, Heb 6. cap 6. verse) crucify again unto themselves the Son of
God, and make a mock of him. Nevertheless, albeit they burst in two, for
very madness and fury: yet are they not able to rid their hands, nor clear
their seared and gawled consciences hereof.

For Christ Jesus as he died but once, so was he offered no more then once.
These two are inseparable things of his Passion: as,

1 The shedding of his blood by which he was made that same ( victima cruenta)
bloody sacrifice for us, and that but only once neither: as for that ( victima
(...)) bloodlesse sacrifice, he never was such, and the whole course of
scripture, does gainsay it.

2 The offering up of his body upon the cross, which was also done no more
the^ once. Now what reason have the Papists thus to disseuer and separate these
two, which may not nor cannot any kind of way be severed. Wherefore seeing
they are so hot upon the spur, that they will (whosoever says nay) have Christ
to be often offered: then must they even spite of their nose have him in like
manner to be often slain too.

Let them not think to turn it over their thumbs thus childishslie, by
saying; that their sacrifice in the Mass is incruenta, an vnkilde or unbloody
sacrifice: no surely this forged invention of theirs is by many pounds to
light in the balance, and being compared with the truth, will be returned home
unto them for want of weight.

To conclude, the offering up the body and blood of Christ is so done, that
being perfected once upon the cross, it may not be done again. For Christ by
once offering himself died and rose again: and it cannot be, that he should
after that die again. Neither can it be victima Christi; the sacrifice of
Christ for remission of sins, which is ((...)) without blood. Touching which
thing read the ninth Chapter to the Hebrews and there you shall find that this
bloodlesse sacrifice in the Mass is nothing else but a Mockery of the true and
perfect sacrifice of Christ, which was with blood.

And questionles, the oblation and death of Christ are so combined and knit
together that it is impossible for the one truly to be perfected without the
other. Wherefore whosoever go about to offer Christ again, and that too for
remission of sins, do attempt also after the same manner to crucifice him
anew.

This undoubtedly many do, crucifying to themselves the son of God: whenas yet
no man is once able to crucify again Christ himself in se, that is, in
himself: and therefore can neither offer him.

And from hence it is, that with one only oblation he has made perfect or
consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. Heb. 10.14. Because the offering
up of himself did require such a death of his, as was perfused with blood:
which death was only once; Romans 6.10. and therefore must his oblation be no
more then only ( Heb. 7.27.) once. Because, look how many oblations of
Christ, so many deaths of necessity must there be. For these two can in no wise
be separated.

That this is the truth, and no more then truth, Read Heb. 9. cap.
24.25.26.27.28. verses. Leave of then ye Papists thus to love vanity and to
seek after lies, as ye do.

A third member of the Definition.
Thirdly and lastly, after they have in this fashion made their Mass, to be a
propitiatory sacrifice, and then a bloodles sacrifice, that is, not crucified
or put to death by them: examine them again why they do continually offer him
upon their Alters, and you shall hear them by and by answer you, wonderful
readily and ridiculously.

For what is this else, the^ if they should say; namely, that Christ himself by
offering up himself once for all, had done nothing, or surely had scarce done
enough: whereby it comes to pass, (as we see now in these Locustes of
Rome, and frogs of the false Prophet, Revel. 16. cap. 13.) that, that thing
which Christ himself either could not o would not do, that (as experience
testifies to their open shame) these gallant shauelinges by their Art more
then magical do most gracelessely and sacrilegiously endeavor to perform
and finish.

But these idle feakes, so they may keep their upper garments dry, make a
light come off how much the water does, in the mean while, swell above their
shoes. For because they will not in any case forsooth seem tardie of killing
and crucifying the Lord in their execrable Mass, they will use him in the
tractablest sort, as their own dreadsul and abominable heart can best imagine.
Now how is that? even no more then a few times, (as a thousand thousand
Millia^s,) to offer him up a sacrifice upon their Altars. Which unto the^ is
the easiest matter amongst ten thousand to do: but to us it is as pleasing, as
daggers thrust into our hearts.

In the mean space, they grant as much as we request, in saying; they do but
very oftentimes, often, that is, continually offer up Christ at their pleasure
by massing and remassing, by hoissing and rehoissing, by da^dling of the host,
much after a rate, as children use to play with Puppets: which does taste full
and whole of the dregs of that spiritual fornication of the whore of Babylon,
Revel. 18. whereas the scripture every where beats flat to the ground these
and al such like drossie, rotten, and canker-eaten doctrines of men's own
brain-sicke making. as see.

Heb. 10. c. 14, verse. For with one offering has he consecrated for ever them
that are sanctified.

Mark here how the Apostle says:

1 One offering; there is no need the^ of many, often, or iterated offerings.

2 There is added He, who is that? even none other, but Christ himself.

3 St. Paul uses the word ever: to show, that it is always most powerful in
it self, and effectual for ever.

See the 12. ver. of the same chapter. And the whole 9. cap. read it. Item
Hebr. 7. Chap. 27.28. verses.

Hitherto of those three former clauses of their quintessence-like extracted
sacrifice: yet one bone more for them to nibble upon, and so an end of this
matter. For one, (though we ought not to be weary in well doing,) shall
sooner weary himself herein, then weary the^.

A scruple of Conscience unto the Papists.
MOreover by offering up of Christ an oblation or sacrifice, what do they but
lift themselves above Christ. For the offerer is greater then his offering as
were Abel, Abraham, Jacob, Job, and others when they offered up their
sacrifices: so likewise the Priests, as Aaron and the rest: and so in like
manner Christ himself, conparing his divine nature with his humane body. But
stay a while: what a contumely, I pray, is this against Christ thus insolently
and presumptuouslie to vaunt of their excellentnes before God to offer up
Christ his only begotten: when as yet there is neither Angel, nor any
creature may be found worthy, to enterprise or take this thing in hand. I could
wish them from my heart, so much piety or at least humanity, as to regard this
well.

Besides, the Mass, as themselves affirm does deserve ex opere operato, that
is, by the very Massing of the Mass, (or threadbare uttering and huzzing of
it,) not only forgiveness of sins as touching men: but it meriteth also a
curing of cattle, oxen, hoggs, hens, geese and other deseased beasts
whatsoevernay what is there which this medcine of Daucus Maucus made, and (as I
may so say) put out of his wits too by a priest, cannot work upon for money?
It will make, I marry will it, the souls of al old beldams to whippe out of
Purgatory dungeon, and away amain so fast as a dog may trotte, I know not
whither my self in all the world, nor they neither.

To trusse up al in one fardle; these are those very misshapen and more then
hideous monsters of the Mass, 1 Transubstantiation. 2 (...) or bread worship.


It must needs be, that one and the same substance of the body of Christ
has diverse forms, one which he took from the blessed virgin his mother:
another borrowed from the bakers shop, which these sacrificulous chapmen by
their solemn art of witchery have pawnd al their creditt on, that they will
make fools believe, it is his body. So then, there is one form of him in the
heave^s, another on the earth: one true and besett about with all proprieties
and accidents, which after death ascending he took a long with him, and tells
us that he will come again with the same unto judgment: another imaginary
without any visible shape and accidents object unto our senses, even that
Missaticall one, which is neither in the bread, neither in the body, neither
hangs it in the air, nether sticks it in the clammes of any scrificious
hulkster, neither does it wabble down into the stomach: But it is that which
is not, and is not that which it is: namely, very that, it is supposed to be,
which the distempered sconces of dunsticalizing Schoolmen by their often
dreaminges have shaped out, and now (as they had done a long while since,)
obtrude the same, because it stands filthilie upon their hands, unto the
dotardes of the world for a most abominable and monstrous miracle.

3 The 3. is a propitiatory sacrifice.

4 Sacraecoenae mutilatio deliibatioque, that is, A mangling or curtoling, an
hacking or hewing, as one may term it, of the most holy Supper of the Lord.

The conclusion.

Wherefore this Mass by the consent and judgment of the godly minded men, is to
be condemned to the pit of hell, because it enfeebleth and makes void the
strength and virtue of that only sacrisice of Christ once offered: and which
is wholly and most absolutely in it self, and by it self, and for it self
availeable to wipe away all our sins.

A farewell to them.
Talem idcirco, vos Papistae, mangonicum foetum, and fucum plusquam diabolicum
vestrum, longissime a nobis, quam possitis, a pagitote. Christum denig, ipsum
semel crucisixum, and super altar non nisi vna vice Deo patri pro nobis
peccatoribus ac misellis oblatum, ab sque omni impostura, fraud, fuco, vere,
sincere, semperque induite. Valete.

A right merry and pleasant Appendix: dialogue wise.
I determined to set down a just catalogg of vbiquitary sophismes, sleights
and fallacies: but seeing I have bin overlo^g already, I will herein use al
possible briefnes I can. By the way I cannot forbear to tell them, that they
are in a miserable and pitiful taking. For thus may ye think, how hardle the
Papist whetteth upon this bone, as it we^^, of murmuring, spite, and
in^ete^^^ed malice against us, faying oh where are those days of old become,
wherein we eat, drank, slept our bellies sul, when our necks grew in
strength, and our eyes could scarce peep out for fatnes, when we laughed and
were right iocandary, bathing our selves in delights, sporting our selves in
witty tales of St. Dominike, Fraunces, Cutberd, Becket, and such reliquious men
of ours, whenas we enharbored our selves in most vicious security within the
cloisters and monasteries, and did let the world wagge: whenas we heard but
little of these Scripture matters, neither was there one amongst an hundred of
us before Luthers days which troubled himself herein, the law was so bravely
on our sides, that we did even what we list, and had also what heart could wish,
nay if we did no more but buzze in the peoples ears, that ignorance was the
mother of pure devotion, it was taken straight for an axiom and ground of
Doctrine. Here ye may think again how this woeful Papist does fetch me up an
inlie sigh, and says; oh what a change is this from the better unto the
worse? What a promotion unto our fraternity and order, out of the hall to be
popt into the kitchen, or else, out of Gods blessing, as the proverb is, to
come forthwith into a vvarme sun? Upon this the Papist not vvishing which
way to turn his head so adled with lunatiknes and restless grief, falls me
incontinently into a preposterous course of ex clamation and downright
rauing: Luther, Luther, Luther that ever thou wast borne, thus to have
reclaimde our doctrines and disclaimde our doings; thou, thou which vvast one
of our consorte, pack, and crew, have spoild our market, Indulgences do stand
upon our hands, our Masses are derided, the second vault of Hell which is our
Purgatory is reckned no otherwise then a tale of Robin Hoode, our Pilgrimages
and gilded magies are entitled by no better name then Popish bables, our
superstitious ceremonies which cost much good hot liquor and many a draught of
warm ale for the invention of them, are thrust by into corners as rags of
carnal rites and plain hypocrisy, there is no more room left for relics,
yea which is more and the greatest plague unto us, even all goes down, al
goes out, nothing goes in, our iron bonded and plated hutches are welneere
for the most part coinelesse, hollow, void, and empty. At length this
exclamation ended, the Papist better bethinking himself, by turning his tale
clean round devises withal how to help and rub out in these his
passing-sorrowfull and misdeeming haps. And therefore as one seeking a new last
to beat his shoo upon after that the old can serve his turn no longer, he
begins thus to excogitate a way which shall not any thing meanly, as he
thinks, stand him instead. Well, says he, unto his brother Papist, seeing this
matter will cotton no better in our behalf, we must learn to turn the stream
some other way. Blindness and ignorance are chased away, the maine pillars of
our building: and therefore if we will keep up still the house over our ears
that it fall not down upon us, it behooves us mightily to underset it with our
cunning. Cunning, quoth the other, alas for woe; our cause is so passing bad,
that if we appeal unto these latter reformed years, al men for the most part
cry out and say, fie upon it: if unto the Fathers, they also on the other side
are too hard judges against us. Tush, Brother quoth he again, let me tugge
and try with the Fathers.

1. First, the Fathers are read but of few, The Index expurgatorius would be
mentioned here.
and those which read them do not read them all: therefore it is a small thing
with me to belie the Fathers.

2. Secondly, the Fathers were but men as we are, and therefore did sometime
slip; now my purpose is, vt volute^ in vlceribus Patrum, id est, in
eoru^erroribus: and it shall escape me hard but I will find them where they lie.
Yea but this cannot prevail, quoth the other, whiles the Scriptures are so
strong against us. Thou art a fool Brother, said the other, and know not
how to bestirre thy stumpes handsomely in these matters: I that am an old fox
and beaten herein, can with great ease wrest the Scriptures, to what sense I
will my self. Nevertheles, quoth the other, this knavery of thine will soon
be spied by the circumstances of the place. Though it be says the other, yet
have I more yrons in the fire at once then one, to help at a pintch and time of
need: which is to implicate and infold the plain truth in obscurity of words
of art, after the manner of the Dunces; in which knackes Lumbard, Aquinas,
Scotus, Gabriel Biel etc. will furnish me with avoidances at such dead liftes.

Yea; I tell thee Brother, it will do me such an odlie pleasure, that I shall
not need to fear how rightly in I am or else how widely out: and seeing I
know not where I am my self either in right or wrong, (yet cock sure enough
in an inextricable labarinth of Sorbonizing sophismes:) others thou may
judge with thy self, must needs have picking meat for some pretty sturte to
find it out.

Grant it to be as thou have said, quoth the other, thou can not shifte
thy hands for all this wylie-pylienes of thine, from those Lutherans and
Protestants: but they will wind thee out of thy intricablest doublings of
deceaveable subtleties and guiles; which being done, thou have no more then
out of the land the ditch, that is, thy naked traveile for thy pain: and
besides, thou art as far of still from the aim thou shottest at, as thou
wast at the first onsett, when thou so meagerly beganst to attempt it.

I confess Brother, said he again, that thy words do bear some palm with
them, yet such is our case and it is to be lamented, that, unless we did
behammer our heads and quiddifie our wits as it were unto the proof herein,
our kingdom had gone long since wholly unto pot. And what marveile, being so
deadly windshaken at the heart and tottering too, as it is: that did we not take
horrible heed thereunto, it would suddenly fall into a sound, by sincking
into the dust of utter ruin and desolation.

It is a saying, that a scald man's head is quickly broken; then how ought we
to stand in bodily fear of our Antichristian head the Pope, who has not, as
these Lutherans hold and Protestants together, so much as an hears breadth of
hoalenes in it: lest through our negligence and want of seeing thereto, it might
not only be broken (for so it is already to our great discomfortes,) but also
crushed and quasht to pieces. And therefore in my bare judgment, brother
Papist, we are wonderfully sustained by that matchles Jewel of our Popish
Church, Mr. Bellarmine by name; that were it not so, that we enjoyed his
paineful decaying traveiles: it could not be chosen, but we should have bin
left to lie in Bakers ditch long before.

I do gladly subscribe, quoth the other, unto your grave and learned verduit:
but yet not so, as fully satisfied. For Bellarmine indeed has gone far
herein, and we may not see abroad without his spectacles: but I tell you this
by the way, and it tends not a little to our annoyance, if not undoing; that
whereas Bellarmine was wont to be appropried unto our selves, he is now made
an atte^dant in common studies? and what studies? of our own men generally,
trow you? Noe surely our own adversaries. Why, thy are so well experienced
in him, that we can no sooner filch an argument and open our mouths to urge
it: but they know from what Inn he came, they have him by the top by and by,
and will hardly afford us so much breath as to spet him forth, before they will
have fairly and roundly answered it. Besides if this were all, that this
mischief did spread no further the^ to some few of us of thinferiour route,
(though we would least have it so by our wills,) it might go well: but they
wade deeper and deeper still, never leaving till they feel the bottom, and
having grounded once, they do the^ so shouldershake our chieffest forgeman, the
good old man and father Mr. Robin Bellarmine (a Cardnaule too I ween,) by
tossing and tumbling, by volving and revolving of his leaves, (which by many
men's sweat he hammerd up,) that he hardly gettes a quiet nights rest for them.

And learn; I pray what a compe^dious method they begin to take with him; For
when he is in hand to treat of very weighty matters, (as think it to be
either Prayers for the dead, Invocation on the blessed Virgin, by saying to
her, Rogapatrem, iube natum, and iure matris impera, or else upon other holy
Saints; likewise when he handles the point of Satisfaction to be done by us
or by other after our deaths for us, when he decideth the foundation and
receptacle of satisfactions, even that very dismal Purgatory blindhouse of
ours, Hell first cowsen, again when he falls (by breaking his own neck)
into the profoundity and depth of that grande question, touching the scriptures
and the authority of our church above the same, and of the supremacy of our
mo^strouse Garaganticall head the Popes own likeness himself, (with other
decisio^s of no less valewe:) and has spoken and blatterd out so much upon
every one particularly, as might seem to fill an house: what do these
younkers then, but cross over a nearer way to wood, and do by and by reduce
me all which he has scratcht and rapt together (by other folks drudgerie)
so laboriously, into a threefold class and order: as,

1 Into the judgment of the Fathers, and orthodoxal councels.

2 Into the weight and force of arguments.

3 Into the thing which presses most and strikes dead as they say; that is,
the authority of the holy Scriptures.

First, touching either fathers or councils, if they agree with the word of
God, they embrace and reverence their writings: but if they once square and
differ, they let them lie dead upon Bellarmines own hand to make the best of
them.

Secondly, they yield that his reasons are somewhat acute, sharp, and keen:
but shrewdly pestered with sophistical conclusions, which they in down right
English call deceiptful fallacies.

Thirdly, when he comes unto the word it self, being the surest and
stro^gest weapon he has against the^: why there, say they, he strikes the
faintest blow. For the places which he brings are both far fette, and
smell very hoatlie in their noses of the wreast. And this is their use and
guise in every thing, that nothing now a days does pass vnsurvewed of the^,
which causes me a thousand times at least, to wish for blindness and palpable
ignorance, to circumfuse and overspredd again the earth, as being the only
pearls of price, that are by many degrees for our wealth and store, to be
preferred before this cunning captiousnes. For in elder time men every where
possessed with blind devotion, and drinking out of the cup of errors and
superstitions, sucked in many a deadly fly, which yet they found no fault
withal: but since this captious cavillation of ours started up, we are never
out of work, our Adversaries do so fire our breeches, and fox us back so
eagerly unto the earth of subtle inve^tions, that we puff and blow about it,
and as it were melt our selves away in our grease, not having an Alphabet while
so much as to peer out a little our heads and fetch breath for them.

Moreover, when we have labored in our celles as men for life and death, and
our labors chance to light into their fistes: they do so file and refile
over and over our hammer beaten stuff, that in the end it goes well with us, if
there be found the least glimmering shine of truth in it.

In the mean time I deny not absolutely, but that this is beneficial unto our
Papal and Pontificious orders, and a great deal more I suppose it would be,
were al comparable in these feats unto thy self: but there are such a rabble
of biffe boffe Papists, idiotical and simple; whereof I am one (without shame
be it spoken,) my self: that if any be saucy with with us to understand our
reasons, we do no more the^ set this Stand a broach, which is; The holy
Catholic Mother Church of Rome has thus determined it: and therefore (talk no
more,) of necessity it must be so. And if they urge us any farther, no way
then is left for us but one, namely, to rush into the multitude of papists,
which are called omniu^ simplicissimi and stolidissimi, that is, dreaming and
welmeaning Papists though they cannot nor will not express it, and say with
the^: It is my conscience, which (I think) a bare joined stool, had it the use
of speech, would say as much or more.

Norwithsta^ding, though I thus come short of thee in intricable
sophistications, yet do I bear as great good will unto that game as thou do
for thy guts; and do desire that I had but a quarter of thy excellent skill
herein, thou should perceive that I would bristle after an other manner of
sort, then yet I do, with these ordinary prying Protestants into our doings:
but I fear me these Elenches are so abstruse and hard, as they will never whilst
the world stands, enter within my clockhouse of conceipte, to consider of them.

Well Brother, quoth the other, I have hitherto with patience and willingly
heard thy tale, because I see thy willingness great to vie with me, though
thine ability is but small.

Concerning those afterfetches and recanvassing of our doeings by the
Protestants, thou have hitte the nail right upon the head, in so sensibly
portraiting them out before me. Wherefore as I began this fraternal
communication with thee, so do I conclude the same; that seeing we are thus
extremely firkt, besert, vexed, and counterchardged by our enemies: we must
necessarily like true Catholics, (if we intend to uphold the glittering pride
of our Mother Church at Rome,) toil night and day like packehorses, and take
intolerable pains, as well directly in smothering of the truth, by wreasting (
Loc. Com. Musc. 161.) the right sense of it clean camme from the drifte and
purpose of the writer: as also indirectly, what we can, in reobscuring the same
with doubt upon doubt by our scholastical and questionizing altercations.

Lastly, forasmuch as thou have made known unto me thy studiouse mind to
congratifie with me and the rest of our society, the catholic mother Church
of St. Peter, and our holy Papal Father of St. Angelo in Rome, (who is the head
thereof, as thou know well enough,) in such like manner knowledge of depraving
and inverting the Scriptures and in falsely syllogizing thereupon: here is my
hand, use me any night thou will, and assure thy self, I will both indoctorate
and Papistifie thee with that superexcellent quality, as also for thy fidelity
unto my self, and for thy true hearted Catholiknes unto the Church, will
perform unto thee any other good else what I can. And thus, my Brother
Papist, I bidd thee, till our next meeting in some such like black darckesome
mistie rotten weather, hartelie adewe.

I have purposely used prolixity; because I could no way better then with some
delight both laugh at their wilful selfe-pleasing allurements unto folly, and
ekewise display the accustomed detestable pranks of al superstitiously sworn
and vnreturnable vowed Papists.

Two or three, at last, Vbiquitary arguments, and so an end.

Vbiquities of the true natural body of Christ.
1 The body of Christ is invisible: because it has the grace (...), that is,
of dispensation.

Confutation.

Nay that is false; because, that the body of Christ is not by nature invisible
no not after his resurrection, as, Ioh. 20. cap. 20.28.29. verses. Luke 24.
cap. 39. v.

Secondly, the Vbiquitaries do most groslie forge a new signification of this
word (...) or dispensation: which for sooth very trimly they use for the
feighned majesty of the flesh of Christ, that is, for the vbiquitie of it,
when notwithstanding the Fathers have called (...) or dispensation, even the
whole incarnation and administration of the office of Christ by taking of
flesh. Theodoret. Dial. 2.

2 The Vbiquitaries for the true communication [idiomatum] of the proprieties
of both natures of Christ into one Person, will by and by have signified under
this form of speech proprietatum tranfusionem; that is, a transfusion of
Proprieties out of one nature of Christ into an other, as may be out of the
divine into his humane nature: so that they will have the Proprieties of his
Deity or godhead to be communicated unto his Humanity. But this axiom is
(...) and overthrowes it self. For if once they be proprieties then are they
not communicated: and if they be communicated, then are they not proprieties.

3 The like quaint and passing evil improper speech before this never heard of
have they counterfeited in these two voices, Abstract and Concret: teaching
that the humane nature of Christ is not every where in the Abstract, that is,
abstracted and separated from his divinity: but it is every where in the
Concret, that is, concreted and united unto the Deity. Is not this, I pray,
trecherously to corrupt the usual speaking of the church? They know I am sure
that an Abstract is the name of a nature or form whatsoever, which is in some
other either essentially or accidentally, as are these; deity, Humanity,
VVisdome, Justice: but the Concret does signify the thing it self or the
Subject, which has that nature and form, as; God, Man, Wise, Just. Now how
true this is, which they go about, al men know right well. For the Co^cret of
Christ's divine nature is to be God himself: the abstract hereof, is his
Deity. Likewise the Concret of his humane nature is to be Man: and the
Abstract hereof is his Humanity. Apply these terms of Art, according as they
will have them, and it is al one, as if they had said: that the humane nature of
Christ is every where, as he is Man, which is the Concret: but he is not every
where in his Humanity, which is the Abstract. Judge whether this be not
workemanlie knocked and beaten out by their sophistrizing hammer.

4 Fourthly, and lastly; the vbiquitarians trifle most passing idly in
behatching a threefold manner of the body of Christ: that is, 1 A natural
manner. 2 A glorious manner. 3 A maiesticall manner.


The first two ways, they deny marveylous crookedly that Christ is every
where in body: but come ye once to the third, which is his manner of Majesty;
then have, say they, along with you to Westminster, seeing in this sort both
there and every where else throughout the world, we shall never miss him.

Examination.

First here is in this distributio^ a notable Catachresis or abuse of the
voice, manner, which is placed here most improperly for an adiunct.

Secondly, the parts do not cohere and agree with the Distribute: for the
natural manner is not an Adiunct of the body of Christ, but it is the form it
self. And as for that their manner of Majesty, some men are over hasty to
term it, figmentum perquisite excogitatum: but I had rather speak English,
and call it a plain cogge and foisted legerdemaine.

Thirdly, the Parts do not oppositlie disagree betwixt themselves; because the
glory of the natural body is an adiunct, and it remains, (notwithstanding
the adiunct) still a true physical and natural body, although it be also
glorified. For glorificatio^ has not taken away the nature of Christ his body,
but the infirmity thereof and patibilitie. But these Vbiquitaries are sure
cards, take them at any time without a fitten, and strike of their necks.

They durst not say that Christ's natural body is every where; fie, that were
to gross: and therefore see what cunning can bring to pass; they have wrought
it out maiesticallie. Wherefore behold their folly; whiles that they think to
shun the rain, they run me out of hand above head and ears into the river.
For it had bin as good, nay better for them to say at first dash, that the
natural body of Christ is every where, and so to make no more then one body of
him: then by such an vnartificial blind distinction, both to affirm his body
to be every where, and over and besides to ordain him a triple body too; that
is, 1. a Natural body: 2. a Glorious body: 3. a maiesticall body.

I might set down much more such stuff of theirs, but I count this sufficient
to show what they are, even (in this respect) the Popes own ympes, and still
like unto themselves, and will be so, though the Devil say nay. This I do,
and may speak boldly, upon regard of their wilful obstinacy and malicious
hearts both against our selves, and our doctrine. Ours? nay the Lords own
doctrine.

The Corollarie and vpshot of this whole treatise upon the Lords Supper.
LEt us most humbly beseech the Lord our God of his abundant kindness and mercy
toward us in his Son Christ Jesus, that he would stay us with his grace, that
we denying and defying from our hearts al ungodliness, al heresies, scismes,
erroneous opinions, false doctrines, all superstitious relics and ceremonies
of that whorish church of Rome, in a word al Epicurisme, Atheism, Papisme,
Bron nisme, we may be grounded in the truth of his most powerful word, being
nourished up continually in a lively faith with this heavenly holy banquet,
and may persist in stedfastnes of the same truth, even to our last breathing
and yielding up the Ghost into the hands of our allouing and gracious God, who
has faithfully promised that he will not fail us nor forsake us, ( Hebr.
13.5.) but will be ready then especially by his holy Angels, to receive us
up unto himself into his holy mountain and new Jerusalem, the city ( Hebr.
12.22.) of the living God: where we shall live in joys unutterable with the
congregation it self of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and with
God the Judge of al, and with the spirits of just and perfect men, And with
Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, and with the blood of sprinkeling,
that speaks better things then that of Abell.

God grant us al these things for our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus sake: to
who^ with the Father and the holy Ghost be attributed al praise and glory now
and for ever. So be it. Amen.

A Prayer for the whole State of this Church and Realm of England, containing
a true confession of our sins before the Lord: fit to be said at all
times and seasons.
Merciful Lord and Father, which refusest not to hear thy servants at what time
they do flee unto thee, in the contrition of their hearts: we beseech thee to
expel the darkness of our understanding, that being directed by thy holy
Spirit we may, from a true feeling of our woeful state, in the name of Jesus
Christ unlock our grieved consciences, and power out the affections of our
broken hearts, by sincerely invocating on thy holy and blessed name, Amen.

O Most gracious and loving Father, we come unto thee in the name of thy
dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, beseeching thee out of the humility of our
souls, that thou would vouchsafe to look down upon us with the eye of
pity, notwithstanding most vile and miserable sinners as we are; For we were
conceaved in sin and borne in iniquity, having no truth nor sound part within
us, seeing from the sole of the foot unto the crown of the head there is
nothing whole but wounds and swelling, and soars full of corruption: we are a
seed of the wicked, corrupt children, forsaking the Lord and provoking the
holy one of Israel to anger. Now though we are thus unclean and sunken deep
into all impieties, though our righteousness be as filthy clouts, though we do
al fade like a leaf, and that our iniquities like the wind have carried us
away; yet thou O Lord art mercy and truth, promising to harken unto repentant
sinners that do call unto thee. We call and cry unto thee, O Lord, out of the
true sorrows and grievances of our hearts to remove from us the burden and
horror of our sins, which do lie most heavy upon our consciences, stinging
and pressing us down unto the very gates of Hell: thou therefore, o heavenly
Father, which savest both man and beast, thou whose mercy reaches unto the
heavens, and whose faithfulness unto the clouds, thou whose righteousness is
like the mighty mountains, and thy judgments like a great deep, power forth
upon us (most silly worms and unworthy wretches as we are,) of the rich
plenty of thy Grace, let thy accustomed mercy break forth and prevent us in all our actions, reform our froward wills, our corrupt affections, our inbred
depraved natures, create in us clean hearts and renew right Spirits within us,
that so our whole man both souls and bodies may be conformed to thy holy
will. And to this end out of the longing desires of our hearts, we prostrating
our selves at the foote-stoole of thy mercy seat, do crave of thee, o
bountiful Father, to quicken us with thy holy Spirit; by whose gracious
working, being freede from these hellish downefals of sin and wickedness, of
desperate sins, of presumptuous sins, of sins by omission, of sins by
commission, of sins by ignorance, of secret sins, of notorious and
outrageous crying sins, briefly of sines against the first table, and of sins
against the second table, we may the residue of our days (which are but few
and evil,) be lifted up to place our cogitations on heaven and heavenly
things, there to contemplate with the eye of a steadfast and lively faith
Christ Jesus our alone and only redeemer, that through a true feeling and
apprehension thereof, we may with that blessed Martyr St. Steven pearce the
heavens and behold our alone all-sufficient saving Mediator standing at the
right hand of God, cladd with the garments of our slesh, both preparing the way
and making intercession for us: and that we likewise (by virtue of our mystical
incorporation and union with him,) receaving from his hands the garments of
his righteousness, may be covered from the accusations and terrors of our
sins.

For who is it that shall stand up and lay any thing unto our charge? It is God
that justifies. Or who is it that shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead,
yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and
makes request also for us. We then truly resolved through a due
consideration of these things, do beseech thee our most gracious and loving
Father, to establish these thy blessings in us, and to continue us in the truth
of thy holy Gospel, that as we are according to thy great mercy freely
adopted and accepted for just in thy sight by the only obedience and merits,
and full satisfaction of Christ our Savior: so again that we might strive,
(through thine especial favor,) in our daily conversation, and in the midst
of a crooked and stiffnecked generation, to approve our selves out of the
fruits of a lively faith, to be sincere followers and embracers of thee. To
which purpose, we beg of thee, o Father, to sanctify us with thy Spirit,
that we loathing from the heart our inborne filthiness, and mortifying our
members which are on earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, and covetousnes which is Idolatry, and putting away eve^ al
these things, wrath, anger, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out
of our mouths, and in a word, putting of the old man with his works: we may,
(thine only goodness to vs-wardes effecting it,) be prepared to receive the
new; by putting on, as the Elect of God, tender mercy, kindenes, humblenes of
mind, meekenes, longsuffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another.

Finally, we stirred up with a fellow feeling of others wants, as members of
one body with the residue of thy Saints in the Communion thereof, do humbly
entreat thy divine Majesty to be gracious and loving unto thy Church which
lives here in continual exile and warfare upon the earth; protect it, O Lord,
saflie under thy wings against the rage of Satan, and the furies of
bloodthirsty men: particularly, for these of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, and in them, as the Principal member thereof, for thine obedient
servant our dread Sovereign, Lord James; by thy Grace King of the foresaid
Realms and Dominions, defender of the true, ancient, catholic, and Apostolic
faith, and in all Causes and over all Persons within these his Majesty's
Kingdoms next and immediately under thee Supreme head and governor: grant
unto him health and prosperity all his days, crown him so long as he lives
upon this earth with continual victories over his enemies: give him the spirit
of wisdom, knowledge, and judgment that he may carefully and uprightly go in
and out before thy people: enrich his Royal heart with thine heavenly
blessings, namely; true faith, godly zeal, love, and fear of thy holy name
even all the days of his life, and after this life once expired, crown him in
thine everlasting Kingdom with bliss and triumphant glory.

We pray thee eftwise for all the Nobility, Gentry, and comminalty of this
Realm, and more especially for the Lords of the Privy Council, that as they
are high in Honor and great Pears of this Land, so they may be great Pillars
also in the Church to exalt and advance thy name. Bless in like manner all the
Clergy and Ministry of this Land by what names and titles soever they are
called, engraue in their breasts that Vrim and Thummim, that is to say, an
inward burning zeal joined with soundnes of doctrine and with vprightnes and
integrity of life. Extend thy merciful care on all Universities and schools
the nurceries of good learning that they may (according to thy good pleasure)
remain evermore as habitations for the Prophets and Prophets children, so long
as the Sun and Moon endures. Keep, O Lord, and direct in thy fear the
Magistracy of this Land, that they in their Places may discharge a good
conscience, in the Ministration of equity and justice, together with the
advancement of piety and virtue.

Moreover we do pray thee for all those that suffer any Cross or trouble
either sickness of body or vexation of mind, affliction, persecution for thy
names sake and the testimony of a good conscience; that it may please thee to
en arm them with patience and constancy to persevere unto the end of al their
trials: knowing that patience brings forth experience, experience hope, and
hope makes not ashamed. And more particularly, we power forth our humble
supplications and suites unto thy Majesty, for all such as do lie groueling
and groaning under the burden of their sins, make thou their bed in the time of
their sickness by putting thy Spirit into their hearts, by comforting and
relieuing the^ with inward ioies, that thereby their faith may be increased,
their hope confirmed, their love enflamed, their patience and perseverance made
known unto men and Angels, tried, continued, and preserved: that neither
Leviathan that crooked wily serpent withal his mischievous assaults without,
neither the bruisedly afflicted conscience within, neither the gaping gulf of
hell beneath, neither the angry threatening heavens for our sins above,
neither the allurements, and earthly cogitations and changes of this world on
the one side, neither the wicked Imps thereof on the other, may strik a terror
into our minds, but that in the assurance of a good conscience we may being
bold and confident as a Lion, break through them al and say with the Prophet
David; The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge And again
with St. Paul; In all these things we are more then Conquerours through him
that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us, from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Last of al, we yield unto thee, good Lord, most humble thanks for thy mercies
showred forth, yea powered down upon us out of the riches of thy Grace, that
is, for our Creation in time, our Election before al time, our Preservation,
Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and for the good hopes sake of our
Glorification in the time to come: as also we thank thee (so long as we shall
move and breath upon the earth) for our health, our wealth, our food, our
raiment, our education, our instruction, our peace and tranquillity, and for
this so long and so large a time of repentance given unto us by the preaching
of thy truth amongst us, which uphold thou still, O Lord, we pray thee, even
for thine own glories sake, and for the unspeakable consolations sake and
gathering in together of thy Saints.

That so in the end, we may al meet jointly in the unity of one faith, and
that in the mean time we may wait, for the hastening and consummation of the
kingdom of Christ thy dear Son our Lord and Savior, who testifies these
things and says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

1. Tim. 2. chap. 1.2. verses, I exhort therefore, that first of all
supplications, prayers intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men. For Kings, and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life, in all goodness and honesty.

A very short, but sweet Dialogue, between an ancient deep learned Father
and his Sister, reasoning upon the Case with in themselves.
O Sister, says he, no man is righteous, every man is guilty of wicked
works, words, and thoughts: and what then shall we do, when we shall come
before God to be judged. For if the righteousness of the righteous shall not
be had in remembrance, if the just shall scarce be saved, where shall the
wicked and sinner appear? O brother, she says again, this causes me to wish
with the Prophet that mine head were a fountain of tears, that I might
bewail my sinful life. Indeed, says the other, that is somewhat: for one
tear in this life is better then all the weeping and gnashing of teeth, which
shall be after this life. For God is near in this life, that is, he will be
entreated to forgive us: but then he will be far of, which is, he will not yield
to any petition.

As the last hour of thy life leaves thee: so the first hour of judgment shall
find thee. For where the tree falls, there it lies. Eccl. 11. chap. 3.
verse.

(...).

FINIS.

