WILLOBIE HIS AVISA. OR. The true Picture of a modest Maid, and of a chaste and
constant wife.

In Hexamiter verse. The like argument whereof, was never hereto fore published.

Read the preface to the Reader before you enter farther.

A virtuous woman is the crown of her husband, but she that makes him
ashamed, is as corruption in his bones. Proverb. 12. 4. Imprinted at London by
John Windet. 1594.

To all the constant Ladies and Gentlewomen of England that fear God.
PArdon me (sweet Ladies,) if at this present, I deprive you of a just Apology
in defense of your constant Chastities, deserved of many of you, and long
sithence promised by my self, to some of you: and pardon me the sooner, for
that I have long expected that the same should have been performed by some of
your selves, which I know are well able, if you were but so wellwilling to
write in your own praise, as many men in these days (whose tounges are tipped
with poison) are too ready and over willing, to speak and write to your
disgrace. This occasion had been most fit, (publishing now the praise of a
constant wife) if I had been but almost ready. But the future time may again
reveal as fit a means hereafter for the perfourmance of the same: if so it
seem good to him that moderateth all. Concerning this book which I have
presumed to dedicate to the safe protection of your accustomed courtesies; if
ye ask me for the persons: I am altogether ignorant of them, and have set
them down only as I find them named or disciphered in my author. For the
truth of his action, if you enquire, I will more fully deliver my opin ion
hereafter. Touching the substance of the matter it self, I think verily that
the nature, words, gest ures, promises, and very quintessence, as it were, is
there lively described, of such lewd chapmen as use to entise silly maids, and
assail the Chastity of honest women. And no doubt but some of you, that have
been tried in the like case, (if ever you were tried,) shall in some one part
or other acknowledge it to be true. If mine Author have found a Brytaine
Lucretia, or an English Susanna, envy not at her praise (good Ladies) but
rather endeavor to deserve the like. There may be as much done for any of you,
as he has done for his AVISA. Whatsoever is in me, I have vowed it wholly, to
the exalting of the glory of your sweet sex, as time, occasion and ability
shall permit. In the mean time I rest yours in all dutyfull affection, and
commend you all to his protection, under whose mercy we enjoy all.

Your most affectionate, Hadrian Dorrell.

To the gentle and courteous Reader.
IT is not long sithence (gentle Reader) that my very good friend and chamber
fellow M. Henry Willobie, a young man, and a scholar of very good hope, being
desirous to see the fashions of other countries for a time, departed
voluntarily to her Majesty's service. Who at his departure, chose me amongst
the rest of his friends, unto whom he reposed so much trust, that he delivered
me the key of his study, and the use of all his books till his return.
Amongst which (perusing them at leisure,) I found many pretty and witty
conceits, as I suppose of his own doing. One among the rest I fancied so
much, that I have ventered so far upon his friendship, as to publish it
without his consent. As I think it not necessary, to be over curious in an
other man's labor, so yet something I must say for the better understanding of
the whole matter. And therefore, first for the thing it self, whether it be
altogether feigned, or in some part true, or altogether true; and yet in most
part Poetically shadowed, you must give me leave to speak by conjecture, and
not by knowledge. My conjecture is doubtful, and therefore I make you the
Judges. Concerning the name of AVISA, I think it to be a fained name, like
unto Ouids Corinna; and there are two causes that make me thus to think.
First, for that I never heard of any of that name that I remember; and next for
that in a void paper rolled up in this book, I found this very name AVISA,
written in great letters a pretty distance asunder, and under every letter a
word beginning with the same letter, in this form. A. Amans. V. vxor. I.
inuiolata. S. semper. A. amanda.


That is in effect. A loving wife, that never violated her faith, is always to
be beloved. Which makes me conjecture that he minding for his recreation to set
out the Idea of a constant wife, (rather describing what good wives should do
then registring what any has done) devised a woman's name, that might fitly
express this woman's nature whom he would aim at: desirous in this (as I
conjecture) to imitate a far off, either Plato in his Common wealth, or More in
his Vtopia. This my surmise of his meaning, is confirmed also by the sight of
other odd papers that I found, wherein he had, as I take it, out of Cornelius
Agrippa, drawn the several dispositions of the Italian, the Spanyard, the
French man, the German, and the English man, and how they are affected in love.
The Italian dissembling his love, assaileth the woman beloved, with certain
prepared wantonness: he praises her in written verses, and extolleth her to
the Heavens.

The Spanyard is impatient in burning love, very mad with troubled
lasciviousness, he runs furiously, and with pittyfull complaints,
bewailing his fervent desire, does call upon his Lady, and worshippeth her, but
having obtained his purpose makes her common to all men.

The French man endeuoreth to serve, he seeks to pleasure his woman with
songs, and disports etc.

The Germane and Englishman being nigher of nature, are inflamed by little and
little, but being enamored, they instantly require with art, and entice with
gifts etc. Which several qualities are generally expressed by this Author in
the two first trials or assaults made by the noble man, and the lusty
Caualieros, Captains, or Cutters etc. Signifying by this generality that our
noble men, gentlemen, captains, and lusty youths have of late learned the
fashions of all these countries, how to solicit their cause, and court, their
Ladies, and lovers, and this continues from the second Canto, to the end of
the two and twentieth.

After this he comes to describe these natures again in particular examples
more plainly, and begins first with the French man under the shadow of
these Letters D. B. from the three and twentieth Canto unto the end of the
three and thirtieth. Secondly the English man or Germane, under these Letters
D. H. from the 34. Canto unto the end of the forty three. Lastly the Spanyard
and Italian, who more furiously inuadeth his love, and more pathetically
indureth then all the rest, from the forty four Canto to the end of the
book. It seems that in this last example the author names himself, and so
describes his own love, I know not, and I will not be curious.

All these are so rightly described according to their nature, that it may
seem the Author rather meant to show what suites might be made, and how they
may be aunsweared, then that there has been any such thing indeed.

These things of the one side lead me to think it altogether a fained
matter, both for the names and the substance, and a plain morrall plot,
secretly to insinuate, how honest maids and women in such temptations should
stand upon their guard, considering the glory and praise that commendes a
spotless life, and the black ignominy, and foul contempt that waits upon a
wicked and dissolute behavior.

Yet of the other side, when I do more deeply consider of it, and more
narrowly weigh every particular part, I am driven to think that there is some
thing of truth hidden under this shadow. The reasons that move me are these,
First in the same paper where I found the name of AVISA written in great
letters, as I said before, I found this also written with the Authors own
hand, videlicet, Yet I would not have Auisa to be thought a politic fiction,
nor a truethlesse invention, for it may be, that I have at least heard of one
in the west of England, in whom the substance of all this has been verified,
and in many things the very words specified: which has endured these and
many more, and many greater assaults, yet, as I hear, she stands unspotted,
and unconquered.

Again, if we mark the exact descriptions of her birth, her country, the
place of her abode; and such other circumstances, but especially the matter and
manner of their talks and conferences, me thinks it a matter almost
impossible that any man could invent all this without some ground or foundation
to build on.

This inforceth me to conjecture, that though the matter be handled poetically,
yet there is some thing under these fained names and shows that has been done
truly. Now judge you, for I can give no sentence in that I know not. If there
be any such constant wife, (as I doubt not but there may be) I wish that
there were more would spring from her ashes, and that all were such. Whether
my Author knew, or heard of any such I cannot tell, but of mine own knowledge
I dare to swear, that I know one. A. D. that either has, or would, if
occasion were so offered, endure these, and many greater temptations with a
constant mind, and settled heart. And therefore here I must worthily reprehend
the envious rage, both of Heathen Poets, and of some Christian and English
writers, which so far debase the credit and strength of the whole sex, that
they fear not with lying toungs wickedly to publish, that there are none at
all that can continue constant, if they be tried. Hereof sprang these false
accusing speeches of the old Poets. Ludunt formosae, casta est, quam nemo
rogauit.
Fair wenches love to play.
And they are only chaste, whom no man does assay.


And again Rara auis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno,
Foemina casta volat.
Arare-seene bird that never flies, on earth ne yet in air,
Like blackish Swan, a woman chaste; if she be young and fair.


This false opinion bred those foule-mouthed speeches of Friar Mantuan, that
vpbraides all women with fleeting inconstancy. This made Ariosto and others to
invent, and publish so many lewd and untrue tales of women's unfaithfulness. And
this is the cause, that in this book ye shall so often find it objected
against AVISA by all her suitors, that no woman of what degree so ever can be
constant if she be much requested, but that the best will yield. But the best
is, this common and course conceit is received but only among common, lewd,
and careless men, who being wicked themselves, give sentence of all others,
according to the loose and lawless humors wherewithal they feel their own
straying and wandering affections to be infected. For they for sooth, because in
diverse and sundry places, (as they often wickedly boast) they may for an
Angel and a great deal less have hired nagges to ride at their pleasure,
such as make a sinful gain of a filthy carcass; because in other
countries, where stews and brothelhouses are winckt at, they see oftentimes,
the fairest and not the meanest flock to the fellowship of such filthy
freedom, Think presently, that it is but a money matter, or a little
entreaty, to overthrow the chastity of any woman whatsoever. But if all women
were in deed such as the woman figured under the name of AVISA either is, or
at least is supposed to be, they should quickly restore again their ancient
credit and glory which a few wic ed wantons have thus generally obscured. In
the twenty and seven Canto, I find how D. B. persuades with A. that it is
little sin or no fault to love a friend besides her husband. VVhereupon,
inquiring more of the matter I have heard some of the occupation verify it for
a truth: That among the best sort, they are accounted very honest women in
some cities now, that love but one friend besides their husband, and that it is
thought amongst them a thing almost lawful. If this be true, (as I hardly
think it to be true, because wicked men fear not to report any untruths)
but if it be true, I fear least the ripeness of our sin cry to the Lord for
vengeance against us, that tremble not at the remembrance of Gods judgments,
that has bound a heavy curse and woe upon the back and conscience of them,
That speak good of evil, and evil of good. that is, such as are grown to
that point, that they are no longer ashamed of their sin, nor care for any
honesty, but are become wilfully desperate in the performance of all kind of
impiety.

But I leave this to the godly preachers to dilate more amply. And to return
to my purpose, although I must confess that of all sorts of people, there
have been and will be still some loosely and lewdly given, yet this can be no
excuse to lauishe tounges, to condemn all generally. For, I dare to venture my
hand, and my head upon this point, that, let the four moral virtues be in
order set down. Prudence Fortitude Temperance Justice
and let the holy scriptures be searched from the beginning to the end, and let
all the ancient histories both ecclesiastical and profane be thoroughly
examined, and there will be found women enough, that in the performance of all
these virtues, have matched, if not over matched men of every age, which I dare
my self, to verify in their behalfes upon the venture and losing of my
credit, if I had time and leisure. Among infinite numbers to give you a taste
of one or two: for wisdom, and Justice, what say you to Placilla, wife to the
Emperor Theodosius? She was wont every day in her own person, to visit the
sick, the poor, and the maimed: And if at any time she saw the Emperor
declining from Justice to any hard course, she would bid him Remember
himself, from whence he came, and Theodoret. eccles. hist. lib 5. cap. 17.
what he was, in what state he had been, and in what state he was now; which
if he would do, he should never wax proud nor cruel, but rather humble,
merciful and just.

For temperance, how say you to the wife of one Pelagius, Theodor. ecc hist.
li. 4. c. 10
of Laodicea, which being young her self, and married to a young and lusty man,
was yet notwithstanding contented willingly, to forbear carnal pleasure,
during her whole life. I bring not this woman's example, for any liking I have
to her fact, being lawfully married, but rather, against the curious carpers at
women's strength, to prove that some women have done that, which few men can do.

For Fortitude and temperance both, I find, that in Antioche, Eusebius lib. 8.
cap. 24.
there was a noble woman with her two daughters, rather then they would be
defloured, cast themselves all willingly into a great river, and so drowned
themselves.

And also, that in Rome there was a Senators wife, who when she heard, that
there were messengers sent from Maxentius cap. 27. Lok for Blandina in
Eusebius, ^ rare example of constancy and fortitude.
the tirant, to bring her unto him, perforce to be ravished of him; and seeing
that her husband was not of ability and power to defend her, she used this
policy. She requested that they would give her leave to put on some better
apparel and to attire her self more decently: which being granted, and she
gotten into a chamber by her self, she took a sword and perced her self to
the heart, rather then she would be counted the Emperors whore.

By this may be seen what might be said in this argument, but leaving this to
some other time, or to some other better able; I return to my author.

For the persons and matter, you have heard my conjecture, now for the manner
of the composition, disposition, invention, and order of the verse, I must
leave every man's sense to himself, for that which pleases me, may not fancy
others. But to speak my judgment, the invention, the argument, and the
disposition, is not common, nor, (that I know) ever handled of any man before
in this order. For the composition and order of the verse: Although he fly
not alofte with the wings of Astrophell, nor dare to compare with the Arcadian
shepherd, or any way match with the dainetie Fayry Queen; yet shall you find
his words and phrases, neither Tryuiall nor absurd, but all the whole work
for the verse, pleasant, without hardness, smooth without any roughness,
sweet without tediousness, easy to be understood, without harrish absurdity:
yielding a gracious harmony every where, to the delight of the Reader.

I have christened it by the name of Willoby his Auisa: because I suppose it
was his doing, being written with his own hand. How he will like my bouldnes,
both in the publishing, and naming of it, I know not. For the encouraging and
helping of maids and wives to hold an honest and conastnt course against all
dishonest and lewd temptations, I have done that I have done. I have not added
nor detracted any thing from the work it self, but have let it pass without
altering any thing: Only in the end I have added to fill up some void paper
certain fragmentes and ditties, as a resolution of a chaste and constant wife,
to the tune of Fortune, and the praise of a contented mind, which I found
wrapped altogether with this, and therefore knew not whether it did any way
belong unto this or not.

Thus leaving to trouble your patience with farther delays. I commit you to the
good government of Gods spirit.

From my chamber in Oxford this first of October. Hadrian Dorrell.

Abell Emet in commendation of Willobies Auisa.
TO Willoby, you worthy Dames yield worthy praise,
Whose silver pype so sweetly sounds your strange delays,
Whose lofty style, with golden wings remountes your same,
The glory of your Princely sex, the spotles name:
O happy wench, who so she be if any be,
That thus deserud thus to be praisd by Willobie,
Shall I believe, I must believe, such one there is,
Well have thou said, long may thou say, such on there is,
If one there be, I can believe there are no more,
This wicked age, this sinful time breeds no such store:
Such silver myntes, such golden mines who could refuse?
Such offers made and not receu'd, I greatly muse.
Such deep deceit in friendly shows, such tempting fittes,
To still withstand, does pass the reach of women's wits:
You Country maids, Pean nymphs rejoice and sing,
To see from you a chaste, a new Diana spring:
At whose report you must not frett, you may not frown,
But rather strive by due desert for like renown,
Her constant faith in hot assaye has won the game,
Whose praise shall live, when she is dead with lasting fame:
If my conceit from strangers mouth may credit get,
A brauer Theme, more sweetly pend, was never yet.
Abell Emet.
In praise of Willobie his Auisa, Hexameton to the Author.
IN Lauine Land though Liuie bost,
There has been seen a Constant dame:
Though Rome lament that she have lost
The Gareland of her rarest fame,
Yet now we see, that here is found,
As great a Faith in English ground.
Though Collatine have dearly bought,
To high renown, a lasting life,
And found, that most in vain have sought,
To have a Fair, and Constant wife,
Yet Tarquyne plucked his glistering grape,
And Shake-speare, paints poor Lucrece rape.
Though Susan shine in faithful praise,
As twinkling Stars in Crystal sky,
Penelop's fame though Greeks do raise,
Of faithful wives to make up three,
To think the Truth, and say no less,
Our Auisa shall make a mess.
This number knits so sure a knot,
Time doubts, that she shall add no more,
Unconstant Nature, has begot,
Of Fleting Feemes, such fickle store,
Two thousand years, have scarcely seen,
Such as the worst of these have been.
Then Aui-Susan join in one,
Let Lucres-Auis be thy name,
This English Eagle sores alone,
And far surmounts all others fame,
Where high or low, where great or small,
This Brytan Bird out-flies them all.
Were these three happy, that have found,
Brave Poets to depaint their praise?
Of Rural Pipe, with sweetest sound,
That have been heard these many days,
Sweet wylloby his AVIS blessed,
That makes her mount above the rest.
Contraria Contrarijs: Vigilantius: Dormitanus.

Faults escaped.
Folio 8 b staf 2 ver 1 read bane ver 3 wane Fol 18 a staf 1 ver 2. Soil staf
4 ve 6 foxly b staf 4 ver 2 and Fol 26 a staf 3 ver 4 fool Fol 27 a staf 3 ver
1 Greece b staf 1 ver 4 strey staf 2 ver 6 fond Fol 28 b staf 1 ver 1 die staf
3 ver 6 from.

WILLOBIE HIS AVISA, OR The true picture of a modest Maid, and of a chaste and
constant wife.
CANT. I.
LEt martial men, of Mars his praise,
Sound warlike trumpe: let lust-led youth,
Of wicked love, write wanton lays;
Let sheepeheards sing, their sheep coats ruth:
The wiser sort, confess it plain,
That these have spent good time in vain.
My sleepie Muse that wakes but now,
Nor now had wak't if one had slept,
To virtues praise has past her vow,
To paint the Rose which grace has kept,
Of sweetest Rose, that still does spring,
Of virtues bird my Muse must sing.
The bird that does resemble right,
The Turtles faith in constant love,
The faith that first her promise plight;
No change, nor chance could once remove:
This have I tried; This dare I trust,
And sing the truth, I will, I must.
Afflicted Susans spotless thought,
Intis't by lust to sinful crime,
To lasting fame her name has brought,
Whose praise incounters endless time:
I sing of one whose beauties war,
For trials pass Susanna's far.
The wandering Greeks renowned mate,
That still withstoode such hot assayes,
Of raging lust whose doubtful state,
Sought strong refuge, from strange delays,
For fierce assaults and trials rare,
With this my Nymph may not compare.
Hot trials try where Gold be pure,
The Diamond daunts the sharpest edge,
Light chafe, fierce flames may not endure,
All quickly leap the lowly hedge,
The object of my Muse has past
Both force and flame, yet stands she fast.
Though Egle-eyde this bird appear,
Not blushed at beams of Phoebus rays:
Though Faulkcon winged to pearce the air,
Whose high-pla'st heart no fear dismaies:
Yet sprang she not from Egles nest,
But Turtle-bred, loves Turtle best.
At wester side of Albions I Will,
Where Austine pitched his Monkish tent,
Where Sheapheards sing, where Muses smile,
The graces met with one consent,
To frame each one in sundry part,
Some cunning work to show their art.
First Venus framed a luring eye,
A sweet aspect, and comely grace;
There did the Rose and Lilly lie,
That bravely decked a smiling face,
Here Cupids mother bent her will,
In this to show her utmost skill.
Then Pallas gave a reaching head,
With deep conceits, and passing wit,
A settled mind, not fancie-led,
Abhorring Cupids frantique fit,
With modest looks, and blushing cheeks,
A filed tongue which none mislikes.
Diana decked the remnant parts
With fewture brave, that nothing lack,
A quiver full of pearcing Darts,
She gave her hanging at her back;
And in her hand a Golden shaft,
To conquer Cupids creeping craft.
This done they come to take the view,
Of novel work, of perelesse frame;
Amongst them three, contention grew,
But yet Diana gave the name,
Auisa shall she called be,
The chief attendant still on me.
When Juno viewed her luring grace,
Old Juno blushed to see a new,
She feared least Jove would like this face,
And so perhaps might play untrue,
They all admired so sweet a sight,
They all enuide so rare a wight.
When Juno came to give her wealth, Beauty without riches, is as a fair
picture without life.

(Which wanting beauty, wants her life)
She cryde, this face needs not my pelffe,
Great riches sow the seeds of strife:
I doubt not, some Olympian power
Will fill her lap, with Golden shower.
This jealous Juno faintly said, Iealosie breeds envy: Both together breed
frenzy yet neither of them both can prevail against wandering fancy.

As half misdeeming wanton Jove,
But chaste Diana took the maid,
Such new-bred qualmes quite to remove:
O jealous envy, filthy beast,
For envy Juno gave her least.
In lieu of Iun'os Golden part,
Diana gave her double grace;
A chaste desire, a constant heart, A strange bayte.

Disdain of love in fawning face,
A face, and eye, that should entice
A smile, that should deceive the wise.
A sober tongue that should allure,
And draw great numbers to the field;
A flintie heart, that should endure
All fierce assaults, and never yield,
And seeming often as though she would;
Yet fardest off when that she should.
Can filthy sink yield wholesome air,
Or virtue from a vice proceed?
Can envious heart, or jealous fear
Repel the things that are decreed?
By envy though she lost her thrift,
She got by grace a better gift.
Not far from thence there lies a vale,
A rosy vale in pleasant plain;
The Nymphs frequent this happy dale,
Old Helicon reuiues again;
Here Muses sing, here Satyrs play,
Here mirth resounds both night and day.
At East of this, a Castle stands,
By ancient sheepheards built of old,
And lately was in sheepheards hands,
Though now by brothers bought and sold,
At west side springs a Crystal well;
There does this chaste Auisa dwell.
And there she dwells in public eye,
Shut up from none that list to see;
She answers all that list to try,
Both high and low of each degree:
But few that come, but feel her dart,
And try her well ere they depart.
They tried her hard in hope to gain,
Her mild behavior breeds their hope,
Their hope assures them to obtain,
Till having run their witless scope;
They find their vice by virtue crossed,
Their foolish words, and labor lost.
This strange effect, that all should crave,
Yet none obtain their wrong desire,
A secret gift, that nature gave,
To feel the frost, amidst the fire:
Blame not this Dians Nimphe too much,
Since God by nature made her such.
Let all the graces now be glad,
That framed a grace that past them all,
Let Juno be no longer sad;
Her wanton Jove has had a fall;
Ten years have tryde this constant dame,
And yet she holds a spotles fame.
Along this plain there lies a down,
Where sheepheards feed their frisking flock;
Her Sire the Mayor of the town,
A lovely shout of ancient stock,
Full twenty years she lived a maid,
And never was by man betrayde.
At length by Juno's great request,
Diana loath, yet gave her leave,
Of flowring years, to spend the rest
In wed-locke band; but yet receive, A good gift.

Quod she, this gift; Thou virgin pure,
Chaste wife in wed-locke shall endure.
O happy man that shall enjoy
A blessing of so rare a price;
That frees the heart from such annoy;
As often does torment the wise,
A loving wife unto her death,
With full assurance of her faith.
When flying fame began to tell,
How beauties wonder was returned,
From country hills, in town to dwell,
With special gifts and grace adornd,
Of suitors store there might you see;
And some were men, of high degree.
But wisdom wild her choose her mate,
If that she loved a happy life,
That might be equal to her state,
To crop the sprigges of future strife;
Where rich in grace, where sound in health,
Most men do wed, but for the wealth.
Though jealous Juno had denyde
This happy wench, great store of pelffe:
Yet is she now in wedlock tide,
To one that loves her as himself,
So thus they live, and thus they love;
And God does bless them from above.
This rare seen bird, this Phoenix sage
Yields matter to my drowsy pen,
The mirror of this sinful age,
That gives us beasts in shapes of men,
Such beasts as still continue sin,
Where age does leave, there youths begin.
Our English soil, to Sodoms sink
Excessive sin transformd of late,
Of foul deceit the loathsome link,
Has worn all faith clean out of date,
The greatest sins among greatest sort,
Are counted now but for a sport.
Old Asues grandame is restored;
Her grouie Caves are new refinde:
The monster Idol is adored 2. Chro. 15. 16

By lusty dames of Macha's kind:
They may not let this worship fall,
Although they leese their honors all.
Our Moab Cozbies cast no fear,
To let in view of every eye,
Their gainelesse games they hold so dear, Numer. 25. 6.

They follow must, although they dye.
For why? the sword that Phineas wore,
Is broken now, and cuts no more.
My tender Muse, that never tried
Her ioynted wings till present time,
At first the perelesse bird espied,
That mounts aloft, deuoide of crime;
Though high she sore, yet will I try,
Where I her passage can discry.
Her high conceits, her constant mind;
Her sober talk, her stout denies;
Her chaste advise, here shall you find;
Her fierce assaults, her mild replies,
Her daily fight with great and small,
Yet constant virtue conquers all.
The first that says to pluck the Rose,
That scarce appeared without the bud,
With Gorgeous shows of Golden gloss,
To sow the seeds that were not good:
Suppose it were some noble man
That tried her thus, and thus began.
The first trial of AVISA, before she was married, by a Noble man: under which
is represented a warning to all young maids of every degree, that they beware
of the alluring intisements of great men.
CANT. II.
NOB.
NOw is the time, if thou be wise,
Thou happy maid, if thou can see,
Thy happiest time, take good advise,
Good fortune laughs, be ruled by me:
Be ruled by me, and here is my faith,
No Gold shall want thee till thy death.
Thou know my power, thou see my might,
Thou know I can maintain thee well,
And help thy friends unto their right;
Thou shall with me for ever dwell,
My secret friend thou shall remain,
And all shall turn to thy great gain.
Thou see thy parents mean estate,
That bars the hope of greater chance;
And if thou prove not wise too late,
Thou may thy self, and thine advance:
Repulse not fondly this good hap,
That now lies offered in thy lap.
Abandon fear that bars consent,
Repel the shame that fears a blot,
Let wisdom way what faith is meant,
That all may praise thy happy lot;
Think not I seek thy lives disgrace;
For thou shall have a Ladies place.
Thou art the first my fancy chose,
I know thy friends will like it well:
This friendly fault to none disclose,
And what thou think, blush not to tell,
Thou see my love, thou know my mind,
Now let me feel, what grace I find.
CANT. III.
AVISA
YOur Honors place, your riper years,
Might better frame some grauer talks:
Midst sunnie rays, this cloud appears;
Sweet Roses grow on prickly stalks:
If I conceive, what you request,
You aim at that I most detest.
My tender age that wants advice,
And craves the aid of sager guides,
Should rather learn for to be wise,
To stay my steps from slipperie slides;
Then thus to suck, then thus to taste
The poys'ned sap, that kills at last.
I wonder what your wisdom meant,
Thus to assault a silly maid:
Some simple wench, might chance consent,
By false resembling shows betraide:
I have by grace a native shield,
To lewd assaults that cannot yield,
I am too base to be your wife,
You choose me for your secret friend;
That is to lead a filthy life,
Whereon attends a fearful end:
Though I be poor, I tell you plain,
To be your whore, I flat disdain.
Your high estate, your silver shrines,
Repleate with wind and filthy stink;
Your glittering gifts, your golden mines,
May force some fools perhaps to shrink:
But I have learnd that sweetest bayt,
Often shrowds the hook of most desayt.
What great good hap, what happy time,
Your proffer brings, let yielding maids
Of former age, which thought to clime,
To highest tops of earthly aids,
Come back a while, and let them tell,
Where wicked lives have ended well.
Shores wife, a Princes secret friend,
Fair Rosomond, a Kings delight:
Yet both have found a ghastly end,
And fortunes friends, felt fortunes spite:
What greater joys, could fancy frame,
Yet now we see, their lasting shame.
If princely palace have no power,
To shade the shame of secret sin,
If black reproach such names devour,
What gain, or glory can they win,
That tracing tracts of shameless trade,
A hate of God, and man are made?
This only virtue must advance
My mean estate to joyful bliss:
For she that swaies dame virtues lance,
Of happy state can never miss,
But they that hope to gain by vice,
Shall surely prove too late unwise.
The root of woe is fond desire,
That never feels her self content:
But wanton winged, will needs aspire,
To find the thing, she may lament,
A courtly state, a Ladies place,
My former life will quite deface.
Such strange conceits may hap prevail,
With such as love such strong desayts,
But I am taught such qualmes to quail,
And flee such sweet alluring bayts,
The witless Fly plays with the flame,
Till she be scorched with the same.
You long to know what grace you find,
In me, perchance, more then you would,
Except you quickly change your mind,
I find in you, less then I should,
Move this no more, use no reply,
I Will keep mine honor till I die.
CANT. IIII.
NOB.
ALas, good soul, and will ye so?
You will be chaste Diana's mate;
Till time have woue the web of woe,
Then to repent will be too late,
You show your self so foole-precise,
That I can hardly think you wise,
You sprang belike from Noble stock,
That stand so much upon your fame,
You hope to stay upon the rock,
That will preserve a faultlesse name,
But while you hunt for needelesse praise,
You loose the Prime of sweetest days.
A merry time, when country maids
Shall stand (forsooth) upon their guard;
And dare control the Courtiers deeds,
At honors gate that watch and ward;
When Milk maids shall their pleasures fly,
And on their credits must rely.
Ah silly wench, take not a pride,
Though thou my raging fancy move,
Thy betters far, if they were tried,
Would feign accept my proffered love;
It Was for thy good, if thou had wist,
For I may have whom ere I list.
But here thy folly may appear,
Art thou preciser then a Queen:
Queen Ioane of Naples did not fear,
To quite men's love, with love again: Cornelius Agrippa.

And Messalina, it is no news,
Was daily seen to haunt the stews.
And Cleopatra, prince of Nile,
With more then one was wont to play:
And yet she keeps her glorious style,
And fame that never shall decaie,
What need'st thou then to fear of shame,
When Queens and Nobles use the same?
CANT. V.
AVISA
NEeds must the sheep struck all awrie,
Whose sheepheards wander from their way:
Needs must the sickly patient die,
Whose Doctor seeks his lives decay:
Needs must the people well be taught,
Whose chiefest leaders all are naught.
Such lawless guides Gods people found,
When Moab maids allured their fall;
They sought no salve to cure this wound,
Till God commands, to hang them all;
For wicked life, a shameful end
To wretched men, the Lord does send.
Was earth consumde with wreakfull waves?
Did Sodom burn and after sink?
What sin is that, which vengaunce craves,
If wicked lust no sin we think?
O blind conceits! O filthy breath!
That draws us headlong to our death.
If death be due to every sin,
How can I then be too precise?
Where pleasures end, if pain begin,
What need have we, then to be wise?
They weaue indeed the web of woe,
That from the Lord do yield to go.
I will remember whence I came,
I hunt not for this worldly praise,
I long to keep a blameless fame,
And constant heart against hard assaies:
If this be folly, want of skill,
I will remain thus foolish still.
The blindfold rage of Heathen Queens,
Or rather queanes that know not God,
Gods heavy judgments tried since,
And felt the weight of angry rod;
God save me from that Sodomes cry,
Whose deadly sting shall never die.
CANT. VI.
NOB.
Forgive me wench, I did mistake,
I little thought, that you could preach,
All worldly joys, you must forsake:
For so your great Divines do teach,
But yet beware, be not too bold,
A yongling Saint, a Devil old.
Well wanton well, thou art but young,
This is the error of thy youth,
Thou will repent this faith ere long,
And see too late (perhaps) the truth;
And they that seem so pure at first,
Are often found in proof the worst.
Thy youth and beauty will not last,
For sickness one, the other age
May captive take, when both are past,
You may have leisure to be sage,
The time will come, if these retire,
The worst will scorn that I desire.
Of chaste renown, you seek the praise,
You build your hope above the air,
When wonders last not twenty days,
What need you rusticke rumors fear?
Esteem not words above thy wealth,
Which must procure thy credits health.
And yet in truth I can not see,
From whence such great discredit grows,
To live in spite of every eye,
And swim in silks, and brauest shows,
To take the choice of daintiest meat,
And see thy betters stand and wait.
These grave respects breed pleasures brave,
Thy youthly years for joys crave,
And fading credit has his wave,
That none to thee does shine so brave:
That smokie fame which likes thee best,
The wisest have esteemed least.
CANT. VII.
AVISA
WEll now I see, why Christ commends,
To loving mates the Serpents wit,
That stops his ears, and so defends
His heart, from luring sounds unfit,
If you your madness still bewraye,
I Will stop my ears, or go my way.
Ulysses wise, yet dared not stay
The tising sound of Sirens song:
What fancy then does me betray,
That think my self, so wise and strong;
That dare to hear, what you dare speak,
And hope for strength, when you beweake?
My wisdom is the living Lord,
That gives me grace which nature wants,
That holds my seat from ways abhord,
And in my heart good motions plants:
With him I dare to bide the field,
Strive while you list, I can not yield.
Fond favor fails, the time will pass,
All earthly pleasures have their end,
We see not that, which sometime was,
Nor that which future times will send:
You say the truth, remember this,
And then confess, you stray amiss.
The shorter time, the greater care,
Are pleasures vain? the less delight,
Are dangers nigh? why then beware,
From base affections take your flight,
Think God a reckning will require,
And strive to quail this bad desire.
To swim in silks, and brave array,
Is that you think which women love,
That leads poor maids so often astray,
That are not guarded from above?
But this I know, that know not all,
Such wicked pride, will have a fall.
CANT. VIII.
NOB.
ALas the fear, alas the fall,
And what is the fall, that you so fear?
To toss good fortunes golden ball,
And gain the goal I prize so dear,
I doubt least these your needless fears,
Will bar good hap, from witless years.
Thy age experience wants I see,
And lacking trial art afraid,
Least ventring far to credit me,
Our secret dealings might be wrayd;
What then does not my mighty name,
Suffice to sheeld thy fact from shame?
Who dares to stir, who dares to speak,
Who dares our dealings to reprove?
Though some suspect, yet none will creake,
Or once control thy worthy love;
My might will stand for thy defense,
And quite thee clear from great offense.
Who sees our face, knows not our facts,
Though we our sport in secret use,
Thy cheeks will not bewray thy acts,
But rather blushing make excuse:
If thou will yield, here is my faith,
I Will keep it secret till thy death.
To seem as chaste, let that suffice,
Although indeed thou be not so,
Thus deal our women that are wise,
And let thy godly Doctors go,
Still feign as though thou godly art,
It is enough, who knows thy heart?
Let not the idle vulgar voice,
Of fained credit witch thee so,
To force thee leave this happy choice,
And flying pleasure live in woe;
If thou refuse, assure thy mind,
The like of this shall never find.
CANT. IX.
AVISA.
LEt that word stand, let that be true,
I do refuse and so do still,
God shield me from your cursed crew,
That thus are led by beastly will,
It grieves my heart, that I do find
In Noble blood so base a mind.
On worldly fear, you think I stand,
Or fame that may my shame resound,
No Sir, I fear his mighty hand,
That will both you and me confound,
His fear it is that makes me stay
My wandering steps from wicked way.
Who dares, say you, our facts unfold?
Even he that can mighty Kings tame,
And he that Princes has controld,
He dares provide a mighty shame,
What fence have you for to withstand
His fiery plagues, and heuie hand?
Though Samson queld the Lions rage,
Though Solomon, a mighty King,
Yet when to sin their hearts they gage,
On both does God confusion bring,
How can you then his wrath avoid,
That you and yours be not destroid?
He sees our facts, he viewes our deeds,
Although we sin in secret place,
A guilty conscience always bleeds:
My faults will show upon my face,
My cheeks will blush, when I do sin;
Let all men know, when I begin.
To seem as chaste, and not to be,
To bear a show, and yet to feign,
Is this the love, you bear to me,
To damn my soul in lasting pain?
If this the best you have to say,
Pray give me leave, to go my way.
CANT. X.
NOB.
WEll then I see, you have decreed,
And this decree must light on me:
Unhappy Lilly loves a weed,
That gives no sent, that yields no glee,
Thou art the first I ever tried,
Shall I at first be thus denide?
My hapless hap, fell much awrie,
To fix my fancies prime delight,
In haggard Hawk that mounts so hie,
That checkes the lure, and Fawkners sight;
But sore you hie, or fly you low,
Stoop needs you must, before you go.
Your modest speech is not amiss,
Your maidens blush becomes you well;
Now will I see how sweet you kiss,
And so my purpose farther tell;
Your coye looks and tricks are vain,
I will no nay, and that is plain.
Thou must perforce be well content,
To let me win thee with thy will;
Thy chiefest friends have given consent,
And therefore think, it is not ill,
Abandon all thy fond delay;
And mark this well, that I shall say.
My house, my heart, my land my life,
My credit to thy care I give:
And if thou list to be a wife,
In show of honest fame to live;
I Will fit thee one, shall bear the cloak,
And be a chimnie for the smoke.
But say the word, it shall be don,
And what thou list, or what thou crave,
What so be lost, what ever won,
Shall nothing want, that thou will have,
Thou shall have all, what will thou more,
Which never woman had before.
Here Is forty Angels to begin;
A little pledge of great good will,
To buy thee lace, to buy a pin;
I will be careful of thee still:
If youth be quaild, if I be old,
I can supply that with my gold.
Silk gowns and velvet shall thou have,
With hoods and cauls, fit for thy head;
Of goldsmithes work a border brave,
A chain of gold ten double spread;
And all the rest shall answer this,
My purse shall see that nothing miss.
Two waiting maids, attendant still,
Two serving men, four geldings pressed,
Go where you list, ride where you will,
No jealous thought shall me molest;
Two hundredth pounds I do intend,
To give thee yearly for to spend.
Of this I will assurance make,
To some good friend, whom thou will choose
That this in trust from me shall take,
While thou do live, unto thy use;
A thousand marks, to thee give I,
And all my Jewels when I die.
This will I do, what ever chance,
I Will shortly send, and fetch thee hence;
Thy chiefest friends I will advance,
And leave them cause of no offense,
For all this same, I only crave
But thy good will, that let me have.
A modest maid is loath to say,
In open words, she does consent,
Till gentle force do break the stay,
Come on mine own, and be content,
Possess me of my loves desire,
And let me taste that I require.
CANT. XI.
AVISA.
HAnd off my Lord, this will not serve,
Your wisdom wanders much awrie,
From reasons rule thus far to swerve,
I Will never yield, I Will rather die,
Except you leave, and so depart,
This knife shall stick within your heart.
Is this the love, your frantic fit
Did so pretend in glosing show?
Are these your ways, is this your wit,
To tice and force poor maidens so?
You strive in vain, by raging lust,
To gain consent, or make me trust.
For who can trust your flattering style,
Your painted words, your brave pretense,
When you will strive, by trained will
To force consent to lewd offense,
Then thus to yield by chaunted charms,
I Will rather die within your arms.
Your golden Angels I repel,
Your lawless lust I here defy
These Angels are the posts of hell,
That often lead poor souls awrie,
Shame on them all, your eyes shall see,
These Angels have no power of me.
Your gowns of silk, your golden chains,
Your men, your maids, your hundredth pounds,
Are nothing else but devil ish trains,
That fill fond ears with tickling sounds,
A bladder full of traitorous wind,
And fardest off from filthy mind.
Well, since your meaning now is plain,
And lust would give no longer leave,
To faithless heart, to lie and feign,
Which might perchance in time deceive,
By Jesus Christ I do protest,
I Will never grant that you request.
CANT. XII.
NOB. Furens.
THou beggars brat, thou dunghill mate,
Thou clownish spawne, thou country gill,
My love is turned to wreakefull hate,
Go hang, and keep thy credit still,
Gad where thou list, aright or wrong,
I hope to see thee beg, err long.
Was this great offer well refused,
Or was this proffer all too base?
Am I fit man to be abused,
With such disgrace, by flattering gase?
On thee or thine, as I am man,
I will revenge this if I can.
Thou think thy self a pearelesse piece,
And peevish pride that does possess
Thy heart; persuades that thou art wise,
When God does know there is nothing less,
It Was not thy beauty that did move
This fond affect, but blinded love.
I hope to see some country clown,
Possessor of that fleering face,
When need shall force thy pride come down,
I Will laugh to see thy foolish case,
For thou that think thy self so brave,
Wilt take at last some paltrie knave,
Thou selfewill gig that do detest
My faithful love, look to thy fame,
If thou offend, I do protest,
I Will bring thee out to open shame,
For since thou fayn'st thy self so pure,
Look to thy leapes that they be sure.
I was thy friend, but now thy foe,
Thou had my heart, but now my hate,
Refusing wealth, God send thee woe,
Repentance now will come too late,
That tongue that did protest my faith,
Shall wail thy pride, and wish thy death.
CANT. XIII.
AVISA.
YEa so I thought, this is the end
Of wandering lust, resembling love,
Wa'st love or lust, that did intend
Such friendlesse force, as you did move?
Though you may vaunt of happier fate,
I am content with my estate.
I rather choose a quiet mind,
A conscience clear from bloody sins,
Then short delights, and therein find
That gnawing worm, that never linnes,
Your bitter speeches please me more,
Then all your wealth, and all your store.
I love to live deuoid of crime,
Although I beg, although I pine,
These fading joys for little time,
Embrace who list, I here resine,
How poor I go, how mean I fare,
If God be pleased, I do not care.
I rather be are your ragingire,
Although you swear reuengment deep,
Then yield for gain to lewd desire,
That you might laugh, when I should weep,
Your lust would like but for a space,
But who could salve my foul disgrace?
Mine ears have heard your taunting words,
Of yielding fools by you betrayed,
Amongst your mates at open bords,
Know such a wife? know such a maid?
Then must you laugh, then must you wink,
And leave the rest for them to think.
Nay yet welfare the happy life,
That need not blush at every view:
Although I be a poor man's wife,
Yet then I Will laugh as well as you,
Then laugh as long, as you think best,
My fact shall frame you no such jest.
If I do hap to leap aside,
I must not come to you for aid,
Alas now that you be denide,
You think to make me sore afraid;
Nay watch your worst, I do not care,
If I offend, pray do not spare.
You were my friend, you were but dust,
The Lord is he, whom I do love,
He has my heart, in him I trust,
And he does guard me from above,
I way not death, I fear not hell,
This is enough, and so farewell.
THE SECOND TEMPtation of AVISA, after her marriage by Ruffians, Roysters,
young Gentlemen, and lusty Captains, which all she quickly cuts off.
CANT. XIIII.
CAVEILEIRO.
COme lusty wench, I like thy looks,
And such a pleasant look I love,
Thine eyes are like to bayted hooks,
That force the hungry fish to move,
Where nature grants such a face,
I need not doubt to purchase grace.
I doubt not but thy inward thought,
Does yield as fast as does thine eye;
A love in me has fancy wrought,
Which work you can not well deny;
From love you can not me refrain,
I seek but this, love me again.
And so thou do, I know it well,
I knew it by thy side-cast glance,
Can heart from outward look rebel?
Which yeaster night I spide by chance;
Thy love (sweet heart) shall not be lost,
How dear a price so ever it cost.
Ask what thou will, thou know my mind,
Appoint the place, and I will come,
Appoint the time, and thou shall find,
Thou can not fare so well at home,
Few words suffice, where hearts consent,
I hope thou know, and art content.
Though I a stranger seem as yet,
And seldom seen, before this day,
Assure thy self that thou may get,
More knackes by me, then I will say,
Such store of wealth as I will bring,
Shall make thee leap, shall make thee sing,
I must be gone, use no delay,
At six or seven the chance may rise,
Old gamesters know their vantage play,
And when it is best to cast the dice,
Leave open your point, take up your man,
And mine shall quickly enter than.
CANT. XV,
AVISA.
WHat now? what news? new wars in hand?
More trumpets blown of fond conceits?
More banners spread of follies band?
New Captains coining new deceites?
Ah woe is me, new camps are pla'st,
Whereas I thought all dangers past.
O wretched soul, what face have I,
That can not look, but some misdeame?
What sprite does lurk within mine eye,
That kendles thoughts so much unclean?
O lucklesse fewture never blessed,
That sow'st the seeds of such unrest.
What wandering fits are these that move
Your heart, inragde with every glance;
That judge a woman straight in love,
That welds her eye aside by chance,
If this your hope, by fancy wrought,
You hope on that, I never thought.
If nature give me such a look,
Which seems at first unchaste or ill,
Yet shall it prove no bayted hook,
To draw your lust to wanton will,
My face and will do not agree,
Which you in time (perhaps) may see.
If smiling cheer and friendly words,
If pleasant talk such thoughts procure,
Yet know my heart, no will afords,
To scratching kites, to cast the lure,
If mild behauior thus offend,
I will assaie this fault to mend.
You plant your hope upon the sand,
That build on women's words, or smiles;
For when you think your self to stand
In greatest grace, they prove but wyles,
When fixed you think on surest ground,
Then fardest off they will be found.
CANT. XVI,
AVISA.
YOu speak of love, you talk of cost,
Is It filthy love your worship means?
Assure your self your labor's lost;
Bestow your cost among your queanes,
You left not here, nor here shall find,
Such mates as match your beastly mind.
You must again to Coleman hedge,
For therebe some that look for gain,
They will bestow the French man's badge,
In lieu of all your cost and pain,
But Sir, it is against my use,
For gain to make my house a stews.
What have you seen, what have I done,
That you should judge my mind so light,
That I so quickly might be won,
Of one that came but yeaster night?
Of one I wist not whence he came,
Nor what he is, nor what is his name?
Though face do friendly smile on all,
Yet judge me not to be so kind,
To come at every Faulkners call,
Or wave aloft with every wind,
And you that venture thus to try,
Shall find how far you shoot awry.
And if your face might be your judge,
Your wannie cheeks, your shaggie locks,
Would rather move my mind to grudge,
To fear the piles, or else the pockes:
If you be moved, to make amends,
Pray keep your knackes for other friends.
You may be walking when you list,
Look there is the door, and there is the way,
I hope you have your market mist,
Your game is lost, for lack of play,
The point is close, no chance can fall,
That enters there, or ever shall.
CANT. XVII.
CAVELEIRO.
GOds woe: I think you do but jest,
You can not thus delude my hope:
But yet perhaps you think it best, ^right Caueleiro.

At first to give but little scope:
At first assault you must retire,
And then be fors't to yield desire.
You think, that I would judge you bad,
If you should yield at first assaie,
And you may think me worse then mad,
If on repulse send me away,
You think you do your credit wrong,
Except you keep your suitors long.
But I that know the wonted guise,
Of such as live in such a place,
Old dame experience makes me wise,
To know your meaning by your face,
For most of them, that seem so chaste,
Deny at first, and take at last.
This painted sheth, may please some fool,
That can not see the rustie knife:
But I have bin too long at schools,
To think you of so pure a life,
The time and place will not permit,
That you can long, here spot-lesse sit.
And therefore wench, be not so strange,
To grant me that, which others have,
I know that women love to change,
It Is but deceit, to seem so grave,
I never have that woman tried,
Of whom as yet I was denied.
Your godly zeal does breed my trust,
Your anger makes me hope the more;
For they are often found the worst,
That of their conscience make such store,
In vain to blush, or look aside,
A flat repulse, I can not bide.
CANT. XVIII.
AVISA.
THou wicked wretch, what do not think
There is a God that does behold
This sinful ways, this Sodoms sink?
O wretched earth that art so bold,
To jest at God, and at his word,
Look for his just revenging sword.
Saint Paul commands us not to eat,
With him that leads a wicked life; ^. Cor. 5.

Or shall be found to lie in wait,
To seek to spoil his neighbors wife,
Such wicked souls God does forsake, Reuela. 12.

And dings them down to fiery lake.
A brain-sicke youth was stricken blind, A young man was stricken blind for
looking dishonestly upon a godly woman. The Locrenses use to put out both the
eyes of the adulterers. The law Iulia in Rome put adulterers to the sword. The
Arabians do the like.

That sent his greedy eye to view,
A godly wench, with godless mind,
That pain might spring, whence pleasures grew,
Remember friend, forget not this,
And see you look no more amiss.
O Iulia flower of thy time,
Where is thy law, where is thy word,
That did condemn the wedlock crime,
To present death, with bloody sword?
The shining of this percing edge,
Would daunt the force of filthy rage.
Though shameless Callets may be found;
That oil them selves in common field;
And can carire the whoores rebound,
To strain at first, and after yield:
Yet here are none of Creseds kind,
In whom you shall such fleeting find.
The time and place may not condemn,
The mind to vice that does not sway,
But they that virtue do condemn,
By time and place, are led astray,
This place does hold on at this time,
That will not yield to bloody crime.
You think that others have possessed
The place that you so lewdly crave,
Wherein you plainly have confessed,
Your self to be a jealous knave,
The rose vnblusht has yet no stain,
Nor ever shall, while I remain.
CANT. XIX.
CAVELEIRO.
ME thinks I hear a sober Fox,
Stand preaching to the gagling Geese;
And shows them out a painted box,
And bids them all beware of cheese,
Your painted box, and goodly preach,
I see does hold a boxly reach.
Perchance you be no common card,
But love the dainty diamonds place,
The ten, the knave, may be your guard,
Yet only you, are still the ace,
Contented close in pack to lie,
But open dealing you defy.
Well I confess, I did offend,
To rush so headlong to the mark;
Yet give me leave this fault to mend,
And crave your pardon in the dark,
Your credits fame I will not spill,
But come as secret as you will.
Nay here is my hand, my faith I give,
My tongue my fact shall not reveal,
To earthly creature while I live;
Because you love a secret deal,
And where I come, I still will say,
She would not yield, but said me nay.
So shall your credit greater grow,
By my report a passing praise
And they that scant your name do know,
Your fame on hie, and hie shall raise,
So shall you gain that you desire,
By granting that, which I require.
To plant a siege, and yet depart,
Before the town be yielded quite,
It kills a martial manly heart,
That can not brook such high despite,
Then say you yea, or say you no,
I Will scale your walls, before I go.
CANT. XX.
AVISA.
A Fine device, and well contrived,
Brave Gold upon a bitter pill;
No marvel well though you have thriu'd,
That so can deck, that so can dill;
Your quaintish quirkes can want no mate;
But here I wis, you come too late.
It Is ill to hault before the lame,
Or watch the bird that can not sleep,
Your new found tricks are out of frame,
The fox will laugh, when Asses weep;
Swear what you list, say what you will,
Before you spoke, I knew your skill.
Your secret dealing will not hold,
To force me try, or make me trust
Your blind devises are too old,
Your broken blade has got the rust,
You need not lie, but truly say,
She would not yield to wanton play.
Your tongue shall spare to spread my fame,
I list not buy too dear a sound,
Your greatest praise would breed but shame,
Report of me, as you have found,
Though you be loath to blow retreat,
This mount's too strong for you to get.
The wisest Captain now and then,
When that he feels his foe too strong;
Retires betime to save his men,
That grow but weak, if seege belong;
From this assault you may retire,
You shall not reach, that you require.
I hate to feed you with delays,
As others do, that mean to yield,
You spend in vain your strong assaies,
To win the town, or gain the feeld;
No Captain did, nor ever shall,
Set ladder here, to skale the wall.
CANT XXI.
CAVELEIRO.
HAd I known this when I began,
You would have used me as you say,
I would have take you napping than,
And give you leave to say me nay,
I little thought to find you so:
I never dreamt, you would say no.
Such self like wench I never met,
Great cause have I thus hard to crave it,
If ever man have had it yet,
I sworen have, that I will have it,
If thou did never give consent;
I must perforce, be then content.
If thou will swear, that thou have known,
In carnal act, no other man:
But only one, and he thine own,
Since man and wife you first began,
I Will leave my suit, and swear it true,
Thy like in deed, I never knew.
CANT. XXII.
AVISA.
I Told you first what you should find,
Although you thought I did but jest,
And self affection made you blind,
To seek the thing, I most detest;
Besides his host, who takes the pain,
To reckon first, must count again.
Your rash swore oath you must repent,
You must beware of headlong vows;
Excepting him, whom free consent,
By wedlock words, has made my spouse,
From others yet I am as free,
As they this night, that boren be.
CAVELEIRO.
Well give me then a cup of wine,
As thou art his, would thou were mine.
AVISA.
Have to ye good-lucke, tell them that gave
You this advice, what speed you have.
Farewell.
The third trial; wherein are expressed the long passionate, and constant
affections of the close and wary suitor, which by signs, by sighs, by letters,
by privy messengers, by Jewels, Rings, Gold, diverse gifts, and by a long
continued course of courtesy, at length prevails with many both maids and
wives, if they be not guarded wounderfully with a better spirit then their
own, which all are here finely daunted, and mildly over thrown, by the
constant aunsweres, and chaste replies of Auisa.
CANT. XXIII.
D. B. A French man.
AS flaming flakes, too closely pent,
With smothering smoke, in narrow vault,
Each hole does try, to get a vent,
And force by forces, fierce assault,
With rattling rage, does rumbling rave,
Till flame and smoke free passage have.
So I (my dear) have smothered long,
Within my heart a sparkling flame,
Whose rebel rage is grown so strong,
That hope is past to quell the same,
Except the stone, that struck the fire,
With water quench this hot desire.
The glauncing spear, that made the wound,
Which ranckling thus, has bred my pain,
Must pearcing slide with fresh rebound,
And wound, with wound, recure again.
That flooting eye that pearst my heart,
Must yield to salve my curelesse smart.
I strived, but strived against the stream,
To daunt the qualmes of fond desire,
The more their course I did restrain,
More strong and strong they did retire,
Bare need does force me now to run,
To seek my help, where hurt begun.
Thy present state wants present aid,
A quick redress my grief requires,
Let not the means be long delaid,
That yields us both our hearts desires,
If you will ease my pensive heart,
I Will find a salve to heal your smart.
I am no common gameling mate,
That list to bowl in every plain,
But (wench) consider both our state,
The time is now, for both to gain,
From dangerous bands I set you free,
If you will yield to comfort me.
CANT. XXIIII.
AVISA.
YOur fiery flame, your secret smart,
That inward frets with pining grief,
Your hollow sighs, your heuie heart,
Me thinks might quickly find relief,
If once the certain cause were known,
From whence these hard effects have grown.
It little boots to show your sore,
To her that wants all Physic skill,
But tell it them, that have in store,
Such oils as creeping cankers kill,
I would be glad, to do my best,
If I had skill, to give you rest.
Take heed, let not your grief remain,
Till helps do fail, and hope be past,
For such as first refused some pain,
A double pain have felt at last,
A little spark, not quenched be time,
To hideous flames will quickly clime.
If godly sorrow for your sin,
Be chiefest cause, why you lament,
If guilty conscience do begin,
To draw you truly to repent,
A joyful end must needs redound,
To happy grief so seldom found.
To strive all wicked lusts to quell,
Which often sort to doleful end,
I joy to hear you mean so well,
And what you want, the Lord will send:
But if you yield to wanton will,
God will depart, and leave you still.
Your pleasant aid with sweet supply,
My present state, that might amend,
If honest love be meant thereby,
I shall be glad of such a friend,
But if you love, as I suspect,
Your love and you, I both reject.
CANT. XXV.
D. B. A French man.
What you suspect, I can not tell,
What I do mean, you may perceive,
My works shall show, I wish you well,
If well meant love you list receive,
I have been long in secret mind,
And would be still your secret frind.
My love should breed you no disgrace,
None should perceive our secret play,
We would observe both time and place,
That none our dealings should bewraie,
Be it my fortune, or my fault,
Love makes me venture this assault.
You mistress of my doubtful chance,
You Prince of this my souls desire,
That lulls my fancy in a trance,
The mark whereto my hopes aspire,
You see the sore, whence springs my grief
You weld the stern of my relief.
The grauest men of former time,
That lived with fame, and happy life,
Have thought it none, or petty crime,
To love a friend besides their wife,
Then since my wife you can not be,
As dearest friend account of me.
You talk of sin, and who does live,
Whose daily steps slide not awrie?
But too precise, does deadly grieve,
The heart that yields not yet to die,
When age draws on, and youth is past,
Then let us think of this at last.
The Lord did love King David well,
Although he had more wives then one:
King Solomon that did excel,
For wealth and wit, yet he alone;
A thousand wives and friends possessed,
Yet did he thrive, yet was he blessed.
CANT. XXVI.
AVISA.
O Mighty Lord, that guides the Sphere;
Defend me by thy mighty will,
From just reproach, from shame and fear,
Of such as seek my soul to spill,
Let not their counsel (Lord) prevail,
To force my heart to yield or quail.
How frames it with your sober looks,
To shroud such bent of lewd conceits?
What hope has pla'st me in your books,
That files me fit, for such deceites?
I hope that time has made you see,
No cause that breeds these thoughts in me.
Your fervent love is filthy lust,
And therefore leave to talk of love,
Your truth is treason under trust,
A Kite in shape of hurtlesse Dove,
You offer more then friendship would,
To give us brass in steed of gold.
Such secret friends to open foes,
Do often change with every wind,
Such wandering fits, where folly groes,
Are certain signs of wavering mind,
A fawning face, and faithless heart,
In secret love, breeds open smart.
No sin to break the wedlock faith?
No sin to swim in Sodomes sink?
O sin the seed and sting of death!
O sinful wretch that so does think!
Your grauest men with all their schools,
That taught you thus, were heathen fools.
Your lewd examples will not serve,
To frame a virtue from a vice,
When David and his Son did swerue,
From lawful rule, though both were wise,
Yet both were plagued, as you may see,
With mighty plagues of each degree.
CANT. XXVII.
D. B. A French man.
FRom whence proceeds this sudden change?
From whence this quainte and coye speech?
Where did you learn to look so strange?
What Doctor taught you thus to preach?
Into my heart it can not sink,
That you do speak, as you do think.
Your smiling face, and glauncing eye,
(That promise grace, and not despite)
With these your words do not agree,
That seem to shun your chief delight,
But give me leave, I think it still,
Your words do wander from your will,
Of women now the greatest part,
Whose place and age do so require,
Do choose a friend, whose faithful heart,
May quench the flame of secret fire,
Now if your liking be not pla'st,
I know you will choose one at last.
Then choosing one, let me be he,
If so our hidden fancies frame,
Because you are the only she,
That first enraged my fancies flame,
If first you grant me this good will,
My heart is yours, and shall be still.
I have a Farm that fell of late,
Worth forty pounds, at yearly rent,
That will I give to mend your state,
And prove my love is truly meant,
Let not my suit be flat denide,
And what you want, shall be supplide.
Our long acquaintance makes me bold;
To show my grief, to ease my mind,
For new found friends, change not the old,
The like perhaps you shall not find,
Be not too rash, take good advice;
Your hap is good, if you be wise.
CANT. XXVIII,
AVIS A.
MY hap is hard, and over bad,
To be misdeemd of every man;
That think me quickly to be had,
That see me pleasant now and than:
Yet would I not be much a greiu'd,
If you alone were thus deceived.
But you alone are not deceived,
With tising baytes of pleasant view,
But many others have belieu'd,
And tried the same, as well as you,
But they repent their folly past,
And so will you, I hope at last.
You seem, as though you lately came
From London, from some bawdie sell,
Where you have met some wanton dame,
That knows the tricks of whoores so well,
Know you some wives, use more then one?
Go back to them, for here are none.
For here are none, that list to choose,
A novel chance, where old remain,
My choice is past, and I refuse,
While this does last, to choose again,
While one does live, I will no more,
Although I beg from door to door.
Bestow your farms among your frinds,
Your forty pounds can not provoke,
The settled heart, whom virtue binds,
To trust the trains of hidden hook,
The labor's lost that you endure,
To gorged Hawk, to cast the lure.
If lust had led me to the spoil,
And wicked will, to wanton change,
Your betters that have had the soil,
Had caused me long ere this to range,
But they have left, for they did see,
How far they were mistake of me.
CANT. XXIX.
D. B. A French man.
MIstake indeed, if this be true,
If youth can yield to favors foe;
If wisdom spring, where fancy grew;
But sure I think it is not so:
Let faithful meaning purchase trust,
That likes for love, and not for lust.
Although you swear, you will not yield,
Although my death you should intend,
Yet will I not forsake the field,
But still remain your constant friend,
Say what you list, fly where you will,
I am your thrall, to save or spill.
You may command me out of sight,
As one that shall no favor find,
But though my body take his flight,
Yet shall my heart remain behind,
That shall your guilty conscience tell,
You have not used his masterwell.
His masters love he shall repeat,
And watch his turn to purchase grace,
His secret eye shall lie in wait;
Where any other gain the place:
When we each others can not see,
My heart shall make you think of me.
To force a fancy, where is none,
It Is but in vain, it will not hold,
But where it grows it self alone,
A little favor makes it bold,
Till fancy frame your free consent,
I must perforce, be needs content.
Though I depart with heavy cheer,
As having lost, or left my heart,
With one whose love, I held too dear,
That now can smile, when others smart,
Yet let your prisoner mercy see,
Least you in time a prisoner be.
CANT. XXX.
AVISA.
IT makes me smile to see the bent,
Of wandering minds with folly fed,
How fine they feign, how fair they paint,
To bring a loving soul to bed;
They will be dead, except they have,
What so (forsooth) their fancy crave.
If you did seek, as you pretend,
Not friendlesse lust, but friendly love,
Your tongue and speeches would not lend,
Such lawless actions, so to move,
But you can wake, although you wink,
And swear the thing, you never think.
To wavering men that speak so fair, Catullus. Tum ^am nulla viro ^uranti
foemina credat. Nulla viri ^eret, sermo^es esse fideles. Qui dum aliquid
cupiens ^nimus praege^tit apisci, Nil metuunt iura^e, nihil promittere par^unt.
Sed simul ac cupidae mentis satiata libido est, Dicta nihil metuere, nihil
periuria curant.

Let women never credit give,
Although they weep, although they swear,
Such fained shows, let none believe;
For they that think their words be true.
Shall soon their hasty credit rue.
When ventring lust does make them dare,
The simple wenches to betray,
For present time they take no care,
What they do swear, nor what they say,
But having once obtaind the lot,
Their words and oaths are all forgot.
Let rouing Prince from Troyes sack,
Whose fauning framed Queen Dido's fall,
Teach women wit, that wisdom lack,
Mistrust the most, beware of all,
When selfewill rules, where reason sat,
Fond women often repent too late.
The wandering passions of the mind; Combat between reason and appetite. No
constant love where unconstant affections rule. That love only constant that is
grounded on virtue

Where constant virtue bares no sway,
Such frantic fickle chaunges find,
That reason knows not where to stay,
How boast you then of constant love,
Where lust all virtue does remove?
T. B. Being somewhat grieved with this answer, after long absence and
silence, at length writes, as follows.
CANT. XXXI,
D. B. To AVISA more pity.
THere is a cole that burns the more,
The more ye cast cold water near, Canol cole found in many places of
England. Nympaus locu^ Leonicus de varia Histor. for 98. By the Ionian Sea
there is a place that burns continually, and the more water is cast into it,
the more it flames.

Like humor seeds my secret sore,
Not quenched, but fed by cold despair,
The more I feel, that you disdain,
The faster does my love remain.
In grace they find a burning soil,
That fumes in nature like the same,
Cold water makes the hotter broyle,
The greater frost, the greater flame,
So frames it with my love or lost,
That fiercely fries amidst the frost.
My heart inflamed with quenchlesse heat,
Does fretting fume in secret fire,
These hellish torments are the meat,
That daily feed this vain desire;
Thus shall I groan in ghastly grief,
Till you by mercy send relief.
You first inflamed my brimstone thought,
Your faining favor witcht mine eye,
O lucklesse eye, that thus have brought,
Thy masters heart to strive awrye,
Now blame your self, if I offend,
The hurt you made, you must amend.
With these my lines I sent a Ring,
Least you might think you were forgot,
The posie means a pretty thing,
That bids you, Do but dally not,
Do so sweet heart, and do not stay,
For dangers grow from sound delay.
Five winters Frosts have said to quell
These flaming fits of firm desire,
Five Summers suns can not expel
The cold despair, that feeds the fire,
This time I hope, my truth does try,
Now yield in time, or else I die.
Dudum beatus, D. B.

CANT. XXXII.
AVISA. To D. B. more wisdom and fear of God.
THe Indian men have found a plant,
Whose virtue, mad conceits does quell, The root Ba aras is good to deliver
them that are possessed with evil sprites. Josephus.

This root (me thinks) you greatly want,
This raging madness to repel,
If rebel fancy work this spite,
Request of God a better sprite.
If you by folly did offend,
By giving raines unto your lust,
Let wisdom now these fancies end,
Since thus vntwin'd is all your trust,
If wit to will, willneeds resign,
Why should your fault be counted mine?
Your Ring and letter that you sent,
I both return from whence they came,
As one that knows not what is meant,
To send or write to me the same,
You had your answer long before,
So that you need to send no more.
Your chosen posie seems to show,
That all my deeds but dallings be,
I never dallyed that I know,
And that I think, you partly see,
I shewde you first my meaning plain,
The same is yet, and shall remain.
Some say that Time does purge the blood,
And frantic humors brings to frame, Time purges choleric humors, and the
blood

I marvel time has done no good,
Your long hid griefs and qualmes to tame?
What secret hope does yet remain,
That makes these suits revive again?
But did you will, and that in have,
Except you find some quick relief,
I Will warrant you, your life at last,
While foolish love is all your grief,
As first I said, so say I still,
I can not yield, nor ever will.
Always the same, Auisa.

CANT XXXIII.
The 2. letter of D. B. to hard hearted AVISA farewell.
I Find it true, that some have said, Difficile est diligere, and Sapere.
Vulteius.

It Is hard to love, and to be wise,
For wit is ost by love betrayed,
And brought a sleep, by fond devise,
Since faith no favor can procure,
My patience must, my pain endure.
When women's wits have drawn the plot, Non si foeminium crebro caput igne
refu^ das, Ingenii mutes prima metalla sui.

And of their fancy laid the frame,
Then that they hold, where good or not,
No force can move them from the same:
So you, because you first denide,
Do think it shame, for that to slide.
As faithful friendship moved my tongue,
Your secret love, and favor crave;
And as I never did you wrong,
This last request so let me have;
Let no man know what I did move,
Let no man know, that I did love;
That I will say, this is the worst,
When this is said, then all is past,
Thou proud Auisa, were the first,
Thou hard Auisa, art the last,
Though thou in sorrow make me dwell,
Yet love will make me wish thee well.
Write not again, except you write,
This only gentle word, I will,
This only word will bring delight,
The rest will breed but sorrow still,
God grant you gain that you desire,
By keeping that, which I require.
Yet will I listen now and then,
To see the end, my mind will crave,
Where you will yield to other men,
The thing that I could never have.
But what to me? where false or true,
Where live or die, for aye Adue.
Fortuna ferenda. D. B.

DYDIMVS HARCO. ANGLO-GERMANVS.
CANT. XXXIIII.
D. H.
I Have to say, yet can not speak,
The thing that I would gladly say,
My heart is strong, though tongue be weak,
Yet will I speak it, as I may.
And if I speak not as I ought,
Blame but the error of my thought,
And if I think not as I should,
Blame love that bad me so to think;
And if I say not what I would,
It Is modest shame, that makes me shrink,
For sure their love is very small,
That can at first express it all.
Forgive my blush, if I do blush,
You are the first I ever tried,
And last whose conscience I will crush,
If now at first I be denide,
I must be plain then give me leave,
I can not flatter nor deceive.
You know that Marchaunts ride for gain,
As chief foundations of their state,
You see that we refuse no pain,
To rise betime, and travel late,
But far from home, this is the spite,
We want sometimes our chief delight.
I am no Saint, I must confess,
But naturde like to other men,
My meaning you may quickly guess,
I love a woman now and then,
And yet it is my common use,
To take advise, before I choose.
I often have seen the Western part,
And therein many a pretty elfe,
But found not any in my heart,
I like so well as of your self;
And if you like no worse of me,
We may perhaps in time agree.
CANT XXXV.
AVISA.
WHen first you did request to talk
With me alone a little space,
When first I did consent to walk
With you alone within this place,
From this your sage, and sober cheer,
I thought some grave advise to hear.
Some say that women's faces feign
A modest show, from wanton heart;
But give me leave, I see it plain,
That men can play a duble part,
I could not dream, that I should find
In lustlesse show, such lustful mind.
You make as though you would not speak,
As unacquainted yet with love,
As though your mind you could not break,
Nor how these secret matters move,
You blush to speak, Alas the blush,
Yet this is all not worth a rush.
Such sly conceits are out of joint,
So foul within, so fair without,
Not worth in proof a threden point:
But now to put you out of doubt,
Your thought is far deceived of me,
As you in time shall plainly see.
If you had known my former life,
With spotless fame that I have held,
How first a maid, and then a wife,
These youthly suits I have repeld,
You would (I hope) correct your rate,
That judge me thus a common mate.
Whom you have seen, I do not care,
Nor reck not what you did request,
I am content this flout to bear,
In that you say, you like me best,
And if you wish that you agree,
Correct your wrong conceit of me.
CANT. XXXVI.
D. H.
THe lymed bird, by foulers train,
Intrapt by view of pleasant bait,
Would feign unwind himself again;
But feels too late the hid desaite:
So I have found the clasping lyme,
That will stick fast for longer time.
There is a flood, whose rivers run, In Italy is a certain water that
falls into the River Anion, of color white, and at first seems to be
wonderful cold, but being a while in it, it heateth the body more extremely.
Leonicus de va ria Histor.

Like streams of Milk, and seems at first,
Extremely cold, all heat to shun,
But stay a while, and quench your thirst,
Such vehement heat there will arise,
As greater heat none may devise.
These strange effects I find inrold,
Within this place, since my return,
My first affections were but cold,
But now I feel them fiercely burn,
The more you make such strange retire,
The more you draw my new desire.
You think perchance I do but jest,
Or I your secrets will bewray,
Or having got that I request,
With false AEneas steal away,
If you suspect that I will range,
Let God forsake me, when I change.
I will not bost me of my wealth,
You shall no Gold nor Jewels want,
You see I am in perfect health,
And if you list to give your grant,
A hundredth pounds shall be your hire,
But only do that I require.
And here is a Bracelet to begin,
Worth twenty Angels to be sold,
Besides the rest, this shall you win,
And other things not to be told,
And I will come but now and then,
To void suspect, none shall know when.
CANT. XXXVII.
AVISA.
Why then your conscience does declare
A guilty mind that shunnes the light,
A spotless conscience need not fear,
The tongues of men, nor yet the sight,
Your secret slides do pass my skill,
And plainly show your works are ill. In Plato his common wealth all women
were common, con trary to the commandment of God. Exodus 20, 14. Leuit 18. 20.
29.

Your words command the lawless rite,
Of Platoes laws that freedom gave,
That men and women for delight,
Might both in common freely have,
Yet God does threaten cruel death,
To them that break their wedlock faith.
The Be bears honey in her mouth, Strange pleasure seems sweet at the
beginning, but their end is as bitter worm wood Prouer. 5. 3. 4. Prouer. 6.
27. Non tanti emam paenitcre, Filthy heathen laws. In Cyprus, their maidens
before the time of their marriage were set open to every man to gain their
dowry. Iustine. The Babilonians had a custom, that if any were poor, they
should procure their daughters and wives to get money with their bodies.
Herodot. Formosae, pretio capiuntur auarae. Imitantur hamos Dona. Foemina
prostituit seseque Munera donat. Femina se vendit quae data dona capit,
Vulteius.

Yet poisoned sting in hinder part,
The spring is sweet where pleasure growth,
The fall of leaf brings storming smart,
Vain pleasure seems most sweet at first,
And yet their end is still accursed.
What bosom bears hot burning coals,
And yet consumes not with the same?
What feet tread fire with bared soles,
And are not synged with the flame?
Then stay my friend, make no such have,
To buy Repentance at the last.
I am not of the Cyprian sort,
Nor yet have learnd the common use
Of Babble dames, in filthy sport,
For gain no comers to refuse,
What storms or troubles ever grow,
I list not seek my living so.
Your gorgious gifts, your golden hooks,
Do move but fools to look aside,
The wise will shun such crafty crookes,
That have such falfe resemblance tried.
But men are sure, that they will lift,
That are content to take a gift.
CANT. XXXVIII.
D. H.
NAy then farewell, if this be so,
If you be of the purer stamp,
Against wind and tide I can not roe,
I have no oil to feed that lamp,
Be not too rash, deny not flat,
For you refuse, you know not what.
But rather take a farther day,
For farther trial of my faith,
And rather make some wise delay,
To see and take some farther breath:
He may too rashly be denide,
Whose faithful heart was never tried.
And though I be by Jury cast,
Yet let me live a while in hope,
And though I be condemnde at last,
Yet let my fancy have some scope,
And though the body fly away,
Yet let me with the shadow play.
Will you receive, if I do send
A token of my secret love?
And stay until you see the end
Of these effects, that fancy move?
Grant this, and this shall salve my sore,
Although you never grant me more.
And thus at first let this suffice,
Inquire of me, and take the vewe
Of mine estate, with good advise,
And I will do the like by you;
And as you like, so frame your love,
But pass no promise till you prove.
This have I said to show my bent,
But no way spoken to offend,
And though my love cannot relent,
Yet passed errors will I mend,
Keep close the Tenor of our talk,
And say, we did for pleasure walk.
CANT XXXIX.
AVISA.
THen iugling mates do most deceive,
And most delude the dazeled sight,
When up they turn their folded sleeue,
With bared arms to work their slight,
When sharpe-set Fox begins to preach,
Let goslings keep without his reach.
And will you have me set a day,
To feed your hope with vain delays?
Well, I will do as you do say,
And posse you up with fainting stays,
That day shall break my plighted faith,
That draws my last and gasping breath.
If you will hope, then hope in this,
I Will never grant that you require:
If this you hope, you shall not miss,
But shall obtain your hopes desire,
If other hope you do retain,
Your labor's lost, your hope is vain.
The child that plays with sharpened tools,
Does hurt himself for want of wit,
And they may well be counted fools,
That wrestle near a dangerous pit:
Your loose desire does hope for that,
Which I must needs deny you flat.
Send me no tokens of your lust,
Such gifts I list not to receive,
Such guiles shall never make me trust,
Such broad-layde baytes cannot deceive, The woman that receives gifts of
such suitors, sells her self and her liberty.

For they to yield do then prepare,
That grant to take such proffred ware.
If this be it you have to say,
You know my mind which cannot change,
I must be gone, I cannot stay,
No fond delight can make me range,
And for a farewell, this I swear,
You get not that I hold so dear.
After long absence, D H. happening to come in on a time sodenlyto her house,
and finding her all alone amongst her maids that were spinning, said nothing,
but going home wrate these verses following, which he called his Dum habui. and
sent them unto her.
CANT. XL.
D. H. to AVISA. too constant.
WHyl'st erst I had my liberty,
To range the woods where fancy list,
The cause of all my misery,
By heedlesse have my way I mist,
Until I found within a plain,
A Crystal Well, where Nymphs remain.
As weary of this wild-goose race,
That led a skance, I know not where,
I chose at length a shadow place.
To take the cold and pleasant air,
But from the brinke of that same well,
I saw my heaven, or else my hell.
I saw a bird from joining grove,
That soaring came with comely grace,
The Lilly and Vermillion strove,
In mayden-like and lovely face,
With seemly arms in steed of wings,
No claws, but fingers set with ringes.
And in her hand she held a dart,
As being of Diana's train,
O that is the cause of all my smart,
And breeder of this endless pain,
The thing I sought not, there I find,
And lost the freedom of my mind.
While on her eyes, my eyes did hang,
From rolling eye there sprang a glance,
And therewith heard a sudden clang,
That struck me in a deadly trance.
But wak't I saw blind Cupids craft,
And in my heart the golden shaft.
I sewd for grace, but she denied.
Her laughty looks she cast awry,
And when my folly she espied,
She laughed to see my misery:
Away she soars, and from my sight
She smiling takes her parting flight.
You are the bird that bred the bane,
That swells thus in restless thought,
You are the snare that thus have taken,
And senses all to thraldom brought,
You are the Iaylor that do keep
Your friend in bands, and dungeon deep.
Renowned chaste Penelope,
With all her words could not redryue
Her suitors, till she set a day,
In which she would them answer give,
When threedy spindle full was grow'n,
Then would she choose one for her ow'n.
They daily came to see the end,
And every man does hope to be
The chosen man, to be her friend,
But women's wyles here men may see,
Her Spill was never fully spone,
For night undid that day had done.
I hope the like you have decreed,
That found you spinning but of late,
Would God your Spill were full of thread,
That might relieve my wretched state,
I will forget the wrongs are past,
So you will choose me at the last.
Choose one at length, I know you will,
Let tried says for ten years space,
How ever that your spindle fill,
With joy possess that empty place,
And if you will, I do protest,
My love shall far surmount the rest.
These lines that hope for better speed,
As loving spies are sent to see,
Where you have sponne up all your thread,
And what good hap is left for me:
Let there return, yet make him glad,
Whom loves despair has made so sad.
D. H.

CANT. XLI.
Auisa her answer to D. H. a final resolution.
IF I be of Diana's train,
As true it is I must confess,
I meruaite that you strive in vain,
Where frutelesse hope yields no redress:
For they must needs continue sad
That seek for that, will not be had.
What servile folly does possess
Your base conceit, that can abide
Such piteous plaintes, and suits address,
To them that do your suits deryde?
For I can hardly think them wise,
That try again, repulsed thryse.
No Hellens rape, nor Trojan war,
My loving mate has fors't away,
No Iunoes wrath, to wander far,
From loving bed can make him stray,
Nor stay at all in foreign land,
But here I have him still at hand.
My sweet Ulysses never stays
From his desired home so long,
That I should need such rare delays
To Shield me from intended wrong,
My chief delights are always nigh,
And in my bosom sweetly lie.
The Spindle that you see me drive,
Has fyld the spill so often trend,
My hartis fixed, since I did give
My wedlock faith to chosen friend,
Then leave to sewe, since that you see
Your hap debarres your hope from me.
I use not often to make reply
To lines that yield such wanton store,
Let this suffice, that I deny,
And after this, look for no more,
My choice is bound, by lawful band,
My oath is past, and that shall stand.
Always the same Auisa.

CANT. XLII.
D. H. to chaste Auisa perpetual constancy.
THis is enough: now I have done,
I think indeed you do not feign,
As others have, that have been won
In shorter space, with lesser pain,
And since you will not yield in deed
To these my words, yet take good heed.
My former love was only lust,
As you in deed did truly say,
And they, such love that rashly trust,
Do plant the plot of swift decay:
But they whom Grace does make so wise,
To high renown, will surely rise.
If you had had a waxye heart, O violata, vale, vale o violata, placebas,
Inuiolata noces nunc violata mihi, Vulteius.

That would have melt at hot desire,
Or chaffye thoughts that could have start,
And yield to burn at every fire,
What ere I did, or said before,
I should have thought you but a whore.
Though sailors love the common Port, Sic virgo dum intacta manet, tu^ chara
suis, sed cum amisit polluto corpore storem. Nec pueris iucunda manet, nec
chara puellis. Catullus.

As safest harbor where to rest,
Yet wise men seek the strongest fort,
And paper castells most detest:
Men cannot love such as they know,
Will yield at sight of every blow.
But now my love by virtue bound,
No stormy blastes can make it quail,
Your constant mind a friend has found,
Whose honest love shall never fail,
A faithful friend in honest love,
Whom lewd affections shall not move.
If you this wanton fault forgive,
No time in me shall ever find
Such lewd attemptes, while I do live,
Now that I know your constant mind,
My pen does write, my heart has swore,
My tongue such speech shall use no more.
A thousand times I love no more,
Then if I had my purpose won,
Of common love I make no store,
But leave it there where I begun,
What odds there is, now you may prove,
Twixt wicked lust and honest love.
Now grant I pray this last request,
That fraudlesse heart does friendly send,
That if my faith deserve it best,
Accept me for your honest friend:
And if I seek your spoil, or shame,
Then raze me out, and blot my name.
Andif I shall this favor find,
Then wear this ring, though you be loath,
As token of my simple mind,
And perfect band of faithful oath:
The posye is, No friend to faith
That will remain, till both our death.
Esteem not this a painted bait,
Or golden ball cast to deceive:
If I do mean such lewd desait,
Let God my soul in torments leave:
I say no more, but thus I end,
In honest love your faithful friend.
D. H.

AVISA. to D. H.
CANT, XLIII.
YOu know that I have laid my rest,
From which my mind shall never swerue,
If all be true that you protest,
Then shall you find, as you deserve:
All hidden truth time will bewraie,
This is as much as I can say.
Always the same Auisa.

CANT. XLIIII.
Henrico Willobego. Italo-Hispalensis.
H. W. being suddenly infected with the contagion of a fantastical fit, at the
first sight of A, pyneth a while in secret grief, at length not able any
longer to endure the burning heat of so fervent a humor, bewrays the
secresy of his disease unto his familiar friend W. S. who not long before had
tried the curtesy of the like passion, and was now newly recovered of the like
infection; yet finding his friend let blood in the same vain, he took pleasure
for a time to see him bleed, and in steed of stopping the issue, he inlargeth
the wound, with the sharp rasor of a willing conceit, persuading him that he
thought it a matter very easy to be compassed, and no doubt with pain,
diligence and some cost in time to be obtained. Thus this miserable comforter
comforting his friend with an impossibility, either for that he now would
secretly laugh at his friends folly, that had given occasion not long before
unto others to laugh at his own, or because he would see whether an other
could play his part better then himself, and in vewing a far off the course of
this loving Comedy, he determined to see whether it would sort to a happier end
for this new actor, then it did for the old player. But at length this Comedy
was like to have grown to a Tragedy, by the weak and feeble estate that H. W.
was brought unto, by a desperate vewe of an impossibility of obtaining his
purpose, til Time and Necessity, being his best Physicians brought him a
plaster, if not to heal, yet in part to ease his maladye. In all which
discourse is lively represented the vnrewly rage of unbridled fancy, having
the raines to roue at liberty, with the diverse and sundry changes of affections
and temptations, which Will, set loose from Reason, can devise. etc.

H. W.
WHat sudden chance or change is this,
That does bereave my quiet rest?
What surly cloud eclipst my bliss,
What sprite does rage within my breast?
Such fainty qualmes I never found,
Till first I saw this western ground.
Can change of air complexions change,
And strike the senses out of frame?
Though this be true, yet this is strange,
Since I so lately hither came:
And yet in body cannot find
So great a change as in my mind.
My lustlesse limbs do pyne away,
Because my heart is dead within,
All lively heat I feel decay,
And deadly cold his room does win,
My humors all are out of frame,
I frize amid'st the burning flame.
I have the fever Ethicke right,
I burn within, consume without,
And having melted all my might,
Then follows death, without all doubt:
O fearful fool, that know my grief,
Yet sew and seek for no relief.
I know the time, I know the place,
Both when and where my eye did view
That novel shape, that friendly face,
That so does make my heart to rue,
O happy time if she inclyne,
If not, O wourth these lucklesse eyne.
I love the seat where she did sit,
I kiss the grass, where she did tread,
Me thinks I see that face as yet,
And eye, that all these turmoyles breed,
I envy that this seat, this ground,
Such friendly grace and favor found.
I dreamed of late, God grant that dream
Protend my good, that she did meet
Me in this green by yonder stream,
And smyling did me friendly greet:
Where wandering dreams be just or wrong,
I mind to try ere it be long.
But yonder comes my faithful friend,
That like assaults has often tryde,
On his advise I will depend,
Where I shall win, or be denyde,
And look what counsel he shall give,
That will I do, where dye or live.
CANT. XLV.
W. S.
Well met, friend Harry, what is the cause
You look so pale with Lented cheeks?
Your wanny face and sharpened nose
Show plain, your mind some thing mislikes,
If you will tell me what it is,
I Will help to mend what is amiss.
What is she, man, that works thy woe,
And thus thy tickling fancy move?
Thy drousie eyes, and sighs do shoe,
This new disease proceeds of love,
Tell what she is that witch't thee so,
I swear it shall no farther go.
A heavy burden wearieth one,
Which being parted then in twain,
Seems very light, or rather none,
And boren well with little pain:
The smothered flame, too closely pent,
Burns more extreme for want of vent.
So sorrows shrynde in secret breast,
Attainte the heart with hotter rage,
Then griefs that are to friends expressed,
Whose comfort may some part assuage:
If I a friend, whose faith is tryde,
Let this request not be denyde.
Excessive griefs good counsels want,
And cloud the sense from sharp conceits;
No reason rules, where sorrows plant,
And folly feeds, where fury fretes,
Tell what she is, and you shall see,
What hope and help shall come from me.
CANT. XLVI.
H. W.
See yonder house, where hanges the badge
Of Englands Saint, when captains cry
Victorious land, to conquering rage,
Lo, there my hopeless help dothly:
And there that friendly foe does dwell,
That makes my heart thus rage and swell,
CANT. XLVII.
W. S.
Well, say no more: I know thy grief,
And face from whence these flames arise,
It is not hard to find relief,
If thou will follow good advise:
She is no Saint, She is no Nonne,
I think in time she may be won.
At first repulse you must not faint, (...) vetera to^.

Nor fly the field though she deny
You twice or thrice, yet manly bent,
Again you must, and still reply:
When time permits you not to talk,
Then let your pen and fingers walk.
Apply her still with diverse things,
(For gifts the wysest will deceive) ^unera (cre^ mihi) pla^nt homi^sque
Deosque.

Sometimes with gold, sometimes with ringes,
No time nor fit occasion leave,
Though coy at first she seem and wielde,
These toys in time will make her yielde.
Look what she likes; that you must love,
And what she hates, you must detest,
Where good or bad, you must approve,
The words and works that please her best:
If she be godly, you must swear,
That to offend you stand in fear.
You must commend her loving face,
For women joy in beauties praise, Wicked wiles ^o deceive witles women.

You must admire her sober grace,
Her wisdom and her virtuous ways,
Say, it was her wit and modest shoe,
That made you like and love her so.
You must be secret, constant, free,
Your silent sighs and trickling tears,
Let her in secret often see,
Then wring her hand, as one that fears
To speak, then wish she were your wife,
And last desire her save your life.
When she does laugh, you must be glad,
And watch occasions, time and place,
When she does frown, you must be sad,
Let sighs and sobbes request her grace:
Swear that your love is trulyment,
So she in time must needs relent.
CANT. XLVIII.
H. W.
THe whole to sick good counsel give,
Which they themselves cannot perform,
Your words do promise sweet relief,
To save my ship from drowning storm:
But hope is past, and health is spent,
For why my mind is Mal-content.
The flowring herbs, the pleasant spring,
That deckes the fields with vernant hew,
The harmless birds, thatsweetly sing, To despair of good success in the
beginning of any action, is always a secret and most certain forewarning of
ill success, that indeed does often follow.

My hidden griefs, do still renew:
The joys that others long to see,
Is it that most tormenteth me.
I greatly doubt, though March be past,
Where I shall see that wished May,
That can recure that balefull blast,
Whose cold despair wrought my decay:
My hopeless clouds, that never clear,
Presage great sorrows very near.
I mirth did once, and music love,
Which both as now, I greatly hate:
What uncouth sprite my heart does move,
To loath the thing, I loved so late?
My greatest ease in deepest moan,
Is when I walk my self alone.
Where thinking on my hopeless hap,
My trickling tears, like rivers flow,
Yet fancy lulles me in her lap,
And tells me, life from death shall grow:
Thus flattering hope makes me believe;
My grief in time shall feel relieve.
Good fortune helps the ventering wight, Audaces fortuna iuuat, timidosque
repellit.

That hard attempts dare undertake:
But they that shun the doubtful fight,
As coward drudges, does forsake:
Come what there will, I mean to try,
Where win, or lose, I can but dye.
CANT. XLIX.
H. W. the first assault.
PArdon (sweet wench) my fancies fault,
If I offend to show my smart,
Your face has made such fierce assault,
And battred so my fencelesse heart:
That of my foe, my life to save,
For grace I am constraind to crave.
The raging Lion never rendes
The yielding pray, that prostrate lies,
No valiant captain ever bendes
His force against surrendering cries:
Here I surrender room and right,
And yield the fort at captains sight.
You are the chieftaine, that have laid
This heavy siege to strengthlesse fort,
And fancy that my will betrayed,
Has lent despair his strongest port:
Your glauncing eyes as Cannon shot,
Have pearst my heart, and freedom got.
When first I saw that friendly face,
Though never seen before that day,
That wit, that talk, that sober grace,
In secret heart thus did I say:
God prosper this, for this is she,
That joy or woe must bring to me.
A thousand fewtures I have seen,
For Trauelers change, and choice shall see,
In France, in Flaunders, and in Spain,
Yet none, nor none could conquer me:
Till now I saw this face of thine,
That makes my wits are none of mine.
I often said, yet there is one,
But where, or what I could not tell,
Whose sight my sense would overcome,
I feared it still, I knew it well,
And now I know you are the She,
That was ordaind to vanquish me.
CANT. L.
AVISA.
WHat song is this that you do sing,
What tale is this that you do tell,
What news is this that you do bring,
Or what you mean I know not well?
If you will speak, pray speak it plain,
Lest else perhaps you lose your pain.
My mind surprised with household cares,
Tendes not dark riddles to untwine.
My state surcharged with great affares,
To Idle talk can lend no time;
For if your speeches tend to love,
Your tongue in vain such suits will move.
In greenest grass the winding snake,
With poisoned sting is soonest found,
A cowardes tongue makes greatest crack,
The emptiest caske yeeldes greatest sound, Idleness the mother of all foolish
wanness. David being idle fell to strange lust. Quaeritur Egistus, quare sit
factus Adulter.

To hidden hurt, the bird to bring,
The fouler does most sweetly sing.
If wandering rages have possessed
Your rouing mind at randame bent;
If idle qualmes from too much rest;
Fond fancyes to your lust have sent:
Cut off the cause that breeds your smart,
Then will your sickness soon depart.
The restles mind that reason wantes, In prompt^ causa est: Desidiosus erat.
Noblemen gentlemen. and Captains by idleness fall to all kind of vices.

Is like the ship that lackes a stern,
The heart beset with follyes plants,
At wisdoms lore repynes to learn:
Some seek and find what fancy list,
But after wish that they had mist.
Who loves to tread unknown paths,
Does often wander from his way,
Who longes to laue in brauest bathes,
Does wash by night, and wast by day:
Take heed betyme, beware the pryse
Of wicked lust, if you be wise.
CANT. LI.
H. W
Unwonted syking breeds my love,
And love the welspring of my grief,
This fancy fixed none can remove,
None send redress, none give relief,
But only you, whose only sight
Has fors't me to this pyning plight.
Love often does spring from due desert,
As loving cause of true effect,
But mine proceeds from wounded heart,
As scholar to a novel sect:
I bare that lyking, few have bore,
I love, that never loved before.
I love, though doubtful of success,
As blindmen grope to try the way;
Yet still I love because I guess,
You love, for love cannot denay,
Except you spring of sauadge kind,
Whom no desartes, nor love can bynd.
Of all the graces that excel,
And virtues that are chiefly best,
A constant love does bear the bell,
And makes his owner ever blessed:
How blame you then the faithful love,
That has his praise from God above.
Can you withstand what fates ordain?
Can you reprove dame Natures frame?
Where natures join, shall will disclaim?
Acquit my love, bear they the blame,
That snuff at faith, and look so coy,
And count true love but for a toy.
If fortune say it shall be so,
Then though you like, yet shall you yield,
Say what you list, you cannot go
Vnconquerd thus from Cupids field,
That love that none could ever have,
I give to you, and yours I crave,
CANT. LII
AVISA.
WEll, you are bent I see, to try
The utmost list of follies race,
Your fancy has no power to fly
The luring bait of flattering grace,
The fish that leapes and never looks,
Fyndes death unawares in secret hooks.
You say you love, yet show no cause,
Of this your love, or rather lust,
Or whence this new affection groes
Which though vntryde, yet we must trust,
Dry reeds that quickly yield to burn,
Soon out to flamelesse cinders turn.
Such raging love in rangling mates,
Is quickly found, and sooner lost;
Such deep deceate in all estates,
That spares no care, no pain nor cost:
With flattering tongues, and golden gifts,
To drive poor women to their shifts.
Examine well, and you shall see
Your truthlesse treason termed love,
What cause have you to fancy me,
That never yet had time to prove,
What I have been, nor what I am,
Where worthy love, or rather shame?
This love that you to strangers bare,
Is like to head strong horse and mule,
That ful-fed nyes on every mare,
Whose lust outleapes the lawful rule,
For here is seen your constant love,
Whom strange aspects so quickly move.
Besides you know I am a wife,
Not free, but bound by plighted oath,
Can love remain, where filthy life
Has staind the soil, where virtue gro'th?
Can love endure, where faith is fled?
Can Roses spring, whose root is dead?
True love is constant in her choice,
But if I yield to choose again,
Then may you say with open voice,
This is her use, this is her vain,
She yields to all, how can you than
Love her that yeeldes to every man?
CANT. LIII.
H. W.
IF fear and sorrow sharp the wit,
And tip the tongue with sweeter grace,
Then will and style, must finely fit,
To paint my grief, and wail my case:
Since my true love is counted lust,
And hope is rackt in spiteful dust.
The cause that made me love so soon,
And feeds my mind with inward smart,
Springs not from Stars, nor yet the Moon,
But closly lies in secret heart:
And if you ask, I can not tell,
Nor why, nor how, this hap befell.
If birth or beauty could have wrought,
In lustlesse heart this loves effect,
Some fairer far my love have sought,
Whose loving looks I did reject.
If now I yield without assault,
Count this my fortune or my fault.
You are a wife, and you have swore,
You will be true. Yet what of this?
Did never wife play false before,
Nor for her pleasure strike amiss?
Will you alone be constant still,
When none are chaste, nor ever will?
A man or woman first may choose
The love that they may after loath;
Woe can deny but such may use
A second choice, to pleasure both?
No fault to change the old for new;
So to the second they be true.
Your husband is a worthless thing,
That no way can content your mind,
That no way can that pleasure bring,
Your flowring years desire to find:
This I will count my chiefest bliss,
If I obtain, that others miss.
There Is nothing gotten to be coye,
The purer stamp you must detest,
Now is your time of greatest joy,
Then love the friend that loves you best,
This I will count my chiefest bliss,
If I obtain that others miss.
CANT. LIIII.
AVISA.
THat others miss, you would obtain,
And want of this does make you sad,
I sorrow that you take such pain,
To seek for that, will not be had,
Your filed skill the power does want,
Within this plot such trees to plant.
Though some there be, that have done ill,
And for their fancy broke their faith:
Yet do not think that others will,
That fear of shame more then of death:
A spotless name is more to me,
Then wealth, then friends, then life can be.
Are all unconstant, all unsound?
Will none perform their sworen vow?
Yet shall you say, that you have found,
A chaste, and constant wife I trow:
And you shall see, when all is done,
Where all will yield, and all be woone.
Though you have bin at common school,
And enterd plaints in common place;
Yet you will prove your self a fool,
To judge all women void of grace:
I doubt not but you will be brought,
Soon to repent this wicked thought.
Your second change let them allow,
That list mislike their primer choice,
I loved him first, I love him now,
To whom I gave my yielding voice,
My faith and love, I will not give
To mortal man, while he does live.
What love is this, that bids me hate,
The man whom nature bids me love?
What love is this, that sets debate,
Twixt man and wife? but here I prove:
Though smothed words seem very kind,
Yet all proceed from deuilish mind.
CANT. LV.
H. W.
FRom deuilish mind? well wanton well,
You think your strength is very sure,
You think all women to excel,
And all temptations to endure.
These glorious braggs show but your pride:
For all will yield, if they be tried.
You are (I hope) as others be,
A woman, made of flesh and blood,
Amongst them all, will you go free,
When all are ill, will you be good?
Assure your self, I do not feign,
Requite my love with love again.
Let me be hanged if you be such,
As you pretend in outward shoe:
Yet I commend your wisdom much,
Which moved me first to love you so:
Where men no outward shows detect,
Suspicious minds can nil suspect.
But to the matter; tell me true,
Where you your fancy can incline,
To yield your love, for which I sue,
As fortune has entangled mine:
For well I know, it is nothing good,
To strive against the raging flood.
What you mislike, I will amend,
If years I want, why I will stay,
My goods and life here I will spend,
And help you still in what I may:
For though I seem a headlong youth,
Let time be trial of my truth.
Your name by me shall not be cracked,
But let this tongue from out my jaws,
Be rent, and bones to pieces rackt,
If I your secrets do disclose,
Take good aduisement what you say,
This is my good, or dismal day.
CANT. LVI.
AVISA.
YEs, so I will, you may be bold,
Nor will I use such strange delays;
But that you shall be quickly told,
How you shall frame your wandering ways:
If you will follow mine advise,
Doubt not but you shall soon be wise.
To love, excepting honest love,
I can not yield, assure your mind;
Then leave this frutelesse suit to move,
Least like to Sysyphus you find,
With endless labor, gainelesse pain,
To role the stone that turns again.
You want no years, but rather wit,
And dew forecast in that you seek,
To make your choice that best may fit,
And this is most that I mislieke;
If you be free, live where you list,
But still beware of, Had I wist.
Serve God, and call to him for grace,
That he may stay your slipperie slides,
From treading out that sinful trace,
That leads where endless sorrow bides,
Thus shall you wisely guide your feet;
Though youth and wisdom seldom meet.
And if you find, you have no gift,
To live a chaste and matelesse life,
Yet fear to use unlawful shift,
But marry with some honest wife,
With whom you may contented live,
And wandering mind from folly drive.
Fly present pleasure that does bring
Ensuing sorrow, pain and grief; Fuggi quel piacer present, che ti da dolor
futuro.

Of death beware the poys'ned sting,
That hatcheth horror sance relief,
Take this of me, and in the end
I shall be thought your chiefest friend.
CANT. LVII.
H. W.
IF then the welspring of my joy,
A flood of woe, in fine become,
If love engender loves annoy,
Then farewell life, my glass is run:
If you thus constant still remain;
Then must I die, or live in pain.
Thrice happy they, whose joined hearts,
United wills have linckt in one,
Whose eyes discern the due deserts,
The griping grief, and grievous groan,
That faith does breed in settled mind,
As fancies are by fates inclind.
And shall I role the restless stone?
And must I prove the endless pain?
In curelesse care shall I alone,
Consume with grief, that yields me gain?
If so I curse these eyes of mine,
That first beheld that face of thine.
Your will must with my woe dispense,
Your face the founder of my smart,
That pleasant look framed this offense,
These thrilling gripes that gall my heart,
Since you this wound, and hurt did give,
You must consent to yield relieve.
How can I cease, while fancy guides
The restless raines of my desire?
Can reason rule, where folly bides?
Can wit inthrald to will retire?
I little thought, I should have mist,
I never feared of, Had I wist.
Let old men pray, let settled heads
Inthrall their necks to wedlock band,
Shrend golden gyues, who ever weds
With pleasant pain, shall take in hand:
But I will be your faithful friend,
If health by hope you yield to send.
CANT. LVIII.
AVISA.
WHat filthy folly, raging lust,
What beastly blindness fancy breeds?
As though the Lord had not accursed,
With vengeance due, the sinful deeds?
Though vaine-led youth with pleasure swell,
Yet mark these words that I shall tell.
Who so with filthy pleasure burns;
His sinful flesh with fiery flakes Genesis 38. 24 Whoremoungers burnt.

Must be consumed; whose soul returns
To endless pain in burning lakes.
You seem by this, to wish me well,
To teach me tread the path to hell.
Call you this (Love) that brings sin,
And sowes the seeds of heavy cheer?
If this be love, I pray begin,
To hate the thing I love so dear;
I love no love of such a rate,
Nor fancy that, which God does hate.
But what says he that long had tryde
Of harlots all the wanton slights;
Beware least that your heart be tide, Prouer. 5. 3.

To sond affects by wanton sights:
Their wandering eyes, and wanton looks
Catch fools as fish, with painted hooks.
Their lips with oil and honey flow,
Their tongs are fraught with flattering guile;
Amidst these joys great sorrows grow;
For pleasures flourish but a while,
Their feet to death, their steps to hell,
Do swiftly slide, that thus do mell.
Then fly this dead and dreadful love,
This sign of Gods revenging ire;
Let love of God such lust remove,
And quench the flames of foul desire:
If you will count me for your friend,
You must both works and words amend.
CANT LXI.
With this bitter reply of Auisa, H. W. being somewhat daunted, yet not
altogether whithout hope, went home to his house, and there secretly in a
melancolike passion wrote these verses following.

H. W. To AVISA my friendly foe.
THe busy Gnat about the candle, houering still does fly, Sixaine,

The slimie Fish about the bayt, still wavering does lie,
The fearful Mouse about the trap does often try his stength,
Until both Gnat, and Fish and Mouse, be taken at the length,
Even so unhappy I, do like my greatest baine,
Unless you do with speed, release my mortal pain.
The light foot heart desires the waters brook, Quatraine.

The dog most sick the greenest grass does crave.
The wounded wight for surgeon still does look,
Until both heart, and dog, and wight their medicine have:
But I with grief th'vnhappiest of them all,
Do still delight to be my enemies thrall.
Mine enemy I say, though yet my sweetest friend,
If of my sorrows I may see some speedy wholesome end. Deuxaine.

FINIS. Chi la dura, la Vince.
CANT. LXII.
AVISA. her reply to H. VV.
THe busy Gnat for want of wit,
Does sindge his wings in burning flame,
The Fish with bait will headlong flit,
Till she be choked with the same;
So you with Gnat and Fish will play,
Till flame and food work your decay.
The heedlesse Mouse, that tries the trap,
In have to reach her hearts desire,
Does quickly find such quainte mishap,
That bars her strength from free retire,
So you will never cease to crave,
Till you have lost that now you have.
The heart, the dog, the wounded wight,
For water, grass, and Surgeon call,
Their griefs and cures, are all but light,
But your conceit surpast them all;
Except you change your wanton mind,
You shall no ease, nor comfort find.
Always the same Auisa.

CANT. LXIII.
H. W. prosecuteth his suit.
WIll not your laughty stomach stoop?
Will not this self conceit come down?
As haggard loving mirthlesse coupe,
At friendly lure does check and frown?
Blame not in this the Faulkners skill,
But blame the Hawks unbridled will.
Your sharp replies, your frowning cheer,
To absent lines, and present view,
Does aie redouble trembling fear,
And griping griefs do still renew,
Your face to me my sole relief,
My sight to you your only grief.
O lucklesse wretch, what hap had I,
To plant my love in such a soil?
What fury makes me thus rely
On her that seeks my utter spoil?
O Gods of love what sign is this,
That in the first, I first should mis?
And can you thus increase my woe,
And will you thus prolong my pain?
Can kill the heart that loves thee so,
Can quit my love with foul disdain?
And if thou can, woe worth the place,
Where first I saw that flattering face.
And shall my folly prove it true,
That hasty pleasure doubleth pain,
Shall grief rebound, where joy grew?
Of faithful heart is this the gain?
Me thinks for all your grave advise,
(For give my thought) you are not wise.
Would God I could restrain my love,
Since you to love me can not yield,
But I alas can not remove
My fancy, though I die in feeld;
My life does on your love depend,
My love and life at once must end.
CANT. LXIIII.
AVISA.
WHat witless errors do possess
The wretched minds of loving fools,
That breathless run to such distress,
That lively heat fond sorrow cooles?
They reke not where they stand or fall,
Deny them love, take life and all.
It seems a death to change their mind,
Or alter once their foolish will,
Such od conceits they seek to find,
As may their childish fancies fill,
It makes me smile thus, now and then,
To see the guise of foolish men.
I can not stoop to wandering lure;
My mind is one, and still the same;
While breath, while life, while days endure,
I will not yield to work my shame,
Then if you strive and stir in vain,
Blame but the fruits of idle brain.
If I do sometimes look awrie,
As loath to see your blobered face,
And loath to hear a young man cry,
Correct for shame this childish race,
And though you weep and wail to me,
Yet let not all these follies see.
Good Harry leave these raging toys,
That thus from restless fancy flow,
Unfit for men, not meet for boys,
And let us a while talk wisely now;
If that you love me as you say,
Then cease such madness to bewray.
If honest love could breed content,
And frame a liking to your will,
I would not stick to give consent,
To like you so, and love you still,
But while lust leads your love awrie,
Assure your self, I will deny.
CANT. LXV.
H. W.
ANd is it lust that welds my love?
Or is it but your fond surmise?
Will you condemn, before you prove?
How can I think you to be wise?
O faithful heart, yet thrice accursed,
That art misdeemd thus at the first.
If lust did rule my restless heart,
If only lust did bear the sway,
I quickly could assuage my smart,
With choice, and change, for every day,
You should not laugh to see me weep,
If lust were it that struck so deep.
And yet at first, before I knew,
What vain it was that bled so sore,
Where lust or love, to prove it true,
I took a salve that still before
Was wont to help, I chose me one,
With whom I quenched my lust alone.
Yet this (sweet heart) could not suffice,
Nor any way content my mind, A bad argument to prove good love.

I felt new qualmes, and new arise,
And stronger still, and strong I find,
By this, I thus do plainly prove,
It is not lust, but faithful love.
And yet to prove my love more sure,
And since you will not false your faith,
This pining plight I will endure,
Till death do stop your husbands breath;
To have me then if you will say,
I will not marry, till that day.
If you will give your full consent,
When God shall take your husbands life,
That then you will be well content,
To be my spouse and loving wife,
I will be joyful as before,
And till that time, will crave no more.
CANT, LXVI.
AVISA.
NO more; no more, too much of this,
And is mine ynch become an ell?
If thus you writh my words amiss,
I must of force, bid you farewell,
You show in this your loving bent,
To catch at that, I never meant;
I thought at first, (but this my though
I must correct;) that simple love,
In guilles heart these fits had wrought.
But I; too simple I, now prove,
That under show of great good will,
My hearts delight you seek to spill.
He loves me well, that tils a trap,
Of deep deceit, and deadly baine,
In dreadful dangers thus to wrap
His friend by baits of flering train:
Though flattering tongues can paint it brave
Your words do show, what love you have.
I must consent, and you will stay
My husbands death. Obtaining this,
You think I could not say you Nay:
Nor of your other purpose mis,
You are deceived, and you shall try,
That I such faith, and friends defy.
Such fained, former, faithless plot
I most detest, and tell you plain,
If now I were to cast my lot,
With free consent to choose again,
Of all the men I ever knew,
I would not make my choice of you.
Let this suffice, and do not stay
On hope of that which will not be,
Then cease your suit, go where you may,
Vain is your trust, to hope on me.
My choice is past, my heart is bent,
While that remains to be content.
Now having tract the winding trace
Of false resemblance, give me leave,
From this to show a stranger grace,
Then heretofore, you did perceive,
Against friendless love if I repyne,
The fault is yours, and none of mine.
CANT. LXVII.
H. W.
I Will not wish, I cannot vow,
Thy hurt, thy grief, though thou disdain,
Though thou refuse, I know not how,
To quite my love with love again:
Since I have swore to be thy friend,
As I began, so will I end.
Swear thou my death, work thou my woe,
Conspire with grief to stop my breath,
Yet still thy friend, and not thy foe
I will remain until my death:
Choose whom thou will, I will resign,
If love, or faith, be like to mine.
But while I wretch too long have lent
My wandering eyes to gase on thee.
I have both time, and travel spent
In vain, in vain: and now I see,
They do but frutelesse pain procure,
To haggard kytes that cast the lure.
When I am dead, yet thou may boast,
Thou had a friend, a faithful friend,
That living lived to love thee most,
And loved thee still unto his end:
Though thou unworthy, with disdain
Did force him live, and dye in pain.
Now may I sing, now sigh, and say,
Farewell my life, farewell my joy,
Now mourn by night, now weep by day,
Love, too much love breeds mine annoy:
What can I wish, what should I crave,
Since that is gone, that I should have.
Though hope be turned to despair,
Yet give my tongue leave to lament,
Believe me now, my heart does swear,
My lucklesse love was truly meant:
Thou art too proud, I say no more,
Too stout, and woe is me therefore.
Felice chi puo.

CANT. LXVIII.
Auisa having heard this patheticall fancy of H. W. and seeing the tears trill
down his cheeks, as half angry to see such passionate folly, in a man that
should have government, with a frowning countenance turned from him, without
farther answer, making silence her best reply, and following the counsel of
the wise, not to answer a fool in his folly lest he grow too foolish,
returted quite from him, and left him alone. But he departing home, and not
able by reason to rule the raginge fume of this fantastical fury, cast
himself upon his bed, and refusing both food and comfort for many days
together, fell at length into such extremity of passionate affections, that as
many as saw him, had great doubt of his health, but more of his wits, yet,
after a long space a bsence, having procured some respite from his sorrows, he
takes his pen and wrate, as follows.

H. W
Like wounded Dear, whose tender sides are bathed in blood,
From deadly wound, by fatal hand and forked shaft:
So bleedes my pierced heart, for so you think it good,
With cruelty to kill, that which you got by craft:
You still did loath my life, my death shall be your gain,
To dye to do you good, I shall not think it pain.
My person could not please, my talk was out of frame,
Though heart and eye could never brook my loathed sight,
Yet love does make me say, to keep you out of blame,
The fault was only mine, and that you did but right
When I am gone, I hope my ghost shall show you plain,
That I did truly love, and that I did not feign.
Now must I find the way to wail while life does last,
Yet hope I soon to see, the end of doleful days;
When floudes of flowing fears, and creeping cares are past,
Then shall I leave to sing, and write these pleasant lays:
For now I loath the food, and blood that lendes me breath,
I count all pleasures pain that keep me from my death.
To dark and heavy shades, I now will take my flight,
Where nether tongue nor eye shall tell or see my fall,
That there I may disiect these dregs of thy dispight,
And purge the clotted blood, that now my heart does gall:
In secret silence so, Perforce shall be my song,
Till truth make you confess that you have done me wrong.
Gia speme spenta. H. W.

Auisa refusing both to come or send him any answer, after a long and
melancholic deliberation, he wrate again so as follows.

CANT. LXIX
H. W.
THough you refuse to come or send,
Yet this I send, though I do stay,
Unto these lines some credit lend,
And mark it well what they shall say,
They cannot hurt, then read them all,
They do but show their masters fall.
Though you disdain to show remorce,
You were the first and only wight,
Whose fawning features did enforce
My will to run beyond my might:
In femall face such force we see,
To captive them, that erst were free.
Your only word was then a law
Unto my mind, if I did sin,
Forgive this sin, but then I saw
My bane or bliss did first begin,
See what my fancy could have done,
Your love at first, if I had won.
All fortune flat I had defyde,
To choice and change defyance sent,
No frowning fates could have denyde,
My loves pursuit, and willing bent,
This was my mind, if I had found
Your love as mine, but half so sound.
Then had I bad the hellish rout,
To frounce aloft their wrinckled front,
And cursed haggs that are so stout,
I boldly would have bid auaunt,
Let earth and air have fround their fill,
So I had wrought my wished will.
Noraging storm, nor whirling blast,
My settled heart could have annoyd,
No sky with thundering clouds orecast
Had hurt, if you I had enjoyed,
Now hope is past, lo you may see,
How every toy tormenteth me.
Chi cerca troua.

CANT. LXX.
H. W.
WIth oken planckes to plane the waves,
What Neptunes rage could I have feared
To quell the gulf that rudely raues,
What peril could have once appeared?
But now that I am left alone;
Bare thoughts enforce my heart to groan.
With thee to pass the chamfered grounds,
What force or fear could me restrain?
With thee to chase the Scillan hounds,
Me thinks it were a pleasant pain,
This was my thought, this is my love,
Which none but death, can yet remove.
It then behoues my fainting sprite,
To lofty skies return again,
Since only death bringes me delight,
Which loving live in curelesse pain,
What hap to strangers is assind,
If known friends do such favor find.
How often have my friendly mates
My loving errors laughed to scorn,
How often for thee found I debates,
Which now I wish had been forborne:
But this and more would I have done,
If I thy favor could have won.
I saw your gardens passing syne,
With pleasant flowers lately dect,
With Couslops and with Eglentine,
When woeful Woodbyne lies reject:
Yet these in weeds and briars meet,
Although they seem to smell so sweet.
The dainty Daysy bravely springes,
And cheesest honor seems to get,
I envy not such friendly things,
But bless the hand that these have set:
Yet let the Hysope have his place,
That does deserve a special grace.
Viui, Chi vince.

CANT. LXXI.
H. W.
But now farewell, your self shall see,
An odd exchange of friends in time,
you may perhaps then wish for me,
And wail too late this cruel crime:
Yea wish your self perhaps beshrewd,
That you to me such rigor showed.
I cannot force you for to like,
Where cruel fancy does rebel,
I must some other fortune seek,
But where or how I cannot tell:
And yet I doubt where you shall find
In all your life so sure a friend.
Of pleasant days the date is done,
My carcass pyneth in conceat,
The line of life his race has run,
Expecting sound of deaths retreat:
Yet would I live to love thee still,
And do thee good against thy will.
How can I love, how can I live,
Whilst that my heart has lost his hope,
Despair abandons sweet relief,
My love, and life have lost their scope:
Yet would I live thy feature to behold,
Yet would I love, if I might be so bold.
My grief is green, and never springes, These verses exceed mea^ure, to show
that his affec^ions keep no ^ompasse, and ^is exceeding ^oue.

My sorrow full of deadly sap,
Sweet death remove these bitter things,
Give end to hard and cruel hap:
Yet would I live, if I might see,
My life, or limbs might pleasure thee.
Farewell that sweet and pleasant walk,
The witness of my faith and woe,
That often has heard our friendly talk,
And given me leave my grief to show,
O pleasant path, where I could see
No cross at all but only she.
Il fine, fa il tutto.

CANT. LXXII.
H. W.
LIke silly Bat, that loves the dark,
And seldom brooks the wished light,
Obscurely so I seek the mark,
That aye does vanish from my sight,
Yet shall she say, I died her friend,
Though by disdain she sought mine end.
Feign would I cease, and hold my tongue,
But love and sorrow set me on,
Needs must I plain of spiteful wrong,
Since hope and health will both be gone,
When branch from inward rind is fled,
The bark does wish the body dead.
If ever man were borne to woe,
I am the man, you know it well,
My chiefest friend, my greatest foe,
And heaven become my heavy hell,
This do I feel, this do I find:
But who can loose, that God will bind?
For since the day, O dismal day,
I first beheld that smiling face,
My fancy made her choice straight way,
And bad all other loves give place,
Yea since I saw thy lovely sight,
I frize and fry, twixt joy and spite.
Where fond suspect does keep the gate,
There trust is chased from the door,
Then faith and truth will come too late,
Where falshod will admit no more;
Then naked faith and love must yield,
For lack offense, and fly the feeld.
Then easier were it for to choose,
To crale against the craggie hill,
Then suits, then sighs, then words to use,
To change a froward woman's will,
Then oaths and vows are allin vain,
And truth a toye, where fancies reign.
Ama, Chi ti ama.

CANT. LXXIII.
H. W.
MY tongue, my hand, my ready heart,
That spoke, that felt, that freely thought,
My love, thy limbs, my inward smart,
Have all performed what they ought,
These all do love you yet, and shall,
And when I change, let vengeance fall.
Shall I repent, I ever saw
That face, that so can frown on me?
How can I wish, when fancies draw
Mine eyes to wish, and look for thee?
Then though you do deny my right,
Yet bar me not from wished sight.
And yet I crave, I know not what,
Perchance my presence breeds your pain,
And if I were persuaded that,
I would in absence still remain,
You shall not feel the smallest grief,
Although it were to save my life,
Ah woe is me, the case so stands,
That senseless papers plead my woe,
They can not weep, nor wring their hands,
But say perhaps, that I did so,
And though these lines for mercy crave,
Who can on papers pity have?
O that my griefs, my sighs, my tears,
Might plainly muster in your view,
Then pain, not pen, then faith, not fears,
Should vouch my vows, and writings true,
This wishing shows a woeful want,
Of that which you by right should grant.
Now fare thou well, whose welfare brings
Such loathsome fear, and ill to me.
Yet here thy friend this farewell sings,
Though heavy word a farewell be.
Against all hope, if I hope still,
Blame but abundance of good will.
Grand Amore, grand Dolor, Inopem me copia fecit. H. W.

CANT, LXXIIII.
AVISA. her last reply.
YOur long Epistle I have read,
Great store of words, and little wit,
(For want of wit, these fancies bred)
To answer all I think not sit,
But in a word, you shall perceive,
How kindly I will take my leave.
When you shall see sweet Lillies grow,
And flourish in the frozen yse,
When ebbing tides shall leave to flow,
And mountains to the skies shall rise,
When roaring Seas do cease to rave,
Then shall you gain the thing you crave.
When Fish as haggard Hawks shall fly,
When Seas shall flame, and Sun shall freese,
When mortal men shall never die,
And earth shall yield, nor herb nor trees,
Then shall your words my mind remove,
And I accept your proffered love.
When Thames shall leave his channel dry,
When Sheep shall seed amidst the Sea.
When stones aloft, as Birds shall fly,
And night be changed into Day,
Then shall you see that I will yield,
And to your force resign the feeld.
Till all these things do come to pass,
Assure your self, you know my mind,
My heart is now, as first it was,
I came not of dame Chrysiedes kind,
Then leave to hope, learn to refrain,
Your mind from that, you seek in vain.
I wish you well, and well to fare,
And there with all a godly mind,
Deuoid of lust, and foolish care,
This if you seek, this shall you find.
But I must say, as erst before,
Then cease to wail, and write no more.
Always the same Auisa.

H. W. Was now again stricken so dead, that he has not yet any farther assaid,
nor I think ever will, and where he be alive or dead I know not, and therefore
I leave him.

The Authors conclusion.
SO thus she stands unconquered yet,
As Lamb amidst the Lions pause,
Whom gifts, nor wills, nor force of wit,
Could vanquish once with all their shows,
To speak the truth, and say no more,
I never knew her like before.
Then blame me not, if I protest,
My silly Muse shall still commend
This constant A. above the rest,
While others learn their life to mend,
My tongue on high and high shall raise,
And always sing her worthy praise.
While hand can write, while wit devise,
While tongue is free to make report,
Her virtue shall be had in prise
Among the best and honest sort,
And they that will mislike of this,
I shall suspect, they strike amiss.
Eternal then let be the fame
Of such as hold a constant mind,
Eternal be the lasting shame,
Of such as wave with every wind:
Though some there be that will repine;
Yet some will praise this wish of mine.
But here I cease for fear ofblame,
Although there be a great deal more,
That might be spoken of this dame,
That yet lies hid in secret store,
If this be liked, then can I say,
Ye may see more another day.
Agitante calescimus illo. Farewell.

FINIS.
The resolution of a chaste and a constant wife, that minds to continue
faithful unto her husband.
To the tune of Fortune.
THough winged Birds, do often skorne the lure,
And flying far, do think them selves most sure,
Yet fancy so, his luring ingines frame,
That wildest hearts, in time become most tame.
Where secret nature, frames a sweet consent,
Where privy fates their hidden force have bent,
To join in heart, the bodies that are twain,
Fly where you list, you shall return again.
From fancies lore, I striued still to fly,
Long time I did my fortune flat deny,
Till at the length, my wrestling bred my woe,
Knowing that none, their fortune can forgo.
For while I lived, in prime of vernant youth,
Falshod that showed, the face of fained truth,
Falsely began weane, a web of wily kind;
So to entrap, my plain and simple mind.
Great were the suits, great were the friendly signs,
Sweet were the words, to poison tender minds,
Large were the gifts, great were the proffers made,
To force my mind, to try a trustlesse trade.
Great were the wights, that daily did conspire,
To pluck the rose, their fancies did desire,
Traile did the tears, in hope to purchase trust,
Yet this was all, no love, but luring lust.
No fancy could then force me to reply,
Nor move my mind such doubtful deeds to try:
For well I knew, although I knew not all,
Such trickle trades procure a sudden fall.
Thus did I mount, thus did I fly at will,
Thus did I escape the foulers painted skill,
Thus did I save, my feathers from their lime,
Thus did I live, a long and happy time.
Cupid that great, and mighty kings could move,
Could never frame, my heart to like of love,
His limber shafts, and eke his golden dart,
Were still too blunt, to pearce my steely heart.
Till at the length, as nature had assind,
Unto the earth, I bent a willing mind:
He was the first, to whom I gave my hand,
With free consent, to live in holy band.
Eua that gave her faithful promise so,
With Adam to live in wealth and in woe,
Of faithful heart, could never have more store,
Then I have felt, thrice three years space and more.
When I had gieu'n my heart and free consent,
No earthly thing could make me once repent,
No Seas of grief, ne cares that I could find,
Could so prevail, to make me change my mind.
Did fortune fawn, or did our fortune frown,
Did he exalt, or did he cast him down,
My faithful heart did ever make me sing,
Welcome to me, what ever fortune bring.
Now when I thought, all dangers had been past
Of lawless suits, and suitors at the last,
The trade, the time, the place wherein I live,
Unto this Lamp, new oil do daily give.
But like of this all you that love to range,
My fixed heart likes not the skittish change,
Now have I made the choice that shall remain,
Vengeance befall, when I do change again.
Now have I found a friend of high desert,
I have his love, and he has stool my heart,
Now fortune pack, with all thy pelting store,
This is my choice, I like to choose no more
Cease then your suits, ye lusty gallants all,
Think not I stoop at every Faulkners call,
Trusse up your lures, your luring is in vain,
Chosen is the Perch, whereon I will remain.
Spend not your breath in needless fained talks,
Seek other mates, that love such rouing walks,
None shall ever vaunt, that they have my consent,
Then let me rest, for now I am content.
Great be your birth, and greater be your wealth,
I reckon more my credit and my health,
Though I be weak, my power very scant,
God so prouides that I shall never want.
Be mine own at home, or be he absent long,
Absent or present, this still shall be my song,
Fortune my friend, A friend to me has lent,
This is my choice, and therewith am content.
Range they that list, and change who ever will,
One has mine oath, and his I will be still,
Now let us fall, or let us rise on hie,
Still will I sing, now well content am I.
The praise of a contented mind.
THe God that framde the fixed pole, and Lamps of gleaming light,
The azure skies, and twinkling Stars. to yield this pleasant sight,
In wisdom pight this perelesse plot, a rare surpassing frame,
And so with brave and sweet delights, have fraught and dect the same,
That every creature keeps his course, his compass and his place,
And with delightful joy runs, his pointed time and race,
In one consent they friendly join, from which they can not fall,
As if the Lord had first ordainde, one soul to guide them all,
In every part there does remain, such love and free consent,
That every frame does kiss his lot, and cries I am content,
The Articke pole that never moves, by which the shipmen sail,
Craves not to change his frizen Axe, nor from his place to steal,
The fixed Stars, that sildome range, delight their circles so,
That from their choice by wanton change, they never yield to go.
The Sun and Moon that never hide, their brave resplendent rays,
Did never wish in wavering will, to change their wonted ways.
The roaring Sea, with ebbs and tides, that leapes against the land,
Is yet content for all his rage, to stay within his band.
The flooting Fish, the singing Bird, all beasts with one consent,
To live according to their kind, do show them selves content,
So that by practice and by proof, this sentence true I find,
That nothing in this earth is like, a sweet contented mind.
The beasts, the Birds, and ayrie powers, do keep their compass well,
And only man above the rest, does love for to rebel,
This only man, the Lord above, with reason did indue,
Yet only man, ungrateful man, does show himself untrue.
No sooner was brave Adam made, but Satan wrought his thrall,
For not content, aspiring pride, procurde his sudden sall.
The princely Primerose of the East, proud Eua gave consent,
To change her bliss to bale, for that, her mind was not content.
Thus may the darkest eye perceive, how folly strikes us blind,
Thus may we see the often change, of man's unconstant mind,
The Moon, the Sea, by natures course, do not so often change.
As do the wits, and wanton wills, of such as love to range.
The rangling rage that held from home, Ulysses all too long.
Made chaste Penelope complain of him that did her wrong.
The loathsome days, and lingering nights, her time in spinning spent:
She would not yield to change her choice, because she was content.
Such calm content does plainly show, that love did much abound,
Where free consent breeds not content, such faith is seldom found.
For careless Crysed that had gin, her hand, her faith and heart,
To Troylus her trusty friend, yet falsely did depart:
And giglot like from Troy town, to Grecians camp would go,
To Diomede, whom in the end, she found a faithless foe,
For having fliu'd the gentle slip, his love was turned to hate.
And she a leaper did lament, but then it was too late.
Now foolish fancy was the cause, this Crysed did lament,
For when she had a faithful friend, she could not be content.
Ten thousand fell at Troyes siege, whose blood had not been spent,
If fickle headded Hellen could, at first have been content.
You can not in the Serpents head, such deadly poison find,
As is the fained love that lives, with discontented mind.
Of all the wisdom of the wise, that I could ever tell,
This wisdom bears the chiefest sway, to stay when we be well,
As sweetest Music rudely iarres, except there be consent:
So hottest love does quickly cool, except it be content.
Of all the brave resounding words, which God to man has lent,
This sounds sweetest in mine ear, to say. I am content.
Ever or Never.

FINIS.
LONDON Imprinted by John Windet, dwelling at Paul's wharfe at the sign of the
cross Keys and are there to be sold. 1594.


