Perseuerantia Sanctorum. A SERMON OF PERSEVERING IN Patience, Repentance, and
Humiliation, in time of Afflictions, Preached before the Lords of the
Parliament, at the last General Fast, upon Ash Wednesday, the 18. day of
February 1628. At the Collegiat Church of S. Peter in Westminster.

By the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop
of Lincoln, Deane of the said Church.

And now published, by their Lordships order, and direction.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1628.

JOB. 42. 12. The Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more then his beginning.
GREGORY observes in his Lib. 27. cap. 5.
Morals, that those virtues which GOD has taught us, at the last, by an united
Example in the New, he had taught us before, by several Examples in the Old
Testament. To show unto us, that, as Claudian said of Stilicon, -- Claud. in
laudem Stiliconis. lib. 1.
sparguntur in omnes,
In te mista fluunt.
Those veins of Virtues distinguished in the Patriarckes, as in several
members Incarnatus enim Dominus in semetipso, omne quod nobis imperavit
ostendit; ut quod praecepto diceret, Exemplo suaderet. Greg. Mor. lib. 1. cap.
5.
are conjoined in Christ, as the common head, and what Christ teaches in the
New Testament by one whole, and united, the Patriarckes preach unto us in the
Old, by many broken, and divided examples. Hence we are taught (before the Law
written) but one lesson, for the most part, from any one man. As Innocence
only from 1. Johan. 3. 12.
Abel, Religion from Genes. 5. 22.
Enoch, Hope from Genes. 7. 5.
Noah, Obedience from Genes. 22. 3.
Abraham, Wedlocke-keeping from Genes. 26. 7.
Isaac, doing good for evil from Genesis 42 24. and 25.
Joseph, Meekness from Number. 12. 3.
Moses, Courage from Ioshuah. 1. 5. and 6.
Iosuah, and Patience in Calamities from holy Job. And this most Christian
Virtue of Patience, in great afflictions, though we hear of it, in all this
Book, yet do we learn to follow it in this Chapter only. For as this holy
Man, Si non flagellaretur, non agnosceretur, (as Moral. l. 2. c. 2. Aperta
namque alijs virtutis exempla non daret, si ipse sine tentatione remaneret,
Gregory notes) had never been known, if he had not been afflicted in the
body of the Book; so say I, that he had never been taken up for imitation by
any man, encompassed with flesh and blood, if he had not been rewarded in the
end of the Book. It is not the love of Affliction, (a (...). Naz. Epist. 69.
Natural est, mali sui fine gaudere. Senec.
most unwelcome guest to this Nature of of ours) but the (...), and issue of a
godly man's Affliction, to wit, a Blessing upon the latter end, which teaches
us to fast, and pray in time of Affliction. And so (say the Grammarians) that a
Reward is called Pretium, quasi Praeitium, it must go before, at least in our
(...). Naz, Orat. 42.
faith, and belief, or else our Patience in Afflictions never comes after.

ANd upon this consideration, was this Book first translated by Interpretata
autem sunt (ex Sytorum lingua) a viro illo magno, Mose, etc. Origin. l. 1. in
Job; Qua Idumaea regio utitur, and quam Iobus Idumaeus loquutus est. Hier. in
Prolog.
Moses out of Syriacke into Hebrew, not to teach the Children of Israel (who
were yet in In Aegypto scil. illum Moses ex ^yro in Hebraeu^ transtulit. Orig.
l. 1. in Job.
Egypt) to suffer Afflictions, but to teach them Et ut bonam rem,
remunerationem Domini, quam Iobo post tolerantiam largitus est, audientes etium
ipsi liberationem sperarent, and beneficentiam beatae mercedis laborium suorum
spectarent. Orig. ib.
comfort, and hope of deliverance from their Afflictions. And afterward, this
very self same Book was read to the Christians, in the Primitive Church, not
only in this time of Similiter and in conventu Ecclesiae, in diebus sanctis
legitur Passio Job, in diebus Iejunij, in diebus Abstinentiae etc. in diebus,
in quibus in Iejunio, and Abstinentia sanctam Jesus Christi Passionem sectantur,
etc. Ibid. Job enim interpretatur dolens. Greg. Mor. lib. 1. c. 5. and Mor. 17.
c. 1.
Lent, and public Sorrow, but withal, upon each several occasion of any
sudden mishap, or private sorrow, Pro consolatione, and spe liberationis, for
their praesent comfort, and hope of deliverance, as Origin writes.

ANd this is the reason, that I have also, according to the Praesidents of
Antiquity, chosen a piece of the same Book, for my Text, at this time. It is
a time of Lent, or public Sorrow, over all, or the greatest part of the
(...). Ignat. Epist. 5. ad Philippens.
Christian World, wherein men do use to humble themselves, by Fasting, Prayer,
Repentance, and all manner of Devotion, for their sins against God.

ANd surely if we consider (with Saint Iejunia autem, and congregationes inter
dies, propter eos, a viris prudentibus constitutos, qui magis saeculo vacant,
quam Deo: nec possunt, immo nolunt toto vitae suae tempore, in Ecclesia
congregari, etc. Hieron. lib. 2. in 4. c. ad Galat.
Hierome) the infinite number of those men, of all sorts, and callings, qui
saeculo magis vacant, quam Deo, who spend more time in the service of the
World, then in the service of their God, and never dream of Fasting, and
Prayer, but when this Season of the year does call upon them, we shall find,
that this standing Fast was most profitably instituted by the Church, Exam:
Council. Trident: part 4. Ordinis, and commone factionis gratia instituta est
Quadragesima.
Commonefactionis gratia, to call upon the backward, as Chemnitius; Stata
tempora, ut tardos, and cessantes tanquam calcaribus, and stimulis ad
abstinentiam excitarent. G. Cassand defens: libelli de officio pij viri.
Ad cessatores excitandos, to spur them onward, that lagge behind, as
Cassander writes.

BEing therefore to offer up unto God, in sorrow, and repentance, these 36.
days ( Quadrage sima proprie dicta. Bellarm. l. 2. de bon. oper. c. 16. rat.
6. 36. dies Decimae sunt, and 4. dies additi pro Primitijs. Alardus Gazaeus
Annot. in Cassian.
the whole time of our clean Lent) either as the Tyth of our days, as S. De
Iejunio sermon. 3.
Bernard, or as the Tyth of the year, as Dum enim per 360 dies Annus ducitur,
nos autem per 36. dies affligimur, qui sunt jejunabiles in 6. Septimanis
Quadragesimae, quasi anni nostri Decimas Deo damus. Aquin. 2a. 2ae. q. 147.
Art. 5. ex Gregor.
Aquinas, or as the Tyth of our life, as Gers. Hom. 1. in Quadrages: and
Bellarm de bon. oper. l. 2. c. 16.
Gerson, or as the Tole, and Tribute of all that we are, as Fortasse ipsa
Decimatio recte, quasi ab usu telonei, Quadragesimae nomen accepit. Ita enim
illa publica vulgo vocabatur Exactio; Ex qua tanta lucri portio Regis commodis
deputatur, quantu^ and a nobis a Rege omnium saeculorum, pro usu vitae nostrae
legitimum Quadragesimae vectigal exigitur. Cassian. Collat. 21.
Cassianus thinks; We cannot do it in better tuned meditations, then in
these Sorrows, and Comforts of the Book of Job.

Again, it is a time of our Private, or National Sorrow, wherein this little
world of ours, the Church, and State of this Kingdom do cast themselves down
before their God, in true Compunction, and contrition of heart, because of
their departing from their God, in life, and Conversation, and of Gods
departing from them, in his wonted Benediction.

IT is true indeed, that as the Lent of a Christian man, should take up non 40.
tantum, sed singulos, and vniuer sos dies hominis, as S. Sermon. 3. de Iejunio.
Bernard, not 40. only, but all the days, and minutes of a Christian man: So
surely this General Fast for the sins of the Nation, in-steed of taking up
this one short day, should not leave one day untaken up, of the whole Lent of
an Englishman. But the wisdom of the State, finding the weakness of our
flesh, and blood, (...) (as Orat. in sacr. Baptism.
Naz. speaks in the like case) has proportioned our humiliation to our power,
and strength to endure the same, making this one solemn day to be non solum
partem, sed and sacramentum (to use the words of S. Sermon. 3. de Ieiunio.
Bernard) not a portion only, but a Symbol, and repraesentation of a whole
Lent, and therefore to be solemnized, with no Theme more conveniently, then the
Sorrows, and Comforts of this Merito etiam nunc in diebus Passionis, in diebus
Sanctificationis, in diebus Iejunij Beati Job Passio legitur, meditatur, a^que,
scrutatur. Origin. l. 1. in Job.
Book of Job.

NOw all the Comfort of this Book (for upon the Comfort I principally insist)
is put off to this Chapter, and all the Comforts of this Chapter Epitomized in
this Verse, and all the quint-essence of this Verse couched in the beginning of
the Verse, which I have read unto you. Where, notwithstanding the miseries,
which Job endured, yet when his Faith was once discerned, his latter end became
more blessed; The Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more then his beginning.

I Have heretofore, some years sithence, dealt with this Verse, as God did
with Job in this verse, given some blessing upon the latter end thereof, but
none as yet on the beginning, which shall be the Subject of this praesent
Discourse. The beginning of this verse I may fitly term the Reward of an
afflicted Christian; For that Job was ante Euangelia Euangelicus, as O virum
ante Euangelia Eungelicum, and Apostolorum ante Apostolica praecepta
Discipulum. Julian. Celan. Ep. l. ad Demetriadem virg. de instit. virg.
Salmeron, and others make S. Hierome Author of the Book, but unjustly.
Julian the Pelagian does wittily term him, a Christian man long before
Christ, is acknowledged by all the Chrysostom. tom. 1. Hom. de Job, and Abraham.
Origin. l. 1. in Job. Hieron. in epist. In eo diuinitus prouisum, vt alios
inter Gentes sciremus Fideles. Aug. de Cin. Dei, l. 18. c. 47.
Fathers. And that Christian virtues are really rewarded, ex promisso, though
not ex commisso, by way of promise, though not of contract, is truly taught by
Sed, vt mihi videtur, hoc verbum, Debet, verenum habet; Multiplicom enim, and
inuolutam continct intelligentiam, nec Deo proprie competit, qui non est
Debtor nobis, nisi forte ex Promisso, nos vero ei Debitores sumus ex Commisso.
Lem. l. 1 did. 43 Habent praemia spiritualia, and corporalia in hac vita, and
post hanc vitam, idque ex gratuita Promissione diuina, etc. lit in hanc
sententiam Nostri etiam a vocabulo Meriti non abhorrent. Chemnit. Exam. Conc.
Trid. c. de Meritis Operum.
Peter Lombard, and the Schoolmen. Here then have you the Reward of Christian
patience in Adversity, invested with four several Circumstances.

FIrst, the Efficient cause, or the Rise of this Reward, which is the Lords
Blessing, The Lord Blessed; Secondly, the Material cause, or Subject of this
Reward, double in this place; The first points out the person, Job; the second
reflects upon his disposition, The later end of Job; The Lord blessed the later
end of Job. Fourthly, and lastly, the Portion and quantity of this Reward,
which is very ample, more then the greatest man in the East is held to be
worth; for so Job was in the beginning, Job. 1. 3. verse; But now he is more
then in the beginning. The Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more then the
beginning. So have you the Efficient of this Reward of a Christian man's
Patience in time of affliction, the Lords blessing, the Subject, generally,
Job, particularly, the latter end of Job, the Portion, more then his beginning.
The Lord blessed, etc. Of these parts by Gods assistance, and your Lordships
honorable patience, I shall speak plainly, briefly, and orderly.

Begin we therefore with the Efficient cause, and let us take our rise at the
Magazin, and Treasury, where Christian Patience, and forbearance is usually
rewarded, which is the Lords blessing; The Lord Blessed. Dicere Dei est facere,
says S. Libr. Expos. Ep. ad Romans imperfect. Sic Moller. in Ps. 3. 9. quia
Dicto absoluit negotium. Ambros. 1. Hexam.
Augustine, Gods saying is operation, and doing; For Dixit, and factum est, he
spoke but the word, and it was done, as it is in the Ps. 32. 9.
Psalm. And as his saying is his doing: so his Benediction, or saying of some
good, is his doing of some good; or (to speak properly) his augmenting, and
superadding of some good; For as the first blessing, that ever fell from God,
was a Crescite, and multiplicamini, a kind of increasing, and multiplying,
Genesis 1. 22: So ever since, Cum Dominus nobis Benedicit, nos crescimus, Gods
Blessing of us, is an increasing of us, says Vt abundare ab vndis, ita
Berecha, i. affluentia a Bereca, font, seu piscina. Lorin. in ps. 20. v. s.
S. Augustine in his Commentary upon the 66. Psalm. And so the Apud Chemnit.
in Harm.
Rabbis define Gods Blessings to be (...) an Addition of some good. And
Chemnitius notes, that temporal Blessings are ever expressed in the old
Testament, by the Verb (...) which signifies to Add, or as our Savior
translates it (...), to add over and above, Mat. 6. 33. And so in this place,
over and above the Diuitias Cordis. Aug. in ps. 103.
treasures of the spirit, wherewith the mind of this holy man was highly
enriched, the Lord heaped upon him, and added unto him, these temporal
Blessings; The Lord Blessed. From the nature therefore of the Lords Blessing in
this place, I will borrow some five several Observations, which I hope your
Lordships shall not hold impertinent to this portion of Scripture.

FIrst, if Gods blessing be an oueradding, it is neither piety, nor policy
(for there is a kind of policy even in Piety) for In dilunio aquarum
multarum ad cum non approximabunt. Ps. 31. 6. i. aduersitatum. Lorinus in loc.
any Nation whatsoever, to forbear her humbling, and bowing of her self
before her God, until the last cast, as it were, of her fortunes, That is,
until the utmost period of her Calamities be come, until all Gods Graces be
quite spent out, until that Nation be settled upon the lees, and dregs, as
it were, of Desperation. For that blessing, which crowns this humbling, is not
always a creating, or restoring, but many times a praeuenting, and
super-adding of blessing upon blessing, as in this place, The Lord blessed. Be
a Nation never so happy in many Circumstances; in a Prince all made of virtues;
in a people full of piety, and devotion; in a Religion well established; in a
Government politiquely founded; in a Land that flows with milk, and honey;
yet has it not quite drawn dry all the Treasury of Gods blessings, He has
still some in store: For, if God go not in, and out with their Ps. 43. 10.
Armies, if Cadmus teeth be sown in their land, and the Apples of Contention
thrown in among them, if Esaias. 9. 21.
Ephraim be set against Manasses, Manasses against Ephraim, both against Judah;
if the Prince be jealous of the People, the People suspicious of the Prince,
and Achitophels practicing up, and down, and putting ends upon both, then
surely there is great cause of humbling, because there is great need of
blessing, that is, of increasing, and super-adding new blessings still to those
in the beginning, as in this place, The Lord blessed the latter end of Job,
more then the beginning. And so much of the first Observation.

SEcondly, if Gods outward blessings be only an ouer-adding, though our
heavenly Father should (as sometimes he does) close up his hands, and add none
of these outward blessings, yet were our Patience in time of Istaec
interpretatio non insinuat ambiguitatem, vel incertitudine^ promissionis, sed
quia Deus his modis, and sua bona voluntate, sol^t suos consolari, liberando,
initigando, confirmando, salvando. Chemnic. in Harm.
Adversity sufficiently rewarded in its own self. So this holy man in my
Text, before this outward blessing, Intus dives erat, was rich enough with his
inward blessings, as In Cantic. O diuitiae interiores, quo fur non accedit.
Aug. in Ps. 55.
Saint Bernard writes. And had he received no other wreath at all, yet
Patientiae munere coronabatur, He was sufficiently adorned with his Crown of
Patience, says S. In Moral.
Gregory. And yet every Patience will not serve our turn; for to have a
careless, and brawnie soul, relying wholly upon imaginary suppositions, as
that there is no providence at all, as the Epicures in De natura Deorum, l 3.
Ita Plinius. Irridendum vero, agere curam rerum humanarum illud, quicquid est,
summum. Anne tam tristi, atque multiplici mysterio non pollui credamus,
dubitemusque? Plin. hist. not. l. 2. c 7.
Tullie, or if it be, that it fall no lower then the Sphaere of the Moon, as
Aristotle in Aduersus haeres. Ita eius Commentator in 12. Metaph. and quidam
apud Isid. Pelusiot. (...). l. 4. ep. 99.
Epiphanius, or if it vouchsafe to descend to the Earth, it relates unto none
but two or three Favorites, as some in (...). Is. Pelus: l. 4. ep. 99. Non
simus tam fatui adulatores Dei, vt dum prouidentiam eius ad ima detrudimus, in
nos ipsos iniuriosi simus, etc. Hier. in Hab. obelisconotatus a Danaeo in 1.
Sent. did. 39. Non tamen numerus vel apum, vel culicum, vel eiusmodi est per
se praeordinatus a Deo. Tho. p. 1. q. 7.
Isidorus Pelusiota are of opinion, would prove but a raw, and naked blessing:
So likewise that Paper-patience of the Philosophers, begotten either by former
praemeditations, or by a continual habit of suffering, or some opinion of
fatal necessity, or lastly by an abandoning of all natural affections, is
but a thin, and bare shelter, for a man to repose himself, in the storms of
Adversity. But that patient enduring of the child of God, we now speak of,
when the faithful soul stays her self upon Gods Prouidentia inter
Christianos, vt ianua in domo, quam nemo, nisi ebrius ignorant. Lyta, seu
Glossat. in Repli. ad Burg. in fine Gloss. Interlin.
providence, and upon an assured resolution of an happy issue in his good time,
passes in the mean while, in all security through the sharp pikes of woes,
and miseries, is such an admirable endowment, and portion of the spirit, as
that it was reward, and blessing enough, though the Lord had no otherwise
blessed the end of Job.

ANd many times, when God has been bountiful and magnificent in the inward,
he spares the Foris pauper es, sed intus dives. Diuitias tecum portas, quas
non amitteres, etiamsi de naufragio nudus exires. Aug. in Ps. c. 6. Nostrae
enim facultates, and aurum Christus est; Ad hunc accedito, and veris diuilijs
abundobis. Baron. Lippel. tom. 2.
super-addition of these outward Blessings. So as we find whole Kingdoms,
and Nations, where the Gospel is planted, and the true Religion generally
embraced, not to abound for all that, as plentifully, as the heathen, which
know not God, or the people which have not called upon his Name, in these
outward, and Ergo tales, quando humiliantur, nolite putare miseros. Erratis,
nescientes, quid intus habeant. Ex vobis conijcitis, qui mundum diligitis, quia
vos, cum talia perditis, miseri remanelis, Prorsus nolite hoc putare; Habent
intus quo gaude. ant. Aug. in Ps. 30.
external blessings. And I would to God, we were to fetch a larger compass to
find some instances hereof, and had not so many so near unto us, amongst our
distressed Brethren of the Reformed Churches. But passages of this nature God
suffers to come to pass (says S. In Ps. 30.
Augustine) for two several reasons. First, lest the wicked should think, Ob
has colendum Deum, That God is worshipped by people upon this ticket only, for
outward blessings only Secondly, lest the Godly should be ever expecting of
these blessings, by the mercenary way of compact, and (...). Chrysostom. ad pop.
Antioc. Hom. 1.
Salarie, Dices, feram mala, and reddet mihi Deus, vt Job; Iam non est
Patientia, sed Auaritia. Aug. ad Catech. l. 1.
Quae non Patientia foret, sed Auaritia, which would amount, not to Christian
Patience, but to a kind of carnal concupiscence, says S. Augustine. And this
is Gods ordinary course with us now adays, that live under the Gospel. For as
before the coming of Christ, and the manifestation of his spiritual Kingdom,
corporal blessings were for the most part, tendered under the law: So now
sithence the incarnation of our Savior, and the erection of his spiritual
Scepter, Spiritualia bona ^uimus d^^^rae, sinistrae vero carnalia -- Haec vara
Philosophia. Haec denique gratia, and misericordia Dei in servos suos, and
respectus in Electos, vt in illorum sinistram quidem velut dissimulans dextrae
semper studiosus Protector assistat. Bern. sermon. 7 in Ps. Qui habitat.
spiritual blessings are every where proposed to us in the Gospel; So as Gods
children, that endure their afflictions, sent by him, as they ought to do, are
still one way, or other rewarded; Sometimes spiritually, sometimes corporally,
always certainly. And this Dominus dedit, Dominus abstulit. Vide te foris
paupeiem, intus divitem. Aug. in Ps. 30.
spiritual reward had here sufficed, though the Lord had no otherwise blessed
this Holy man Job. And so much of the second Observation.

THirdly, when we consider this blessing to be a super-adding, we may
observe, that God sometimes, besides these inward Sit nomen Domini benedictum.
Istae gemmae laudis Dei vnde sunt? Aug. in Psalm. 30. Patrimonium Fidei in
cord. Id. in Psalm. 123.
Jewels of the mind, Faith, Hope, Patience, and the like, which we suruaied
but even now, does heap upon his servants (even in the time of the Gospel)
these outward favors, and blessings also, and that for many reasons. First, Ne
Diuitiae ne malae putentur, dantur bonis, ne summae, malis, Aug. in Ps. 123.
malae putentur, lest Riches otherwise, and the like outward Blessings of God,
may be thought to be evil; Evil in themselves, says S. Augustine in his
Commentaries upon the 66. Psalm. Secondly, lest the Godly, compassed with
flesh, and blood, should boggle at the Religion, Worship, and Service of God,
if these outward blessings were thus monopolized to the wicked only, says the
same Ne infirmos animos ob dilationem mercedis subeat poenitentia, contempsisse
praesentia. Ambros. de Abraham. l. 5. c. 3 (...) tales laudant, and admirantur,
quibus Deus benedicit. Isidor. Pelus. l. 4. Ep. 161.
Father in his 1. B. ad Catechumenos. Thirdly, Qu. Nam quaero abs te, si tibi
persuadeatur aliter cum multis charissimis tuis te in studio sapientiae non
posse viuere, nisi amplares aliqua familiaris, necessitates nostras sustinore
posset, nonne desiderabis diuitias, and optabis? Resp. Assentior. Aug. soliloq.
lib. 1.
because these temporal blessings are expedient, and necessary to set many of
the Virtues a going, as Charity, Almes-giuing, and the like. In which
consideration Aristotle is not so justly taxed by S. (...). etc. Naz. ep. 64.
Gregory Nazianzen, for making riches necessary for some of the Virtues,
Because they are out of all quaestion, Bonum vnde facias bonum, a Good without
which we cannot do good, says S. Augustine in his 5. Sermon De verbis Domini.
Fourthly, God many times adds these temporal, because men are not able to
take such exact notice, as they should, of those spiritual blessings,
wherewith the Elect are Quia alias videre non poteramus occultam eius coronam.
Aug. l. 1. ad Catech. Boni latent, quia bonum ipsorum in occulto est. Et tam
merita eorum sunt in abscondito constituta, quam praemia. Aug. Sentent. 201.
inwardly adorned; As here, what God did for Job, Fecit haec Dominus, vt
ostenderet hominibus, nam ipse seruo suo maiora in coelo seruauit. Idem ib.
fecit vt ostenderet hominibus, he did it only that men might observe it,
says S. Augustine in his 1. B. ad Catechumenos. For these reasons, and the
like, Almighty God (besides the riches of the Spirit) rewards many times the
long suffering of his Servants, with an Amalthaea's horn, of these outward
blessings; especially those, that he knows will Audiant haec diuites, audiant
haec pauperes, quem admodum hic beatus vi^ in diuitijs suis, and foelicitate
benignus dispensator extuit diuitiarum, and in tentatione pauper^atis
patienter, and fortiter tolerauit. Aug. de Temp. sermon. 225. (...), etc. Chrysostom.
in Genesis Hom. 66.
use them aright. Those, that (with Job. 31. 17. and 31. 20.
Job) can never eat their morsels alone, but must have the Fatherless taste
thereof. Those, that cannot endure the poor without covering, but warm them
continually with the fleece of their sheep. Those, who suffer not the
Strangers to lodge in the street, but open their doors to the Trauailers,
etc. These, beside these spiritual, shall be crowned also with temporal
blessings, as the Lord here blessed the end of Job. And so much of the third
Observation.

FOurthly, if these temporal blessings are blessings of the Lord, those
Cloister conceits of the Monckes, and Friars, are merely ridiculous, Sed ait
mihi quisque Mendi^us, debilitate fessus, pan^^s obsitus, fa^^e languidus, Mihi
debetur regnum Coelorum, Ego enim similis sumilli Lazaro, Nostrum genus est,
cui debetur regnum Coelorum, non illi gene^, qui induuntur purpura, and bysso.
Audi ergo me de hoc, quod proposuisti, Dom^^^ Pauper. Noli contemnere diuites
mis^ ric^rdes, diuites humiles, and vt citius d^cam, quod paulo ante dixi,
diuites pauperos noli contemnere O Pauper. Aug. sermon. de Temp. 110.
that God loves none, but the poor, and needy, and has praepared the Kingdom
of heaven for the beggar only, as some Maison de Dieu, or great Hospital.
Solomon tells us another Story, that the rich, and the poor meet together, and
the Lord is the maker of them all. Prou. 22. 2. verse. And S. Sermon. 110. de
Temp. in Ps. 66.
Augustine, together with S. Ju 16. Luc. l. 1. de Abrah. and alibi.
Ambrose, observe, in many passages of their writings, that the Holy Ghost has
placed, of purpose, Lazarus, that was so poor, in the bosom of Abraham, that
was so rich, Luc. 16. 22. to teach us, that both rich, and poor, noble, and
ignoble, if they be indenizon'd by faith in the Kingdom of Grace, have an
aequall interest in the kingdom of Glory. I will conclude this point with that
passage in In Ps 30. Dives, qui talis est, vt contemnat in se, quicquid illud
est, unde instari superbia solet, pauper est Dei. Aug. sent. 149. Da mihi
Zachaeum habentem magnas diuitias, statura breuem, animo breuiorem. Aug. sermon.
110. de Temp. Si enim dives factus est humilis, quanto magis pauper debet esse
humilis? Idem ib.
Cassiodorus, Si pauper superbiat, non est Dei pauper, and si locuples
humilitatem diligat, non est saeculi dives: voluntates enim talium sunt
inspiciendae, non Nomina, If a poor man be sturdie, and stubborn, he is none
of Gods poor men, and if the rich man, be lowly, and humble, he is no
worldly rich man, for in such you must not mark so much their outward styles,
and denominations, as their inward habits, and dispositions. And so much for
this fourth Observation.

FIfthly, and lastly, if these outward blessings come from the Lord; Sapient.
8. 1.
Qui disponit omnia sua viter, who linckes up all his businesses in a decent,
and comely method, it behooves us to observe, by what Pipes, and Conduits they
are usually derived from so remote a fountain. This we are taught by this
little Particle in the front of my Text, So, So the Lord blessed. So. These
blessings are derived from God to men, so, and so; By such means, and
conveyances, as are most beseeming the wisdom of God, and most corresponding
with the nature of men. Deus enim sic administrat omnia, quae creavit, ut ea
proprios quoque motus exercere sinat; It is a saying of Saint Aug. saepius in
libris de Civ. Dei.
Augustine, quoted by all the In 2. sent. did. 23.
Schoolmen, God does so moderate, and reigle all his creatures, as he
follows the bent, and inclination of his creatures. If a people be to be
blessed, God does it by the goodness, sweetness, and gratiousnesse of the
King. If a King be to be blessed, he does it by the affection, love, zeal,
and cheerful supply of the People. And in this last sense, the learned
Interpreters expound this place. This greatest man of all the East, not
beggared (which In locum.
Pelican fitly terms a beggarly exposition) but as Apud Mercerum. Add quod
Rabbi Selamoh supra alicubi non ita ad inopiam fuisse redactum, vt vulgo
putatur, Iobum scribit, ex veterum Hebraeorum sententia. Pecora quidem, and
bona, quae erant in agris amisisse eum tradit Scriptura, sed nummorum cum, and
^et^rarum facultatum non fecisse alioqui iacturam; Nec id Scriptura memorat.
Mercerus.
Shelamo Ben Iarchi proves out of the Ancient Rabbis, impaired only in his
state, and fortunes, comes now to be supplied per modum subuentionis, as
Aquinas terms it, by Adhibuerunt subuentionis remedium. Aquinas in Job. 42.
lection. 1. Donaria in eum collata credimus, vt saepe divitibus, and amicis
munera donari solent, non tam ad ditandum, quam ad ^^s demerendes. Vti magnus
vir and Orient toto celeberrimus erat. Merc^rus ex Rabbin. Tanquam Xenia.
Augustinus Steuchus. Tanquam obsequij Symbola. Franc. Iunius.
way of support, and subsidy. And so, according to the laws, and customs of
those ancient times, and Eastern Countries, every man, as it follows
immediately before my Text, gave him a (...) A piece of money, or a lamb.
(...), Act. 7. 16. but centum agni. Genesis 33. 19. It signifies both. A piece of
money stamp't with the image of a Lamb. Pecunia a pecore sieve pecude. Plin.
hist. not. lib. 18. c. 3. Varro de l. Latin. l. 4. Gellius de noctib. At. l.
11.
sum of money, and every man an Vsque hodie inter caetera ornamenta mulierum
solent aurei c^^culi in os ex front pendere, and imminere naribus. Hier. in
Ezech. 16. 12.
earing of gold, and so in this very sort, and manner, The Lord blessed his
latter end, more then his beginning. And so much of the first part of my Text,
the Efficient cause, or fountain of this reward of our Patience in
Afflictions, and humiliation under the same, which is the Lords blessing; The
Lord blessed.

NOw I come to the Second part of my Text, the common, and general subject of
this reward, which relates to a person, by name Job; The Lord blessed Job. Of
him I will say, as De Mithridat. Hist. lib. 1.
Velleius Paterculus did of another, Neque nihil, neque omnia dicenda sunt,
somewhat I must, and all I may not here speak; For those ordinary Quaestions,
concerning Job; as whether he was descended from R. Shelamo Ben Iarchi apud
Tostatum in Genesis 22. Ph. Presbyter in Job. Come. Hist. scholast. c. 58. in
Genes.
Cain, Scripturae quintum ab Abraham facit ipsum. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. de patientia
Job. and Orig. l. 1. in Job.
Abraham, Hebraei narrant eum de Nachor stirpe generatum. Hieron. ep. 126.
Nachor, or Communis opinio, praecipue Patrum, and Scriptorum Ecclesiast.
Pererius in Genes. 36. Disp. 2.
Esau, whether he lived in the time of Atqualem Iacobo probant ex Philone
Rupertus in Genesis l. 8. and Tostatus in 1. Pa^al. c. 1.
Jacob, or of Synthronon Mosi facit Sul. Senerus Hist. Sacr. l. 1. Hier. in
Tradit. Heb. in c. 22. Genesis
Moses, or of the Gregor. in Job in principio.
Judges or of the Anabaptist. apud Sixth. Senens. and alij Rabbini apud Mercerum
Praefat. in Job.
Babylonian, or the Adrich. in Chronic. Anno 2235. Genebr. in Chron. An. 2239
Egyptian Captivity; whether this Book was penned by one of his Quidam ap.
Author. Catonae in Job.
Friends, or one of the Isidor. 6. Etym. c. 2.
Prophets, or some Rabbini ap. Mercer. Praefat. in Job. Naz. Orat. ad Julian.
and Nicetas in eum loc.
Rabbin of Babylon, or by Solomon, or by his Gregor. in princ. Suidas in verbo
Job. Sententia verissima. Albert. M. ap. Pinedam.
own self, or by Orig. l. 1. in Job. Hoc autem, sicut and caetera de
Creatione, Moses a Deo accepit.
Moses, or by both, (as Initio l. 1. in Job.
Origin thinks) these doubts are no more interessed in this piece of
Scripture, then in any other part of the whole Book.; and to pass, in
despite of all Logicque, the whole history of Job through one little Text,
like a Camel through the eye of a Needle, were to drive out Myndo's once more,
at one of her gates, as Diogenes was wont to say. I will only touch the two
ordinary Quaestions in all Arts, and Sciences, An fuit? Quis fuit? First,
whether Job was a man, and, if that appear, what kind of man he was, that
was so blessed. For the first, as Lucian sayas in Dion Chrysostomus, and our
late Chronologers write of the Trojans, that they fought 10. years in defense
of Hecuba aetate aequalem. Lucian. lib. 2. de vera Histor. Raptam ante initium
regni Thesei. Scalig. l. 3. Canon Isag. ob longaeuitatem, dicta, Immortalem
Helenam. Seruius in 2. Aeneid. Troiae fuisse fictio Homerica, (...). Herod. in
Enterp. Menelaus vero, (...). Dion Chrysostom. orat. 11. Cuius amplexus (...).
Lycophr. in Cassandra. See History of the World. lib 2. c. 14. par. 3.
Helen, when then they had no more but her withered Carcass, or bare picture,
her self being in Egypt, or dead long before: So the R. Moses Ben Maymon. Job
tantum parabolam esse putat, ad exponendum opiniones hominum de prouidentia.
Mercer. praefat. in Job.
Rabbis of old, and many Tragico comaedia Hebraeorum. Anabaptistae apud Sixtum
Senens. lib. 8. haeres. 10. Est veluti fabulae argumentum, ad proponendum
patientiae Exemplum. Luth. lib. de libris Vet. and Neu. Testam. vt citatur a
Bellarm. l. 1. de verbo Dei. c. 5. Liber iste Lutheri supposititius est, Franc.
Junius in 1. Tom. Bellarm.
writers of latter times, will have here nothing, but the picture of Job, A
lesson, an Idea, a Pattern, a Repraesentation, and a perfect example of the
reward of Patience, and of true magnanimity in great afflictions; But this
fantasy, and Chymaera is easily refuted, out of books Canonical,
Ecclesiastical, profane, and reason it self. For the first, Ezech. 14. 14.
Though Noah, Job, and Daniel were in it, etc. Now Noah, and Daniel were no
Fantasies, Repraesentations, or imaginations of men, and therefore no more was
Job. Again, James 5. 10. 11. we are turned over to the Prophets, and Job, to
take out lessons, and patterns (...) of Patience, and long suffering in those
adversities, which it shall please God to send upon us; Now the Prophets were
no Idea's, conceptions, or Repraesentations of men, and consequently, no more
was Job. Secondly, for Ecclesiastical history, we will take the book of
Tobias, commended for antiquity by S. Praef. in Job.
Jerome, and S. Dom. 15. post. Trin. sermon. 1.
Augustine, Where in the second Chapter, and the fifteenth verse in the Latin,
though not in any Greek Copy, that ever I saw, or (I believe) is extant,
Tobias is compared to holy Job; Now Tobias is there set out for a real, and an
Individual man, and consequently, so was Job. Thirdly, for profane histories,
we have Aristaeus a Jew, that brings Job for a Pattern (...), of long
suffering, and patience, as Eusebius cites him in his (...) Book de
praeparatione Euangelica: And Citatus ab Augustino S^eucho praefatione in Job,
and a Pererio in 16. Genesis
Auerroes that famous Philosopher, and Jobs own Countryman, that points him
out, for a Pattern of magnanimity, in his Commentaries upon the fourth Book
of Aristotle's Ethiques. Lastly, for Reason, I will go no further then the
first words of this Job. 1. 1.
Book. Erat vir, says the Holy Ghost, He was a man, and therefore I cannot
believe that he was no man, but a Moral virtue, or a Lecture of the same,
which is likewise the Collection of L. 1. in Job.
Origin, and Hom. 1. de Abraham. and Job.
S. Chrysostom.

NOw how great a man he was, I have had occasion heretofore to speak at large
in a Preached at Abthorp before K. James of blessed memory, in the year 1617.
whole Sermon, but hold it not so pertinent for this praesent purpose, unless
your Lordships will be pleased to hear him a little Si priuatus esset, cur
public loqueretur? Tacit. hist. l. 4. de Muciano.
speak forth him self in the 29. Chapter of this Book. Verse. 6. 7. 8.
I washed my steps in butter, and the Rocks poured out Rivers of Oil. The
young men saw me, and hid themselves, and the aged arose, and stood up. The
Princes refrained talking, and laid their hands on their mouth. The Nobles held
their peace, and their tongues cleaued to the roof of their mouth. I broke the
jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoils out of their teeth etc. Surely
Job, in these passages, and the like, does Plus quam civilia agitare, as Plus
quam ciuilia agitare. Annal. 3. Id est maiora, quam Ciuem decet. L. D'Orleans
in 1. Annal.
Tacitus would describe it, speak in a higher phrase, then the language of a
Subject; I make no quaestion, but he was as great, as the greatest of you all,
and yet humbled himself in repentance, and devotion, under the hand of God,
and by his Prius in multis, and districtis percunctationibus humiliari curauit,
and sic parare vitam benedictioni. Bern. sup. Cantic. sermon. 34.
humbling obtained this blessing; For so the Lord blessed the latter end of Job.

ANd surely the person of a meaner, or of a more An Rex fuerit, solum inuenio
Caietanum de re non valde dubia dubitantem. Pineda in c. 1. v. 1. (...).
Septuagint. in fine cap. 42. Rex Idumae orum. Isid. l. de vita, and morte
Sanctorum. Praeerat solus Regioni Vssitarum cum imperio. Caesar, Dial. 3. Rex
Arabiae. Gaud. Brixianus praefat. in script. Dux de genere Esau. Prosp. de
Promiss. p. 1. c. 2^.
private man, could never have afforded so remarkable a Pattern, either of
such Patience, and Christian magnanimity in the Sufferer, or of such bounty,
and unspeakable magnificence, in the rewarder, or blesser in this place; For
(as Moral. 1.
Gregory well observes) Ad maiorem dolorem, damna maiora, The losses of
Princes, Realms, and States, require the more Fortiter colluctatus est
Diabolus, sed fortiss. Athletam Dei superare non potuit. Aug. sermon. 225. de
Temp. (...). Isid. Pelus l. 4. ep. 114. (...). Suidas in verbo Job.
Fortititude (for so indeed it is) and Patience; and their recompencing again,
the more magnificence. God was desirous to leave an example to all, that should
come after, how that, Pro maioribus plagis, mayor Corona, as Hom. de patient.
Job.
Chrysostom speaks, wheresoever, and whomsoever he visited the more heavily,
there, if he found Diabolus parieiem perfo^a^^tt, sed thesaurum auferre non
potuit, thesaurum dico non auri, and argenti, sed Fidem iusti. Aug. sermon. 225.
de Temp.
Faith, Patience, Repentance, Humiliation, and the Concomitant Graces of the
same, he would reward again, the more bountifully; Now no fortunes, but the
fortunes of a Prince, and a whole Estate; no Patience, and Humiliation, but the
patience, and humiliation of a Prince, and a whole Estate, was able to fetch
off, either the deep Cup of Gods afflictions, or that bottomless Sea of his
outward consolations. When God is disposed to hang up a Pretiosa in conspectu
Domini mors sanctorum eius. Psalm. 115. 15. Pretiosa, quod non p^^mittat
illorum vitam, atque salutem inimicis quasi flocci venalem, nisi pro ingenti
quodam pretio, and bono sua Ecclesiae: sic sane neque vult suum iustum affligi,
nisi ingens quoddam, and publicum bonum suae Ecclesiae jude eliciat. Illud aut:
est patientiae exemplum. Pineda praefat. in Job. c. 6.
picture in his Church, to be well observed of all, that shall come after,
that the People, which shall be borne, may praise the Lord, he does it not by
limming, and painting, but by the Art of Cutting, and Embroydering. For the
Painter, as your Lordships know, deals but in colors, ordinary colors,
which, according to the strength of his imagination, he tempers, and lays out
to the view of the Eye; But the Embroyderer deals in more costly matter, takes
his cloth of Gold, and Silver, which he mangles into a thousand pieces,
bittes, and fragments, to frame, and set out his curious ymagerie: So Almighty
God, being to adorn his Church, not with blocks, and stones, but with some
rare Hanc tentationem ideo permisu Dominus eu^ni^e ill^, vt posteris daretur
Exemplum patientiae eius. Tob. 2. 15. P^etatis exempla sunt v^d^que nobis
proposita, and tanta multitudo, vt (...) densitate exaequent. Theodor. in Hebr.
12. 1. Super ill. (...). Imo and Christus passus est, (...). 1. Pet. 2. 21. Et
Christus factus est homo, vt exhiberetur homini, and qui videretur ab homine,
and quem homo sequeretur. Aug.
pictures of Christian virtues, works not these in ordinary colors, but in
gold, and silver, Princes, Nobles, and great Estates, whom he first mangles,
and cuts into bits, and pieces, with Crosses, calamities, and deep
temptations, but afterward, when he finds them suppled, and humbled with
sorrow, and Repentance, he makes up again into most heavenly, and Angelical
forms, and images, to be Aduersa latentem virtutem, and fortitudinem
ostendunt, vt eam spectatares imitentur. Propter h^c Dominus accendit Iobum
instar facts, vt luceat omnibus in Othe^errarum. Caesarius dial. 3. (...).
Suidas in verbo Job.
looked on by us in the Church Militant, and to look upon him in the Church
triumphant. So Abraham a great, rich, noble, and mighty Patriarcke, was first
tempted in his son, and then set up for an example of Genesis 12. 12. (...). Or.
N: 12. Orat. 19.
obedience. Moses another Prince, and Potentate, was first afflicted in Egypt,
and then erected in the Church, for an image of Number. 12. 3.
meekness. David a King, first persecuted by Saul, and then accounted a
Statue of Ps. 88. 21.
uprightness. Lastly, Neque enim solum peculiare Iobi bonum, sed commune suae
Ecclesiae solatium, and commodum Deus spectat in affligendo quolibet iusto.
Pineda Praefat. in Job. c. 6. In hac virtute exemplar opinatissimum. Bern.
sermon. 2. de Conuers. Pauli. Athletam in certamen impellit erecta victori
statua. Armigerum in praelium provocat decreta fortibus gloria. Quis autem tam
strenuus, and fortis, ut beatus Job? Chrysostom. sermon. in Job, and Abraham.
this greatest man, in all the East, was first pulled in pieces with a thousand
miseries, and in the latter end blessed up, for an aeternall praesident of the
reward of Patience, and true courage in Princes, and great ones; For so the
Lord blessed his latter end, more then his beginning. And so much of the second
part of my Text, the common, and general subject of this reward, in this word
Job; The Lord blessed Job.

NOw I come more closely to my Text again, and fall upon the proper, and
praecise subject of this reward of Patience, and Christian humiliation, which
is (to speak truly, and according to Logicque) not all Job, but his latter
end only; The Lord blessed the latter end of Job. The latter end. It is
observed by S. L. 7. de institut. Virg. Et ideo laudatio eius non in Exordio,
sed in Fine est.
Ambrose, that when God had created the heaven, the earth, the night, the day,
the fowls of the Air, the fish of the Sea, and the beasts of the Land, he
gave his approbation, that they were good, and commended them every one in the
beginning; But when he came to Man, he paws'd upon the matter, and never graced
him with the least Commendations in the beginning; And why think ye? Because,
says In Christianis non laudantur initia, sed finis. Hier. in Regul. Monarch.
cap. de Poenit. (...). Chrysostom. in Illud, Saulus adhuc. sermon. 47.
S. Ambrose, prius probandus, quam laudandus, he was first to be tempted, and
then respectively to be commended. And this method we find observed in this
holy man Job; For although God spoke kindly of him unto others, Job 1. 8. and
suffered him to taste largely of his common blessings, in the very beginning,
yet had he never as much as one Dignitas est Subiecti, affatus meruisse
Dominantis. Cassiod. lib. 8. c. 4.
word with Job himself, or afforded him any extraordinary Blessing, that the
Scripture takes notice of, before his temptations were all past, before his
latter end of his Book, and the latter end of his Patience, humiliation, and
repentance; The Lord blessed the latter end of Job.

THe latter end only. For as S. Bern. libello, qui vocatur 8. puncta.
Bernard wittily makes the Allusion, Patientia, and perseuerantia, Patience in
Affliction, Repentance, and perseverance unto the end, are fellow-partners
indeed in the Lords harvest, and yet though the (...). Chrysostom. in Illud, Saulus
adhuc Sermon. 47.
former endure the burden, the latter only receives the blessing; Because, as
S. Augustine observes in his seventeenth Book De Ciuitate Dei, and fifth
Chapter, Non in quo medio, sed in quibus extremis, every man, and every
Society, and state of men, is cursed, or blessed, not as they suffer in the
middle, but as they speed in the end; The Lord blessed the end of Job. The
Schoolmen make of this Perseverance unto the end (which some late Divines had
rather fasten with a rope of sands to the liberty of our will, then with a
chain of Adamant to Gods steddie, and immovable Grace, and goodness) not any
one particular virtue, but Perseverantia generalis (...) v^^tutem. Gul.
Parisiens. Sum^a de Virtutibus, part 3. Tract. de Fortitud. c. 3. Vide Aquin.
1a. 2ae. Qu. 5^. Art. 3.
conditionem annexam cuilibet virtuti, says Bonauenture upon the third of the
sentences, a condition implied in every virtue, this being Dei Donum, quo
caetera seruantur dona, says S. De bono Perseverantiae. l. 2. Hanc totius
probitatis unicam, fidamque custodem custod^i a vobis firmiter hortor. Bern.
Ep. 129.
Augustine, Gods rare, and special gift, which praeserues, and maintains his
other gifts; For although (as the Apostle tells us) (...), the virtues, that
adorn a Christian soul, Iam. 1. 17.
do every one of them claim kindred of Almighty God, Metamorph. lib. 12.
et Deus est in vtroque parente, and descend from him both in the one, and the
other line, yet this perseverance unto the latter end, is Vnica filia, says S.
Perseverantia est summi Regis filia, virtutumque (...), and consummati^. Bern.
Ep. 129.
Bernard, his only daughter, and heir, which carries all away; Cum enim omnes
virtutes current in stadio, sola perseuerantia accipit brauium, says S. Lib.
2. de bono Persever. Multorum est incipere, paucorum finite; sola tamen
Perseverantia coronabitur, sola accipiet bravium: nulla sine labor virtus, and
ad magna praemia non pervenitur, nisi per magnos labores. Bern. ^octo puncta.
Augustine, when all the virtues, Patience, Repentance, and Humiliation have
run the race, none but this Perseverance to the latter end, can get the Cup,
I mean the Cup of the Lords blessings; The Lord blessed the latter end of
Job. Our Savior promised a table in heaven, not to those, that heard him, or
to those, that followed him, says S. Hom. 10. ad Pop. Antioch.
Chrysostom. but to those only, Qui permanserunt, who continued with him. Luc.
22. 28. And he once provided a Table on earth, to those only, Qui
perseuerarunt, who perseuered with him, Mat. 5. 32. to teach us, that both
these Tables, that is, the blessings of the Heaven, and the blessings of the
Earth, are provided for them, and them only, which continue, and persevere in
their Repentance, and Devotions, to the latter end. If a sacrifice be offered
unto God, he likes it not, unless it come entire, cum cauda, with his latter
end, says Caudam Hostiae in Altari offerre praecipimur, ut videl: omne bonum,
quod incipimus, perseveranti sine compleamus. Been igitur c^^pta cunctis diebus
agenda sunt, ut ipsa victoria manu Constantiae teneatur. Greg. 1. Mor. c. 40.
Gregory. If his Priests be anointed with holy oil, it must be in extremis,
in their outmost parts, and latter ends, says S. Cyrill. If the Son of man
appear unto Apoc. 1. 13.
John, he does it vestitus podere, in a long garment down to his latter end,
as Aquinas observes; And all to teach us, that if we look for a blessing upon
any of these Graces, which the holy Ghost has stirred in us, to wit, Faith,
Repentance, sorrow for our sins, and the like, we must cherish, and praeserue
them to the latter end, for of those the Lord blesses only the Toll
perseverantiam, nec Obsequium mercedem habet, nec Beneficium gratiam, nec
laudem Fortitudo. Bern. Ep. 129.
latter end. Our great Assemblies, of late, have begun very well with the
General Devotions of Fasting, and Prayer. Who so profane as to deny it? But
out alas, Lachryma nihil citius arescit, as Cic. ad Heren. l. 2.
the famous Orator was wont to say, Nothing dries up faster then a public
tear; It seldom continues moist a whole day. (...); Liban. Declamat. 2.
Vlyssi.
Faction, Ambition, and private ends, by separating a Good King from a Good
people, a good People from a good King, and so both King, and People (for the
time) from the wonted benedictions of a good, and gracious God, have hitherto
praeuented that world of blessings, which is ready to fall upon a devout
perseverance to the latter end; For, say what you will, of all our humbling,
and Repenting, the Lord blesses but the Et nunc quid restat charissimi, nisi
ut admon^amini de perseverantia, quae sola meretur viris gloriam, c^ron^^^
virtutibus. Bern. Ep. 129.
latter end. And because these Blessings ever fall upon the latter end, Satan
is ever fighting against the latter end; For, as the K. of Syria commanded
those 32. Captains to fight against neither small, nor great, save only
against the K. of Israel, 1 King. 22. 31: So the Devil commands his leading,
and master-Temptations, not to fight against any, small, or great virtue, not
to fight against any of Gods Graces whatsoever, save only against this
perseverance in true Repentance, unto the latter end, quam solam virtutum nouit
coronari, says S. Studete itaque perseuerantiae, quae sola virtutu^ (...).
Bern. ep 109 S^ens Diabolum soli semper perseuerantiae insidiari, quam sola^^
virtut^m (...) coronari. Bern. ep. 32. (...) cornua ad d^as coenas simul
sonantia, vtraque f^^^datur. Prosp. libello. de d^no timoris.
Bernard, upon the which virtue only, he knows very well, the Crown must
fall, the Crown of all Blessings temporal and (...). Chrysostom. ad Pop Antioch.
Hom. 1.
aeternall, as here, The Lord blessed the latter end of Job.

ANd indeed, if that conceit of the Friars may pass for Gold, and will endure
the Touch, no virtue whatsoever can expect those aeternall blessings, save
only a perseverance in Repentance, and piety unto the latter end; For
nothing, but Aeternitie, can expect to be rewarded with Aeternitie; And if we
look for a Per hoc nostrum aeternum consequimur Dei aeternum. G^^. (...) l. c.
blessing aeternall, which shall continue, as long as Gods being, we ought to
endure (not one days Fast, and sorrow for sin) but a Cum enim praem^um, quo
prae^^abuntur sermon Dei, sit aeternum, id est, quamdiu est Deus: labor, quo homo
seru^^ Deo, correspondens suo praemio debet esse perpetuus, id est, quamdiu
erit homo. Destruct. Vitior. part 5. cap. 15. Nunquam vir iusius arbitratur se
comprehendisse; Nunquam dicit satis est, sed semper ^surit, sititque iustitiam;
Ita vt si semper viueret, semper, quantum inse est, iustior esse contenderet.
Non enim ad annum, vel ad tempus, instar Mercenarij, sed in aeternum diuino se
mancipat famulatui Bern. epist. 253.
sorrow, and a suffering aeternall, which is to continue, as long as our being;
I mean our worldly, and mortal being. So that no virtue can lay claim to
this Aeternitie of God, but Perseverance unto the End, which is the Aeternitie
of man, As the Lord here blessed the latter end of Job. You therefore that
would climb up to blessings, by Jacobs Ladder, and beginning at the foot
thereof, the blessings here on earth, get up to the top, the blessings in
heaven, remember what you saw upon that ladder, There were Angels descending,
and Angels ascending, but not any sitting, or Videt enim scalam Jacob, and in
illam Angelos, vbi nullus residens, nullusue subsistens apparuit, sed vel
ascendere, vel descendere videbantur: quo palam daretur intelligi inter
profectum, and defectum in hoc statu mortalis vitae nihil medium inueniri, sed
vt ipsum corpus nostrum continue crescere constat, aut decrescere; sic necesse
sit and spiritum aut proficere semper, aut deficere. D. Bern. epist. 253.
standing still; And therefore, if you look to have your Fasting, your
praying, your sorrow for sin, and your other virtues rewarded by God, you
must never rest then, but breath them in continual motion, until the time of
their Blessing come, which is only the latter end, as here; The Lord blessed
the latter end of Job. And so much of the third part of my Text, the proper
subject of this reward of Christian Patience, Repentance, and Sorrow for sin,
which is the latter end thereof; The Lord blessed the latter end of Job.

I Hasten now to the last part of my Text, which is the Quantity of this
Reward, and is drawn from a Comparison with those blessings, which this great
man had in common with other Princes of the East, before his Affliction, and
from the beginning; and these blessings of his latter end, being duly weighed,
bear down the scales, and prove more then those of his beginning; The Lord
blessed the latter end of Job, more then his beginning. And this in many
respects, which to avoid taediousnesse in this honorable Assembly, I will run
over very briefly. First, all the Blessings in the beginning made Job but vnum
ex multis, one of Gods Children at large, amongst whom the evil, and unjust
are also reckoned, Mat. 5 45. But this Chastisement, and correction toward the
latter end made him Gods special Quantum v^sus superior est auditu, tanto
di^^ert ab eo quod prius extitit and hoc quod post modum per flagella prosecit.
Greg. Mor. lib. 35. c. 4. Aperte quantum de verbere ^r^uerit indicatur. Ibid.
cap. 6
Minion, and darling, as it were, for he chastises every son, whom he
receives, Heb. 12. 6. whom he receives, that is, Quem approbat, whom he
makes his white Boy, as Theophylact interprets that place; For indeed the word,
Prou. 3. 11. from whence the Apostle takes it, is (...) quem vnice diligit,
whom he cockers above the rest of his Children, and may be interpreted (...),
that Son, in whom he is well pleased, as Mercerus, that great Linguist,
makes the Observation. You see then what height of favor, and priuacie Job by
this Correction, and due humiliation under the same, is got unto, and all this
sithence his beginning, and therefore, The Lord blessed the latter end of Job,
more then his beginning.

SEcondly, in the beginning, I do believe he was a great man, but I do not
read he was a Vo^atur Mil^s Dei, a Gregor. Hom. 19. in Ezech. (...) * Chrysostom ad
pop. Antioch. Hom. 4. (...). Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. ^. b^ob. 19. 25* 26
Knight, your Lordships will pardon the lightness of the Notion, which I chose
of purpose, that the Thing may be the better remembered* But in the latter end
he had this honor added to be made a Knight, a Knight of the Order, I mean,
Christ's own Order, a Knight of the Cross, that when he should rise again out
of the Earth in the last day, and be covered with his skin, and see God in
his flesh, he might accompany his Redeemer unto Judgment in a fitting
aequipage, adorned with his Passions, like a Collar of Pearl, and covered with
his Afflictions, the Robes of the Martyrs. Now to this Addition of Honor he
was advanced in his latter end, and not in his beginning, and therefore, The
Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more then his beginning.

THirdly, (...). Isidor. Pelus. lib. 3. ep. 11. Nisi enim passus fuisset,
fortasse veluti virtutus non landaretur. Chrysostom. hom. 4. de patientia Job.
(...). Id. ad Pop. Ant. hom. 1 (...) etc. Chrysostom. ^b. In Iconib.
His Fame, and Renown, which in honorable Persons, no man, without impudency,
can deny for one of Gods blessings, is now much enlarged in his latter end;
For, as Philostratus says very well, that one Jupiter, set o^t by Homer the
Poet, was worth ten Jupiters set out by Phidias the Caruer, because the
former flew abroad through all the world, whereas the latter never budg'd from
his pedistall at Athens: So the Fame of Job in his latter end, which is cum
sole, and luna, as he speaks, as far spread, as the beams of the Sun,
and the influence of the Moon, extinguisheth the Fame of his beginning,
confined to Husse, and a little corner of Arabia. The Devil in the beginning
was feign perambulare, Job 1. 7. to compass the world, before he could find
him, but ever sithence, he cannot tempt the least of Gods children, but
instantly he hears of him, says Saint Sermon. 3. de patientia Job.
Chrysostom. I confess he was from the beginning notus Deo, known unto God,
but now he is become notus nobis, known also unto us, and a praesident for
all men that expect deliverance from great afflictions, says S. Vir ille
sanctus in prosperis interrogatur aduersis, vt qui notus erat omnipotenti
Domino, notus per flagella fieret and nobis. Greg. in Ezech. lib. 2. Hom. 20.
Gregory. In the beginning the Holy Ghost could say no more, but Erat vir,
there was such a man; In the latter end he might have said, Erat (...). Chrysostom.
ad pop. Antioch. Ho^ Orig. lib. 1. in Job.
Philosophus, there was such a Philosopher, and notable Christian, says
Origin. So that the Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more then his beginning.

LAstly, his learning, and knowledge in the way of Godliness, was nothing so
praegnant in his beginning, as in his latter end. Doctrina viri per patientiam
noscitur, Pro: 19. 11. Patience is the best teacher of true Intelligence. The
Schoolmen, Hales. part. 3. q 62. m. 1. and 3 Aquin. 2a. ^ ^. q. 69. art. 3.
ad ^. 2a. 2. ^. q 9. art 4. in Matt. 5 Biel in 3. s^nt. d, 34.
Hales, Aquinas, Biel, and others, when they suite the Beatitudes (The Gospel
appointed for this solemn Fast) to the fruits (as they call them) of the holy
Ghost, do join that of Sorrow, and weeping for sin, to Science, and
knowledge, Because (say they) this Sorrow for sin can issue from no other
Fountain, then the true faith, and knowledge of God, nor is it ever found in
any man, sundred, or divided from the same. Qui addit scientiam, addit dolorem,
He that increases his knowledge of the faith of Christ, shall ever increase
the sorrow for his sin, as In Ps. 34. O lach^ma humilis, Tu^ est potentia, tuum
regnum. -- aperis coe^um, sug^^ Diabolum. Justinian in ligno vitae. cap. 9 Da
mihi gratiam lach^^marum, etc. Aug. lib. Med. c. 36. Flere debes, sed
recordando Sion. August. in ps. 136
S. Augustine applies that of Ecclesiastes, the 1. and the 18. verse, and so
say I, e conuerso, He that increases his sorrow for sin, shall prove a
great Clerk in the School of Christ. It was the Gall of the Fish, that
restored Tobias to his seeing, Tob. 11. 14. verse, and it is only the Gall,
and bitterness of the Cross, which restores a Christian to his perfect
understanding, Vbi multum Crucis, multum lucis, as Apud Gerard. in l. c.
Luther was wont to say, A Christian Soul is best instructed, when it is most
scourged, and Non poenas damus, sed ^rudimur. Chrysostom. Hom. 28. in 1. Cor. Saepe
Dei fit providentia, ut qui non cognoverunt Deum in prosperis, cognoscant in
adversis, and qui divitijs male sint abusi, ad virtutes penuria corrigantur.
Hieron. in* 1. Io. 1.
afflicted. For as Joseph entertained his Brethren roughly, before he was
pleased to be discovered by them, Genesis 45. 1: So God will have his Children
exercised with roughness, before he will be perfectly known unto them. Job
(it seems) was no young man in the beginning, but sure he was a young
Scholar, and never put to his Christ's Cross (the real Alphabet of true
Christianity, which we spell out by suffering, not by reading) until his
latter end; And so the Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more then his
beginning. And so much of my Text.

For the use thus in a word, both for the General, and the particular
Application.

GENERALLY.
FIrst, if a Christian man lie under any temporal losses, of Health, Wealth,
Wife, or Child, let him remember they were the blessings of the Lord, and if
he has lost these blessings, unless by impatience he (...). Chrysostom. ad pop.
Antioch. hom. 4.
loose the Lord too, the Lord knows how to bless him again, as here, The
Lord blessed.

SEcondly, what wicked Cain said of his sins, that they were greater then
could be forgiven, no Child of God must think of those losses, that they are
greater then can be given; For be he the greatest man in all the Country, as
Job was in all the East, (...). Chrysostom. hom. 1. ad pop. Antioch.
yet if he humble his soul with Prayer, and Repentance, the Lord can bless
him above all his losses, as here, The Lord blessed Job.

THirdly, if a Christian man has expected some time to have his Patience, and
Repentance rewarded, and thinks it now long, ere this blessing fall, let him
suspect he is yet in (...). Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. hom. 4.
his nonage, and incapable of the same; He must therefore prolong his
patience, and eke out his repentance, and awaite the Lords goodness, until
the latter end, and then, without all doubt, the Lord will bless him, as here,
The Lord blessed the latter end of Job.

LAstly, if the reward of his Repentance seem to be already received, and the
outward blessings (for all that) appear no more, nor (peradventure) so much as
in the beginning: yet let the Child of God take along with him the observation
of S. In Psalm. 66.
Augustine, Quamuis ar^a exinanita sit auro, Cor tamen plenum est fide, though
he has the less in his chest, he has the more in his heart, He has it in
the one, or the other Alloye; If not in the riches of the flesh, yet surely in
the riches of the spirit, in Faith, Hope, Patience, and Perseverance, which
make him more blessed in his latter end, then it was possible he should be in
his beginning, as here, The Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more then his
beginning.

And so much by way of use, Generally.

PARTICVLARLY.
I Would to God my Text were impertinent to my purpose, and that I could make
no application at all of the Gall, and wormwood, that praeceded the same. I
would the State were nothing near that estate, that Job is made to be in the
beginning of this Book, and I little doubt (...). Chrysostom. ad pop. ^nt. hom. 4.
if our Humiliation be cordial, true, and sincere, but it will be (in a short
time) in as good an estate, as he is made to be in the end of the Book. I
would to God, that no Diabolus dum subita ad nos perturbatione tentationis
irruit, circumspectiones cordis inopinate praeueniens, quasi ipsos custodes
pu^ros gladio occidit. Greg. Mor. l. 2. c. 24.
Sabaeans had slain our Servants with the edge of the sword, as we read, Job
1. 15. I would to God we could call to remembrance no bands of Chaldaei
interpretantur captiuantes. Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 2.
Chaldaeans, that had carried away any thing, that was ours, as we read, Job
1. 17. I would to God that no wind from the wilderness had blown down our
houses, (...), etc. Plutarch. (...).
those timber houses, that floate on our Seas, and makes us as safe in his
Island, as men use to be in Houses, as we read was done, Job 1. 19. I would
we heard of no mishaps of our Euersa igitur domo mortuntur si^^: quia ^urbata
in centatione con^cientia ad vtilitatem propriae cognitionis, raptim, and in
momento temporis obruuntur genitae in cord virtutes. Greg Mor. l. 2. c. 26.
Children, the sacred branches of that Royal Stem, that might any way relate
to that, which we hear of, Job 1. 18. To say little by way of discourse of the
principal object of our humiliation at this time, the most deplorable case of
our distressed Brethren in the Palatinate, and other places, where, in regard
of any free profession of the true Religion, the fire of God seems to have
fallen from heaven, and to have Ignis Dei dicitur, quia etsi non faciente Deo,
tamen patiente dicitur. Greg. Alor. l. 2 c. 24.
consumed all, as it does, Job 1. 16. Lastly, to say nothing, how, in these
last Parliaments, that should have yielded her some comfort, this State of
ours, by the jealousy, and distraction of her best Friends, had but too much
cause to cry out Quamuis boni studij, and rectae fuerint intentionis, tamen
haec ipsa illorum intentio, eis ad verba prorumpentibus, ante districti Iudicis
oculos suborta indiscretione fuscatur. Greg. Mor. l. 3. c. 9. Et bona quidem
intention ad consolandum venerunt, sed hoc quod ^ia men's Deo mundum praetulit,
locutio praecipitata vitiauit. Id. Mor. l. 3. c. 10
miserrimi Consolatores, miserable Comforters are ye all; as it is Job 16. 2.
These are bitter things indeed, and sore corrosiues, I confess, to the hearts
of true Englishmen; And yet for all this (Gods name be praised for it) Nondum
ad sterquilinium redacti sumus, Our State is not yet brought unto the dunghill;
Nondum versa est in cineres Troja; Although we in our particulars do this
day, by the custom of the Church, which calls it our Ashwednesday, yet the
State in general (Gods name be glorified therefore) does not lie in Dust, and
Ashes; All her Noble parts are strong, and entire; We have a King, who is (as
Histor. l. 2.
Velleius said of Cato) Virtuti simillimus, as like Virtue it self, as can be
partern'd in flesh, and blood; We have a wise, religious, and valiant
Nobility; We have (what ever desperate, and obnoxious persons may whisper to
the contrary) a dutiful, zealous, and (as I hope they will ever show
themselves) a respectfull Communaltie; We have a knowing, learned, and (the
busy meddling of some few, in some matters of no substance, excepted) a right
venerable Clergy; And therefore let no man laugh at Psalm. 68. 1^.
David's sackcloth, or mistake our humiliation; The exercise of this day does
not call upon the State to despair, but only to repent; Mutatus mutatum
inueniet, as S. Of his own Nephew. Mutatus mutatum invenies: Si agnoscis,
ignosco. Fugisti saevum, revertere ad mansuetum. Epist. prima ad Robertum
Nepotem.
Bernard speaks, let it change it self, and God will be praesently changed.
There is nothing but our sinning, that keeps off the Blessing, and there is
nothing but a (...). Chrysostom. ad popul. Antioch. Hom. 4.
serious, and continued repentance, that can break off our s^^ning; A
Repentance of some length, that will not fall short, but reach out, as far as
Gods blessing, which falls not upon the beginning of any spiritual Grace, or
Virtue, but still upon the latter end, as here, The Lord blessed the latter end
of Job, more then his beginning.

TO conclude all in a word, This Assembly began, as this Book began, with
Sorrowing, Fasting, and Prayer, as I touched before; But this Fasting, Prayer
Repentance, and Humiliation lasted not long enough, it reached not to the End;
For As S. Sermon. 1. de Pentecost.
Bernard speaks of Lent, Vita Quadragesima, that all our life, by right,
should be a Lent: so say I of this Fast, for the sins of this Nation, that
all our life should be nothing else, but magnum, and generale ieiunium a
vitijs, a great, solemn, and continued Fast from sin, and enormities, as
Alicubi. Sic Bern. I^i^^a^dum long amplius a vitijs, quam a cibis. sermon. 3. in
Quadrag. (...). Chrysostom. ad pop Antioch. Hom. 16. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 16.
S. Augustine speaks; A Fast that has not only a Beginning, as all Fasts
have, but withal an Ending, which we must not fix upon this day, or the next
day, or any day at all, (...). Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 4.
until the day of Blessing shine upon us, which will be at the latter end of
our Repenting, when we shall find, to our unspeakable comfort, that God will
surely bless the latter end of our Fast, more then the Beginning.

Which God of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1628.


