

Kings have their Periods by Dame Natures date.
The poor man dies, so does the Potentate;
And though to ye Worlds eye Kings seem compleater,
Their standing high makes but their fall the greater
Pauosian sculp.
Great Britains SOLOMON. A Sermon Preached at THE MAGNIFICENT Funeral, of the
most high and mighty King, JAMES, the late King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.

At the Collegiat Church of Saint PETER at Westminster, the seventh of May 1625.

By the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, etc.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1625.

1 Kings 11. 41. 42. 43.
and part of the Verse.
And the rest of the words of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom,
are they not written in the Book of the Acts of Solomon?

And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel, was forty
years.

And Solomon slept with his Fathers, and was buried in the City of David his
Father.

Great Britains SOLOMON.
Most high, and mighty,
MOst honorable, worshipful, and well beloved in our Lord, and Savior JESUS
Christ; It is not I, but this woeful Accident, that chooses this Text. You know
best, that no Book will serve this turn, but the Book of the Kings; no King,
but one of the best Kings; none of the best Kings, but one that reigned over
all Israel, which must be either Saul (as 1 Samuel 13 1. Filius vnius anni erat
Saul. S^mplex and inno^^ns ^anquam pu^r vnius anni. Called paraph. Hieron. P.
Dan^an. l. 2. ad Albe^icum. Cardin.
yet good) or David, or Solomon; no King of all Israel, but one of the wisest
Kings, which cannot be 1 Samuel 13. 13. Stult^ ^gis^^, ^^c custod ^^imandata
Dom^ni D^i tu^.
Saul, but either David, or Solomon; none of the wisest Kings neither, unless
he be a King of Peace, which cannot be David, 2 Samuel 32. 35.
a Man of War, but only Solomon; no King of Peace neither (the more is our
grief) alive, and in his Throne, and therefore it must of necessity be the
Funerals, and Obitts of King Solomon, which we have in these words: And the
rest of the words of Solomon, etc.

I Must no otherwise paint Solomon this day, then as Apelles was wont to do
King Antigonus, which was Plutarchus in Eu^en^.
imagine lusca, halfe-fac't, and of one side only, to conceal the want of an
eye, which he had on the other. For if I should set him out in the full
proportion, and leave not so much as a wart, or a mole vndescribed, he would
prove, but a foil, and a shadow, and not (as I desire he should) a lively
image, and repraesentation to deck, and adorn these praesent Funerals. His
Vices can be no blemish to that King, that resembled him only in his choicest
Virtues. The Rule in Scripture does differ much from that in the Painters shop.
For here Coppies do many times exceed the Originals. Solomon was a Type of
Christ himself, and by consequence a Pattern for any Christian. I do
therefore in these three Verses observe three parts, the Happy Life, the Happy
Reign, and the Happy End of this great King Solomon. For the first part, his
Life was happy in four respects. First, for his Sayings, The rest of the
Words. Secondly, for his Doings; And all that he did. Thirdly, for his
Wisdom; And his Wisdom. And fourthly, for the Eternity, and preservation
of all these, In a Book of Annals of the Acts of Solomon; And the rest of the
words of Solomon, etc. For the second part, his Reign was Happy for three
Circumstances. First for a great Capital City, wherein he resided, which was
Jerusalem; He reigned in Jerusalem. Secondly, for a great Circuit of Ground
in which he commanded, which was, all Israel; over all Israel. Thirdly, and
lastly, for a great Space of time, wherein he flourished, which was forty
years; And the time which Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel, was
forty years. For the third part, his End was Happy in a threefold
Circumstance. First, in regard of his death, which was not a sudden, and
violent dying, but an affected, and premeditated kind of Sleeping; And Solomon
slept. Secondly, in regard of his Soul at the time of his death, the which (
Vid. Io. Monthol. i^ Prompt. Iuris. verbo Solomon.
how ever wanton, and unruly wits have made their disputes) went to no other
place, then the receptacle of his Fathers; And Solomon slept with his Fathers.
Thirdly, and lastly, in regard of his Body after his death, which was no way
despised, or neglected, but solemnly interred in the Sepulchers of the Kings,
in the Tower of Sion, and the City of David his Father; And Solomon slept with
his Fathers, and was buried in the City of David his Father.

Nor does this Text hang together like a rope of sands, but the parts thereof
are chained, and linked very fast, in a mutual cohaerence one with another.
For first, A^nal. 1^.
Nullus magnam potentiam sine Eloquentia est consecutus, says Tacitus, No
glorious King, but was a For as Alexander tells his ^ather Philip. Such
Exquisiteness in this kind, as he his Father expressed, is not required in
every King. (...), Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 2. (...).
Kind of Speaker, and therefore here are Words; Reliquum verborum, as Saint
Hierome reads it, the rest of the Words. Secondly, because they are not Words,
but (...)* Pyndar. Olimp. od. ^ (...) Nazianz. Orat. 30.
Actions, that aeternize a King, here are Actions likewise; Quae fecit, All
that he did. Thirdly, because Actions from without are of small continuance,
without a Well from within for a new supply, here is a Pond to feed them from
time to time; Sapientia eius, His understanding, and wisdom; And his
wisdom. Fourthly, because this Wisdom would be soon forgotten ( Iul.
Capitol. in Antonino Philosopho. and Anton. de Gueuara. in ^orol. p^n^.
as M. Aurelius was wont to complain) without a History, here is a History
provided of the Acts of Solomon; The Book of the Acts of Solomon. Fifthly,
because a History written in an obscure place, of a little Country, and but a
short time, is of no esteem, and reputation, here are all things fitted for
Fame, and aeternitie, A great City, to wit, Jerusalem; He reigned in
Jerusalem. A great Empire, the twelve Tribes of Israel; over all Israel. A
great, and a long reign, for the space of forty years; The time that he
reigned over all Israel was forty years. Sixthly, because such a long, and
glorious life would be crowned ( S^^ton. in eius (...)* S^b^ and suis (...)
pre(...). cap. ^9.
as Augustus was wont to say) with a fair, and an easy death, here is a dying
compared to a sleeping; Dormiuitque Solomon, And Solomon slept. Seventhly,
because the Soul, which cannot sleep, must be provided for, as well, as the
Body, it is disposed of to his hearts desire, In the Society of David, and the
rest of his Fathers; Cum Patribus suis, With his Fathers. Lastly, though this
be enough for a Private Man, yet somewhat more would be wished in a King. That
Body, (...), Anton. Monach (...). Datur hoc i(...)strium v^^orum posicrit^ti,
vt ex^qu^^^ ^ ^^^^iscua Sepultura s^^^^ e^^ur, etc. Tacit. Annal. 16.
which so repraesented God himself, when it was alive, must not be neglected
now it is dead. And therefore he is buried in the Sepulcher of the Kings, and
the City of David; in Ciuitate David Patris sui, In the City of David his
Father. And the rest of the words of Solomon, etc.

But you will say, All these parts refer to King Solomon, and that King JAMES
is forgotten in the division. Most High, and Mighty, Right Honorable, and
Right Dearly Beloved; Our late Sovereign shall be remembered in due time, and
much to the honor of King Solomon. King Solomon in his Funerals had a
glorious Tomb in deed, as Antiq. l. 7. c. 1^.
Josephus describes it, but he had no Statue at all carried before him. That
was peradventure scarce to lerable amongst the Jews. A Tomb he provided for
himself, and so prophetically, as that (if we may believe (...). Salom. (...)
3. ^^ Serli(...) Ar(...). (...)
Pineda, and others) there were just as many Cells therein, as there were to be
Kings of Judah, that is twenty one. A Statue God Almighty has this day
provided for him. Many of these twenty one Cells being never filled, because
the 4 Reg. 21. 28* 2 Chronicles. 21. 20. 2 Chronicles. 24. 25.
unworthy Kings were buried elsewhere, Solomon shall lend King James a Tomb,
and King James shall lend unto him a Statue. The Tomb you may observe in the
Exposition, and the Statue in the Application of this piece of Scripture. King
JAMES shall first die in SALOMONS Text, and Solomon shall then arise in King
JAMES his VERTVES* For as Lib. ^.
Herodotus reports of the Egyptians, that by wrapping their dead in glass,
they praesent them alive to all posterity: so by that time I have plated over
the parts of this Text with the particulars of the Application, you that hear
me this day, shall have that happiness Matthew. 12. 42.
of the Queen of the South, which is not only to have read in a Book, but
withal to have seen with your eyes, and to have heard with your ears all the
rarities, and perfections of the wise King Solomon. You shall then perfectly
remember these Sayings, these Doings, this Wisdom, this History, this great
City, this united Empire, this long Life, this happy Death, this Rest with
his Fathers, and these solemn Funerals, which are the Minutes of this Text.
And the rest of the words of Solomon, etc.

I Begin with that part, whereof I find in my self the greatest want, to wit,
Eloquence, pointed at in the Entrance of my Text. Reliquum verborum, the rest
of his words. For that Man had need of Salomons Words, that will speak of this
first, or second Solomon. Eloquence in some reasonable proportion is so
necessary in a King, that a Musonius apud S^ob. s^rm. 4^
Philosopher calls it (...), one of the chiefest of the Royal Virtues. Surely
the want of this made Exodus 4. 10.
Moses in a manner refuse all government, though offered unto him by God
himself. And Homer, that is, Solon ( Octa^^^nus F(...) lib. de (...)
for he is supposed the Author of the Poem) is by (...)*
Plutarch made to say, that a ready Sword will not do the work, if it be not
attended with this readiness of Speech. Surely Pyrrhus, though a mighty
vaunter of all his Actions, would often Plutarch. in P(...).
confess more Cities conquered by Cyneas his tongue, then there were by his
own Spear. And although an Aaron may sometimes supply a Moses, and Eloquence
be borrowed from the tongue of a Minister, yet surely no great Monarchy was
ever raised, but where the King himself was a ^^^ Alexander thought it
unnecessary in a King to be exact in this kind of learning. (...). Dion.
Ch^ys. Orat. 2. (...) And Ta^^^us requires in a Prince, (...) ill^um illum ex
Sa(...). De (...) Agricol. And Leo the Emperor made use of M(...) his
Eloquence, (...) (...) in (...) Sid(...). Apol(...) in Panegyr.
competent Speaker. In the Roman Empire it is observed by Annal. 15.
Tacitus, that the Princes of the first line, Julius, Augustus, Tiberius,
Claudius, yea and Caius himself (as blunt as he was) never borrowed a tongue
to speak to the people. Nero is noted to be the first Caesar, Qui alienae
facundiae eguit, that ever usurped another man's Language And therefore no
marvel, if in Solomon a great Monarch, and the second of his line, the
History gave a touch of his Oratorie, and Eloquence, Et reliquum verborum
Salomonis, And the rest of the words of Solomon. Now when I look upon this
world of Matter I am to run through in a minute of time, the best Eloquence,
that I can use in setting forth the Eloquence of Solomon, is to say nothing,
and to turn you over to his admirable Writings; the Prous. ^^
Proverbs, the In (...) Solomon(...) Aquinas 2 q. 113. a^^. 3. ad. 2.
Book of Wisdom, and Prior pars p^^b(...) P^^ed. d(...). Sa(...) 1.
Ecclesiasticus, which were dictated; together with Ecclesiastes, the
Canticles, and many of the Psalms, which were penned to a Syllable by King
Solomon. And so I proceed from his Words unto his Actions, the second part of
his Life; Omnia quae fecit, All that he did. And the rest of the words of
Solomon, and all that he did.

HE DID.

Kings are anointed (as (...)
Cassa^eus observes) upon the Arms, as well as upon the Head; and the Arms
are the Instruments of Action, and Doing. That phrase of Scripture, so applied
to Kings, that they must Numb. 27. 17.
go in and out before the people, requires somewhat more then Elocution. In
the Genealogy of our Savior, expressed by S. Matthew, though many more be
written down, yet none is called a King but David; Dauidem Regem, David the
King. Matthew. 1. 6. verse; because (as Interpreters expound the place) David
was, as a King should be, a Man of War, and a Man of Action. Nero could tune
his Instruments well, and yet, as (...). Philostrat. de vita Apoll. lib. 5. c.
10. (...)
Apollonius said to VESPASIAN, he was a mean Prince, because he knew not how
to tune a People. And on the other side, Themistocles could never play on the
Harp, but yet is famous in all Histories, Plut. in Themisto^^e.
because he could make a City greater. Plutarque in his (...), speaks of two
Men, that were hired at Athens for some public work, whereof the one was
full of Tongue, but slow at Hand, but the other blunt in Speech, yet an
excellent Workman; Being called upon by the Magistrates to express
themselves, and to declare at large how they would proceed; when the first had
made a long harangue, and described it from point to point, the other seconded
him with this short speech, (...), ye Men of Athens, what this man has said in
Words, that will I make good in true performance. And as he was adjudged the
better Artisan; so is the Man of Action the better King: unless they come
jointly, as they do in this Text, VERBA ET FACTA, Words and deeds, And the
rest of the Words of Solomon, and all that he Did. Now if you desire to know
all that he did, I must turn you over to this Book of the Kings, which
notwithstanding is but a Florus to that Liuie, or rather a PHOTION to that
DEMOSTHENES, that first described them. Some of them I shall touch upon, when I
come to the second Solomon, and do now hasten to the third part of his Life,
which is his Wisdom; And the rest of the words of Solomon, and all that he
did, and his Wisdom.

HIS WISDOM. For indeed brave Actions are but the Fruit, Wisdom is the Tree
that bears them. Actions are but Rivers, Wisdom is the Head that feeds
them. And where this is wanting, they are like Land-floods, violent for the
time, but gone in an instant. Here therefore you have the fruit together with
the Tree, that brought them; here you see the Rivers, together with the Spring
that sent them; here you read of Salomons Deeds joined with that Wisdom that
first contrived them. And the rest of the words of Solomon, and all that He
did, and his Wisdom. HIS WISDOM. How necessary in a King, Salomons choice
has taught all Kings. For being praesented by God himself with a Pandora of
royal graces, although brave Actions called in that (...)
place the life of his Enemies was in the Box, yet took he out nothing but
Wisdom to govern his people, 1 Kings 3. 9. verse. He took out nothing, but
Wisdom said I? Nay, rather in taking out Wisdom (as God tells him in the
next verse) he left nothing behind. Omnia assunt bona, quem penes est virtus.
How can he want these golden Apples of Princely Actions, that has this garden
of the Hesperides, wherein they grow? For although Kings (as I said before) be
anointed on the Arms, the Instruments of Actions, yet are they crowned only
on the Head, the s^at of Wisdom. For as in the natural; so in the civil
Body, the spy and discovery of all the members is placed aloft in the
watchtower of the Head. Here are the Eyes, that see for all. Here are the
Ears, that listen for all. Here are the Nostrils, that smell out for all. Here
are the Brains, that sweat for all. And here is the Wisdom, that prouides
for all. And therefore what can a tongue, or an Arm do a Man good, if they be
not guided by somewhat in the Head? Sayings, and Doings are of little worth, if
(...). Syne^. de regno
Wisdom follow not, as it does in this place; And the rest of the words of
Solomon, and all that he did, and his Wisdom. WISDOM. Whither this
Wisdom of Salomons was universal, and embraced all Sciences, as Nullis
Circums^^iptam terminis sapientiam adeptus est. de reb Sal. l. 3 c. 9.
Pineda; or a Prudence reaching to the Practique only (because of those words,
To govern my people) as Libr^^ in Genes. q. 4. vt and Abulens. 3 Reg. 3. q. 10.
Pererius thought; the Latin translation Sapientia being for the first, the
Greek (...) for the second, the Hebrew (...) for both the opinions; Also
whither Solomon did surmount as I^ 3 Reg 3. q. 11.
Tostatus, or fall short of Adam in the pitch of his Wisdom, as Tom. 1. disp.
7. q. 2. pun^^^. 1.
Gregory de Valentia thinks, are such doughty Frayes, as I have no leisure to
part at this time, being now in the fourth place to speak of that Book, which
(if extant) would peradventure end part of the quarrel; the Book of the Acts
of Solomon. And the rest of the Words of Solomon, and all that he did, and his
Wisdom, are they not written in the Book of the Acts of Solomon?

THe Book of the Acts of Solomon. C(...) lib. 5.
Alexander upon the Conquest of Persia in a deep contemplation of his late
Victories, being told of one, that brought him some news, replied hastily
thereupon, What news can any Man bring unto Me, unless it be that Homer is
alive again? As who should say; All these Actions of mine will vanish into
air, if there be not a Scholar to write, and record them. And surely little
had now remained of the Sayings, the Doings, and the Wisdom of Solomon, if
they had not been of Studia praestant. vt etiam ^^^er. (...). Quin^^l. (...)
Orat. l. 12. c. 4.
Record in this Book. The Book of the Acts of Solomon. For although God
suffered this Book to be burnt by Sanctius. proem. in 1 R^^
Nebuzaradan, and ordered not Esdras to renew the same, because it was but a
Iournall of Salomons Actions, of a Civil rather, then a Religious use, and
fitter for a Closet, then for a Temple, yet was so much thereof placed in the
Canon, (...) Paralip. (...) (...)rum, (...) (...)m, (...) rep(...) (...)
Sanctius (...) 1.
as might be useful for Gods Church, being culled out of this Iournall either
by San(...)
Hieremie, or Esaias, or Esdras, or Ezechias, or (as I think) the Servants of
that King, who without quaestion collected his PROVERBS, Proverbs 25. 1. verse.
And therefore as this Text is but an Epitome of the 11. first Chapters of the
first Book of the Kings: so are these Chapters but an Epitome of this (...), or
Iournall of SOLOMON. The Book of the Acts of Solomon. And surely Dignum laud
virum Musa vetat mori, as there was never any King, that deserved; so was there
never a King in Scripture, that has obtained more Writers of his Acts, then
this King Solomon. For whereas Saul had never a one, David in his long reign
had no more then (...)
two, besides what Solomon in his Ecclesiastes has written of himself (as
many of the (...)
Caesar's, Julius, Augustus, Tiberius, and Adrian are noted to have done) three
great Prophets, famous in their times, 2 C(...)
Nathan, Ahias, and Addo had their several pens in these Acts of Solomon; the
Book of the Acts of Solomon. And indeed Books, especially such as these,
written by Prophets, and Honest men, are most necessary both for the (...)
(...) Annal 3.
applauding of the good, and the terrifying of ill-deseruing Princes. Non
potest humile, aut abiectum quid cogitare, qui scit de se semper loquendum,
says Mamertinus in his Panegerique. He had need be careful of all his
Actions, that is to be the subject of future Histories. For although I allow
not a Private man to feed upon Glory, and have preached against it (with all my
heart) not many weeks sithence: yet was I ever of Panormitans opinion in the
life of Alphonsus, that it is Cibus Regum, a very fit dish for the repast of a
King, and due unto him from the after Ages. Plinius (...) lib. 3. ^p 20. (...)
man, etc.
Multi famam, pauci verentur conscientiam. Some few peradventure refer it to
God, but most Kings desire, as Augustus did, to be applauded by Men. Then for
the bad Kings a History is the true Aretine of the world, Flagellum Principum,
the Lash, and scourge of all wicked Princes. They have no Schoolmaster (on
this side Hell) unless it be this one, to keep them in awe. And in very
truth, if he comes but Fama liberrima principum Iudex. Senec. Detestantur
malos principes etiam qui malos faciunt. Plin. Panegyr.
one day after their Reign, as Tacitus did to the Caesar's, he lays about
him, like an Orbilio, or as that Usher in Octauian. Ferrar. lib. de sermon.
Exoter.
Theon, (...), fetching blood at every stroke, for very small, and petty
offenses. And yet as humorous as they are, what History did ever commend Nero,
or discommend the Emperor Traian? I except Cardan the Phantastique, who writing
a Book de morte Gulielmi, of the death of Will his footboy, thought good to
join it with another piece, which he was pleased to style the Encomium of
Nero. To conclude this point, it is called (...) in the Greek, (...), which
signifies to fix, and settle. All these sayings, and doings, and wisdom of
Kings, would scatter away, like quick Mercury, if they were not fixed in such
a Book as this; The Book of the Acts of Solomon. And so much of the first
part of my Text, which I called Salomons Life, comprehending the words, the
deeds, the wisdom, and the Iournalls of Solomon. And the rest of the words of
Solomon, and all that he did, etc.

NOw to come to the second part of this Text, which is Salomons reign, and to
begin with the first Circumstance thereof, his Capital City, it is true what
(...). Plutarch. in vita Demost. Beat victuro ante alia conuenit patriam esse
glorios^m. Amm^anus Marcell. lib. 14. and tamen (...). Arist. apud La^rtium.
lib. 5.
Euripides said of old, (...), it is requisite for a Man, that would be
glorious to have his abode in a famous City. This Book of the Acts of Solomon
had scarce been worth the taking up, if his Words, his Actions, and his
Wisdom had not been praesented on this great Theater, the City of
Jerusalem; And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem. A City is an
Abstract of a whole State. For as Cain being guilty of the Murder of his
Brother, built the first City we read of in the world, Genesis 4. verse. 17.
(...), as (...). 3.
Josephus speaks, to make himself strong with his people about him: So most of
the Monarchs to this very day, guilty of oppressing, or being oppressed by
their neighbor Princes, Orbem in vrbem contrahunt, do contract their people
to this short Epitome, which we call a City, as the twelve Tribes are said to
be fetched to Jerusalem, Psa. 122. And the time that Solomon reigned in
Jerusalem. Now Jerusalem was not only a City by it self (as it is in that
Psalm) but a Type, and Figure of all other Cities. 'For as Jerusalem was an
union of two Cities, Masius in Ios. ^^^. 15. n. 63.
Iebus, and Salem, and an union of ^^a^ Montan. ^ Ios. 18. 20. Ruper^us lib. 2.
in Deuteronomy. c. 18. V(...). ^om. 3. (...). chapter p. 1. lib. (...).
two Tribes, Judah, and Benjamin, and an union of all Israel, as it follows in
my Text: So are other capital Cities in their proportion. So that as a City
seated upon (...) 14.
a Hill cannot be hidden; no more can a King seated in such a City. All his
Words, his Actions, and his Wisdom are still upon record* God Almighty
therefore being thus resolved to make Solomon glorious, as a type of our
Savior far more glorious, placed all his sayings, his doings, and his Wisdom,
long pulcherrima vrbium Or^entis, as (...)
Pliny calls it, On the goodliest Theater of all the East, the Eye of the
world, and the Queen of the Nations, the City of Jerusalem. And Solomon
reigned in Jerusalem. And so much for the first Circumstance of Salomons
Reign, which is his capital City Jerusalem. He reigned in HIERVSALEM.

THe second Circumstance of his Reign is his Empire, or Dominion, which is
very large, and with a Reference, and a Difference withal from the ^ Reg. 2.
^^.
beginning of his Fathers, and from the ^ Reg. 12. 16.
middle of his sons Reign, said here to be over all Israel. He reigned in
Jerusalem over all Israel. Over All. For as Orat. d^ l^g^ Ag^^^. contra ^ul^um.
Tullie says, that the Romans held no true Cities, but these three, Carthage,
Corinth, and Capua, which they called (...), the three Cities that troubled
their Common wealth, because these three only had Territories, and Dominions
belonging unto them: so Jerusalem, confined to her Walls, might peradventure
put forth a Mayor, but was no seat for a glorious King, without the annexation
of this great Empire of all Israel. He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel.
(...) Aristot. ^^^^. 7. ^. 8.
In multitudine populi dignitas Regis, In the multitude of the people is the
Kings glory, Proverbs 14. 28. verse. And behold a people not to be numbered for
Multitude, 1 Kings 3. 8. verse. As the sand of the sea, 1 Kings 4. 20. As the
dust of the earth, 2 Chronicles. 1. 9. Even the Kingdoms from the river unto the
lands of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt, 1 Kings 4. 21. For
these were the bounds of all Israel. He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel.
I will not sin with David in numbering this people, which Vilalpanda in his
second Part. 2. ^^^. ^. d^sp 3. c. 5^
Tome upon Ezechiel* labors to do, and makes up a Total of 6624. millions.
Neither will I compare Solomon either with Arphaxad, a King of many Nations,
Judith. 1. 1. verse. or with Assuerus a King of twenty seven Provinces, Esther
1. 1 verse. or with Nabuchadnasor a King of all the earth, Judith. 2. 3. verse,
or with Alexander, that would have been King of more; I must leave Imperij
amplitudine, longo interuallo su^erabatur ab alijs imperatoribus tum prioribus,
tum (...)oribus. Tosta^. in 2 Chronicles. 1. q* ^1. Dionys. Ca^thus. ^n ^ ^^^. c. 3.
Tostatus, and ^go ^^re si ^^^ seo, vt (...), i^^ gl^ria, a^qu^ a^^^ gl^riae
o(...), populique mul(...), Salomonem sur erasse al^o^^m n^s ^i^e pr^^r^s ^i^e
(...)s orbis dominatores. Pineda d^r^b. ^alomonis. lib. 6. c. 2.
Pineda, two Spaniards, in a hot skirmish about this question: It suffices me,
that God gave Solomon as many people, as he took to himself in those days,
to wit all Israel. He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel; And so much of the
second Circumstance of his Reign, the largeness of his Empire and Dominion.

I Come now to the third Circumstance, the Continuance of the same, which was a
fair, and a large scope of time, aequalled only by one, or two, but exceeded
by none of the Kings of Judah, to wit, forty years. His reign in Jerusalem
over all Israel was forty years. Forty years. For, Solomon was not brought
upon the Stage, as Cato stole into the Theater, vt exiret, to take a turn, and
go out again, Ostentatus, raptusque simul Solstitialis velut herba, solet, As
the Poet speaks of Mineruius: But that his sayings, his doings, and his great
Wisdom, irent in saecula, might make an impression upon the Ages to come; God
gave him a long, and a stirring part in this Scene of Glory, which was a reign
of forty years. He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel for forty years.
Forty years. For although we commend not a Musician for playing long, but for
playing well upon the Lute; yet occultae musicae nullum encomium, without
competent trial he is not at all commended. This life, says In Sententijs
la^^ici^ quater. ^^^ ^ersibus com(...).
Nazianzen, is a Fair, or a Mart, wherein good men may be furnished with
virtues. Although he that buyeth most in this Fair, is a better Chapman, then
he that staieth most, yet common reason must allow a time for a man to make his
market. Shall (...).
Hippocrates with his Ars longa, vita breuis, complain for a time to study
Herbs? and (...) etc. (...) ^ce^ ^us^ul. quaest. l. 3. (...). D^ g^^.
La^^^^us ^ib. ^.
Theophrastus fall out with Nature for a further respite to study Trees? and
In^e A(...). (...) ^xigen^^, (...), etc* S^n^^ d^ B(...)e vi^^* c. 1.
Aristotle vex himself for a longer life to study Motions? And may not Kings
expect more favor in this kind, to study out those Egyptian Hieroglyphiques
of the Hearts of Men? and to perfect that Art of Plin S(...)d. l^b. 3. (...) 1.
^^ Caluis^um. and A^n^rum (...)udo d(...) s^^^en^iam. Job 32. 7. Crescit
inse^ibus. Hieron. ep. 2. ad N^po^^an.
Vesticius Spurinna, Sola^ senectute prudentiam, a wisdom taught only by
multitude of years? Surely God is very careful herein. That life, says Non
^a^^le (...) plenus dierum ponitur, nisi is, euius per ^andem scripturam vita
lauda^^r. Grego^. M^^nus in Job. vlt. Nemini dedit D^^s spacium peccandi.
Ecclesiasticus 15. 22.
Saint Gregory, which is commended in Scripture, does commonly end with a
plenitude of Days. When God lends these extraordinary Qui pau(...)
multatalenta lucri secit ben^ viuendo. Chrysostom. in locum. Quaeris quid sit
ampl(...) spacium? vsque ad Sapientiam viuere. Seen.
talents to any man in place, Post multum temporis, it is a long time after
that he reckons with them, Matthew. 25. 19. verse. And therefore Solomon
trusted with all this stock of Sayings, and Doings, and Wisdom, and a City,
and an Empire over all Israel, had a reign of forty years to employ the same.
And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years. And so much of
the Second general part of my Text, the most happy reign of King Solomon.

I Was now concluding with that 2 Chronicles. 1. 12. that there was no King before
or after to be compared for happiness with our King Solomon. His Sayings, his
Doings, his Wisdom, his Fame in Histories, his City, his Empire, and his
long Reign, far surmounting all Kings in Scripture; when lo a (...). Aristot.
Ethic. l. 1. c. 11.
Philosopher (who must also be heard when he speaks the truth) pulls me by
the sleeue with an Ante obitum Nemo supremaque funera, that before I presume to
commend a King, I consider well his death, and his Funeral. Verily I have done
so both now, and heretofore, and that with more then ordinary diligence. I have
read all that Peraldus, Cognatus, Vilalpanda, Pineda, Delrio, Suarez, and some
others have said of this Theme. I know that Basil. ^ P(...). n^m vitae ^^. p. ^
non glorio ^um.
Saint Basil says in one place, he died not so well, and Part. 2 de praedict.
c. 27.
Prosper plainly, that he died ill. No doubt but he sinned against his God, for
he was not Christ, but his Type only. Yet I know on the other side, the whole
Army of the Fathers, Schoolmen, and Commenters upon the Scripture, do bring
him with Faith, and Repentance to his Grave, moved principally with the end of
my Text, that his Soul departed (as the Souls of the Saints are said to do)
by a sweet sleeping, that then it rested in the society of his Fathers, and
that his Body was buried with the better Kings in the City of David his devout
Father. And Solomon slept with his Fathers, and was buried in the City, etc.

THe first happiness of Salomons end is this, that his Death is resembled to
slumbring and sleeping. And Solomon slept. It is obser^'d by one, (...)
Quod Hebraei, Homines in stat^^perditionis mortuos, Sanctos autem do^^ientes
vocent, that the Hebrews say of Wicked Men, that they dye; but of the Saints,
that they fall a sleep. I cannot tell, whether the Rule be general; but (...)
Chrysastome says directly, that without Christ, (...), death is still death,
and Hell in the bargain, and they are only said to sleep, that dye in him.
Surely it is the godly dying, that most resembles slumbring, and sleeping. For
first as we praepare our selves unto the one before it comes, by setting aside
the traffic of the World: so are the godly disposed to the other. Look upon
Solomon at his deaths bed (for then says ^n 1. cap. (...) and lib. 2. con^ra
Iouinianum.
Hierome this Book was penned) Two things have I prayed of thee, deny me not
before I dye, Take away from me Vanity, and Lies, Proverbs 30. 7. Verse.
Secondly, as we willingly yield to Nature in the one* so do the (...) quod
(...) P^lanus, (...) (...) 39.
Saints to the God of Nature, when he calls upon them, in the other. Listen to
Solomon in his Ecclesiastes written not long before his death; The Righteous,
and his works are in the hand of God, Eccles. 9. 1. verse. Lastly, as Men lay
by their clothes with an expectation to use them again in the one: so do the
Saints their bodies, with an expectation of Judgment in the other. So ends the
Sermon of this Royal Preacher. God shall bring every work unto judgment,
Eccles. 12. and the last verse. And therefore this praeparing, and composing of
our selves ouer-night, with a full Resolution to awake in the morning, is no
bitter dying, but a gentle sleeping. Dormiuitque Solomon. And Solomon slept.
And so much of this first happiness.

THe second Happiness is in regard of his Soul, which is said here to remain
with his Fathers, Dormi^^tque Solomon cum Patribus suis, And Solomon slept with
his Fathers. His Fathers. Nonotiose scriptum est hoc, sed perpense, and
examinate, says Saint Ambrose in his first Book of Caine, and Abel. This is
no phrase light on by chance, but to be well weighed, and considered. It cannot
be expounded of his dead Body; for none of the kindred were entombed with
Solomon, but David only. Vnde claret, non ad Sepulturam corporis, sed ad
consortium vitae relatum, as he says of Isaac; and therefore, we must
conclude, that Salomons sleeping in this place, was not to rot with his Fathers
in the grave, but to live with them in the Kingdom of Heaven. And so Solomon
slept with his Fathers. Idem est apponi ad populum suum, ac apponi ad Patres,
says Burgensis. To sleep with his People, Genesis 25. 8. is the same thing as to
sleep with his Fathers. And to sleep with his People is expounded by Sup.
Genes. 26. 8.
S. Augustine, to rest in the society of the Angels with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
and David, who praeceded Solomon in this Faith, and Repentance, as spiritual
Fathers. And Solomon slept with his Fathers. And so much likewise of his second
Happiness.

THe last Happiness at his End, or rather after his End, was this, to be
solemnly interred as a great Prince in the City of David his Father. And was
buried in the City of David his Father. After his End I say. For I will not
strain this note, as some have done. Tom. (...)
Bachiarius, a Writer as ancient as Saint Augustine, makes it an Argument of
his very Salvation, that he was buried inter Reges iustos, in the Sepulchers of
the better Kings, in the City of David. It is true indeed, that those wicked
Princes, 1 Reg. ^^. ^^.
Amon, 2 Chronicles. 21. ^^.
Ioram, and 2 Chronicles. 24* ^^.
Ioas were not: and it is as true, that 3 Reg. 14. ^^.
Rhehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 2^* ^^.
Amasias, and 3 Re^. ^^* ^.
Abiam, as wicked as they, were all buried in the same place. Leaving therefore
his Soul in blis^e with his Fathers, these Funerals shall serve for a double
use; first, for an honor to this Body already dead; and secondly, for a Comfort
to all Bodies as yet alive. For the first, the Bodies of Saints must be
respected, as Phidias his Images were wont to be; not for the Stuff, but for
the Makers sake. (...)um, (...) ad (...) est (...) August. de ^^^^tate Dei.
lib. ^. c. ^3.
Non contemnenda sunt spiritus sancti organa, says Saint Augustine. This Body
of his, so glorified by God while he was alive, must be glorified in some
proportion, although he be dead. Amongst other magnificencies of his own,
he (...) ^^^^phus Antiq. (...).
built this Sepulcher of David his Father, and therefore was rightly interred
in the Sepulcher of his Father. In the City of David his Father. And as
Funerals do honor the Bodies that be dead; so do they comfort the Bodies that
are alive. Sepultura Spiritualiter prodest viuentibus, in quantum per hanc
astruitur resurrectionis sides, says Thom. in 4. Sent. ^^si 4^. q. 2(...) 3
Aquinas writing upon the fourth of the Sentences. The Burial of the Dead is a
(...) August. (...) lib. ^. c. 5.
lesson to the Living, to put them in mind of the Resurrection. Indeed if I
were of Heraclitus his Faith, I should be just of his opinion, as Origin quotes
it in his fifth Book against Celsus, that dead Bodies are to be neglected, as
dissolved for ever to dust, and ashes. But we Christians must be more
careful, where we lay these clothes, being to wear them again in the
Resurrection. I beseech you remember in (...) upon (...)
Herodian, and Xiphiline, what costly beds the Emperors lay in, when in their
(...), they were to be burned, and changed to Gods. With what cost does the
Phoenix consume her self, because she knows she shall be revived? Had not
Solomon been to rise with David; he had never provided in this sort to be
buried with David, In Ciuitate David Patris eius, In the City of David his
Father. And so I have done with the parts of my Text, the Obit, and the
Funerals performed of old; I come now to what I promised to add to the same,
which is a lively Statue of King Solomon.

AS Imaginem Traian^ ^urru triumphal^ ^^xit, vt optim^^ imperator ne post
mortem quidem triumphi a(...) dignitat^m. Spart. in Adrian.
Spartianus therefore reports of Traian, that after his Death, he triumphed
openly in the City of Rome, In Imagine, in a Lively Statue, or Repraesentation
invented by Adrian for that purpose: So shall this Solomon of Israel do at
this time in the Statue, and Repraesentation of our British Solomon. Truly me
thinks ( Si nunquam fallit imago) the resemblance is very lively.

Sic oculos, sic illemanus, sic oraferebat. All the Circumstances do suit very
well. And therefore, as a late Blaise de Viegenere sur le premier liver des
tableaux de plat-pemture de Philost.
Commenter upon Philostratus tells us, that in Greece the Statuaries began with
the making of their mould, and then proceeded to the polishing of their parts:
So will I compare these two Kings, first as it were in one general lump, or
mould, that you may see by the odnesse of their proportion, how they differ
from all Kings beside: and then with a particular examination of the parts of
my Text, that you may observe by the several Members, how well they resemble
the one the other.

FOr the bulk, or the mould, I dare praesume to say, you never read in your
lives, of two Kings more fully paralleled amongst themselves, and better
distinguished from all other Kings besides themselves. King Solomon is said to
be Vnigenitus coram Matre sua, the only son of his Mother, Proverbs 4. 3. so
was King James. Solomon was of complexion white, and ruddie, Canticles 5. 10.
verse. so was King James. Solomon was an infant King, Puer paruulus a little
child, 1 Chronicles. 22. 5. verse. so was King James a King at the Age of thirteen
months. Solomon began his reign in the life of his Praedecessor, 1 Kings 1.
32. So, by the For his ^ate Maies^ie never approved of the president, as is
touched in some place, by Cambden, and Thuanus.
force, and compulsion of that state, did our late Sovereign King James.
Solomon was twice crowned, and anointed a King, 1 Chronicles. 29. 22. So was King
James. Salomons minority was rough through the quarrels of the former
Sovereign; So was that of King James. Solomon was learned above all the
Princes of the East, 1 Kings 4. 30. So was King James above all Princes in the
universal world. Solomon was a Writer in Prose, and Verse, 1 Kings 4. 32. So
in a very pure and exquisite manner was our sweet Sovereign King James.
Solomon was the greatest Patron we ever read of to Church, and Churchmen; and
yet no greater ( let the house of Aaron now confess) then King James. Solomon
was honored with Ambassadors from all the Kings of the Earth, 1 Kings 4. last
verse; and so you know, was King James. Solomon was a maine Improuer of his
home commodities, as you may see in his Trading with Hiram, 1 Kings 5. 9.
verse; and, God knows, it was the daily study of King James. Solomon was a
great maintainer of shipping, and Navigations, 1 Kings 10. 14. A most proper
Attribute to King James. Solomon beautified very much his Capital City with
Buildings, and Water-workes, 1 Kings 9. 15. So did King James. Every man lived
in peace under his vine, and his Fig Tree in the days of Solomon, 1 Kings 4.
25. And so they did in the blessed days of King James. And yet toward his
End, K. Solomon had secret Enemies, Razan, Hadad, and Jeroboam, and prepared
for a War upon his going to his Grave, as you may see in the verse before my
Text. So had, and so did King James. Lastly, before any Hostile Act we read of
in the History, King Solomon died in peace, when he had lived about 60. Years,
as Lyra and Tostatus are of opinion. And so you know did King James. You see
therefore a Mould fitted for another Solomon in the Bulk, and General: I come
now, according to the Method in my Text, to polish, and refine the Members of
this Statue in their division, and particular.

TO begin with his Reliquum verborum, his words, and Eloquence; you know it
well enough, it was rare, and excellent in the highest Degree. Solomon speaking
of his own Faculty in this kind, diuides it into two several Heads, a ready
Invention, and an easy discharge, and expression of the same. God has granted
me to speak, as I would, and to conceive, as is meet, for the things spoken
of, Wisdom 7. 15. verse. and this was eminent in our late Sovereign. His
Invention was as quick as his first thoughts, and his Words as ready as his
Invention. God had given him to conceive. The Greek word in that place is
(...), that is, to make an Enthymem, or a short syllogism; and that was his
manner. He would first wind up the whole Substance of his Discourse into one
solid, and massy conception; and then spread it, and dilate it to what compass
he pleased, profluenti, and quae Principem deceret eloquentia (as Tacitus
Annal. lib. 13.
he said of Augustus) in a flowing and a princely kind of Elocution. Those
Speeches of his in the Parliament, Star Chamber, Council Table, and other
public Audiencies of the State (of which, as of Tullies Orations, Plin.
Secund. lib. 1. ep. 20.
Ea semper optima quae maxima, the longest still was held the best) do prove
him to be the most powerful Speaker, that ever swayed the Scepter of this
Kingdom. In his Style you may observe the Ecclesiastes, in his Figures the
Canticles, in his Sentences the Proverbs, and in his whole Discourse, Reliquum
verborum Salomonis, all the rest that was admirable in the Eloquence of
Solomon. For, beside his Prose, Iter ad carmen nouerat, he made a Verse also
when he pleased, and that (as became Buchanans best Scoller) Sanissimi
coloris, of a most dainty, and elaborate composition. An everlasting honor to
the Muses. Plutarch. i^ Alexand
For as Alexander, somewhat shie at the first, was content afterward to be
Burgess of Corinth, because Hercules had formerly accepted of the place: Even
so the greatest Potentate of all the Earth, may now without blushing stoop to
a Verse, being the usual Recreation of King (...) St. Ambrose of David.
David, together with this first, and second Solomon. For the King our Master
never used it, but as David did, for the praise of God, and his own comfort.
He was in hand (when God called him to sing Psalms with the Angels) with the
Translation of our Church Psalms, which he intended to have finished, and
dedicated withal to the only Saint of his Devotion, the Church of Great
Britain, and that of Ireland. This work was stayed in the one and thirty
Psalm. Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered, The very best meditation of all (as Saint Aug(...).
Austin thinks) in the Church Militant, to prepare a Soul for the Church
Triumphant. Thus therefore in Prose, and Verse, in his Proverbs, and in his
Canticles, he was nothing short of the Eloquence of Solomon, pointed at in this
first circumstance. Reliquum verborum Salomonis, The rest of the words of
Solomon.

FRom his Sayings I am come to his Doings. Quae fecerit, All that he did (...),
(as Idyll(...)
Theocritus speaks) a vast wood, and world of matter, fitter for the Annals,
and History of the Time, then for a fragment of a Funeral Sermon. Every
Action of his sacred Majesty was a Virtue, and a Miracle to exempt him from
any parallel, amongst the modern Kings, and Princes. Not a particular of his
life, but was a mystery of the Divine Providence, to keep, and praeserue
those admirable parts, for the settling, and uniting of some great Empire. Why
was the Queen his Vna ^^^^arum in omni^^^ Lampido Lacedae^^nia r^p^ritur, quae
regis filia, regis vxor, regis matter fuit. Plin. Histor. not. l. 7 c. 41.
Mother barren in France then grown a greater, and yet fruitful in Scotland,
a lesser Kingdom then this of ours? Why was A^roci, and horrendo scelere, quod
boni omnes ^^^^ detestati. Cambd. Eliz. page 11^.
the Father killed in his Bed, and yet the Son at the same time spared in his
Cradle? Why was he put (like another Postquam conspexit angueis ille alter
pue^, (...) cunis exilit, facit recta^^ angucis impetum, etc. Plautus in
Amphitruone. Act. 5. (...).
Hercules) to strangle Serpents in his swaddling clouts, and to fight, before he
could lift up his Arm, with the Cambden. Eliz. page 121.
Husband of his Mother, for a just revenge of the Death of his Father? Why were
those worthy Guardians of his Sacred Person so swept away, Cambden. Eliz. page
172.
Murray, Idem. ibid. page 203.
Lenox, and Mortonius Anglis addictissimus ab Arranio l^s^ Maiestatis
accusatus, in carcerem (...) Cambd. Eliz. page 314. Ex delator^m inuidia. page
315. obtrun^atus. page 317.
Morton killed, and Prae moerore, postquam tredecim meses praefu^sset, ^atis
concessi^. Cambd. Eliz. page 204.
Mar tormented, and vexed to death, and yet this Infant, without his
Protectors, from time to time miraculously protected? How was his Youth freed
from the Faction of Cambd. Eliz. page 316.
France, and his Riper years from that of Summa consilij erat, vt rege
intercepto, externas cop^^^ ad religionem Romanam restaurandam, and Angliam
^uadendam admitterent. Cambd. Eliz. part. ^ page 500. M. S.
Spain? the which two, like Sampsons Foxes, tied by the tails, agreed in
nothing but their End, which was to poison his Religion, and Succession. Why
did Gow^^es conspi^acie. fol 6.
Gowries Man, prepared to Kill him, tremble in his praesence, and begin to
adore him? Lastly, (for no praeseruation can be named after this) when the
Match, and the Powder, not far from this place, was so fitted, and praepared,
why was this King so divinely praeserued? Surely for no other End then this,
that as Cambd. Eliz. part. 2. page ^^6. M. S.
Perez was wont to call himself Monstrum Fortunae, the Monster of Fortune: So
this Prince might appear in the world, Monstrum Prouidentiae, a Monster, as it
were, of the Divine Providence; (taking the word, as Scaliger applies it to In
Poetice.
Virgil, Monstrum sine Labe, a Monster for want of Imperfections,) and be
esteemed for his Quae fecerit, what he should do, in time to come, a Miracle
of Kings, and a King of Miracles. I leave the multitude of his Actions to fill
up Chronicles, and will instance only in those four Virtues; which it seems
do now adorn his Hearse, and speak the same unto your Eyes, which I would
do unto your Ears; that is, the Actions of his Religion, his Justice, his
War, and his Peace, four principal Members in this Statue of Solomon. First
for the Actions of Religion, it is true what St. Vt terrestre regnum coelesti
regno famuletur. Greg. ep. 62. ad Mau^itium.
Gregory says, that God does therefore give Princes their Kingdoms to fit,
and praepare men for his Kingdom. Hence our Churches come to be builded, and
our Churchmen to be thus maintained. Now as Solomon of all the Kings of
Israel: So our Late Sovereign of all Christian Kings, that ever I read of, was
the most constant Ing^^^ ^aesar, and p^r gloria tua, ^iue (...)ud post (...),
si^e (...)nt. P^m. ^^ Paneg.
Patron, of Churches, and Churchmen. This Patronage extended to three several
Branches, to the Doctrine, to the Discipline, and to the Maintenance of Gods
Church. And of his Affection to these three he gave a full demonstration, by
that he had spent three Months in this Kingdom. To the Doctrine, by the Now
read in our Churches.
Translation of the Bible, against the Papists. To the Discipline, by the
Conference at Printed by command 14. January 1603. and now reprinted by King
James his new command, (...)diatly before his death. ^^^^.
Hampton Court, against the Nouellists. And to the Maintenance, by remitting
all Sede-vacantes, and disabling The Act. of (...) 1 ^ac.
Churchmen to make Leases to the Crown, against the Courtiers, and Statists
of those worser times. Ye House of Leui praise ye the Lord, quoniam
misericordia eius in Saeculum, For this Mercy of his endures for ever. But
this Ipsa initia plantare debent Principis nominis samam. Theodoricus.
beginning amongst us was but a Map of his whole Life, as many times a little
Ring, receives the image of a great Colossus; Because, from the very cradle
wherein he was crowned, all his life was a continued Patronage of the Doctrine,
the Discipline, and the Maintenance of the Church. For the first, I will speak
it boldly, Et dicam vniuersa audiente Graecia, in the praesence here of God,
and Men, that I believe in my soul, and conscience, there never lived a more
constant, resolute, and settled Protestant in point of Doctrine, then our late
Sovereign. The first Letter that ever he wrote to Queen Elizabeth of famous
memory, upon his taking of the Government to his own managing, was for
Assistance against those Men, Per Dunfer^^ilinium. Cambd. Eliz. page ^^^.
Qui verae Religioni aduersabantur, that were Opposers of this true Religion;
And this was in the year 1578. In the same blessed mind he still remained,
when he made that profession to Secretary Edinburg^. Cambd. Ehz page 341.
Walsingham; Se Religionem receptam constantissime defensurum, that he would
most constantly defend his received Religion, in the year 1583. In the same
Resolution he continued, when he put it to (...) (...)ham de (...) c. ^a(...)
Eliz. (...) 2. page 513. (...).
Queen Elizabeth to choose him a Lady, who recommended unto him at the first
(...) Ma^g^^i(...) (...) regis (...) regi (...) Ca^^^d Eliz. part. 2. ^ ^. 3 M
S.
Madam Margarite, Aunt to our now Queen (whom God long bless, and praeserue)
and afterward our late Queen (...) idem. (...)
Anne, a most blessed Lady in many respects, and yet in none more then this,
that she was the Mother of our praesent Sovereign. In the same Faith he
perseuer'd, when he made his Rodes (as they call it) to the Cam^^d. Eliz.
(...) 2. page 561. M. S.
North of Scotland against the Papists, in the year 1594. or there abouts. He
grew in this Faith from strengh to strength, when he wrote his Sed his alij,
libr^^ long prae(...) Basilicon Do^on. etc. Incre(...), quo^ h^m^num animos
and (...) sibi conci(...), etc. Id. in Eliz. part. 2. page 65^. M. S.
Basilicon Doron, which made the Romanists despair of him, and set on Id^^b^d.
page 562. M. S.
Parsons to forge Titles, Speedes* Chro. p. 9^^.
Clemens Octanus to publish Bulls, and the whole Conclaue to oppose his
Succession, as we may now read at large in the Letters of L^^re s^pti^sme 131.
A^ Roy and (...) 8. 162. A (...) de Ville^oy. and Liver 7. 132. A Mons. de
Villeroy.
Cardinal D'Ossat. And upon his happy Arrival to this Crown, a Protestant
he was deemed by Speedes Chro. p. 912.
Watson the Prologue, and, that without any hope of Change, by Faux the
Epilogue of the Powder Treason. To conclude, he defended this Doctrine of ours
with his pen, his Laws, and his Sword, the whole Progress of his Life; and
sealed it with the blessed Sacrament at the time of his Death. Sic illi visum
est viuere, sicque mori. I am bound in conscience out of Zeal to the Truth,
and my duty to my dead Master, to add a word more, ere I close this Point.
This blessed King, in all the time I served him, did never out of deep, and
just reason of State, and the bitter necessities of Christendom in these
latter times, give way to any the least Conniuence in the world, toward the
person of a Papist (for to his Doctrine he never did, he never would do, nor
was there any For they themselves will needs (as the Romans said of the Jews)
make themselves as remote from us, as the Indians* (...). Philostrat. in vita
Apollon. l. 5. c. 10
Consideration under heaven could have forced him thereunto) but he strictly
guided himself in the same, by some notable Praesident of Queen Elizabeth,
(the Load-starre of all his greatest Actions) and that in the very point; and
bathed his favors with showers of Tears (I speak it in the praesence of
Almighty God) least these Intendments of his for the apparent good of the
State, might scandalize for all that, (in an oblique line) his weak, but well
meaning Subjects in their Religion, and Doctrine. And so much for the first
point.

FOr the second, as he patronized the Doctrine, so did he also the Discipline
of this Church, I mean the Hierarchy of the Bishops, and the use of Chapters,
and Cathedral Churches, as a Government received from Christ, and his
Apostles, and the (...). lib. 2. and his word was, No Bishop, no King. Confer.
at Hampt. Court. page 36.
only Discipline that ever agreed with the Fundamental Laws of any Christian
Monarchy. For as that Musician in (...). Philostrat. in vita Apoll. l. 5. c.
11.
Philostratus sent his young Scholar to a sort of Bunglers, where he might
learn, (...), how he should not pipe: so God Almighty was pleased, that this
great Howeuer he lived amongst Puritanes, and was kept as a Ward under them,
yet since he was ten yea^es old, he ever despised their opinions. Confer. at
H^mp^. Court. page 20.
King should be bred for a while in that new Discipline, that he might learn
in times to come how he should not Discipline the Church of Christ. In that
Discipline he learned this Doctrine, that Cambd. Eliz. page 342.
one King may be lawfully surprised by three Earls, 1583. That Cambd. Eliz*
page 361.
Ministers are not subject to either King, or Council, 1584. That they may
Cambd. Eliz. page 444.
deny the King to pray for his Mother. 1586. That they may call Synods without
the King, and make Laws too; Cambd. Eliz. part. 2. page 550. N^c exp^ctata
Regis authorit^te, Barons, and Burgenses Con^ocarunt (Ministri) ad
consultandum ne quid detrimenti relligio, aut respub. caperet. M. S*
Ne quid Respublica detrimenti capiat, That there be nothing done to the
praeiudice of the State. 1593. For these Aberrations therefore in the
Discipline of that Church (though he honored those Preachers to his dying day
for the truth of their Doctrine in all other points) he first brought in
Cambd. Eliz. page 362.
the Jurisdiction; Secondly, the Name; Thirdly, the Cathedrals; and lastly, the
Consistories, and Reuenews of my Lords their Bishops: such a Patron he was of
this most reverend, most ancient, and most Apostolical Discipline. Lastly, he
was as great a Patron of the Maintenance of the Church, as ever I read of in
any History. For beside his refusal of Sede-vacantes, and that Law he enacted
at his first entrance for the preservation of the Reuenew of our Churches in
England, he might well say with David for his other Kingdoms; Psalm. 68. 10.
Zelus Domus tuae deuorauit me, that the Endowing of Bishopricques, the
Erecting of Colleges, the buying out of Impropriations, the Assigning of
Glebes, the Repairing of the old, and the Founding of new Churches has
consumed, and taken up all, or the far greater part of his Reuenews in
Scotland, and Ireland. I have no time to dwell upon particulars, but in the
general, think you of whom you please, of Constantine of Rome, of Charlemaine
of France, of Alphonso of Spain, or to come home to our own Island, a Soil
more fertile in prodigious Founders, of Lucius, of Offa, of Alfred, of Saint
Edward, of any King before, or since the Conquest, and I will say of my dear
Master (as he said of Traian) Tu melior peioriaeuo, though the times be far
worse, yet was he far the greater Founder. And therefore to conclude this
point, imagine Discipline to be the Walls, Maintenance the roof, and cover,
true Doctrine the sweet perfume, and Incense of the Temple, and you have
Salomons first Act before your eyes, the Building of Gods House, and his Quid
fecerit, what he did by Actions of Religion.

FOr the Actions of Justice in this King, they were so ordinary, that being
repeated they would prove as taedious for the praesent, as in the Ages to come
they will be admired. For, as (...). Synesius de regno.
Synesius says of that glorious Planet, that it is nothing for the Sun to
shine (...), it being of his Essence to glister, and shine: so were it
frigidissima laudatio, very poor Oratory, to commend our King for being just,
there having been made over all Europe, for the space of forty years, no more
quaestion of his being Just, then of his being King. If we look at home in
his own Dominions, never were the Benches so gravely furnished, never the
Courts so willingly frequented, never poor, and rich so aequally righted,
never the Balance so euenly poized, as in the Reign of our late Sovereign. I
could tell you that, that will never be believed in future times, of a Lord
that died for a vile Varlet, of a Peer condemned for a sorry Gentleman, nay of
a dear Son vnrelieued for a time against a Stranger, for fear of swaruing
the breadth of a hair from the line of Justice. If we look abroad into
foreign Countries, Quae tam seposita est, quae gens tam barbara? Those very
Princes, that have done him none, have been forced to confess his
Uprightness, and Justice. I leave you therefore to resolve with your selves,
of the which of these Salomons, that Text is most true; The Wisdom of God was
in Him, ad faciendum iudicium, to do Justice. 1 Kings 3. last verse. And so
much of the Actions of his JUSTICE.

THe third sort of Actions, which are those of War, are also obseruable in
the peaceable Reign of our late Solomon. For although it be a fashion amongst
men, vt nolint eundem pluribus rebus excellere ( Cicero in Bruto.
as the Orator speaks) that they cannot endure that one Man should be thought
eminent in many qualities, as the same Prince in the managing of Peace, and
War: yet surely nothing, but the malice of some people, that would place
their wheels in Princes, as Aristot. Politi^. l. 1. c. 1.
Daedalus did in his Statues; to pull them to combustions at their own
pleasure, can deny this Laurel to our late Sovereign. For besides that
occasioned in Scotland, to make his roades into the North, after the defeat of
the Earl of Arguile, he showed himself in person, not only (...), resolute
enough, but, if we may believe the Rex ipse difficill(...) i^meris molestus
confl^ct^tus, per asp^rrimo^ ^ont^s in illa part cont^^dit, etc. Camb. Eliz.
pa^^^ 2. ^ag. 5^1. M. S.
Story (as Plutarque said of Tiberius Gracchus) (...), somewhat too forwardin
those vnapproachable places, scattering his Enemies as much with his example,
as he did with his forces;

-- Lucan.
dum magnos tolerare labores Ipsa Ducis virtus cogit -- I say, beside these
Adventures of his person, he was unto his people, to the hour of his death,
another Cherubin with a flaming sword, to keep out Enemies from this Paradise
of ours; wherein, above al neighboring Nations, grew in abundance those Apples
of peace, which now I am to gather in the last place.

ANd surely Actions of Peace (what ever debauched people say to the V^^nam meis
tempori^us even at, ^t militum stipendi^ in Doctor^s Artium absuma ^tur. Leo
Graecanicus.
contrary) set out a Prince in more orient colors then those of War, and
great combustions. In turbas, and discordias pessimo cui que plurima vis: Pax,
and quies bonis Artibus indigent, says Histor. l. 4. initio libri. Ad laud^m
regnant^^ tra^itur, si a^ omnibus p^^ ametur. Cassiodorus. ^pist. l. 1. ep. 23.
A deep point of policy. (...). Artist. polit. l. 8. c. 14.
Tacitus, any Phaethon will serve to fire the world, but none beside the God of
Wisdom can keep it in order. And this is most evident in the Book of God.
When Israel is to be chastized with War, and Desolation, any furious Iehu
will serve the turn; But for the managing of a long, and a continued Peace, no
less is required then the Wisdom of Solomon. Now of these Actions of King
James his Peace, though many others have made whole Books, yet will I make but
a short Index. You may find in those volumes, the Schools of the Prophets
newly adorned, all kind of learning highly improued, manufactures at home
daily invented, Trading abroad exceedingly multiplied, the Borders of Scotland
peaceably governed, the North of Ireland religiously planted, the Navy Royal
magnificently furnished, Virginia, New Foundland, and New England peopled, the
East India well traded, Persia, China, and the Mogor visited, lastly, all the
ports of Europe, Afrique, Asia* and America to our red Crosses freed, and
opened. And they are all the Actions, and true-borne Children of King JAMES his
Peace. And so much, or rather (for want of time) so little of the Quae fecerit,
and what he did; The rest of the words of Solomon, and all that he did.

THe third member of this Statue, is his Wisdom, fitly resembled to that of
Salomons. For if the pattern seem to excel in the Intellectuals, I am sure
the Statue exceeds in the Morals. If we take this Wisdom for an
Universality, clasping in her Arms all Arts, and Sciences; she cannot be
denied in that large sense, to have built her a house in that sacred bosom.
For, as In vita Budaei. Id^m narratur de Theodoro Gaza. Sphynx. Philos. cap. 25.
Budaeus being ask'^ by Francis the first, if all the Books in the world were
to be burned, what one he would save, to preserve Learning, made answer, that
he would save the Works of Plutarque, because they had impressions of all the
Sciences: so say I, and appeal herein to any Scholar in the world, that if
all Books were to be burnt, and Plutarque also to bear them company: yet
could a man find some footing, and impressions of all Arts, and Sciences, of
all kinds of As (...) is called (...). S^^d^s in P^^lolog. and ^piph. lib
d^m^nsu^ ^.
Divinity, Morality, and Humanity whatsoever, within the Works of our late
Sovereign. But if we take Wisdom for that deep reach required in a King, for
the governing of his people, which (...)* Synes. de regn^.
Synesius calls (...), the Prince of all the Princely Virtues; I will without
blushing say of Him, as Pliny did of another, and appeal herein to my Noble
Lords of his Privy Counsel, Nihil est omnium quod discere velis, quod ille
docere non potuit, there was nothing in that kind that a man would learn, but
was fully taught by our Great Master. But (alas) I dare not launch into this
vast deep, whereof the best Head (whereeuer it is) in all Europe cannot sound
the bottom: Plin. S^^undus l. 1. epist. 10.
Nisi sapiens non potest perspicere sapientem: My wisdom, I confess, is far
too short to give you any character of his infinite Wisdom. Some streams
hereof, you may hereafter find in the Histories of this Age, the fourth Member
of this Statue, the Book of the Acts of Solomon. And the rest of the words of
Solomon, and all that he did, and his Wisdom, are they not written in the
Book of the Acts of Solomon?

FOr although King James had no such Officers as Sanctius in. 1. Reg. proleg. 1.
Solomon had, a Commentarijs, appointed of purpose to write his Actions; yet
Ecclesiastes 11. 7.
Dulce estoculis videre Solemn, the Sun cannot shine in such a brightness,
but Eyes must behold it, nor set in so lasting a night, but the world will
miss it. Private Histories (as Spartianus in Adriano.
Adrian said of Apers accusations) are but Incke, and Paper, and may be help
in part with the golden pin-dust; whereas Sidonius. Me^^s omnibus quam singulis
creditur. singuli enim decipere, and decip^ possunt: nemo omnes, neminem omnes
^e^ellerunt. Plin. Secund. in Panegyr.
Suffragia mundi nullus emit, None can be honored of all Europe, but he that
held the Balance of all Europe; and, for the space of twenty years at the
least, preserved the peace of all Europe. Christendom therefore will be the
Book, Swords, I fear, will prove the Pens, and the Remembrance of the times
past, the Acts, and Monuments of our blessed Solomon. And if multitude of
Writers could multiply his Fame, the Israelite with his fifteen Penmen (for
so De reb. Salom. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Pineda makes his Boast) must give place herein to our British Solomon. What
Writer has cause to speak of a King, but praesently he falls upon this King
of Writers? So that as Ap^d Eusebius.
Constantine the Great did nickname Traian, Herbam Parietariam, a Wall-flower,
because his name was engraven on every wall: so shall aemulous Posterity term
King James Herbam chartaceam, a Paper-flower, when they read his glory in all
Writers. And as one says of Plinius, and Tacitus, that they were Nos^i m^? and
quidem ex s^^d^* ^s. Ad ho^ ^l^um. Tacitus ^s, ^n Plinius? Exprim^^^ non poss^m
quam sit iu^^ndum mihi, quod nomina nostra qu^si litera^um propria, non
^omin^^, lit^ris reddunt^r. Plinius Secund. lib. 9. ep. 23.
Literarum nomina, non Hominum: So will it be a quaestion amongst Critiques in
the Ages to come, whether this name of James does more properly note an eminent
King, or an eminent Scholar. And in that case, if ungrateful posterity
should forget the King, (as believe me it will not; for like one of (...).
Plutarch. re^p. gere^d. praecept. So^um ^^ ^^m(...)dat, a^g^tqu^ t^mp^r^s
spat^^^. Plin. in Pan^g.
Demetrius his Statues, this King will show better and better with time) yet if
it should, Learning will never forget the Scholar. In the world before the
Flood, though we read not of one King, Genes. 5.
the Inuenters of the Arts are still remembered. His History therefore, like
Whereof the several books are assigned to several Mus^s. Qu^m ^e^^ren^ mu^^,
viuet. Tibul. li. 1. ^l^g. 4. (...). Pynd. Olymp. Hymn. 7.
Herodotus his History, shall be written, and set out by all the Muses; they
all shall join in the writing of his Book, the Book of the Acts of our
British Solomon.

IN the fifth place, survey we his Capital City; which See the Proclamations
for buildings. (...). Philostratus de vitis Sophist. l^. 1.
enlarged, and repaired in each corner thereof, 1 King. 9. 15. and refreshed
within with a Which a man might call, as the Egyptians do N^lus, (...).
Philost. de ^i^. Apol. l. 5. c. 10.
running water (which De bello Iudaic. l. 6. c. 6.
Josephus attributes to the Son of David) does no more resemble that other,
then this Jerusalem, where our Solomon reigned. He reigned in Jerusalem.
Here for the space of two and twenty years the Sacrifices were daily offered,
here Gods word was learnedly expounded, here the Laws were justly administered,
here all the Tribes were usually assembled, here the three Kingdoms were
conuened, here Edinburgh and Diuelen were united, like Iebus, and Salem, in one
Jerusalem. Whilst Solomon reigned in this Jerusalem. And so much of this
fifth Circumstance.

IN the sixth place, suruay we the bounds of his Empire, and King James will
prove a King Solomon in this, as being the first King (for ought we know) that
reigned here over all this Island, Over all Israel. He reigned in Jerusalem
over all Israel. There is a brute of one Brutus long before, but it is no more
then a mere brute. King a Cambd. in sua Brit. page 5*
James is the first King of the Island, that we read of in good Histories.
And surely Non sine numine Diuum, this came not to pass otherwise, then by
Gods direction, from time to time. When the two Daughters were so matched, why
should Scotland be preferred? when a The name of the T^ddo^s.
new race had gotten the Crown, why should the name within the space of 115
years be thus extinguished? When many praetenses were made to this Land, why
should they all in this one King be concentred and united? (...) by the (...)
Ea^^e of N(...)ton, in (...) speech for the (...), made in (...)meant. 3. l^c.
26* Ma^j. M. S.
that of the Britains by Cadwallo, that of the Scots by Fargus, that of the
Picts by the Daughter of Hungus, that of the Saxons by the Sister of Edgar,
that of the Danes by the Daughter of King Christian, and that of the Normans by
the Daughter of Henry the seventh, from all the which he was a Lineall
Descendant. Surely to let us know, that this was the Solomon, whom God from the
beginning had anointed King over all Israel, and accordingly he reigned in
Jerusalem over all Israel. And so much of the sixth Circumstance.

THe seventh Circumstance is the time of his Reign, the which, though it falls
short in a divided, yet in a compounded sense exceeds the pattern. For though
he reigned not so long over all Israel, yet in all he reigned 58. years. A
long, and a blessed reign, wherein he was married to one Queen, and (as he
said of Tigranes) to a thousand Virtues. A Reign like that (...), ^^a^. ^
or golden chain in Homer, whereof (...), the several linkes were several
blessings, with the one end fastened to his Cradle, and the other dropping into
his Grave. And surely God Almighty, to let us know that it is Pr^^. ^* ^^.
by him that Kings do reign, makes them sometimes to govern States (and that
very well) before they be able to govern themselves. (...)
Varanes his child was crowned King, while he was yet in his Mothers womb.
^^^^ of (...) Poly(...)
Frederick the second, when he was but three years old. 4 (...)
Ioas, when he was but seven. Solomon, (as some Ra^^^ Da^^d Kim^^^a^^d ^y^am
Sal(...) d^ce^^^m in^tio (...) (...)am. Although all the Gr^^ke and ^at ne
Fathers, make him to be 12. years old.
Rabbis think) when he was but ten. ^nuent^r of France* in Ca^. 9. ^
Charles the ninth, when he was but eleven. I ^d^^i^^ su^ fectus est I
^do^icu^ (...) duo^^^^m ^a^u^ Gaguinus. Comp^ndij sui libr. 7.
St. Lewis, when he was but twelve. And our late Sovereign aged little more
then Regn^m ^^ssit (...) vix ^redecin* m^^s^s ^ato. Cambd. Eliz. page* 119.
so mamy months. Thus God stocks those Kings with Days, whom he means to
stock with Goodness. Thus our Dear Master, who reigned better, reigned also
longer then King Solomon, whose Reign in Jerusalem ou^r all Israel, was no
more then forty years: And so much of the seventh Circumstance.

AND hitherto, Most High and Mighty, most Honorable, Worshipful, and
well-beloved, you may imagine I have offered unto your thoughts, not only a
Statue of King Solomon, but withal, as the Graecians did in their Hercules,
and Xenophon in his Cyrus, an Idaea, or Repraesentation of all the perfections
required in a King. But, out alas! those Statues of theirs are (as the Soul
that frames them) lasting, and immortal, but this of ours made of Flesh and
Blood, Maiore nostrum damno, quam suo (as Su^ton. in Ti^o. Non mem^ni me^e^^sse
m^la morte ^ortuum, qui lib^nter opera pieta^^^ exe^cuit. Hi^^on. did. 13.
he said of Titus) to our loss, but his great Advantage, is proved Mortal.
I, but did you not know before (will some men say) that the King was mortal? I
did indeed, And I know withal, the state of Christendom does require, that
such a King, as this, of these Sayings, and Doings, and Wisdom, and
Experience of 58. years, should have been immortal,

Auson. Burd^^ pr^^^. cap. 19
Verum oneranda mihi non sunt, memoranda recepi, Fata -- Our only comfort is
this, that as he lived like a King, so he died like a Saint. He did rather (as
Saint Hierome said of Nepotian) migrare, quam mori; or (as Saint Bernard writes
of Hubertus) abire, quam obire, he did not dye, but fall asleep, Dormiuitque
Solomon, And Solomon Faelix s^mnu^ (...) requ^^s volu^tate, (...) vol^ptat^,
vol^pt^^ cum ^tern^ta^^ Petius Damianus de Stephano. Dulcis sim^l and beatus
(...). Gregor. Nyss^n. de c^^.
slept. Never have you read of any King, that left this world more resolved,
more prepared, as though he had vnbrac't himself for his Bed, rather then for
his Grave. And it was his fashion so to do, when he was summoned by any
sickness. God dealt with this Blessed Prince, as he did with 4 Reg. 20. 6.
Ezechia, for certain years before his Death, he was called upon by his
sickness at Royston to set his House in Order. Lord, what a (...) Mr. (...)
and showed and approved ^y the (...) in his lifetime M. S.
Speech he then made to his Son our praesent Sovereign? O Verba Bracteata.
Not a syllable in all the same, but deserves to be written in letters of Gold.
How powerfully did he charge him with the care of Religion and Justice, the
two Pillars (as he termed them) of his future throne? How did he recommend
unto his love, the Nobility, the Clergy, and the Communaltie in the general?
How did he thrust, as it were into his inward bosom, his Bishops, his Judges,
his near Servants; and that Disciple of his whom he so loved in particular?
And concluded with that heavenly Advice, to his Son, concerning that great
Act of his future marriage, To marry (...). Solon apud Plutarch.
like himself, and marry where he would. But if he did marry the Daughter
of that King, he should marry her Person, but he should not marry her
Religion. But now at this sickness more shaken with the fits of a raging
Fever, the nearer Death drew unto him, the more he prepared himself for it.
All his Latter days he spent in prayer, sending his thoughts before into
Heaven, to be the Harbingers of his happy Soul. Some four days before his
end, he desired to receive the Blessed Sacrament, Viaticum Aeternitatis, as it
is termed in the Ancient Councels, a blessed Bait, that the devout soul uses
for the most part to take in this life, when it is ready to travail for the
other life. Being demanded, if he was prepared in point of Faith, and Charity
for so great a Devotion; He said he was, and gave humble thanks to God for
the same. Being desired to declare his Faith, and what he thought of those
Books he had written in that kind, He repeated the Articles of the Creed
one by one, and said he believed them all, as they were received and expounded
by that part of the Catholic Church which was established here in England.
And said with a kind of sprightfulnesse, and viuacitie, that what ever he had
written of this Faith in his life, he was now ready to seal with his Death.
Being questioned in point of Charity; He answered presently, that he forgave
all Men that offended him, and desired to be forgiven by all Christians, whom
he in any wise had offended. Being told, that Men in Holy Orders in the Church
of England do challenge a power, as inhaerent in their Function, not in their
Person, to pronounce and declare Remission of sins, to such as being paenitent
do call for the same; And that they have a form of Absolution for that very
purpose, set down in the Book of Common Prayers; So his Majesty had done
before, sying, that it was Apost^^^^all,, and a very good ordinance, in that it
was given (...) name of (...) th^^ de(...) it, and upon the clearing of his
con(...)e Con^er* at (...). Court. page (...) it is re(...) in the (...)sions
of (...), Bohem, ^ Saxon.
He answered suddenly; I have ever believed, there was that power in you, that
be in Orders in the Church of England. And that, amongst others, was unto me an
evident demonstration, that the Church of England is without all quaestion the
Church of Christ. And therefore I a miserable sinner do humbly desire Almighty
God to Absolve of my sins, and you, that are his servant in that high place,
to afford me this heavenly comfort. And after the Absolution read, and
pronounced, he received the Sacrament with that Zeal, and Devotion, as if he
had not been a frail Man, but a Cherubin clothed with flesh, and blood. And
some hour after, he said unto his Son, the Duke, and others that stood about
him, that they could not imagine what ease, and comfort he found in himself,
^ithence his receiving of the blessed Sacrament. O, says he, that all my
Lords would do but thus, when they are visited with the like sickness.
Themselves would be more comforted in their Souls, and the world less
troubled with quaestioning their Religion. From this time, to the hour of his
death, the sickness prevailed more and more upon his Body, and his Sense, and
Memory not much impaired, Prayers were multiplied accordingly from hour to
hour, for the comfort of his Soul. And as In ei^^ vita.
Nazianzen says of Saint Basil, that he did desire to dye (...), with some
sentence of piety in his mouth: so there were selected in English, and Latin,
some short sentences of Devotion to raise, and lift up his Soul into Heaven,
before it came thither. With this he was so ravished, and Comforted, that as
all his Servants (never sufficiently commended for Diligence, and Est
magnisicum, quod te ab omni cognatione vitiorum reprimis, ac reuocas; sed
magnificentius, quod tuos. Quanto enim magis ard^um est, alios praestare quam
se; tanto laudabil^us, quod cum ipse sis optimus, omnes circa te similes tui
effecisti. Plin. sec. de Traiano in Paneg. (...). Plutarch. de Catone Maiore.
Devotion) can bear witness, when he groaned now under the pangs of Death,
yet was he ever still, and as quiet, as a Lamb, when these Eiaculations were
infused into Him. To one of them, to wit, Mecum eris in Paradiso, he replied
presently, Vox Christi, that it was the voice, and promise of Christ. And
another, Veni Domine Jesus, veni cito, he twice, or thrice repeated. And a
while after, his hastening on forward toward his End, hastened us also to that
Prayer usually said at the hour of Death; the which was no sooner ended with
that sentence, In manus tuas Domine Commendo spiritum meum, but his Lords, and
Servants kneeling on the one side, his Archbishop, Bishops, and other of his
Chaplains on the other side of his Bed, without any pangs, or Conuulsion at
all, Dormiuit Solomon, Solomon slept. And so much of this eight, a most bitter
Circumstance.

ANd yet this Bitterness is like the bitterness of Myrrh, very unpleasing
unto us, but very praeseruatiue unto him. Cui peregrinatio dul^is est, non a^a^
patria^. August. in Psalm. 93. Cur ^an^ vitam adeo amamus, vbi quanto ^iutius
quis ^u^rit, tanto ma^or^ oneratur Sarcina p^ccator^m? Ambros. ^e bono mortis.
cap. 2. Nam ^ur ^o^t^m adeo detr^ct^mus? Ne videa^us nimirum descripta in
Apocalypsi Ioannis. Cypr. lib. de mortal. Sect. 17.
Mors ianua vitae. Si tamen ^as ^st aut ^lere, aut omnino mortem voca^e, qua
tanti viri mortalitasmagi^ ^inita, quam vita ^st. De Verginio. Rufo. Plin. sec.
l. 2. ep. 1.
He had no way, but by this Mortality, to cloth himself with Immortality.
Were it not for this Sleeping, how had he obtained this aeternall Dormiun^
^ort^^, non solum p^opter f^cilita^em r^suscitandi, sed ^tiam ^^^pter iucund^
insomnia, quae animae a cor^o^^bus s^paratae ha^ent, dum Deum ^^c^e ad ^aciem,
etc. Salmer. tom. 6. tract. 44.
Dreaming? which his Soul seuer'd from the dregs of the Body, does now
enjoy in the praesence of God, enuiron'd no more with Lords, and Knights, but
with troops of Angels, and the Souls of the Blessed, called in this Text, his
Forerunners, or Fathers; And Solomon slept with his Fathers. And therefore as
Thebaid. 4.
Papinius Statius reports of the old Arcadians, that mourning all night for the
setting of the Sun, they were comforted notwithstanding at the break of day,
when they saw him in his Sphere again. And as the people enraged at the death
of Romulus, were quieted by and by with Plin. secund. de viris illustribus. c.
2.
Proculus his news, that he saw him in glory riding up to Heaven: Much more
must we Christians remain full of hope at the death of a So the Egyptians
mourned for Jacob 70. days; Joseph but 7. days. Genesis 50. 3. and 10. So of the
blessed Virgin at the death of Christ: Stantem lego, flentem non lego. Ambros.
in Luc.
Saint, that is gone to his Fathers; Dormiuitque Solomon cum Patribus suis, And
Solomon slept with his Fathers. And no more of this ninth Circumstance.

ANd I must say less of the Last of all, praeuented therein by the
Magnificence of his Majesty: Because, for any thing we read in the
Scriptures, the Funerals of the first, came nothing near the Stately Funerals
of our second Solomon. Shall I say therefore of my praesent Master, that he is
a great, and a hopeful King? All that is true; but I leave it to another, that
has time to enlarge it. I will only say, as St. Orat. Funebr. de Morte
Theodos. Imperat.
Ambrose said of Theodosius, Summam votorum complexus est, pius est; He has
showed himself, as we desired he should, a pious Son of a most pious Father.
He lays, with all possible solemnity, the Body of his Father in the Sepulcher
of the Kings, erected by Henry the seventh his great Grandfather, Tanquam in
Ciuitate David Patris eius; Just as this other Solomon was, In the City of
David his Father. And yet, with due reverence to his Majesty, I must be bold
to say, that all this is nothing to that Honor, which God has done to the
Funerals of his Father. So Psalm. 115. 15.
dear in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his Saints. For God has
provided another Statue yet to adorn the Exequies of our Late Sovereign. I
do not mean this Artificial Repraesentation within the Hearse; for this
shows no more then his outward Body; or rather the Body of his Body, his
clothes and Ornaments. But I mean that Statue which (beyond all former
praesidents of Piety) Te ad sydera tollit humus. Plin. secund. in Panegyr.
walked on foot this day after the Hearse, one of Myrons Statues, Qui paene
Hominu^ animas effinxerit, which came so near to the Souls of Men, (...)
Cyrus Prodrom. in sua (...): in Gregor. Theol.
A breathing Statue of all his Virtues. This God has done for Him, or rather
for Us. For as he has made a lively Repraesentation of the Virtues of Solomon,
in the Person of King James: So has he done a like Repraesentation of the
Virtues of King James, in the Person of King Charles our Gracious Sovereign.

I will therefore conclude these Exequies of Solomon, with a saying spoken by
that imitator of Solomon, Ecclu^s. 30. 4.
Mortuus est Pater, and quasi non est mortuus, Similem enim reliquit sibi post
se. Though his Father be dead, yet is he, as though he were not dead, for he
has left One behind him most like himself. Whom God long prosper, and
praeserue.

The Grace of our Lord etc.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. M.
DC. XXV.


