NEVVES FROM Sir Roger Williams.

With a discourse printed at Rheines containing the most happy victory,
lately obtained by the Prince de Conty, Lieutenant general over the Kings
forces, in Aniou, Touraine, Maine, Poictu, Berry, Blaysois, Vendomois, Dunois,
high and lower Limosin, and Perch, against the rebellious Leaguers, enemies to
his Majesty.

Whereunto is annexed the order or agreement of the Court of Parliament, held
in Normandy at sundry times, and now lastly confirmed the eighteenth of August,
to the utter abolishing of the Popes authority, the taking away of his
revenues, and the burning of his Bulls.

Printed by John Woolfe, and are to be sold by Andrew White, at the Royal
Exchange, over against the Conduit in Cornwall. Anno. 1591.

The Copy of a Letter, sent by Sir Roger Williams to the Citizens of Paris,
concerning some false rumors by them lately given out.
To the Colonels, Captains, as well Spaniards as others being at this present
in Paris.
Having received intelligence by men of credit and good condition, that you
and your Allies in the City of Paris, as well the masters of the
Sorbonistes, as all other the favorers of the Spanish power, have given forth
a false brute, that you have challenged the English forces, lying at
Hauberuiller, to the combat, number for number. Whereunto I answer, that true
it is, we are but four of the meanest companies, which might be chosen out
of the Queens Majesty's forces, our Sovereign Lady and Mistrisse, the Queens
most excellent Majesty of England: yet notwithstanding, if you please to do
us the credit (having leave of the Kings Majesty our master) we will meet you
with two hundred English Pike-men, and a hundred Musketeers, between the
Villette, and Paris. Where with the help of the great God, the world shall
testify, that I, and my companies, shall not have the least fear of you. True
it is, that for mine own part, I do esteem you brave soldiors, and would do
more, if you were conducted by Julian Romero, your late Collonell, Mondragon
Sentio Dauille, and the like, who of late have been discomfited and slain:
but I doubt, that Sir Alexander de Mantes, and those which now command you, do
willingly persuade the Governors and Ladies of Paris, that there is none other
conduct in the world but theirs: only this I think, that what they do is
upon compulsion. As for me and my companies, we have obtained leave of the
King, to show that we are resolute to defend and disprove your rumors to be
false and forged, if so it please you to repair to the place appointed, where
I determine, that a hundred French Gentlemen in my company, (who have humbly
besought the King, to permit them to try their valor with Pikes, though it
were against six score of you, of such as you can bring) shall prove and
allow the same to be just, and lawful. Thus staying for your answers, I kiss
your hands in courtesy. From Hauberuiller this 16 of July.

A Letter sent by the King, to my Lord the Prince de Conty, upon the taking of
the City of Louuiers in Normandy.
COusin, God has so highly favored me, that my City of Louuiers is this
day delivered into my obeisance. The execution whereof was done at the hour
of midday, and in my presence: for ten of mine possessed themselves with one of
the gates of the said City. The Baron of Biron, whom I caused to come near
with my forces, was also so soon entered therein; notwithstanding the fight was
very fierce, in regard of the resistance made by the inhabitants, and Fontaine
Martel, who had his company of an hundred Cuirasses in the said City: yet it
pleased God I became master, loosing there not above eighteen or twenty men,
among whom were five Captains. Beside, I found my self able to make one of
the gates of the City to yield, where through most part of the men of war
and the inhabitants withdrew themselves. The Bishop of Eureux, and
Fontaine-Martel, were found, taken by the hands of my Soldiers. There was
found in the City a great quantity of Corn and Wine, beside other
munitions, and the place it self in such estate, as it may be called one of
the Forts of my realm. And heerevpon I pray God to preserve my good Cousin in
his safe and holy guarde.

From the Camp at Vernon, the sixth of June, 1591. Signed, Henry. And a little
lower. Potier.
On the outside was written.

To my Cousin, the Prince of Conty.



A discourse of the victory obtained by my Lord the Prince of Conty,
Lieuetenant general over the Kings forces in Aniou, Tourin, Maine, Poctu,
Berry, Blaisois, Vendomois, Dunois, high and nether Liuosin, and Perch,
against the rebellious Leagers enemies to his Majesty.
MY Lord the Prince of Conty, being come into the country of Poictu, with the
Army which he conducted for the Kings service, consisting of a great number of
Noble men and Infanterie, to the end he might purge this Province of the
oppression and tirannie, which the rebellious Leaguers (enemies to his
Majesty) exercised on his subjects: to bring those places which they
unlawfully used into his Majesty's obedience, and freely to deliver this
Province: Being advertised the Vicount de la Guierche had besieged Belac with
two Cannons, one Coluering, and a Bastard piece of ordinance: resolved with
himself to march right and directly thither, to raise the siege of the said
Vicount, or bid him battle, if he durst tarry his coming. But his excellency
having attained so far as Lucac,, a very great days journey, was given to
understand, that the Vicount himself had withdrawn his siege, and according to
the natural villainy, wher-withall the Leaguers are familiarly acquainted, had
betaken himself with his Cauallery to Chauuigny, leaving his Cannon and
Infanterie at Mont Morillon. Which when my Lord the prince perceived, and that
he had lost the occasion of giving a fair check to the presumptuous Vicount
(who by an extreme mischance saved himself from the sight of my Lord of
Trimouile, he marched but a little before, and not able to be succored by the
prince, could not fight with him, but was constraind to leave him to slight)
concluded now with himself to fasten on the said City of Mont-Morillon,
which at the same time he caused to be summoned: but they within being not
willing to make any answer, his excellency commanded to give them certain
vollies with the cannon, after which he caused them to be summoned again: but
they still continued in their resolution to keep aloof.

On the morrow (being the sixth day of June) at five of the clock in the
morning, his excellency changed the battery, which endured very furious till
the tenth hour before midday, and then my Lord the prince commanded to give
the assault, which was done very courageously on all sides, and continued the
space of three long hours together. But in the end, our men having taken the
high town, compelled the enemy to retire into the low town (separated by the
River which passes through the midst) where they hid themselves within a
Chapel, and there prevailed so well, as they did greatly endamage our men on
the side toward the high town. But the Prince seeing advisedly into the
danger, sent five or six charges from the Cannon against the gate of the
Chapel: which being immediately broken, the enemy was constrained quickly to
forsake it. This gave our men occasion to pursue them so bravely and
cheerfully, that God (who evermore assisteth with his divine bounty, such as
in good zeal fight for his name, and in so just a quarrel, and for the
service of their King) favored them so graciously, that they conquered both the
high and low Towns of the said Mont-morillon, having put to the sword more
then five hundred footmen, and sixty Cuirasses, two masters of the field,
and all the Captains slain, wounded, or taken prisoners, whereof my Lord the
Prince caused many to be hanged, by example of that which the Leagers did at
S. Sauin.

This brave exploit was done, without loss of aniemore on our side, then one
soldiour, being of his Excellencies Guarde who was slain, and one Gentleman,
named the Seigneur of S. Martin. The Marshal of our company of armed men, was
hurt with an Harquebuze in the arm, and very few of our soldiers beside were
wounded. Three other places afterward were yielded, to wit, the Towns of
Chauuigny, S. Sauin, le Blanke en Berry, with the Castles of Bourg-Archambault,
Plaisance, Bel-Arbre, Auailles, Belauue, Angles, and Bisse, beside many other
that are as willing. So that more fair and fortunate effect has not been
seen, then of this happy and signal victory, wherein it pleased God to bless
my Lord the Prince, as he has evermore done in all his enterprises, returning
still to the great advantage of the Kings affairs and service, whereby his
poor people shall receive great comfort. Thus first was the siedge of Belac
raised by the Vicount of Guierche, and only upon apprehension of the coming
of my Lord the Prince: the Vicount with his cauallery in rout, posted away in
the greatest disorder that could be: Mont-morillon taken by assault: all the
Leaguers Infanterie shamefully scattered: four Cannons besides other munition,
and seven Ensigns taken: so many places likewise yielded at the same time
into the Kings obeisance: and infinite other, who attend nothing else, but that
his Excellency will receive them to their first and natural duty, which is
to obey his Majesty, as all good and true Frenchmen are bound to do: to God
therefore be all honor and glory.

The order of the assault, neither the names of the Captains and heads of the
contrary part, is spoken of in this discourse: because it is but a letter or
remembrance of the deed done and lately effected at the Camp at Mont-morillon.

The order or agreement of the Court of Parliament held in Normandy.
THe Court and Chambers assembled, seeing the Kings letters of declaration,
given at Mante the fourth of July last, following upon a former declaration
made by the said Lord, at his coming to the Crown, wherein he confirmed what
will he had to conserve whole and sound the religion catholic, Apostolic and
Roman in this realm, had given in charge to proceed against one, naming
himself the Nuntio of the pretended Pope Gregory the xiiii. who contrary to
the dignity, authority of the said realm, and liberty of the French Church;
published certain Bulls in form of admonition against the king, princes of
his blood, and other princes, prelates, ecclesiastical, officers of the
Crown, and all other his faithful subjects and servants. An other agreement
was made by the Court the xxx. of January. 1590, upon the kings letters
pattents, bearing date the fifth of that month and year, against a pretended
Legate come into France: whereby the said Court made defenses and inhibitious
to all Curates, Vicars, and other ecclesiastical officers, as also to all
persons, of whatsoever quality or condition they were: not to receive any
charge, neither act or expedition proceeding from the said pretended Legate.
And if any were found so hardy, as to enterprise or proceed to the publication
and reading thereof: it was enioined to all such as found them with the deed,
on pain of being declared guilty of high treason, to seize upon their bodies,
and to present them in justice before the Judge royal. An other declaration
was published in the Court the xviii. day of August, 1591. with a coppie of
the said pretended Bull, sent from the above named Gregory, who calls
himself Pope, dated the first of March. 1590. Signed Vestrius Barbianus, and
underneath A De Alexiis, and on the outside Registrata apud Marcellum
Secretarium: whereupon the Attorney general to the king, and Thomas the
Advocate general proceeded in manner following.

Among things natural there is such an order, that one depends upon an
other, and to avoid confusion, the inferior are subjects to the superior.
Even so among men, the divine providence has given a natural inclination, to
one to command, and to others to obey, in whom lies the greatness, quiet, and
welfare of realms, and commonwealths, where the Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates ordained to be above, are marks and prerogatives more then other,
which makes them sacred and inviolable, as representing lively the image of
the divinity. Such therefore are we bound to obey, as the wisest in all times
past have with one voice witnessed, that the bonds which we hold or retain one
to another, of what estate soever they be: are not of such virtue and
efficacy, as those whereby we are restrained and bound to regard and honor
our Kings: to expose our lives, goods, and all means else for their safety,
and for the execution of their commandments. But beyond this natural
inclination, there is nothing so much expressed in all the holy Scripture, and
which has bin more religiously observed in the church of God: then using
prayers public and particulerly, for the prosperity of Kings and Emperors,
albeit they were Pagans and Infidels. Such likewise ought to be the vows and
oraisons of the Prelates and Pastors, for the life of their Princes, and
prosperity in their affairs, following therein the ancient councels and
determinations of the good fathers, and holy personages: and so well has this
order been preserved, as thereby has the catholic religion flourished, and
realms and great Seigneries filled with patience and charity, with continual
and free invocation on the name of God. And principally might this be noted in
this realm of France, the true prop or stay of religion, and refuge to the
seat Apostolic in all her afflictions: till now that certain ambitious and
unthankful men, being little contented with the excessive good turns they
have received from our Kings, and aspiring to their height of estate and life,
have filled this Realm with Sedition, Fellonie, Barbarism, and cruelty. And
as this unhappy and insatiable ambition, has made them forget all right and
piety, so well know these Rebellious coniurers, that in all times religion
has had a most mighty puissance over men, and that under the shadow thereof,
the Pagans themselves have held their Monarchies, estates, and authorities*
even so under this pretense they lay down the foundations of their pernicious
purposes, and making trafike of the gifts and blessings of the holy spirit,
have with counting money bought the selling toongs of many ecclesiastical
persons, made drunk with like ambition, and the great promises of the authors
of this rebellion, and by blasphemy and hypocrisy, have filled the house of
God with all execrable abominations, making the flesh to sound where the word
of God ought to be preached, by burnings, murders, massacres, spoils, and
subtle practices, and by fearful outrages have deceived and drawn to them
the worst sort of people, the weakest and fanaticall spirits.

Then have they called to the partage and dissipation of this flourishing
Realm the Spaniards, ancient enemies to true Catholics, and this French
estate, without whose aid, nevertheless the predecessors of their King had
never obtained the crown of Spain, and all the people yet live in Arrianisme
and Sothike heresy. And to heap impiety and wickedness together, they
caused to be done that cruel, abominable and detestable Paracide on the late
most Christian King, a religious and catholic Prince, whom God absolve.

Now seeing that the divine providence has miraculouslye preserved and raised
King Henry the fourth, reigning at this present, (who in so just a cause is
assisted by all the Princes of his blood, the Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
and the better part of good Prelates, the principal officers of the Crown,
and the Nobility beside, who all with one voice, demand and breath for
nothing else but the expiation of a deed so heinous, the reestablishing of this
estate, as also the religion Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman, and the
restitution of those great Signeuries, which unjustly they have detained in his
realm of Nauar since the time of his majesty's great graundfather, and to
reprove the title which they by usurpation pretend to this Realm:) these
rebels opposing themselves against him, have made, and do make, by their
accustomed practices, to run under hand diverse scandalous libels against the
honor of the king, the princes of his blood, and his good and faithful
subjects: to overthrow all order, to induce the^ forsake the yoke of obedience,
and wander from the service and fidelity, which they owe to his highness* by
the disposition of all right, divine and humane. Notwithstanding, they shall not
be shaken by such sinister deceites, the grace of God assisting, the wisdom
and valor of the king, their loialty in defense of this Realms dignity, and
the perfect freedom of the French Church: following the examples of their
predecessors who in like and less case, employed themselves, and bravely held
head against all the Popes enterprises: who sometimes forgetting themselves
against their benefactors, would insult upon the preheminences, rightes, and
authority of the French church, and this Realm, which stands exempt from al
excommunications, and interdictions: as the Popes, namely, the hottest, and
most audacious, has been enforced to confess, by many autenticall Bulls; yea
and in case of commination, or declaration of such censures, by great and grave
deliberation of all orders, have been with unanimity withstood, as well by
substraction of obedience, as of money and goods.

Which examples of so weighty consequence, might and ought withold the
pretended Pope, by name called Gregory the 14. from enterprising in this
Realm a matter so bold and monstrous, as to send and publish certain
infamous libelles, scandalous, and full of impiety, sedition, and heresy,
under a masque of Religion, in form of Bulls, by his pretended Nuntio M.
Marcilius Laudrianus, authorized (as he says) under his two Seals. But the
rather is this done, in respect that the Pope Sixtus Quintus his predecessor,
was in the beginning of his pontificacie left beguiled by the perturbers of
this Realm, and being afterward by certain Princes and especial Lords
informed touching the truth and estate thereof, that all the principal
Catholics and men of worth and the goods of all qualities, were (to the
great disgrace and danger of the catholic Religion) pursued by the Leaguers
and rebels: chased from their houses, piety and religion trod under foot, the
Churches by them contuminate and overthrown, the Priests and religious
ransomed and slain, and a million of such innocent souls as have been cruelly
massacred, continuallye crying to God for vengeance due to such misdeedes, and
the taking of his holy name so wickedly in vain: he would now by his fatherlye
provision safelye foresee, this scandale to christianity, by abridging the
course of his life so shamefullye practiced, and by the Spanish faction hindered
from any conuenable remedy, which yet turned to the shame and confusion of the
Leaguers and rebels. Hereupon the Attorney general calling for the said
writing or Bull in form of an excommunication or interdict from the said Pope
Gregory the xiiii. of that name, against the King reigning at this present,
and all the good Catholics of his Realm: for the observation of Justice,
ordained that the said Marcilius Laudrianus the pretended Nuntio, should as a
common enemy and kindler of hatred, be pursued, taken and apprehended alive or
dead, to be delivered to justice if it might be possible. And if he happened
not to be apprehended, he should within three days be summoned to the Town of
Pontellarche, which was nearest to the City of Rome, wherein he had published
the said scandalous Libell, there to be proceeded against, according to the
Laws of the Realm. In mean while, it was most expressly forbidden to all
the Kings subjects, of what estate or quality soever they were, not to
acknowledge or use any obeysaunce to the said Pope, nor to pay him directlye or
indirectlye any right, under the name of first fruits or such like pretense.
And not to pursue or receive of him or any other, of what quality or condition
soever they were, his accomplices adherent, any collations, confirmations, or
provisions for benefices in this Province and primatie of Normandy, graces,
dispensions, or other expeditions, neither to answer, bear or cause to be
borne, by way of banque or otherwise, gold or Silver to the Court of Rome,
likewise not to obey or pay any thing to the Archbishops, Bishops or other
Prelates his adherentes, who had put in execution any of the pretended
diffamatorie Libelles, so scandalous in form of excommunication and
interdiction: on pain of confiscation of body and goods, as infringers and
perturbers of the public peace. And that the ecclesiastical persons should
be admonished to assemble together, according to the Kings will contained in
his letters, that they being spoiled by the ambition of the League, setting
before their eyes the fear of God, the quiet of their consciences, the honor
and dignity of their charges, the conservation of the catholic Religion, the
virtue and success of such as have advanced the same: should never suffer the
liberty of the French Church to be in any sort diminished. But being assisted
by their Kings and their soueraign justice, to oppose themselves against all
the Popes enterprises: considering when they were known in their greatest
promotions, they that were enemy to the Crown of France, ever used some
means and practices against them. As it happened by Pope Martin the fifth, in
the cause of the Emperor Sigismund, when he declared against the King and many
other: yet they reestablished this fair French church in her former right, in
purging it from the vices which slipped thereinto, by the violent passions of
these disturbers, and such as they framed of their mind: which to effect, they
held Counselles and Smodes, true and only remedies against scismes and
heresies: moreover, by that Court was foreseen and prevented the scandales
that might arise by the exposing and reading of such Libelles and pretended
admonitions.

This Court and Chambers assembled, have ordained and do ordain, that these
Letters shall be published, heard and registered: requiring the Attorney General
to the King, who already has received them, openly to declare and manifest
them, how that the said Bull given at Rome the first of March 1591. is
abusiue, scandalous and injurious, tending to sedition and trouble of all the
Christian estate: contrary to the word of God, holy decrees and liberties of
the French Church, proceeding from wrong and not from right, stuffed with
error, impiety and deceit. It is ordained that it shall be torn and burned
before the Palace gate, by the Executioner of public justice. Forbidding all
persons, of what estate, quality or condition soever, to keep, read, publish or
commune thereof, on the pain of confiscation both of body and goods. Likewise
that all Colleges, Couents, Chapters, Communalties, bodies of Cities, Curates,
Vicars and such like* shall not assist or favor such communications,
publications or readings, on pain to be attainted and convicted of high
treason, and deprivation of all priueledges, prerogatives and exemptions.
Commanding likewise al persons, that shall have knowledge of such as secretly
keep it, read or talk thereof: quicklye to reveal them to the Attorney
general, or his substitutes in the place, who have in charge to make secret
search, and thereof to certify the Court, on the pains aforesaid.

The Court also declares, the said Pope Gregorye the xiiij. of that name, an
enemy to the King and the estate of France, as also the peace of
christianity: a troubler of the religion catholic, apostolic and Romain: a
pertaker with the League and coniuration, done as well against the King now
reigning, as also the late King Henrye the third of most happy memory,
traitorously and cruelly murdered by the means and procurement of the said
rebels. Forbidding all persons of this province and primatie of Normandy, to
send to Rome for obtaining of Bulls, writings, collations, graces,
dispensations, or other expeditions, neither to carry directly or indirectlye
thither, gold or silver, on pain of being declared an enemy to the estate
and deprivation of their goods and possessions. Moreover, that the said
Marcilius Laudrianus calling himself Nuntio to the said Gregorye, shall be
apprehended alive or dead, to be delivered to justice, and if he cannot be
apprehended, he shall be summoned three days in the public places in
Pontellarche, being nearest to the City of Roane: the first eight days
hence, and the two other by three days and three days following. This does
the Court declare for good and avayleable, and that this present agreement
shall be sent into all the Baylywickes of this jurisdiction, to the end that none
may pretend ignorance thereof.

Pronounced in judgment at Caen in Parliament the third day of August, 1591.

Signed. De Medyne.

THis Edict being published, the Popes Bulls were burned in diverse places of
Normandy, diversely in some place after one sort, in some place after another
sort: in as infamous manner as could be, and to omit all the rest, I will only
show you how it was burned at Toures.

The Maiestrates and the common people of Toures being assembled, before the
Palace gate, there was a Pillar erected, a little distant from the foot
thereof, there was a fire made by the common Hangman of the Town: then did he
take the Bull and hang it on the top of the Pillar: which being done, he
kindled another fire at the very foot of the Pillar, which by degrees crept up
the Pillar, until it took hold of the Bull which presently was consumed with
fire, to the great joy of all the beholders.

FINIS.

