Loidoromastix: THAT IS, A SCOVRGE FOR A RAYLER; CONTAINING A FVLL AND
SVFFICIENT ANSWER UNTO the Unchristian raylings, slanders, untruths, and other
injurious Imputations, vented of late by one RICHARD PARKES master of Arts,
against the author of LIMBOMASTIX.

Wherein three hundred raylings, errors, contradictions, falsifications of
Fathers, corruptions of Scripture, with other gross ouersights, are observed
out of the said uncharitable discourse, by ANDREW WILLET Professor of
Divinity.

Job 31. 35, 36. Though mine adversary should write a book against me, would
I not take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me?

August cont. Petilian. lit. lib. 3. c. 8. Nec malam conscientiam sanat
praeconium laudantis, nec bonam vulnerat convitiantis opprobrium:

Neither does the commendation of the praiser heal an evil conscience, nor
the reproach of a Reviler wound a good.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1607.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard by RICHARD BANKEVVORTH at the sign of
the Sun.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, RICHARD, by the Divine providence
Archbish. of CANTERBVRIE, Primate and Metropolitan of all England: and of his
Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
AVgustine (Right Reverend Father) when a certain young man of no good fame,
Epist. 1^^
had accused one Bonifacius, a Minister or Presbyter, of a great crime (they
both being of his own College and society) though he gave more credit unto
the Presbyter, Quamvis magis Presbytero ^redidissem.
yet the matter hanging in suspense and doubt, he sent them both for the more
full manifestation of the truth, unto the tomb of Felix the Martyr: for they
had a great opinion of such places in those days. My case at this time in some
things is not much unlike: who having been a Minister and Presbyter of this
Church, and a poor Preacher and writer of the same now these twenty years,
am at the last, by one of obscure fame and name, See Imput. 1. recrimin.
accused before your Grace, of heresy, blasphemy, and charged with the
denial of an Article of the faith. In which accusation, as I doubt not, but
that your Gr. opinion is as indifferent toward me (whose Parents, education,
studies, and travails, you have known these many years) as Augustines was
toward Bonifacius; yet herein my case is better, that I do refer my self to
the judgment of a Reverend Prelate living, and am not sent to the trial of
the dead.

Archidamus, Plutarch. inter Laconica apothegmata.
not much unlike to the former exampl^^ being chosen an arbitrator between
two that were at variance, brought them into the Temple of Minerva, and having
first bound them with an oath to stand to his sentence, decreed, that they
should not depart thence, before they had compounded the controversy. Crates
Thebanus is said to have used to resort unto fa^^^lies that disagreed, and with
persuasions of peace to have adjudged their strifes. (...).
So your (Honor) not so much by choice an arbitrator, as by office and place a
Judge in these causes, will bring us both (I trust) into the Temple of GOD,
there to be tried by the Scriptures: And as Crates endeavor was to pacify
families, so I hope, your Gr. care is, to settle this Church in peace:
approouing that godly saying of Basilius; (...) Basil.) (...), that nothing is
so proper to a (Bishop) as to be a peacemaker.

Mine adversary has had the prioritie of complaint, and first filled your
ears (though not possessed them) with his untrue surmises: for I doubt not,
but as Alexander, when one of his familiar friends was traduced before him,
stopped one of his ears, (...).
as reserving it for him that was absent: so your Gr. has one ear left for
me: according to that rule of Seneca, Vtrique parti actiones dares, dares
tempus, Lib. 2. de ira.
non semel audires: magis enim veritas elucet, quo saepius ad manum venit: to
give unto both parties their action, and to grant them time, to hear more
then once: for the oftener the truth comes to hand (to be scanned) the more the
light thereof appears. Cicero against Antonie said: Cicer. Philip. 2.
quid mihi before, quid vberius, quam mihi, and pro me, and contra Antonium,
dicere: But I may add the third; that it contenteth me, that I may speak not
only for my self, and against such an one, but before your Gr. As for his
accusations, I fear them not, mine own conscience testifying with me: I will
(as Job says) take them upon my shoulder, Job 31. 36.
and bind them as a crown unto me. For, as Cyprian well says, de baptism.
Christ.
but upon an other occasion; nequaqua^ sub hoc onere lassitudinem, sed quietem
inventuri: under this burden I shall not find wearines, but rest. As
Augustine also says: Lib. 3. contra Petil. c. 7.
qui volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi: he that willingly
detracteth from my fame, does against his will add to my reward.

But two things I do not a little, wonder at, that he durst abuse your Gr.
ears, with such untrue and uncharitable invectures in his Epistle, and the
Reader, with such gross and absurd ouersights in his book.

In the first, Epist. Dedicat.
he charge me with a profane and irreligious fact in denying p. 3.
an Article of the Christian faith: p. 6.
with errors, or heresies rather in ^ppugning the doctrine of the Church: p. 6.
striking at some maine points of faith, shaking the foundation it self, and
calling in question, heaven and hell, the divinity and humanity, yea the very
soul, and salvation of Christ our Savior himself: p. 7.
so bard^ed in error that they neither she contrition of heart to repentance,
nor confession of mouth to obedience: p. 10.
that neither Rhemist nor Romanist, could lightly have more disgraced the
discipline and doctrine of the Church in diverse points* To these injurious
slanders, Imput. 2. recriminat. 3. 5. 7.
my particular answer afterward follows, which were needless to be inserted
here. Thus much concerning my self I say in general in Hieromes words: Lib.
3. adv. Pel.
Egone haereticus, quare ergo me haeretics non amant: am I an heretic,
wherefore then do not heretics love me? Apologicall epistle, written as is
supposed by one Phillips a Jesuit: and in the Retection by Woodeward an other
of that faction.
which in their railing pamphlets and libells have made me a mark to shoot
at. But that saying of Cyprian does give (...) Scias hoc semper opus esse
diaboli, vt servos dei (...) laceret, vt qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt,
alienis rumoribus sordidentur: Know this to be always the work of the devil,
Lib. 4. epist. 2.
to vex the servants of God with lies, that they which are clear in the light
of their conscience, should be blemished with other men's reports. Now, though
he took unto himself this liberty, in this unfriendly manner to disgrace me,
yet he might have showed more modesty, then to outface me with such untruths,
in your Gr. presence. It is said, that the actors of those wanton plays,
called Floralia: Catone praesente agere recusaru^t: refused to play in Catoes
presence: and he might have forborne to have uttered his forged calumniations
before so grave a personage. But I trust it will fall out here, as sometime in
the like case with Augustine: Experti dicimus, Tom. 10. ser. 49.
nam non crederemus, multi a nobis mala consilia petunt, consilia mentiendi,
consilia circumveniendi, sed in nomine Christi nullus talis nos tentavit: I
speak (says he) by experience, otherwise I would not have believed, many do
ask of us evil counsel, counsel to lie, counsel to circumvent; but in the
name of Christ, none such has tempted us. Neither (I hope) hereafter, your
wisdom will give passage or license to such men's intemperate pens, to wound
and gall their brethren: yet had he stayed here only, in censuring the
living, and not proceeded to tax the memory of the dead, it had been more
tolerable: that godly learned man Doctor Reynolds, who is now at rest in the
Lord, is thus injuriously handled by him, and that since his Christian
departure; whereby grace may so happily work in their hearts, Epist. dedi. p.
11.
that where the truth has been heretofore frowardly excluded, etc. as though
that worthy man, were either void of grace, or did frowardly exclude the
truth: nay he spares not to charge him, as guilty of profane, See Impu. 1.
recrim.
irreligious, heretical, sacrilegious opinions, of grosnes, sophistry,
profaneness, etc. It is said of Themistocles, that in his return from
battle, seeing a dead body lying with jewels of gold, he thus spoke to one
that was with him, Take thou away these things, Plutarch. praecept. de regend.
republic.
for thou art not Themistocles: neither would this man, if he had been, (I say
not of an heroical spirit, as Themistocles) but of a sober and charitable
spirit, as every good Christian, have stripped the dead of his well deserved
ornaments: in seeking to impair his credit, he does but blemish and obscure
his own; and shows himself to be of those, who as Hierome says,
Hippocratis fomentis magis, quam monitis nostris indigent: had need rather of
Hippocrates medicine, then our admonition.

Now may it please your (Reverend Fatherhood) to give me leave, to offer unto
your view some of the principal contents of his book: by the taste whereof, it
will appear, what relish the rest have; and by the smell of some of his
flowers, Dixit se foetor^e eius far non posse, non sentis (inquit) putorem
teterrimum, and in cicere foetere avaritiam. Hieron. vit. Hilar.
one may guess, what herbs grow in his garden: as Hilarion said to Hesychius,
when a bunch of small pulse was brought them out of a Churles garden, that he
could not abide the stinch thereof: Do you not feel (says he) a filthy
savor, and even his covetousness to smell in the pulse? So by this handful,
which I shall gather out of his book, the evil savor will be found of the
rest.

1. He much forgetting himself, thus breaks out beyond the limits of
modesty, 1. Impu. recrim.
charging me with folly, hypocrisy, falsehood, lying, infidelity, impudency,
sauciness, Machiauell sme, Atheism, Heresy; as particular instance is given,
in more then 80. railing speeches used against me, and others: Contr. Sallust.
so that I may say unto him in Tullies words, Neque qui tam illoto sermon
vtitur, vita honestior est: It is not like that he which uses such unclean
spech, can be much honester in life.

2. I have observed 22. slanderous imputations, whereof some are these: that I
would transform the order of the Church into an Imp. 2. Slan. ^.
Anarchie: that their heads plot, and their hands Slaund. 9.
practice Babylonicall war: Slaund. 11.
that he defends diverse things contrary to the truth of the Gospel: Slaund.
17.
that he justifies pestilent and blasphemous heretics, against the learned,
and holy Fathers: Slaund. 18.
that he holds the flames of hell to be temporal: Slaund. 22.
that he called the blessed roots of the Christian faith* cursed roots: with
such like.

3. Instance is given of 34. untruths uttered by him: 3. Imp. vntr. 6.
As that he believes, I was one of those, which writ the Letter to Master
Hooker; the writers whereof, I know not to this day: 9. vntr.
that I borrowe diverse things from Carlils book; which I never saw: vnt. 11.
that I fasten all the torments of hell, upon the blessed soul of Christ;
which I never thought: truth denied ^
that there is not one word through his book, that insinuates any suspicion
of Limbus patrum: whereas, in the preface following, the contrary is proved
directly, in 20. several places out of his book.

4. Among the errors which he is charged with, to the number of 14. these
specially are noted: Imp. 6. recr. 2.
he justifies the Latin text, against the original Greek in the new
Testament: error. 2.
he calls the book of Ecclesiasticus the word of God, which the Church of
England holds for one of the Apocryphal books: artic. 6. error 11.
that the baptism of infants is not to be found in Scripture, by any express
mention; whereas the Church of England holds it to be most agreeable to the
institution of Christ: artic. 27. He calls these sound positions, imp. 2.
scla. 15.
that the Scriptures alone are not complete unto salvation: that man's will is
naturally apt without grace, to believe: that men's natural works are
acceptable to God: which are directly opposite to the doctrine of the Church of
England, which holds the contrary: that the holy Scripture contains all
things necessary to salvation: artic. 6. that man of his own natural strength
cannot turn and prepare himself to faith: artic. 10. that works done before
the grace of Christ, are not pleasant to God: artic. 13.

5. Diverse harsh and unsavory speeches are laid unto his charge; as that he
applies those words of Christ to himself, imp. 7. recr. 1.
de bono opere lapidor: I am stoned for a good work: ibid. recrim. 3.
that Christ's conquest upon the cross was openly an overthrow, and therefore
no triumph: if it were, it was a triumph before victory: recrim. 6.
that there is a most plain distinction between the holy Ghost and Christ,
not in person only, but in his divine nature. These and the like assertions,
(which he would have termed blasphemies) to the number of ten, are observed
out of his book.

6. Diverse points of arrogance, and vain ostentation are observed, to the
number of 13. whereof this is one, that he makes his boast, that my Lord of
Winchester has in his last book much altered his judgment concerning the
place of Peter, Imp. 8. recr. 10.
moved by the reasons laid down by me (says he) and none but me: whereas it
is not true, that that Reverend learned father, has therein altered his
judgment: at the lest, it becam not him so to brag: It might have better
beseemed the other, if any such thing were, to have acknowledged it: As August.
thus modestly writes to Petrus, De orig. ani^ lib 2. tom. ^.
a Bishop to a Presbyter: Vellem rescriptis tuis, quid te docuerit me docere:
absit enim vt erubescam a presbytero discere, si tu non erubuisti a laico: I
would have thee by thy rescript to teach me, what taught you: far be it, that
I should be ashamed to learn of a Presbyter, if you were not ashamed to learn
of a lay man.

Further he charge the great English Bible, Imput. 8. recrim. 6.
which is authorized to be read in our Curches, with error in the translation,
and with blasphemy in the annotations.

7. Concerning the allegation of the Fathers, I have showed partly his
ignorance, in mistaking and misquoting them, partly his unfaithfulness in untrue
alleging them, in 30. several places: as namely his ignorance in Imput. 1^
iustif. 2. 2.
Cyril, ibid. iustif. 3. and recrim. 1. 4.
Hierome, recrim. 7. 3. and 4.
Augustine: ibid. recr. 2. 3
Tertullian also is strangely produced, contrary to his own judgment: thus
he deals also with the new writers, as with Calvine, Beza.

8. Neither can the Scripture escape his unclean fingers: as instance is given
in 26. places: as loc. 17. the Scripture says, He shall not preserve the
ungodly, Job 36. 5. he reads, thou will not preserve: loc. 19. S. James
says, which has converted, etc. and shall save a soul, Iam. 5. 20. he
reads, which conuerteth, in the present: and shall save his soul: adding
(his:) and he makes as bold with many places beside.

This it is for one to deal out of his element, and to meddle beyond his
skill, for a professor of Grammar, to take upon him to teach Divinity. He must
needs stumble that walks in darkness, and he can not be without error, that
is corrupt in judgment. Now is verified that saying of the wise man, (...),
Prove. 13. 7.
There is that makes himself rich, and has nothing: As this man makes
himself skillful in the tongues, in the Scriptures, in the Fathers, and in
what not, in all these proclayming his ignorance: Hierome spoke it modestly of
himself: Perorat in Orig. ad Roman.
Fateor, frater Heracli, dum tui, desiderijs satisfacere cupio, oblitus sum
pene mandati, quo praecipitur, onus supra vires tuas ne levaveris: I confess
(brother Heraclius) while I satisfy thy desire, that I had almost forgotten
the commandment that bids, Take not up a burden beyond thy strength. But
it is most true of him: who has (unbidden) thrust his shoulders under a
burden, that is like to crush him. As Cleon was unfit to lead an army, and
Philopoimen to guide a navy, Plutarch. praecept. de Repub. regend.
and Hannibal to play the Orator: so is this Grammarian to meddle with
Divinity. Euripides saying may well be applied to such: (...): a Carpenter
thou art, and yet do not deal with carpenters work. Seneca well said,
Necesse est, vt opprimant onera, quae ferente maiora sunt, Lib. 1. de vit.
tranq.
etc. nec accedendum eo, vnde non sit liber regressuo. Those burdens must
needs press to the ground, which are greater then the bearer: And it is not
safe going thither, whence there is no return. And so it falls out to such
according to the saying of Hierome: Qui scribunt, non quod inveniunt, Hier. ad
Lucin.
sed quod intelligunt, and dum alienos errores emendare nituntur, ostendunt
suos: They write, not what they find, but what they understand, and while they
go about to correct the errors of others, they bewray their own.

Now let me crave a little further leave to add some what concerning the
former book, which is by him impugned, and this written in defense thereof.
The first, entitled ( Limbomastix) I acknowledge to be mine; and am not
ashamed of any matter therein handled, though for the manner it might have
been more exact, I confess. And for the publishing thereof, this is my
excuse, or rather defense: first, that I was thereunto provoked in particular:
again, I saw in his pamphlet maintained that Popish opinion of Limbus patrum,
which suspicion the author can not avoid, as it is at large declared in the
Preface following: who if he be sound in other points of Protestants doctrine,
it is well: but then is he much wronged both in the opinion, and reports of
them that know him: further, that book passed under the censure of a grave and
learned writer of our Church: D Sutcliff.
and yet it was printed without my priuitie.

As touching mine opinion of CHRIST'S Descension, handled in that book, I will
freely deliver what I think: first, I believe the Article of the Descension,
to be a necessary part of our faith: Lib Instit. 2. c. 16. sect. 8.
and say with Calvine, In the descent of Christ to hell, there is no small
force to the effect of our Redemption, etc. and it avails so much unto the
(chief) sum of our redemption, that it being pretermitted, much will be
lost of the fruit of Christ's death: thus much for the substance of the Article.
Secondly, concerning the manner of Christ's descension, I do hold and believe
whatsoever can be proved out of Scripture, and truly collected from thence.
Thirdly, yet I affirm, that out of those three places, Act. 2. 27. 1. Pet. 3.
19. Ephesians. 4. 9. the local descension of Christ's soul to hell, can not
necessarily be concluded. And herein I affirm no more, then other grave and
learned writers of our Church have done before me. Confut. of the Rhem. annot.
D. Fulke says, that the article of Christ's descension, is not grounded upon
the first text: 2. Act. 3.
Bish. Bilson resigneth the second place: B. Bills. Survey. 676.
and D. Fulke out of Theodoret shows, Confut. Rhem. ann. Ephesians. 4. 1.
that the third makes not for the passing of Christ from place to place, and
so consequently belongs not to his local descension. Fourthly, I say
notwithstanding, and profess in the same words, which I set down before: They
which hold not the local descent of Christ's soul to hell, Limbom. p. 5.
should not condemn the other, as Popish and superstitious men, that are so
persuaded: They which affirm it, ought not to account them as enemies, or
adversaries to the truth, that dissent from them therein. He that thus writes,
is far from either having his head plotting, or his hands practicing
Babylonicall wars: as I am slaundered, as I have showed before. Fifthly, I
hold the Article of Christ's descension, as the Church of England propounds
it: Articl. 3.
As Christ died for us, and was buried: so also it is to be believed that he
went down to hell: in which words the Article of the descension is commended
in general to be held, without any the determination of the sense: as M.
Rogers in his book of the Catholic doctrine of the Church of England, printed
at Cambr. ann. 607.
he that lately has learnedly I would he had written as soundly in some
points, as namely concerning the doctrine of the Sabbath. p. 163. 195. 192.
and in other places.
written (dedicating his book to your Gr.) upon the Articles of Religion, by
public authority, having delivered diverse senses of this Article, and
especially these three: 1. some hold that Christ descended as God only not as
man, etc. powerfully and effectually, not personally: 2. some as man only,
either in body only, etc. to the grave, or in soul only, when he went to
the place of the reprobate, etc. 3. as God and man in one person, etc. that he
went, as it were into hell, when upon the cross, and else where, he suffered
the torments, etc. Then he infers thus: But till we know the native and
undoubted sense of this Article, and mystery of religion, persist we
adversaries to them which say, that Christ descended not into hell at all, etc.

This was the sum of my first book, which being written without gall and
bitterness; as he says, Ego sine iracundia dico, Cicer. Philip. 8.
vt omnia, tamen non sine dolor: I speak it without anger, though not without
grief: and the party being not known, which was the author of that Pamphlet,
and so no man being personally touched: as Hierome says, ^d Nepotian.
Nullum laesi nullius nomen mea scriptura designatum est: I hurt no man, no
man's name is in my writing decyphered: He might in silence have corrected this
error, as Ambrose says, (...) Luke
Et si nostra voce non proditur, vel su^ tamen crubescat affectu: though he be
not by my voice bewraied, yet he might in his own opinion have been ashamed:
Yet could he not contain himself, but must set pen to paper, and publish his
own shame, by his unchristian and intemperate railing: according to that
saying of Hierome to Helvidius: (...).
Arbitror te veritate superatum, ad maledicta conuerti: I think, you being
overcome with the truth, did turn to railing. I have felt before this, the
whip of popish tongues, and have tasted of their virulent pens; but the badge
of heresy, impiety, profanenes, blasphemy, atheism, was never set upon my
sleeue before; himself, that there pin^ed it, being more worthy to wear it
in his forehead: he has nothing almost in his mouth, but lying, falsehood,
hypocrisy, corruption of Scriptures, contradictions, falsification of Fathers:
which things, if he could fasten upon me, as he never shall, yet it would
nothing help his cause; Apolog. 3. adv. Ruffin.
as Hierome says Quid vulneribus tuis prodest, si ego fuero vulneratus? what
does it help your wounds, if I likewi^e be wounded? and again, Quid refert,
si causa cadis, and crimine superes? what does it avail, if you fail in the
cause, and be superior in obiecting of crimes? I fear not what he can lay to
my charge, for I have read, (...): that neither a weak man's blows, nor an
unwise man's threats are to be feared.

Now in this other book, I have framed a brief answer unto his calumnious
accusations, not meddling at all with the argument and matter it self, both
because it remains by him unanswered, and for that I will not cross the
judgment of some Reverend learned men of our Church, but content my self with
that, which I have formerly written thereof: I have only answered his
uncharitable slanders, and returned them with advantage upon his own head. I
have observed of raylings, slanders, untruths, contradictions, falsification
of Fathers, corruption of Scriptures, with such other ouersights, not fewer
then 300. his errors being more then the leaves, and almost equal to the
pages of his book: if he had had the like advantage against me, he would not
have doubted to use that sentence of Hierom against me; Lib. 1. conr. Iovin.
Proponam aduersarij sententias, and de tenebrosis libris eius, quasi de foueis
serpents protraham, neque sinam venenosum caput spiris maculosi corporis
protegi: I will propound the adversaries sentence, and out of his dark books
I will draw the serpents, as out of their holes; neither will I suffer his
venomous head to lie lurking within the winds of his speckled body. But I will
forbear him; yet I must confess, that in returning this answer, I wanted the
patience of Joseph, of whom Ambrose says, Epist. 44.
Mal^it falsum ^^rimen subire, quam verum referre^ that he had rather undergo
a false crime, then report a true: or as Hierom writes of Blesilla, Blesilla
nostra rid^^it, ^es dignabitur loquacium ranarum audire convitia that she
would smile, ad Marcel.
nor vouchsafing to hear the raylings of the clamorous frogs* For my ease is
diverse, who being charged with her esie, blasphemy, atheism, must either by
silence confess the crime, or by a just Apology wipe it away: So indeed, I
was driven to a great strait, Hieron. Pammach. Ocean.
as Hierome again says; Hoc mihi praestiterunt vt si tacuero, re^s, si
respondero, inimicus iudicer, d^ra vtraque conditio fed e duobus eligam quod
leuius est: simultas redintegrari patest, blasphemia veniam non meretur* They
have brought me to this, that if I hold my peace, I shall be held to be
guilty; if I answer, I shall be judged an enemy: an hard condition of each
side: but of the two, I will choose the easier: a privy grudge may (well) be
renewed, but blasphemy cannot be pardoned: which as it seems, was imputed
unto Hierome, as now unto me. Now then, he may thank himself, that began the
quarrel, if he be well beaten for his labor, that might have slept in a whole
skin: and if he cannot fence off that blow, which is coming toward him, let
him afterward learn to play with his matches. For as Origin well says,
writing upon those words in the Gospel; tract. 35. in Math.
Omnes belli concitatores, in eo bello per^bunt, quod concitant: all that take
the sword, shall perish with the sword: all the raisers of war, shall perish
in that war, which they have raised.

Now unto your Gr. wise and grave censure, I present this my justification; of
whom I might crave justice against this defamer and slaunderer, who has
objected capital crimes of blasphemy, and heresy, against a Minister of the
Church, contrary to the atrocem tibi iniuriam esse factam manifestum est, si
tibi illata est, cum esses in sacerdotio. Cod. lib. 9. tit. 35. leg. 4.
Valerian. Gale.
law: which by imperial constitution deserves si minime haec vera ostenderit
capitali poeua plectetur. Cod. lib. 9. tit. 36. l. 1. Valentin.
capital punishment, if he cannot prove the things^ objected to be true: by
the Canons it was censured, by qui in alterius famam public scripturam confinx
erit, flagelletur. Cause. 2. q. 5. c. 1. Hadrian.
whipping, or by being qui inuenti fuerint famosos libellos in Ecclesia
ponere, anathematizentur. Cause. 2. q. 5. c. 3. council. Elib.
excommunicate and anathematized. But I crave no such revenge of him but only
pray; touching himself, that he may become an honest man hereafter: and that
your Gr. would be pleased, that as I have been publicly defamed and traduced
by him, so it may be lawful for me publicly to defend my self: that according
to the Cod. lib 9* tit. 36. l^g. 1.
law, hu^us^odi libellus alterius opinionem non ledat, such an infamous libell
do, not hurt the op^^on of another: which cannot be prevented, unless some
public satisfaction should be made: for as Lib. de bon. viduitat. cap. 22.
Augustine says well, nobis necessaria est vita nostra, alijs fama nostra: as
our life is necessary to our selves, so our fame is (...)

Now lastly (...) prays Epist ded. p. 11.
that my books as abortiue brats be not suffered to see the sun, whose light
they seek to obscure; I am content to stand herein to your judgment also,
whether of bu^ wri^^ngs are more worthy to come into the sun light: as for
mine, (whereof some are extant in your Gr. name, which may deliuerme from his
injurious accusation, as being as enemy unto that eminent place and calling)
if they were no more meet then his, to be admitted unto the public view of
men, I could wish them not only out of the sun light, but in the fire light
also. But which be the abortiue brats, I refer me to the midwiues that
brought them out, I mean the Stationers that printed them: I think some of
them may wish, that his beggarly brats had been yet unborn.

Con^^ning (...) I am not ashamed to say with Hierom: Ad Cresiphon.
Multi anni sunt, quibus ab adolescentia, vsque ad hanc aetatem, diuer sa
scripsiopuscula, etc. prouoco adversaries vt (...) ^^artulas exintegro
discutiant, and si quid in meo ingeniolo vitij repererint, proferant in medium,
confitebor errorem, malens emendare, quam perseuerare in prauitate sententiae:
There are many years, wherein since my youth, unto this age, I have written
diverse works: I do provoke mine adversaries, to examine all my writings afresh,
and if they find any fault in my small wit (and understanding) let them bring
it forth. I will confess mine error, willing rathr to amend it, then to
persevere in a wrong sentence. And concerning such slanderous libels, and
immodest inuectiues, as his are, I say unto your Gr. as Bernard wrote sometimes
to Eugenius: De consid. lib. 1.
Miror, quomodo religiosae aures tuae, audire sustinent huiusmodi pugnas
verborum, que magis ad subversionem, quam inventionem proficiunt veritatis:
corrige pravum morem, and pra^ide linguas vaniloquas; etc. flagellum tenes,
timea^t nu^^^ularij ne fidant nu^mis: I marvel, how your religious ears can
endure to hear such strife of words, which avail more for the subversion,
then finding out of the truth: correct this evil use, and stay such vain
tongues, etc. you hold the whip, let the money chaungers fear to trust to
their (counterfeit) coin. And so I end with that salutation of the same
Father, Plenum vos dierum suscipiat dies vna illu melior in atrijs Domini super
millia, Venerabilis pat^r* Epist. 61.

Your Gr. ready to be commanded in the Lord Jesus, ANDREW WILLETT.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian-Reader.
WHen Rezin King of Aram, and Pekah King of Israel had conspited against Judah,
and fought against Jerusalem: the Prophet was sent with this comfortable
messages Fear not, Isa. 7. 4.
neither be faint hearted, for the two tails of those smoking firebrands,
Woodward the Jesuit as it is thought, in his Detection.
etc. two such suming, rather then fiering brands, have raised of late a smoke
against me: R. Parkes.
some four years since a Popish Aramite and now of late an English Israelite:
But as the flames of the first were soon quenched, so I doubt not but the
irefull heat, and vain smoke of the other will quickly be laid. It were
somewhat too hard to say of these two adversaries, as Tulke did of his two
enemies D^labella and Antonie: Philippi^. 11.
Duo haec capita nata sunt post homines natos tet^rrima (...) quorum alter
effecit, quod ^pt abat, de altero p^tefactum est, quod cogitaret: these two
heads are sprung up the worst and most dishonest of all men alive; the one
whereof has effected, what he desired. the other has discovered what he
thought: for neither will I think so uncharitably of them, though they think
and speak most basely and vilely of me: neither has either of them had his
pleasure of me, but in seeking to disgrace me, have defamed themselves: and
have rather bewraied what they thought, then effected, what they intended.

Dy^nisius when he heard of two young men, that railed upon him, and perceived
that the one spoke in drink, but the other seemed to be sober, and yet
reviled: he dismissed the one as a drunken and foolish person, (...).
but punished the other (...) Antagonists. The one being (...) Babylons cup,
and having wrung out the very dregs of Romish superstition, writ his pleasure
of me in his madd and drunken fittes: the other, professing himself a sober
Protestant, (but let him take heed, if all be true o si and mihi liceret
dicere, quae multi clamitant, iam and nos intelligeres scire, quae omnes
sciunt, and me quoque audire, quae nullus ignorant Hieron. ad Theoph.
I hear, least that one cup of ( nimis) more, make him not as drunk as the
other) has in his pretended (...) ^^^^ded the raging fittes of the other
lightbraine. But I pass very little, neither do I regard their railing
speech, comforting my self with that saying of the Apostle, If ye be rayled
upon for the name of Christ, blessed (...) ye: a^ all they are, 1. Pet. 4. 14.
which are maligned for the defense of the (...): and here I may fitly use
those words of Augustine: ^go volo te esse sanum, Sermon. 164.
quare tu furis in me sicut insanus; I would have thee to be found and whole
and you rage against me, as one unsound or mad. If they are become mine
enemies for the Gospel and the truths sake, I will therein glory. The one of
them shoots his darts at me, because I strike at the very body of Popery:
the other ^arpeth, because I prune off one of the branches thereof, that
superstitious opinion of Limbus patrum, as even now shall be s^ewed. Dialog. 1.
adv. Pelagian.
But I say here with Hierome, Bre^iter respon^eo, nunquam me haereticis
pepero^^sse, and omni eg^sse studio, vt hosts Ecclesiae, mei quoque hosts
fiero^^: I answer briefly, that I never spared heretics; and have endeavored
with all my study, that the enemies of the Church should also be enemies unto
me. Let them divide this sentence between them: let the first take the first
part, and the other, that which remains: for this I speak bordly, and
confidently, that I know no enemies of mine in matter of religion (some
difference in opinion there may be among friends and well ^illers, whom yet I
count no enemies) but they are also enemies (I dare say to the Church of God,
and religion: that I may here truly v^e the Orators words; Quonam meo fat^
fieri dicam vt nemo his annis viginti Reipu^^hostis fuerat, quinon bellum eonam
tempore, mihi quoque indixerit: I can not tell by what fatal destiny it
happens, that there has not been these twenty years an enemy to the
Commonwealth (and so to the Church also) which has not the same time bid
battle unto me.

Now I come to show, that this mungrell Protestant, directly holds, that
Christ descended in soul to hell, to deliver some from thence, that were
there, and so consequently maintains the Popish opinion of Limbus patrum:
where they imagined the souls of the Patriarks to be till the coming of
Christ thither.

1. Place. P. 9. of the former book. edit. 1. and p. 1^. edit. 2.
These are his own words: S. Peter mentions sorrows, which Christ loosed at
his resurrection, which could not be in the sepulcher, where his body lay
dead, and senseless: P. 12. 1. b. edit. 1. and p. 14. edit. 2. and 2. b. p. 37.
and in an other place: he affirms they were the sorrows of hell which
Christ loosed: out of which words this argument is pressed: The sorrows of
hell which Christ loosed, he loosed for himself, or for others there. detained:
but not for himself: Ergo for others. To this he answeareth: 1. in granting
all this to be true, and yet it will not follow that the Fathers were delivered
out of Lambus: 2. b. p. 37.
unless by bell, you understand Limbus patrum, and the persons there detained
the Patriarks, then you will fall into the same ditch your self, etc.

Contra. 1. It follows well, if the conclusion be granted, that Christ
loosed the sorrows of bell for others: for either they must be the Fathers
which were delivered out of Limbus, which the Papists make a member of hell: or
else he falls into a worse heresy, that some of the damned detained in hell,
were thence delivered. 2. Is he so blind and absurd, that he sees not how this
conclusion is enforced against him, and not out of the Replyers judgment: does
the opponents conclusion force the disputer, I pray you, or the answearer: the
conclusion is, Ergo be delivered the Fathers out of Limbas: does he infer
this to confirm his own opinion, or to confute yours? The Replyer therefore
will keep himself well enough out of the ditch, while he himself sticks
fast in the mire.

Ans. 2. He denies the assumption, affirming with Augustine, Epist. 99.
that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell for himself.

Contra. 1. In deed one of Augustines expositions in that place is, that
Christ may be said to have loosed the sorrows of hell for himself,
quemadmodum solvi possunt laquei venantium, etc. as the snares of hunters may
be loosed, least they should hold, not because they did hold: but this
exposition can not serve his turn: for he says, these sorrows were loosed at
Christ's resurrection: they were not then loosed before, till then: so it
follows that Christ was in them: which Augustine there denies; neque coperat
in eis esse tanquam in vinoulis: he began not at all to be in those sorrows,
as in bands. 2. Again, he says, these sorrows were not in the grave,
because the body was senseless, and so felt them not: therefore by the same
reason, those sorrows were in hell, because Christ soul was full of sense,
and consequently felt them. Thus, will he, (...) he, either he must
confess, that some other were delivered out of the sorrows of hell by Christ's
descending thither, or that he himself felt the sorrows of hell.

2. The second place that increases this suspicion is, because he strives
mightily, 1. b. p. 36. 1. edit.
that we must read, 1. Pet. 3. 19. the spirits, which were in prison, not which
are: whereupon it follows, 2. b. p. 39.
that he thinks, some were in the prison of hell, but are not, or else he
strives about words.

Ans. It follows not, because I say it should be translaeted, (which were)
etc. not, (which are) that they therefore were in hell, but are not: no more
then it follows, the Angels were in heaven at Christ's as^ension, but are not.
2. b. p. 39.


Contr. 1. He omitteth the other part of the disiun^tion, that either that
must follow, or else he strives about words. 2. The instance of the Angels
therefore is impertinent: for the Replyer does not reason thus; they were in
hell, Ergo they are not: but thus, either they were in hell, and are not, or
else he strives for words. 3. Yet this co^tending about the reading of were
for are, gives strong suspicion, that he so thinks, that some were in hell,
and are not; because his great Master; upon the advantage of that word, Bellar.
lib. 4. de Christ. anim. cap. 13.
infers the same conclusion, thus writing: All the Latins, and Greeks,
whom we have cited, expound (were) not (are;) because they will have them
delivered out of hell by Christ but it could not be said truly of those
spirits in the time of Peter, that they were then in the prison.

3. The third place is this: In that Christ personally descended into hell, it
does more amplify and set forth his goodness toward mank^^de, 1. b. p. 52. 1.
edit. p. 55. 2. edit.
etc. for so much, as the more vile, and loath some the dungeon is, the greater
is the love of the Prince, 2. b. p. 40.
who to enfranchise and set at liberty the captives there enthralled,
dis^^ineth not to enter into it, in his own person.

Hence it is inferred, that these captives in hell, which were enfranchised by
Christ descending thither, could be no other, then the fathers in Limbo patrum:
for out of the nethermost hell of the damned, none can be delivered.

Ans. 1. The argument is denied, Christ went to set at liberty captives in
hell: Ergo, the fathers in Limbo.

Cont. The argument stands thus; the captives in hell set at liberty, were
either in Limbo, or in the nethermost hell.

But they were not in the nethermost hell, for thence none can be delivered.

Ergo: the captives in hell set at liberty, were those in Limbo.

The reason cannot be denied, being a true syllogism: the Replyer is not then
a (...) in making such reasons: but the Confuter a brables in denying them.

Ans. 2. You must first prove that the Fathers were in Limbo patrum and that
hell, the place of eternal captivity* was all one with it, which yet your
self affirm, is no part of hell: and therefore I infer it is no place of
thraldom.

Cont. 1. Now this ignorant Confuter shows himself a trifler indeed, and a
silly Logician, to deny the conclusion, that the Fathers were not in Limb,
which is the conclusion of the former argument.

2. How absurd is this fellow, that seeing a manifest disjunction in the
proposition, between Limbus patrum, and the nethermost hell; yet says, it
must be proved that they are all one.

3. The Replyer in his own opinion takes Limbus, to be neither a part of hell
nor any where else; but disputes ex concessis, according to their conceit,
that so imagine. But this trifling Confuter is caught in his own words; for
in confessing that Limbus is no place of thraldom, he grants, that such a
Limbus there is, but not a place of that quality: for according to his own
rule, the forme^ must first be granted, (namely, that there is a Limbus) before
you can dispute of the latter: whether it be a place of thraldom, 2. b. p. 3.
or not; and thus to give him his own words again you whip your self with
your own scourge, whose lashes if you feel^ not. I say you are very senseless:
and to use Tullies words, Secund. Philip.
haec te si vllam partem habes sensus laceret, haec crue^tat oration: this
saying, if you have any part of sense, tareth and wounds you.

Answ. 3. But the Confuter not insisting upon any of these answers, which are
very simple; finds our another: that these captives, enfranchised by Christ,
was all mankind, which by Ad^^s sin were made guilty of eternal death, and
so made his captives, that had power over death, that is the devil, under whom
we were held in most slavish thraldom, etc. until such time, as it pleased
our most gracious king to enfranchise us. 2. b. p. 143.
2. b. p. 143.

Cont. 1. This answer is not to the purpose, for the question out of his former
words objected, is not of captives to hell and the devil, but of captives in
hell. 2. b. p. 40. and there detained. p. 37. and enthralled there; to
enfranchise whom our prince descended thither. p. 40. We were indeed all
captives by sin to the devil, subject to death, hell, and damnation, but not
captives and enthralled in hell; this is but a simple evasion.

2. Our deliverance and enfranchising was procured and purchased by the death
of Christ, The Coufuters inconstancy and uncertainty.
as the Apostle says, that he might destroy through death, him that had power
over death, that is the devil, and that he might deliver, etc. for that end
therefore Christ needed not to descend to hell.

3. See how inconstant this new doginatist is: one while he says, that Christ
descended to hell, that the Redemption of mankind now performed, might be
manifested even unto the dead. 2. b. p. 72. sometime, to denounce retention in
sin to the obstinate: and so consequently, in everlasting death and
damnation; for so he expounds that preaching to the spirits in Peter: 2. b.
p. 77. And now it was, as he says, to enfranchise, and set at liberty. And
thus he is one of those, of whom the Apostle speaks, 1. Timoth. 1. 7.
They would be Doctors of the Law, and yet under stand not what they speak,
nor whereof they affirm. I may apply against him the Orators words, quam
miserum est id negare non posse, quod (...) est conf^er^: how miserable a thing
is it, Philipp. 2.
not to be able to deny that, which it is a^^rame to confess. He is ashamed to
confess he holds Limbus patrum, and yet being pressed with his own words,
he can not deny it.

4. Pla. What honor is greater then his, who enters by force into his enemies
palace, (...) him of his power, disfurnisheth him of his treasure; Lib. 3. p.
5.
and returns victorious, etc. In lib. 5. ep. ad. Romans cap. 6.
and what he means by his treasure, he refers us to a place of Origin,
where he says thus; hic alligato forti, etc. the strong man being here bound
upon the cross, he went forward into his house, into the house of death, into
hell, and took thence his goods, that is, the souls, which he held.

5. Pla. Ambrose is cited in these words, lib. 3. p. 22.
being free among the dead loosing the power of death, he gave release to
those which were in (...) and what he means hereby, Lib. de incarnat. Domin.
sacram. c. 5.
the words following show, (omitted by him) he shed the light of life upon
those which were placed in hell, etc.

6. Pla. 3. b. p. 72.
He says that Christ euangelized, or delivered the glad tidings of the gospel
to the dead: but to whom else could the preaching of the Gospel be glad
tidings, but to those, which had comfort and deliverance by it? And so he must
be driven to say with his great friend, Bellarm. l. 4. de Christ. anim. ^. 13.
Pradicationem Christi, etc. that the preaching of Christ in hell, was only for
the annuntiation of that great joy (of their deliverance) to the godly souls.

7. Pl. You must first prove, 3. b. p. 79.
that they erred in holding that opinion of the delivery of the Fathers: but if
he himself hold that to be an error, what needed any further proof thereof?

8. Pl. 3. b. p. 122.
Hierom is cited, who should say, that Christ descended to hell, vt vinctos de
carcere dimitteret: that he might dismiss them which were bound, out of
prison.

9. Pl. Likewise, 3. b. p. 123.
Cyril is brought in, speaking to the same purpose: that Christ appeared to the
spirits in hell, and said to those which were in bonds, come forth, To what
purpose should he allege these testimonies, if he consented not with them
herein? for men do not use to produce witnesses against themselves.

10. Pl. He confesses Limbus patrum, but denies it to be any part of hell: to
let pass (says he) your falsehood, (being the falsarie himself) and
absurdity, 3. b. p. 142.
in confounding (Limbus patrum) with locus damnatorum, the one being no part of
hell, as your self every where preach, But this is his own preaching or
rather prating* for the Replyer in those places, Limb. 43. 44.
speaks only of Abraham's bosom not a word of Limbus. If then, in his
opinion, there was a Limbus patrum, then either the fathers were delivered
thence, or else they are in Limb still; for heaven or paradise, I hope he will
not take to be Limbus, which the masters of that term the Romanists, take for
a prison and dungeon of darkness.

11. Pl. Cassiodorus is brought in thus witnessing for the delivery of the
Fathers out of hell: 3. b. p. 144.
Christ having bound the devil, brought out those prisoners which he held in
captivity.

12. Hierome again is thus alleged: Christ descended not into the whale, 3.
b. p. 169.
but into hell, to the end, that those which were in hell, might be loosed
from perpetual bonds.

13. Augustine also is brought to the same purpose: I see no reason, 3. b. p.
194.
why we should believe, that our Savior came thither, but to save some from
the sorrows and pains thereof.

14. So also Origene is produced: the only begotten son (of God) descended
into hell for the salvation of the world, 3. b. p. 194.
and thence brought back again the first man Adam.

15. For the enfranchising and setting at liberty the captives in hell, he
alleges Ruffinus, referring us only in general to his exposition of the
Creed: in the which he directly affirms in these words, Redijt victor a
mortuis, 1. b. p. 55. 2. edit.
inferni spolia, etc. he returned a conqueror from the dead, and carrying with
him the spoil of hell, brought out those which were held of death. So it
seems that therein he concurreth with Ruffinus, for the bringing out of some
out of hell.

16. Whereas the Article of the descension was thus set down in K. Edwards
time, in the Synod held ann. 1552. As Christ died for us, and was buried, so
it is to be believed, that he descended into hell: for his body lay in the
grave till the Resurrection, his spirit being sent forth from him, was with
the spirits which were detained in prison, or in hell, and preached unto them,
as testifies Peter: the last clause whereof was left out by the Reverend
Fathers of this Church in their Synod, ann. 1562. and so remains still. Now
this man comes, and would expound the meaning of that clause omitted: 2. b.
p. 4^.
saying, that their application of those words of Peter unto Christ's descension
into hell, is no other then all the ancient Fathers have made on that place,
as may appear by holy Athanasius, etc. But Athanasius says, (...).
he preached the Gospel or glad tidings to those which were in hell: D^al. 4.
de sanct. T^^it.
so he understands S. Peter's (...). So likewise Justinius and Ireneus say,
descendit ad eos evangelizare salutem: D^alog. cum T^phon.
he descended unto them to evangelize, or bring the glad tidings of salvation,
I^ea. l. 3. c. 23.
as they cite the Prophet Isai: wherefore, if he understand it according to
their exposition, he must hold, that salvation and deliverance was preached by
Christ to some in hell.

17. Place. The harrowing of hell, etc. if you will believe an old ploughman in
your harvest, 3. b. p. 110.
is no such matter, as you take it for, Northbrokes confes^. c. 4. fol. 11.
but such as ought to be believed of all Christians, as containing a deep
mystery: he would father his conceit upon an other, that he expounds that
phrase of the harrowing of ^ell, of the victory obtained by Christ's death over
hell: not of his personal descending thither, as he ^oth.
favors it not: but indeed he cunningly hereby conueieth his own opinion,
as fit to be believed of all Christians.

18. His opinion is that Job was in hell: for that place, Job 17. 13. he
reads thus: hell shall be my house, and I shall make my bed in the dark. And
further he adds: for so much as Job was a perfect figure of Christ, in many
things, the word (bed) taken in the better part, does very truly agree unto
him: 3. b. p. 153.
because, though hell be a place of restless disquiet to the wicked, yet was
it to him a place of quiet rest. In which words, beside that in right
construction the whole sentence runs upon Job, he being a figure of Christ's
being in hell, as he makes him, must first be there himself. But to the hell
of the damned he will not thrust him, where else was he then in Limbo?

19. But he does not more apparently discover himself, then in these two
places following: the first is, 3. b. p. 170. Unto these I will also add a
prophetical saying, 3. b. p. 1^0.
(as it seems to me) which I find reported out of two of the most famous
Doctors among the ancient Hebrews: ^. Hoc eo dosti. ^. R. Simeon a^^d
Galatinum.
(the latter Jews shall kill their Messiah, then shall his soul descend to
hell, ^. b. 8. c. 21.
where it shall abide three days, that it may bring from thence all the souls
of the Fathers, and of the Just, and lead them with him into Paradise, and
heavenly glory:) If this be a prophetical saying, then it must have his
accomplishment; and so in his judgment the souls of the Fathers and the just
men, were brought out of hell by Christ's descending thither.

20. The other place is, 3. b. p. 174. The end of this redeeming visitation he
makes to have been, 3. b. p. 1^^
(the illumination of those, which sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death,) which words S. Damascene and Ruffinus apply to Christ's descension in
hell: And in truth the words of (visiting and redeeming) do necessarily implie
a freedom to men in captivity, which to deny to have been in hell, as you
do in your second assumption, is to derogate from the blessed death, and
passion of Christ. Now my second assumption (as he calls it) was, But Christ
redeemed none in hell. This assumption, seeing he denies, what else can be his
opinion, but that Christ redeemed and delivered some in hell by his descending
thither? and therein agrees with Damascene and Ruffinus.

I appeal now to all judicious men and understanding Readers, whether this
counterfeit Confuter, be not apparently convinced to be an evident maintainer
of Limbus Patrum: therefore how void of all truth and modesty that speech is,
2. b. p. 5.
who sees not? there is no cause, nor color of cause in the world ( says he)
why you should accuse that mine answer, as any way enclining to that opinion:
for what one word is there thorough the whole book, which does so much as
insinuate any suspicion thereof? But what need this circumloquution of words,
when the thing it self is apparent: according to that saying, (...); when the
matter is conspicuous, the prolixitie of speech is superfluous. These places
objected do give such evidence of his opinion, that he can not with modesty
deny it: Philippi^ ^.
as the Orator says, Respondebisne ^d haec, aut omnino hiscere audebis: can
you answer any thing to this, or dare you once open your mouth? and so I say
with Hierome: Apolog* 3. cont. Ruffin.
si non illud scripsisses, vtcunque de luto evaderes, If you had not thus
written, etc. you might have wrastled out of the mire.

But in defense of this his opinion, of the delivering the Fathers out of
Limbus, antiquity will be alleged: for this goes for current among the
Fathers: whereunto I answer; That the ancient writers of the Church, in some
things might be ouerseene, and that this error might be both general, and
continue long also: as the Patriarchs long remained in that error of Bygamie,
and Polygamie, and corrected it not. Augustine answered Hierome well, who
having alleged diverse places, said, Patere me errare cum talibus: Aug. ep. 19.
suffer me to err with such: quis est (says he) qui se velit cum quolibet
errare? who is there that would willingly err with any? The Orator says well,
quae malum est haec ratio, semper optimis causis veteranorum nomen opponere,
Philip. 10.
etc. quos quidem libertatis adiutores complecti debetis, seruitutis authors
sequi non debetis: What reason is this, always in good causes to oppose the
name of the ancients, whom you ought to embrace as helpers of your liberty,
not to follow, as authors of your servitude. The like may be said of the
ancient Fathers, that we ought to follow them, when they stand for the truth,
not to be lead by them, when they incline to error. And herein the intent of
the Fathers is rather to be respected, then the content of their speech: their
meaning was, that even the Fathers of the old Testament, though being at rest
in Abraham's bosom, yet had an accession of joy, the Redemption of mankind
being accomplished by Christ: (like as the Saints now shall have the like
increase of joy at the resurrection, and consociation of their bodies with
their souls) though they failed in the particular apprehension and application
of this mystery. And so I end this point, with that worthy saying also of the
Orator, Philip^. 9.
Non exempla ^aierum quarenda sunt, sed consilium est eorum, a quo exempla nata
sunt, explicandum: The examples of the Elders, are not (so much) to be sought
into, as their intent, and counsel, from the which the examples are sprung, is
to be expounded.

Thus much for the matter of his book in general, now concerning the manner:
First, he fails in charity, in confuting publicly, that which was written
first privately; and bringing into open view to the world, that which was sent
in secret to a gentleman: I speak of the original occasion of his first
book, wherein, he being a Christian, saw not so much, as Tullie perceived by
the light of nature; who thus reprooueth Antonie for the very like, for making
his letters public, which he sent unto him in private: Quis vnquam, qui paulum
medo bonorum consuetudinem nosset, Philipp 2.
literas ad se ab amico missas, offensione aliqua interposita, in medium
protulit? quid hoc est aliud, quam tollere e vita vitae societatem: quam multa
ioca solent esse in Epistelis, quae prolata si sint, inep^a videntur? quam
multa seria, neque tamen divulgenda? Who ever, that was but even a little
acquainted with the custom of good men, brought forth letters sent to him from
a friend, some offense coming between? what is this (...), but to take out of
this life, the society of the living? how many merriments use to be in
letters, which seem foolish, if they be uttered? how many serious things,
that are no ways to be published?

Secondly, he fails in modesty, in persecuting the Replyer with railing
speech: you shall find few pages of his book, Impu. 1.
which are not pestred with the imputation of lying, forgerie, falsie^e,
heresy, blaspemie, atheism, Machiauellisme, and such like. Thus he
bestirreth him as another Shimei, or Rabshekah: which I may well requite with
round and smart speech, but will not with like railing: for as he says, Cicer.
Philip. 8.
vehementer me agere fateor, i^acunde nego: I confess I deal earnestly, but
not angerly: and I consider that it is much better, according to that saying,
(...): to hear evil, then to speak evil.

Thirdly, he forgets common honesty, in loading the Replyer with slanders
and untruths; Imput. 2. 3.
God forgive him this wrong: John 8. 44.
he knows who is called the father of lies, and the accuser of the brethren:
Apocal. 12. 10.
far be it from me to repay him in the like. I say with the Orator, Ego dabo
operam, vt and pro me minimo cum fastidio respondeam, ^icer. contra Sallust.
and in hunc minime mentitus esse videar: I will do my endeavor, that I may
both answer for my self, with the least irkesomnesse, and without lying of him.

Fourthly, his discretion might have been better, then every where untruly to
object those things, whereof he is guilty himself; as throughout this my
defense appears, not remembering the saying of our blessed Savior: why see
thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, Math 7. 3.
and perceiuest not the beam that is in thine own eye? And so Hierome says,
^eg^l. Monach.
Perdit authoritatem docendi, cuius sermo opere destruitur, vt been Tullius,
caput artis est docere, quod facis: He loses the authority of teaching,
whose saying is controlled by his own doing, as Tully says, it is the chief
thing in art, to teach that which thou do thy self.

Fifthly, his answer is insufficient; for neither does he clear himself of
the suspicion of being a favorer of Limbus patrum: neither has he answered
the arguments proposed by the Replyer, Limbom. p. 11. Ans. 1. 9. lines omitted:
p. 37. argum. 3. 17. lines omitted: to object. 2. p. 40. 2. whole l^aues
omitted, from arg. 5. to arg. 9. p. 53. ob. 6. 20. lines omitted.
omitting many of them of purpose, as I have here observed, as finding no
color o^ answer unto them: leaving therefore, the argument of the book as
yet unanswered, I only have collected 1* 2. several imputations, by him
imposed upon the Replyer; in every of them, first setting down the accusation,
then the justification, lastly, the recrimination: wherein, the Confuter is
discovered to have written neither diuine-like, scholler-like, nor
Christian-like; so that the Proverb which Hierome used against Heluidius
homely dispute is verefied upon him, Camelum vidimus saltitantem, we have seen
a Camel dancing.

Now one word I will add more concerning my self, mine adversary, and to the
indifferent Reader: As for my self, I had thought at the first to have said
nothing; nor to have regarded vain words; as the Preacher says, Eccles 7. 23.
Gine not thine heart to all the words that men speak: and Aristippus said
well, when flying away from one that reviled, being asked why he did so, made
this answer, (...): thou have power to speak evil, and I not to hear: and
that saying also of Demosthenes came unto my mind, who when one rayled upon
him, answered; (...): I will not enter into that combat, where he that is
conquered (indeed and in truth) is superior (in words) to him that conquereth.
But further considering with my self, that by his audacious and brauing
speech, (if it went current without check) some might be carried away; I
thought it not amiss, though not very needful, to frame him some answer: and
here I say with Hier* Hieron. August. tom. 2.
Si in defensione^ mei aliquid scripsero ^^ te culpa sit qu^ prouocasti, non in
me, qui respond^^ compulsus sum: If I write any thing in my ^^erence, the fault
is in you, that provoked me, not in me which am compelled to answer.

And touching him, I have small hope to reclaim the man to a peaceable mind,
considering his insolent kind of writing, and his hawty spirit, who proudly
refused to have any conference with me, when his book was offered to the
Press, though I earnestly desired it, (which he calls in his Preface
indirect dealing, for other can he charge me with none) being with child,
as it were, till this his misshapen and deformed monster came forth: so that I
may say with the Orator, 4. Philippie.
Non est mihi cum eo host certamen, cum quo aliqua pacis conditio esse possit:
I have not to do with such an enemy, as with whom there can be any condition
of peace. And I may say with Diogenes, who admonishing a lewd man, being asked
what he did, said, (...): I do wash a blacke-a-moore to make him white: yet I
will not cease to advise him, that if he have any grace, he may return to a
better mind; that seeing he has once done evil, he may leave off, and do
so no more. Seneca said well, Optima ciuilis belli defensio, obliuio: The best
defense of civil discord, is to forget it. And Tullie said well, Liceat semel
impune peccare: Philippie. 12.
sit erranti medicina confessio: It may be born with, once to offend without
punishment: let confession be a medicine of error. Homil. 6. in Exodus
And Origin also says, Possibile est; vt si forte resipiscat, qui devoratus
est, rursus possit evomi, sicut Jonas: it is possible, that he which is
devoured, if he repent, may be cast up with Jonas: So he may vomit up those
bitter pills again, which he has swallowed, if his stomach be not still
sick. But if he be auerse from wholesome counsel, and so show himself
unworthy of peace, which is offered, Matthew. 10. 13.
it shall, as our Savior says, return to us again.

Now last of all to the Christian Readers I turn me in a word, not doubting of
their godly equity in comparing his calumniations, and my defense together,
that I shall not need^ to say with Simonides the Musician, who thus answered to
one that said ^e heard evil of him; (...): and when will you leave to hurt my
fame with your ears. But I say unto them in Augustines words: Contra lit.
Petilian. 3. 11.
Obsecro vos deponet^ paulisper studia partium, and inter me and Petilianum cum
aliqua aequitate indicate: I praey you lay aside a little all partiality, and
judge between me, and mine (adversary) with equity. And so I commend you all
to the grace of God, who in his mercy grant, (...).
that we may follow the truth in love: And as many as walk according to this
rule, Ephesians. 4. 15.
peace (shall be) upon them, and mercy, Galat. 6. 16.
and upon the Israel of God.

Further aduertisments to the Reader, containing a brief answer to a certain
Popish pamphlet, entitled, The first part of Protestants proofs, etc.
AFter that I had finished this answer, which was ready for the Press in
September last, but stayed only the Printers leisure, till he had dispatched
an other work upon the first of Samuel, which in all reason was to be
preferred; there came to mine hand a certain Popish pamphlet, entitled, The
first part of Protestants proofs for Catholic religion and Recusancie:
wherein I found, that among other late writers of our Church, the author of
that pamphlet had abused and traduced me, and some of my writings: and had made
special use of this Adversaries testimony against me: I will therefore
briefly take a survey of his fraudulent and corrupt dealing herein, that by the
evil measure which he has offered unto me, it may appear how he has
handled others.

In this Romanists spiteful collections, three things I observe, absurdity,
falsitie, impertinencie: as the chief pillars and proppes of his rude and
ragged building.

First his absurdity herein appears, that he alleges this Cauillous
Accusers testimony, more then twenty several times against me: as p. 5, 6.
and most of all, p. 35. that I condemn all the ancient Fathers for dreamers:
that I condemn all learned and godly Divines: that I falsely corrupt,
translate, injuriously handle, abuse the Fathers: that I straungely pervert,
belie, deprave, abuse the Scriptures: and all this he takes for truth upon an
adversary, and evil willers report. All which slanderous accusations are, I
trust, sufficiently answered in this defense, unto the which, the Table annexed
in the end of the book, may direct the Reader, that desires further to be
satisfied. He might have thought of the common saying, Evil will never said
true: and if that usual byword sound to harsh in his ears, ask my fellow, if
I be a thief: yet I may use Hieromes words, (...). 3.
possem credere, si vnus assereret, nunc aut duo mentiuntur, aut omnes: if one
(honest man) said it, I could believe it, but now either both lie, or all: as
well he that receives a false report and carries it, as he that first coined
it, is counted a gloser.

His falsitie he bewraieth, in misreporting, and perverting diverse places by
him produced: as that I call the rules and principles of Religion, which his
Majesty approoueth, a foolish conceit, and imagination, p. 6. quoting Eccles.
triumph. p. 40. and again p. 31. he harpeth upon the same harsh string, that I
call the Kings sentence, that (the Roman Church is our mother Church) a
foolish conceit, and imagination: whereas I affirm no such thing, see mine
answer, p. 17. of this book. p. 10. he says, I speak of his Majesty's mother,
applying that saying of one to Augustines mother, the child of such prayers and
tears can not possibly fall away: pref. to Antilog. whereas I speak only of
his Majesty's prayers and tears, making no mention at all of his mother. So,
p. 21. he charge me to say, that all scriptures have been doubted of by one
Church or other, Synops. p. 2. in which place, no such thing is affirmed, but
only diverse heretics are rehearsed, by whom one or other, most of the
Scriptures have been doubted of: p. 27. that I should say, that Vigilantius
was condemned of heresy, for denying Relics to be reverenced: Antilog. p.
13. whereas my words in that place, are these: Some of these, as they are
imputed to Protestants, we deny to be heresies at all; as that of
Vigilantius, that Relics are not to be adored. Here no such thing is
affirmed, that Vigilantius was herein condemned of heresy.

P. 30. that I account the Council of Florence, a general Council: Synops.
cont. 1. qu. 7. whereas I there urge it only against the Romanists, as in
their opinion general: for otherwise elsewhere I have proved, that indeed it
could not be a general Council, the great Synod at Basil being at the same
time assembled. Antilog. p. 61.

P. 31. that I call the primitive Council of Neocaesarea, Toletane, the first,
and the sixth general Councels, the papal Church, popery, etc. Antil. p. 88.
89. whereas I only show in that place, that diverse errors decreed in all these
Councels, (the first only excepted, whereof I make no mention at all there)
are allowed in the popish church: see the place. Such deprauing and wresting of
sentences, shows a badde cause, and a worse mind in those that use such
beggarly shifts: the truth need not to be so defended; and such false and
deceitful dealing, will fall of it self, without any confutation: as Hierome
says; non necesse habet convinci, quod sua statim professione ( apud Hieron.
blasphemum legitur.
falsum) est: That need not to be convinced, which at the first is discovered
of falsehood.

Thirdly, his impertinent allegations are these; p. 10. to prove by our own
testimonies, that they which live and die in the Roman Church may be saved:
he urges these words of mine, that many renowned Kings and Queens (which
professed the Roman faith) are Saints in heaven. Antilog. p. 144. as if he
should reason thus; many ignorantly misled in those days of darkness, yet
holding the foundation, might through Gods mercy be saved: therefore they which
now wilfully resist the truth in the Roman Church, in these days of
knowledge, and erring in some fundamental points, may be also saved.

P. 24. to prove by our confession, that there is no true, lawful, and
judicial exposition of Scripture among the Protestants, he presses these
words; that the reformation of religion, belongs to the judgment and
redress of the Prince: and yet he is not privileged from error. Antilog. p.
120. The argument follows not; for we neither refer the exposition of
Scripture unto the Prince, nor hang religion absolutely upon his judgment, but
according to the word: and we interpret Scripture by Scripture, which is the
most lawful, sure, and certain way of expounding.

P. 30. propounding to himself to prove by Protestants writings, that the
testimony of the ancient Fathers, is for the doctrine of the Church of Rome;
he alleges this sentenee of mine, quite contrary: Antilog. p. 263. the same
faith and religion, which I defend, is taught and confirmed in the more
substantial points, by the Historians, Gouncels, Fathers, that lived within
five or six hundred years after Christ. Who but this lawless disputer would
infer hereupon, that even by the Protestants own testimony, the Fathers and
Councels make for the Romish religion?

Thus absurdly, falsely, and impertinently, this Popes penne-man wresteth and
depraueth my writings; and the like measure he offers to the rest: whose
chief strength lies in the weapons of a false brother at home. And such is
the fruit that comes of these domestical contentions, that thereby we put a
sword into the adversaries hand: whereas I could have wished rather, that al
these unnecessary brabbles at home had been stayed, 2. Sam. 1. 2^.
according to that saying of David, Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the
streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistims rejoice: for by these
unbrotherly dissentions, we give occasions to the enemies of God to rejoice,
and mispend our time, which might more profitably be employed. And as for mine
own part, I say with Hierome; Opto, sifieri potest, Hierom. aduers. L^ciferian.
and si aduersarij siverint, commentarios potius scripturarum, quam Demosthenis
and Tullij s^ribere: I wish, if it may be, and if mine enemies would permit,
to write rather commentaries of Scripture (which course I am now entered into)
then Demosthenes or Tullies Philippices. And as for any thing, which mine
adversaries at home or abroad can object, I pass not much, but comfort my
self in that saying of the Prophet; Mi^ah. 7 8.
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall, I shall arise, when I
shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

ERRATA.
In the Preface, p. 13. l. 17. read divulganda, for divulgenda. p. 21. l. 4. r.
Erasmus Sarcerius, for Erasmus, Sarcerius. p. 26. l. 13. r. denies not, f.
deemeth not. p. 27. l. 8. r. in as many syllables. p. 30. l. last. r. so much,
f. so must. p. 32. l. 10. in domo sua. p. 33. l. 18. r. practical knowledge,
for practiced, etc. p. 34. l. 33. r. nakedness, f. wickedness. p. 45. in the
marg. r. insertum Chalced. f. infestum. ibid. l. 23. paid ten, p. 40. l. 7.
r. to signify hell, and the soul. p. 53. l. 11. r. challenges. p. 74. l. 26.
r. vesica. p. 80. l. 8. r. retalion. p. 89. l. 3. r. (...). p. 91. l. 7.
supply in the margen: ad Oceanum. and l. 19. ad Rusticum. p. 102. l. 24. r.
instance. p. 111. l. 29. r. obiecteth. p. 116. l. 26. r. keber, for avad, and,
Psalm. 88. 12. f. 88. 10. p. 129. r. left in bonds. p. 146. l. 26. r. proof, f.
praise. p. 147. l. 1. r. Marcella, f. Marcellus. p. 174. r. in the marg cont.
Crescon.

A just, true, and sober answer unto the slanderous accusations, untrue
surmises, and uncharitable railing of RICHARD PARKES, writing himself master
of Arts of Brasen-nose College in Oxford, which he has of late with a more
brazen and bold face, vented unto the world, against the author of Limbomastix.
*
AGainst the unjust and false accusations of men, and their bitter and
unsavory reuilings, the servants of Christ are to oppose that heavenly
encouragement of our blessed Savior: Math. 5. 11, 12.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and speak all manner
of evil against you for my sake, falsely: rejoice and be glad, for great is
your reward in heaven. Lib. 1. offic. c. 5.
Ambrose says well, Ne quis aestimet plus ponderis esse in alieno convitio,
quam in testimonio suo: let not any think, that there is more weight in an
others obloquie, then in his own testimony. And, (as the same father well
resembles it) sicut milites Gedeon in hydrijs suis faces habentes non
timuerunt hosts, lib. 1. de spir. c. 15.
etc. Like as Gedeons soldiers having lamps burning in their pitchers feared
not their enemies, so our bodies being as pitchers formed of clay, are void of
fear, si gratia spirituali ignescant, if the grace of Gods spirit be kindled
in them. Whereas then this railing adversary has raked together a dunghill of
slanderous untruths, I will set against his calumniations, conscience; against
his vain surmises, truth; against his malice, charity. I am before God and in
my conscience clear of these his malicious imputations, as shall appear in
this discovery. Let him and others like minded, go on if they will, in this
their injurious course, to their own shame now, and grief afterward, if they
have any grace: in the mean time the Replier will content himself, and
resolve with Hierome, Hieron. ad Celantiam.
Nos modo id agamus, vt male de nobis loqui sine mendacio nemo possit: let us
endeavor that no man can speak evil of us, unless he lie: for according to
the wise saying of Plato, If a man have done no such thing, for the which he is
reviled, (...).
let him take the reproach to be but as smoke; which will vanish away of it
self.

Now at the first coming forth of this railing Inuectiue, I somewhat paused
with my self, as uncertain, whether it were not better in silence altogether
to pass over such frivolous and malicious cauills, which seemed to some not
worthy of any answer: as Hierome stayed a while from writing against
Helvidius, upon the same reason: Non quia difficile erat eum convincere, Hier.
adv. Helv.
sed ne respondendo dignus fieret, qui vinceretur: Not because it was hard to
convince him, but least in answearing, he might seem worthy to be overcome.
Beside, I considered, that in some men's opinion a rayler could not handsomely
be answered, but in his own kind: Prove. 26. 4.
but therein the wise man gives counsel, not to answer such according to
their foolishnes, least we should be like them: and Ambrose says, Si referas
contumeliam, dicetur, ambo convitiati sunt, vterque condemnatur, Lib. 1. offic.
c. 5.
nemo absolvitur: If thou return (the like) contumely, it will be said, they
both have (equally) reviled: each is condemned, neither is cleared: yet seeing
the wise man says again, Answer a fool according to his foolishnes, least he
be wise in his own eyes: Prove. 36. 5.
if in silence all those disgraces and contumelies should be passed over, which
have fallen out of his black and filthy pen, it might be both an occasion
of fleshing and heartning to the Rayler, and to those which applaud him, of
insulting. The Preacher says, there is a time to keep silence, Ecclesiast. 3.
7.
and a time to speak: upon the which words Ambrose well says, 1. Imputation.
Si pro otioso verbo reddemus rationem, Offic. lib. 1 c. 3.
videamus ne reddamus pro otioso silentio: if we shall render an account for an
idle word, s^e if we shall not also for slothful silence: therefore as
Hierome also says, Huc vsque silentium modestiae fuit, non malae conscientiae:
Advers. Ruffin.
hitherto my silence has been of modesty, not of an evil conscience. But
now I will give the onset upon this raging, if not rauing Adversary.

The 1. imputation of railing.
The Accusation.
FIrst, the Rayler charge the Replier with railing: thus complaining: he
rayleth on me without reason, calling me a secret Censor, a masking Mummer, a
new Rabbine, a Limbist, a disgracer of the Gospel: pref. page 2. and again:
your four cautions are nothing else but so many calumniations full of railing
without reason, etc. a secret Censor, a disgracer of the Gospel, a partaker
with the wicked, a lover of Gods enemies, an adversary to Protestants, and a
fighter against them with the weapons of Papists. 2. b. p. 48. and again,
although you think no terms disgraceful enough toward me. 2. testim. sect.
7. because the Replier had said, these are but ridiculous objections: and yet
further he says, with what conscience or honesty, can you condemn me for a
most shameless and impudent man. 3. b. p. 196.

The satisfaction.
1. Some of these terms the Replier uses not, but the other imagines: he
calls him not a disgracer of the Gospel, but only says thus, what came in
his mind to join with the common adversary, in disgracing the defense of the
Gospel, by one undertaken in Synopsis. Limbom. p. 3. the other words, a
partaker with the wicked, a lover of Gods enemies, an adversary to
Protestants, are the Raylers own collections, not the Repliers direct
applications: for he speaks in that place in Hieromes words, and not his
own: neither does he call him, a most shameless and impudent man: but only
writes thus, with what face can the answearer affirm, etc. It seems his
own conscience condemned him, finding himself inwardly guilty of all this,
which he imagined outwardly to be imputed: as Ambrose well says, Ambros. l. 3.
offic. c. 4.
Quod severius iudicium, quam domesticum, quo vnusquisque sibi est reus? what
judgment is more severe, then the domestical, wherein every one is guilty to
himself?

2. The most of the titles and epithites are truly imposed, and therefore they
contain no unjust calumniation, but a due castigation or reprehension: is not
he a secret Censor, that censureth other men's private writings, and brings
them to public view? a maintainer of ^imbus I have proved him before in the
Preface, and therefore a masking Mummer he is, that hides his face, and
ratleth his box full of counters, in stead of silver and gold, winding in an
error and counterfeit opinion for sound doctrine. He therefore that speaks
the truth, reuileth not, as Hierome well says, Hieron. oburgat Sabini^n.
using those words of the Apostle: inimicus factus sum tibi vera dicens? Am I
become your enemy speaking the truth?

3. All this being uttered in general, no person being named, nor
discovered, not so much, as the man in the moon, shows that he does but
bark at his own shadow: for a general and indefinite reprehension is no
defamation; as that Imperial law says, Verba generalia vt quis vitam
reformet, God. lib. 2. tit. 12. leg. 19.
non infamant: general words that one should reform his life, do not
defame. But what do I tell him of Imperial laws, whose element and trade
reaches no further, then to give laws to petites and schoole-boies.

The Recrimination.
Now this untrue imputation of railing, is justly returned upon his own head,
who for his graceless facility that ways, is worthy to carry the bell, of
all scurrilous writers (not the Popish Iudasites and Seminary sectaries
excepted) that have abused their pen that way. Thus therefore he barketh and
belcheth out his stinking and indigested stuff.

1. Like a mad dog he snatcheth. pref. p. 5. 2. I cannot but condemn your
prauitie in so wilful perverting it, even contrary to your own conscience.
2. b. p. 4. 3. You add malice to falsehood. p. 5. 4. It argues mere malice
without matter. p. 6. 5. His malecontented impatience. p. 17. 6. he counts
the author of Limbomastix, both a fool, p. 27. and a goose. p. 28. 7. rather
Ismaelites in faction, then Israelits in faith. p. 18. 8. in this Calender of
Saint-seeming Nocents Limbomastix has canonized himself. p. 19. 9. he uses
the like parasiticall preoccupation to currie favor. p. 24. 10. there is
neither truth nor modesty in your words. p. 34 11. he calls him a lier:
applying these words, mendax raro memor. p. 38. that he properly belieth him.
3. b. 127. 12. no Sophister but your self. p. 39. 13. it is but the suggestion
of malice. p. 40. 14. proves nothing else but presumptuous boldness. p. 44. 15.
which for want of true knowledge, you reject with malice. p. 47. 16. past the
bounds of modesty. p. 53. 17. he obiecteth also impudency. ibid. 18. where
verity is banished, modesty is expulsed. p. 56. 19. as in pretending charity,
you should defame all Christianity. p. 64. 20. he obiecteth unchristian, if
not Machivellian policy. p. 79. 21. Thus Machivellian dissimulation is
Christian policy with you. p. 82. 22. it is little better then infidelity. p.
86. Falsehood attended with contradiction and absurdity. p. 3. 23. as you
began with falshoode you mean to continue. p. 32. 24. it is both false and
calumnious. p. 87. 25. you would falsely insinuate. ibid. 26. does notably
discover his hypocrisy. p. 19. 27. letting hypocrisy pass this once, as if
it were humility. p. 27. 28. you most hypocritically pretend. p. 44. 29. As
you began your preface with falsehood and malice. p. 105. 30. to the end
neither falsehood should want absurdity, nor folly contrariety. p. 126. 31.
you begin with falsehood and slander. p. 139. 32. fraud and falshoode are
every where your strongest forts. p. 143. 33. your falsehood mixed with
absurdity. p. 144. 34. falsification is grown into such an habit with you.
p. 162. 35. falsehood is your surest fortress. p. 186. 36. as you delight in
contrariety, so it best pleases you to add falsitie to it. p. 195. 37.
fallacy mixed with falsehood. p. 197. 38. would God you would once leave your
falsehood. 1. test. s. 17. p. 2. 39. from these you proceed to the shameful
falsification, etc. 1. test. sect. 23. p. 2. 40. you seek after nothing but
falsehood. 3. test. s. 7. p. 1. 41. your profane contentions. p. 103. 42.
diabolical presumption. ibid. 43. having never a good thought of your own. 2.
b. 106 44. what is this else but to root out Christianity, and plant
infidelity. 2. b. 146. 45. it shows your spitefulnes. p. 155. 46. it is your
own folly. ibid. 47. which shows you neither regard rules of divinity, nor
yet of humanity. p. 158. 48. as you show neither verity nor modesty, so you
incur thereby absurdity and impiety. p. 161. 49. your malice shall not
extinguish my charity. p. 165. 50. the Evangelists are sufficient witnesses to
convince your incredulity. p. 179. 51. which insolent vanity. p. 175. 52.
what peruersenes or rather impiety is it. 2. test. s. 9. p. 4. 53. if malice
had not miscarried you. 2. test. s. 14. p. 3. 54. what arrogant presumption is
this. 2. test. s. 17. p. 1. 55. thus imperiously, if not saucily. ibid. thus he
raileth and rages, because the original is preferred. 56. with what conscience
or honesty. 3. test. sect. 16. p. 5. 57. your self in that respect worse then
the Arrians themselves. p. 178. 58. you still feed your Reader with falsehood
in stead of truth. p. 179. 59. you do exceed the limits of all modesty and
shamefastnes. p. 181. 60. if your darkness will receive it. p. 193. 61. you
prove your self to be a various impostor. 1. test. sect. 17. p. 2. 62. what
dishonest dealing is this in you. 1. test. s. 23. p. 2. 63. you had no color
of belying me. 2. test. s. 1. p. 3. 64. while you bolster out impiety with
blasphemy. 1. test. s. 3. p. 2. 65. such malepart saucines. 1. test. s. 14. p.
3. 66. whosoever denies the article, ( he means, in his sense) is an
Atheist. 3. test. s. 6. p. 3. 67. And to fill up the measure of this his
poisoned cup of reuiling words, he charge him with gross error, or rather
heresy directly tending to Atheism. pref. to the first book.
Thus this uncharitable fellow goes on in his pitiful rage, laying on load,
charging the Replier, with folly, hypocrisy, falsehood, infidelity,
impudency, Machiavellisme, Atheism, heresy: who in the sight of God, and of
all good Christians, will by Gods grace approve himself as far from the
imputation of these, as the Rayler will show himself (if he go on in this
course) from the reputation of an honest man. Little did he remember, when he
suffered his pen thus to rage, that all raylers by the sentence of the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 6. 10.
are excluded out of Gods inheritance: what blindness is this, to object railing
to an other, giving him self ten words of reproach for one, and that not
reproachful neither. Hieromes complaint is here most just: Quid possumus
facere, Hieron. advers. Ruffin.
si vnusquisque just putat se facere, quod facit, and videtur sibi remorderi
potius, quam mordere: what should we do, if every man thinks he well does,
that which he does, and that he himself is bitten, when he biteth others.

But the Replier for his part grieueth not to hear this intemperate mate, thus
to revile the living: for, as Hierome says, Scillaeos canes obdurata aure
transibo: I will pass by the Scillean dogs, Hier. ad Celant.
and stop mine ears: seeing that he spares not the dead, but emptieth his
unclean stomach, casting up gall and all by his unbridled tongue upon them.
Of reverend Beza, he thus irreverently speaks: All the fig leaves you can
filch, R. Parkes his railing upon the dead.
will not cover his nakedness herein. 2. testim. sect. 17. p. 3. of that learned
man D. Fulke, he is not ashamed to say, that he was in such an error, as could
not be defended without blasphemy. 3. testim. sect. 17. p. 2. grave M. Gilbie
is charged with swelling pride, and seducing hypocrisy. 2. b. p. 9. Carlisle, a
Protestant, neither Papist, nor heretic, is burdened with heretical dealing
in deprauing Scripture. 1. testim. sect. 1. p. 2. But among all other, that are
at rest in the Lord, this wretched man rages not more against any, then
against worthy Doctor Reynolds: D. Reynolds reviled after his death.
whom he is not ignorant to be the author of the objections, which he takes
upon him to confute in the first book: for he in two several places, 2. b. p.
6. and p. 76. names him in the Margen. In this manner does he handle that
learned Defender of the truth against the Popish Synagogue: calling his fact,
in so obiecting and impugning, profane and irreligious: epist. dedicat. p. 3.
and the effect thereof heathenish and pernicious. ibid. their dissenting
heretical and sacrilegious. ib^d. p. 6. he whereby grace may happily work in
their hearts. epist. p. 11. as though that godly man, had been void of grace:
he in the same place further charge him, frowardly to have excluded the
truth: he includes him, among the profane Anaxagorists of this age. pref. p.
2. one iuuenters of Novelty, and Masters of error. ibid. he as an adversary
of the truth. ibid. p. 3. he that he stands peremptorily upon the denial of
this article. ibid. he means an article of the faith: as thoroughout the
whole book is evident. And further he he says: both which foul imperfections
you grossly discover, etc. 1. b. p. 3. it argues more cunning and subtilty,
then simple and plain dealing. p. 4. unless perhaps you think, the
confession of the truth to be an indignity unto you: who, as it seems, have
vowed the contrary in this question. p. 7. in the same place he charge him,
with gross absurdity, or rather impiety: with profane speeches. p. 18. with
gross error joined with impiety: he calls him captious sophister. p. 24. he
challenges him, that he wresteth the Scriptures, and makes the spirit of
verity, the spirit of error and absurdity. you deal, as you did in the
former, that is corruptly, and so falsely in both. p. 33. this Nemesis still
pursues falsehood. 33. resting in hope, that where the love of verity can not
draw you, the very loathsomnes of absurdity will drive you to renounce it. p.
43. And thus he persecuteth the blessed memory of that renowned Divine in his
former book: which although it was first printed, while that worthy man was
yet living, and not known to be the author of those objections; yet it is
evident, that he, whom this Reviler and false accuser of his brethren now
knows to have first written those objections, had then finished his days in
peace, before this filthy sink and channel was the second time let go, and
this slanderous Inuectiue reprinted. And no better deals he with him in the
second book: D. Reynolds in his opinion was none of the I say and prove that
it is directed against no writer of our Church at all: 2. b. p. 7. l. 9. whereas
he writes directly against D. Reynolds. And this motion being made, that it
had been better privately to have conferred with him (that is, D. Reynolds)
then publicly to have censured him, this answer is made Ask no counsel of
religion of him; who is without all religion himself. 1. b. p. 74. but falsely
noted in this point (that is, of the local discension) every good Christian is
fully satisfied. p. 76. So by his uncharitable censure, D. Reynolds was without
all religion, and no good Christian.

Thus this good man is traduced by the Raylers uncharitable pen, as guilty
of profane, irreligious, heretical, sacrilegious opinions, of grossenes,
absurdity, sophistry, prophanenes, and what not: So that, to use his own
phrase, 1. b. p. 29.
What could the greatest Seminary or Jesuit have spoken more to the
discredit, or defamation of this worthy Confessor: whose memorial shall be
blessed, when the name of such as he is shall rott: according to the saying of
the wise man in the Proverbs. Prove. 10. 7.
Nay, I verily think, the most gross and railing Romanist would have been
ashamed, thus to have reviled the servant of God: who blusheth not, and is not
ashamed that such stuff should come out in print: as Augustine says, miror,
si habet in corpore sanguinem, Epist. 164.
qui ad haec verba non erubescit: I wonder, if he have any blood in his body,
that does not blush at these words. I may say unto him in Tullies words to
Antonie: Philipp. 2.
quam me pudet nequitiae tuae, cuius teipsum non pudet: how am I ashamed of
your lewdnes, whereof you are not ashamed your self. To scourge good men
living with the whip of the tongue, is injurious, but to rage against the name
and memory of the righteous departed, is impious, Hieron. As^l^^.
and sacrilegious. Hierome says well: prava dixisse de rectis, non facilis
venia: to speak evil of the righteous, is not so easily pardoned. Plato
resembles such, as rage against the dead, unto dogs, (...); Lib. 5. de (...)
which are angry with the stones which are cast, not touching him that cast
them: such are they, which unchristianly, and currishly too (according to his
own phrase, 2. b. page 199.) bark against the dead, carping at their memory
and name, who themselves are without his reach. The Replyer therefore need not
to be grieved, that he is marked with such a black coal: seeing such reverend
men as M. Beza, D. Fulke, D. Reynolds can not go vnbranded: where he may say
with Cicero, Philipp. 2.
In huius concilij societate^, tanquam in equum Tr^ianum includi non recusabo:
I will not refuse to be included in this company, as in a Trojane horse. But
in the mean time, while he would obscure others men's fame, he staineth his
own, and besprinkleth his own face with that filthy dirt, which he casts
upon others. Let him go on still, if he will in his mad fittes, he will
purchase thereby eternal infamy unto himself: as the Orator again says,
Philipp. 12.
Pergit in me maledicta congerere, quasi vero ei pulcherrime priora
processerint, quem ego inustum verissimis maledictorum notis, tradam memoriae
hominum sempiternae: he proceeds still to speak evil of me, as though he
had sped so well in the former: whom branded with the true notes of disgrace,
I will deliver over to the everlasting memory of men.

The 2. imputation of slanders. 2. Imputation.

The accusation.
1. The Replyer is noted as a slaunderer, because he charge the Antagonist,
to understand directly by Christ's death, hell. 2. b. p. 36. 2. b. p. 36.


2. He calls it a slander, that he is charged by the Replyer, to maintain
Limbus patrum. 2. b. p. 40. 2. b. p. 40.


The satisfaction, or justification.
1. THe slaunderer himself mistaketh the Replyers words, which are these; he
directly by his death understands hell: where this word his, should by the
Compositor have been made this: which missing of a letter in the word this, is
an oversight of the Printer, as may be seen in other places of the Replyers As
Hexapl. p. 217. l. 24. this chief fault, for his chief fault: and, p. 356. l.
25. this Patriarchal dignity, for his Patriarchal. So Synops. p. 978. l. 28.
this soul, for, his soul.
works: the Printer therefore, sets his death; the Author wrote, this
death: neither of them has Christ's death, as he misreporteth: he is therefore
the slaunderer himself.

2. Whether he be not without any slander or false imputation, directly a
Limbist, it has been sufficiently proved before in the preface.

The recrimination.
That eloquent declamer said well, Carere debet omni vitio, Cicer. respons. ad
Salust.
qui in alterum paratus est dicere: he should himself be void of blame, that
speaks against an other: with what face then could the Accuser impute that to
others, which he falls into himself? and wrack himself upon that rock,
which he imagines others to run against: for here follows a rabble of his
slanderous accusations.

1. Limbomastix, is become Symbolomastix: that is, a scourger of the Creed.
epist. dedic. p. 10. ep. ded. p. 10.
you cunningly went about to casheere an article of the Creed. 2 b. p. 166. 2.
b. p. 166.
you still labor to discreede this Article of our faith. 3. b. p. 3. 179. 3.
b. p. 179.
you still labor not only to discredit it, but to discreede it also. 3. b. p.
198. 3. b. p. 198.
And in diverse other places he lays this grievous imputation: whereas the
Replyer directly says, Who denies the article of Christ's discension? 3. b. p.
197.

2. That he conueyeth an appeal from his Majesty, and the Clergy, unto the
Parliament: epist. p. 10. epist. p. 10.
whereas the Epistle Dedicatorie to the Parliament house, is directly entitled
to the Lords spiritual and temporal.

3. That in Synopsis he strikes at some maine points of faith, shaking the
foundation it self, and calling in question heaven and hell, the divinity and
humanity: yea, the very soul and salvation of Christ himself. epist. p. 6.
epist. p. 6.
all which are mere slanders: the author of Synopsis holds all these points
more soundly, then this slanderous carper: neither shall he be able to fasten
any such imputation upon that book, and therefore he glaunceth over with this
general fiction, descending to no particular.

4. That the Replyer holds this blasphemous paradox, that Christ our Savior
suffered in his sacred soul, the hellish horror and pains of the damned.
epist. p. 10. epist. p. 10.
whereas, he misliketh this phrase of speech, that Christ suffered the pains
of the damned, and wishes it to be forborne. Synops. p. 974. err. 7.

5. That he maintains, impious and heretical paradoxes: pref. p. 2. pref. p.
2.
seeks to bring in a new Puritan heresy. p. 43. 2. b. p. 43.
that neither Rhemist nor Romanist could lightly have more disgraced the
discipline and doctrine of the Church. epist. dedic. p. 10. how falsely he has
herein slaundered the Replyer, his writings already extant can give sufficient
testimony both to this age present, and to posterity: that he is as far
from all heresy, and popish doctrine, as this Reviler is from a sober and
modest man.

6. That he falls to scourging the guides and governors of the Church: 2. b.
p. 2. 2. b. p. 2.
transformeth the order thereof into an Anarchie: p. 29. p. 29.
that he rejects Ecclesiastical authority, 2. b. p. 110.
ever repining at that government whereby you should be ruled. p. 110. But what
a reverent opinion the Replyer has of the calling of Bishops, it appears
both by his judgment delivered, Synops. p. 241. l. 3. wherein he confesses in
the calling of Bishops in the reformed Churches, (such as the Church of England
is) somewhat no doubt to be divine and Apostolical: and Antilog. pref. to the
King, p. 9. where he esteems the calling it self of Bishops, as one of the
profitable parts of the Church. As also by his practice, who has dedicated
diverse books unto certain reverend Bishops and Prelates: more, I think,
then any one writer of the Church in this age has done beside: which he has
done only of duty and love toward them, not being moved thereunto by any
present fruition, or future hope, of any preferment either received at their
hands, or expected.

7. As for personal inueighing against the writers of our Church, there is
none that has more peremptorily directed his pen, or more presumptuously
employed his pains, then your self. 2. b. p. 7. 2. b. p. 7.
There is none among all the impugners of the local descent of Christ's soul
to hell, who has in more disgraceful manner reproached some of the best
Preachers and writers of this English Church, then you have done. 2. b. p. 81.
2. b. p. 81.
he falsely and slanderously condemns the doctrine and teachers of the
Church, for Popish, unsound, corrupt, erroneous, yea heretical. 2. b. p. 29.
2. b. p. 29.
you affirm some Popish books to have been written by Protestants. 2. b. p.
54. 2. b. p. 54.
All these are uncharitable slanders: 1. for he can not name one writer of the
Church, that the Replyer has personally inueighed or directed his pen
against. 2. of like truth is it, that he has used reproachful terms against
some of the best preachers: what are those reproachful words, where, and when
uttered? 3. it is as true, that he charge the doctrine and teachers of the
Church, with heretical opinions, and writing of Popish books: he says that
some books (set forth) do maintain doctrine too much declining to Popery,
which can not be denied of any of sound judgment: if these and the like
positions, that the Scriptures alone are not complete to everlasting
felicity: that man's will naturally is apt without grace to believe: that men's
natural works are acceptable unto God: that there are works of
supererogation: that to be preserved from all sin in this life, is not
impossible: and such like, as they are noted else where, Eccles. triumph. p. 91.
be not doctrines too much declining to Popery: then it must be confessed the
Replyer is ouerseene, The Confuter holds positions contrary to the articles
of religion established.
if they be, then the wrongful Accuser is proved a slaunderer. Does he count
these the doctrines of the Church, which are directly opposite to the articles
of religion established? which thus affirm, that the holy Scripture contains
all things necessary to salvation: artic. 6. that man of his own natural
strength, can not turn and prepare himself to faith: artic. 10. that works
done before the grace of Christ, are not pleasant to God: artic. 13. works of
supererogation, can not be taught without arrogancy and impiety: artic. 14.
they are to be condemned, which say they can no more sun, as long as they
live here. artic. 16. The Slaunderer then himself, and his adherents, are
those that condemn the doctrine of the Church.

8. He charge the Replyer, with heresy tending to Atheism: pref. p. 5.
pref. p. 5.
it is to be feared least in time you become as bad members to the Church of
England, as they, that is, the Anabaptists, were to the Church of Germany. 2.
b. p. 8. 2. b. p. 8.
there were certain omnifidians, etc. who held the like opinion, as you do,
of which number was one Appelles, who affirmed, that it was needelesse to
discuss the particulars of faith. 2. b. p. 90. 2. b. p. 90.
he calls his exposition of some places of Scripture (which he terms
misconstruction) heretical. 2. b. p. 91. blasphemous, p. 92. 2. b. p. 91. 92
These imputations of heresy, blasphemy, Anabaptisme, are most vile and
pestilent slanders: so is this, that the Replyer is burdened, to hold an
implicit faith, p. 91. and that it is needelesse to discuss the particulars
of faith: whereas he directly holds the contrary, condemning else where the
Popish implicit, and simple faith: S^nops. p. 874.
he only wishes, that seeing we all hold the foundation, the peace of the
Church be not broken, in contending about the manner of Christ's discension.
Limbom. p. 5.

9. Slander. That he bitterly exclaimeth against the whole state of the
Church: 1. b. p. 10. 1. b. p. 10.
reuiueth clamorous inuectiues: their heads plotting, and their hands
practicing Babylonian wars: they can not avoid the name of dissemblers in
the Church of England, nor yet disturbers of it. p. 18. 1. b. p. 18.
his petition and complaint, are in plain English nothing else but a bitter
inuectiue against the doctrine and discipline of the Church, glossed with
flattery, and gilded with hypocrisy. 2. b. p. 19. 2. b. p. 19.
that they thought his Majesty would erect the Genevian Consistory, or
Scottish Presbytery, p. 23. p. 23.
and change the state of religion. ibid. the picture of a discontented, if not
turbulent spirit. p. 29. p. 29. 31.
he rebelleth against the Church. p. 31. those whom you call reverend Fathers,
you vouchsafe them no sonne-like obedience. p. 68. p. 68.
All these are most untruly objected: 1. to complain of some abuses of the
Church, is not to exclaim against the Church: the late Canons and
Constitutions of the Church do show, that many things had need of amendment
and reformation in the Church: 2. what reverent opinion the Replyer has of the
Governors of the Church, is before showed, slaund. 6. 3. how far he is from
a turbulent spirit, God he knows: and some of the greatest place in the
Church can tell, how his courses have tended to a pacification in the Church. A
more vile slanderous tongue, I think has seldom been heard to speak.

10. Slaund. The Kings most excellent Majesty can not escape the Taint of his
intemperate tongue: for whereas his grace says, that he acknowledges the
Roman Church to be our mother Church: it is ( says Limbomastix) a foolish
conceit and imagination: he makes him a very nouice in the faith. 2. b. p. 28.
2. b. p. 28.


In these foul slanders, he does bewray nothing else but (to use his own
terms) falsehood and malice. 1. Is it like that the Replyer had the least
imagination to cross his Majesty's speech, when as the book, which the
slaunderer quoteth, Eccles. triumph.
was published ann. 1603. about the time of his Majesty's coronation in the
month of Iulie, and the Kings oration followed above six months after, Anno
1603.
in the month of March: Mart. 19.
what an absurd collection is this? 2. But this slanderous obiecter does his
Majesty the wrong, to suppose that he is contrary to himself: for his
Majesty holds the Pope to be Antichrist, and to be the head of a false and
hypocritical Church: Meditat. in Revel. 20. par. 2.
is he so shameless to imagine, that his Majesty thinks a false and
hypocritical Church to be our mother? it is clear then, that the King in
acknowledging the Roman Church to be our mother, means not the Popish
Church, as it now stands: but that sometime while it stood in the integrity,
it was our mother Church: that is, a principal and chief church, where the
Patriarchall seat was of the Occidentall parts: for these are his Majesty's
own words, I acknowledge the Roman Church to be our mother Church, although
defiled with some infirmities and corruptions, as the Jews were, when they
crucified Christ. The Church of Rome is no otherwise then our mother Church,
then the Church of the Jews was of our Savior Christ and the Apostles. 3.
Neither yet is it in the place given in instance called a foolish conceit to
say, that the Roman Church is our mother, (which in the Kings sense being
admitted, yet as he blindly takes it, will be denied) but that Rome should be
the mother Church and nurserie of all the world: the Accuser then himself is
found to be a falsifier, and slaunderer. 4. Yea, it is his own intemperate
tongue, the taint whereof his Majesty can not escape: whereas he calls
diverse points of doctrine true and sound positions, 2. b. p. 20. 2. b. p. 20.
some of which are before set down, slaund. 7. which his Majesty in his
judgment condemns: the King affirms, that all, which is necessary to
salvation, is contained in the Scripture: R. Parks opposes himself in
diuerspoints of doctrine to his Majesty's judgment.
that no man is able to keep the law, or any part thereof: that we are saved
by believing, not by doing: that whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: that we
can not think any thing of our selves, and consequently that we are not apt of
our selves to believe: the contrary positions to all these, with others, this
cauillous adversary calls sound and true positions: as that the Scriptures
of themselves are not complete to salvation: that it is not impossible in this
life to be preserved from all sin, and so consequently to keep the law: that
our works (and so not only faith and believing) are means to blot out sin:
that natural works are acceptable to God, even such as are without faith:
that man's will is apt to take or refuse any particular object: and consequently
to believe. Then in this slanderous excepters opinion, the King holds
unsound and untrue positions: the contrary whereof he calls sound and true
positions: and thus he thwarteth not only the doctrine of the Church in the
articles of religion, as is before showed, 7. slaund. but his Majesty's
judgment also: see more of this, pref. to Antilog. p. 4.

5. But the other objection is frivolous and childish, that the Replyer makes
him a Novice in the faith: affording his Highness only a lively feeling and
inward touch thereof: Sense and feeling of religion the perfection thereof:
against R. Parks ignorant position.
for, 1. he adds ( only) deceitfully of his own: the Replyers words are
these, as God has endued his princely heart with a lively feeling, and inward
touch of true religion. 2. he bewraieth his carnal and gross ignorance, in
making the lively sense and feeling of religion only to appertain to a
Novice, which is the very perfection of true knowledge, and religion: for a
lively sense presupposes knowledge: one may have the knowledge and show of
religion, and yet feel not the power thereof, as the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 3.
5. (...).
having a form of religion, but have denied the power thereof: in which number
(I fear me) this envious adversary is one. But there can not be a lively
sense of religion, Philip. 1. 9. (...).
without knowledge preceding: as S. Paul again says, I pray that your love
may abound, yet more and more in all knowledge and sense.

11. Slaund. That the Replyer defends many things in that book that is
contrary to the Gospel. 2. b. p. 50. 2. b. p. 50.
you convince your self to be no Protestant, in calling me an adversary to
Protestants. p. 52. p. 52.
they have neither friend, nor faith left them. p. 53. p. 53.
that some of his friends deny the Pater noster. p. 76. p. 76.
if we must receive no article of the Creed, unless it be expounded according
to your sense of the Scriptures, and your conceit of the Analogy of faith, we
may in time have neither Creed, nor Christianity left us. 2. b. p. 180. 2. b.
p. 180.
that he follows profane error in hatred of the truth. 3. b. p. 203. 3. b.
p. 203.


Unless this shameless man were possessed with the spirit of lying and
slander, he would never have laid unto the Replyers charge, to defend things
contrary to the Gospel, to be no Protestant, to have no faith, no
Christianity, to hate the truth: whose books, if they had not more true
divinity in one leaf, then his railing bundle in the whole pack, and the
author more faith and Christianity in his serious meditations, then the other
in his deepest studies, he would never set pen to paper again, nor look any
man in the face hereafter. But I must here excuse my self with Tullie,
Philippic. 12.
Iniuriae dolor facit me praeter morem gloriosum: the sense of my wrong makes
me boast beside my wont.

12. Slaund. Your seldom excursions abroad against the common adversary, can
not excuse your often incursions at home against your brethren: 2. b. p. 58. 2.
b. p. 58.
what will not a slanderous tongue forge? The Replyer calls God and men to
witness for the clearing of him in this point: that he has neither used often
nor seldom incursions against his brethren; making any challenge by name to
any of them. This whole Church can testify with him, that the most, if not
Synops. Tetrastylon. Catholicon. the Retect. the Antilog. Hexapla on Genesis.
all of his writings (certain explanations of Scripture only excepted) have
been directed against the common adversary: of like truth is the marginal
glaunce in the same place: that two petitions were exhibited to the King, the
one with a 1000. hands, the other with 1500. whereas I have been certainly
informed, and I do verily believe, that neither of them were subscribed with
any hands at all. Of the same credit is the next objection, p. 60. 2. b. p. 60.
that the Replyer with others do think themselves persecuted for the
profession of the Gospel: whereas (leaving other men's complaints) he most
heartily thanketh God for that sweet peace, which he has enjoyed in his
ministry, which by Gods gracious assistance has brought forth such fruits in
the use of his pen, as he needs not be ashamed of.

13. Slaund. Your words do necessarily implie all the ancient fathers, and
all sound writers since, together with all good Christians throughout the whole
world, to be popish and superstitious men, etc. for all these do firmly hold
the local descent of Christ's soul into hell. 2. b. p. 82. 2. b. p. 82.
Contra. 1. The Replyers words do implie no such thing, but the contrary:
for these they are, They which hold not the local descent of Christ's soul to
hell should not condemn the other as profane and superstitious that are so
persuaded. Limbom. p. 5. is not then he ashamed to infer the contrary, that
the Replyers words implie they are popish? 2. The fathers opinion touching the
local descent of Christ's soul, is far different from his: and in these four
substantial and material points: 1. in respect of the place, they hold he
went not down to the hell of the damned, but to that part of hell, where the
fathers were: 2. in respect of their persons; that he descended not to the
damned, but to preach deliverance to the fathers there detained: 3. the end is
also diverse: they hold he went to deliver: 4. in the effect they differ: for
their opinion is, that hell was emptied at Christ's going down thither, and
that returning from thence, he brought an innumerable company of captives with
him: Bell. de Christ anim. l. 4. c. 14.
to this purpose Bellarmine alleges above twenty Greek and Latin fathers
beside Counsels. 3. And are all sound writers, and good Christians of his
opinion? then in Act 2. v. 27. institut. lib. 2. c. 16. sect 9. 8.
Calvine, in Math. c. 27.
Bucer, in Act. 2. 27.
Beza, Act. 2. v. 27.
Erasmus, Sarcerius, in Ephesians. 4. 9.
Marlorate, in Ephesians. 4. 9.
Gasper Megander, in Symbol.
Oleviane, Act. 2 sect. 11.
D. Fulke, D. Reynolds, cont. Monach. Burdegal. p. 176.
Sadeel, Medull. de Ignat. c. 3. p. 448
Scultetus, super hunc articulum.
Vrsinus, Bucanus, with diverse others, were in his blind opinion neither sound
writers, nor good Christians, all which held the contrary.

14. Slaund. That the Replyer was one of those that contradicted, what reverend
2. b. p. 95.
B. Bilson taught concerning our redemption by the death of Christ: p. 95. that
he holds that the article of Christ's descention 2. b. p. 96.
is to be rejected out of the Creed as a new addition, lately foisted into the
Creed. 2. b. p. 96. Contra. What will not now this malicious Accuser dare to
say, obiecting things as contrary to truth, as darkness is to light? he might
as well say, that the Replyer holds, there is no Christ, nor God, as accuse
him to deny the redemption of mankind by the death of Christ, and the article
of the discension: his profane heart knew, that his dissembling lips,
wandering hand, and erring pen, consented here to make a lie.

15. Slaund. The fourth fault is horrible impiety, in that you hereby condemn
the soul of the Prophet David, to the very place of the damned. 3. b. p. 41.
Whereas, 1. the Replyer says in very direct words, his, that is, David's soul
was not at all in hell, Limbom. p. 24. how then is not the slaunderer ashamed
thus to object: 2. because the Replyer says, the not being or leaving of the
soul in hell, was as well performed in David as in Christ: Limbom. p. 24.
hence he does infer thus: David's soul was not left in hell, Ergo it was in
hell: whereas it is clear, that the Replyer, by not leaving, understands the
not being: so our Savior says to his Apostles, Ioh. 14. 18. I will not leave
you comfortless: will he hereupon conclude, that they were comfortless, but
not so left: 3. It is the accuser himself, that is guilty of this impiety,
that David's soul was, if not in hell, David's soul affirmed by the adversary,
to be almost in hell.
yet near unto hell: for in these words of David, if the Lord had not helped
me, my soul had well-nie dwelt in silence, Psalm. 94. 17. by silence, he
understands 2. b. p. 159.
hell: in his sentence then David's soul was almost in hell, and by the like
collection it was there, though it dwelt not, or continued there.

16. Slaund. The Replyer is charged with Iudaisme, for that none but Jews did
ever apply this prophecy to any but to our Savior Christ. 3. b. p. 41.
Contra. 1. It is not Iudaisme to apply the prophetical saying of David
concerning Christ, in some sense, unto David, but to understand them only of
David, and not at all of Christ: as, if his memory had served him, he might
have turned back to 2. b. p. 136 2. b. p. 136.
where he himself cites Hierome upon the 71. Psalm. v. 20. Thou will take me
from the depth of the earth: Iudaei hunc psalmum in solum Davidem convenire
volunt, etc. the Jews will have this psalm to agree unto David only: and 3.
b. p. 47. 3. b. p. 47.
he alleges out of Mollerus, that D. Kimchi interprets the 16. Psalm. of
the Prophet David: and will not have these words meant of the resurrection of
Christ. 2. If they savor of Iudaisme, which apply the prophetical sayings
concerning Messiah in the Psalms to David, then is Basil guilty that way, who
upon these words in the 48. Psalm. The Lord shall deliver my soul from the hand
of hell, Basilan Psalm. 48.
thus writes: Manifest vaticinatur Domini ad inferos descensum, qui cum alijs
etiam ipsius animam redimat, ne remaneat ibi: he manifestly prophesies of the
Lords descension to hell, which with others should also redeem his soul that
it remain not there: he applies this text both concerning Christ's descension
to hell, and David's deliverance from thence. So Augustine indifferently
expounds those words, Psalm. 86. v. 13. Thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest hell: Aug. in Psalm 86.
either of Christ, or of some of his members. Ergo aut ipsius vox est hic,
eruisti etc. wherefore it is either his voice (that is, Christ's) or our voice
by Christ our Lord, which to that end came thither. 3. Then does he himself
Iudaize, who thus confesses of that place, Psalm. 68. 18. He ascended up on
high, and led captivity captive, which is as properly by S. Paul fitted to the
ascension of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 8. as the other place, Psalm. 16. is by S. Peter to
our Saviors resurrection: alluding (says this obiecter) to the place of the
Psalm, Psalm. 68 18.
where it is literally spoken of King David himself, The slaunderer taken in
his own trap.
to whom God gave victory and triumph over all his enemies, but prophetically
meant of Christ our Savior, 1. b. p. 57.
of whom David was a type and figure. Thus it falls out according to the
saying of the wise man, Prove. 26. 27.
he that diggeth a pit, shall fall therein, and he that rolleth a stone, it
shall return unto him: this accusation of Iudaisme, which as a stone he cast
at the Replyer, recoyling again, has broken his own pate.

17. Slander. According to your sense, all that will follow Christ, must
suffer the death of the soul, 3. b. p. 63. 3. b. p. 63.
You deliver for sound doctrine, that Christ suffered that death which was
threatened to Adam. 3. b. p. 66. 3. b. p. 66.
Your blasphemous paradox of the death of Christ's soul. 3. b. p. 83. 3. b. p.
83.
Whereas the Replier does directly affirm, that Christ died not the death of
the soul, either by sin, or damnation. Synops. p. 977. which are the two
kinds only of the proper dying of the soul. And, though a kind of death may
after some sort be affirmed of Christ's soul, in respect of the great anguish
and torment which he endured in his soul; yet he wishes that kind of
phrase, as being not used in Scripture, to be forborne and discontinued.
Synops. p. 978. The Replier here then, is as far from blasphemy, as the
Accuser is from honesty, in charging him with such an apparent untruth.

18. Slander. That he does call again out of hell, Arrius, Eunomius,
Apollinaris, Lucianus, to join hands with you against Athanasius, Epiphanius,
Fulgentius: that he does justify so pestilent and blasphemous heretics,
against so reverend, so learned, and holy fathers. 3. b. p. 74. 3. b. p. 74.
You rejected Athanasius before for a misconstruer of Scripture, an establisher
of error; yea little better then a blasphemer: even because he proved against
the Arrians, that the word Spirit in this place of Peter, signifies the humane
soul of Christ. 3. b. 125. 1. 3. b. p. 125.


Contra. 1. What an absurd collection is this? Athanasius, Epiphanius, did
censure the Apollinarists out of this place of Peter, proouing thence, that
Christ had an humane soul: you therefore refusing their interpretation and
collection out of this place, condemn them, and justify those heretics. 2.
Augustine and Ambrose do prove the eternity of Christ, and coexistence with
his father, against the Arrians out of that place, Ioh. 8. 2. which they read
thus according to the vulgar latin; the beginning, who spoke unto you: which
reading, indeed by the authority of these Fathers, the Rhemists follow in
their translation: whereas, the true reading according to the original is,
Even the same thing which I said unto you from the beginning. Does it follow,
that they which refuse this their interpretation and application of this text
against the Arrians, do therefore justify the Arrians against these godly
Fathers? 3. The Replier no where ascribes blasphemy unto Athanasius; the
slaunderer blasphemeth rather in so saying: error he is not free from, seeing
he is cited by Bellarmine, De Christ. anim. lib. 4. c. 14.
to prove Christ's descent to Limbus patrum, which all Protestants hold to be
an error, howsoever this Antagonist staggereth at it.

19. Slander. That the flames and torments of hell fire are temporal: Synops.
p. 1010. 1014.
and that eternal continuance in them, is not of the essence and nature of
hell torments. 3. b. p. 77. 3. b. p. 77.
If this (false fellow) had not hardened his face as the Adamant, he would not
for shame have thus objected: for, the Replier in the first place quoted in the
margen, speaks only of the hell sorrows and torments, which Christ suffered
in his soul, which were not eternal, because of the dignity of his person:
for, these are the words concerning hell flames; First, in that they are not
eternal in Christ, the digniti^ of his person obtained: for his temporal
enduring of hell sorrow, was as effectual and meritorious, as if they had
been perpetual. Here is no one word of the torments of hell in general.
Again, in the other place these are the words: The inseparable adjuncts, and
necessary members of hell, are these; 1. the Place, which is infernal: 2. the
Time, which is perpetual: 3. darkness unspeakable. What fault can this
quarrel-picker find with these words? what mean Logician knows not, that
the continuance of time, is not of the essence of a thing, but a necessary
adjacent or adiunct? Yea, these are his very own words in an other place;
whose inseparable adjuncts (speaking of hell) are utter darkness, and
endless pains. 1. b. p. 3. 1. b. p. 3.
Is he not now a wise man, that reprooueth another for speaking in his own
words?

20. Slander. By which wicked and intolerable speech, you send to hell, not
only those, which were at that time thorough the world, but even Noah's own
family also, which were together with him in the Arc. 3. b. p. 104. 3. b. p.
104.
But more wicked and intolerable is this shameless creature, that dare thus
open his mouth to revile: for, whereas the words which he quarrelleth at, stand
thus in the book; In so much, that the Lord vpheld him in all his preaching,
and profession, against all the (professors) of the old world, condemning them,
Li^bomast. p. 41.
and saving him: but that his malice blinded him, he might have turned to the
Errata in the beginning of the book, where he should have found, that
professors by the Printer was here taken for profane persons. If he knew this
escape to be so corrected, and yet would traduce the Replier, it bewraieth
malice: if he knew it not, it argues his ignorance and rashness, that would
make no further search.

21. Slander. You place hell in the air. 3. b. p. 153. 3. b. p. 153.
1. What shameful dealing is this, Synops. p. 1018.
thus without any conscience to detort and deprave the Repliers words? He in
that place speaks only of the place whither the deui^s are now cast down,
which is into hell (as S. Peter says) where God has delivered them to chains
of darkness; 2. Pet. 2. 4.
whom yet S. Paul says, to rule in the air, Ephesians. 2. 2. To reconcile these two
Apostles, it must be confessed, that the air is the devils present hell: and
so Augustine takes it. Poenaliter hunc infernum, id est, De nature. bon. c. 32.
caligino sum aerem tanqua^ carcerem acceperunt: They have received this
infernal and dark air for their prison. That therefore, which is spoken
secundum quid, in part, and after such a sort, he wresteth, as being spoken
simpliciter, simply and absolutely: inferring thus; The devils present hell is
in the air: ergo, there shall be no hell but in the air. 2 And concerning the
site of hell, the Replier elsewhere deemeth not, but that it may be in the
earth, Synops. p. 1056.
or where else it pleases God: and consists specially upon this position,
That the place of hell causes not the torment, but the wrath and curse of God:
which, this caueller shall never be able to disprooue.

22. Slander. Hexap. 9. 28. 15. 9. etc.
That he utterly condemns allegories. 3. b. p. 166. 3. b. p. 166.
Here this endless wrangler commits the same fault which he fell into
before, to press that as generally spoken against all allegories, which is
intended only against such allegories, as are of men's devising, and have no
warrant in Scripture: as the words thus stand in the first place there noted, I
hold it not safe wading without a bottom, and therefore I omit these
allegorical applications, as men's fancies. Is this utterly to condemn
allegories? he that so does, allows none, and so even the allegories used by
S. Paul, Gal. 4. and in other places of Scripture, should also be excluded.
Every man may see what paltrie dealing this is, and such is his lewd vain
throughout this whole Satyricall discourse. Many other slanderous accusations
are foisted in every where, which it were lost labor to examine. If I should
altogether busy my self in raking in this filthy dunghill, I might be thought
as vain and beastly, (...), qui ^tercora colligit.
as this Coprologus himself: yet I will add one slander more.

23. Slander. That the Replier calls the blessed roots of the Christian
faith, cursed roots. 2. b. p. 84. 2. b. p. 84.
A vile slander: for the Replier only repeateth the Confutors words, which are
these; That he charge his brethren irreligiously and unchristianly to call
the maine grounds and principles of our faith into question. Saying further, To
plant by writing, or water by speaking the cursed roots thereof. These are his
own words in many syllables: now this word thereof, which he means of
Atheism, he with a cavillous spirit retorteth upon the Replier, as spoken of
faith in the precedent sentence; which is apparently separated and suspended
from the next clause, by these words interlaced in other caracters ( and
saying) which this sly iugler concealeth, that his fraud appear not.

I would he had grace to consider, how grievously he has offended, in
persecuting his brother with such uncharitable slanders, and had remembered
that sentence of the Apostle, 1. Ioh. 3. 15.
that he which hates his brother is a man-slaier: yea, as Cyprian says, Multo
malum leuius and periculum minus est, cum membra gladio vulnerantur: facilior
cura, vbi plaga perspicua, etc. zeli vulnera abstrusa sunt and occulta. Sermon.
de Liuore. It is a lighter evil, and less danger, when the members are
wounded with a sword: the cure is easier, where the wound is in sight; the
wounds of envy are close and secret.

Theocritus being demanded which were the most cruel beasts, (...).
made this answer; Truly in the hills, the Bears and Lions; but in Cities,
sycophants and slaunderers. The wise man has expressed it better, Prou. 17. 12.
That a Bear might rather meet with a man, then a fool in his folly. But,
because a word once spoken cannot be called in; the next way to make amends
for this gross ouer-sight, is to take heed of the like slip afterward: Prou.
3. 32.
and to follow the wise man's counsel; If thou have been foolish in lifting
thy self up, and if thou have thought wickedly, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.
Let him hear Cyprian again; Venena fellis euome, purgetur men's quam
serpentinus livor infecerat, 3. Imputation.
amaritudo omnis quae intus insiderat, Cyprian. de livore.
Christi dulcedine leniatur. Vomit up thy poisoned gall: let the mind be
purged which serpentine envy has infected: let all bitterness, which festred
within, be allaied by the sweetness of Christ.

The 3. imputation of untruths.
The accusation.
Next after his uncharitable slanders, follows the imputation of untruths.
In the front of Limbomastix he finds no fewer then six untruths.

1. He takes exception to the title Limbomastix, which he would have to
signify, a scourge of the hem or border of a garment: and so he charge the
Replyer in his rude discourse (as he more rude himself calls it) to cut a
sunder the hem of the precious garment of Christ, the doctrine and discipline
of the Church: he says also that it is a new found name: and it should have
been entitled Limbopatrum mastix, the word patrum should have been added to
limit the general signification. 2. b. p. 2. 2. b. p. 2.


2. Vntr^th. That he forgeth a new matter never questioned in this Church,
whether Christ descended into hell to deliver the Patriarchs. ibid. p. 3. 2. b.
p. 3.


3. Untruth. That the Replyer ac^useth his answer as enclining to that opinion
( of Limbus patrum:) for what one word ( says he) thorough the whole book
does insinuate so much as any suspicion thereof? p. 5. 2. b. p. 5.


4. Untruth. The abuse and misapplication of Saint Paul's words, Phil. 3. 15.
Let us, as many as be perfect, be thus minded. p. 8. for the Apostle speaks
not this of doctrine, but of perfection of life, if you will credit S.
Chrysostom. p. 10. 2. b. p. 10.


5. Untruth. You abuse that ancient and godly father S. Augustine in
perverting his words. p. 12. 2. b. p. 12.


6. Untruth. That he makes the ignorant believe that the defenders of this
article of Christ's descension into hell, join hands with none but with
Bellarmine and other Papist. 2. b. p. 33. 2. b. p. 33.


The justification.
1. FIrst, if the Replyer had missed somewhat in the title and inscription of
his book, had that been so great a fault, as to deserve to be counted an
untruth? Cicero was more equal toward his deadly enemy Antonie: who says,
Philippic. 10.
Te verbi inopia lapsum putarem: I would have thought, that you were ouerseene
for want of a word. 2. What though Limbus originally signify the purle, hem,
or guard of a woman's garment: yet seeing the Romanists have appropriated that
word, to signify that place which is in the brimme and skirts of hell, where
they imagine the fathers to have been, we must understand it according to the
usual sense: as Hierome says in the like: non possumus quae dicuntur, Hieron.
de v^^te sacerdotal.
nisi consuetis vocibus intelligere: we can not understand what is said, but by
the accustomed words. 3. That the Replyer scourges the doctrine and discipline
of the Church (which is as the hemme of Christ's garment) is a mere slander,
as is before showed, slaund. 6. but the Replyer is beholding to this forger of
untruths, that he makes him but a scourger of the hemme of Christ's garment,
which comes not near the flesh and body: as the saying is, near is my
shirt, but nearer is my skin* whereas he himself has whipped the very
members and parts of Christ's body, holding his brethren, because they dissent
from him about the local descent, no better then dissemblers, schismatikes,
yea heretics, and maintainers of blasphemous paradoxes: as has been before
declared, in the two former imputations of railing, and slanders: so that I
may justly return upon him Augustines words against the Donatists: Venit
persecutor, and non fregit crura Christi, venit Donatus, and diripuit Ecclesiam
Christi: integrum corpus Christi in cruce inter manus persecutorum est, and
inter manus Christianorum, non est integrum corpus Ecclesiae: In Psalm. 33. 2.
The persecutor came and brake not the legs of Christ: Donatus came, and
spoiled the Church of Christ: the body of Christ is whole amid the hands of
the persecutors; but in the hands of Christians, the body of the Church is not
whole.

Secondly, though Limbomastix may seem a new name for the application, yet in
respect of the manner of deriuation and composition, it is not new: as the
usual words, Homeromastix, Rhetoromastix, do show. Again, if Limbomastix be
a new found name, what is his Symbolomastix, and Cleromastix, epist. dedid. p.
10. and that new term of discreeding, wherein he glories being used
thoroughout his, not only rude, but rauing and railing writing: whereof I may
say, as Tullie does of a certain strange word in the Latin tongue, which
Antonie used: quod verbum in lingua (Anglicana) nullum est, id tu novum propter
diuinam tuam pietatem inducis: Latinae Cicero Phil. 13.
that word which is not at all in (the English) tongue, you take up new,
because of your divine piety.

Thirdly, whereas he would have it entitled rather, Limbopatrum mastix: 1.
what need the word patrum be inserted, seeing use has obtained among the
Romanists (who are masters both of the word, and error therein implied) that
Limbus, without any addition should signify that place and part of hell, where
they imagined the fathers to be imprisoned: as his ringleader could have told
him, after whose pipe he might have daunced here, as well as in other places.
2. And if he would needs have formed a word, Bellar. illuminauit sanctos
patres, qui era^t in limbo, etc. Durandus dicit eos fuisse in limbo. lib. 4. de
Christi anim. c. 15.
to his own fashion, he that is so cunning in declining and inflecting of
nounes (as his daily exercise with his grammar boys does make him perfect)
should rather have said, Limbopatrimastix, to avoid the concurrence of a
double ( m) euphoniae gratia, then Limbopatrummastix. 3. And why else does he so
must strive for this sesquipedale verbum, Limbopatrummastix, but to obtrude, as
Hierome, says, Hieron. ad Theodor.
magis portenta, quam nomina, monstrous terms, rather then names: simplices
quosque terrens sono, vt quod non intelligant, plus mirentur: terrifying the
simple, with strange sounds, that what they understand not, they may wonder
at, as Hierome says of Basilides.

2. The question in deed concerning Limbus patrum, was never controuerted
among sound Protestants: and therefore while he falls upon that rock (as is
discovered in the preface) he brings his Protestants faith into strong
suspicion, as not holding a strait course by the direction of the true
compass of Evangelical truth: he wresteth here against the Replyer a sentence
out of Augustine: as though he could have had nothing to say, unless he had
imagined an adversary to rail upon. But the truth is, that if this brazen
face, I would say, brasen-nose master of art, had left out his railing,
slanders, untruths, errors, absurdities, and such like: he should neither
have found what, nor against whom to have written. And Augustine shall be
returned again upon himself, who may use his words in his own person: de
nature. and great. lib. 1. c. 25.
Procliviores sumus quaerere potius, quid contra ea respondeamus, quae nostro
obijciuntur errori, quam intendere, quam sunt salubria, vt carcamus errore: we
are more ready to seek rather, what we may answer to those things, which are
objected against our error, then to consider, how wholesome they are, that we
may be without error.

3 How untrue it is, that there is not one word through his whole book, that
does insinuate any suspicion of holding Limbus patrum, let the Preface be
witness, wherein this Popes* liuerie is fitted so close to his back, as if
he himself had of purpose put it out to making. Therefore, the title of
Lambomastix misseth not an hairs breadth, (in that respect) of that mark
which he aims at in his first book. Indeed, his leaves are fronted
throughout with false and presumptuous inscriptions; the defense of 3.
testimonies of scripture. For, what a vile slander is this, that any of those
against whom he speaks, and carpeth (according to his name) should deny any
testimony of Scripture? and what presumption is it, to take upon him, and
profess to be a defender of Scripture; whereas, both the truth, and whosoever
professes the truth, is by it defended: the Scripture should be driven to a
great straight, if it needed his poor defense. Here therefore, Augustines
sentence fitteth him well; Haeretici ad defensionem possessionis suae, Christi
titulos ponunt, sicut nonnulli faciunt in doma sua: ne domum suam inuadat
aliquis potens, ponit ibi titulos potentis, In Psalm. 21.
titulos mendaces, ipse vult possessor esse domus, and frontem domus suae
titulo alieno vult muniri. Heretics for the defense of their possession, do set
up the titles of Christ, as many do in their house: least some mighty man
should invade his house, he sets up the title of some great man, but a
false title: he would be the owner of the house, but the front of his house he
would have privileged by another man's title. We will pardon him the first
name of heretics, though we might as justly return it upon him, as he sends
it to us: but all the rest most kindly agrees unto him. For, he under color
of defending certain testimonies of Scripture, obtrudeth his own private
sense of scripture.

4 First, some Fathers also understand that place of the perfection of
knowledge; Orig. l. 10. in epist. ad Roman.
as Origin upon those words, Romans 15. 14. filled with all knowledge, alluding
unto this place, thus expounds the one by the other; Paulus, and si qui sunt
tales, ad comparationem caeterorum perfecti dicuntur, etc. Paul, and if there
be any such, are said to be perfect by way of comparison with others; ad illam
summam scientiam, quae est in coelestibus ordinibus, etc. in respect of that
high knowledge, which is in the heavenly orders, none among mortal men can be
called perfect. Likewise, Augustine thus interprets the 13. verse, of the
which, this other place depends: de diverse. ser. 13.
Ergo non arbitror meipsum apprehendisse, id est, qualis sit Deus: I do not
think, that I have apprehended it, that is, what manner of one God is. 2 Yea
Chrysostom himself, in the same place adds these words, which are not
truly alleged by the Carper: Et ne putent seipsos perfectos esse: that they
should not think themselves to be perfect. Quisquis putat se totum esse
assequntum, nihil habet: He that thinks he has attained the whole, has
nothing. And a little before he says, Non dixit, Deus inducet, sed reuelabit,
vt res ista videatur magis esse ignorantiae: He said not, God will induce, but
reveal, that all this matter may seem to be ignorance. Where then, there is
opinion on the one side, and ignorance of the other; there the matter treated
of, belongs to knowledge, not to practice or perfection of life only.
Chrysostoms meaning then is, that the Apostle speaks not, de dogmatibus of (
speculatiue) doctrines, for that must be his meaning, unless he will make him
contrary to himself; but of practiced knowledge, which belongs to the
practice of life. That no man should think, that he has any other perfection
or righteousness, but only by faith in Christ; for, that is the principal
argument handled in this place, as appears verse 9. And further, what
Chrysostoms meaning is, appears by his interpretation of the very like place,
1. Cor. 2. 6. We speak wisdom among those which are perfect: Sapientiam
autem praedicationem, and salutis modum, hoc est, per crucem salutem, perfectos
vero credentes appellat, etc. Wisdom he calls preaching, and the manner of
salvation; that is, by the cross, and believers he calls the perfect. Here
it is clear, that he understands not the perfection of life, but of faith. 3
There is no sense urged of the Apostles words, but only the sentence produced;
and therefore this exception of the Apostles meaning is superfluous and
impertinent. 4 Concerning that false charge of dissembling the Apostles words
following, Nevertheless, whereunto we have attained, let us proceed by one
rule, that we may be of one accord. First, if he dissembleth, which citing a
place of Scripture, omitteth either the verse before going, or following; he
will make S. Paul a dissembler, who uses every where, as chap. 3. to the
Romans, and chap. 10. throughout those chapters, only to allege that part of
the sentence, and testimony of Scripture, which was to his purpose, leaving
the rest. Secondly, the Replyer also, even produces this sentence afterward,
where he had cause to use it, epi. d^d. p. 5. 2. b. p. 12.
and this the Cauiller himself confesses: how then was he not ashamed, to
charge him herein with dissimulation?

5 Neither is Augustine abused, or his words perverted; for, the Replyer
writing in other characters, erraueris, and tibi, did insinuate that those
words were otherwise in Augustine: and he followed rather his sense, then
urged the sentence. Could he make no difference between a Rhetorical
imitation of an authors sentence, and a logical allegation of his testimony?
the one being used for illustration only, the other for probation: the one
following the ^ense, the other tied to the words. As Hieroms alleges Cicero
to have done the like: Non conuerti vt interpres, sed vt Orator: I did not
turn and translate him (meaning Demosthenes) as an interpreter; but as an
Orator. And Hierome further adds: Hieron. Pammac. de optimo genere interpret.
Non me ea annumerare lectori debere putaui, sed tanquam appendere: I thought I
was not bound to deliver the words by number, but by weight.

6 In the sixth untruth objected, he commits two untruths: for neither does
the Replyer make mention of other defenders of the local descension, but of
the immodest pamphleter only: neither says he that he joins hands only
with Bellarmine: but that the places first urged by Bellarmine to that purpose,
were seconded by him. But thus cunningly to cover his own wickedness, he
would have the lap of an others garment cast upon him: and where his own
credit serves not, he would be maintained by other men's fame. And to make the
Replyer more odious, and himself more popular: he seeks to justify
himself, by extending the accusation to others. So that saying of Hierome may
very well be applied against him: Hierom. Ocean^ tom. 3.
Indecens est vnum tueri, vt plures accusare videaris, and qu^m ratione non
possis, societate peccantium defendere: It is an unmeet thing, so to justify
one, that you seem to accuse many: and whom with reason you cannot, to defend
with number of offenders. This was an old trick of the perverse dogmatizers
in times past, Ephesin. 2. in^ostum Cha^^e^nens.
as Dioscorus cried out in the 2. Ephesine Synod: Ego cum patribus eijcior:
Ego defendo patrum dogmata: I am cast out with the fathers: I defend the
opinion of the fathers.

The Recrimination.
Untruths boldly affirmed and falsely forged in the Anapologist, that is, a
defender without defense.
Anapologists Reioynder.
It may seem strange that a man should be so besotted with his own conceit,
and blinded with envy, that he should object error and untruth to another,
not knowing to tread one right foot himself: and to cavil at another
tripping, when he stumbleth and falls down right. For any one untruth
surmised by him, he shall be apaied ten for one. It may truly be said, if a
diligent examination were had, that he has not so many leaves in his book, as
leasings; nor so many numbers, as errors: a dog trotteth not so fast, as his
pen droppeth forgeries (as the common saying is:) for plainly to give him the
lie, the Replyer will forbear, as this sophistical forger for want of manners
does more then once, being ten times more worthy the whetstone himself.
Archidamus said of an old man of Chius, that being sent of an Embassage to
the Lacedaemonians, had colored his graie hairs, before he delivered his
message: (...): what truth is to be expected from this man, which carries about
a lie not only in his heart, but in his head. And if this Chian coyner do so
forge with his hand and pen, who can judge his heart to be clear. But I will
now open this pedlars pack, and bring to view his sophisticate wares.

1. Vntr. I do marvel to see an Article of our Creed in so ill credit with
Christians: epist. dedicat. p. 9. epi. ded. p. 9.
he labors in what he may to discreede my Christian and necessary defense
of this article of our Creed. pref. p. 5. pref. p. 5. 3. Untruths.
Here are three untruths couched together: for what Christian denies any
article of the Creed? his defense is neither Christian, being full of
uncharitable railing, and slanders: nor yet necessary: as though both other
learned men had not written better of that argument, and as if there were not
many that could handle their pen with more wit and learning, if he had held
his peace.

2. Vntr. In the prophetical testimony of David you will needs have the word
(soul) to signify the humanity of Christ, and here ( that is, in this place
of Peter) you will needs have it to signify the divinity. 1. b. p. 24. 1. b.
p. 24.
Whereas in that place of Peter, there is no mention made of the soul of
Christ, but of the spirit.

3. Vntr. Bellarmine most truly defends with me against you, etc. that Christ
after his death descended in soul to those places of hell, where dolours and
torments were; and where the souls of sinners wont to be tortured. 1. b. p.
35. where four untruths are wrapped up together. 1. b. p. 35. 4. Untruths.
1. Bellarmine says only, probabile est, etc. it was probable, that Christ
descended to all the places of hell; whereas this fellow defends it to be an
article of the Creed so to believe, and consequently of necessity: therefore
his Ringleader and ghostly father therein agrees not with him. 2. Those first
are not Bellarmines, but Augustines words: dicit Augustinus, Christum
descendisse, etc. Augustine says, that Christ descended to those places of
hell, etc. where dolours and torments were. 3. These torments Bellarmine
understands to have been spoken of the purgatory pains, and not of the
torments of hell: restat, vt loquatur de animabus quae adhuc luebant poenas
purgatorias: it remains that he ( Augustine) speaks of the souls which
suffered purgatory pains. in fin. capitis. 4. Bellar. lib. 4 de Christ. anim.
c. 14.
The other words, vbi solebant peccatorum animae torqueri, where the souls of
sinners were wont to be tortured, are not Bellarmines but Fulgentius his words:
see the place.

4. Vntr. Howsoever you bestirre your selves first to kill and crucify the
blessed soul of our Savior upon the cross. 2. b. p. 35. 2. b. p. 35.
A great slander, with untruth: the Replyer is far from that blasphemy, to
say that the soul of Christ can be killed.

5. Vntr. H. I.
Whose arguments are every where seconded, urged, and intruded by you: 2. b. p.
44. 2. b. p. 44.
whom with a scurrilous term, he calls one of his chiefest captains, and
greatest masters: p. 51. p. 51.
and every where he calls him, the Replyers Patriarch, 3. b. p. 3. 3. b. p. 3.
and in diverse other places: whereas the Replyer professes ex animo, that he
knows not what arguments are urged by him (whom this forger notes) as
having not read his defense: Synops. p. 1049, 1050, 1051.
and beside, the Replyer did first else where write somewhat of this matter, and
therefore he was rather seconded by the other, then did second him. And how
absurd and inconsequent a speech it is, who sees not, to nickname him a
Patriarch, whom his cauilling spirit every where inueigheth against as an
impugner of the reverend calling of Bishops.

6. Vntr. 2 Untruths.
That he verily believes the Replyer to be one of those, which writ the
unchristian letter to M. Hooker: p. 49. 2. b. p. 49.
whereas the Replyer knows not to this day, who were the writers of that
letter: which he that calls unchristian, being for the manner modest, and
for the points of doctrine there maintained sound, seems rather himself to
have small Christianity. If his belief of Christ's soul descent into hell, be
of no more certentie with him, then this his belief, (as it may be thought
verily it is not with him, howsoever it is with others) his faith and belief
is very weak.

7. Vntr. 2. Untruths.
The ancient fathers do interpret it of a mortal sin, not secretly but
openly committed against others: 2. b. p. 67. 2. b. p. 67.
he means that place, Matthew. 18. 15. If thy brother trespass against thee,
etc. In this indefinite speech, he seems to mean all the ancient fathers,
whereas he alleges not one to prove this his assertion to be true. But in
deed in this his bold speech, he bewraieth his ignorance mixed with untruth:
for the first he is to be borne withal: for his schoolemasters skill can not
be supposed to be able to attain unto any great reading in the fathers. But
his other fault is not to be excused: The blind Confuters ignorance in the
fathers.
his ignorance in the fathers should have made him doubtful and scrupulous,
not bold and presumptuous: but in him the proverb is verified, who so bold, as
blind bayard: for here he has with one breath uttered two untruths: first,
that the ancient fathers do interpret this place of mortal sin: Origene I
hope (in his calender) is one of the ancient fathers, yet he expounds the
place of light and small offenses: Qui in peccato levi correptus ter, Tractat.
6. in Matthew.
etc. non se emendat, nos quidem sic eum debemus habere tanquam publicanum,
etc. He that in a light sin being thrice reproved, etc. does not amend
himself, we must so hold him as a publicane.

Secondly, that the fathers do expound it of sins openly committed; and
therefore to be openly and publikly censured, is an other untruth. For the
author of the Homilies upon Matthew, fathered upon Chrysostom, writes thus upon
this place; Homil. 61. in 18. cap. Math.
Inter duos solummodo redargutionem fieri iubet, etc. He bids that the
reprehension should be made between two alone, lest by the testimony of the
multitude, etc. he should show himself more hard to be corrected. Likewise I
suppose, that Augustine will be allowed for one of the Fathers, but he gives
this interpretation; Sermon. 16. de verb. Dom. cause. 2. qu. 1. c. 19.
Quid est (in te peccauit) tu scis, quia peccauit, quia enim secretum fuit,
quando in te peccauit, secretum quaere cum corrigis, quod in te peccauit: What
is this, has sinned against thee? thou know that he has sinned, because
therefore it was secret, when he sinned against thee, seek him in secret, when
thou do correct that, which he has sinned against thee. Now then, his own
words may be returned upon his own head; 2. b. p. 68.
it was either great ignorance, or gross oversight in you, to say, the ancient
Fathers do interpret it of mortal sin openly committed.

8. Untruth. That the Replyer presses Carliles very reasons, etc. and
acknowledges him for a sound interpreter. p. 92. 2. b. p. 92.
and that he borrows diverse things of him. p. 125. p. 125.
whereas the Replyer does protest, that he never yet read, or so much as saw
Carliles book: but what will not evil will imagine?

9. Untruth. 3. Untruths.
That Bellarmine agrees with all antiquity, in taking the Hebrew and Greek
words, sheol, and (...), that they signified only soul and hell. 2. b. p.
119. 2. b. p. 119.
Here are three notable untruths; for neither antiquity, nor yet Bellarmine,
nor any learned interpreter, ever took these two words sheol, and hades, to
signify the soul and hell: for neither of them was ever taken by any to
signify the soul. Secondly, not all the ancient interpreters took sheol,
Cyprian. seu Ruff. in Symbolum.
translated infernus, only to signify hell; for Cyprian upon the Creed, which
is also ascribed to Ruffinus, does take it for the grave, in these words:
Sciendum est, quod in Ecclesiae Romanae symbolo non habetur additum descendit
ad infernos, etc. We must know, that in the Roman Church it is not found
added in the Creed, he descended to hell, etc. Vis tamen verbi eadem videtur
esse in eo, quod sepultus dicitur: but the same force of the word seems to be
in that he is said to be buried. And Chrysostom also concurreth: Descendit ad
infernum, vt ibi a miraculo non vacaret, etc. He descended to hell, that he
should not there be without miracle; See more of Augustines judgment. Imp. 11.
Recrim.
for many of the bodies of the Saints rose with Christ, and died again, hom.
2. in Symbol. Here by infernus, hell, he seems to understand that place,
from whence Christ raised the bodies of the dead, that came out of their
graves; which is none other, but the place of burial, August. loc. 5.
and the grave. And Augustine expounds that place, Psalm. 88. 3. My life
draws near to hell, by these words of Christ, My soul is heavy unto death.
Thirdly, neither does Bellarmine take the words sheol and nephesh, only to
signify hell: for the first, he says, Lib. 4. de Christ. aenim. c. 10.
Ordinary accipitur, etc. it is taken ordinarily for the place of souls under
the earth: and vel raro, vel nunqua^ pro sepulchro: or seldom, or never for
the grave. He simply denies not, but that it sometime signifies the grave,
though not ordinarily. For the other word, thus he says; Nephesh est
generalissim^ vox, Bellar ibid. c. 12.
etc. Nephesh is a general word, and signifies without any trope, as well the
soul, as the living creature; yea the body. He may be ashamed therefore thus
to belie his ringleader, and grand captain; with whom, he says he is
beholding to the Replyer for joining him, being a learned Papist. p. 119. 2. b.
p. 119.


10. Untruth. That he does fasten all the torments of hell upon the blessed
soul of our Savior. 2. b. p. 154. 2. b. p. 154.
whereas the Replyer simply denies against the false charge of Feuardentius,
Synops. p. 1814.
That Christ suffered in his soul the whole pains of the damned in hell.

11. Untruth. 4. Untruths.
That you expound in the former testimony, soul, that is, body; hell, that is
grave: and here, spirits, that is, men; dead, that is living. 3. b. p. 71. 3.
b. p. 71.
Here are four untruths fardelled up together. 1. Neither does the Replier by
soul understand body; but either the person, or life. 2. Neither by hell, the
grave; but only shows that the hebrew word sheol, which signifies hell, is
sometime taken for the grave. 3. Nor yet does he expound spirits, that is men;
but that they are called now spirits, with S. Peter, which sometime were men.
4. And they which are now dead, were sometime living.

12. Untruth. Only Beza may seem to favor you, that is, 2. b. p. 118.
in taking soul for life. 2. b. p. 118. What boldness is this, to set down
such peremptory negatiues, as though he had himself run over all writers,
both new and old? What a great untruth is it to say, only Beza, when as
Calvin directly affirms the same: In Act. 2. 27.
Neque enim anima tam spiritum immortalis essentiae significat, quam vitam
ipsam: for the soul does not so much signify the immortal essence of the
spirit, as the life it self. Is Calvin in his base opinion no body?

13. It turns Christ's everliving soul into a dead body: 3. Untruths.
it siteth hell in the superficies of the earth: makes hell a place of
corruption, and there burieth the blessed soul of our Savior. 2. b. p. 164.
2. b. p. 164. All these impieties and absurdities he charge the Replyer with
for so understanding that place, Act. 2. 27. that Christ's life seemed to be
raked up in the grave: for here he has uttered three untruths: 1. the soul
being taken for the life, turns not the soul of Christ into the body, but
makes the life only to be as laid up in the grave: 2. they which take sheol
here for the grave, which also signifies hell, deny not, but that beside this
sheol in the grave, there is an other also in hell: sheol taken for the grave
is a place of corruption, not sheol when it signifies hell: 4. he is the man,
that burieth and shuts up Christ's soul in hell, holding and affirming, that
it was there three days.

14. That Durand held an opinion contrary to all the rest of the Romanists,
that Christ's soul descended not to hell in substance, 2. b. p. 190.
but by certain effects: Thom. 3. p. q. 52. art. 2.
p. 190. whereas Thomas Aquinas held the same in effect: that Christ only
descended per realem praesentiam, by his real presence to Limbus patrum: to
all the other places of hell, per effectum, by effects: Bellar. de Chr. anim.
c. 16.
and thus Bellarmine himself cites him: take away that conceit of Limbus
patrum, which to all Protestants is but a dream, and in the rest these two
agree.

15. Neither Protestant, 2. b. p. 190.
nor yet Papist (of any account) will take your part: for the Papists, they are
fitter mates for him: but diverse Protestants of great account are in this
question of the Replyers judgment: as instance is given in twelve of them
before, 13. slaund. therefore, it is great unshamefastness in this brabler, to
utter so unreasonable and improbable a speech.

16. He calls A. Humes his first instructor, 1. b. p. 195.
p. 195. whereas he shall find that the party given in instance in his
Reioynder, Synops.
has reference unto some of the Replyers works, even in this argument.

17. Vntr. In this sense the word (...) is used every where throughout the
Bible, that is, is meant for the soul. 3. b. p. 57. 3. b. p. 57.
A most audacious speech, and full of untruth: for the word (...), spirit, is
as often taken for the divine spirit of God, as for the soul of man: as is
evident in these places, Ioh. 4. 24. God is a spirit. Romans 1. 4. declared
mightily to be the son of God touching the spirit of sanctification. 1. Tim.
3. 16. justified in the spirit. 1. Tim. 4. 1. the spirit speaks evidently:
and many other such places might be produced: he shows how shameless a man
he is therefore, that dare vent forth such a great untruth, that this word
spirit, every where is taken for the soul of man.

18. He says, that sixteen of the fathers cited by Bellarmine, make no
mention of the delivery of the fathers, by Christ's descending to hell: 3. b.
p. 79.
3. b. p. 79. whereas there are five of that number wanting: for Bellarmine
cites in all 36. Councills and fathers, of the which 25. do either directly,
or by necessary consequent affirm, that Christ descended to hell to deliver
the souls of the fathers: so that to make up the full number, there remain
only an eleven, which make mention only of Christ's descending to hell, and
speak not of the delivery of the fathers, and these they are: Lateranens.
Council. Irenaeus, Clemens, Gregor. Nyssen. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Augustine,
Leo, Fulgentius, Vigilius, Arator subdiaconus: all which notwithstanding, or
most of them, if not in those places, produced by Bellarmine, yet else where in
their works, do give testimony with the rest for Limbus patrum.

19. Vntr. Synops. p. 1000.
You flatly deny this distinction of the souls death by sin or damnation,
as insufficient: 3. b. p. 84. 3. b. p. 84.
whereas the Replyer directly says, we approve that sentence of Augustine,
which makes mention only of those two kinds of the death of the soul:
speaking properly: though in a more general sense, the deep perplexity and
terror of the soul, may be said to be a kind of death of the soul: where the
Replyer further adds in direct terms, I will forbear to use this phrase of
Christ's dying in soul. ibid.

20. Vntr. He calls the Replyers exposition of that place of S. Peter, new
fancies, having the approbation of Augustine for the most part, and of Bid
more fully: whereupon the Replyer infers, that this exposition is not newly
devised. Limbom. p. 45.

21. Vntr. The word descending, is never spoken of the grave: 3. b. p. 139. 3.
b. p. 139.
whereas David says thus to Solomon concerning Ioab: thou shall not suffer his
hoare head to descend into the grave in peace: where the word iaradh is used,
which signifies to descend: and the other word sheol beside the consent of the
interpreters, Page Mont. Tremell. Vatab. and the Chalde translatour, and both
our English translations, which all read or understand, the grave; the
circumstance of the place gives it so to be taken, because he speaks of his
gray hairs, which go not down to hell, but to the grave.

22. He says that all Latin interpreters turn sheol, infernum, 3. b. p. 151.
hell: Psalm. 139. 8. p. 151. 3. b. when as Iunius reads, stratum ponerem in
sepulchro, if I should make my bed in the grave: and so Vatablus, though he
retain the word infernum, in the text ^yet in his annotations he understands
it of sepulchrum the grave. An other untruth it is, that all translatours and
interpreters are condemned of falsehood by Limbomastix: when as the Replyer
says only thus; neither do some of the best interpreters read hell, but the
grave. ibid. 3. b. p. 151. in marg.

Manifest truths denied.
Unto these untruths vnshamfastly affirmed, shall be added also diverse truths
as immodestly denied.

one word through his whole book, which does insinuate so much as any
suspicion of Limbus patrum. 2. b. p. 5. 2. b. p. 5.
How untrue this is, the Preface does evidently show, wherein the imputation
of this opinion is justified by twenty several places out of this
hell-harrowers books.

2. He says, he censureth no man at all. 2. b. p. 87. 2. b. p. 87.
How false this is, see before his bitter railings against Doct. Reynolds,

Bellarmine finds not fault with Beza for tra^slating (...), cadauer, in that
place of Genesis 37. but in this place of the Acts, p. 123. 2. b. p. 123.
Yet Bellarmine directly affirms, Bellar. lib. 4. de Christ. anim. c. 12.
res. 4. 14. ad 1. ration.
animam nunquam accipi pro cadauere: that the soul is never taken for the
carcass: and therefore consequently he finds fault, whosoever shall any
where take anima, for the carcass or flesh; and yet himself so takes it,
Genesis 37. 21. and therefore he is contrary to himself.

I confess the word sheol, Psalm. 6. 4, 5. does properly signify the grave,
when I plainly confute it, is properly to belie me. 2. b. p. 127. 2. b. p. 127.
Who ever heard such a forgetful and wilful man? for whereas he whom he
confuteth, reads that place thus; In hell, who shall praise thee? This
cavillous and frivolous obiecter, shows, it should be read rather thus; who
shall give thee thanks in the pit? where the word in the hebrew is sheol.
besheol.
And h^ further adds, by which last word, all our late interpreters, both
Latin and English, do with one consent understand the grave, as being the
ordinary sequel of temporal death, both of the good and bad; but yet can
extend no further, then to their dead bodies only. 1. b. p. 12. 1. b. p. 12.
Does he not manifestly affirm, that sheol is here taken for the grave, and
therefore finds fault with his adversary, for there reading hell? If any
then be here a lier (to return his own unmannerly term) he has made a lie
of himself.

5. He denies that more go to the grave then to hell. 2. 2. b. p. 128.
And yet all, both good and bad, go unto the grave, Sheol pro quo in
scripturis nos fere (infernus) legimus, sepulchrum significat, quod nunquam
saturatur. Bucer in Math. c. 27.
the place of corruption: where he obiecteth, that many wicked men want the
honor of burial, so do many of the godly also; yet they all have a place of
rest in the earth, where there body corrupts. Therefore, it is a marvel
with what face he could deny a thing so apparent, that more go to the grave
then to hell, See Pet. Marlinus in cap. 30.
seeing it is called in Job, Job.
the house appointed for all the living, cap. 30. v. 23.

6. He denies that he censureth any interpreter at all, or that he calls
them wranglers, which take sheol for the rather an immodest wrangler in so
saying. 2. b. p. 151. 2. b. p. 151.
And yet these are his own words, Howsoever some curious linguists may wrangle
with the hebrew word sheol in the old testament, etc. 1. b. p. 14. 1. b. p. 14.
What now will this vain man be ashamed to deny?

7. Because it ( that is hades) is all one with Abyssus, b. p. 155. 2. b. p.
155.
Now let us see his own words in his former book, which are these; The truth
whereof does more evidently appear, Luke 8. 31 (...).
in that the same Greek word is by the same Evangelist rendered in another
place, by another Greek word, as Beza himself does interpret it, etc. 1. b.
p. 14. Is it not now apparent, that he first confirms that point by the
words of Saint Luke, which he indeed further explaneth by the words of Beza:
but first he cites the Evangelist.

8. No English translators turn (sheol, grave) in this 3. b. p. 26.
whereas the Geneua translators read thus; in the grave who shall praise thee?

To say that nothing is said in scripture to be quickened, which is not apt to
die, contains both falsehood and impiety. 3. b. p. 90. 3. b. p. 90.
But when this railing companion shall be able to produce any instance in
scripture to the contrary; he shall be discharged of falsehood and impiety, for
this matter: which till he can perform, they do cleave as a proper badge and
cognizance to his sleeue, that it may be known what master he serves: for he
brings no place to any purpose, but that Ezech. 13. 18. where the prophet
speaks as well of killing souls, as preserving souls alive.

It is false, when you say, that if I hold those disobedient spirits to have
been in hell at the time of that preaching unto them, 3. b. p. 119. 3.
but now are not; I agree with the Papists, that Christ descended to empty
Limbus patrum, for they hold only the holy Patriarks and Prophets, etc. to
have been in that place, to whom that sin of disobedience cannot be imputed.
Who would deny this consequent but he? for if any were delivered out of hell,
either they were the righteous there holden captive, or the damned: but of
those there is no deliverance. He therefore so holding, must also with the
Papists hold Limbus patrum, or maintain a more gross error, or heresy
rather, that the damned in hell may be delivered thence. As for the reason
taken from the sin of disobedience, his ringleader and grand master might have
satisfied him therein; Bellar. lib 4. de Christ. anim. cap. 13.
that the Apostle speaks of such incredulous persons, qui in fine vitae
poenitentiam egerint, which repented in the end of their life.

Beda is any whit more pregnant for him then the rest. 3. b. p. 126. 3. b. p.
126.
Concerning the exposition of that place, 1. Pet. 3. 19. whereas Beda in these
three maine points approoueth that exposition. 1. by the spirit he
understands not the soul of Christ, but his divine spirit. 2. by the
preaching in the spirit, his being by his holy spirit in Noe, and other holy
men: and by the incredulous, those which in the days of Noe lived carnally.

Augustine also concurreth with him: and yet he is not ashamed to say, that
he is clearly against you. 3. b. p. 127. 3. b. p. 127.
The exceptions which he takes to avoid these clear expositions of these
two fathers, are frivolous and impertinent. 1. That Beda speaks of preaching
by conversation, Saint Peter of a ministerial action of the word: but this is
not the question, what manner of preaching it was; but by whom performed,
whether by Christ, as man in his soul; or as God, by his divine spirit. 2.
Beda speaks of preaching before the flood: So also does Saint Peter, or else
he beggeth the thing in question; which is, when this preaching was. 3.
Augustine understands not by prison, hell. p. 127. 3. b. p. 127.
This is none of the three points, wherein we lay claim to Augustine. 4. He
takes flesh for the body only; So does the Replyer here, howsoever he
thinks it may in other places be more largely taken. 5. Augustine reads,
which were in prison, not which are: This being granted, yet he in those
three maine points before alleged, confirms the Replyers exposition. 6.
Both Augustine and Beda, by the spirit here understand the holy Ghost. Ans. As
though Christ also in his deity by nature is not a spirit; or as though the
works of the Trinity are inseparable, but that which one does, the other do
also? All this cannot excuse him of unshamefast boldness, that dare deny the
exposition of these two fathers to make for the Replyer.

Thus the untruths which he objected to the Replyer, are repaied home upon
himself, and in his own net are his feet caught: the fraud and craft whereby
he subtly fought to undermine an other, has supplanted himself: it had
been good for him, if he had remembered that saying of Menander: (...): that no
lier can any long time be hid. Did he think, that his untrue surmises and
fraudulent accusations would never come to be examined? He obiecteth often to
the Replyer, that falsehood is grown into an habit with him: But whosoever
will take the pains to lay together all his sophisticate stuff, 4. Imputation.
and immodest leasings, can think no other but that he has made a covenant
with deceit and fraud: the saying is, use brings perfectnes: and he has used
so much to speak untruly, that he is grown to such a faculty and dexterity
therein, as that he can do little else: and while he makes no conscience in
devising tales, he sins still and staieth not, because he sees it not:
according to that excellent saying of Cyprian, Sermon. de Livore.
Dum peccatum existimatur leve and modicum, non timetur, dum non timetur,
contemnitur, dum contemnitur, non facile vitatur, and fit coeca and occulta
pernicies: while sin is thought but a light and slender thing, it is not
feared, while it is not feared, it is contemned, while it is contemned, it is
not shunned, and so the mischief is secret and hid.

The fourth imputation of gross ouersights.
The accusation.
1. That it be lawful for none to maintain or defend, those doctrines,
wherein the Protestants of England consent with other reformed Churches. Here
he cries out: when he set down this petition, sure it is either he was much
distracted, or not soberly minded. 2. b. p. 25. 2. b. p. 25.


2. Because the Replyer has as it is printed, Augustine says well to Hierome,
whereas it was Hierome that so writ to Augustine in his 13. epist. he
exclaimeth, you unlearnedly mistake. 2. b. p. 101. 2. b. p. 101.


3. Because his Linx eye finds applicate printed for explicate. 3. b. p. 6.
3. b. p. 6.


4. Because Limbom. has, if the Apostle had treated of Christ's descensio^,
before his resurrection: is this such a foul error? whereas he should have
said, if the Apostle had treated of Christ's resurrection, before his ascension:
he proclaims gross oversight. p. 54. 2. b. p. 54.


5. Because Limbom. 3. b. p. 89.
reads (...), where it should be (...).

6. Limbom. says, The Lord vpheld Noe in all his preaching and profession
against all the professors of the old world, condemning them, and saving him:
whereupon he cries out: a wicked and intolerable speech. 3. b. p. 104. 3. b.
p. 104.


7. Amiddes the uncircumcised ( not circumcised) as you falsely call them. p.
137. 3. b. p. 137.


8. Limbom. But there came an other descention between, which immediately went
before his descending to death and the grave: whereupon this peevish prier
would infer, that the Replyer brings in a third descension, which should
immediately go before his descending to death and the grave. 3. b. p. 158. 3.
b. p. 158.


The iustificatim, or satisfaction.
1. THis curious ouerseer of others, might have considered, that this one
monosyllable ( but) should have been inserted, and so the words to be read
thus: ( but) those doctrines, wherein the Protestants, etc. And thinks he,
that so small a word, might not easily escape the compositor in the authors
absence: who neither knew of the printing of that book, no^ was present at it?
seeing that in other of his works the like scapes have been made: sometimes
by the adding of a word too much, sometime by leaving out: as Hexapl. p. 8. l.
45.
were not, is put for were: p. 65. l. 31.
for the, in stead of, for that the: p. 283. l. 21.
had yet revealed, for, had not yet revealed. And as ( but) is here omitted, so
is it there superfluously added, as, p. 193. l. 37.
but though, for though.

2. The Replyer himself in an other place, In the Latin Epistle to the
Archbish. of Canter. before the first Cent. in Synops. p. 4.
citing the very same words, says, vt been Hieronymus Augustino, as Hierome
says well to Augustine: therefore this partial Censurer, who otherwise is
quick sighted enough to epsy motes in the authors eye in Synopsis, might have
compared that place with his censure: but his uncharitable partiality blinded
him. The Replyer therefore is cleared from this oversight, who soeuers else it
was. And whereas Hierome writ but 10. epistles to Augustine, and this is found
in the sixth of them, he commits a double oversight, saying it is in the 13.

3. As though the Replyer himself has not corrected that word among the
errata before Limbom. showing that explicate should be read for applicate: he
had small reason therefore to take this slender exception.

4. He that takes this transposing of the words, whether in the writer or the
setter (an usual oversight in compositors) for so great a fault, might have
remembered, that it is a grosser fault to mistake one word for another,
especially of a contrary sense, as ascending for descending, as he does in
these words: there is no word of ascending joined with it, as in all places,
where it signifies hell. 3. b. p. 184. 3. b. p. 184.
he should have said, no word of descending: for to ascend to hell was never
read* And again, he might hal^e ^eene (if he had not been wilfully blind)
that the Replyer in setting down the objection, placed the words in their
right order: the transposing then of them afterward, by all likelihood was not
his fault.

5. The word corrected by the Caviller, was before so amended by the Replyer in
the errata, which his wilful blindness would not suffer him to see.

6. Likewise, professors in that place, should be read, profane persons, as
the Replyer himself has noted it among the errata to Limbom.

7. The Replyer himself thus reads in the one place not many lines before:
they are gone down with the uncircumcised: and therefore this frivolous fault
finder might have known, that the Replyer could read no otherwise in the other
place: whose oversight so ever it was.

8. Here this captious Controller picketh this quarrel for want of a small
comma in parenthesis: for the words should be read thus: there came an other
descension between, which went immediately before,) his descending to death and
the grave: that is, namely his descending etc. so there must be a pause
between, before, and descending, and then there is no place left for this
cavil.

The Recrimination.
1. He says, he will take the pains to perverse his pamphlet once again,
pref. p. 5. Pref. p. 5.
he means the Replyers book: but this may be well taken for a willing or
wilful escape: for in deed this spiteful spy fault, or rather make fault,
does nothing else but pervert, and, in his own term, perverse the Replyers
pamphlet: his pen did here hit righter then he was aware.

2. There wanted no good will in you, but courage in a good cause: 2. b. p. 44.
he would have said, bad cause: but his pen is ouerruled to write the truth
against his own mind.

3. Now to proceed to your militiaes, p. 57. 2. b. p. 57.
he would have said militaries: so, 3. b. p. 150. 3. b. p. 150.
here is a plain exposition (of ascending and descending) he would have said
opposition.

4. Touching the signification of the Hebrew and Greek words, sheol and hades,
used by David, and Peter in this place, all religious divines and learned
Doctors, etc. which for a thousand five hundred years together flourished in
the Church of God, always taught, and the Christian world believed, that they
signified only soul and hell. 2. b. p. 119. 2. b. p. 119.
I pray you (Sir Controller) which of these two words in your Grammar learning
signifies soul? sheol, or hades?

5. He cites Synops. p. 1218. p. 124. 2. b. p. 124.
in the margen, whereas that book has in all but pages 1114. Will not any man
think that he was well ouerseene here?

6. David's perdiction. 2. b. p. 116. 2. b. p. 116.
It may be he would have said David's prediction. So 3. b. p. 78. ancient
Nathers, for fathers. 3. b. p. 60. 3. b. p. 60.
in spirituae sancto for spiritu.

7. As for the ancients, Irenaeus, Athanasius, etc. and for late interpreters,
Calvin, Bullinger, etc. as the reader may see in my former book, it is also
confirmed by the text it self, etc. 3. b. p. 72. 3. b. p. 72.
I think no man living can make any sense or construction of this inconsequent
speech.

8. 3. b. p. 193. 3. b. p. 193.
he says, S. Chrysostom, and S. Augustine, are both here named by your self
among those, which agreed in that opinion: he should have said, agreed not: for
the Replyer propounds it negatiuely: neither did all the fathers agree in
judgment, that Christ descended into hell; to redeem, etc. and then
Chrysostom and Augustine are produced, as not agreeing with the rest therein.

9. So, 3. b. p. 184. 3. b. p. 184.
he puts acending for descending, as is noted before, iustificat. 8. I omit
many other literal scapes: as keek justice, for keep, and convertite, for
convert, with such other slippes usual in his book: which his trippings
should not have been spoken of, but that he is so quick sighted to note the
least scapes in others. Let now the indifferent Reader judge what he has
gained by obiecting gross ouersights.

Thus it falls out according to that saying of Chrysostom, (...): that
dishonestie is easily taken, and every where entangled by it self. And I send
him withal Hieromes posie: Suadeas homini, Hieron. Magno.
ne vescentium dentibus edentulus invideat, and oculos caprearum talpa
contemnat: let not this toothlesse gentleman envy at the feeders teeth, nor
the moule scorn the goats eyes: his moulish blindness was ouerseene to carpe
at them, which are sharper sighted then himself.

The 5. imputation of ignorance.
The accusation.
1. Because the Replyer translateth those words of Augustine: apud inferos
custodiae mancipari: to be kept in hell: this Reuiler says, every Grammarian
knows to be false, and that the true translation is, to be kept in bondage,
or held captive in hell: and further for this signification of the word, he
alleges Tullie, Lucretius, and Plautus. 3. b. p. 3. 3. b. p. 3.


2. Because the Replyer translateth out of Hierom, 5. Imputation.
caprearum oculos, Goats eyes; he thus lays about him: do you make no
difference between capra and caprea, a Goat and a Roe-bucke? that you
mistranslate. Hieroms words, every boy may see. 3. b. p. 99. 3. b. p. 99.


3. Thus this profound Grecian bestirreth him. p. 107. 3. b. p. 107.
And for the verb (...), whereon you ground your whole fancy, the meanest
Grecian knows it is not an active, but a passive: and therefore most
unlearnedly translated by you, preaches.

4. Again, he according to his great skill chanllengeth also the Replier, for
writing false Hebrew, as cheber for keber, 3. b. p. 136.
a grave.

The justification.
1. THough the Replyer has not spent so much time in teaching of Grammar, as
this perke Pedantius has done; yet he knew what the proper signification of
the verb mancipo was, before the other knew how to decline a noune, or
coniugate a verb: for, though mancipo put absolutely, signify to deliver into
bondage, or possession; yet the other word custodiae being put unto it, does
somewhat alter the signification: So that mancipari custodiae, signifies to
be committed or delivered up to keeping. And what is this else (Sir
Grammarian) but in a shorter phrase, to be kept? And will he needs have it
englished, kept in bondage? then it will follow upon Augustines words ( Shall
we think any to be so impious, that dare say that the soul of our Savior,
etc. was three days held captive in hell) that Christ's soul was held captive
in hell, though not three days. But I think he is not so absurd, as to
grant, that it was there held captive at all. These three latin Authors are
impertinently alleged: Lucretius, for the use of the word mancipium: Plautus,
for the word manceps: and Tullie, for the word mancipo: whereas he should have
produced them concerning this phrase, mancipari custodiae.

2. And every Grammar or dictionarie boy could have told him, that caprea as
well signifies a wild See Adrianus, Iunius, and Dictionar. Thomasij.
goat, as a Roe-bucke: Gesner says, that caprae, eaedem and capreae, that the
same are called by both names: which are wild goats, whom the Grecians of
their seeing call (dorcas) they stay in the mountains, Gesn^r de capris
syluestr.
and (though afar off) see those which are coming, etc. He also shows out
of Martial, that he takes caprea for rupicapra, for the wild goat, or rock
goat. Gesner de caprea.
And Gesner himself confesses; that the ( caprea) is de genere caprarum
syluestrium, of the kind of wild goats. And he alleges out of Aristotle,
that the caprea is the smallest of all horned beasts: and therefore comes
nearer the nature of a goat, then of a bucke.

3. But our cracking Grecian goes on to show his skill in the Greek tongue,
as he has done in the latin. Indeed he is a very mean Grecian, that knows
not that (...) may as well be of the mean voice, as of the passive, and so
may be translated as well actiuely, preaches; as passiuely, preached. And is
it indeed unlearnedly translated preaches? Then were the Septuagints
unlearned, that so interpret the active in the Hebrew, tikra; for they were not
so ignorant, as to express an active by a passive. Likewise, they in the same
place interpret another active in the Hebrew, taronah, by a verb of the mean
voice, (...); which both the Latin translater, Montanus, and Pagnine express
by the active, praedicat, preaches. All these also must go for unlearned
translaters in the blind judgment of this new Grammarian, who takes upon him
to teach Divines, when he seems scarce able to teach boys their Grammar.

4. But his Hebrew Rabbinicall science, will help out his small intelligence
in the Greek: forsooth a letter is mistaken, cheth is put for coph: a great
matter. But is he sure the author mistook it? I think not: for he might
have found elsewhere, that this word is written with coph: Synops. p. 1050.
which corner he had sought before to find dust, but he saw not the besome,
that would have served to sweep it away.

The Recrimination.
1. As he challenged the Replyer (but beside his book) for the signification
of the word caprea, 2. b. p. 107.
what beast it should betoken; so he shall first be apposed with the like
question: what kind of beast pardus is? a Leopard it is not, for that is
called Leopardus, a Leopard, or Libbard. Then was this Etymologist ouerseene,
in translating out of Origin, pardum cum haed^, the Leopard and the Kidde.
Gesner de Panthera.
Gesner shows, that the Leopard is a diverse beast from the Pardus, as he
alleges out of Isidorus, Ex adulterio Pardi and Le^nae, Leopardus nascitur*
The Leopard is engendered by the adulterous commixtion of the Pard and the
Lioness. The Leopard he thinks to be the same, which the English men call
the Cat a mountain. It is true that both our English translations do read
Leopard in that place of Isay, chap. 11. v. 6. but in so translating, they
express not the word pardus in the Latin; but the Hebrew word namer, which
serves both for Pardus and Leopardus. But we pardon him this small oversight,
and will not insist upon it.

2. But his Latin scapes are not so many, for it were a stark shame for a man
to mis^e in his ordinary trade: it would pi^tie a man to see how he (...) in
the Greek. 2. b. p. 178. 2. b. p. 178.
He translateth, Job. 38. 17. (...), the gates of hell: whereas both the
interpreter of the Septuag. the Latin translator, with Vatablus and others,
read the gates of death.

3. 3. b. p. 82. 3. b. p. 82.
Twice he setting down the Replyers words, reads (...), whereas the word is
(...), as Limbomastix has it. p. 32. 33. This error falling out twice within
10. lines, may argue ignorance rather in the penman, then oversight in the
Printer.

4. So in another place, he writes (...) for (...), to save alive. 1. b. p.
29. 1. b. p. 29.
in the margen; and that his ignorance may appear, he still retains the same
word (...). 3. b. p. 86. 3. b. p. 86.
and (...), for viuificare, to revive, or save: whereas, there is no such word
at all in the Greek, The confuter detected to be no Grecian.
much less in that sense. For the Greek word which signifies to save, is
(...), which makes in the future (...): the other word, which begins with
(...) is (...), which makes (...) in the future, which signifies to live: and
this for a taste of his greek.

5. As unsavory a relish has his hebrew smattering: for in stead of the hebrew
word carah to live, 1. b. p. 30.
he writes caia, with aleph in stead of he, there being no such hebrew word.
And lest he might excuse it by oversight, he writes the same word again after
the same manner. 2. b. p. 159. 2. b. p. 159.
and the third time so likewise. 3. b. p. 86. 3. b. p. 86.


6. The hebrew word keber, he according to his skill will have taken for hell,
3. b. p. 28.
Psalm. 88. 10. whereas all interpreters, do there read and understand the
grave: the Septuag. (...): the vulgar latin, Vatabl. Montan. Pagnin. in
sepulchro, in the grave. And so our English also.

7. Further, in the very same place, that his hebrew profunditie may
sufficiently be testified to all men, he notes another word (...), perdition,
in the same verse: can any man tell what this word is? The Confuter discovered
to have no skill in the hebrew.
the Hebrew word there used is (...), abaddon: where he leaves out the letter
vaf with the vowell cholem. What a shame is it for a man so utterly ignorant in
the languages, to take upon him to control others, being more blameable
himself? By this view of his gross slips in Greek and Hebrewe, I am induced
to think that report to be true, which has been given out by some that knew
him in Oxford; that what ostentation soever he makes now, he was thought to
have no great skill either in Hebrew or Greek then.

Now it falls out upon him, according to that saying of a Greek Father,
Gregor. Nysser.
(...): nothing makes a man so unshamefast (he would have translated impudent)
as a bad conscience. 6. Imputation.
So this talkatiue tasker of others, having a bad conscience, not caring what
he said or objected to others, though never so untrue, is without measure bold
and bragging. I may say of him, as Hierom of his adversary, that professed
general skill in whatsoever: Apolog. 3. ad verse. Ruffin.
tu, fella public posita, Hermagoram nobis, and Gorgiam exhibes Leontinum: you
(your chair being set aloft) do offer your self as another Hermagoras, and
Gorgias; which took upon them to dispute of any matter propounded unto them.
So this Crazy Craker would make himself a professed linguist in all the
learned tongues, being nothing else then a wrangling verbalist.

The 6. imputaton of errors.
The accusation.
1. That Christ has two kingdoms belonging unto him, one as God, an other as
God and man: and that his kingdom as he is God, is incommunicable to any. 2.
b. p. 201. 2. b. p. 201.


2. That the Godhead is invisible, incomprehensible: ibid. He counts these
paradoxes, contrary to the holy scriptures, and wondreth how they could fall
from the Replyers pen.

3. Augustine takes the spirit, 1. Pet. 3. 19. not for the divine nature of
Christ, but for the operation of the holy Ghost: which two you most erroneously
confound, says this error finder. 3. b. p. 127. 3. b. p. 127.


4. He calls it a strange position, that the true joys of heaven are in this
world. 2. b. p. 207. 2. b. p. 207.


The justification.
1. THis Erring Censor, at the first erreth in misreporting the Replyers words,
which are these; that kingdom, whereof Christ promises to make the thief
partaker, is not that kingdom, which belonged to him as God (for that is not
communicable to any creature) but which is due to him, as Messiah. Limbomast.
p. 18. It is not affirmed here, that Christ has two kingdoms, but that it
being one and the same kingdom, yet has a diverse respect, one as it
belongs to Christ as God, an other as he is the Messiah, both God and man.

And that this diverse relation and respect of the kingdom of Christ, is not
contrary to the Scripture, (as this ignorant scripturian says) but most
consonant and agreeable to the same: it appears evidently by that divine
testimony of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 24. Then shall the end be when he has
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the father, when he has put down all
rule, and all authority and power: v. 25. for he must reign till he has put
all his enemies under his feet: v. 28. and when all things shall be subdued
unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him, that did
subdue all things under him, that God may be all in all.

But because the deciding of this question, Diverse expositions brought of that
place, 1. Cor. 15. 24. Then shall the Son himself be subject.
consists in the right understanding of this Scripture, I will deliver diverse
expositions thereof, and approve the best: I find eight several
interpretations of these words: then shall the Son himself also be subject.

1. The Sabellians, which denied the distinction of the three persons of the
glorious Trinity, and the Marcionites joining with them, did thus understand
it: Ista filij subiectio futura est; cum in patre^ filius refundetur: this
subjection of the son shall then be, when the son shall be resolved into the
father: meaning that the person of the son, shall run into the person of
the father. Ambr. l. 5. de fid. ^^.
But Ambrose confuteth this wicked opinion, by this reason: Tum omnia, quae
filio subiecta erunt, in filium and patrem resolventur: Then all those things,
which were subject to the son, shall also be resolved into the son and the
father: as they say the son shall be resolved into the father: which were
absurd to say: which was one of those gross errors, imputed to Origene: that
upon those words of S. Paul, that God may be all in all, groundeth this
erroneous fancy: Hieron. ad Avitum.
vniuersa creatura redigetur in eam substantiam, quae omnibus melior est,
divinam scilicet: that every creature shall be brought to that substance, which
is the best of all, that is, the divine.

2. An other exposition as bad as this, was, that the humane nature of Christ
should be converted into his divine, and penitus absorbenda^ a divinitate, and
should be wholly swallowed up of his deity: Lib. 1. de Trin. c. 8. and 10.
so Augustine reports. But this heretical sense is overthrown by the
Apostles direct words: for in that the son is said to be subject, it shows,
that there remains somewhat to be subject, otherwise there could be no
subjection.

3. Some refer it to the body of Christ the Church, and understand it of his
faithful members, in whom there yet remains some sins and imperfections:
which till they be subdued unto God, Christ in his members is not subdued:
Orig. hom. 7. in Levit. c. 10.
so Origene: donec ego non sum subditus patri, nec ipse dicitur patri esse
subiectus: while I am not subdued to the father, neither is he said to be
subject to the father.

4. Others take it to be understood of unbelievers, not yet converted to the
faith, which are not yet subject: so that pars membrorum eius non est subiecta
fidei, part of his members is not subject to the faith: but in the end, when
as they also acknowledge the kingdom of Christ, then Christ with his whole
body, shall be subject unto God: so Hierome. Hieron. Amando. tom. 4.
But both these expositions are taken away by the Apostles words: for he is
made subject unto the father, to whom he subdued all things, but to the son
are all things subdued, therefore he speaks of the subjection of the person
of the son.

5. Some take this subjection to be spoken of the person of Christ, that
thereby is meant nothing else, but that the son had his beginning and was
begotten of the father: so Theophylact and Oecumenius upon this place: and
Ambrose to the same effect says, Ambr. in 1. Cor. c. 11.
Deus caput Christi dicitur, quia ab eo genitus, that God is said to be Christ's
head, because he was begotten of him. But there can be no subjection in the
godhead: seeing the father and son are of the same nature in the Godhead; so
one can not be said to be subject to an other.

6. Others do understand this subjection, in respect of Christ's humane nature,
Ambr. l. 5. de fid. c. 7.
as Ambrose: fecundum humanae naturae assumptionem erit illa subiectio:
according to the assumption of the humane nature shall be that subjection. But
then why should Christ be said to be subject now more, then in the days of
his flesh: if it be answered, that it may appear, that the man Christ, even
being glorified; is subject unto God: yet this does not satisfy, for even now
Christ is entered into his glory, and yet this time of the subjection of the
son is not come.

7. There remain then two expositions of Augustines* the first is, that Christ
is said to deliver up the kingdom to his father, qu. 63. lib. 83. quest.
non quod tunc incipiet, sed cognosci incipiet: not that then it begins to
be, but begins to be acknowledged: now also the father reigns, but then
the kingdom of the father shall be made manifest. But neither does this
explanation fully satisfy: for neither now is the kingdom of Christ made
manifest to all the world, but then shall appear unto all at his coming: if
then the manifestation of the kingdom of the father, be the delivering of it
up unto him; then also the manifestation of the kingdom of the son, in that
day, should also be the delivering of it unto him: and so in effect, he should
be said to deliver it up, when it is (in that sense) delivered to him.

8. The last therefore and best exposition is: that the Apostle speaks of
surrendering up and resigning that kingdom of Christ unto his father, How the
son shall be subject to his father.
which was given him, as he was manifested in the flesh, until all his enemies
be subdued: Calvin. in 1. Cor. 15. v. 25.
as Calvine very well says, Pater eum hac condition ad dextram suam
collocavit, etc. The father placed him upon this condition at his right hand,
that he should not leave the government, which he had received, before his
enemies were brought under. Iun. annotat. in hunc locum.
Likewise, learned Iunius* Illud puta (...), quod filio imposuit pater, nam
illud divmum, etc. He shall deliver up his Oeconomicall kingdom, which the
father has laid upon his son, not that divine and eternal (kingdom)
common to the father, the son, and the holy Ghost: which was never laid
down by any person of the Trinity, no not for a moment.

This diverse respect of the kingdom of Christ, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 15.
Chrysostom long since touched, in these words: Regna Dei Scriptura duo
novit, alteru^ adoptionis and familiaritatis, alterum creationis, etc. The
Scripture acknowledges two kingdoms of Christ, the one of adoption and
familiar (care,) the other of creation: he is therefore by the law of
workmanship and creation the King, of Jews, Ethnikes, Devils, and
adversaries; but of the faithful, and such as willingly commit and subject
themselves, by familiar care. This kingdom also is said to have a beginning:
for of this it is spoken in the second Psalm, Ask of me, and I will give thee
the nations for thine inheritance. And he himself said to his Disciples: all
power is given unto me of my father: referring all as received of his father:
not because he was not sufficient, but showing that he was the son, and not
unbegotten: this (kingdom) therefore he will deliver, that is, restore.

Here this learned father makes two kingdoms of Christ (which are rather
diverse respects or relations of one and the same kingdom) Christ is king over
all creatures, as God and creator: and he is king of his Church, as redeemer.
This respective kingdom he shall render unto God.

Augustine treads in the same steps: Augustine. vbi prius.
that as Christ rules the creatures, he shall reign for ever: vt autem
militat, etc. See Augustine further hereof. Imp. 11. recrim. 7. August. 7.
but as he warreth against the devil, there shall be an end of his kingdom.
And this is agreeable to the Apostle, He must reign till he has put all his
enemies under his feet. How Christ's kingdom shall have no end, and yet be
delivered up.
This is that kingdom which was given unto Christ, as the Messiah. But it will
be objected, that the kingdom of the Messiah shall be everlasting, as the
angel said to Marie, Of his kingdom shall be no end, Luke 1. 33. The answer
is, that the kingdom of the Messiah, in respect of the glory and power
thereof is everlasting, the humanity of Christ being by an everlasting and
inseparable union joined to his godhead in one person: but in regard of the
manner and execution it shall determine: in 1. Cor. 15. 28.
as Calvin excellently touches this point, Deum quidem agnoscimus rectorem,
sed in facie hominis Christi, etc. Now we acknowledge God to be the ruler, but
in the face of the man Christ: but then Christ shall restore the kingdom which
he received, that we may perfectly adhere unto God: neither by this means
shall he abdicate his kingdom, but shall draw it after a manner from his
humanity to his divinity. And again, then the veil being removed, we
shall manifestly see God reigning in his Majesty. Neque amplius media erit
Christi humanitas: neither shall Christ's humanity need to come between (or
to be a mean) etc. His meaning is, that in the kingdom of God, when Christ
has brought us to his glory, there shall not then be such use of the mediation
and intercession of Christ, for remission of sins, for the subduing of our
enemies, and such like, August. vbi prius.
because then, as Augustine says, fides cessabit, and pleno aspectu Deum
intuebimur: faith shall cease, and we shall behold God with full sight. Now
then, if this place of the Apostle be well waighed, where he speaks of
Christ's kingdom, which shall be delivered up unto God: a kingdom wherein he
that gave it shall put down all things under him: a kingdom that is but until
all his enemies be put under his feet: The Confuter ignorant in the principles
of di^inity.
a kingdom, the governor whereof, shall himself be subject to his father: no
man can without blasphemy understand this of the everlasting kingdom of God,
which he neither received of any, neither shall it have end, neither is he
himself subject to any. It is therefore gross error, and foppish ignorance in
this new fangled nouice, to deny that the kingdom of Christ is to be
respected one way, as it belongs unto him as God; and another, as it is given
him, as the Messiah.

2. As grossly ignorant does he show himself in deciphering of the next error:
in that the Replyer holds the deity of God to be invisible and
incomprehensible: which this deep divine in his new Theology counts
paradoxes. And hereupon insulting, he goes on, flying from the point in
question, The question discussed, whether the godhead be visible and
comprehensible.
whether the deity shall be, or can be of the creature comprehended. He
busieth himself to prove, that though not in this mortal and s^nnefull life,
yet in the next, we shall behold the glory of God. To this purpose he
alleges scriptures, that we shall see him as he is, 1. Ioh. 3. 2. of
Fathers, as of Augustine, that the blessed Trinity can no ways be seen with
humane eyes, but with those eyes, etc. of Ambrose, that we shall then see with
uncovered face the glory of God. 2. b. p. 203. 2. b. p. 203.
He tells us of certain heretics that held, that they which awake at the
last day, shall not see God at all in his divine essence and nature. Of which
opinion was one Abailardus, against whom Bernard writes. p. 207. 2. b. p. 207.
And thus he fights with his shadow, leaving the point in controversy,
whether the Godhead may be comprehended.

Briefly therefore to open this point, I find that there have been two
principal opinions concerning the vision of God, and the one contrary to the
other. It is noted as one of Origens errors by Hierom, ad Avitum.
that he should think the Godhead of the father to be so invisible, as that
it could not be comprehended of the son. As this opinion makes the Godhead
altogether invisible in one extreme; so some were so gross and carnal, as
that they held, Verbi Dei naturam, non solum mutabilem, sed etiam visibilem:
that the nature of the word of God, was not only mutable, August. lib. 2. de
Trinit. cap. 8. and 9.
but visible; as Augustine reports their opinion: unto these the heretics
Anomoei came near, of the which sort, Eunomius was a principal, who held, se
naturam Dei comprehendisse, that he comprehended the nature of God: Theoph. in
3. Ephesians.
as Theophylact testifies.

Now out of this question of the Comprehending of the Deity, Christ, even as
touching his humane nature is to be excepted: of whom the divine nature,
because of that hypostaticall union, was fully seen and comprehended. Yea,
Gennadius in his catalogue makes mention of one Servus which writ against
those who denied Christ when he lived here in the flesh, Deum carneis oculis
vidisse, to have have seen God with the eyes of his flesh.

Concerning then this point, a distinction is here to be received, touching the
knowledge of the Godhead: there is cognitio simplex, and comprehensiua, a
simple (that is absolute) and comprehensiue knowledge: and cognitio pro modulo
and apprehensiua, and a knowledge in a certain measure, and apprehensiue
(only.) This latter way God may be seen and known: August. lib. 1. de Trin
c. 6.
But upon these two conditions, as Augustine well observes, Humano visu nullo
modo potest, etc. That first God can not be seen by any humane sight, but with
that whereby they that see, are no men, but beyond men. Secondly, nemo vidit
per seipsum, etc. No man has seen by himself, that is, by his flesh and
blood, but by the revealing of the father, and enarration of the son. As the
Evangelist says, No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son
has declared him. Thus God may and has been seen and known of the Saints
in this life, as of Moses and Paul; but more fully in the next, when we shall
see the sight of God as he is. August. lib. 12. de Genes. ad liter. c. 10.
But (as Augustine in another place) quantum eum capere creatura rationalis and
ctualis potest) as much as a reasonable and intellectual creature is capable
of.

But touching the other kind of knowledge, though God be cognoscibilis ex
gratia, Espens. ex Aquinat. in 1. Tim. 6.
to be known by grace, comprehensibilis tamen a nemine quam seipso, yet he
is comprehended of none but himself. The reason is, because the deitle is
infinite, the creature finite: so that which is of a finite nature, cannot
comprehend that which is infinite. Augustine says, si sanctis Angelis iam
equales essemus, de Genes. ad Lit. lib. 4. c. 6.
non vtique ita nota esset nobis diuina essentia, sicut ipsa sibi: if we were
equal to the Angels, the divine substance should not be so known to us, as
it is to himself.

But here comes in this quaint distinguisher with this gloss; God is not
called incomprehensible, as if there were any thing of his, He speaks
contradictions.
which his Saints shall not see, but because they see him not so perfectly, as
he is visible of himself. 2. b. p. 204. 2. b. p. 204.
Wherein he speaks contradictions; for if God cannot be seen of us, as he is
of himself, then there is somewhat in the Godhead which we cannot see, which
himself sees. Then by grace apprehend him we may, but comprehend him we
cannot: August. epist. 50. ad Elpidium.
Plenitudinem diuinitatis nemo de coelestibus etiam virtutibus conspexit: The
fullness of the divinity none of the celestial powers has seen: but if
there be nothing of his, which the Saints shall not see, then they should see
his fullness.

Now then it is evident, which of the twain holds a paradox: the Replyer,
that says the deity of Christ is incomprehensible, or the erroneous
Reprehender, which enclineth to the contrary. He says further, that the
Replyers peremptory words seem to incline to those Errors, or rather
heresies, of certain Armenians, which denied that the Saints in the next world
should see God at all in his divine essence. p. 207. 2. b. p. 207.
But as the Replyer detesteth from his heart that erroneous opinion: so let
this newfangled Dogmatist take heed, least in his comprehensiue fancy, he
apprehend not and lay hold of the heresy of the Anomaeans before spoken of,
that affirmed, they comprehended the essence of God.

3. As good success has this trifler in the third pretended error: for first,
he misconceiueth (himself would here have said, after his unmannerly phrase,
belieth) Augustine, that he takes not the word spirit, for the divine nature
of Christ, but for the operation of the holy ghost: for Augustines words are
these: Epist. 99.
saepe antea veniebat in spiritu ad quos volebat, he came often before (that
is, his incarnation) in the spirit to whom he would: does he speak, I pray
you, of the operation of the spirit here, and not of the spirit himself: to
confound the spirit, and the operation of the spirit, is both great error and
ignorance. Again an other untruth is, that Augustine by the word spirit,
takes not the divine nature of Christ. If Augustine may be credited, he
himself says otherwise: Et ipse quidem filius in substantia deitatis spiritus
est;and quid facit silius sine spiritu sancto vel sine patre, Epist. 99.
cum inseperabilia sunt opera trinitatis? Both the Son himself is a spirit
in the substance of the deity: and what does the Son without the holy Ghost,
or without the Father, seeing the works of the Trinity are inseparable? Does
it not now appear that Augustine indifferently takes the spirit here, either
for the divine nature of Christ; or for the holy Ghost? say also then that
Augustine does ignorantly confound them.

Further, does not the Scripture indifferently sometime ascribe the same work
to Christ, sometime to the holy Ghost: as our Savior says, The spirit of my
father speaks in you, Math. 10. 20. which Mark names the holy Ghost, Mark.
13. 11. and S. Paul says, Seeing ye seek experiment of Christ, that speaks
in me, 2. Cor. 13. 3. So the Apostle says, that Christ offered himself, Hebr.
7. 17. and thorough the eternal spirit he offered himself: chap. 9. 14. which
Ambrose understands of the holy Ghost. Lib. 1. de spir. c. 8.
Say also that the Apostles ignorantly confound the divine nature of Christ,
and the holy Ghost.

But that it may fully appear, who is both the ignorant, and errant too, (to
use his own words) what a dangerous and suspicious speech is this, taking the
word spirit, for soul, I might have divided Christ, and his spirit, without
all suspicion of ignorance, and his imputation of error: 3. b. p. 97. 3. b. p.
97.
yea, The ignorant Confuter divides Christ and his spirit.
and dare any presumptuous spirit divide that, which God has inseperably
united, the deity, and humanity, (to the which belongs the soul (...)
spirit) in one person in Christ. Our Savior said upon an other occasion, Let
none put asunder that which God has coupled together, Math. 19. 6. which rule
holds in general, that it is no less presumption, to divide the humane
soul from the person of Christ, which is hypostatically united for ever: I may
here say with Hierome, Hieron. ad Damasum.
Nescio quid veneni in syllabis latet: I can not tell what poison lies hid
under these syllables. But to return his own words, it may be that these
things have slipped from you, thorough heat of contention, rather then
persuasion of heart: 2. b. p. 207. 2. b. p. 207.
yet I say again with Hierome, Non bonae suspicionis est, cum in eodem sensu
verba dissentiunt: it is no good suspicion, when in the sa^e sense the words
do dissent. If he hold the hypostaticall union of Christ's soul and body with
his Godhead, why does he in words divide them?

4. Concerning the fourth position, which he calls strange, the words of the
Replyer are these: the joys of heaven may be truly, though not fully felt in
this life: whosoever counts this position strange, shows himself indeed a
strange fellow, and a stranger from such true feeling of heavenly joys. What
thinks he of those three, Svnops. p. 1013. Ambr. epist. 11.
Peter, Stephen, and Paul, whom Ambrose gives in instance: Petrus in monte
Domini aspiciens gloriam Christi: noluit descendere, Stephanus cum Iesum vidit,
lapidari non formidabat: Paulus raptus in Paradisum, vsum proprij non sentiebat
corporis: Peter in the mount of the Lord beholding the glory of Christ, would
not descend: Stephen, when he saw Jesus, feared not to be stoned: Paul, being
rapt into Paradise did not perceive the use of his own body. Thinks he,
that they even in earth felt not the true joys of heaven, though not so fully
as they enjoy it now? Yea this wrangler himself confesses upon these words of
Peter with our eyes we saw his majesty: 2. Pet. 1. 16.
that they enjoyed the sight of his glorious majesty in this life. 2. b. p.
205.
Could he then be so forgetful, as to call it a strange position, that the
true joy (...) heaven may be felt in this life: is it not a true heavenly joy
to see the Majesty of God? how say you, (Sir Medler) speak out, is it not?
your own mouth does condemn you: Coelum (inquit Deus) mihi seeds est, anima
ergo iusti coelum est. in Psalm. 121.
What if the Replyer had said with Augustine, that heaven may be in this life,
in the soul of the righteous: or with Ambrose, that the spirit of grace makes
the regenerate heavenly and celestial: he would also have thought in his
vnheauenly blindness, Cum coelestem faciat gratia spiritualis, multo magis
terrenum creavit, Ambr. l. 2. de spir. c. 9.
that he had spoken straungely also: for where heaven is, and men are become
heavenly, what should let them, but to have a feeling also of heavenly joys.

The Recrimination.
Now let us turn aside a little to take a view of his blind errors.

1. He holds, that the original text of the Scriptures is corrupt, in these
words; And say we must go to the originals: I will run with you to those
fountains, whose pure waters if the foul feet, and unclean hands of some
had not corrupted, etc. there could never be so many gross and filthy errors
drawn and derived thence. 1. b. p. 26. 1. b. p. 26.


2. The Syriake together with the Greek he holds to be the original tongues
of the new Testament: ibid. whereas there can be but one original tongue to
the rest: if he grant the Greek be the true original, then the Syriake is
not, which was translated out of the Greek. So in an other place he reprooueth
the Replyer for rejecting the Syriake, 3. b. p. 57.
as contrary to the original.

3. He prefers the Latin text before the original Greek. Act. 2. 24.
reading, the sorrows of hell, for the sorrows of death, as the original
Greek has: saying, I see no cause, 3. b. p. 30.
why I should not approve the old Latin text: 3. b. p. 30. so also, Bellar.
lib. 2. de verb. Dei. c. 10.
2. b. p. 154. showing hereby of what house he comes, and whose disciple he
is, justifying the Latin translation against the original: of the which
further, he thus irreverently writes: As for that vulgar Greek now extant,
whether it be the true Authentike original or no, is a question, because it is
neither the most ancient, nor that which was most used in the Ancient Church:
and beside that it is not free from corruption in diverse places. 3. b. p. 14.
3. b. p. 14.
What could be spoken more to the derogation of the authority of the
Scriptures, The original Greek text of the new Testament disgraced.
then thus to abase that original, wherein the Apostles themselves did write.
And in this profane, and (little better) then Popish assertion, he has
uttered three great untruths: that the Greek original, which we now have, is
not the most ancient; that it was not most used in former times; that it is in
some places corrupt: none of these slanders of the text, shall he ever be able
to justify.

4. He calls the book of Ecclesiasticus, which the Church of England
counts among the Apocryphal books, Artic. 6.
the word of God: 2. b. p. 70. 2. b. p. 70.
and in the next page before, he calls it Scripture, I think it fit to join
Scripture with Scripture, making mention of Ecclesiasticus. And that we may
see, he is no chaungeling; in an other place having alleged a place out of
Ecclesiasticus, he adds, by which Scriptures it is plain. 2. b. p. 136. 2.
b. p. 136.
Such a divine as he is, such is his Scripture: how audacious is this fellow,
that contrary to the judgment and determination of this Church, dare make
Ecclesiasticus a book of Canonical Scripture?

5. The question being demanded, why the soul may not be taken for his (that
is Christ's) whole person, as well as holy is understood to be his flesh?
answer is made, because cause it (that is, the soul) is no part at all of the
whole person, while it remains separated from the body: for of these two the
whole person consists, when they are joined together living, etc. 2. b. p.
162. 2. b. p. 162*
Where, seeing the demand is made concerning Christ's soul, the answer
contains two manifest errors, or rather heresies: the one, that the soul
separated from the body, The confuter intangleth himself by his own words,
with an inclination to the heresies of the Apollinarists and Nestorians.
was no part of Christ's person: which sauoureth strongly of the heresy of the
Apollinarists, that made the man Christ without a soul: the other, that the
soul and body joined together (that is, in Christ, for of him the question is
proposed) make his whole person; which inclines to the heresy of the
Nestorians, that made two persons of Christ; one, as he was the son of God;
the other, as he was the son of man: which was the heresy also of Theodorus,
condemned in the 5. Synod. ca. 12. I am right sorry, and it pitieth me for this
poor man, that so windeth himself in his own words, as that he has made a
maze and labyrinth for himself, out of which he cannot get out. He, if he had
met with the like advantage, would have cried out with open mouth (heresy,
heresy) as he does notwithstanding in diverse places untruly object. Pref. to
the 1. book. p. 5. and 2. b. 43.
But we forbear him that term, as having slipped here rather of ignorance,
and as one, to use Hieroms words, Puritan heresy objected.
qui magis misericordia dignus, quam invidia: which had more need to be
pitied, then envied.

6. Alleging the corrupt translation of the Septuag. Job. 38. 17. Dialog. 1.
aduer. Pelagian.
(...), Did the porters of hell at the sight of thee shrink for fear, or
rather were astonished? whereas the true reading according to the original is
this: have thou seen the gates of the shadow of death? he says, they were
here propheta^ verius, quam interpretes, Prophets more like then interpreters,
and justifies their faulty translation against the original. 2. b. p. 178. 2.
b. p. 178.


7. He says that Jehovah is the essential name of God, or rather the very
essence it self, because his name and nature are all one. 2. b. p. 196.
2. b. p. 196. Who but this blind archer would shoot such blind bolts? if
he had said Jehovah signified the very essence of God, he had said well; but
that it is the very essence of God, is an absurd speech: for then the essence
of God may be seen and uttered, as this word Jehovah can: then should it be
lawful to adore this name wheresoever we see it painted or written, if it were
the very essence of God.

8. This is the guerdon laid up for Gods children, 2. b. p. 202.
to participate even with his Godhead, for to this end he took upon him our
humane nature, that we might be capable of his divine substance: 2. Pet. 1. 4.
and to this end he alleges Saint Peter, that by them we should be made
partakers of the divine nature. What strange speeches are these? that we shall
participate and be capable of the godhead and divine nature, as Christ was of
our humane? How much differs he now from the Origenists error, that vniuersa
creatura redigetur in diuinam naturam, that every creature shall be resolved
into the divine nature; noted 6. imputat. iustific. expos. 1.
before: or from the family of Love, that say they are godded with God. It is
held to be a great error in Osiander, that man is justified by that justice,
not which Christ had as man, but whereby he was essentially just as God: and
this is well confuted by that Popish champion, Bellar. lib. 2. de iustificat.
c. 5.
both by scriptures and fathers: as Augustine expounds what this justice is;
qua nos eius gratia iusti sumus, etc. cum just viuimus, etc. non qua ipse
iustus est, aeterna sua and incommutabili iustitia: whereby we are just through
his grace, when we live justly, etc. not by his eternal and immutable justice,
whereby he is just himself. This error, this wandering discourser cannot be
free from, for if Gods children shall participate with the godhead and divine
substance, then also with the essential justice, which is inherent in that
divine substance.

As for that place of Peter, it serves not to prove any such participation of
the divine substance, unless he will say, that even in this life we are also
capable of the godhead: for the Apostle speaks of that conformity to the
divine nature, which is in the Saints in this life; namely, in flying the
corruptions of the world, as the next words show, which do serve to expound
the former: so that (as a good interpreter says) it is to be noted, that the
name of nature here does not signify the substance, Marlor. in hunc locum.
but the quality: yea, that great defender of the Pope-catholike faith (whom
it may be he more respects, Bellar. ibid.
then our Ecclesiastical expositors) does hit the right meaning of this place,
expounding it by the like: Psalm. 82. 6. and Ioh. 10. 32.
as, I said ye are gods, and ye all are children of the most high: and, behold
(says the Apostle) what love the father has showed on us, 1. Ioh. 3. 1.
that we should be called the sons of God: 1. Ioh. 4. 7.
and, every one that lives i^ borne of God. This partaking then of the divine
nature, is not in the communication of his substance, vt conformes deo
reddam^r: id est, quasi deificari.
but our conformation in holiness and love: so that we are as it were deified,
in being made conformable to God: as M. Calvin speaks, and long before him
Bernard used the same phrase, Lib de diligend. deo.
thus writing: Oportet nos in eundem affectum transire, vt quomodo Deus omnia
propter seipsum esse voluit, sic and nos ipsos propter ipsum esse volumus: sic
affici, deificari est. We must pass into the same affection with the creator,
that as God would have all things for himself, so that we be willing to be
our selves for him: so to be affected, is as it were to be deified. This our
deifying, is not in passing into the same identitie of nature with God, but in
imitating the divine quality: not in being transformed into the same
condition of substance, but in being changed into the like affection. It was
the wicked opinion of the Manichees, ex Marlor. in hunc locum.
that as we were made out of Gods nature, so we should return to it again.
Let this braine-sicke concluder take heed that he fall not down into this
pit, standing so near the brinke: saying, that we shall be partakers of the
divine substance and Godhead: in which sense also if he understand the
blisfull fruition of the godhead, to be made partakers and capable of the
divine nature and godhead, as it seems his meaning is: it is also an
erroneous speech, and neither agreeable to the scripture, nor antiquity, as
has been showed: what that fruition of God shall be, In festiuit. sanctor.
sermon. 4.
Bernard well shows: tripliciter in aeterna illa beatitudine fruemur Deo,
etc. we shall three ways enjoy God in that eternal blessedness, beholding
him in the creatures, having him in our selves, and knowing the very Trinity in
it self.

9. To descend, is a voluntary action, whereas to suffer torments, is a
violent passion. 3. b. p. 201. 3. b. p. 201.
In which unadvised speech, he must either confess, that Christ endured no
torments for us upon the cross, contrary to the Prophet; he was wounded for
our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities: or that he suffered them
violently, and so not voluntarily, Ioh. 10. 18.
contrary to our Saviors own words: No man takes it (that is, my life) from
me, but I lay it down of my self.

10. He calls certain points of doctrine (exempli^ied by the Replyer in
another book, for strange and unsound positions) most true and sound
positions. 2. b. p. 20. 2. b. p. 20.
and yet afterward he confesses, that the very first thereof, which is this,
The ignorant confuter windeth himself by his own words into suspicion of
Arrianisme.
that Christ is not originally God, is the most damnable heresy of Arrius,
ibid. p. 21. Thus he ignorantly makes himself an Arrian; for thus may his
own speeches be retorted against him: whosoever says that Christ is not
originally God, is an Arrian: this proposition is his own: but so holds this
confused confuter, in calling it a true and sound position: this also is his
own, for he calls all those true and sound positions, there excepted
against, whereof this is the first. Ergo: by his own confession he draws
himself into suspicio^ of Arrianisme. Indeed, this (heresie-mouther) that has
often in his mouth, heresy, heretic, obiecteth Arrianisme, but very simply to
the Replyer, because alleging the words of S. Paul of our Savior, justified
in the spirit, he by the spirit, understands his divine spirit and nature: as
quickened, says he, in your sense signifies to be made alive, so must
justified to be made just, which is rank Arrianisme: 3. b. p. 60. 3. b. p. 60.
poor silly fellow: and does he know what Arrianisme means: for though the
Replyer medleth not here with the signification of the word justified, but
alleges this sentence, for the use of the word spirit: neither does he take
the word justified, in the active signification, as we are said to be
justified: but passiuely, as when wisdom is said to be justified of her
children, Math. 11. 19. that is, approved and declared to be just: yet if it
be referred to Christ's humanity, it is no Arrianisme to say, that he as man
was justified, not from sin, which he had not, but preserved by the
inhabitation of the spirit from all sin. If this be Arrianisme? then is
Chrysostom an Arrian, who delivers these two expositions of this place:
Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
Sive hoc intelligi potest, etc. whether this may be understood, because
wisdom is justified of her children, or because he did none deceit, as the
Prophet testifies, saying: Who did no sin, neither was any guile found in
his mouth: he understands this justification, of his preserving from sin.
And what is it more, to say that Christ as man was justified, or that he was
sanctified: but our Savior says of himself, whom the father sanctified,
Ioh. 10. 36. if for Christ to be made just, be Arrianisme; then also to be made
holy? Then he sees who is charged with Arrianisme in his sense, which once to
think, were horrible blasphemy. I therefore say unto him, Contra Pe^il. l. 2.
c. 101.
concerning this imputation of Arrianisme, Vides ne quomodo ista non sententia,
sed vescia, non solum mani sonitu, sed in capite vestro crepuerit: See you not,
how this, not sentence, but bladder, not only with a vain crack, but is
broken upon your own head.

11. He affirms, that the baptism of Infants, is not to be found in
Scripture, by any (express) literal mention: 2. b. p. 170. 2. b. p. 170.
for though he leave out that word express, yet he of whom he borrows this
opinion, The ignorant Confuter not sound, concerning the baptism of Infants.
uses that term: and he may put literal in his purse: his meaning is, that
it is not expressly delivered in Scripture: for there he impugneth that
conclusion, that nothing is to be admitted, that is not expressly delivered in
Scripture. Now then that baptism is expressly grounded upon Scripture, and
not upon tradition: which must follow upon the other, it is diversely evident.
Mark 10. 14.
As because Christ commands little children, Ephesians. 5. 26.
not to be forbidden to come unto him: the Church is cleansed by the washing of
water through the word: of which Church, infants are members: Christ commands
to baptize all nations, Math. 28. 19.
among the which children are counted. And seeing infants were circumcised, in
stead whereof baptism succeeds, Coloss. 2. 1^.
which the Apostle likeneth to circumcision: it is evident that the baptism of
infants is founded upon Scripture: it is also the doctrine of our Church,
Artic. 27.
that the baptism of infants is most agreeable with the institution of Christ:
but where is the institution of Christ to be found, but in express Scripture:
what shameless dealing then is this, to say that they which hold the
contrary, namely that the baptism of infants is not expressly found in
Scripture, do maintain the doctrine of the Church, when they directly impugn
it. And this uncertain and wandering opinion, gives occasion to the wicked
heresy of the Anabaptists: that affirm the baptism of Infants to take
beginning from the Disput. cont. Anabap. sub Egidio Hun. art. 77.
Bishops of Rome, and not from the Apostles.

12. He further among those things, which are not expressly delivered in
Scripture, gives in instance, our belief in the blessed Trinity: 2. b. p.
170. 2. b. p. 170.
whereas the ancient Fathers of the Church, have principally out of the
Scripture proved this Article concerning the Trinity: as Origene urged that
place in the 51. Psalm. where mention is made of three spirits: Homil. 5. in Ier.
principalis spiritus pater, etc. the principal spirit is the father, the
right spirit the son, and the free spirit the holy Ghost. But more pregnant
is that place which Ambrose selecteth; 1* Cor. 13. 13.
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
holy Ghost, Ambr. in hunc locum.
be with you all: Trinitatis hic complexio est, and vnitas potestatis: here is
a conjunction of the Trinity, and the unity of power. Augustine does conclude
the Trinity from that heavenly vision in the baptism of our Savior: Apparuit
manifestissime Trinitas, Tract. 6. in Joan.
etc. The Trinity appeared manifestly, the Father in the voice, the Son in
man, the holy Ghost in the dove. But of all other those places are most full
for the Trinity: Math. 28. 20. Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
the Son, and the holy Ghost: and that other, 1. Ioh. 5. 7. There are three
which bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost: who of
any judgment reading these places, can deny for shame, but that the blessed
Trinity, is expressly delivered in Scripture.

13. The coeternitie of the Son with the Father, is an other point objected,
2. b. p. 107.
not expressly delivered in Scripture: which is evident by the words of the
Evangelist, that the word was in the beginning with God. Tract. 71. in Ioann.
Augustine out of those words of our Savior, I and my father are one:
concludes his equality with God: and so consequently his coeternitie. Bernard
infers it out of those words of the Prophet: Bernard. ser. 2. de nativit.
Isa. 53. 8.
Who shall declare his generation. And further he thus says, Commendant nobis
sacrae literae Christum ex patre, in patre, cu^ patre, etc. quod dicitur ex
patre, ineffabilis est nativitas, quod in patre, consubstantialis vnitas, quod
cum patre, equalitas maiestatis: (...) verb. Isa. sermon. 5.
The sacred letters do commend unto us Christ of his father, in his father,
with his father: that which is said of his father, is his ineffable nativity,
in his father, his consubstantiall unity, that with his father, the equality
of his majesty.

These fathers held, that these mysteries were not to be learned else where,
then in the Scriptures, as most plainly therein expressed.

14. The proceeding of the holy Ghost, he thinks also not to be expressly
delivered in Scripture: 2. b. p. 170. 2. b. p. 170.
whereas notwithstanding, our Savior says directly, Whom I will send unto
you from the father: Ioh. 15. 26.
and, whom the father will send in my name. Ioh. 14. 26.
Augustine would prove it out of those words in the Gospel, Mark. 5. 30.
virtue went out of him: for it is clear that the holy spirit is called
virtue: but that other place is more evident, which Augustine urges also:
August. tract. 99. in Ioann.
He shall not speak of himself: and, he shall receive of mine: Ioh. 16. 13*
14.
Audire illi scire est, scire ess^, a quo ergo illi essentia, ab eo scientia:
to hear, is to him to know, to know, is to be: from whom his essence is, from
him his science: seeing then he hears and receives from the son, he also
has his essence and proceeding from the son.

These holy mysteries of the Trinity, the coeternitie of the Son with the
Father, the proceeding of the holy Ghost, the fathers take to be expressly set
down in Scripture, as Bernard, speaking of the mystery of the Trinity: Non
potuit expressius commendari, Bern. sermon 5. de verb. Isa.
etc. It could not be more expressly commended, then it is necessary to
believe. To say therefore, The ignorant consuter gives advantage unto the
heretics the Sabellians, Arrians, Macedonians.
that these points of doctrine, are not expressly delivered, is to give way
unto those wicked heretics, the Sabellians that denied the first, the Arrians
the second, the Macedonians the third.

Beside these errors, add as many more, which he calls true and sound
positions, being indeed unsound and corrupt doctrines, Pref. to Antilog.
Eccles. triumph. p. 90. 91.
as is partly touched before: slaund. 10. and more at large else where: which I
will not now repeat, because I am only to deal here with this froward
spirit, leaving to provoke those of more modest carriage, though in some things
otherwise minded.

Now, what has this blind obiecter of error gained to himself, but his own
shame, who reckons that for error and falsitie in others, which agrees with
truth and verity; and sees not his own gross and erring ignorance. He with
a curious eye observes others slippes, and tripping (nor that neither) while
himself stumbleth, and falls down flat: the Prophet says, Woe unto them
that speak good of evil, Isa. 5. 20.
and evil of good, which put darkness for light, and light for darkness: I
pray God he be not of that number. Ambrose says well, Lib. offic. 2. c. 17.
talis consiliarius sit, qui nihil nebulosum habeat: He that advises others,
must not be (darkened) or ouercast with clouds himself. Ad Nepotian.
And Hierom well admonishes, Non confundant opera sermonem tuum: Let not thy
works confound thy words. And this blind guide, while he notes other men's
wanderings, should not have gone himself out of the way: he tells the Replyer
most disdainefully, and withal untruly, that he has never a good thought of
his own. 2. b. p. 106. 2. b. p. 106.
while his own heart is pestered with erroneous and malicious cogitations: and
no marvel, for as Josephus well says, (...): a temperate heart is the haven
of (good) meditations: while the heart therefore boyleth with intemperate
envy, the spring head being troubled, the waters issuing from thence cannot be
clean: I wish he may have grace to see his errors, and to confess his
ignorance. Tully has a good saying, Philip. 12.
Cuiusuis est hominis errare, nullius nisi insipientis perseuerare in errore:
Any man may err, but none but unwise men continue in error. Let him not think
it folly to reuerse with judgment, what he has written with error: It is a
wise man's part rather to amend what is amiss, and to straighten that which is
crooked, and to rectify by the line of truth, that which has been set down
against the rule of truth: and so again I commend unto him, that worthy
sentence of Cicero, Optimus est portus poenitenti, Philip. 12.
mutati. consilij: the best haven to repentance, is to change the (heart and)
purpose.

The 7. imputation of Blasphemies.
The accusation.
1. The heaviness which Christ felt in his soul, was not through the horror
of eternal death, Synops. 997. 1004. 1005.
as you and others do blaspheme, etc. 2. b. p. 193. 2. b. p. 193.


2. Why do you not exempt it ( that is, the soul of Christ) from all kind of
death whatsoever, but then your blasphemous hell torments, which you make a
third kind of death of the soul, cannot stand. 2. b. p. 91. 2. b. p. 91.


3. Let the godly judge whether those your inward afflictions, reach not to the
height of sin and damnation, and so consequently prove your doctrine in this
point to be blasphemous, even by your own confession. 3. b. p. 67. 3. b. p. 67.


4. By this time, I trust every well disposed Reader does see, how this your
exposition of this prophecy of David, hardens the Jews, encourages
Atheists, justifies old damned Heretics, confirms Saduces and Epicures,
which deny the immortality of the soul, etc. and finally opens the way unto
blasphemy, paganism, and all impiety. 3. b. p. 51. 3. b. p. 51.


The justification.
1. HOw injuriously this belcher out of blasphemy deals with the Replyer,
his own conscience, if it be not seared with an hot iron, knows; and there
need no other judge: for the Replyer in as plain terms as he could utter
it, denies that there was in Christ any fear of eternal death, Synops. p.
997.
in these words: We willingly grant, that Christ feared not hell fire, nor
everlasting destruction: these authorities press not us, but rather help our
cause; for Christ neither feared temporal, nor everlasting death, as these
fathers witness, and the Apostle says he feared, Heb. 5. 7. what then
remains, but that he feared the cup of Gods wrath mixed with death: Cyprian.
sermon. de passion^.
and as Cyprian says, before cited, difficultatem extremi exitus, The
difficulty or hardness of his last passage, that is, in respect of Gods wrath
tempered with it. And in the other place quoted, these are the words; Synops.
p. 1004.
Though Christ neither felt, nor feared everlasting death, yet he both felt and
feared his fathers displeasure that causes it. 7. Imputation.
What impudency is this, Great unshamefastness in the confuter to charge the
Replyer to affirm that which he denies.
to use his own term (for I may call a spade a spade) to charge the Replyer
to affirm that which he instantly denies: let the charitable reader judge of
him in the rest, as he finds his faithful dealing here: when he quoteth any
place out of the Replyers books, not rehearsing the words, suspect the like
fraud. This false charge then of blasphemy, returns upon his own head, and
by the law of retalian and equality, he should be censured as a blasphemer,
for being a false witness therein against another.

2. The Replyer freeth Christ's soul from all kind of death of the soul,
which is either by sin, or damnation; though beside these, a kind of death
may be affirmed to have been suffered by Christ in his soul, Synops. p. 978.
in respect of the inward afflictions and perplexity which he endured,
wrestling even with the wrath of his father: yet he wishes this phrase of
speech to be forborne and discontinued; therefore he freeth the soul of
Christ in effect, from all kind of death of the soul properly so called.
Further, if it be blasphemous to say that Christ suffered some of the sorrows
and torments even of hell in his soul, what thinks he of that prophetical
saying of David, Psalm. 18. 3. The sorrows of hell have compassed me: and Act.
2. 24. he loosed the sorrows of hell: as the Latin interpreter reads: does
he also say, that these are blasphemous speeches? nay does it not come nearer
blasphemy, to deny Christ to have suffered in his soul for our souls, and
so to rob him of the most glorious part of his passion?

3. And does he count it also blasphemous, to say that Christ suffered the
inward afflictions of his soul? then he most blasphemously must charge the
Prophet David with blaspemie, Psalm. 88. 15.
who says in the person of Christ, Thy terrors have I suffered from my youth:
or as the Latin interpreter whom Augustine follows, terrores tui
conturbauerunt me, thy terrors have troubled me: For that diverse sayings in
this Psalm are prophetical, as that verse. 5. free among the dead. Augustine
confesses, who says also of this whole Psalm, in Psalm. 87.
Christi vocem, etc. Let us hear the voice of Christ singing in the prophecy.
Further, when the Prophet says, Isa. 53. 11.
he shall see of the travail of his soul: or, as the Latin interpreter,
because his soul labored: what other travails and labors of the soul were
these, then the spiritual and internal? And is he not ashamed to say, that
these inward afflictions are blasphemous, even by the Replyers own confession,
as reaching to sin and damnation: when as in direct words he freeth Christ's
soul from all sin and damnation: but not from inward afflictions. Further,
if all inward afflictions include sin and damnation, then he will fasten upon
S. Paul's soul sin and damnation: who confesses he had fightings without,
and terrors within: and so was not void of inward and spiritual afflictions.
This then is the issue, upon his own words, either to deny, that Christ
suffered the inward afflictions and terrors of the soul, which to him is
inglorious, in denying the most honorable part of his sufferings, or if he
did, that he incurred either sin and damnation, which to think were
blasphemous.

4. If to understand by nephesh, the soul, that is, the life, in that
prophecy of David, Psalm. 16. do breed all those supposed inconveniences;
then belike the Prophet David, in saying, Psalm. 88 3.
My life draws near to hell, gave way and occasion to Atheism, impiety,
blasphemy: for, he there calls it life, not soul: if those absurdities
follow upon the construction of the one place, it can not be avoided in the
other. Again, what an absurd consequent is it, that the immortality of the
soul should fall to ground, and so the Sadduces and Epicures be confirmed, if
it be not proved from this place? As though there be not many more places
pregnant in Scripture, to prove the immortality of the soul? And as for
justifying of old damned heretics, let him take heed, least by casting
Christ's soul into hell, the place of the damned, he make not a way for them
himself: Treatise of Banisters errors.
for two heresies there were, one that Christ's soul descended into hell, there
to suffer the pains and torments, August. haeres. 7^.
which the damned spirits abide: an other, that Christ by descending into hell,
delivered all which were there in torment: to these heresies they come nearer,
which affirm Christ's local de^cent in soul to hell, then they which deny it.

Then to return his own words: by this time I trust, every well disposed
Reader does see, how this your objection of blasphemy reboundeth upon your
own head, with shame enough: while he would set fire on an others tower, his
own brains are pasht out with Abimelech: and his serpentine objections are
devoured of a contrary serpent: His uncharitable charge, is discharged upon
himself: it no more hurts the Replyer, then the viper, that leaped upon
Paul's hand: and as Diogenes wittily said of one, whom he heard to rail upon
him: (...), let him also beat me being absent: so false calumniations shall
no more fasten upon the innocent, then blows upon him that is absent. And as
for these so improbable and unreasonable accusations of blasphemy, I may say
with the Orator; ^^cer. Phil. 14.
Opinor eum non tam fuisse sceleratum qui fingeret, nec tam furio sum qui
crederet: I did think he had not been so lewd to imagine them, nor so without
wit to believe them.

The Recrimination.
I am loath to set upon this (chafing Challenger) and to charge him in the same
kind: It is no small matter to lay upon any the imputation of blasphemy;
seeing the greatest sin in the world is called by this name. But seeing he
which provoke, is the beginner of the battle, and the defender does but take
the challenge, I hope the fault is the less, if I shall answer him in his own
kind, and beat him with the weapon, which he has chosen. It was a good
excuse, which Tullie uses in answearing Salusts inuectiue: Si mihi forte
offendimini, iustius huic quam mihi succensere debetis, qui initium introduxit:
If ye perhaps be offended with me, ye ought to be more justly incensed against
him, then me, because he began the quarrel.

1. His presumptuous speeches, and some of them tending to blasphemy, in part
are these: 2. b. p. 8. 2. b. p. 8.
I will comfort my self with that saying of our Savior: de bono opere
lapidor, I am stoned for my good work: what presumption is this, to compare
himself a sinful man, with the holy person of Christ; and his intemperate,
slanderous, railing, and uncharitable writings, with Christ's most heavenly
sermons and miracles?

2. He confesses that Christ loo^ed the sorrows of hell for himself: 2. b. p.
37. 2. b. p. 37.
then it must follow, that he was in the sorrows of hell before he loosed them,
whether he says in soul he descended: (for the knot must first be tied,
before it be loosed:) but this he himself in many places counts a blasphemy
to affirm: before blasph. 2. 3.

3. The word (openly) proves, that it was no triumph at all upon the cross:
for that conquest upon the Cross, was openly an overthrow, and therefore no
triumph. And again a little after: If Christ triumphed on the Cross, as you
say he did, it was according to the proverb: triumphus ante victoriam, a
triumph before victory. 2. b. p. 188. 2. b. p. 188.
What a derogation is this to the triumphant and victorious cross of Christ,
thus contrary to the Scriptures to say, that it was an overthrow, rather then
a triumph: seeing the Apostle thus witnesses, Hebr. 2. 15.
that he might destroy thorough death, him that had power over death, that is,
the Devil. If the Devil were destroyed by the death of Christ, then was he
conquered, and overthrown: how then did he not tremble to say, that the
conquest upon the cross, was openly an overthrow: and did not our Savior
himself say upon the cross, It is finished: what else was finished, but the
redemption of mankind, in delivering of mankind from the kingdom of Satan.
And was his heart so profanely carried with the spirit of derision, The
Confuter scoffeth at the triumph of Christ on the Cross.
to scoff at Christ by that usual proverb, triumph before victory: this is
a more heinous offense, then Ismaels was to scoff at Isaak. He may remember,
whom he scornefully calls Ismaelites: 2. b. p. 18. 2. b. p. 18.
Such an Ismaels trick shall he not find in all their writings: it were
better they were all set on a light fire, then that their pens should be
stained with such impiety. God mollify his hard heart, that he may in time
repent him of this so great iniquity.

4. As the thief was partaker of Christ's humanity, in suffering with him on
the crosse^ so he was partaker with him in all his deity: 2. b. p. 199. 2. b.
p. 199.
to this end he took upon him our humane nature, that we might be capable of
his divine substance: p. 203. ibid. p. 203.
if we should not communicate with Christ in all his glory, etc. we should be
no better then the wicked. 2. b. p. 205. ibid. p. 205.
What harsh stuff is this, and fit to be waighed in the balance of
blasphemy, See before Recrimin. err. 9.
that we shall be partakers of Christ's divine nature, as he was of our humane:
and so the Saints shall become Gods with Christ, as he was made man with us.

5. Resurrection is attributed by Peter, as well to Christ's soul returning out
of hell, as to his body rising out of the grave. 3. b. p. 38. 3. b. p. 38.
What a strange paradox is this? In the Creed we are taught to believe the
resurrection of the body, The Confuter has devised a new kind of
resurrection of the soul.
but the resurrection of the soul in the next world, was yet never heard of:
neither has Peter any such meaning: for that was raised of Christ, which
rested in hope: but it was his flesh (not soul) that rested in hope, Act. 2.
26. that is raised, which before was sown by death: but the body only was so
sown, not Christ's soul: both these propositions are S. Paul's: that which thou
sowest is not quickened except it die, 1. Cor. 15. 36. so also is the
resurrection of the dead: 24. it is sown a natural body, and is raised a
spiritual body. v. 44. How far now is he from bringing death upon Christ's
soul, (which could not be quickened in the resurrection, except it first died)
which he himself counts blasphemy.

6. Is there not a most plain distinction between the holy Ghost, The
confuter affirms a distinction between the holy Ghost and Christ, not in
person only, but in the divine nature.
who foretold, and Christ, who endured these afflictions; and that not in
person only (which is the point I stand upon) but in nature also, I mean his
diuiue nature, etc. 3. b. p. 94. Does he not here manifestly affirm, that
there is a plain distinction between the holy Ghost and Christ, not in person
only, 2. b. p. 94.
but in his divine nature? was this doting divine well advised thus to write?
What Macedonian heretic would have written more in disgrace of the holy Ghost,
then to say he is distinguished from Christ, even in his divine nature?

7. And as he deals with Christ himself, Error and arrogancy ascribed to
Peter by the Confuter.
the like measure he offers his servants, for thus irreuerently he writes
of Peter: you think all men to be unclean and impure in comparison of your
selves, which was partly Peter's error, Act. 10. 2. b. p. 107. 2. b. p. 107.
But does he speak as he thinks, had Peter such an opinion of himself, as
to think al men unclean and impure beside: Peter only held as yet them of
the uncircumcision to be unclean, not of any singularity of opinion, but
because it was not yet revealed to him.

8. Thus also he serves the Prophet David, David almost in hell, in this
profane Confuters opinion.
making him almost in hell: for that place, Psalm. 94. 14. If the Lord had not
helped me, my soul had almost dwelt in silence. This place of silence, he
ignorantly understands of hell. 2. b. p. 149. 2. b. p. 149.
yet falsely printed 159. But David elsewhere declares his hope, that he was
sure never to go to hell: when I awake I shall be satisfied with thine image,
Psalm. 17. 15. This holy Prophet now is much beholding to this (pragmatical
Nouelist) in placing him almost in hell.

9. The like censure he gives of that holy man Job, Job also in hell in his
profane conceit.
understanding those his word^ the grave (or hell says he) shall be mine
house, and I shall make my bed in the dark, Job. 17. 13. of hell: for the
grave is never called the place of darkness. 3. b. p. 152. 3. b. p. 152.
and herein he makes Job a figure of Christ's being in hell, p. 153. What
injury does this (unholy glossograph) offer to this holy man, who was most sure
he should never go to hell, thus professing his faith; I am sure my Redeemer
lives, etc. Job. 19. 25.

10. And to end where I began, with his hard usage, as toward the servants, so
against the Lord and master himself: these words of Peter, quickened in the
spirit, he applies to Christ's soul in this sense; that he was not made
alive in soul, but kept or preserved alive. 2. b. p. 85. 2. b. p. 85.
and alleges to this purpose other places, where the word is so taken:
Nehem. 9. 6.
as Nehemiah speaking of the heavens and earth, Iam. 1. 21.
says, thou preseruest them: and Saint James says, receive the word with
meekness, etc. which is able to save their souls. Now then, if Christ's soul
be said to be preserved alive in either of these senses, Christ's soul subject
either to corruption or damnation, by this profane Confuters words: a most
horrible blasphemy.
as in the first, then was it saved from death and mortality, and corruption,
as the heavens and earth are; and so the soul of Christ should not be
immortal of it own nature, but by special preservation: if he take it in
another sense, to be saved as our souls are, which is from damnation, then it
will follow, that Christ's soul was subject to damnation, as ours are without
him, and so had need of salvation: which way soever he says his soul was
saved alive, he must needs incur most horrible blasphemy. Here I may now
fitly apply Hieroms words uttered against Heluidius: aduers. Helvid.
Illud dico praeveniens, gloriae mihi fore tua maledicta, cum eodem, qu^ Mariae
detraxistiore, me laceres, and caninam facundiam servus domini pariter
experiatur and matter: This I say aforehand, that your railing will be a glory
unto me, when as you tare me with the same mouth, whereby you backbite Marie:
that both the servant of the Lord, and his mother, may together have experience
of your doggish eloquence. But I may say more, that the servant need not
think much to be slaundered, when as the Lord himself is blasphemed.

I am sorry in my heart (God is my witness) that this man was so far carried
in his uncharitable heat, as not only to break charity toward men, but to
violate piety also toward God: and let him remember what the Apostle says,
Hebr. 10. 31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. in Epist. ad
Roman.
Augustine has a severe sentence, Si quis per inuidiam opera diuina
blasphemat, quoniam bonis dei, hoc est, donis dei malitia sua resistit, in
spiritum sanctum peccare, and propterea spem veniae non habere existimandus
est: If any man through envy do blaspheme the works of God, because he by
his malice resists the good things of God, that is, the gifts of God, he is
to be thought to s^nne against the holy Ghost, and therefore to have no hope of
forgiveness. Let him therefore take heed, lest while he goes on, by envy
miscalling the gifts of God in others, counting the defense of the truth
blasphemy, he be not given over even to blaspheme the truth it self, and
the Lord of truth, and so endanger his own soul: he knows what the end of
blasphemers is: One may say unto him, Philip. 2.
as Tullie did to Antony, miror te, quorum facta imitere, eorum exitus non
perhorrescere: I marvel that you are not afraid of their end, whose doings
you imitate: and let him in time recall his words, and be sorry for the slips
of his pen; lest what he has erred in word, he pay for in deed: and for the
blots of his pen, feel the smart of punishment, according to that saying of
Theophylact: (...), what we have offended in word, we shall suffer punishment
for it in deed.

The 8. imputation of arrogancy.
The accusation.
1. BEcause the Replyer sometime sets down Synopsis in the margin,
referring the Reader to that book for brevity sake; 8. Imputation.
as treating how the article of the descension has been omitted in diverse
ancient Creeds: he adds, Synops. 1034.
as elsewhere is showed; he calls it in solent vanity, which I should wonder
at, but that I know (...) is always (...). 2. b. p. 175. 2. b. p. 175.
and in another place, arrogant vanity.

2. What arrogant presumption is this in a man of your profession, who should
be an example of humility, thus imperiously, if not sawcily, to check and
control all the learned of former ages, as if none of them knew the original
reading in this place, till you came this last day to teach them. 3. b. p. 114.
3. b. p. 114.


3. It does not become inferior persons publicly to check and control their
superiors for every private difference in opinion: such malepart sauciness I
leave to you, and such other whose common practice it is. 3. b. p. 101. 3. b.
p. 101.


4. Such is your ambitious humor, that all your geese must be swans, and every
one a present for a prince; in so much that you pitifully complain unto the
Kings majesty of the small reward that you, etc. have received, etc. 2. b. p.
103. 2. b. p. 103.


The justification.
1. ANd is it such insolent vanity for a writer, for brevity sake to have
reference to some of his former books; then he himself must go for an
insolent craker, that usually blotteth his margen, with making mention of his
first worthy treatise: as 3. b. p. 54. p. 55 p. 42. and in many places beside.
Does he think also Augustine an insolent man therein, who often has relation
to other of his works? De baptism. l. 2. cap. 1.
Noui quomodo soleat contristare lectorem, etc. I know how it uses to grieve
the Reader, when from the book which he has in his hand, when he falls into
any hard question, he is sent to another, where he may find the solution
thereof. As for his insolent terms of (...), and (...), he himself is both,
and (...), and (...) too, a lover of strife and contention. And yet it were
better to be (...), as the Replyer is not, then (...), as the Confuter is. And
for his objection of (...), Ad Rustic.
self love, Hieromes portraiture does show his lively image: Quidam, qui sibi
videntur scioli, pomparum ferculis similes prodeunt in publicum, vt caninam
exerceant facundiam: Some, which seem unto themselves to know somewhat, do
come forth in public, like messes of state, to exercise their doggish
eloquence. There is no such sign of self love, as when one does brave a bad
cause with insolent words, and bends his tongue and pen wholly to the
disgrace of others: for he which seeeth his own faults, will have no leisure
to pry into an others.

2. The occasion, which this (brauing bragger) takes, thus to set up his
bristles is, by reason of these words of the Replyer: how translatours do
interpret we are not so much to respect, as how the Original reads:
therefore because in the original Greek there is no word to express [were]
we are not bound to retain it. Limbom. p. 38. Is this any imperiousnes or
saucines to prefer the Original before all other translations? And have not
Arias Montanus, who leaves the verb out altogether, and Beza, who translateth
it in the present tense, according to the native sense of the participle of the
present tense, which is to be supplied, and the Geneva translators also,
followed that reading, which the Replyer prefers? And are these also for so
doing, saucie and imperious, as (this saucie fellow) seems to infer: who is
justly to be taxed for this malapertnes, Philippic. 10.
with those words of the Orator: Cur eos, quos omnes venerari debemus, solus
oppugnas: why dare you only impugn those, whom we ought all to reverence?

3. But who is he that checketh superiors for every private difference in
opinion? not the Replyer, who thus writes, that there are most reverend
learned men of both opinions. Limbom. p. 5. And how does he check the
judgment of superiors, in the exposition of that place of Peter, B. Bilson in
his first book.
seeing a reverend Prelate of our Church (as this arrogant Controller himself
confesses) did incline to that opinion of Noah's time: 3. b. p. 105.
how does he check authority, that consents with men of authority? But he
himself is the man, that controlleth superiors: who charge the great Bible
set forth by the authority and consent of all the Bishops of the land, 3. b.
p. 49.
with maintenance of blasphemy: as shall afterward be more fully showed in the
Recrimin. 6.
Recrimination. Indeed this fauning flatterer seems every where to insinuate
himself to authority, thinking under that pretense, to find passage for his
errors: as I fear me some in these days, speak in defense of the place of
Bishops, that hate the persons of Bishops. But in true love and reverence to
that honorable calling, the Replyer thinks great skorne to be compared with
such a painted Parasite, (to return his own term.) He may be thought to be
such a friend unto them, Dialog. 1. adv. Pelag.
as Hierome speaks of: Pulchre adulator apud philosophos definitur, blandus
inimicus: A flatterer is well defined among the Philosophers to be a fauning
enemy. And as he speaks of an other: Verba ei de alieno stomacho fluunt:
Hieron. ad Theophyl.
His words are framed to please other men's humors: he speaks not out of his
own heart.

4. As is the building, such are the props thereof: the accusation is here
salse, and the grounds thereof are untrue: for neither has the Replyer
dedicated all his books to the Prince, nor yet the third part of them: nor yet
does he in that place, which he misreciteth, complain of his small reward for
his books, but lays open the general complaint of students, and the common
vilipending of books. And does not he the same, complaining that books are in
so small request with many, Pref. to the 1. book. p. 5.
that they esteem them no otherwise, then gentlewomen do their fancy
flowers, which in the day time they carry in their heads, and in the night
cast at their heels: does he think himself also worthy to wear a goose
feather for thus writing. But as for the Replyers geese (for so he disdainfully
calls some of his books) they shall be able to compare with his supposed
swannes, which by the hissing may seem at the first to be swannes birds, yet
by the gagling, show, they were but hatched in a goose nest: for he is like
unto him, whom Hierom taxes, Pisoniano vitio laborat, cum loqui nesciret
tacere non potuit: he has Piso his fault, he knows not how to speak, and
yet he can not hold his peace. As the goose can not sing, and yet she will
always be gagling. Erasmus spoke it modestly of himself, but it may be truly
said of this intempestiue writer: Ad Rustic.
Multi hoc morbo laborant, mei similes, qui cum scribere nesciant, tamen a
scribendo temperare non possunt: many have my fault, who not knowing how to
write, yet can not refrain from writing. When he has cast all his cards, and
taken his accounts, and sees how little he has gained by thus writing, he
will beshrew himself, that he followed not Hieromes counsel: Ne ad scribendum
cito prosilias, neque levi ducaris insania: Do not hastily fall to writing,
and be not carried away with cockbraine fittes.

The Recrimination.
But seeing he puts the Replyer to it, to find out the arrogant spirit
indeed, who can not better clear himself of this injurious imputation, then
in returning it thither, where it shall find best entertainment: he shall be
set forth in his own colors, and by his own words I will sound the depth of
his high and haughty spirit.

1. I will ascend by degrees, and give in the first place the least taste of his
own proud humor, how disdainfully he carries himself toward the Replyer: he
obiecteth unto him, want of learning and judgment. 2. b. p. 46. 2. b. p. 46.
you unlearnedly mistake. 2. b. p. 101. 2. b. p. 101.
you impertinently and unlearnedly bring the example of Lazarus, etc. 2. b. p.
141. 2. b. p. 141.
how unlearned and erroneous is it, to distinguish the person of Christ, and
the Messiah. 3. b. p. 7. 3. b. p. 7.
And I pray you, who does so? he is more unlearned, that so imagines. Your
examples are impertinently and ignorantly alleged. 3. b. p. 67. 3. b. p. 67.
unlearnedly translated by you, preaches. 3. b. p. 107. 3. b. p. 107.
but himself wants learning herein, 5. Imput. of ignorance, iustificat. 3.
as is showed before. He takes exception also to the Replyers person and
degree: If you know no difference, etc. you are ill worthy of those school
degrees, which you have taken. 3. b. p. 161. 3. b. p. 161.
And to his books: one he calls a base pamphlet, 2. b. p. 19. 2. b. p. 19.
I had for a good space cast it aside into a corner, being in truth the
fittest place for it. pref. p. 4.

Such ignorance and want of learning it had been enough for this (Paidomastix)
to have objected to his schooleboyes. The Replyer, as he confesses his
knowledge not to be great, so he is sure, the others is less: it is a pitiful
thing, as one said, (...): when one that is not wise, Critias.
seems to be wise: and so it is, when one that is unlearned, does arrogate to
himself the name of learning. Tullie spoke sharply to Antonie, and yet but the
truth: Philippic. 2.
Implicata inscitia impudentia est, si nescit, quod augurem, nec facit, quod
pudentem decet: his encumbred inscience will prove but impudency, if he
neither know, what becomes a divine, nor do what beseems a shamefast man.
The Replyers Antonie may take this if he will, as spoken of himself.

Concerning his person and degree, as the Replyer does modestly acknowledge
himself unmeet for the same, so he sees no cause, why he may not be thought
as worthy thereof, as this brauing Pedantius, of his mastership: and he may
say unto him in Tullies words, without any great boasting: Non video, nec in
vita, nec in gratia, nec in rebus gestis, nec in hac mediocritate ingenij, quid
despicere posset Antonius: I see not, neither in life, nor in grace, nor in
exploits, nor in this mediocritie of wit, what Antonie has reason to despise.

As for the Replyers books, even the most vile and base of them (he doubts
not) but may compare with his most vainglorious writings: it had been good
indeed for him, if Limbomastix had been laid aside, for then this Paidomastix
had not shamed himself: and if a corner had been the fittest place for that,
I think his will prove as a bundle of rotten sticks fit for the fire: there
are some books, which though they avail not to virtue, yet otherwise do bring
some profit with them for knowledge; as Seneca says, Senec. lib. de studiis
liberal.
ad alia multum conferunt, ad virtutem nihil: Some there are, which though they
yielde no profit, yet show art and cunning in the framing of them; which may
be likened to the Spiders webbes, (...). Ariston.
which are very artificial, but nothing profitable. But this scholemasters
scribbling, in truth is of neither sort, the Reader shall find it neither to
edify for the matter, and much to offend in the manner: vt onerent Seneca has
discentem. de tranquillit. lib. 1.
legentem magis, quam instruant: they will cumber the Reader rather, then any
wise further him. But I will proceed, and show how by higher degrees his own
arrogance rises still, till it come to the height.

2. He charge Tremellius, that in his translation concerning the word sheol,
he dealt neither so ingenuously, nor so religiously as he ought. 2. b. p. 130.
2. b. p. 130.
His translation, of grave for hell, Psalm. 6. he calls false and foolish. 3.
b. p. 25. 3. b. p. 25.
Tremellius and Iunius reading, Psalm. 139. 8. is called false and immodest. 3.
b. p. 151. 3. b. p. 151.


3. Pagnine, Arias, and Tremellius translation, he calls false; adding, that
whose late error herein must not ouerrule the ancient truth. 2. b. p. 148. 2.
b. p. 148.


4. Beza, beside that every where rejecting his interpretation, he calls him
in scorn, your interpreter. 2. b. p. 171. and 3. b. p. 111. he further
charge him, by his interpretation to confirm the heresy of the Arrians. 3.
b. p. 15. 3. b. p. 15.


5. It is no marvel that he thus hardly censureth the private translations of
some particular men, when he spares not to condemn the public translations
of the Bible, The Confuters profane censure of the Geneua translation.
which are used among us: as first, beside his light regard of the Geneua
translation, calling them in scorn, your Genevian translators. 2. b. p. 131.
and 3. b. p. 27. he thus in most vile terms disgraceth them: For your Geneva
Bibles, etc. it is to be wished, and I trust, God will work it in his
Majesty's most religious heart, that either they may be purged from those
manifold errors, which are both in the Text, and Margent, or else utterly
prohibited. 3. b. p. 49. 3. b. p. 49.


6. Neither does he thus deal only with the Geneua translation, but even the
great English Bible also, authorized publicly to be read in the Church, cannot
escape his virulent censure: as 2. b. p. 48. 2. b. p. 48.
thus he says, I cannot conceal a foul and intolerable corruption, which is
lately crept into a late edition of our Church Bibles. And further thus
peremptorily he proceeds in condemning the said translation together with the
notes: for that diverse of your Geneuian notes, especially such as tend to the
maintenance of that blasphemy of hell torments in Christ's soul, are foisted
into the margent of the said The great Bibles printed 1595, 1583, 1591
Bibles, and some other before them: which you urge, as if they were the very
word of God, making them the pestilent premises of your blasphemous
conclusions. 3. b. p. 50. 3. b. p. 50.
he means the annotation, Luke 22. 24. The Church Bibles charged by the
Confuter with blasphemy.
he felt the horror of Gods wrath, and judgment against sin. and another,
Heb. 5. 8. being in perplexity, and fearing the horrors of death. Who can
endure such presumption, to hear our authorized Bibles charged with
maintenance of blasphemy, and pestilent premises of blasphemous conclusions.

But he goes on still in this his arrogant inuectiue, and takes not only
exception to the marginall notes, as 2. Cor. 13. 7. (wherein, though some
oversight might be committed by the Compositor in transposing some notes, he
had no reason thus sawcily to check and control the translation it self) but
further says, neither is the text it self free from error in translation: and
here he notes in the margin, 1. Co. 9. 21. where all the exception he can take
is to these words, The great English Bible defended against the cauillous
objections of the confused Confutor.
when I am not without law, as pertaining to the law of God: whereas in the
original, it is only, not being without law unto God: the Geneua translation
reads, as pertaining unto God: where who sees not, that in the one
translation, these words, as pertaining to the Law, and in the other, as
pertaining, are no part of the text, but inserted by way of explanation, and
should be written in other characters. But against that other place, Ephesians. 6.
12. I wonder with what honesty he can take exception, seeing it agrees
exactly with the original, better then the vulgar latin, which is such a
pearlesse translation in his eye: We wrestle not against blood and flesh,
says the English, as it is in the original; against flesh and blood, says
the Latin: against Princes says the Latin: against rules says the English,
not rulers, as some Bibles have: for the words are (...), against rules or
principalities, not princes or rulers.

7. From finding fault with translations, he ascends to carpe at the
original, saying, whether the Greek now extant be the true authentike
original or no, is the question: and he says further, it is not free from
corruptions in diverse places. 3. b. p. 14. 3. b. p. 14.


8. He goes on, and secretly taxes the fathers; as first Augustine, for he
counts it a badge of presumptuous singularity, and pernicious nouelty, to
reject the general confession (he means opinion, or exposition) of the
fathers. 2. b. p. 131. 2. p. p. 131.
And yet Augustine has a special interpretation of that place of Peter,
contrary to the current interpretation of most of the fathers of those times;
applying it to the times of Noah.

9. He meets also with Bernard, calling it absurd to apply descension to the
grave. 2. b. p. 155. 2. b. p. 155.
whereas Bernard makes direct mention of three descensions of Christ, Sermon.
part. 18.
ad carnem, Limbom. p. 49.
ad crucem, ad mortem, to the flesh, to the cross, to death, which is to the
grave: so that Bernard also must be content to wear his liuerie of absurdity.

10. Among these fathers may be numbered the reverend Prelates of the Church;
B. Bilson.
toward one of them yet living, a reverend writer, and public defender of
religion, he thus vaunteth himself: That whereas he seemed in the first book
to incline to that opinion in Noah's time (in the exposition of that place of
Peter) he is not so mislead with self-love and singularity, as you and others
are (though every way far his inferior) but has much altered his former
judgment, moved as it may appear, upon those reasons laid down by me, and
none but me, in the former book. 3. b. p. 101. 3. b. p. 101.
wherein, how unmannerly he uses so reverend a man, B. Bilson put to school
to learn of this ignorant Confuter.
who sees not? first, saying by way of comparison, that he is not so mislead
with singularity, etc. as though he should be somewhat mislead that way, but
not so much as others: secondly, he thinks he has his schoolboyes in hand,
and would put that deep learned father to school, to learn his lesson of
him: thirdly, his vanity appears, that he, and none but he, has hit upon
those reasons, which changed the Bishops mind; whereas in truth, he has
borrowed the most of his reasons and testimonies from the other, as may appear
by comparing their books together: fourthly, beside all this, it is untrue
which he says, for that reverend learned man is still of the same opinion,
concerning that place of Peter; for these are his words: Survey p. 676.
I bind no man to my private exposition of the Scripture, but rather stand on
those places, which have the full consent of all antiquity to pertain directly
to this matter. And again, I thought not fit to press them, when Augustine
had once resigned them.

11. But no marvel if particular fathers be thus taxed, when he spares not
whole Churches; as 2. b. p. 180. 2. b. p. 180.
in saying, The Oriental and Roman Church wanted this clause of Christ's
descension into hell, shows a defect in the^, no fault in the Apostles
Creed: But the truth is, there was neither fault in the one, nor defect in the
other, in the omission of that article then. Thus he prowdly makes the whole
Oriental and Roman Church defective, unless he will give Ruffinus the lie,
Cyprian. vel Ruffin. in Symb.
or Cyprian (for under both their names that treatise goes) who so affirms,
that the article of the descension was not added of old, neither in the East,
nor Roman Church.

12. He brings a scandal upon the whole Church of England, affirming, that
in the same there is dissension about substantial points of doctrine; for he
misliketh and condemns that defense of the Replyer against the objection of
the Romanists, A slander upon the whole Church of England.
wherein he affirms, that in the Church of England there is no difference in
any substantial point of faith: and concerning the descending into hell, given
in instance by the Iudasite, whom he confuteth, he answers, Antilog. p. 15.
that the difference is not concerning the truth or substance of the article,
but the manner. This answer this (sly fellow) rejects, 2. b. p. 89.
and would needs have protestants dissent in substantial, points of faith: for
(says he) the right sense and meaning of the articles of faith, is of the
substance: It is true that the substantial sense of an article is of the
substance, but the sense, which concerns the manner is not of the substance:
as the sense or belief of the articles, that the world was created, that
Christ was crucified, that the body shall rise again, are of the substance:
but how the world was created, and in what form Christ was crucified, and how
the resurrection shall be, belongs to the manner; and is of curiosity rather
to enquire, then of faith, And so likewise in the article of the desceusion,
that Christ descended, no good Christian denies, and that is of the substance;
but how he descended is a question, as every boy Logician knows, that
belongs to the manner.

13. As he thus disgraceth the Church, so he handles the whole state of the
common wealth; thus irreverently and seditiously writing of the honorable
assembly of the Parliament: speaking of Limbomastix he says, published, as the
only colorable mean, whereby to convey an appeal from his Majesty and the
Clergy, unto the Parliament, in behalf of himself and others: then it
follows, whereby such their Agents might work, Epist. ded. p. 10.
as he well kn^we were busiest in hindering the unity of the Church: A
slander of the Parliament house.
epist. dedicat. p. 10. In the which words, beside diverse untruths, as that the
Replyer conuayeth an appeal from his Majesty, whereas there is no appeal at
all: and it was not fit in the dedication to join his pearelesse Majesty with
his subjects: beside, from the Clergy there is no appeal, the spiritual
Lords being directly mentioned in the inscription of the dedicatorie: neither
does the Replyer make any appeal for himself at all, having no agrieuance (he
thanketh God.) Beside these manifest untruths, he most sawcily, and malepartly
(which are his own terms) nay mutinously, makes the honorable Senators of
the Parliament house, busy bodies, and hindrers of the unity of the Church:
which presumptuous speech, how that grave Senate will take, at such a light and
base Cornercreepers hand, I refer to their godly grave wisdoms to consider.

Thus in some particular and special instances, we have seen this
vainglorious Thraso play his part upon the stage: he spares neither new
writers nor old, in his proud censures, neither few nor many, neither
inferiors nor superiors, he gives them all the check mate: I may here use
Augustines words, Cernis quam tibi perniciosum fit crimen obijcere talibus,
Lib. ^. contra Julian.
and qua^ mihi gloriosum sit quodlibet crimen audire cum talibus: you see how
pernicious a thing it is to object a crime unto such, and how glorious unto me,
to hear of a crime with such. This shows nothing else but his own arrogant
spirit, thus to censure better men then himself: he speaks of one in his
rude discourse, whose books (in his opinion) the Replyer should not be worthy
to bear: but he himself has trampled upon some with his foul feet, whose
shoes for learning and piety, 9. Imputation.
he is not worthy to wipe. Aristotle is said thus to have taxed a proud young
man: O young man, I would I were such an one, as thou seem to thy self to
be; but such an one as indeed thou art, I wish mine enemies were. Plutarch
uses this handsome and fit similitude, The husbandmen do better accept, Lib.
de profect. virtu. sentien.
and more willingly behold those ears which hang down their heads; those that
stand upright they hold to be light and empty: so humility is a sign of
worth; but hautinesse and arrogance bewraieth lightness and vanity. And so I
end this place with that wise saying of Euagrius: (...): It is an unworthy
thing, that he which can perform little, should brag much. And as unseemly a
thing is it for this ambitious humorist, so to set others at light, that is so
empty himself.

The 9. imputation of Contradictions.
The accusation.
1. In that the Replyer makes this the question, that Christ descended not
into hell to deliver the Patriarchs: he says, you wound your self incurably.
2. b. p. 4. 2. b. p. 4.
for the former, which every Aristotelean knows, must of necessity be
granted, before you can dispute of the l^tter. 2. b. p. 3. 2. b. p. 3.
and so in effect, he charge the Replyer to affirm that which he denies,
the descension to Limbus.

2. That the Replyer does in other places as earnestly maintain it (that is,
Synops. p. 1017. 1018.
that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell for himself) as here you impugn it.
2. b. p. 37. 2. b. p. 37.


3. These words nephesh and sheol say you, do properly signify sometime (
soul) and ( hell) and do also properly sometime betoken ( life) and ( grave:)
they cannot properly signify both, being two distinct things. 2. b. p. 121.
2. b. p. 121.
in other places you contend, Synops. p. 999. 1005, 1006. etc.
that these words may in no wise be taken for ( life) and ( grave) but for (
soul) and ( hell) only: this is the certainty you keep.

4. You affirm, that no figure is to be admitted in these words soul and
hell, and yet you fall presently to figuring upon figuring. 2. b. p. 141.
2. b. p. 141. Hitherto you have borne us in hand, that soul does properly
signify ( life) and that no figure at all is to be admitted; and yet you here
affirm, that it is so taken by the figure Metonymia; what gross contradiction
is this? 2. b. p. 144.


5. Again, in another place you will needs have this word soul, not to be
taken (...) for the life, but (...) for the whole person. Synops. p. 1050.
2. b. p. 144. again you say, that soul is here taken for the whole person,
whereas a little before you contend by examples of scripture, that in this
place it signifies life. 2. b. p. 161.


6. In these two examples alleged by you, you grant that the particles ( not
and neither) do show a difference of the clauses and diversity of matter,
etc. because the greatness or littleness of a difference is but an accident,
etc. and thus in wielding the weapon against me, you wound your self with the
blow: And yet after you have yielded thus much, you presently revoke it,
compelled thereunto by the evidence of holy Scripture, and so convince your
self of falsehood, in condescending to a truth. 2. b. p. 163. 2. b. p. 163.


7. You contradict your self palpably, in calling that Limbus patrum here,
which you called before in se^ting down the question ( hell:) whereas you your
self affirm in express words, that Limbus patrum is no part of hell. 2. b.
p. 165. 2. b. p. 165.


8. Your self in the next page affirm directly, Limbom. p. 43.
that after that ( consummatum est) uttered by Christ upon the cross, his
glory, victory, and triumph remained ( unaccomplished:) wherein you do not
only grossly contradict your self in saying here, that Christ triumphed over
death, hell, and the devil upon the cross, but also derogate from his blessed
death and passion, etc. 2. b. p. 189. 2. b. p. 189.
the same contradiction is again objected, 3. b. p. 156. 2. b. p. 156.


9. You affirm in an other place, Synops. p. 1052.
that the thief made request to Christ as man, and not as he was God, etc. now
your self dare not defend your former opinion, but say, that Christ spoke this,
as he was the Messiah: wherein, as you delight in contrariety, etc. 2. b. p.
195. 2. b. p. 195.


10. Herein you contradict your self: for in the former ^ection you say, that
Christ is with us in respect of his Godhead, but we with him, as he is our
Messiah. 3. b. p. 9. 3. b. p. 9.


11. You contradict your self herein many ways, for before p. 9. you
acknowledge this reading (of the sorrows of hell) to be the true reading, etc.
how then can you say here, that Christ only suffered the sorrows of the first
death? 3. b. p. 25. 3. b. p. 25.


12. The Reader may see how unlearnedly you condemn that for an error in
Bellarmine (for saying, that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell for others, not
for himself) which your self defend for a truth. 3. b. p. 36.


13. We say not ( says the Replyer) that Christ's body felt sorrows ( in the
grave) but was under the sorrows or bands of death: and yet your self (
meaning the Replyer) in the former section, make it all one, to be under the
sorrows of hell, and to suffer them. 3. b. p. 36.


14. Your ( minor) or assumption contains gross error, and contradiction, in
that it implies David's soul to have been sometime in hell, because it was
not left in hell: 3. b. p. 40.
it is your own reason, Synops. p. 1017.
and indeed most true.

15. Your contradiction is, in that you say in your proposition, Synops. p.
1050.
that this prophecy (of David, Psalm. 16.) was wholly performed in Christ.
Again, in an other place you say, that this prophecy is so applied to Christ,
as it must first be true in David* upon which supposition you infer thus:
well then, first David's soul is in hell, and then it must be in the lowest
hell, etc. 3. b. p. 42.


16. You say the whole is a peculiar prophecy of Christ, not partly of him,
partly of David: and presently after, that this prophecy typically agrees to
David. 3. b. p. 42.


17. There is no more necessity here by flesh to understand the whole
humanity of Christ his soul and body, then in that place of S. Paul, Romans 1.
3. Christ was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, etc. if the
soul should necessarily be comprehended under the name of flesh, it would
follow, that Christ received his soul of the seed of David, and so anima
should be ex traduce. 3. b. p. 61. 3. b. p. 61.
And yet in an other place the Replyer speaking of the very same place, says:
Synops. p. 979. 980.
Here whole Christ is described unto us as God and man: the soul then of
Christ is comprehended under the name of flesh, or else it is excluded, and so
the Apostle should set before us an imperfect Christ. 3. b. p. 62. 3. b. p. 62.


18. You contradict your self herein in justifying that for a verity (
because the Replyer says, to what purpose rather should Christ be thought to
preach to the spirits in hell, then for their comfort?) which you condemn a
little before for a most gross heresy: namely that by Christ's descending into
hell, 3. b. p. 77.
the incredulous persons believed.

19. You grossly contradict your self in an other place, where you affirm,
that the doors opened, and gave way unto Christ, Synops. papism. p. 526.
when he entered: and yet you say here, that they were shut in the very instance
of his entrance. 3. b. p. 118.


20. In every place you defend, that by prison in this place (of Peter) hell
and the infernal place of darkness is to be understood, and do you now recant
it, and bring us an other signification of sins and errors? 3. b. p. 122.


21. The Replyer says, having cited that place of the Prophet David, Psalm.
139. 15. (thou have fushioned me in the lower parts of the earth) I trust they
will not say, he was borne in hell. 3. b. p. 134. 3. b. p. 134.
And yet in the first testimony, you (that is, the Replyer) bring S. Ambrose
to prove, that by these very words of the Prophet David, we ought to
understand Christ's descending to hell. 3. b. p. 140. 3. b. p. 140.
see the same contradiction urged, 3. b. p. 183. 3. b. p. 183.


22. Bearing us in hand, that Bernard acknowledges no further descension of
Christ, then to death, etc. and yet in an other place you are driven in the
end utterly to forsake and reject him, (as one carried away with the error of
his time) in thinking that Christ in his soul after death went locally down
into hell. 3. b. p. 149.


22. In the former place you say, that Bernard goes not beyond Christ's death,
nor finds any further degree of descension after that: and yet that he makes
here one degree, to be his descending to the grave: for I am sure, that you will
not say he was buried, before he was dead. 3. b. p. 160.
3. b. p. 160.

23. Before in this place you will needs have the lower parts of the earth, to
be meant of the cross, death, and grave: 3. b. p. 170. 3. b. p. 170.
and yet here you say, that the parts of the earth are not compared with it
self, but considered as parts of the world, 3. b. p. 163.
in respect whereof, they may be called lower or lowest parts. 3. b. p. 163.
And again: to descend to the lower parts of the earth, is to descend from
heaven to earth: and yet other where you defend, that ( by descending into the
lower parts of the earth) is meant Christ's descension to death and the grave:
so that you do here notably contradict your self, unless you make this world
to be all one with death and the grave. 3. b. p. 173.


24. You told us before, that there is none of the ancient fathers, which
speaks of the descension of Christ's soul to hell, but adds withal, that
it was to this end, to deliver the souls of the fathers from thence: 3. b. p.
193.
3. b. p. 193. and yet you say; neither did all the fathers agree in judgment,
that Christ descended into hell, to redeem the souls of the fathers. p. 190.
3. b. p. 190.
what truth can there be in your words, when you thus blow hoate and cold with
one breath. 3. b. p. 193.


25. You change me before to have misalledged (Calvin) for Christ's descension
into hell in that place of Peter, whereas you allege him here your self to
the same purpose. 3. b. p. 195.


The justification.
1. THis (Contradicter) has found out a new kind of reasoning, never heard of
before: that in a proposition, where two questions are included together, the
second can not be denied, before the former be granted. As, the question
being, whether Christ descended to ( Limbus) to deliver the fathers: The
Contradicters new Logike.
one (in his logike) can not deny, that he descended to that end, unless
first he grant, that he descended to Limbus: by the same reason, he that
says, that an Idol must not be bowed unto to worship it, does grant, that it
may be bowed unto, but, not to that end: and he which holds, that the
Scriptures must not be abused to enchantment, confesses, they may be abused,
but no to that end: or it is not lawful to swear falsely by the creatures, as
the heaven, the earth, therefore it is lawful to swear by them, but not
falsely: which indeed was the doctrine of the Pharisees, Math. 5. 33. but our
Savior reaches the contrary, that it is not lawful to swear at all by any
creature. And what thinks he of this proposition, It is not lawful to swear
to the Pope, to assist him inuading the land, before the King: does it follow
therefore, that it is lawful to swear to the Pope, so that it be not to that
end?

And may not this argument be returned upon himself: Christ descended not to (
Limbus) to deliver the Patriarks: I think he will deny this proposition, then
he must grant by his own consequent, that Christ descended to ( Limbus.)

Indeed in an affirmative proposition it holds: as it can not be confessed,
that Christ descended to Limbus to deliver the Patriarchs, but first it must be
granted, that he descended to ( Limbus) but in the negative it is not so.

2. The Replyer in that place groundeth his argument upon the Latin text, that
Christ loosed the sorrows of hell, showing that seeing he loosed the sorrows
of hell for himself, they could not be the sorrows of the local hell: for he
felt not the sorrows of hell after death: Synops. p. 1017.
and here he says, he was never in the sorrows of hell after death: here is
no contradiction at all. If he can find any place, where the Replyer
affirms, that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell for himself after death, he
will grant a contradiction: but to say, that Christ loosed not the sorrows of
hell for himself after death, and yet that he loosed the sorrows of hell for
himself, are not contradictorie, but do implie, that he speaks of other
sorrows of hell, which Christ loosed, then those after death: seeing then he
speaks not of the same sorrows of hell, there is no contradiction, and that
this Cauiller knew right well.

3. As though the same Hebrew word may not properly signify two distinct
things, contained in one general sense: as gez, signifies any thing that is
cut, and therefore some translate a fleece, Psalm. 72. 5. as the Latin, and
Montanus: some, the mowne grass, as Vatab. Iun. because they both use to be
cut. Bellar. lib. 4. de Christ anim. c. 12.
And concerning this word nephesh, his great Master confesses, significat sine
vllo tropo, tam animam, quam animal, immo etiam corpus: it fignifieth without
any trope, as well the soul, as the living creature, yea the body: these I
hope are all distinct things: yea this (palterer) confesses, that it is one of
the words (...), and that it signifies all those three things given in
instance by Bellarmine, lib. 2. p. 159. 160. lib. 2. p. 160.
But that the Replyer says, these words, are taken for the soul and hell
only, is a manifest untruth: Synops. 1005.
for in the place quoted, he confesses in direct words, A great untruth.
that in some places, the soul is taken for life, but contendeth, that Isa.
53. 10. it is properly taken for the soul.

4. The Replyer, when he says these words do properly signify life, and the
grave, speaks of the Hebrew words, nephesh and sheol: when he says, that the
soul is here taken (...), for the life, he means this word, Englished soul:
like as anima in Latin indifferently signifies, the soul, or life: therefore
this is no contradiction to say, that the Hebrew nephesh, sometime signifies
life, without a figure: as, Levit. 17. 14. the nephesh, the life of all flesh
is his blood: it were improper, to say, the soul of all flesh: and that the
Englished and translated word soul, is not taken for life, without a figure:
for this trifler confesses, that the Hebrew word nephesh, is more general in
signification, Bellarm. ibid.
then either the Latin word anima, or the Greek word (...), as his Ringleader
confesses, of whom he borrowed it: and yet either of these are more large, and
general, then the English word, soul.

5. The Replyer in that place, does not so much as use that term (...):
Synops. 1050.
he both there, and in other places alleges that, as a reasonable and fit
exposition, to take soul for the person: but he rather prefers the other
sense, to take soul, for life: Limbom. p. 9. to bring two probable
interpretations of a place, as indifferent to be received, and of the two to
prefer the more likely, is no contradiction.

6. To deny, that not, and neither, do not always show two distinct clauses,
and that sometime, they argue no great difference or diversity, he that says
they are speeches contrary, shows himself to be contrary to reason:
unless he thinks there is no difference, between a plain distinction, and
a small diversity: has he so much forgotten his Logike, that he knows not
diversa to be defined, which dissent only in some reason, and respect: and
opposita to be such as differ, re and ratione, both in respect, and in deed
and effect. And whereas the Replyer says, be it admitted that these particles
do infer a distinction in the sentence, etc. does he revoke any thing? is he
so blind, that he can not discern between a simple assertion, and that which
proceeds upon a supposall and conditional grant. But what new wine had
intoxicated his brain, when he let these words fall from his pen, You
presently revoke it, and convince your self of falsehood, in condescending to a
truth: The blind confuter counts it falsehood to condescend to a truth.
I thought it had bin simplicity rather, and integrity, to condescend to a
truth, and not falsehood: if this be falsehood to condescend to a truth, then it
is simplicity and plainenes to contradict the truth. This may be the reason,
that he is so adverse to the truth, it is one of his virtues: but such falsehood
to yield to the truth, God send me, and let him take his plain dealing to
himhimselfe: whosoever has the blow, I am sure he has the wound, and feels
the smart too: as the Orator says, Luculentam ipse plagam accepit, vt declarat
cicatrix: Cic. Philipp. 7.
he has received a sufficient venie, as the scarre declares.

7. The Replyer in that place, Limbom. 43.
says out of Augustines judgment, that Abraham's bosom is no part of hell, he
names not Limbus: it seems he himself has a conceit that ways, in making
Abraham's bosom, and Limbus all one. But for his own opinion, the Replyer
thinks that Limbus patrum, is neither part of hell, nor of any place else, no
more then Purgatory is: yet he is not ignorant, but that his great Master,
makes it a member of hell. So then the question being propounded in the
Romanists sense: to say sometime Christ descended not to hell, and otherwhile
that he descended not to Limbus to deliver the fathers, is no contradiction.

8. The Replyers words are these: Limbom. p. 17.
his glory, victory, and triumph only remained: so that, he fraudulently
puts in ( unaccomplished) of his own. The Replyer says, that Christ
triumphed over death, hell, and the devil upon the Cross: that is, the
victory and triumph was then obtained: and yet his glory, victory, and
triumph remained; that is, it was not yet manifested, and published: for this
word triumph, though it properly signify, the public solemnity that
follows after the victory: as the Roman Captains had their honorable
triumphs publicly solemnized in the City after their victorious return: in
which sense he that so triumphed, was called (...), a triumphant man: Plutark.
yet in Scripture they are said to triumph, 2. Cor. 2. 14.
that do overcome, as Paul says; Thanks be to God, which always makes us to
triumph in Christ: where the same word is used: (...), triumpho.
and yet the glorious and proper triumph of the Saints, is in the kingdom of
heaven. As Christ now triumphs in his members, in prevailing, and
ouercomming: so he triumphed upon the Cross, in obtaining the victory. And if
any derogate and detract from the blessed death and passion of Christ, it is
this Contradicter and detracter: who a little before said, that Christ's
conquest upon the Cross, was openly an overthrow, and therefore no triumph.
And again, If he triumphed on the Cross, See before, Blasp. recrim. 3.
it was a triumph before the victory. 2. b. p. 188.

9. And are these speeches, to make request to Christ, as man, and as the
Messiah, contrary? is there in them any contrariety at all? are the manhood
of Christ, and the person of the Messiah contrary? or when it is said as man,
is he so absurd to think, that Christ is considered as man without his
Godhead, and not as united with it in the person of the Messiah? or when,
himself says: that the thief made request to him as God, does he mean, his
Godhead without his humanity. And is S. Paul contrary to himself, when not
in diverse, but in one and the same place he joins both together, there is one
God and Mediator, between God and man, the man Jesus Christ, that is, the
Messiah? Does not the Replyer in direct words expound himself: that these
words must not be understood of the presence of Christ in heaven, in respect
of his Godhead only, but of his whole person, as the Mediator? But it may be
he took this exception, because he enclineth to his cousin germans opinion,
that Christ exercised his mediatourship as man only, not as both God and man:
Bellarm. lib. 5. de Christ. anim. c. 1.
and therefore notes this as a contradiction and contrariety.

10. It is not the former sect. which is the 16. but the 15. sect. where the
Replyer says, we are said to be with him as the Messiah: and does he not say
the self same thing here? for having rehearsed those words of our Savior,
Ioh. 17. I will that they which thou have given me, be with me where I am: and
then follow the other words, that they may behold my glory which thou have
given me: he adds in very direct words, Does he not here speak also of that
glory, which was given him as the Messiah? How could then this humorous
Contradicter so much as dream of any contradiction here: but it seems his
wits went a woole-gathering, when he noted this; for in the next sentence
before, in stead of confuting the Replyers reasons, he repeateth and confirms
them: for whereas the Replyer brought this as one: if Christ, saying (where I
am) speak of his Godhead, his request was even then fulfilled, for his
Apostles were with him then present as God. 3. b. p. 5.
3. b. p. 5. This co^fused Confuter steppeth forth, The wise Confuter reasons
against himself.
and says; secondly, if they were with him as God, then was Christ's prayer
unto his father in vain, to grant them that which they presently enjoyed. 3.
b. p. 9. 3. b. p. 9.
Is not this the very same reason urged before by the Replyer, to prove that
Christ speaks not of his Apostles being with him as God; for could he not
see, how upon his words it may be assumed: but Christ's prayer unto his father
was not in vain, therefore he prays not, they should be with him as God.
And thus he hampereth himself, and wounds his own cause.

11. It is untrue, that either in that place, Limbom. p. 9. or in any other,
the Replyer acknowledges sorrows of hell, Act. 2. 24. to be the true reading:
he only thus says, the hell that Christ went unto, he loosed the sorrows of,
Act. 2. 24. which place he cites, not for the name of hell, but for loosing
of the sorrows: because even in the Confuters opinion, that which is called
hell, v. 27. is named death, v. 24. And the Replyer is so far in that place
from justifying that reading of hell in the 24. verse, that he would convince
by this reason, that hell is not meant, no not in the 27. verse, because it
would then follow, that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell there, which had
seized upon him. As untrue it is, that the Replyer in that place goes about to
prove, that Christ suffered the sorrows of hell (in his sense) but rather
declineth it as an absurdity. Synops. p. 1017.
But in another place he infers that conclusion, grounding his argument upon
the latin text, which the Romanists make their only authentike translation;
and therefore it is a good text against them.

12. To say that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell (the place of the damned)
for himself, the Replyer counts it absurd; and yet to say that the sorrows
of death, which Saint Peter speaks of, and Bellarmine reads (hell) were not
loosed for Christ, is contrary to the text, as there he shows by diverse
reasons: hereupon no contradiction can be inferred, but this follows, that
the death which Saint Peter speaks of, the sorrows whereof were loosed for
Christ, cannot be understood of hell.

13. That it is all one to say that the soul is under the sorrows of hell,
and does suffer them, being full of sense and feeling; and yet that it is not
all one, for the body in the grave, to be under the sorrows and bands of
death, and to feel or suffer them, because it is senseless, implies no
contradiction.

14. Not to be left in a place (the word being taken properly for to be
forsaken) implies a being first in the place; Synops. p. 1017.
and in that sense the Replyer thus reasoned: Christ was not left or forsaken
in hell: ergo, he was in hell: but in this other place, by not leaving, he
understands not being: but the not being, or leaving of the soul in hell,
etc. And so is the word sometime used, as Ioh. 14. 17. I will not leave you
comfortless: that is, you shall not be comfortless: for otherwise, in the
other sense of this word it might be inferred: Ergo, they were comfortless,
but were not so left or remained. And so in a certain place Origin takes the
not leaving in hell, Tract. 35. in Math.
for the not being in hell: sine dubio neque nostras animas derelinquet in
inferno, etc. without doubt (as he left not Christ's soul in hell) so shall he
not leave our souls in hell, etc. and he which called him from hell after the
third day, shall also call us in due time.

15. 16. To say that this whole prophecy of David was only historically true
of Christ; and yet typically agreed to David, (...).
is no contradiction: has he so forgotten his Logike principles, The Confuter
has forgotten his Logike.
as that he remembers not that every contraritie and opposition must be
secundum idem, and ad idem, in regard of the same part or place, and in one and
the same respect? But where the Replyer infers, first David's soul is in
hell, he reasons ex concessis, because the Romanists do hold that David's
soul, with the rest of the fathers was in hell.

17. It is evident by the reason here set down concerning the original of
Christ's soul, which cannot be said to be ex traduce, to be derived by
propagation, as the body is, without great inconvenience, and in a manner
impossibility, that the Replyer reuersed his former judgment, concerning the
exposition of the word flesh, Romans 1. 3. that howsoever in some other places it
is taken for the whole nature of man, consisting of soul and body, yet it
cannot be so taken there, for the former reason: And herein the Replyer
follows Augustines judgment, Aug. lib. quest. 83. quest. 80.
who against the Apollinarists, that held Christ only to have taken humane
flesh, without a soul, grounding their error upon those words, Ioh. 1. The
word was made flesh, abiecteth that place of Scripture, all flesh shall see the
salvation of God, and the like, where flesh comprehends the whole nature of
man: yet against Felicianus the Arrian, which asked the question, why the
habit of the son of God might not animate Christ's flesh in stead of a soul,
reasons after this manner; that if Christ took not also an humane soul, one
of those four must follow, it was either for that he thought the soul of man
to be innocent, but that could not be, because sin is voluntary, and so
incident properly to the soul: or that it belonged not unto him, which also is
otherwise, seeing God is the creator of souls: or for that he could not heal
the soul, the^ should he not be omnipotent: or because the soul was abject
and vile; Cont. Felician. Arrian. lib. 1. c. 13.
but that is not so, as he adds in the same place to this effect: that the
flesh was not formed by the breathing in of God, Carnem non inflatu Dei, sicut
animam, sed de limo terrae constat esse plasmatam.
as the soul was, but of the slime of the earth. Here then is no
contradiction, but a reuocation, or qualification rather of his former opinion,
concerning the interpretation of one word in one place, which the Replyer
takes to be no disgrace unto him, having altered his mind therein, before
this cauiller found it out; seeing he himself affirms the like (but
untruly) of a Reverend Prelate of this land, 3. b. p. 101.
that he retracted his judgment in a waightier matter, in the expounding of
that difficult and obscure place of Saint Peter. This is the only place which
he had any color of reason to object.

18. The Replyer affirms not out of his own opinion, that Christ preached in
hell to the disobedient spirits, for their comfort; but he urges it as an
inconvenience which follows upon their interpretation, that say, that Christ
went and preached in hell: and the same absurdity is pressed by Augustine
epist. 99. what gross blindness then is this in him, not to discern when the
Replyer delivers his own judgment by way of position, and when he presses
the adversary, by way of objection?

19. The doors were shut up in the very instant of Christ's entrance: that is,
not only before, but at that very instant, when Christ began to enter: and yet
the doors opened and gave way to Christ, when he entered: here is no
contradiction; for first it is said, in the instant of his entrance, that is,
he found them shut when he began to enter: then it is said, when he entered:
that is, while he was going in: is it not evident that a difference of the
instant time is here noted; one, wherein he found the doors shut, being to
enter: the other succeeding, when the doors opened, as he entered: it is lost
time that is spent with such a trifler.

20. The Replyer still without altering of his judgment, understands by
prison in that place of Peter (hell:) yet he produces expositions of some of
the fathers, which by prison understand, the bands of sins and errors, out of
the which the prisoners were delivered; to show that herein, though not in
every point they make for the Replyer, understanding the delivering of
prisoners, of preaching to the living for their conversion, not to the dead, as
the Confuter does: Is there not here now great contradiction?

21. The Replyer alleges the testimony of Ambrose, that so expounds the
lower parts of the earth, of hell, not to that end, but only to show, that he
understands Christ's descension to hell, of the presence of his divine power
there. 2. b. p. 12. Is it necessary when a testimony is produced to one end,
that whatsoever is contained there beside, should be acknowledged: Then he
himself cannot avoid it, but he must needs go for a maintainer of Limbus,
for he brings in Ambrose, 3. b. p. 169. and Augustine, and Origin, p. 193.
affirming the same; as appears by their testimonies, as he alleges them:
such measure as he meateth, shall be measured to him again.

22. To affirm that Bernard in one place finds no further descension of
Christ, then unto death; and yet that in another, being carried away with the
error of those times, he holds the descension of Christ's soul to hell, is no
contradiction: neither would this (iangling sophister) have thought so, if he
had remembered the laws of opposition and contradiction, whereof I touched two
before; secundum idem, and ad idem: where, as he failed in the latter, (I
affirming Dau. prophecy to be true of Christ one way, i. historically, and of
David another, i. typically: and therefore it was without any contradiction:)
so he fails here in the other, because Bernard is said to affirm diverse
things, but not (...), in the same part and place.

23. As though, when Bernard makes the third degree of descending to be
admortem, unto death, his descending to the grave be not there employed: for
otherwise, he descended not from the cross to die, for he yielded up his
spirit upon the cross. And this Bernard shows, by the words following;
nunquid amplius potuit? Behold how far he descended, could he do any more?
but if he meant nothing else but his death upon the cross, excluding the
grave, our Savior Christ both might have done more, and did more for us, not
only in dying, but in being buried for us.

24. And does not the descending of Christ to the cross and grave, include
also, and imply his descending to the earth? unless you think that his cross
and grave was not in the earth: thus much also the Replyer noted, foreseeing
and preventing this objection; the other two expositions (that is, of Christ's
descending to the earth, and then to the cross and grave) may well agree and
stand together, and he that affirms the one, denies not the other. Limbo. p.
52. These two then were two degrees of Christ's humiliation and descension, his
taking upon him the form of a servant, and being obedient to the death of the
cross, as S. Paul observes, Philip. 2. 7, 8.

25. The Replyer says again, that there are none of the fathers which speak
of Christ's descension to hell, but held it was to that end to deliver the
fathers: and yet some of the fathers differ in judgment, for they hold that
place where the fathers were, not to have been any part of hell, but Paradise;
as Origin, Chrysostom, Augustine: is here now any contradiction? for they
which hold the Patriarchs to have been in Paradise, and not in hell, speak
not of Christ's descension to hell, but to Paradise, to illuminate the fathers.

26. What a strange fellow is this, to say that I allege Calvin my self, for
the same purpose for which he alleged him; namely, to prove the local
descension into hell: whereas I allege Calvin, Beza, and Iunius to the
contrary. 3. b. p. 191. 3. b. p. 191.
Limbom. p. 59. Thus has this busy body troubled himself to spy faults,
where he could find none. Such Seneca compares to the restles Ants, Lib. 1. de
tranquil. vitae.
quae in summu^ cacumen, deinde in imum aguntur: which creep up and down upon
trees from the top to the bottom, and find no resting place. (...).
And Aristo in Plutarke, to the winds, which do uncover our garments, which of
all other are most troublesome. Plutar. lib. de curios.
Such are they which hunt up and down to seek others disgrace, and to uncover
their nakedness, not being able to hide their own uncomeliness: Augustine
does fitly resemble the envious man, O inuide vermis mortifere, qui in hedera,
Ionae quotid ie nasceris: ad frat. in erem. ser. 18.
to the worm which did breed in Jonas gourd; so still he gnaweth upon others
credit, and fretteth at their well-doing* and where he cannot overcome with
wrestling, seeks to supplant by fraud: and as Augustine says, Aliorum
gloriam facit suam poenam, Makes another fame his own ^ane: as shall now
appear in the returning of this accusation.

The Recrimination.
1. This Contradicter finds fault with the Replyer, as though he should say,
that eternal continnance in them, is not of the essence and nature of hell
torments. Synops. p. 1014. 3. b. p. 77. 3. b. p. 77.
whereas he only says, the inseparable adjuncts, and necessary members of
hell are these: 1. the place, which is infernal. 2. the time, which is
perpetual. 3. the darkness, unspeakable: And he himself confesses as
much, whose ( that is, of hell) inseparable adjuncts, are utter darkness, 1.
b. p. 3.
and endless pains.

2. He says it is Iudaisme to apply the prophecy of David, Psalm 16. to any,
but to our Savior Christ. 3. b. p. 41. 3. b. p. 41.
And yet he himself grants, that the prophecy of the ascending of Christ,
and leading captivity captive (which is as peculiar to the ascension of Christ,
as the other concerns his resurrection) is literally spoken of King David
himself, etc. but prophetically meant of Christ our Savior. 1. b. p. 57. 1.
b. p. 57.


3. He says that the Creed was made and composed by the Apostles themselves.
2. b. p. 182. 2. b. p. 182.
but else where he says, it was made either by the Apostles themselves, as the
ancient fathers do think, or by Apostolic men, as all divines confess. 1.
b. p. 5. 1. b. p. 5.
If it were made by Apostolic men, then not by the Apostles, which he
certainly affirmed before.

4. Having recited that place, Psalm. 6. 4, 5. O Lord deliver my soul, for
(...) death there is no remembrance of thee: who shall give thee thanks in the
pit: which word, he whom he confuteth translateth hell: he thus infers; by
the which last word all our late interpreters; both latin and English, do
with one accord understand the grave, as being the ordinary sequel of
temporal death. 1. b. p. 12. 1. b. p. 12.
Here he understands in this place temporal death, whereof the grave is an
ordinary sequel: and yet in the next page following, he affirms the
contrary; wherefore ( death) in that place cannot signify the separation and
dissolution of the soul from the body, which is only temporal: but the
diuorcement and sequestration both of body and soul from God. 1. b. p. 13. 1.
b. p. 13.


5. Neither can this word (grave) signify any other place, then the place of
corruption, and mortality. 1. b. p. 12. 1. b. p. 12.
And yet the word avad, Psalm. 88. 10. which the Septuag translate (...), the
Latin, in sepulchro, in the grave, he says is meant of hell. 3. b. p. 28. 3.
b. p. 28.


6. Who shall give thee thanks in the pit? Psalm. 6. 5. by which last word, all
our late interpreters do with one consent understand the grave, etc. which can
signify no other place, then the place of corruption and mortality. 1. b. p.
12. 1. b. p. 12.
And again, no English translators turn ( sheol) grave, in this place, but
pit, which most fitly and truly agrees to hell. 3. b. p. 26. 3. b. p. 26.
thus in the same place, the same word shall signify both the grave, and hell.

7. He fondly reprooueth the Replyer, for running from the new Testament to the
Old, and from the Greek to the Hebrew. 2. b. p. 120. 2. b. p. 120.
you well perceived the Greek was utterly against you, and therefore
cunningly, but cowardly you forsake it, and fly to the Hebrew. ibid. p. 121.
2. b. p. 121
yet he himself does the same: which to be so in this place, if you will
grant the Hebrews to have had any skill in their own natural language, you
must needs confess. 1. b. p. 16. 1. b. p. 16.
Is it lawful for him to have recourse unto the Hebrew writers, and a fault in
the other to run unto the Hebrew Scriptures?

8. Now if you take exception (says this Contradicter) against this reading,
as mistranslated in all our Bibles, which I see not by what right you can do,
being publicly authorized.) 1. b. p. 26. 1. b. p. 26.
and 2. b. p. 130. 2. b. p. 130.
he calls it an authorized translation: yet he himself most scornefully
rejects the great English Bible authorized publicly to be read, as has
been showed before, Imputat. 8. recriminat. 6.

9. He finds fault with the Replyer, for translating (...), tell him his
fault, as the Geneva translation, and great Bible reads: 2. b. p. 67. 2. b.
p. 67.
and yet he himself translateth the same word, Ecclesiast. 19. 10. 13.
(...), tell thy neighbor roundly of his fault. ibid. p. 71. 2. b. p. 71.


10. He says, that faithful perseverance in piety, is the final possession
of the land of promise* 2. b. p. 113. 2. b. p. 113.
and yet else where he denies, that the true joys of heaven may be in this
world. 2. b. p. 207. 2. b. p. 207.
for if a man by faithful perseverance, has in this life a sure hope, and by
hope possession of heaven, how has he not some true sense of the joys thereof?

11. That sheol was always taken to signify hell only: 2. b. p. 119. 2. b.
p. 119.
and yet else where he confesses, that the same word, Psalm. 6. 5. translated
the pit, is taken for the grave the sequel of temporal death. 1. b. p. 12. 1.
b. p. 12.


12. He reads thus, Exodus 21. 23. He shall pay life for life, not soul for
soul. 2. b. p. 14. the Hebrew word is ( nephesh) which in an other place he
says, was always taken only to signify soul. 2. b. p. 119. 2. b. p. 119.


13. In that the Replyer says, that the glory, victory, and triumph
remained, (that is, the manifestation and accomplishment of it) after Christ
had said, Consummatum est, it is finished: this Contradicter says, you do
greatly derogate from his blessed death and passion: for if he obtained not
victory over those enemies upon the cross, then are they yet unconquered, and
consequently man's redemption unperformed. 2. b. p. 189. 2. b. p. 189.
And yet a little before he denies, that Christ triumphed upon the cross: for
that conquest (says he) upon the cross, was openly an overthrow: and again,
so that if Christ triumphed upon the cross (as you say he did) it was
according to the proverb, a triumph before victory. ibid. p. 188. 2. b. p. 188.
who could imagine, that he should have such a sihttle and crazie brain: as in
the compass of ten lines to affirm and deny the same thing.

14. It is the Obiecter, not I that so takes it, that is, the soul (...) for
the whole person: and yet a little after, forgetting himself, he says: I
grant that the word soul, being joined with the body, may be taken for the
whole person. 2. b. p. 143.


15. Whereas the Replyer understands those words of S. Peter, that Christ
shall be the Judge of the quick and the dead, 1. Pet. 4. 5. of those which are
now dead, but shall be alive at the coming of Christ: he thus friuolously
obiecteth, that then we must correct an article of the Creed: and say, that
Christ shall come to judge the quick, and not the dead. 3. b. p. 71. 3. b. p.
71.
And yet afterward, within two lines he says, as the dead shall be living
then, so the living now, shall be then dead: where beside his absurdity and
contradiction to Scripture, that the living now shall be dead at Christ's
coming, whereas the Apostle says, that the living shall not prevent them that
sleep, 1 Thessalonians 4. 15, 16.
etc. and the dead in Christ shall rise first: he crosses himself, in
altering and changing the article after his own fancy: that Christ shall be
Judge of the dead and quick.

16. He says that these words of Origene, do they not read, what is written
of their hope, that perished in the flood, 1. Pet. 3. can not convince him of
that most gross heresy recorded by Augustine: that some thought, by Christ's
descending to hell, the incredulous persons believed, and all were delivered
thence. 2. b. p. 76. 2. b. p. 76.
And yet he himself charge Origene in the next page following, with a more
gross heresy; that he thought the very damned in the end should be saved
themselves. ibid. p. 77. 2. b. p. 77.


17. He would confute the Replyer for defending, that the true joys of heaven
may be perceived in this life. 2. b. p. 207. 2. b. p. 207.
and yet he says, that Paul being rapt into the third heaven, beheld the very
essence of God. 2. b. p. 205. 2. b. p. 205.
I hope then he saw the true joys of heaven: and S. Paul at that time, had not
resigned this life.

18. The Saints shall not see God so perfectly, as he is visible in himself.
2. b. p. 204. 2. b. p. 204.
And yet afterward he says: they shall see him in plain manner, and in
perfect measure. ibid. p. 205. 2. b. p. 205.
thus they shall see him perfectly, and yet not perfectly.

19. None of his elect are with him, during their abode in this life; otherwise
what meant S. Paul to say, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, if
he were with him without dissolution, etc. 3. b. p. 4. 3. b. p. 4.
yet in an other place, he misliketh that saying of the Replyer: that Christ is
said to be with us in respect of his Godhead, etc. but we are said to be with
him, as our Messiah: as S. Paul says, I desire to be dissolved and be with
Christ: he calls this assertion, (...): 2. b. p. 198. 2. b. p. 198.
and yet in the other place approoueth the same himself.

20. What shall the simple and unlearned do, when they hear those Bibles,
which have been allowed by public authority of this Realm, and openly read
in our Churches these 46. years, to be condemned by some Ministers and
Preachers among us, for false, erroneous, and injurious to the word of God,
etc. 3. b. p. 46. 3. b. p. 46.
And yet he himself charge the same Bibles with errors in the text, and with
blasphemy in some of the annotations. 3. b. p. 49. 3. b. p. 49.


21. He says, that Noe was no preacher at all in any other sense, then all
other godly men are, namely in doing the works of righteousness: 3. b. p. 109.
3. b. p. 109.
and yet a little after it follows: with this construction the Latin word
praeco, used by all translatours in that place, does most fitly agree: which
does properly signify him, that makes open proclamation of a thing, as an
Herald or trumpetter: as Alexander called Homer the trumpetter or sounder out
of Achilles prowes. ibid. p. 110. 3. b. p. 110.
If Noe were in this sense a proclaymer of righteousness, as Homer was of
Achilles valor, it was not a mute and dumb, but a vocal proclayming and
preaching thereof: which he denied before.

22. You will never prove, that there was any other descension but this: he
means the descension into hell, whereof he spoke immediately before. 3. b. p.
155. 3. b. p. 115.
And yet afterward he confesses two descensions: descensions of Christ in the
new Testament are none mentioned, saving these two only. ibid. p. 157. 3. b.
p. 157.
he means the descension from heaven to earth, and from thence to hell.

23. Those words of the Prophet, ( in thy presence is fulness of joy,) Psalm.
16. 11. are not meant of the Godhead of Christ, but of the glory, which his
manhood was to receive at his resurrection. 3. b. p. 165. 3. b. p. 165.
here he confesses, there was glory due unto Christ as God; and glory, which
he received as man: but else where he denies, that there was one kingdom (that
is, glory) due unto Christ as God, an other, as he was the Messiah. 2. b. p.
201. 2. b. p. 201.


24. He says, that there is a plain distinction between the holy Ghost, etc.
and Christ, not in person only, etc. but in nature also, I mean his divine
nature: 3. b. p. 95. but afterward, he better remembering himself, says: I
distinguish only the person of Christ from the holy Ghost ibid. p. 96. 2. b.
p. 96.


25. He says, man's perfect redemption was purchased by his precious death upon
the cross. 3. b. p. 155. 3. b. p. 155.
And yet in an other place, he thus writes: our whole and entire freedom was
wrought and effected by our Savior Christ's descention into hell, and not only
by his death and passion. 3. b. p. 143. 3. b. p. 143.
how could therebe a perfect redemption upon the cross, without a perfect
freedom?

26. You dissemble the Apostles words immediately following in the same place,
let us proceed by one rule, etc. And yet within a few lines after, he
confesses thus: you speak I grant of this proceeding by one rule, etc. 2. b.
p. 12. 2. b. p. 12.
If the Replyer speaks of it, how then does he dissemble it?

27. He denies that Christ had a kingdom (that is, power, authority, glory)
belonging to him as God, and an other, as he is God and man. 2. b. p. 201. And
yet these words he has in an other place: those words of the Prophet repeated
by the Apostle (thou will show me the ways of life, etc.) are not meant, as
you mistake them, of the Godhead of Christ, etc. but of that glory, which his
manhood was to receive at his resurrection and ascesia^, 3. b. p. 165.
He here manifestly affirms, that there was glory due to Christ as God, and
an other glory due to his manhood. But by the way he himself grossly
mistaketh the Replyer: for those words he refers not to the Godhead, but to
the soul of Christ: for these are his words: to say that Christ's soul did not
enjoy his fathers presence in heaven all the while it was absent from the
body, is contrary to the Scriptures, (thou will show me the ways of life,
etc.) 3. b. p. 162.

Thus this impure imputation of contradictions is returned also upon the
Contradicters own head. The Scribes and Pharisees showed themselves more wise,
who were ashamed to cast one stone at the adulterous woman, Job. 8.
being guilty themselves. And this contentious brabler should have been
better advised, then to object difference and contradiction unto others, seeing
he agrees no better with himself. That was a wise saying of Theophr^^stus to
a young man that blushed: (...), Be of good cheer (says he) for virtue has
such a color. If this bold outfacer of others, had first blushed at his own
faults and ouersights, it had been more commendation to him. Lib. 2. Offic. c.
8.
Ambrose says well: An eum putabo idoneum, qui mihi det consilium, qui non dat
sibi, and mihi eum vacare credam, qui non vacat sibi: shall I think him meet
to give me counsel, that can not give himself, or that he can find leisure
for me, that has no leisure for himself: that is, to find his own faults.
It had been good, if first he had viewed the ruins and droppings thorough of
his own house, before he had surueied an others. The contradictions which he
has dispersedly in his contentious plea obtruded, do rather show the humor
of contention in the wrester, then the spirit of contradiction in the writer.
Greater advantage a man can not lightly have against his adversary, then the
Replyer in this vain accusation against his ( Contradicter:) to whom in that
behalf that saying of the Orator against Antonie most fitly agrees, as if it
had been first spoken of him: Philippic. 2.
Tam eras excors, vt tota in oratione tecum ipse pugnares, vt non modo non
cohaerentia inter se diceres, sed maxim disiuncta and contrariae, vt non tanta
mecum, quanta tibi tecum esset cont^^ti^: were you so witless, that thorough
your whole discourse, you were at odds with your self: so that you did not
only utter things not hanging together, but most different and contrary, that
you were at greater strife with your self, then with me?

Imputat. 10. of the pretended falsification of his words.
The accusation.
1. He cutteth off those my words, (much less in heaven, where there is fulness
of joy) which follow immediatley, and contain part of my reason, etc. 2. b. p.
37. 2. b. p. 37.
and 3. b. p. 36. 3. b. p. 36.


2. You conceal my meaning, 10. Imputation.
and corrupt my words: for it is the obiecter, not I, that so takes it
(namely, the soul for the whole person.) 2. b. p. 143. 2. b. p. 143.


3. You cut off all the first part of my sentence here enclosed, (it is a
general axiom of Theology among all divines,) etc. thereby to cover your
legerdemaine, least the Reader should see (to your shame) your contemptuous
reiection of one common received axiom in divinity, etc. 2. b. p. 120. 2. b.
p. 120.


4. You clippe my words in the latter: and thus ancient, godly, and learned
fathers have expounded it. 3. b. p. 6. 3. b. p. 6.


5. What dishonest dealing is this in you, first to corrupt my words, and then
to affirm, that I make no opposition between Christ and David, save only in
incorruption, resurrection, and ascension. 3. b. p. 41. 3. b. p. 41.


6. You clippe my words, in leaving out the Antecedent, whereof this reading is
a consequent, etc. 3. b. p. 58. 3. b. p. 58.


7. After your wonted manner, you misreport my words, etc. for these my last
words, (turning the humane soul of Christ, first into his divinity, etc.) are
not as I make them any part of that period, where I blame the obiector for
confounding the persons of the Trinity, but are referred to his contradicting
of himself. 3. b. p. 96. 3. b. p. 96.


8. Where do I affirm, (that by the lowest parts of the earth, hell is
always signified) but that it is your custom always to charge me falsely. 3.
b. p. 140. 3. b. p. 140.


9. It is denied ( say you) that Christ's descension in soul to hell, does more
set forth his love and favor, then his cross and passion: you are still
forging one falsehood or an other against me: for where do I affirm any such
thing? 3. b. p. 148. 3. b. p. 148.


10. My words are not in that place, as you report them. 3. b. p. 150. 3. b. p.
150.


11. You still detort and deprave my words, as if you had been hatched in the
nest of the Harpies, etc. the indifferent Reader may see, that I do not
attribute the victory to Christ's descension into hell, but to his blessed
passion on the cross. 3. b. p. 154. 155. 3. b. p. 154.


12. Thirdly it is untrue, when you say, that I make but one degree of Christ's
exaltation, for I speak only of his ascending into heaven. 3. b. p. 161. 3.
b. p. 161.


13. Lastly, touching the Greek article ((...)) I do not precisely affirm,
as you untruly make me, that it does particularize, and distinquish the parts
of the earth, etc. 3. b. p. 171. 3. b. p. 171.


14. You still misreport my words, and pervert my meaning, I speak in that
place of the diverse glosses, which those of your opinion make, of this
descending of Christ, etc. 3. b. p. 175. 3. b. p. 175.


The justification.
1. Whereas the Replyer urges these words of the (Confuter) S. Peter
mentions sorrows which were loosed at Christ's resurrection, etc. thereby
inferring that the Confuter in these words implies Limbus patrum; because
those sorrows (of hell) were not loosed for Christ, but for others: to what
purpose should he allege that impertinent addition, much less in heaven,
where there is fulness of joy? for the question is, for whom those sorrows
were loosed: I think, he will not say, for any that were in heaven: there is
then no injury done unto the Confuter, in the omitting of those words: the
Replyer should have had more advantage in setting them down.

2. The Obiector indeed first says, that the soul by a synecdoche is taken
for ( me:) but the Confuter also has these very words, the state of the
question is not, whether the soul joined with the body, may be taken (...),
for the whole man living (in which sense it can not be denied, but it is taken
in diverse places of Scripture.) 1. b. p. 7. The Replyer then corrupts not his
words, but the (Refuter) denies his own words: and that word (...), is
only used in that place by himself, not by the Obiector.

3. The whole sentence is this, ( it is a general axiom in Theology among
divines) that the words of holy writ are always to be taken and understood,
according to their native and proper signification, but only when there
follows some manifest and apparent absurdity: what fraud now or legerdemain
is there in omitting of the first clause, which is but a flourish to the
sentence, no substantial part thereof? The Replyer was not bound to rehearse all
his idle words, but such as were material to the purpose. But the legerdemaine
that here is, is found only in the Confuter, who falsely charge the Replyer
for rejecting of this axiom, whereas he admits it: and upon that ground
proves these two points; that the words ( sheol and nephesh) do sometime
properly signify, the ( life, and grave) and if they did not, yet by reason of
the absurdities and inconveniences ensuing, a figurative sense of those words
should be acknowledged.

4. To what purpose should the Replyer have added that clause, and thus
ancient learned, etc. seeing the Refuter only names certain fathers in the
margin upon this point, as Augustine, Euthimius, Damascen, but produces not
their testimony; for the hunts-man loses but his labor in tracing the hare,
unless he find her sitting in her form, or can find her out by her sent:
and as wearisome a thing it is to follow the fathers in the large field of
their writings, the particular places being not noted.

5. True it is, that the Confuter makes a double Antithesis between Christ
and David: a general between their persons, in these words, thou will not
leave my soul in hell (as he reads:) and a particular, in his incorruption,
resurrection, and a scension: which last (the Refuter) calls the true
antithesis: The Replyer then had no reason to make mention of that general
antithesis, 1. because he speaks of the true antithesis: which the Refuter
himself says, does consist in those three points before mentioned: and this
he affirms, not only in his simple text, but in his frivolous marginall
notes, that herein the true antithesis consists, between Christ and David,
in his incorruption, resurrection, ascension. 2. Neither will his general
antithesis help him, which he says is not between the soul of Christ, and
the soul of David, but between their persons. 1. b. p. 19. But the Replyer
gives an instance in the soul of David, that it neither was at all in hell,
nor yet left there, as likewise Christ's was not; and therefore therein the
antithesis was not.

6. The whole place is this: ( if by flesh you understand the humanity, and by
spirit the divinity,) you must read the text thus: Christ was mortified in his
humanity, etc. What needed here the needless repetition of this frivolous
antecedent, seeing the very sum and substance of the objection is expressed?
the Replyer labored for brevity, to comprehend much in few words; not to
speak much, and say little as the Refuter does, who by loathsome prolixitie
wearieth the Reader, that he should not see his vanity.

7. The Refuter charge the obiector directly with two things together,
ignorantly to contradict himself, and erroneously to confound the distinct
persons of the Trinity: and both these he shufleth up together: and do not
those words, you turn the soul of Christ first into his divinity, etc. in his
collection, as well show a confounding of the persons, as contradiction?
Therefore the Replyer summing the objection together, missed not an hairs
breadth of the (Refuters) meaning, if he understood himself.

8. And where does the Replyer charge him so to say directly? his words are
these: It is evident that the answerer more boldly then truly says, that by
these words (the lowest parts of the earth) hell is always signified: for
unless he be able to prove that, he does but trifle. Is it not evident by
these words, that the Replyer charge the Refuter by a disjunctive speech,
that either he must say so, or he does but trifle?

9. Neither does the Replyer affirm that he says so, but whereas the
Confuter sets forth the greatness of the love of the Prince, in not
disdaining in his own person to go down into the prison, where the captives
were: the Replyer denies (as a consequent of this assertion) that the
descension to hell should more have commended Christ love, then his death and
passion: for if the comparison be not between Christ death, and descension, it
is impertinent.

10. To what end should the Replyer trouble himself and his Reader with
setting down all his frivolous words: if there were any silver or gold in
them, or matter of worth, they might be delivered by number, and weight: but
being as they are, full of droffe, I thought it best to refine them, and not
to take refuse and all. I appeal unto the indifferent Reader, if the very
sense of his long periods be not exactly kept, though all his words are not
given by tale. And he himself is the man, that mis-reporteth his own words:
for whereas in the first book he said, here is a plain opposition of the
personal motions of ascending and descending: now he says (to mende the
matter) here is a plain exposition, etc.

11. These are the Refuters own words: The conquest was not obtained and
effected by his coming down from heaven, nor yet by his incarnation, etc. but
by his passion on the cross, and his descension to hell: wherein now are his
words depraved? does not likewise the Replyer, in propounding his objection,
join both his cross, and passion, and his descending to hell together? But
seeing he ascribes Christ's victory jointly to both these, is he not ashamed
to say, he does not attribute this victory to Christ's descension to hell, but
to his blessed death and passion? And does he not elsewhere say, that our whole
and entire freedom was wrought and effected by our Savior Christ's descension
into hell, and not only by his death and passion upon the cross. 3. b. p.
143. 3. b. p. 143.
There is then no other Harpy here but himself, that scratcheth his face with
his own nails: he need to fear no other talents but his own, to use the
Orators words; Philip p. 2.
Number expectas, dum te stimulis fodiam, haec te, si vllam partem habes sensus,
lacerat, haec cruentat oration: Do you look while I should gore you with
pricks: if you have any part of sense, this ( your own) speech does tear and
wound you.

12. The very words of the Refuter are these: His ascending being but one
exaltation, proves inuincibly, that this descending was but one humiliation.
1. b. p. 58. 1. b. p. 58.
whence the Replyer infers, that he makes but one degree of Christ's
exaltation: The first is his own assertion, without any mis-reporting; the
other is a collection upon his words, without any wresting: for in saying his
ascending was but one exaltation, he says in effect, that his exaltation was
but one (namely his ascending) and so consequently there should be but one
degree of his exaltation. And as by descending, he understands generally the
coming down of Christ from heaven, unto the lowest point of his humiliation:
and not for the local descension only to hell: as appears by that opinion
which he confuteth, of them which understand Christ's descending into the lower
parts of the earth, of his descending from heaven to earth: so by ascending in
this opposition he must understand the whole return of Christ from the lowest
point of his humiliation, unto heaven again: for that there were not many
debasements in Christ's descension, is proved (says he) by the contrary
motion of ascending, which was but one exaltation, etc. who sees not, by this
inference, that as he denies many debasements (i. degrees) of Christ's
humiliation, so he denies many degrees in his exaltation.

13. The Refuters words at large are these: The article (...), added here to
the words ((...)) which is not always expressed in the Greek, but commonly
when it is put ((...)) to particularize some singular or special thing,
seems here plainly to distinguish the parts of the earth in general, from
those notorious infernal parts. 1. b. p. 58. Now the Replyer abridgeth the
objection thus: the article ((...)) added here does particularize and
distinguish, etc. Is here any untruth? seeing these are his own words, seems
here plainly to distinguish: what great difference is there between
distinguishing, and seeming plainly to distinguish: that term of affirming
precisely, is his own, and not the Replyers.

14. The Refuters words are these: his ascending being but one exaltation,
proves inuincibly, that this descending in like manner was but one
humiliation. 1. b. p. 58.
1. b. p. 58. The Replyer reports them thus: his ascension being but one
exaltation, proves that his descending likewise was but one humiliation: for
ascending ( he has) ascension, for (in like manner) likewise: and leaves out
inuincibly, the omitting whereof, if it make any thing at all, is against the
Replyer. Is he not ashamed now to cry out, that his words are misreported?

Now this false accuser of falsification, Prou. 14. 5. (...).
what has he gained, but the reproach of a false witness? the Scripture
says, that a faithful witness will not lie: if he had dealt faithfully,
Hieron. ad Pammach. aduers. Ioann. Hierosolym.
he would not have forged such an untrue and unjust accusation. Hierom well
says, Testimonium pro se, nec Catoni creditum: that, no not Cato was credited
in his own testimony. And this Refuters accusation has no other ground but
his own surmise, AEsop. (...).
and bare word. He said well, that being asked what advantage came by a lie to
him that made it, that they shall not be believed when they speak the truth.
And I doubt not, but this fabler shall find the less credit with every
judicious Reader, having so often failed in his accusations. There was an a
uncient law among the Romans, that he which told a false testimony, Qui
falsum testimonium dixerit, vinciatur apud eum, in quem dixerit. Senec. declam.
lib. 5.
should be cast in bonds with him against whom he spoke it. And this reward
shall this false witness have, that he himself, as bound and entangled with
his own false accufation and slander, shall be delivered up to the party
innocent and accused, as shall now appear in the returning upon his head his
own suggestion.

The Recrimination.
1. This falsifier himself thus mis-reporteth the Replyers words, and
peruerteth his meaning, that whereas he thus writes; Some would have all
purged, not the superfluous humors only, but some profitable parts, etc. And
then a little after it follows: But the better sort, desire neither with
Herodicus nothing to be purged, nor with Heraclitus, all things to be euacuated
and purged: but rather approve Hippocrates method, that what is evil may be
purged, the rest to be comforted and strengthened. And afterward alleging
that place of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 5. 7. concerning the old leaven and new lump:
he adds, we would not, the leaven, Preface to the Antilogie.
lump of dough, and all to be cast out; but the lump to be renewed, the old
sower leaven to be rejected. Now see how this (perverse mis-construer) plaieth
his part: But the better sort ( he means himself, and such other) think
that there (be superfluous humors) which have need to be purged, that the
(new sweet) lump (of their laicall prosbyterie) has need to be renewed, and
the old sower leaven (of our Ecclesiastical policy) to be rejected. 2. b. p.
20. 2. b. p. 20.
where beside the addition of all those words enclosed in the parenthesis, he
charge the Replyer, against his own conscience, and contrary to the words of
the Replyer, as being an enemy to the Ecclesiastical policy; who a little
before, in the same place, makes the calling of reverend pastors and Bishops
in it self, one of the profitable parts of the church.

2. Whereas the Replyer thus writes, We rejoice to hear of your honors
Christian consultation for the propagating of the gospel, in planting every
where of good pastors, that the people may be brought from darkness of their
ignorance, to the light of knowledge, that they be no longer children in
understanding, and as babes and sucklings in religion. Epist. dedicat. to
Limbom. He thus corrupts his words: Our people of England (says he) for
want of good Pastors (such as himself) live in darkness and ignorance, are
children in understanding, etc. 2. b. p. 21. 2. b. p. 21.
making the Replyer to speak of the people of England in general, whereas he
means only such places, where good Pastors are wanting, and the word not
preached, where the people cannot choose but be ignorant, and as children in
understanding, as God he knows. But it seems, that this enemy to Gods
glory, and the peoples salvation, could be contented, they should live in
ignorance still.

3. The Replyer reads; But we do all hope, that this your honorable Session
shall rather deserve to be so called: the Falsifier adds, But we (the
wel-willers of Sion) do all hope, etc. 2. b. p. 24. 2. b. p. 24.


4. Thus also he makes the Replyer to write: (that all Ministers that cannot
preach, may be removed, and such Ministers provided in their rooms, (as
heretofore for their zeal and diligence have been excluded) which have store
of milk in their breasts, 2. b. p. 24.
and which seek in peace, and in a good conscience to nourish the people of
God (being like babes ready to star^e for want of such Nurses.) All these words
enclosed, as the Reader sees, are added by the Falsifier.

5. The Falsifier thus forgeth: that he (i. the King) acknowledges the Roman
Church to be our mother Church, it is (says Limbomastix) a foolish conceit,
and imagination. 2. b. p. 28. 2. b. p. 28.
The Replyer thus writes; a foolish conceit and imagination it is, that Rome
should be the mother Church, and Nurserie of all the world: where there is no
reference at all to the Kings Majesty, neither are the words as he repeateth
them: for it is one thing to say the Roman Church is our mother Church, in
respect of the antiquity of the place; See before Imput. 2.
because the Roman faith and religion (before it yet declined) did spread into
these western parts: and another, that it should be our mother Church, as it
now stands corrupted in religion: it is one thing to say it is our mother
Church, another, that is the mother Church, and nurserie of all the world.

6. The Confuter thus forgeth: does it follow, because I say it ought to be
translated, to the spirits which were, and not which are in prison, that
therefore they were in hell, and are not, I deny your argument. 2. b. p. 39. 2.
b. p. 39.
whereas he leaves out this other part of the Replyers argument, or else he
strives about words.

7. He imagines the Replyer to say, that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell
for others (detained in hell) and that to think otherwise is very absurd. 2.
b. p. 42. 2. b. p. 42.
whereas the Replyer so affirms, not out of his own judgment, but urges
the Confuter with that inconvenience: and concerning the inference of
absurdity, these are his words, and not as he repeateth them; I think he is
not so absurd, as to think he loosed them for himself, who was never in the
sorrows of hell after his death. 2. b. p. 36. 2. b. p. 36.


8. You affirm some Popish books to have been written by Protestants, 2. b.
p. 54.
whereas these are the Replyers words, There are books abroad maintaining
offensive doctrine, Preface to the Antilog. p. 9.
too much declining to Popery.

9. The Replyer says, Antilog. p. 15.
Durand maintains contrary to the opinion of the rest: but he thus falsifieth
the place; Durand maintains an opinion contrary to (all) the rest: where
(all) is added, 2. b. p. 190.
and the order of the words inuerted.

10. You grant, that these two particles ( not) and ( neither) do show a
difference of the clauses, and a diversity of matter, 2. b. p. 163.
whereas these are the words of the Replyer; here these two negatiues ( lo,
lo,) are used, and yet there is no great difference in these two clauses, etc.
nor they show no great diversity of matter: he sets it down negatiuely, and
the other repeateth his words affirmatively.

11. His glory, 2. b. p. 189.
victory, and triumph remained ( vnacco^plished:) this word (unaccomplished) is
added of his own.

12. That Christ has 2. kingdoms belonging unto him, one as he is God, 2. b.
p. 201.
and another as he is God and man: but these are the Replyers words, that
kingdom whereof Christ promises to make the thief partaker, 2. b. p. 194.
is not that kingdom which belongs to him as God.

13. The sorrows of hell or death, 3. b. p. 33.
had fastened on Christ: but the Replyer has, the sorrows, of death and the
grave.

14. You most grossly ouerreach your self, so prophanly and unchristianly to
censure the^, (i. the fathers) to prepare the way to a most gross heresie^ 3.
b. p. 76.
whereas these are the Replyers words, rather this sense of the place, to
interpret it of the descending of Christ to hell, where the disobedient persons
and unbelievers were, gives way, and opens a most wide gap to a most gross
heresy. 3. b. p. 71.
He does not simply charge the fathers, or any other, but speaks only by way
of comparison.

15. Your books ( says the falsifier) should be in so base esteem of all
hands, that many would not vouchsafe the reading of them, etc. nay that the
labors of your sacred wit were only used to beautify walls: 3. b. p. 103.
whereas the Replyer only has, books were grown into such small request,
etc. and the labors of sacred wits ^he speaks not of his own books: for
he (thanked be God) had no cause to complain of his own, which he doubts
not but will live in the memory of the world more years, then his shall
months or days.

16. The Replyers words are these: this phrase is neither strange nor unusual
to say, that Christ went in spirit, or the spirit of Christ went, seeing Noah
went in the spirit of Christ: 3. b. p. 103.
which the Confuter corrupts thus: Christ went in spirit: that is, says he,
Noah went in the spirit of Christ: and yet he denies, that he corrupts the
words: whereas he leaves out this clause altogether: or the spirit of Christ
went* which the Replyer insiste^^ upon: making these in a manner all one; that
Christ's spirit preached in Noe, and Noe preached in the spirit of Christ. 3. b.
p. 98.


17. It follows not (say you) Christ died not the death of the soul by sin
or damnation, Ergo he can not be said to have died in soul* 3. b. p. 84.
But the Replyer has, can not be said ( any ways) to have died in soul:
which words (any ways) he clippeth off.

18. He charge the Replyer to say, that many of the ancient fathers affirm,
that Christ was crucified in his soul: 3. b. p. 93.
where he clippeth off the Replyers words which immediately follow, that he gave
his soul a price of redemption for our soul. Synops. p. 1008.
So he says not that many of the fathers affirm the first, wherein Ambrose
only is produced: but both must be put together.

19. The Replyer says: this article of the present tense, being here to be
supplied, and the sense not enforcing a change of time, 3. b. p. 113.
does rather give to be translated are, then were. The falsifier clippeth off
all that clause: ( and the sense not enforcing a change of time:) and
repeateth the words thus: because you make a difference between the sense of a
word (expressed,) and a word (supplied:) not making any mention, of the
enforcing of the sense: and therefore all these 14. examples produced by him,
wherein the necessity of the sense enforces a participle of the time past, as
Matthew. 1. 36. 2. 25. 5. 40. They that (were) with him: and so in the rest, are
impertinent: for the sense does necessarily give, that it must be understood of
the time past.

20. The Replyers words stand thus: does he think, that these disobedient
spirits were in hell, and are not? if he do not, 3. b. p. 113.
he trifleth: for the word (were) will help him nothing. Now comes this
deceitful forger, and thus turns the sentence: whosoever thinks, that
those disobedient spirits were in hell, 3. b. p. 119.
but are not, is a trifler: whereas the Replyer says the contrary: if he do
not ( think so) he is a trifler.

21. He charge the Replyer thus to say: that the bodily death of Christ was
not sufficient for man's salvation: yea, that his bodily sufferings made not
properly to our redemption: 3. b. p. 156.
and because his forgerie should not appear, he confusedly shuffleth diverse
places together in the margen, Synops. p. 979. 980. 1000. 1003. 1046.
quoted out of Synopsis: in the which, no such words can be found. 3. b. p. 980.
The Replyer says: Christ's blood we confess, in Gods omnipotency to have
been sufficient to redeem us, though but one drop had been shed, but it so
stood not with the decree and purpose of God. p. 1000. By one part the rest are
signified, for if blood be taken strictly, then Christ's flesh is excluded, and
beside his blood, there issued forth also water: all these were necessary
parts of Christ's passion, p. 1003. We ascribe the redemption of our body and
soul, equally to the sacrifice of his body and soul. Again, it is not
affirmed, that the compassion of the soul with the body* did not properly
belong to our redemption simply, but to that redemption, which was to be
wrought by the soul. Who sees not, how shameless this Cauiller is, to charge
the Replyer to affirm that, the contrary whereof he maintains?

12. Your self make three descents of Christ: to the cross, to hell, to the
grave: and yet beside these, you make three more in an other place: 3. b. p.
162.
whereas the Replyers words are these, Bernard makes the same degrees of
Christ's descension, which we do, his descending to the flesh, to the cross,
to the grave. 3. b. p. 159.
He calls them not three descents, but three degrees of his descension. Now
may not his own words with better reason be returned upon his own head: If
you know no difference between descension, and the degrees thereof, you are
ill worthy of those school degrees, which you have taken. But concerning
himself, howsoever he might go out master of Art in the crowd; for forgerie,
railing, untruths, falsifications, and such like, he may well be admitted to be
a professor. Beside, the Replyer speaks not in that place of descending to
hell, but to the cross. Neither in that other place quoted, sect. 17.
does the Replyer make three more descents: his words are these, We also
confess, that Christ by his death overcame hell, and shaked the powers
thereof, that he humbled himself to the ignominious death of the cross, and
descended from thence to the grave, and there continued in the state of the
dead till the third day: and whatsoever else may be comprehended in the article
of Christ's descension. Here are not many descents affirmed, but diverse senses
and explications of one and the same descension delivered, all agreeable to the
Scriptures.

23. You imagine that Christ's soul was deprived of his fathers presence, 3. b.
p. 165.
while it was in hell: but this is his own imagination: for the Replyers words
are these; to say that Christ's soul did not enjoy his fathers presence in
heaven, all the while it was absent from the body, is contrary to the
Scripture: thou will show me the ways of life, etc. he speaks not of the
depriving of his fathers presence in (...) but of the enjoying thereof in
heaven.

24. You hold he descended into hell, Synops. p. 1018.
yea into all the torments, 3. b. p. 175.
that hell could yield: whereas the Replyer affirms the contrary in that
place: the whole punishment, is the whole kind of punishment, that is in body
and soul, which Christ ought to have suffered, though not in the same manner,
and circumstance, neither for the place of hell locally, nor for the time,
eternally, nor for the manner, sinnefully.

May not now this (Momus) justly beshrew his vnblushing cheeks, and bold face,
in accusing the Replyer, of falsifying and corrupting his words: seeing it is
so ordinary a thing with himself, to falsify, pervert, and corrupt the
Replyers both sense, and sentences. He little remembered in this lewd course,
the saying of our Savior: whatsoever you would that men should do unto you,
Matthew. 7. 12.
even so do you to them. He would be loath himself to have his words thus
clipped, and curtalled, chopped, and changed, which measure he has meated with
to the Replyer: who if he had somewhere failed in his sayings, the Confuter
might well have spared him, being so unconscionable himself in his doings:
and he might have used toward him, that saying of the Greek Poet: Sophocles in
Aiace.
(...): as you dare not praise my sayings, so neither can I commend your
doings. If herein he would have been without blame, he should in repeating of
the Replyers words have observed the same rule, which Seneca prescribes in
citing of authors: tota inspicienda, tota tractanda sunt, 11. Imputation.
per lineamenta sua i^genij opus nectitur, ex quo nihil subduci sine ruina
potest: epistol. 23. lib. ^.
the whole must be looked into, the whole must be handled, the work of wit is
tied together by lineaments, from the which nothing can be withdrawn, without
the ruin of the whole. It was therefore an easy matter for this underminer,
to ruinate the Replyers whole building, in supplanting of it by parcels, and
racking and dismembring one piece from an other. Wherein he may complain that
he has bin dealt with, hom 25. in Luc.
as Origene sometime was, who says, Alij tractatus nostros calumniantes
easentire nos criminantur, quae nunquam sensisse nos novimus: some do cavil
with our treatises, and do blame us to think those things, which we know we
never thought. And so plaieth this (Catchpole) ascribing unto the Replyer such
things as he holds not: and shows himself to be of that number, whom
Hierome complains of: non meritum stili, sed suum stomachum sequentes, not
following the merit (and manner of the Replyers) style, but his own (humor)
and stomach.

The 11. Imputation, of the forged falsification of Fathers.
The Accusation. 1. Origene pretended to be falsified.
1. Whereas the Replyer says, that one bond of faith in the diversity of some
private opinions, may contain and keep us in peace: that same, vnum fidei
linteum, quod vidit Petrus quatuor Euangelijs alligatum: that sheet of faith,
which Peter saw tied with the four Gospels in the corners: The Confuter cries
out: he applies it not, (as you untruly report him) unto the diversity of
opinions in matters of faith, 2. b. p. 108.
etc.

2. Who would translate, cum ligno crucis, in the tree of the cross. 3. b. p.
185.


3. He says, he clippeth Origenes words, because the Replyer leaves out (
fere.) 3. b. p. 178.


4. So in an other testimony cited out of Origene, he says, 3. b. p. 182.
that Origenes words are clipped.

5. The Reader may see, what little care you have of credit or conscience, thus
to abuse so ancient, and learned a father. 3. b. p. 188.


6. So an other place of Origene ( he says) is abused in like manner. p. 188.
3. b. p. 188.


The justification.
1. IT is well that this (false Accuser) confesses Origenes sense only not to
be followed, and so grants his words to be rightly alleged. But he
applies it not (says he) unto the diversity of opinions in one particular
Church, etc. but that all people and nations whatsoever, without difference of
place, or distinction of persons, should be gathered unto his Church. He would
be asked, whence he has this application: for Origene only alleges the
prophecy of Isai, and the vision of Peter, without any special application in
that place. And if nations that were at enmity and of diverse religions, shall
be contained in this sheet of faith, much more they which are of one faith,
differing only in some private opinions. The unlearned Confuter himself
clippeth Origene.
But he is the man that clippeth and corrupts Origene: for beside that he
translateth ill, as turning the passive into the active, quae alia nobis figura
servanda est, what other figure should we observe, for, what other figure is to
be observed of us: which I would not note, but that he is so captious in other
places, to find fault with the Replyer in the like, to show his grammar
learning: he also englisheth, simul ire ad pascua, to feed together: which
signifies, to go together to the pastures. He leaves out also a whole
clause, eorumque foetus simul paleis vesci, and their young shall eat straw
together. 3. b. p. 107.


2. Had malice so blinded him, that the Replyer translating, in the tree of the
cross, he could not consider, that it might be the Printers fault, to set cum
ligno, for in ligno, especially seeing in the printed copies of Origene, it is
in ligno: as, in an other place he says, principatus traducti and triumphati
in ligno, the principalities were traduced, and triumphed upon in the tree.
tract. 3. in Matthew.

2. Origenes words are these, inveniemus quia nunqua^ fere in sanctum quis
locum descendisse legitur: we shall find, that never (almost) any is said to
descend into an holy place: hereupon he takes this exception, because this
word fere, (almost) is omitted by the Replyer. A doubtie exception sure. But is
Origenes sense any thing changed by the omission of that word: nay, is not his
sense made more full to the Replyers purpose, by the supplying of that word:
for is he so ignorant in his own grammar learning, that he knows not, that
fere is sometime a word of universality: Memini in eum sermonem incidere, qui
tum fere erat in ore. i. semper.
if he had consulted with Calepine, he could have told him, that fere is
otherwhile taken for semper, for always, as he shows out of Cicero. And that
it is so taken here, it may be gathered by the sentence going before,
observand^m est, etc. quomodo in singulis (quibusque locis) ascendere dicatur
and descendere: it must be observed, how in (every) place, it is said to
ascend, and descend: so then in the next sentence, ( fere) almost, is taken in
the same sense that ( quibusque) every, is in the former.

4. The place cited out of Origene is this: si qui^ mente and cogitatione
descendit in abyssum, etc. if any man in thought and mind descend to the
deep, thinking Christ there only to be contained, as though it were all one,
and alike to call him from the dead, etc. Origene, he says, is here abused,
because he speaks not of Christ's humanity, but of his divinity, 3. b. p.
182.
his words also are clipped. First, the Replyer only alleges Origene in
this place for the meaning of this phrase, to descend to the deep: which he
shows out of his own words, quasi simile sit revocare Christum a mortuis,
ita subiungit, hoc est Christum reducere a mortuis: as though it were alike to
call Christ from the dead, he adioyneth thus, that is, to bring Christ again
from the dead. He evidently shows, that to descend into the deep, and to
bring Christ from the dead, is in a manner all one: whether he speak of the
divinity or humanity of Christ, concerns not the use of the phrase.
Secondly, the Replier leaves out the latter clause, ita subiungit, etc.
partly, because the same in effect was said in the former words, partly,
supplying it by an etc. for brevity sake: which clause being added, makes
the Replyers collection more strong, and full, and therefore it was not omitted
of any fraud, The Confuter himself proved a corrupter of Origene.
Thirdly, he himself is the man, that corrupts Origene: for whereas Origene
thus rehearses the Apostle, therefore the iustine, which is of faith, says
thus: say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven: he turns it, say
not in thine heart, who shall descend into the deep: and thus corrupts both
the Apostle, and Orig. that, cites him.

5. Origene is alleged by the Replyer, to understand Christ's descension
sometime of his coming down from heaven to the lower parts, in these words:
Paul us quoniam descensionis Christi mysterium praedicat, etc. Paul because he
preaches the mystery of Christ's descension into hell, he named the deep, as
of one coming from the higher to the lower parts, etc. Could any thing be
spoken more plainly? what unshamefast dealing then is this, or what means
this bold faced fellow to say, that Origene speaks not a word of any of the
former fictions (he means belike, the mystery of Christ's descension, whereof
the Replyer entreats) but only of the length, breadth, and height of Noah's
Arc: And that by the higher parts, he understands the heavenly, by the
lower, the earthly, (which is an other thing, that he cauilleth at) it is
evident by the words following in the next sentence: de terrenis and humilibus
ad coelestia and excelsa conscenditur: from terrene and low things, it is
ascended to heavenly, and high. He himself also clippeth Origin here: for
whereas Origin thus recites the Apostle, vt sciat is, quae sit longitudo, and
latitudo, etc. that ye may know, what is the length, breadth, height, and
depth; he leaves out (breadth.) 3. b. p. 188.


6. In the sixth place cited out of Origin, the Replyer abridging his testimony
in those places, for the which he is not alleged, leaves out in diverse
clauses, in coelum, de coelo, in coelo, into heaven, from heaven, in heaven;
and not only these words, but a whole sentence is omitted: qui no^ rapinam
arbitratus, etc. which thought it no robbery to be equal to God, but made
himself of no reputation, taking the shape of a servant: that he might hasten
to that part of the sentence which is urged; our Lord descended not only to
take care of us, but to bear our insirmities. If he can show any word of
moment for that purpose, wherefore Origin is produced, to be omitted, let him
cry out, that Origin is abused. And does not Origin himself abridge his own
words, when in the next sentence he says, cum descendit, when he descendit,
The Confuter clippeth Origin.
omitting, de eoelo, from heaven. And how chances it, that he could not see
his own fault; cutting off this whole clause, astiterunt (inquit) tres viri
super eum: three men (says he) stood by him: which follow immediately after
those words, 3. b. p. 188.
as we have declared before. It is a fond part of him to spy a mote in another
man's eye, when he sees not a beam in his own: to complain of curtalling of
words, when he clippeth off a whole sentence.

2. Other Greek Fathers pretended to be falsisied, Athanasius, Cyrillus,
Chrysostom.
The accusation.
1. That Athanasius words are not truly alleged, and that the Replyer goes
about to make him contrary to himself. 3. b. p. 125.


2. For S. Cyril ( says the Confuter) I find no such thing in the place quoted
by you, but those words in the 49. chap. v. 9. after, being in effect the same
with the other, he most plainly expounds of Christ's local descension to
hell. 3. b. p. 123.


3. Chrysostom in the same place says plainly, that both Dives and Lazarus
were apud inferos, 3. b. p. 124.
in hell.

2. The justification.
1. Athanasius words truly alleged are these: Athanas. epist. ad Epictet.
apud Epiphan. here is. 77.
nunc vero ipsum quide^ verbu^ ivit ad praedicandu^, corpus aute^ syndone
inuolutum deposuit Joseph: now the word it self went to preach, but his body
wrapped up in a linen cloth, Joseph laid up, etc. Is he not ashamed to deny
that Athanasius said the divine nature went and preached? for was not the word
his divine nature. Nay, does not he falsely allege Athanasius, that having
cited an impertinent sentence out of him ten lines long, The Confuter
mangleth Athanasius.
breaks off at these words, nune vero ipsum verbum, etc. for the which he was
produced, and passes them over in silence, as though no such words were there
to be found?

2. These are the very words of Cyril, upon the 49. cha. of Isay, v. 9. His qui
in vinculis and catenis suorum peccatorum constrictierant, etc. to those which
were tied in the bands and chains of their sins, he cried out, come forth,
which were conuerfant in the darkness, and the mist of their mind, etc.
those he bid to be lightened, and to come to the light, and to open the eyes of
their mind, etc. Seeing he confesses these words, Isay, 49. v. 9. to be in
effect the same with the other, Isay, 42. v. 7. how was he blinded that he
could not trace out Cyril there? The Confuters ignorance in the fathers.
but this his ignorance in the Fathers, shows that he gathered up other men's
scrapings, and trusted not to his own reading. And whereas he cites another
place out of Cyril, De rect. sid. ad Theodos.
to show the meaning of the prophet Isay; there, though some allusion and
reference be made to that place of that Prophet, yet is it not quoted by name,
not of purpose interpreted. But what did he mean himself, in reciting of that
sentence, to leave out this whole clause? Cyrillus curtalled.
quiddam etiam divinus Paulus dixisse videtur, etc. and divine Paul also
seems to have said somewhat of the word of God, and his soul, according to
the union of dispensation: which whole clause, omitted by him, follows
immediately after these words: and this Peter also declares, etc.

3. Concerning Chrysostom, they are his words; Paradisus pauperis, sinus
Abrah^, Abraham's bosom was the poor man's Paradise: whence the Replyer
infers, that in his opinion Christ went not to hell, but to Paradise: what
Chrysostom says beside in that homily, is not the question, but whether he
has these words which if he have, what impudent and brazen face dealing is
this, to cry out here of illiterate and irreligious dealing? true it is, that
he says that Abraham was ( apud inferos) because Christ was not yet risen,
that should bring him to Paradise: Seeing then Chrysostom says in the same
sermon, that both Abraham's bosom was Paradise, and that he was not yet in
Paradise himself, it is clear, that he takes Paradise in a double sense, and
makes two kinds of Paradise, one in inferno, beneath, or below; another, in
heaven above: in inferno, cannot signify hell, for he puts these two
together, quicunque in inferno est, and in regno coelorum est, etc. He which is
in the infernal, or inferior place, and in the kingdom of heaven, I cannot
tell, whether he can have pity: where Paradise is, and the kingdom of heaven
is, there is not hell. Therefore when he says, that Abraham's bosom was the
infernal or inferior Paradise, and yet he himself not in the superior or
heavenly Paradise, he means nothing but this, that by the resurrection of
Christ, there was an accession of joy, and of greater bliffe and glory to the
holy Patriarchs departed: for he also says, Omnes in illius sinu^ ire
festinemus, Let us all make haste to go into his bosom: the faithful that now
depart, do not presently enter into the fullness of that joy, which they shall
have in the resurrection; but they go also to Abraham's bosom, unto a place of
heavenly joy and rest, where they expect the consummation and perfection of
their glory at the resurrection of their bodies. There is another place in that
homily, which this (blind busie-body) would not see: Abraham nec dum erat in
Paradise, quia nec dum Christus intrauerat cum latrone: Abraham was not yet in
Paradise, because Christ was not yet entered with the thiese: But Christ as God
entered not into Paradise, being never out of Paradise: therefore his meaning
is, that Christ entered in his soul into Paradise, and the thiese with him.

3. Ambrose pretended to be falsified.
The accusation.
1. Saint Ambrose is no less injuriously handled by you. 3. b. p. 20.


2. The other place you corrupt shamefully, etc. S. Ambrose speaks of no such
matter, 3. b. p. 20. 21.
as you would make your Reader believe.

3. Another place makes as clearly against you, as nothing more. 3. b. p. 22.


The iustisication.
1. Ambrose is produced, who expounds Christ's descending into hell, of the
presence of his divine power: Abyssum opinione si penetres, etc. If thou in
thought wilt search into the deep, you shall see also Jesus work there: these
are the very words of Ambrose: here is no mention (says this dreaming
Confuter) of Christ's personal descension into hell, but of the powerful
operation of his godhead. As though the Replyer to that end alleged not
Ambrose, that he expounds the descension of the presence of his divine power;
for he said immediately before, descend verbo in infernum: descend not (in the
word, as he drawleth it out) but with the word into hell: for to say (in the
word) has no sense. And what calls he a personal descension? he would have
said local, for I hope he will not appropriate Christ's person to his humane
nature: when our Savior says, Ioh. 3. 15.
No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that descended from heaven, etc.
Does he not speak of his personal descension, and the powerful operation of
his Godhead together: how then without any learning or judgment, does he here
distinguish them? And if Ambrose be injuriously handled by any, it is by
himself, that leaves out this whole sentence: etenim si ascenderis in coelum,
Ambrose ^^talled.
etc. for if you ascend into heaven, Jesus is there: if you descend into the
deep, he is present: which sentence follows immediately after these words,
Descend with the word into hell, Jesus is there.

2. In the second place, he says Ambrose words are clipped, and corrupted:
because whereas Ambrose delivers two senses of those words, Psalm. 139. 15. My
substance was in the lower parts of the earth: the one of the being of his
soul there, to set at liberty the souls of the deceased: the other of the
presence of his divine substance, the first is omitted. But, 1. the question is
not here, whether Ambrose held the local descension of Christ's soul to hell,
but whether he sometime understand not the being of Christ there, of the
presence of his divine power: which is so evident, that this wilful
gaine-sayer confesses it: to what end then should the Replyer allege that
part, which was impertinent: 2. if the first part of the sentence be added, it
makes not for his opinion, unless he say with Ambrose, that Christ wrought in
hell, to set at liberty the souls of the deceased. 3. this sentence was not
fraudently cut off, Ambrose clipped by the Confuter.
but supplied by an, etc. 4. But what if he himself prove the clipper: for he
skippeth over this whole sentence, denique ad divinam substantiam, etc. and
that the divine substance is here understood, the words following declare;
thine eyes saw mine unwrought substance, that is, the unmade and uncreated
word.

4. Hierome pretended to be falsified.
The Accusation.
1. The like dealing you use with S. Hierome misqueting the place, and
misapplying the words: for it is not in his Epistle to Fabiola, the argument
whereof is de vest sacerdotali, as you note being the 128. but in his epistle
unto Marcella being the 130. lib. 2. p. 72.


2. Whereas the Replyer alleges Hierome, who understands by prison spoken
of in Esai, 42. 7. the bands of sins and errors: the Confuter, to make the
Reader believe, that there is no such thing in Hierome, supposes an other
place out of him, where he should say, that Christ descended to hell, 3. b. p.
122.
where the rich man was.

3. Valerius also being cited, whose epistle to Ruffinus is found among the
works of Hierome: he says, the author, whence he had them, (for I can not
find it) has not the words, as he reported them: but thus, reprobata est
fatu^ vex tanquam anseris inter olores. 2. b. p. 27.


The justification.
1. That saying of Hierome, being alleged rather for exornation, and
accommodation only to the present purpose, then produced for any praise or
confirmation, required not such an exact quotation of the place: the saying is
this: other matters, which you desire to know, let us confer of together in
presence, that if we be ignorant of any thing, where is neither witness nor
Judge, it may die in a faithful ^are: what if the place had not been quoted
at all, the matter had not been great: this allegation being as of a
sentence, not of a testimony: as he to the same purpose citing a sentence of
Augustine, uses no other quotation but this, 3. b. p. 89.
as Augustine says some where. Neither is the mistaking of the place such, as
he proclaims: for the epistle to Marcellus is of the same argument with the
other to Fabiola: treating also de vest sacerdotals, namely of the Ephod.

2. First, Hierome upon those words of the Prophet, Isai 42. 7. That thou may
bring out the prisoners from the prison: thus writes, funibus peccatorum
vnusquisque constringitur, etc. Every one is tied with the coardes of their
sins: and those which sit in darkness, he interprets, qui in error is nocte
and caligine versabantur: which were conversant in the night and darkness of
error: the very like interpretaion, and in the same words he gives, of the
like place, Isa. 49. 9. all which is deceitfully concealed by this Cauillous
wrangler. Secondly, who told him, that Hierom has such a saying upon the 14.
chap. of Isai: some other men's notes deceived him, for there I find it not.
And if he will have Hierome to write, that Dominus descendit ad infernum (locum
suppliciorum and cruciatunm) in quo videtur Dives purpuratus, vt vinctos de
carcere dimitteret: that our Lord descended to hell, a place of punishment, and
torment, where the rich man clothed in purple was seen, to dismiss the
prisoners out of prison: A great error laid upon Hierome by the Confuter.
then is a great error laid upon Hierome, that some were delivered out of hell,
where the rich glutton was tormented: contrary to the Scripture it self, They
which would go from hence to you, can not, neither can they come from thence
to us. Luke 16. 26.

3. This Trifler shows his great learning, and deep reading, The Confuters
ignorance in the fathers.
that could not find out Valerius epistle to Ruffinus in the 4. tome of
Hieromes works, whence the Replyer takes that sentence: and that it may
appear in deed, who is the liker that gagling cheat, he will take upon him
to guess at the authors words, though he know them not. Now that his ignorance
may fully be displaied, Valerius words are these: reprobata est fatui vex
anseris: the gagling of the foolish goose is contemned: and a little after
follow the other words, ea tamen Senatores docuit vrbem servare ab incendie:
yet the goose taught the Senators to save the city from the fire: but those
words coming between, according to the saying, a goose among swannes. which
should have been enclosed in a parenthesis, are inserted by the Replyer, not
borrowed from the author. Now, because this (gagling mate) sporteth himself,
in retorting that byword upon the Replyer, The Raylers immodest term of goose,
returned home to the full.
anser inter olores, a goose among swannes, and so after his unmannerly
fashion, thinking he has his schoole-boyes in hand, calls him in plain
teannes, a goose: this his addle goose egg, which he has brooded, shall be
broken upon his own face. Though with Valerius the Replyer thinks not
scorn, in comparison of Ruffinus, and such grave and wise men, as he writes
unto, to be counted, ( tanqua^ anser inter olores) yet it becomes not such an
anser, so to gaggle at him, that would be ashamed, if he were not worthy to
go for an olor, among such anseres. But the Replyer is contented for this
time, to go for an anser inter olores: as the Poet says, Virgilius.
digna sed argutos inter strepere anser olores; though a goose, yet meet to
make a noise among swannes: and the Rayler shall be a counterfeit swanne: but I
fear me such an one, as Valerius speaks of: forsan cum Senatoribus
intellig^s, quod tibi organizent olores interitum, and anser salutem strepat:
it may be you shall perceive with the Roman Senators, that the swannes sing
your baine, and the goose gagleth health: for the property of the swanne is,
to sing before her death, as the Poet elegantly says, Oridius.
cantator cygnus funcris ipse sui: the swanne does celebrate her own funeral.
So, beside that this glosing flatterer, which with the false Prophets, would
sow pillowes under all arme-holes, ^^ech. 17. 13.
and sing a song of security: he has in his gagling pamphlet in this one
property imitated the swanne, to sing out his own shame and confusion; in all
others parts bewraying his anserine folly: for as he says, Philemon.
(...): if one should gather 30. thousand foxes together, he shall find the
same nature and disposition in them all: so one goose differs not from
another in gagling and creaking.

5. Augustine pretended to to be falsified.
The accusation.
1. Augustine much misvsed and corrupted: for he says, si quid aliter sapio,
2. b. p. 13.
etc. Limbom. reads si quid erraueris.

2. The place of Augustine mis-quoted, the third book for the second: some of
his words are cut off, some mistranslated. 2. b. p. 166.


3. To translate (trophaeum) a devise or policy, is but your own politic
deuiseithe cross of Christ is rather called trophaeum, because it was the
ensign and monument of his victory. 2. b. p. 189.


4. S. Augustines words falsely translated, and corrupted, for triduo illo
corporeae mortis, is not three days by his bodily death: 3. b. p. 2.
but the three days of his bodily death.

5. You corrupt Augustines words, turning blasphemy, into error. 3. b. p. 74.


6. These words of Augustine, which are the two ways, whereby the soul can be
said to die; you cut off. 3. b. p. 84.


7. S. Augustines words you allege corruptly, by leaving out half of the
sentence. 3. b. p. 91.


8. His other words to the same purpose, whereof, as your manner is, 3. b. p.
115.
you take but a piece, are these, etc.

9. S. Augustines words untruly alleged, for you leave out the word (forte.)
3. b. p. 128.


10. S. Augustine clearly against ( Limbom.) in the place alleged by him. 3.
b. p. 189.


11. And because the Replyer says, Why may we not as well expound Christ's
descending into hell with Ambrose, 3. b. p. 20.
of the presence of his divine power, as with Augustine his ascending up to
heaven? The disgraceful Confuter thus insulteth; Where does Augustine expound
Christ's ascending up to heaven, of his divine power? dare you upon your own
bare word, without any proof or show of reason, so contumeliously traduce so
holy a man, as an ouerthrower of an article of our Creed? for you quote no
place, neither will any Christian man believe, that ever he dreamed of any such
exposition.

The justification.
1. For further and full satisfaction herein, I refer the Reader to the 3.
Imputation of untruths. Iustificat. 5.

2. The mis-quoting of the figure of 3. for the figure of 2. is no such
oversight, which might escape the Printer, as well as the Author; seeing there
is as well the 3. as 2. book de doctrine. A gross oversight in the Confuter.
Christian. But that is a more gross oversight in this blind Confuter, in
quoting the 28. homily of Origin upon Joshua, 3. b. p. 19.
whereas he wrote but 26. in all: those words omitted, ( spem atque
charitatem, etc. hope and charity, which we handled in the former book) were
impertinent to the matter in hand, and therefore it was not necessary to
allege them: for the translation, the Replyer englisheth, in ijs, quae aperte
posita sunt, etc. in those places, etc. the Confuter englisheth, among those
things, which are plainly set down in Scripture, all those things which
contain faith and manners are found. Now I pray you (Sir Grammarian) is not in
ijs, better translated, in those, then among those: retaining then the proper
signification of the preposition? whether is better supplied, in those places,
or in those things? for to say in those things, all those things are found,
etc. beside the vain tautologie, it includes absurdity, that the same things
should be both the continent, and the things contained: wherefore his meaning
is, that matters concerning faith and manners, are handled in the plain and
perspicuous places of Scripture.

3. Augustines words are these, trophaeo suo diabolus victus est, The devil
was overcome by his own devise: the word is not referred to Christ; for then
he would have said, The Confuter has forgotten his Grammar rule.
trophaeo eius, not suo: has he, professing himself a Grammarian, forgotten
his Grammar rule* ^^ui and suus reciproca sunt? And in another place Augustine
shows more plainly, that he refers this word to the devil: diabolus
trophaeo suo victus est, Sermon. 174. de Tempor.
exultauit, quando mortuus est Christus: The devil was overcome by his own
policy, he rejoiced, when Christ died, etc. and was overcome by Christ's death:
He calls the death and cross of Christ, the devils trophaeum, because he
supposed to have vanquished Christ by putting him to death: if now trophaeum be
taken in the usual sense, for a monument or ensign of victory obtained, as
he would have it, his translation will contain blasphemy; that the cross of
Christ was the monument of the devils victory: therefore how could it be more
fitly translated, then devise; or policy? the devil supposed, or intended to
set up Christ's cross, as a triumphant pillar, but he was ouer-wrought in his
own devise.

4. The words of Augustine, triduo illo corporeae mortis apud inferos custodiae
mancipari: the Replyer translateth thus; to be kept in hell three days by his
bodily death: the Confuter thus; to be kept in bondage in hell the three days
of his bodily death. Who sees not, that the sentence having no distinction
coming between, will bear both these translations? if corporeae mortis, be
joined with triduo illo, the latter, if it be put to custodiae, the former: but
it is an harsh speech, that Christ's soul should be said to be kept in bondage
three days in hell, for it was not there in bondage at all; but in the grave
his body might be said to be in bondage, during that time, because it was under
the bands of death, which Christ loosed, as Saint Peter says, Act. 2. 24. And
David says in the person of Christ, The sorrows, or coards of the grave (for
the word ^heblee signifies both) took hold upon me: therefore the former
reading yeildeth the safer sense. See more hereof, 5. imput. iustificat. 1.

5. The Replyer there cites no testimony out of Augustine, but only
conformeth and applies his sentence, with the qualifying of one word, to his
purpose: This captious controller takes greater liberty himself, in the next
page following; for citing a place out of Augustine, to make it serve his
turn, he inserteth these names, Arrius, Eunomius, Apollinaris, and Athanasius,
Epiphanius, Fulgentius, making Augustine to bring them in, whereas Fulgentius
was after Augustines time: what reason had he to find fault with another for
strayning a gnat, whereas himself swalloweth a Camel?

6. The addition of that clause was not necessary, and therefore the Replyer
for breuities sake omitted it: he uses not with long and impertinent periods
to weary his Reader, as this palfrey-man posteth often out of the way, till he
has lost both it, and himself. That which is alleged out of Augustine
suffices to show his judgment, that the soul cannot be said to be
quickened, because it cannot die: but what reason had he to translate, quibus
duabus de causis, etc. which are the two ways: he that translateth causae,
ways, shows that he was never well wayed himself.

7. The point there handled is, how Christ is said to be quickened in the
spirit: therefore the Replyer omitteth the former part of the sentence;
Mortificatus carne, etc. He is said to be mortified in the flesh, because he
died in the flesh only: for the question is not, how he was put to death in
the flesh: and then he begins the sentence, at viuificatus spiritu, but he
was quickened in the spirit, etc. But whereas the Replyer here by flesh,
understands Christ's humane nature: how can this sophisticating Sophister
infer, that he means his soul and body: for is there no difference between
his humane nature, and his whole humane nature? as is your logike, such are
your conclusions.

8. What an absurd fellow is this, that will not allow a sentence to be taken
out of a Father, but one must hale in that which goes before, and comes
after, being not to the purpose pertinent: the question being about the
variety of copies; Augustine gives two rules, that the more must be
preferred before the fewer, the Elder before the nower* and thus much was
sufficient to be cited out of that place. But what means himself to corrupt
Augustine by a false translation? whose words rightly translated are these: hoc
modo quaerunt, etc. by this means they search, which would find out in the holy
Scriptures, confirmed with so great authority, what moves them: he
translateth thus; this course they take, who doubt of any thing in holy
Scriptures, 3. b. p. 117.
confirmed with so great authority.

9. As before he quarrelled about the omission of ( fere) in a place of Origin,
loc. 3. so now for leaving out ( forte.) It seems he wanted matter, when thus
he hunteth after words. He is a furious man, that will begin a fray upon a
word; and it is a quick fire, that will flame out straight upon a spark:
Hieron. Pammach.
if he had read that sentence of Hierome, Difficile est alienas lineas
insequentem non alicubi excidere: it is an hard matter for one that follows
another lines, not sometime to miss: he would not have stumbled at a straw*
But forte is a particle of doubting and ^^certaintie* says he, and shows he
did not resolutely pronounce, etc. And will you speak this of your Grammar
skill, that ( forte) is always used as a particle of doubting? Joan.
Godscalcus obseruat. ling. latinae.
I much doubt of that: for sometime, if you will give credit to a good
Latinist, it is used for exornation: sometimes it is a word of attention, and
deep consideration: as Jonathan says, si forte, if perhaps the Lord will work
with us, 1. Sam. 14. 6. he doubted not of it, but with an earnest desire and
attention waited upon God. And so is it here used by Augustine, as a note of
more deep consideration: so that the omission of it, does most disaduantag^
the Replyer.

10. And how prove you, that Augustine is against the Replyer in the place
alleged? his words are these: Haec terrena vita, etc. This earthly life,
where flesh and blood is, if it be compared to that, is the lower part, or
hell, etc. Augustine is alleged, to show that the earth is called the lower
part in respect of heaven: let him show now, how Augustine makes against him
in this very place: forsooth, because he makes mention afterward of Christ's
descension to hell: as though the Replyer were ignorant of that; for does he
not directly confess, that Augustine in the words following seems to incline
to the opinion of Christ's descension to deliver the Patriarchs. 3. b. p. 186.
But this Trifler was to give instance of this place here alleged, therefore he
does but palter, and still beats the bush where the bird is not: and so as
Hierom well says, Manum peteris, and pedem porrigis, You are asked your hand,
and you stretch out your foot.

11. 1. As the godhead in Scripture is said to descend, John 3. 13. None has
ascended into heaven, but he that descended, etc. So God is said to ascend,
Genesis 17. 22. God ascended up to Abraham: where the same word ghalah is used,
which is applied to Christ's ascension, Psalm. 68. 18. 2. And so Augustine
expounds that place also, John 3. 13. of Christ's ascension and descension
according to his godhead: for these are his words in the same epistle, 57.
which is cited by the Confuter upon that place, none has ascended, etc.
secu^dum hominem; etc. According to man he was in earth, not in heaven, where
he now is, when he said (none has ascended, etc.) although according to that,
he was the son of God, he was yet on the earth, and was not ascended into
heaven. Here he understands Christ's ascension and descension, as he was God.
3. Neither is this to deny his ascension, as he was man, and so to overthrow
an article of the Creed, for then he has made a good argument against
himself; that because Christ is there said to descend from heaven in his
deity, therefore it follows, he descended not in his humanity. 4. Nay then
he himself overthrows an article of the Creed, that confesses the
ascension and descension there spoken of, to be diverse from that mentioned by
S. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 9. and to be meant of the deity of Christ. 3. b. p. 172.
173. Now sir, to return your own words, though it belongs not to a
Christian man's belief, what Augustine writ or thought to or fro: yet I hold
him no reasonable man, that hearing Augustines own words, will not think he
spoke of one kind of ascension and descension of Christ in his godhead, (though
properly the godhead neither ascends, nor descends.) But he is no good
Christian, that the Scripture so speaking (that God ascended) will not believe
it: and so in effect, he proves himself no good Christian, if he deny that
Christ is said in Scripture to ascend, as he is God.

6. Other Authors pretended to be falsified.
The accusation.
1. These nine words (of Bernards sentence) are left out by you; 2. b. p. 198.
and so we shall always be with the Lord.

2. Bellarmine ( he unmannerly says) you have belied now the second time; 2.
b. p. 190.
for leaving out this clause, for the enlightening of the Fathers with the
vision of God. 2. b. p. 196.


The justification.
1. Bernard is produced by the Replyer to show the difference of Christ's
being with us, and of our being with Christ: the sentence is this; Christ is
with us at all times to the end of the world: but when shall we be with him?
when we shall be taken up, and meet Christ in the air: thus far Bernard is
alleged; then follow those words, which he cries out are omitted, and so we
shall always be with the Lord. And why might not these words be spared, seeing
sufficient was alleged before for proof of that difference? and if these
words be supplied, they make more fully to the Replyers purpose, and therefore
this exception of omission is frivolous. But it is strange, that he date
object this, seeing in the same recital of Bernard, he cutteth off a long
period himself: for after those words, who could persist in it without him,
follows this sentence: omne gaudium existimemus, The pitiful Confuter takes
himself by the nose.
etc. let us count it all joy, when we fall into diverse tribulations my
brethren, not only because we must through many tribulations enter into the
kingdom of God, but because the Lord is near unto those that are of a
troubled heart: one faith, etc. then follow the next words, If I shall walk,
etc. All these lines are left out by this pitiful Confuter, p. 198. who does
most of all confute himself. A shame it is for a man to ^ee so senseless, to
reprove another for omitting a few words, and those not necessary, himself
skipping over diverse lines.

2. I see it goes near to him, that his graund master is touched, that he so
bestirreth him, in giving the lie, after his rude manner. But it shall
presently appear, that none here has told a lie but himself: So that
according to the law of Honorius, Poena calumniae similitudo supplicij. Cod.
lib. 9. tit. 46. leg 10.
the penalty of slander, is the equality of punishment: the brand of lying,
which he would have set upon an other, shall be printed on his own face.
Bellarmines sentence is thus cited: Licet non esset necessaria animae Christi
praesentia, etc. Although the presence of Christ's soul were not necessary in
hell, yet it was of congrurtie that it should be present: three exceptions now
he takes to this allegation: 1. that, in hell is added, being not in
Bellarmine. 2. that this clause is omit, which follows after ( animae
Christi) vt patres divina visione illustrarentur, that the fathers should be
enlightened, with the vision of God: for he adds immediately, Christ descended
not to hell, for the beatification of the fathers only, but for other causes.
3. the necessary presence of Christ's soul in hell in substance, 2. b. p. 190.
he affirmed a little before.

Contra. 1. These words (in hell) being only in the translation, and not in
the latin sentence, do free the Replyer from all suspicion of corruption: and
they are added in the English only by way of explanation: and Bellarmine so
expounds himself afterward, as his disciple also reports him, that Christ
descended not to hell only for the beatification, etc. 2. Seeing the Replyer
shuts up the first clause of the sentence, ending at animae Christi, with an
etc. 3. b. p. 191. it shows, that there was no fraud intended: neither was
the rehearsal of that clause necessary, seeing as much is said immediately
before, that Christ needed not (by the sentence of Durand) to descend to hell
to deliver the Patriarchs: where upon Bellarmine is produced to confess as
much, that though it was not necessary for Christ to descend (namely for that
end, for that is the point in question) yet it was of congruitie. And what
though he make other ends of Christ's descension? it is sufficient, that he
makes not that end of necessity, which only is in question, to deliver the
fathers. 3. Bellarmine indeed says before, that Durand was in error, for not
holding the substantial presence of Christ's soul necessary in hell: but
there he adds not the end, for the enlightening or delivering of the
fathers: therefore both may stand together, that Bellarmine held Christ's
presence necessary in hell: and yet not for that special end, necessary.
But, if Bellarmine should say and unsay the same thing, which is no rare thing
with him: what is that to the Replyer: let him, whose darling he seems to be,
look to salve his masters credit.

Thus has this (Calumnious adversary) opened his wide throat, and uttered
his S^^^^ors voice, in accusing the Replyer of falsification: whereas he is not
able to fasten one line corrupted or falsified by him. If sometimes for
breuities sake, he abridge a sentence, leaving out yet nothing material, and
omitting what is impertinent, it is no falsification: that is a sound rule of
Gelasius, Non mentitur, Cause. 22. qu. 2. c. 5.
qui animum fallendi non habuit, he lies not, that had no intent to deceive.
It is no small injury, for one against his conscience, Cod. lib. 9. tit. 36.
leg. 1. Si quis famosum libellum. Valentin.
with a cauillous spirit, to accuse an other to be a falsifier. The Civil law
is, that he which finds a famous libell of an other, and publishes it,
should be punished, as if he were the author: Now this unconscionable
Slaunderer, is found both the author, and publisher too, of this infamous
libell and accusation. If he escape humane censure, let him take heed he
incur not the divine displeasure. As for the Replyer he regards no more
such cholerike inuectiues, then David did Shemeies throwing of stones, and
casting dust in the air: a good conscience as a brazen wall shall stand
against all such p^llets of envy: and as Alexander said of Darius great
(...), wherein there were many thousands, (...), that one slaughter man is not
afraid of many sheep: So the edge of truth shall be able to cut down, all such
false accusations, that the defender thereof shall not need to be afraid of
them.

The recrimination.
1. Origene falsified and corrupted by the Confuter.
1. Beside those places of Origene, wherein the Replyer is falsely charged with
corrupting them, but they are retorted upon the Confuter himself, as namely
the 1. 4. and 6. places before objected: He does diversely pervert, and falsify
this learned father in other places by himself produced: as 3. b. p. 169. 3.
b. p. 169.
he three ways abuses a sentence of Origenes: 1. in misnaming the place, from
whence he borrows it: citing homil. 35. i^ Math. whereas it is not an
homily, but a (...) upon Matthew, containing above 20. leaves in folio, which
could not be uttered in one homily or sermon. 2. He clippeth off a great part
of the sentence, which he begins thus: be that called Christ from hell, etc.
leaving all out, that goes before: Quod si vi^ audire, quid profuit Christo,
etc. If you will hear, what it profited Christ to have or ^ed out with a great
voice, Origene curtalled by the confuter.
and so to have given up his spirit, that is, to have commended his spirit into
the hands of the Lord, and so to have given it up, or to have leaned his head
upon his fathers bosom, and so to have delivered his spirit, hear what the
Prophet says; for this therefore, he shall not leave his soul in hell, nor
suffer him to see corruption: if therefore we can so behave our selves, that we
can commend our spirit into the hands of the Lord; or lean our head upon the
Lords bosom, and so deliver our spirit: without doubt, neither shall he leave
our souls in hell, nor suffer us for ever to remain in corruption. All this
is quite cut off, because he save what a pregnan^ place this was against the
local descent: seeing that Origene affirms, that ^he souls of Christ's
members, that commend their spirits into the hands of God, shall after the same
manner, not be left in hell, as Christ's soul was not left. But the souls of
the faithful come not into hell at all. 3. Beside, that, which he rehearses
out of Origene, is very corruptly translated: Origene corrupted.
he that called Christ from hell after the third day; recalled us also in due
time: and he that gave to him, that his flesh should not see (...) has, also
given to us: whereas Origenes words are, nos revocabit, shall recall us in due
time, and nobis dona^is, and shall all give to us: what greater forgerie could
be (...)? what shameless dealing is this?

2. Again, whereas Origene is produced by the Replyer, to show his different
judgment from other of the fathers, concerning Limbus patrum, making Abraham's
bosom to be, where were Angelorum ch^r^, etc. the company of Angels, the
kingdom of Christ: he to confront this testimony of Origin, alleges another
place in this manner: the only begotten son (of God) descended into hell for
the salvation of the world, and thence brought back again, the first man
(Adam:) for that which he said to the thief, to day thou shall be with me in
Paradise, you must understand to be spoken, not to him only, but to all the
Saints, for whom he descended to hell. 3. b. p. 194.
Here diverse faults are committed: 1. The words enclosed in the parenthesis,
he adds of his own. 2. Protoplostum he translateth the first man, which
signifies, the first made (man:) intellige, which is understand thou, he
englisheth you must understand. 3. Beside, this testimony makes flatly against
the Confuter, who holds Christ's soul to have been three days in hell; 3.
b. p. 165.
whereas Origin thinks, that not only the thief, but all the other Saints
went into heaven the same day of his passion: but they returned not without
Christ: Christ's soul then could not be so long in hell, in Origenes opinion.
4. Further, out of this very homil. 15. in Genest. it more fully appears;
that Origene differed in opinion from the rest, concerning ( Limbus patrum) for
upon those words of the Lord to Iakob, revocabo te inde in finem, etc. I will
bring thee back again in the end: he writes thus, velut si diceret, etc. As
if he should say, because thou have fought a good fight, kept the faith,
finished thy course, I will call thee now out of the world, unto future
happiness, unto the perfection of life eternal, unto the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord shall render in the end of the world to all that
love him. The place, whether Iakob was called out of the world, was a place of
happiness, the perfection of life eternal, etc. therefore not a prison,
dungeon, place of darkness, or hell: as Limbus patrum was of some of the
fathers imagined to be.

3. Origene is cited by this confused Confuter, 3. b. p. 19.
where he commits diverse foul ouersights: 1. he names the 18. homily upon
Iosuah: but in that homily, the sentence which he alleges, is not to be
found: nor yet in the homily upon the 18. chap. for he might mistake the
number of the homily for the chapter. 2. Beside, to mende the matter with: in
the margen, he sets the 28. homily upon Iosuah, whereas there are but 26. in
all upon that book. 3. The place is altogether impertinent to his purpose: for
the question being of the meaning of those words of our Savior, Ioh. 17.
Father, I will that where I am, these also may be with me: whether Christ
speak of himself as the Messiah, or in respect of his Godhead only: he
brings in these words of Origene, Blessed is he, who shows himself such an
one, etc. that of our Savior he may receive the portion of the heavenly
mansion in the world to come, The Confuters ignorance in Origens works.
of which our Lord Jesus himself speaks, (father, I will, etc. In which
words it is evident, that Origene speaks of Christ, as the Savior and
Messiah. 4. And to show his great skill in reading of this fathers works: he
cites the 12. homily upon Matthew, 3. b. p. 35. 3. b. p. 35.
and the 35. homily upon Matthew. p. 57. whereas they are the tractates or
commentaries upon Matthew, not homilies: which were his sermons to the people,
or multitude, whereof they have their name.

5. An other place of Origene he diversely abuses: 3. b. p. 165.
1. by clipping of many words: as where Origene alleges the text, to
sacrifice unto the Lord our God, he says, to do sacrifice unto God: Again,
those words of Origene: Pharaoh would not permit the^ to come unto the place of
signs: that is, mysteries: he omitteth altogether. 2. He translateth
corruptly: for those words, resuscitabit nos Deus, etc. God shall raise us
after two days, he englisheth, God shall visit us after two days. 3. He says
very boldly, that these words of Origene, ( the first day to us, is the passion
of our Savior, the second day is that, wherein he descended to hell, and the
third day is the day of the resurrection:) he does not appropriate them to
Christ, and his abode in hell: because he applies them to us. A very senseless
and unlearned answer: for whereas the Prophet says, unto us a child is horn:
he might as well infer, that he does not appropriate it to Christ's nativity,
because it is applied to us. As though all Christ's actions, his birth, passion,
resurrection, and the rest, were not for us. 4. Whereas he holds Origenes
opinion to be, that Christ's soul was three days in hell, and cites him to
that end, p. 169. 3. b. p. 169.
the contrary is showed before, loc. 2. that Origene held, that all the
fathers, together with the theife, entered into heaven the same day of Christ's
passion: whence it will follow, that Christ's soul also entered together with
theirs. And in this place it is evident, that in his opinion the soul of
Christ descended not till the second day.

6. Whereas the Replyer cites a place of Origene, wherein comparing Christ to
a victorious captain, that divides the principal spoils among his soldiers
of best desert, he says, that he likewise, unto those, which have labored
most, sibi similes decernit honores, does give honors like to his own, 3. b.
p. 10.
such as he conferred upon his disciples: when he said, Father I will, that
where I am, they may be with me: And proves hereby, that these honors like
unto Christ's, are not those which are due to his godhead, which are not
communicable unto any, but such, as he received as Messiah. This vain and
trifling Confuter first quarrelling, because the Replyer abridged this
sentence, keeping the sense, then denies that he has any such meaning; but
that these words make directly against the Replyer: whereas Christ being
compared to a victorious and triumpha^t captain dividing spoils, must be
understood as the Messiah, as he ascended into heaven, and led captivity
captive: which he did, not as God only, but as the Messiah and captain of the
Church. These honors were due unto him in deed as God, for who denies that?
(upon which false supposall he groundeth all the force of his reason) but not
as God only, but as God and man, the blessed Savior and Messiah.

2. Ignatius, Thaddaeus, and Tertullian falsified.
1. Thaddaeus, as he is cited by Bellarmine, from whom he borrowed it, (for why
should not the scholar be bold with the master) has this sentence: Christus
descendit ad inferos, and disrupit maceriem, etc. Christ descended into hell,
and brake down the partition wall, which no man had ever broken down in the
world: (who descended alone, but ascended with a great multitude) this last
enclosed clause he cutteth off, 3. b. p. 143.
least he should too openly have discovered his opinion touching Limbus patrum.

2. He brings in Ignatius saying the same thing with Thaddaeus: 3. b. p. 143.
for he ascribes to them both the same testimony. Bellar. lib. 4. de Christ.
anim. c. 14.
But herein he left his first instructor, who produces two other testimonies
of Ignatius: the latter whereof is this, Descendit ad infernum solus, regressus
autem cum multitudine: he descended into hell alone, but returned with a great
multitude. But he omitteth this testimony also, to avoid the former
inconvenience.

3. Tertullian is notably abused by him: 3. b. p. 143. lib. de anim. c. 55.
1. for his assertion in the same place is this: that Christ descended to the
lower parts of the earth: vt illic Patriarchas and Prophetas compotes sui
faceret: that there he should make the Patriarks and Prophets partakers of
himself: this he concealeth. 2. The sentence by him alleged, is not
Tertullians affertion out of his own judgment, but an objection: Sed in hoc
(inquiunt) etc. but he descended ( they will say) for this, that we should noe
go thither: for he takes away this objection: and thus confuteth them, satis
superbe non putant, Tertullian grossly abused.
etc. they proudly think that the souls of the faithful are not fit or meet
for hell, the servants taking upon them more then the Lord, and the scholars
then the master: and concludes the souls of the dead, apud inferos sequestari
in diem iudicij: to be sequestered in hell until the day of judgment: and a
little before: nulli patet coelum, etc. heaven is not open to any, as long as
the earth is preserved, transactione mundi reserabuntur regna coeloru^, etc.
the kingdom of heaven shall be unlocked in the transaction (and passing away)
of the world: what gross ignorance then is this, to ascribe unto Tertullian
that opinion, which he confuteth, though (I confess) he falls into a worse
error himself. But this excuses not his deceitful legerdemaine. These
fathers for antiquity, should have been placed before Origene: but he is
raunged in the forefront, because diverse testimonies of his are corrupted by
the Confuter.

3. Chrysostom falsified.
1. Thus Chrysostom is alleged: Christ descended into the lower parts of the
earth ( that is, in 4. c. ad Ephesians. 3. b. p. 143.
to hell, as himself does interpret it) for our souls: whereas Chrysostom
does in the same place far otherwise interpret it: for he expounds it by
that place, Philip. 2. he humbled himself, and became obedient to the death of
the cross: quemadmedum illic de animi modestia, Chrysostom wrested contrary
to his own mind.
etc. as there giving admonition concerning modesty, and humility of mind,
he brings in Christ; so in this place, because he descended into the lower
parts of the earth: yea further he thus expounds in direct words: inferiores
terrae parts mortem dicit, etc. he calls the lower parts of the earth,
death; and that according to the suspicion and opinion of men, as Iakob also
says, you shall bring mine old age with sorrow to (hell) or the lower parts:
ad inferos.
and again in the Psalm, I shall be like to those that go down to the pit,
that is, to them that die. What an unsavory fellow now is this? that dare so
falsely charge Chrysostom, making him to understand that of hell, which he
interprets of death: which in the opinion of men seems to be as it were
hell?

2. In another place these words of Chrysostom, Ista pro vobis ferens,
Suffering these things for you; he translateth, Suffering these things for
Christ's sake: whereas Chrysostom says, Sed qui moritur indies? studio,
voluntate, and quod promptus ad eam rem sit: How does he die daily? in study
and willingness, and because he is ready for that thing: he turns the words
thus; Animi promptitudine, quia esset ad mortem subeundam semper paratior: 3.
b. p. 64.
In promptness of mind, and for that he was every day more and more ready to
suffer death for Christ's sake.

4. Hierome falsified.
1. Hierome handling that place, Math. 18. 15. is alleged thus; Praecipit.
Dominus peccantes in os argui debere: translated thus; Our Lord commands that
we should reprove offenders to their face, 2. b. p. 67.
or openly: clean contrary to Saint Hieroms words that follow: Hierom
shamefully perverted.
Secreto, vel adhibito test: Secretly, or taking a witness, which words he
fraudulently omitteth: Hierome expounds in os, to the face, secretly, or
before a witness, he perverting his sense says, openly.

2. Saint Hierome also is cited upon Psalm 70. verse 20. expounding it of
Christ's local descension to hell: Hierom clipped.
where the words of Hierom are omitted, which immediately follow upon these
words, thou have increased mine honor: 2. b. p. 136.
cum hi, qui in inferno tenebantur, mecum redierant: when they, which were held
in hell, returned with me: which sentence he concealed, for unless he also
maintain Limbus patrum, it makes nothing for him.

3. The Replyer is charged with many faults, in translating Hieroms sentence:
Non tam stultus sum, vt diuersitate explanationum tuarum, me ladi putem, quia
nec tu laederis, si nos contraria senserimus: I am not so unwise, as to think
my self hurt by your explanations, The Confuter cauilleth about the turning of
nec into non.
because neither are you prejudiced, etc. because he changes nec into non: a
great matter, and beseeming the gravity of such an obiector: whereas, the
Replyer reads non, to make a perfect sentence. Again, there is left out in
the translation diuersitate, with the diversity: but seeing it is not omitted
in the latin sentence, there can be no fraud, and in the English it is
employed; for he could not be hurt or prejudiced, but by different and diverse
explanations. A third fault he sindeth, because the Replyer englisheth laedi,
to be hurt and prejudiced: whereas he translateth it wronged and iniuried,
which is further off from the signification of the word, then the other.

But this (coining Confuter) himself commits many and great faults in the
recital of this sentence. 1. He says he finds it in the 13. Hierom clipped
and corrupted and falsely quoted.
Epistle of Saint Hierome to Saint Augustine: whereas Hierome did not write so
many Epistles to Augustine, but ten only, or there-about, which are extant
in the first and second Tomes of Hieroms works: and this sentence which he
alleges, is found in the 6. of them. 2. These words, in Scripturarum
disputatione versemur, he translateth, we may reason of the Scriptures: the
english whereof is this; that we may be conversant in the disputation of the
Scriptures. 3. Nostrum emendemus errorem, he translateth, and so either
correct your error: which should be thus englished; let us amend our error. 4.
After those words, that is a childish boasting, he leaves out this whole
sentence, quod olim adolescentuli facere consueuerant: which young men in time
past were accustomed to do. 3. b. p. 101.


5. Ambrose corrupted.
1. This Grammarian instructor, that professes to teach boys to conster,
himself makes a pitiful construction of Ambrose, 2. b. p. 59. 2. b. p. 59.
these words, Angelo non placuit ancillae insolentia: Lib. 1. de Abraham. c. 4.
The insolency of the handmaid pleased not the Angel: he translateteth; The
Angel was not pleased to see the insolency and pride of the handmaide:
reuertere ad Dominam tuam, Ambrose corruptly translated.
Return to thy Lady: he englisheth; turn again to thy Lady and Mistress.
Verberantis savitiam, the cruelty of the beater: he englisheth, the cruelty
of Sara beating her. Fugientis discessionem, the departure of the flier or
runner away he renders, Hagars departure in running away: adding Sara and
Hagar of his own. Humiliare, be thou humbled: he englisheth, humble thy self.

2. In another sentence taken from Ambrose, 3. b. p. 22.
he leaves out these words: Ambr. lib. de incarnat. Dom. sacram. c. 5.
In inferno positis vitae lumen fundebat eternae: To those which were in hell,
he powered the light of eternal life. Which clause if he had added, he saw that
Ambrose would make little for him, unless he held the local descent of
Christ's soul to hell, for the enlightening and deliverance of the Fathers
thence.

6. Ruffinus falsified.
1. Ruffinus also is pitifully mangled: for his sentence (taking the whole) is
this; But that he descended into hell also, is evidently pronounced in the
Psalms, where he says, Thou broughtest me to the dust of death: Ruffin. in
Symbolum.
and again, what profit is in my blood, while I descend into corruption: and
again, I descended into the mire of the deep, where no substance is (that is,
ground or bottom:) yea and John says, art thou he, which art to come (without
doubt into hell) or look me for another? All this is fraudulently left out:
and then follow the next words, Ruffinus mangled.
which he culleth out: Our Lord also himself speaks, 2. b. p. 179.
etc. But this deceitful Iugler, that plays fast and loose with the Fathers,
well perceived, that seeing Ruffinus expounds descending to hell, to be
brought to the dust of death, and to the place of corruption and blood, that
his meaning can be no otherwise, then to understand death and the grave: as to
the same purpose he said before, that vis eadem verbi videtur esse, etc. the
same force of the word seems to be in that, he is said to be buried: as he is
said before to descend to hell.

I marvel also, how his (mastership) could take no knowledge of another place
in Ruffinus, not far from that, which he thus hacketh and pareth: where he
says, that Crux Christi trumphus est, etc. that Christ's cross was a triumph,
and a famous ( trophaeum) monument: and further, he shows how he triumphed
over all things upon the cross, both celestial, terrestrial, and infernal:
unto the first, applying the uppermost part of the cross; to the next, that
part where his hands were stretched out; and for the third he says, ea vero
part, quae sub terram submergitur, inferna sibiregna subiecit: but by that
part, which was hid under the earth, he brought under to himself the infernal
kingdoms.

This clear testimony of Christ's triumph upon the cross, and his victory over
hell, crosses that impious and profane opinion of this drowsy and dreaming
divine; that the conquest upon the cross, A blasphemous scoff uttered of the
triumphant cross of Christ.
was openly an overthrow, and therefore no triumph: and again, if Christ
triumphed in the cross, as you say he did, it was according to the proverb,
triumphus ante victoriam (triumph before the victory:) 1. b. p. 188.

7. Augustine falsified.
1. Thus Augustine is alleged: 2. b. p. 165.
This custom ( of baptizing infants) I believe, Lib. 2. contr. Donatist. c. 7.
as coming from the tradition of the Apostles, etc. whereas the question with
the Donatists, was not concerning the baptizing of infants, Augustines sense
corrupted.
but the rebaptizing of those, which were baptized by heretics: as it may
appear by the words going before; Nolite obijcere nobis authoritatem Cypriani
ad baptismi repetitionem, etc. Do not object to us the authority of Cyprian,
for the repeating of baptism, etc. That question of Baptism was not yet
thoroughly handled, but yet the Chruch kept this wholesome custom; in the
schismatiks and heretics, corrigere quod pravum est, non iterare quod datum
est: to correct what was amiss, not to iterate what was given: then follow
those words, which said custom, etc. (as many things are not found in their
writings, nor in the latter Councels) etc. all this enclosed, is omitted.

2. Augustine is thus brought in: de vnitat. Eccles. c. 19.
that custom of the Church, which was opposed against Cyprian, etc. whereas
the name of Cyprian is not to be found in the 18. 19. 20. chapters of that
book. 2. b. p. 167.


3. Again the same place is quoted, where Augustine should write thus: 2. b.
p. 167.
Cum hoc nusquam legatur, etc. when as this is read no where, we must believe
the testimony of the Church, which Christ has testified to be true: these
words are not extant in that place, Augustine untruly alleged.
in that form, but after this manner: Nunc vero cum in Scripturis non
inveniamus, etc. now seeing we find not in the Scripture, that any have come
to the Church from heretics, etc. and afterward: perhibet Christus testimonium
Ecclesiae suae, etc. Christ does give testimony to his Church.

4. Augustine is cited, sermon. ( he should have said) hom, 2. in vigil. pasch.
tom. 10. in these words: si sepultus fuisset in terra, etc. If Christ had been
buried in the earth, they might have said, they had dug up the earth, and
stolen him away, to prove a difference between Christ's tomb, and the earth:
3. b. p. 164.
yet in that homily no such sentence is to be found: Augustine ignorantly
cited.
but rather the contrary: quid illi tumulus in terris, cuius seeds manebat in
coelis? why should he have a tomb in the earth, whose seat remained in
heaven: here he affirms Christ's tomb to have been in the earth. This gross
oversight shows, how well (this pettifogger in divinity) is seen in the
reading of Augustine.

5. That place of August. c. 15. cont. Felician. lib. 3. p. 2. lib. 3. p. 2.
he diverse ways corrupts: 1. he adds general resurrection: nullus
ignorant, he translateth, every man knows: which signifies, no man is
ignorant: cuius corpus, etc. says Augustine, whose body common death had
enclosed for the future resurrection: he reads, whose body death had shut up
(in the grave) until the future resurrection of all flesh.

Beside, he bewraieth his ignorance, in mistaking the sense and scope of
Augustine in that place: 1. he says that Augustines whole discourse, is to
prove that Christ deserved not hell fire: whereas the very point of the
question is, that though Christ died in body, yet his soul perished not: vt
vita perderet vitam, that our life, should loos^ life: c. 4. in init. by
occasion of which question he falls also into that other point, concerning
the death of Christ's soul. 2. He says, that Augustine takes this for
granted, that the promise made to the thief, was the voice of Christ's
Godhead: whereas Augustine only propounds it by way of objection: sed dicet
aliquis, etc. but some one will say: Augustines meaning mistaken.
we believe this was the voice of the deity, not of the soul of Christ, etc.
and afterward he rather reasons against that objection, then yeildeth to it:
and quid in eo cui promittebat, accipimus etc. and what do we take in him, to
whom the promise was made: and so he frames his argument, from the soul of
the thief to the soul of Christ: reasoning from the less to the greater. 3.
He denies that any such collection can be made out of Augustine, that if the
soul of the thief went to Paradise, Christ much more: but that this is
Augustines meaning rather, that because the theefes soul was presently made
blessed, etc. in Paradise, and so freed from the fear of death, and hell, much
more was the soul of Christ exempted. Contra. Augustines words are these: If
the soul of the thief was straightway (the bodie^beeing dead) called to
Paradise: shall we think any to be so impious, to think that the soul of our
Savior was three days kept in hell? etc. here is no mention of the fear of
death or hell, but of calling the soul to Paradise: his words are plain,
that Christ's soul could not be in hell all those three days, that his body
was in the grave: nay it can not be proved out of this treatise of Augustine,
that Christ's soul was in hell: for it is evident, that he takes ( inferi) for
the place of the dead: As c. 14. he says, erat vno eodemque tempore totus in
inferno, totus in coelo, illic patiens iniuriam carnis, etc. he was at one and
the same time, whole in (hell) or below, whole in heaven: there suffering the
injury of his flesh, here not leaving the glory of his deity. Again, c. 17.
iacebat quantum ad corpus, etc. he lay touching his body dead in the grave,
raising the dead in hell, or in the low parts: but Christ's flesh was in the
grave, not in hell, and from the grave, not from hell he raised the dead.

6. An other place of Augustine is corruptly alleged: epist. 57. ad Dardan.
lib. 3. p. 14. lib. 3. p. 14.
first, he inuerteth the order of the words: for that sentence, beginning as
it might rightly be said, and ending, because he is always every where, etc.
is at least 40. lines after that sentence, if this (to day thou shall, etc.)
which he confusedly places immediately after, as though it were all one
sentence. Again, in the next sentence, beginning, if this (to day thou shall,
etc.) and ending, humane soul: he clippeth off at the least 20. lines, and
leapeth them all over, to those words, but the sense is much more ready, etc.
which he joins as immediately following, being 20. lines after: thirdly, he
fraudulently omitteth many sentences, which come between, making directly
against his opinion of Christ's descent to hell: 1. Augustine says, Vnde quaeri
solet, etc. whence it uses to be questioned, Augustine clipped by the
Co^futer, because he directly makes against him.
if the infernal places are understood only to be penal, how can we believe
godly, that the soul of Christ was in hell: but it is well answered, that
therefore he descended, to succor, whom he could. Here Augustine makes no
other end of Christ's descending into the penal place of hell, but to give
succor and relief. 2. If both the region, of those which were in grief, and
those which were at rest, etc. is to be believed to have been in hell, who
dare say that Christ went only to the penal places of hell, and not to have
been with them which were at rest in Abraham's bosom: where if he were, that
was the Paradise, which he vouchsafed to promise the thief: here he resolves,
that the soul of Christ went to the Paradise promised to the thief.

7. So Augustine is erroneously cited: for twice he quoteth tract. 91. in Ioh.
17. 3. b. p. 8. and 16. whereas the place is taken out of the 111. tract. in
Ioh. 17. Beside, he would make the Reader believe, that Augustine expounds
this glory, 3. b. p. 8.
which Christ speaks of, Ioh. 17. only of the glory of his Godhead: 3. b.
p. 16.
and that other speech, (where I am, etc.) to be understood of the presence of
his Godhead. Cont. In the very same tractat. 111. Augustine thus expounds
those words, I will, that where I am, they may be with me: Quantum attinet ad
creaturam, etc. Concerning that creature, wherein he was made of the seed of
David after the flesh, he was not yet himself, where he was to be: but in that
sense he might say, where I am, as we might understand, that he should quickly
ascend into heaven: that he said he was there already, where he was presently
to be. In the same tractate, he also thus expounds the glory: etiamsi eam
dici hoc loco intelligamus, etc. Though we understand that glory to be here
spoken of, not which the father gave unto his son being equal in begetting
him: but which he gave unto him being made the son of man after the death of
the cross: he understands it as well of the glory given unto him as man, as
that due unto him as God.

But more evidently Augustine shows his mind touching these points, in the
former tractates upon this chapter:

As, tract. 104. Haec est glorificatio, etc. This is the glorifying of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which took beginning from his resurrection.

Tract. 105. That the son was glorified of the father, according to the form
of a servant, whom the father raised up being dead, Augustine makes directly
against the Confuter.
and placed at his right hand, the thing it self shows, and no Christian
doubts. And if the Confuter doubt hereof, in Augustins opinion he is no
Christian.

And upon those words, Glorify me with the glory, etc. which I had, etc. he
writes thus, sicut tunc praedestinatione, etc. as then in predestination, so
now in perfection, do in the world, what was with thee before the world, do
in time, that which thou appointedst before all time. Thus Augustine apparently
understands the glory which was given unto Christ, as man.

And how Christ our blessed Savior prayed unto his Father, he thus also
shows; tract. 104. Poterat Dominus noster, etc. Our Lord the only begotten,
and coeternall to the father, might in the form, and by the form of a servant
if it had been needful, have prayed in silence: but he would so exhibit
himself to his father a prayer for us; as that he remembers himself to be
our teacher. And again, in another place, Orauit Dominus non secundum formam
Dei, etc. in Psalm. 87.
Our Lord prayed, not according to the form of God, but according to the form
of a servant, according to the which he suffered. For if he will still stand
unto it, that Christ as God prayed unto his father, and not as man, he will
make Christ a Priest, as he is God, and so inferior unto his father, as God,
and so fall apparently into Arrianisme, from the which he cannot shift
himself, with all the ^^eights that a subtle head, and froward wit can
affoard him.

8. He would wrest a sentence of Augustine, Epist. 99.
to show, that he thought Abraham's bosom to be in hell: 3. b. p. 194.
producing this place; if the holy Scripture had said, that Christ after his
death came into that bosom of Abraham, not mentioning hell, and the sorrows
thereof, I marvel if any durst have said, that he descended to hell, etc. It
is a strange thing, that a man should so cast off all modesty, as so
apparently to fasten upon Augustine an opinion contrary to his own words: The
Confuter cites Augustine, contrary to his own words.
for a little before he said; ne ips^s quidem inferos, etc. I cannot find hell
in any place of the Scripture to be called for good: and immediately after he
infers, that the bosom of Abraham, that is, the habitation of quiet rest,
is not to be believed, to be a part of hell: yea and in these words, which he
ignorantly presses, as much may be gathered: for in saying, that unless
mention were made in Scripture of hell, and the sorrows thereof, but only of
Christ's going to Abraham's bosom, no man durst have said, that Christ descended
to hell: he insinuates that Abraham's bosom was not hell, for then any durst
have so said, without any further mention of hell. Thus he confounds himself
with his own testimony.

9. He cites a place out of Augustine, to prove that unity is a note of the
Church, quoting lib. 2. cont. liter. Petilian. c. 54. Lib. 2. p. 108. but
printed 112. Augustine misquoted.
Dissentio and diuisio facit haereticos, etc. Dissension and division makes
heretics, but peace and unity makes Catholics. But in that place, no such
sentence at all is to be found; which shows, what vain oftentation he
makes of his reading in the Fathers, being utterly ignorant in them. The
place which he aims at, is the 96. not the 54. chapter of that book, which
he corruptly alleges: for Augustine says, Dissentio quippe (vos) and
diuisio facit haereticos, etc. Dissension and division makes (you) heretics,
peace and unity makes Catholics. But he leaves out (you) wherein the force
of Augustines speech lies. His meaning is, that not the diversity of faith, or
dissenting in religion; but division only and separation from the Catholic
Church, made them, namely the Donatists, heretics: for the Donatists confessed
of themselves, and Augustine denied it not; Cont. Cich. lib. 2. cap. 7.
nobis vobisque vna est religio, etc. You and we have the same religion, the
same sacraments, nothing diverse in Christian observation. Other heretics were
discerned then by their heretical opinions; the Donatists by their
schismatic separation. Again, Augustine means not, that unity simply is a
note of the Church; but unity with the Church of God: for the Pagans had unity
among themselves: As Augustine in another place says, Tom. 9. de vtilitat.
i^iun.
Non proferant nobis, quasi concordiam suam, hostem quippe, quem nos patimur,
illi non patiuntur: Let them not object unto us, as it were their concord, for
they suffer not that enemy, whom we suffer. Therefore he two ways abuses
Augustines sentence, both in clipping his words, and perverting his sense, in
making unity and dissension in the Church, the cognizances, and causes
distinctiue, etc. whereas Augustine speaks not of unity and dissension in the
Church, and among themselves; but of unity with the Church, and of dissension
and separation from the Church. Wherefore this sentence was impertinently
alleged against the Replyer, who thus says, That one bond of faith in the
diversity of some private opinions, may contain and keep us in peace. There
may be some diversity in opinion in the Church, and yet neither faith
perverted, nor peace violated.

10. Augustine is brought in thus writing; 3. b. p. 16.
tract. 12. in 3. Ioann. Behold, Christ was here, and he was in heaven, for so
he came thence, Augustine very corruptly alleged.
that he departed not thence, and so returned thither, that he left us not
here: and what marvel you? this God does: for man according to the body both
is in a place, and goes out of a place, but God fills all places, and is
whole every where: yet Christ was at that time, according to his visible flesh
in earth. But Augustines words in that place are these, writing upon this text:
No man has ascended into heaven, but he that descended, etc. Ecce hic erat,
and in coelo erat, etc. Behold, he was here, and he was in heaven: he was here
in his flesh, and in heaven in his divinity; yea every where in his divinity:
borne of (his) mother, and not departing from (his) father, etc. And ^ome few
lines after, he says, mirari^, etc. Do you marvel that he was in heaven also:
he made his disciples such: hear the Apostle saying, our conversation is in
heaven: if Paul the Apostle being man, did walk in his flesh in the earth,
and yet was conversant in heaven; could not the God of heaven and earth, be
both in heaven and earth? The judicious Reader may see, what small affinity
and agreement there is between these two sentences: and although Augustines
testimony had been truly alleged, yet had it not been to the purpose: for
the question is not of the meaning of these words of our Savior, John 3. 13.
The son of man, which is in heaven: but of those, John 17. 24. I will that
they, etc. be with me, where I am. Other places cited out of Augustine, and
other Fathers, are handled with the like unclean fists; but these given in
instance, do sufficiently bewray his cunning counterfetting of antiquity: and
the like fidelity he shows, in producing the new writers, as now shall be
seen.

8. Caluinee falsified.
1. In alleging Calvin, Lib. 2. p. 183.
lib. 2. Institut. c. 16. ser. 8. these corruptions are committed. 1. He
clippeth off diverse sentences: for after these words, There is no small force
to the effect of our redemption, this sentence follows; Quanquam enim ex
veterum scriptis, etc. For although it appear out of the writings of the
ancient, that this particle was not of old so much used in the Church, yet in
handling the sum of doctrine, place of necessity must be given unto it: the^
follow the words next obtruded by him: It contains a profitable mystery,
etc. then, in the last part of the sentence, There is none of the ancient
Fathers, which does not in his writings make mention of Christ's descension into
hell: He quite cutteth off the words following, tametsi interpretatione
diuersa: although in a diverse (sense) and interpretation: the which words do
evidently show, that Calvin receiving the article of the descension, yet
insisteth upon the right interpretation. 2. He also peruerteth the order of
Calvin's words: for that clause, This certain, is out of all question, etc. he
puts last, whereas in Calvin it goes before the precedent part, this clause
has so great force, etc. 3. He alleges Calvin for the local descent,
contrary to Caluins judgment, who understands it of the spiritual agony and
perplexity of Christ's soul. ibid. sect. 10.

2. Calvin also is cited, 3. b. p. 292.
2. lib. Institut. c. 16. sect. 9. as though he should hold, that the faithful
of the old Testament were in that prison mentioned by Saint Peter, that is in
hell, etc. where they carefully expected the promised redemption: where diverse
untruths are uttered. 1. Calvin says, Concludere in carcere mortuorum animas,
puerile est: To shut up the souls of the dead in prison, is a childish thing.
He denies then, that they were in prison. 2. He speaks not of redemption,
which they expected; but says, that piae animae eius visitationis, quam
solicit expectauerant, praesenti aspectu sunt potitae: The godly souls did
enjoy the sight of that visitation, which they carefully expected. His meaning
is, that even the godly souls departed had a sense of Christ's death, and were
affected with a lightsome joy, the time of visitation being now exhibited unto
the Church, which they, while they lived, in faith believed, and in hope
expected. 3. Yet is he not ashamed to allege Calvin, as a maintainer of the
local descension; and not content therewith, he adds one untruth unto
another, that the Replyer himself says, that Calvin holds Christ's
descension into hell even in that place of Peter: 3. b. p. 79.
whereas he affirms the contrary, that Calvin and Beza hold not the
descension as he does, in that very place which he has reference to in the
margin, Limbom. p. 58. And indeed Caluines opinion is, Vim mortis Christi,
vsque ad mortuos penetrasse: that the force of Christ's death did pierce unto
the dead: that the power and effect of his death, not the presence of his soul
was there.

9. Beza falsified.
1. Beza is here diverse ways wronged. 2. b. p. 68.
1. His words are falsely translated: de priuatis iniurijs, of private wrongs,
he englisheth, of private offenses: a private wrong (that is) done to a private
person, may yet be committed publicly, Beza in Math. 18. v. 15.
but so cannot a private offense. 2. He curtalleth the sentence, repeating
only the first clause, they are deceived, who think that Christ in this place
speaks of private offenses: all the rest that follows is omitted; quum
Christus, etc. seeing Christ intends nothing else in these words, then to
distinguish secret sins, from manifest: therefore he is said to sin against
one, not only which hurts him privately, but which with his priuitie only,
sins against God, or any other. 3. By this sentence it appears his meaning
is, that Christ speaks of secret sins, whether committed against God, or
any private man. What immodest dealing then is this, to allege Beza, as
expounding this place, not of sins secretly, but openly done?

2. Beza thus expounds, in te, id est, te tantum conscio, against thee, 2. b.
p. 69.
thou only knowing of it: but he thus corrupts that place; against another,
thou knowing of it: where he adds these words, against another, and leaves
out only: for the secret trespasser may as well sin me against him, whom he
offends, as against another; as appears in the former testimony.

3. I omit certain places out of Beza, 2. b. p. 107.
clipped by him: as in that testimony cited upon Act. 5. 17. Beza his words
are, qui a (recepta) sana doctrina, etc. and, Dei (and) Ecclesiae, (ipsius:)
where these words enclosed, are omitted by the Confuter. So, 2. b. p. 171.
upon John, 15. 26. he leaves out more then four lines in the mids of the
sentence: but because the sense is not much hindered by these omissions, I will
not take that advantage, which he is ready to catch at upon every occasion.

He further abuses Beza, 3. b. p. 69.
in deprauing his words, and detorting his sense, as though he should think it
a forced and violent thing, by spirits to understand living men, 1. Pet. 3. 19.
whereas he means only, that men yet living cannot be called spirits: but
those which are now spirits, may by a certain figure, called prolepsis, be
understood to have been sometime living men: as Peter calls them spirits, in
respect of that time present, wherein he wrote, not of that, whereof he
writes. This then is a mere cauil, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter: because Beza in some sense counts it a coact thing to understand
by spirits, living men, that simply and absolutely he denies it.

4. Beza is imagined to understand that place, 3. b. p. 92.
2. Cor. 13. 4. crucified concerning his infirmity, not of the natural
substance of Christ's flesh and humanity, but of the quality only thereof:
(...), qualitatem declarat: infirmity declares the quality of the substance:
where he leaves out the former part of the sentence: where Beza directly
applies it, ad infirmam formam serui, to the weak form of a servant, (that
is, to the humane nature) which Christ took: and says further, idem hoc
declarat, etc. this shows the same thing, which (according to the flesh) 1.
Romans 3. So Beza his meaning is, that though infirmity in the native use of the
word, signifies the quality only; yet thereby in this place, the very
substance of the humane nature is insinuated.

10. The Geneva translators abused.
This unconscionable Confuter, 3. b. p. 192.
would fasten upon the^, to hold Limbus patrum, and to favor the opinion of
the Fathers; that the Patriarchs went not to heaven, but were delivered by the
descension of Christ: and to this end he brings in that annotation, Hebr.
9. 8. which is thus set down whole in that place: ( So long as the high Priest
offered once a year for his own sins, and for the peoples) and also while
this earthly tabernacle stood, the way to the heavenly Tabernacle, which is
made open by Christ's blood, could not be entered into. Here first, all the first
words enclosed, are cut off: secondly, he forgeth a sense, contrary to their
own judgment: for that those godly learned men, that penned those
annotations, did believe all the holy Fathers of the old Testament, to be in
heaven, appears by that their interpretation of Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22.
whereby is signified (say they) the most blessed life, which they that die in
the faith of Abraham, shall enjoy after this world. Therefore they could not
be so forgetful, or contrary to themselves, in that other place so to
conceive, as though the way in the old Testament was not opened for the
Fathers to enter into heaven, before the coming of Christ: wherefore they
either speak comparatively, that the way was not so opened, and made plain
before the coming of Christ, as since; as they give the like sense of those
words, Heb. 11. 39. They received not the promise: they had no such clear
light (say they) of Christ as we have: Or else their meaning is, that by the
sacrifices and rites of the Tabernacle, that way was not opened, but by the
blood of Christ: so that the times are not compared together, but the things;
as they thus note, Hebr. 10. 19. By the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter
into the holy place: we by Christ (say they) have that liberty, which the
ancient Fathers could not have by the law.

Thus this Surmisers supposed falsifications are returned upon his own head,
and he himself is found to be the clipper and deprauer, and corrupter of the
Fathers testimonies: few whereof are recited by him, which he does not mangle
and wrest at his pleasure. These places out of the old and new writers (about
thirty in all) given before in instance, are an evident proof hereof: the like
might have been showed in the rest, but that it is not worth the labor, to
spend time, to hunt after so mean a game, and to have such a silly bird in
chase; which has (according to the saying) defiled the own neast.

When he first entered into this challenge, and adventured to lay load upon the
Replyer, with this cauillous charge of falsifications: he should first have
himself considered, whether one might not rub upon his own galled back.
And he herein plays an evil fensers part, that lies open himself, where he
thought to give an other a venie. That wise sentence should have come into his
head: (...); Moschionis.
wherein thou purposest to smite an other, therein expect a greater blow thy
self. It is an evident argument either of a bad cause or weak defense, that
is bolstered out with such indirect means. The truth (as the proverb is) will
not seek corners: nor yet will the verity be defended with a lie, nor
simplicity by falsifications and forgerie. In the sixth Synod of Constantinop.
Act. 6. when as Macarius and Petrus, with other Monothelites, had mangled the
testimonies of the Fathers, as well in sense as words; the Catholics said, Non
congruit orthodoxis ita circumtruncatas patrum sententias deflorare, etc. It is
not agreeable to the orthodoxall (men) so to deflowre, (and deface) the gelded
sentences of the fathers: this is more proper for heretics. If he would
therefore have been taken for an orthodoxall and Evangelical writer (as I
wish with my heart, he may hereafter prove, and that the amendment of his
heart may reform the error of his pen) then should he not have trod in the
pathway of Heretics, and followed their guise, in corrupting of his witnesses.
Therefore concerning his omissions, alterations, additions, and other
corruptions in the allegations of the fathers, I say as Augustine did to Julian
concerning Chrysostom, whom he corruptly alleged: lib. 1. cont. Julian. c.
1.
Si totum legisses, invenire potuisti, aut si legisti, miror quemadmodum te
potuit praeterire, aut si praeterire non potuit, miror quomodo te non
correxerit: If you had read the whole, you might have found it: or if you read
it, I marvel how it could escape you, or if it did not escape you, I wonder,
how it did not correct you.

The 12. Imputation, of the pretended corruption of Scriptures. 12. Imputation.

The accusation.
1. Because Ecclesiastic. 19. 10. the Replyer leaves out these words, 2. b. p.
70.
and confidens esto, and be sure.

2. In the place, Genesis 37. 31. these words are omitted: Ruben moreover said
unto them. 2. b. p. 123.


3. In that place, Act. 2. v. 31. you falsify the Syrian Translators words in
mistranslating them: the Latin Translator you abuse in like manner. 2. b. p.
160.


4. These words, (which had seized upon him) are not in that place, 2. b. p.
139.
Act. 2. 24. as you pretend them.

5. You falsify the word of God it self: for in that place of Exodus c. 22.
23. the word (nephesh) is and ought to be translated (life,) 2. b. p. 143.
not (soul.)

6. For, the souls that went down with Iaakob into Egypt; you make the
Scripture to say, their souls went down into Egypt. 2. b. p. 144.


7. The place to the Coloss. 2. 15. (triumphing over them in the same) is
falsely translated: our authorized translatour reads (in himself.) 2. b. p.
186.


8. So, Psalm. 88. 10, 11. is mangled, and corrupted: patching two distinct
verses in one: see afterward, recriminat. 6. 3. b. p. 26.


9. You falsify the Scripture it self, in translating (...), to hold fast,
Mark. 7. 8. whereas our Church Bibles read, (ye observe the traditions.) 3. b.
p. 31. 3. b. p. 31.


10. Limbom. inverteth the text, Act. 2. 31. to serve his turn. 3. b. p. 37.
3. b. p. 37.


11. You commit a double fault in your translation of S. Peter's words: the one
in confounding hell with the grave, which is heathenish; the other in burying
the soul of Christ in it, which is impious. 3. b. p. 38.


12. You falsify the prophecy, in leaving out the words (in hell,) wherein
the maine of the controversy consists. Act. 2. 31. 3. b. p. 42.


13. This is your dalying with the word of God in this place: where having
translated it, (thou will not leave my soul in hell) you interpret it clean
contrary, (thou will not leave my life in grave.) 3. b. p. 44. 3. b. p. 44.


14. You cut off the words (of sanctification) which are annexed to the word
spirit, 3. b. p. 57.
etc.

15. The word (by) is violently intruded by you, 1. Pet. 3. 19. 3. b. p. 59.
(by which spirit.)

16. The words are not, as you cite them, 1. Pet. 2. 18. he has suffered for
our sins: but (Christ has also suffered for us.) 3. b. p. 63.


17. Where Peter says it was Christ that preached, you say it was Noe, 3. b.
p. 70.
and so make him a liar.

18. When you say, you know no end of Christ's preaching to the disobedient in
hell, but for their comfort and deliverance, you contradict the Scriptures,
which teach, that the ministry of the word consists as well in denouncing
retention in sin to the obstinate, as in pronouncing remission of sins to
the penitent. 3. b. p. 77.


19. Those words (that speaks in you) though they be added in S. Matthew, are
not here expressed by S. Mark. 3. b. p. 104. 3. b. p. 104.


20. The words of the Evangelist are not as you report them, (when the doors
shut up,) but when the doors were shut. 3. b. p. 118.


21. Neither is the text, (no man ascends,) but (no man has ascended.) 3. b.
p. 172.


22. Psalm. 139. 13. (...), 3. b. p. 183.
is ignorantly left out by you.

23. Because the Replyer alleges those words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 31. I
die daily, understanding them, of inward afflictions: the Confuter takes a
double exception, both, that some of the words are omitted: As by our
rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord: and that the Scripture is
misinterpreted: which Chrysostom expounds of the readiness and promp^^ of
mind, that he was every day more and more ready to suffer death, etc. 3. b.
p. 64. 3. b. p. 64.
And therefore he cries out, that dishonor is offered to the Apostle, and
contumely to the spirit of God, to say, that Paul died the death of the soul:
whereas contrariwise, that which you call (inward afflictions) was thorough
inward joy, and consolation in the holy Ghost, etc. p. 65.

The justification.
1. THe whole sentence is this: if thou have heard a word, let it die with
thee, and (be sure) it will not burst thee: the Replyer abridging this
sentence, keeping the sense, did not take himself tied to repeat every word,
seeing he brings it not in as a testimony, specially out of Scripture, but
has reference unto it by way of allusion, quoting no place. But it is a
greater fault in him, to add unto the text: if thou have a word (against thy
neighbor,) which words enclosed, though retained in the English translation,
yet are not in the original. Beside, he himself clippeth off many words:
citing the beginning only of the 13. and 17. v. reprove thy friend, reprove
thy neighbor, leaving out all the rest. 2. b. p. 71. in marg.

2. Those words, moreover Ruben said, were not material, or pertinent to the
Replyers purpose, and therefore he omitted them.

3. The Syrian Translator: I mean he which translated the Syrian text, reads
thus; quod non sit derelictus in sepulchro, that he was not left in grave: is
here any mistranslation? And the Latin translator is not alleged for the
word infernus, but because in stead of his soul, as it is in the original, he
reads, neque derelictus est, he was not left: the Replyer then is here no
Corrupter, but the Confuter is a Trifler.

4. These words, which had seized of him, the Replyer alleges not as the
words of the text: but only these, he loosed the sorrows, Act. 2. 24. Here
then he is charged with a plain untruth.

5. Then the Latin interpreter, Montanus, Pagnine, Vatablus: all these
falsify the word of God, which translate there, not vitam, life, but animam,
soul: and the Septuag. also, which read, (...), shall give soul for soul.

6. The Replyers words are these: as in like sense it is said, Synops. p. 105^.
Genesis 46. 26. the souls that went with Iakob into Egypt: is he not ashamed
therefore so notoriously to charge him with an untruth. But he himself
corrupts the text in that place, reading the souls, that went down, etc.
whereas the word is, habiah, which signifies only coming or going.

7. Beza so reads, following Origenes reading, hom. 4. in Exodus hom. 17. in
Numer. and hom. 9. in Joshua.

8. Call you this patching, to put two verses of Scripture together? what
think you of S. Paul, which does the same, Romans 3. 10, 11. joining together, a
part of the 1. and a part of the 2. v. Psalm. 14. as the Reader may see by
comparing the places together: you had best count him a patcher of Scripture.

9. Say also that the Latin translator, and Beza, which in that place reads,
tenetis, you hold: and the Syrian interpreter, retinetis, you hold fast:
Montanus, that reads, prehenditis, you lay hold, etc. that all these do
falsify Scripture: and is he indeed so ignorant, as he makes himself, that
(...) does not signify to hold fast: how else will he interpret that place,
Heb. 4. 14. (...), let us hold fast the profession: as both our English
translations read.

10. The Replyer inuerteth not the text, but the Confuter peruerteth his
words: for he alleges the text right, Act. 2. 31. He spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul should not be left (in hell) or the
grave: whereupon the Replyer reasons thus; the Prophet speaks here of
Christ's resurrection, but the descending of Christ's soul to hell, belongs
not to his resurrection, but the not leaving of his soul in grave implies the
resurrection: Ergo: unto this, the pitiful Confuter makes this answer: your
reason should have been this; David spoke of the resurrection of Christ, etc.
but not leaving of Christ's soul in hell, does no way belong to his
resurrection, etc. therefore, etc. here the minor is apparently false, The idle
Confuter as slender a Logician.
etc. Contra. This poor Logician is much to be pitied: 1. does he not see,
that the conclusion of his argument must be this: therefore David speaks not
of the not leaving, etc. which is clean contrary to the text. 2. If he in
deed might make the Replyers argument for him, he would make him as sensles
and absurd as himself. 3. He grossly mistaketh the Replyers argument: which
was this, the descending of Christ's soul to hell belongs not to his
resurrection, but the not leaving of his soul belongs: ergo the not leaving,
etc. proves not the descension. This argument though he inuert and pervert at
his pleasure, he is not able to euert with all the skill he has.

11. The Replyer confounds not hell and the grave, (which is more heathenish
in him so to imagine, then in the other so to write) but joins together two
usual acceptions of the word sheol, neither does he bury his soul, but his
life thereby signified in the grave. And yet to take infernum for the temporal
death, and grave, is neither heathenish nor absurd: unless you will count
Augustine heathenish, who expounds that place, Psalm. 88. 3. My life draws
near to hell, by those words of our Savior, My soul is heavy unto death:
August in Psalm. 87.
Quod enim aijt, tristis est anima, etc. For that he says my soul is heavy
unto death, this is the same that is said, my soul is filled with evil: and
that which follows, unto death, the same is said, my life draws near to
hell, etc.

12. These words ( in hell) are not expressed, because the Replyer groundeth no
argument upon them: but only by setting down the first words, has reference
to the whole prophecy there contained: for in other places, where there was
cause, he omitteth them not, as Limbom. p. 74.

13. Though the Hebrew word sheol, is indifferently taken sometime for hell,
sometime for the grave: yet in this place, Act. 2. 27. the Replyer contendeth
thoroughout that whole discourse, that it signifies the grave: and therefore
to say, he translateth it hell, is according to his usual manner, to fitten
and forge of him.

14. The Replyer cites not the words of the text, Romans 1. 3. but only
shows, that there is an opposition between the flesh and the spirit: and
therefore there was no cause to add those words ( of sanctification) no more
then other words of the text.

15. As though it be not an usual phrase in Scripture, to say, (...), in
spiritu; when it must be understood, by or through the spirit: as Ephesians. 2. 22.
In whom ye also are built together, to be the habitation of God (by the
spirit:) so road, not Beza only, but Vatablus, the Syrian interpreter, the
Geneva, and the authorized English translation: let him accuse these also of
violent intrusion.

16. But the Apostle also says in an other place, that Christ once suffered
for sins, 1. Pet. 3. 18. the figure 2. might easily be mistaken for 3.

17. Christ by Noah preached: the one as the author, the other as the Minister:
so both may well stand together, S. Peter's text that speaks of Christ, and the
interpretation, that applies it to Noah. If any make the Apostle a liar, it is
himself that corrupts his sense by a false interpretation: and makes him to
speak that, which he never intended.

18. Though the preaching of the word unto unbelievers is thorough the hardness
of their heart, the savor of death unto death: yet the principal and only
end in respect of God, is the comfort and conversion of men: the hardening of
the heart is effected accidentally by the word, and is not the proper end
thereof. This is evident by that prophecy of Isai of Christ; Isa. 61. 1.
The spirit of God is upon me, etc. he has sent me to preach good tidings to
the poor. Epist. 99.
And this is Augustines reason, that if there be preaching in hell, some may be
converted and believe in hell: to say therefore, to what purpose should Christ
be thought to preach to the spirits in hell, etc. then for their comfort and
deliverance, is no contradicting of the Scriptures, but a manifesting of his
ignorance, that knows it not.

19. And is it not sufficient if one Evangelist have those words? and is it not
lawful, what is wanting in one, to supply out of an other? But it can have no
excuse, to clippe the Evangelists words as he does: whatsoever is given unto
you at the same time, that speak, says Saint Mark: but he cites the place
thus: that which shall be given you, 3. b. p. 105.
that speak.

20. And is he so captious, that he could not, or would not see, that the
omission of this word ( were,) was a mere oversight in the setter, and
therefore the Replyer has amended it among the Errata before Limbomastix. And
this (poore-blinde pryer) might have observed the like escape in his own
blotted lines: where he thus writes; where the souls of sinners wont to be
tortured, for, were wont, 2. b. p. 35.
etc.

21. This is a small exception to the Geneva translation, to take the present
tence for the preterperfect: especially, seeing the Apostle so reads, (...),
ascending, Ephesians. 4. 8. and the same tence with the Hebrews, serves both for
the present, and time past: as Psalm. 68. 19. from whence S. Paul borrows that
testimony.

22. These words (...), are englished in the translation: but the words in
Greek it was not pertinent to repeat; because all the force lies in the
other words, (...).

23. 1. The Replyer citing those words of the Apostle, to prove the inward
afflictions, had no cause to repeat the rest, which speak of his glorying and
rejoicing in Christ: but only so much, as was to the purpose. 2. He refuses
not Chrysostoms exposition, though by See before Imput. 11. Recrim. 3. Chrysostom.
him much mis-alleadged; neither does it make against him: for that inward
resolution and preparation of the mind, daily being in expectation of death,
was it not an inward affliction and temptation? to suffer death, I hope he
will not deny to be an affliction: then the daiely expectation of death, being
inward, must be an inward affliction. 3. Neither are those words cited, to
prove that Saint Paul died the death of the soul, but for the similitude of
the phrase. He might elsewhere have further seen the Replyers meaning,
Synops. p. 978.
expressed in this manner: As the body is not said only to die, when the soul
departs from it, but when it is pressed with deep and dangerous afflictions,
which threaten death: as Paul says, I die daily: so the soul may be said
after a sort to die, not only when it is finally separated from God, but
perplexed with the horror and feeling of Gods, wrath. 4. It follows not,
because Paul had inward joy and consolation, therefore he had not inward
afflictions: for speaking of terrors within, 2. Cor. 7. 6.
he adds, God which comforted the abject, comforted us, etc. His inward
afflictions, and terrors, were tempered with inward joy and comfort also: here
is neither dishonor done to Paul, nor contumely to the spirit, unless it be
by his contumelious and slanderous mouth.

Such are this Cauillers exceptions, to the Replyers allegations of Scripture,
as we have seen; wherein I doubt not, but that he has rather showed himself
a wrangler, then the other a corrupter: for although in the citing of other
foreign testimonies, greater liberty may be used; as Hierom says he did in
interpreting of Greek Authors, Hierom. Pammach. de optim gener. interpretand.
Non verbu^ de verbo, sed sensum exprimere de sensu: not to express every
word, but the sense by the sense: yet in alleging Scripture, we must hold us
to the very words: where, as he again says, Verberum or do and mysterium est:
there both order and mystery is in the words. But had he been sincere
himself in alleging of Scripture, he would not have been so suspicious of
another; according to that saying, (...): A wit free from evil, is slowest to
suspect evil. Now then it follows to show, what a pregnant wit, and ready
facility he himself has in corrupting of Scripture.

The Recrimination.
1. That place, 2. b. p. 56.
2. Timoth. 2. 5. he cites thus: (...): no man is crowned, unless he strive
lawfully: whereas these are the Apostles words; (...), etc. If any man strive,
he is not crowned, except he strive lawfully: where for any man, he puts no
man.

2. For (...): 2. b. p. 83.
perrils among false brethren: he reads, (...), false brotherhood: beside, he
quoteth 2. Cor. 12. 26. for 11. 26.

3. He thus irreverently speaks of the Scripture: 2. b. p. 158.
which shows your state wholly depends upon shifting; first from the new
Testament to the old, from the old to the new, and from the new to the old
again: thus he profanely calls the comparing of the new Testament with the
old, shifting.

4. He corrupts the sense of the Apostle, 2. b. p. 202.
understanding his words, 2. Pet. 1. 4.
of being partakers of the divine nature, of participating with his godhead:
which is only meant of a similitude and likeness unto God, not in substance,
but in quality, in flying the corruption of the world, as the words following
show: which thing was well expressed by Justinius Philosophus, that the end
which a Philosopher propounds to himself, (...).
is to be like unto God, as near as may be.

5. Christ says, Where I am, there shall also my servant be, John. 12. 26. he
thus adds unto it; where I am (now) there shall my servant be (hereafter.) 3.
b. p. 3.


6. I go to prepare a place for you, (and though I go to prepare a place for
you) I will come again, John 14. 2. 3. all this enclosed he leaves out; 3. b.
p. 4.
and here he joins himself two verses together, which he before called
patching: Accusat. 8.

7. Ye shall lie down in sorrow, Isay, 50. 11. he reads, ye shall sleep in
affliction and sorrow. 3. b. p. 138.


8. Saint Peter says thus, searching, when, or what time the spirit, which
testified before of Christ, which was in them, should declare the sufferings
(which should come) unto Christ, etc. 1. Pet. 1. 11. he clippeth the text,
saying, the spirit prophesied before of the afflictions of Christ. 3. b. p. 93.


9. For, wisdom calls or preaches in the high ways, Prou. 1. 21. he
reads, wisdom is preached, etc. see before Imput. 5. Ac. 3. 3. b. p. 107.


10. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all witnesses, Act. 2. 32.
he corruptly adds to the text, this is that Jesus, whom God has raised up
(from death, and hell) whereof we are all witnesses. 3. b. p. 180.


11. He quoteth for that place before recited, Act. 1. 9. where there is no
such thing. 3. b. p. 180.


12. Lest I sleep in death, Psalm. 13. 4. lest at (any time) I sleep in death,
3. b. p. 138.
says he: where he adds, at any time.

13. Thou art Lord alone, thou have made heaven, and the heaven of heavens,
Nehem. 9. 6. but he reads, Thou Lord, 3. b. p. 86.
have made heaven, and the heaven of heavens.

14. Again, in the same place, thou preseruest them all, and the host of
heaven worshippeth thee: 3. b. p. 86.
but he adds, thou preseruest them all (in their being,) and he leaves out
that which follows.

15. He profanely scoffeth at Scripture; whereas that place of Peter is
alleged, Noe the preacher of justice: he scoffingly infers, Noe is no
sooner formed a Carpenter, but he is presently a reformed preacher. 3. b. p.
108.


16. Whereas Saint Peter says, Noe the eight, a preacher of righteousness, 2.
Pet. 2. 5. he clippeth the words, Noe the preacher of justice. 3. b. p. 108.
ibid.

17. He shall not preserve the ungodly, Job. 36. 5. but he reads thus, thou will not preserve: changing the tence. 3. b. p. 86. 3. b. p. 86.


18. Saint James thus writes, to receive with meekenes, the word, that is
graffed in you, which is able to save your souls: Iam. 1. 21. he audaciously
changes the person, reading thus; to receive with meekness, the word
engraffed in them, 3. b. p. 87.
which is able to save their souls.

19. Again the same Apostle: Let him know, that he which has converted a
sinner, from the error of his way, shall save a soul, etc. Iam. 5. 20. but he
thus mangleth this place, He that conuerteth a sinner, from the way wherein he
erreth, shall save his soul, etc. In this one place, he clippeth off the first
clause, Let him know: he changes the tence, conuerteth, for has converted:
and adds these words, ( wherein) and ( his.) 3. b. p. 88.


20. Our Saviors words are, when they lead you, and deliver you up, take ye no
thought before, neither premeditate what ye shall say, but whatsoever shall be
given unto you, etc. Mark. 13. 11. he thus boldly corrupts the text, Foul
corrupting of Scripture.
when ye shall be lead, and delivered up into their hands, take no thought
what to speak, but that which shall be given, etc. 3. b. p. 104. 3. b. p. 104.
where he both changes the active for the passive: for they shall lead, and
deliver: he reads, shall be lead and delivered: he adds (into their hands)
and clippeth away (neither premeditate.)

21. Reproouing the Obiecter, for leaving out the word mourning, in citing that
place, Genesis 35. 37. he himself commits the very same fault: the text truly
alleged (says he) is this, I will go down, etc. to my son mourning: 1.
b. p. 12.
where he leaves out, into the grave.

22. Exodus 1. 22. the text is, Pharaoh charged all his people: he reads, all
the people: leaving out ( his.) 1. b. p. 30. 1. b. p. 30.


23. Esech. 13. 19. the text is, will ye pellute me among my people (for
handfuls of barlie, 1. b. p. 30.
and pe^ces of bread?) etc. where he leaves out all the last enclosed clause.

24. Esech. 18. 27. the text is, when the wicked turns away from his
wickedness ( which he has (...)) and does that which is lawful and right:
he in alleging this Scripture, leaves out (which he has committed.) ibid.

25. Numb. 22. 33. the Angel says thus, And the Ass saw me, and turned from
me now three times or else if she had not (turned from me) surely I had (...),
etc. he clippeth the text thus; There (...) turned from me now the third time,
and if she had not, I had surely slain thee, etc. where these words enclosed
(turned from me) in the second place, 1. b. p. 30.
are omitted: and he puts the (third time) for (three times.) ibid.

26. Beside, all these places are falsely quoted: as Esech. 13. 18. for 19.
Esech. 18. 72. for 27. Psalm 41. 12. for 41. 2. Numb. 22. 32. for 33.

Now concerning this unfaithful and fraudulent handling of Scripture, I will
not give such an harsh sentence, as Ambrose does upon some: Epistol. 4.
Qui Scriptur (...) fidem destr^^t, destruitur ipse: he that destroys the
faith of Scripture shall be destroyed himself: as it is said, he that
rem^^ueth an hedge, a serpent shall (...) him. or as he ^^^^ureth them that
had rased out certain words of Scripture: Lib. 3. de spirit* cap. 11.
Illa litura de libro vitae nomina vestra delet: that blot does blot your names
out of the book of life. But yet that saying of Epiphanius may be applied unto
him non it a interpretantur vt scripta sunt, sed id volunt significare, quod
ipsi sentiunt: they do not so interpret (Scripture) as it is written, but they
will have it to signify, as they imagine: Of this number is the Confuter, who
by this time may perceive his own fault, which he has not healed, by
supposing another to be like faulty with himself: for it is a good saying,
(...): that no man heals one evil by another: neither is one man's fault
redressed by another.

But it is now high time to leave weeding another ground; time is better
spent in setting of good plants, then in weeding of thistles: Prou. 24. 31.
I passed (says the wise man) by the field of the slothful, and by the
vineyard of the man destitute of understanding, and l^e, it was all grown over
with thorns, etc. I looked upon it, and received instruction. And this
instruction may we receive, by viewing this thornie field, wherein this simple
workman has solaced himself, that such badde tillage shows the husbandman
not to be very good: It is odious and a thanklesse office, still to be scoring
out men's faults; therefore I say with Tullie, against Sallust. finem dicendi
facia^, saepius enim vidi grauius eos offendere animos aeuditorum, qui aliena
vitia aperte dixerunt, qua^ eos, qui crimen co^miserunt: mihi ratio habe^da
est, non quid (Sallustius) merito debeat audire, sed vt ea dicam, si qua ego
honest effari possum: I will make an end of speaking, for I have often seen,
those more grievously to offend the hearers minds, which openly told of others
faults, then they which committed them: therefore I must have regard, not what
he is worthy to hear, but what I may with credit speak. Diogenes being
reproved for going into an unclean place, made answer, (...): that the sun
does enter likewise into such, but is not defiled. But I dare not say so: I
fear rather, lest by raking long in a stinking puddle, some evil savor should
remain. Hitherto I thought it needful to shape a wrangler an answer, that he
might know himself, and reform his error; not to that end, as Sallust said
to Tullie, Si quam volupatem maledie endo caepisti, eam male audiendo amittas:
that if you have taken any delight in speaking evil, you may loose it again
in hearing evil: for my care has been, not, in reproouing him, to commit
that my self, which I note in him worthy of reproof, his own terms I might
return, and quick and tart speech differs from railing: but I wish unto him
the like sober mind that Gennadius notes to have been in one Seuerus, Gennad.
catol. script.
who being seduced by the Pelagians, Agnoscens loquacitatis culpam, silentium
vsque ad mortem tenuit, vt quod loquendo contraxerat, tacendo penitus
emendaret: did acknowledge his talkatiue fault, and held his peace till he
died; that what he had committed in speaking, he might amend in keeping
silence. But if he finding himself netled shall begin to stir, and being
rubbed on the galled back, fling out his heels again, I will rather choose,
by silence to set him up as a tired hackney, in his own durtie stable; then to
play the jade, in kicking at him* I have lost too much time already, from other
more profitable studies, though I spend no more so: yet if he mind still to
brabble, and contend about words; 1. Cor. 11. 16.
I say with the Apostle, If any man list to be contentious, we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God. He shall play his prizes alone for me, and
move laughter upon his stage of vanity; for if the Replyer should set his
foot to his, and take up the gauntles upon every raw fencers challenge; it
might be said of them both, as Demonactes Cynicus of two wrangling disputers:
Alter ^ulget hircum, alter supponit cribrum: the one milkes an he goat, the
other puts under a sieve. The truth needs no defense, and as our blessed
Savior best answered Pilate with silence, so he knows how to grace the
truth in his members, that love the truth, even when they hold their peace:
Ambr. sermon. 49.
and so I say with Ambr. Ambiat defendi, qui metuit super ar^: let him seek
defense, which is afraid to be ouercom: Melior est causa, quae non defenditur,
and probatur: the cause is so much the better, which is not defended, and yet
approved. And so to conclude, if he be disposed yet to busy himself further,
Epist. Epiph. ad Synod. Constantin. 5. act. 1.
I send him that sentence of Epiphanius for a posie, This is naturally graft in
such as are given to error, vt contra eos pugnent, qui ipsos redarguunt: to
fight against those which do reprove them.

FINIS.
Soli Deo honos and gloria.
(...): Let God be true, and every man a lier: Romans 3. 4.
A TABLE OF THE Principal places of the Adversaries Apology confuted and
answered.
The first figure shows the page of the Apology: the rest the pages of the
confutation.
The second Book which is the first of the Apology.
Page 2. p. 13. 28. p. 39. pref. p. 4. 134. p. 83. p. 190. p. 3. pref. p. 6. p.
28. 29 p. 40. pref. p. 5. p. 12. p. 84. p. 27. p. 4. p. 99. p. 42. p. 132. p.
85. p. 86. p. 5. p. 28. p. 44. p. 44. p. 37. 51. p. 87. p. 44. p. 7. p. 14. p.
46. p. 91. p. 89. p. 97. p. 8. p. 15. 83. p. 48. p. 94. p. 90. p. 15. p. 10. p.
28. p. 49. p. 37. p. 91. p. 15. 79. p. 12. p. 28. 34. 121. p. 50. p. 19. p. 92.
p. 15. 39. p. 13. p. 149. p. 51. p. 37. 79. p. 94. p. 85. p. 18. p. 84. p. 52.
p. 19. p. 96. p. 120. p. 19. p. 16. 92. p. 53. p. 19. p. 97. p. 67. p. 20. p.
17. 73. 130. p. 56. p. 190. p. 102. p. 48. 91. 166 p. 21. p. 131. p. 57. p. 51.
p. 103. p. 88. p. 23. p. 16. p. 58. p. 19. p. 107. p. 55. 76. 85. p. 24. p.
131. p. 59. p. 166. p. 108. p. 137. p. 25. p. 48. p. 60. p. 20. p. 110. p. 13.
p. 27. p. 146. p. 67. p. 38. 79. 117. p. 113. p. 117. p. 28. p. 131. 165. p.
116. p. 51. p. 29. p. 13. 14. 16. p. 68. p. 16. 39. p. 118. p. 40. p. 33. p.
29. p. 70. p. 69. 182. p. 119. p. 39. 40. 51. p. 35. p. 37. 188. p. 72. p. 146.
117. 118. p. 36. p. 12. 122. 132 p. 76. p. 19. 119. p. 120. p. 117. 123. p. 37.
pref. p. 3. 83. p. 77. p. 119. p. 121. p. 99. 177. 99. 122. p. 82. p. 14. p.
122. p. 146. p. 123. p. 44. 182. p. 156. p. 101. p. 186. p. 182. p. 124. p. 51.
p. 158. p. 190. p. 188. p. 83. 118. p. 125. p. 39. p. 159. p. 22. 56. p. 189.
p. 101. 118. p. 127. p. 44. p. 160. p. 182. 132. 149. p. 128. p. 45. p. 161. p.
100. p. 190. p. 41. 132. 153 p. 130. p. 93. 117. p. 162. p. 70. p. 193. p. 79.
p. 131. p. 95. p. 163. p. 100. 132. p. 194. p. 132. p. 136. p. 22. 69. 165. p.
164. p. 41. 169. p. 195. p. 42. 101. p. 139. p. 182. p. 165. p. 168. p. 196. p.
70. 153. p. 141. p. 91. 100. p. 166. p. 10. 149. p. 198. p. 119. 153. p. 143.
pr. p. 6. 118. p. 167. p. 169. p. 199. p. 84. 123. 182. p. 170. p. 75. 76. p.
201. p. 57. 120. 132 p. 144. p. 100. 182. p. 175. p. 88. p. 202. p. 70. 190. p.
148. p. 93. p. 178. p. 55. 70. p. 203. p. 63. 84. p. 149. p. 85. p. 179. p.
167. p. 204. p. 65. 119. p. 151. p. 45. p. 180. p. 19. 96. p. 205. p. 68. 84.
119 p. 154. p. 40. p. 182. p. 116. p. 207. p. 57. 63. 65. p. 155. p. 45. 95. p.
183. p. 176. 67. 117. 119.

The third Book, which begins where the Pages are not figured.
Page 2. p. 149. 167. p. 47. p. 22. p. 3. p. 37. 52. 191. p. 25. p. 93. 101. p.
49. p. 90. 94. 120. p. 4. p. 119. 191. p. 26. p. 45. 116. 182 p. 50. p. 94. p.
5. pref. p. 7. 109. p. 28. p. 56. 116. p. 56. p. 123. p. 6. p. 84. 123. p. 30.
p. 69. p. 57. p. 42. 68. 183. p. 7. p. 92. p. 31. p. 182. p. 59. p. 183. p. 8.
p. 172. p. 33. p. 133. p. 60. p. 51. 73. p. 9. p. 101. 109. p. 35. p. 161. p.
61. p. 102. p. 10. p. 161. p. 37. p. 182. p. 62. p. 102. p. 14. p. 68. 95. p.
38. p. 84. 182. p. 63. p. 23. 183. p. 15. p. 93. p. 40. p. 101. p. 64. p. 165.
184. p. 16. p. 172. 175. p. 41. p. 21. 22. 115. p. 66. p. 23. p. 19. p. 150.
160. 123. p. 67. p. 92. p. 20. p. 144. 149. p. 42. p. 101. 102. 183 p. 68. p.
177. p. 21. p. 144. p. 44. p. 183. p. 69. p. 178. p. 22. pref. p. 8. 144. p.
46. p. 120. p. 70. p. 183. p. 71. p. 40. 118. 133 p. 122. pref. p. 8. 102 p.
170. p. 103. p. 72. pref. p. 8. 51. p. 123. pref. p. 8. 141 p. 171. p. 124.
178. p. 74. p. 23. 149. p. 124. p. 142. p. 172. p. 183. p. 76. p. 113. p. 125.
p. 24. 141. p. 173. p. 103. p. 77. p. 24. 102. 115 p. 126. p. 46. p. 175. p.
124. 136. p. 79. pref. p. 8. 42. p. 127. p. 47. 57. p. 178. p. 138. 177. p.
128. p. 149. p. 179. p. 13. p. 82. p. 55. p. 134. p. 102. p. 180. p. 191. p.
83. p. 23. p. 136. p. 53. p. 182. p. 138. 139. p. 84. p. 43. 133. 149 p. 137.
p. 49. p. 183. p. 102. 183. p. 86. p. 56. 191. 192 p. 138. p. 191. 192. p. 184.
p. 50. 52. p. 87. p. 192. p. 139. p. 43. p. 185. p. 138. p. 88. p. 192. p. 140.
p. 102. 123. p. 188. p. 138. 141. p. 89. p. 48. p. 142. pref. p. 8. p. 189. p.
149. p. 90. p. 46. p. 143. p. 121. 127. p. 191. p. 115. p. 91. p. 149. 162.
164. p. 192. p. 177. 179. p. 92. p. 179. p. 148. p. 123. p. 193. p. 52. 103. p.
93. p. 134. 191. p. 149. p. 103. p. 194. p. 160. 173. p. 96. p. 123. p. 150. p.
51. 123. p. 195. p. 103. p. 98. p. 133. 134. p. 151. p. 43. 93. p. 198. p. 13.
p. 99. p. 53. p. 152. p. 86. p. 201. p. 73. p. 101. p. 88. 96. 112 p. 153. p.
25. p. 203. p. 19. p. 103. p. 133. p. 154. p. 124. p. 207. p. 57. p. 104. p.
25. 49. p. 155. p. 121. 183. 192. p. 156. p. 134. Out of the Epistle. p. 105.
p. 90. 188. p. 157. p. 120. p. 107. p. 53. 178. 191 p. 158. p. 49. p. 5. p. 34.
p. 108. p. 191. 192. p. 159. p. 135. p. 6. p. 13. p. 109. p. 120. p. 160. p.
103. p. 9. p. 36. p. 110. p. 120. p. 161. p. 92. 124. p. 10. p. 12. 13. p. 113.
p. 134. p. 162. p. 135. p. 114. p. 88. p. 163. p. 103. Out of the Preface. p.
115. p. 120. 149. p. 165. p. 120. 121. p. 117. p. 153. 136. 160. 161. p. 2. p.
13. p. 118. p. 102. 183. p. 166. p. 26. p. 5. p. 15. 36. p. 119. p. 46. 134. p.
169. p. 158. 161.

FINIS.

