THE SAINTS ADVANTAGE OR The welfare of the FAITHFVLL, in the worst times. A
Sermon, Preached at the Hage the 18. of May, 1623. before the most High, and
Mighty Princess, ELIZABETH, by the Grace of GOD, QVEENE of Bohemia, Countess
Palatine of the Rhene, etc. By JOHN WING, an unworthy Minister of the gospel
and Pastor to the English Church at FLISHING in ZEALAND.

2 Cor. 1.3.4. 3. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Fathers, mercies, and God of all consolation.

4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort
them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God.

AT FLISHING, Printed by Martin Abraham vander Nolck, dwelling at the sign of
the Printing House, 1623.

TO THE Most, High, and Mighty Princess, ELIZABETH, by the grace of God,
QVEENE of Bohemia, Countess Palatine of the Rhene, etc.
JOHN WING, Pastor of the English Church at Flushing, in Zealand, wishes all
increase of grace, and peace, and whatsoever may enlarge all present happiness
on earth, and assure that which is eternal, in heaven.
MOST GRACIOUS PRINCESS,
Inasmuch as it pleased your most excellent Majesty, to vouchsafe a Gracious
ear to the weak utterance of these meditations, I am comfortablely encouraged
to present a more complete discovery of them, to your Princely eyes, not that
I account them worthy (as they are mine) of the least look of Majesty; but
trusting wholly to that clemency and favor, which I humbly entreat, may thine
from you, upon this my poor endeavor; it having (next to the honor of the
most high God) her only respect, and aim, at your Majesty's present, and
furture condition; a true type whereof, is here tendered by him, whose soul
does daily sue unto the King of Kings, that as he has measured unto, (and you
have shared with,) Moses, and David, many tribulations in the entrance of their
honor, and renown, and after made them so much the more famous, admired, and
victorious: So it, might please the same Lord to alott you the sweet happiness
of their issue, which was most blessed and glorious; to alay the distaste of
that bitter beginning, which (unto nature) seems somewhat tarte, and
grievous; and together with that peerless greatness which they enjoyed on
earth, the same glory and joy, which they posesse in heaven. The Great God of
heaven and earth bless, with the richest abundance, and combination of his
rarest, and best blessings, your Royal Head, and Husband; your Highness, all
your hopeful Plants, and Princely posterity, that your Crown may yet
flourish, your enemies may ever perish, and you all, may be made mirrours of
Majesty, and Royalty, to all generations.

Your Majesty's in all duty to be commanded. JOHN WING.

To my worthy, and Right welbeloved Friends, Master Caleb Cockcroft, Treasurer
to the famous followship of Merchant Adventurers of England, resident at Delft
And unto Master John Barkelay. Master Arthur Tyndall. Master John Quarlys.
Master William Clarke. Brethren of the same Society John Wing, wishes all
present welfare, and prosperity o^ earth, which may further their future
felicity in heaven.
HOwsoever I have hereto-fore saluted your whole society, in that unfeigned
affection which I bear unto you all; yet, n being in some particular
engagements more bound to some in special, then to all in general; I presume
upon your kind acceptance of this poor manifestation of my love to you,
having had large experience of yours, to me. A small token is welcome from a
true friend; and I nothing doubt but this shall be the better entertained, not
only because it is sent from such a one, but also, for that it contains
matter of Advantage, and that (as I trust I may boldly say) to your selves, as
unto those, who desyring, and endeavoring to be of that number to whom these
most worthy preiveledges do appertain, shall (in your due seeking) be right
sure to enjoy, those many and most blessed benefitts, which are here by us
discovered, and by God himself entayled, to all his faithful ones, for ever.
And inasmuch as it is noe good decorum to make a long Epistle, to a little
book, I am more breife with you then (otherwise) my love would let me be,
which could much more enlarge it self, if it were meet (at present) so to
do. But, what is not convenient now to say to your selves, I shall not cease
to utter in my poor requests for you unto him, who is Lord over all, and rich
unto all: To whose grace, and love, I leave you, and all that are yours,
beseeching him to enrich you with all the graces of his good spirit, that may
give you a blessed, and abundant entrance into his glorious Kingdom, by Jesus
Christ, both your Lord, and ours; in whom I rest

Yours unfeignedly, for any good to my utmost ability. JOHN WING.
From my house in Flushing, March 7. 1623.
To the Christian Reader
BEloved in the Lord, seeing promise is debt, and performance alone the only
discharge that can give plenary satisfaction; I must (at present) deal as
poor debtors oft-times are enforced, to pray where they cannot pay, and to
entreat yet longer time, for that which was due long a-goe. It is near four
years, since I began to engage my self unto thee, for the perfecting of my
matrimonial treatise then (in part) published. To this day, I confess I have
not finished the same, for I met with such cumbrance, hynderance, and
inconvenience, in that little, which was but as a praeface to the rest, that I
durst not adventure to set upon the remaynder, being the far greater part.
Yet, I am not out of all hope, ere long to do it; and in the mean time. I
thought good to send this Sermon abroad, wherein I have endeavored the cure,
of one of the most common sores, that has come to my observation in these
evil times; to wit, the hard conceit, that not only the ungodly do harbor of
Gods people, but they of themselves, especially if outward things go hard with
them and the times do not favor, but distaste, and frown upon them. Behold
here, a man that was taught of God, to know so much of the very meanest estate
of the members of Christ, that he willingly left to be mighty in the world, to
make one among them in their meanness, and misery; and by his practice made it
manifest, that his persuasion was quite contrary to the base opinion of men,
touching the saints of God. And if he were led unto this excellent estimation
by extraordinary inspiration from God, is it not extraordinary impiety, to
think or speak otherwise of them? Surely, so far as God did inform the
one, Satan does infatuate the other. Read and ponder the particulers, (but
first correct these few errors of the Printer) and pray to that God for me, to
whom I am, and shall be a suitor for thee, for thy present, and future welfare.

Farewell in the Lord; in whom I am thine. JOHN WING

ERRATA.
Page Lin. Error. Correction. 1. 4. as it is, it is 3. 1. of penman, of the
penman, 29. at must, it must, 4. 4. with these, with these, 6. 33. he second,
the second, 13, 23. and deights. and delights, 17. 3. yeed him, yield him, 18.
5. of he, if he 28. in this, in his, 21. 4. wath the, with the, 30. 32. happing
to, hoping to, 34. 24. able give, able to give, 37. 28. byrd it, byrd that, 41.
34. sull of, sull of, 65. 29. must shall, must be shall, 66. 1. all this, all
his, 68. 5. to gresse, to guess, 10. pemisses, premises, 69. 7. pilaished
with, perished with, 72. 1. everabundantly, over-abundantly 10. the pemisses,
the premises, 77. 10. if the, if they, 14. gnaw own, gnaw out.

THE SAINTS ADVANTAGE Or The welfare of the Faithful, in the worst times. In a
Sermon On
Heb. 11.26. -- Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the
treasures in Egypt.


IT is not much material unto us, neither will it be worth our time and
labor, to look after the Writer of this Epistle, seeing as it is past question
that the H. Ghost was the Author of the same. And therefore we will not trouble
our selves or you, with any needeles and fruitles search, what man of God it
might be that penned it, seeing we are thoroughly persuaded that God himself
inspired it; who having great abundance and variety of divine Secretayes, might
employ whom he pleased in this service, and yet not be pleased to tell us who
it was, whom he did employ in the same. It is not the less Canonical, or
Authentike, because we cannot tell who wrote it: the matter of it is known to
be Gods, though no name of any man of God, be praefixed there unto. The which,
since the Lord in great wisdom has concealed, how can we without gross folly
endeavor to discover it? he having thought good to hyde it, it must be thought
evil in us to make inquiry after it.

What; cannot a good message of glad tidings be welcome from our best friend,
unless we may know the messengers name that brought it; Or shall not a Patent
(from the King) containing matter of profit, or preferment; or a Pardon of some
foul fact, be accepted and believed, if withal we may not be certifyed (by
name) which of the Secretaries of State did write it? would not all the world
censure it for unreasonable absurdity, absurd incivility, yea, and for most
uncivil, and insufferable insolency, if a man should stand upon these terms
with his betters, and thus refuse the means of his welfare? were not such a
one well worthy to be woeful, for want of that which he so unworthily refused?
And if thus it be, in these temporal occurrents, which can concern but our
present external advantage, it must of necessity be so much the more evil,
and intolerable, in these spiritual affairs, by how much in them, we have to
do with him, whose excellency and glory does surmount all men's; and in those
passages, which both in their own nature, and in their consequence to us, do
infinitely and incomparablely exceed, all the benefitts of this present life,
as being concerning the eternal, and inconceivable happiness of our whole man
for ever and ever in the heavens.

Had any jmportant point of holy niformation depended upon the notice of
Penman of this part of scripture, we should assuredly have known who he had
been, for we have great reason to believe that our good God would not have
witholden any good thing from us, we may therefore well conclude that no thing
could be gotten by it, seeing the most wise God will not let us know it; and
what idle and senseless busybodyes are we then, to make our selves such
worthles and unprofitable work, as will not pay for the time which is spent
about it, nor yield any advantage, if it were finished, and the Writer revealed.

The more are men to be balmed, ( Divines especially, and the best most of
all), who make so much a-doe about this particular, as if the authority, or
nullity of this Epistle lay upon the Writer, rather then upon the Author of
the same It would weary and tire any man, and make him to mourn in his very
soul, to see how men of eminent excellency, and worthy parts, have toyled in
this tituler, (I had almost said, trivial) business, disputed between Papist
and Papist, between Protestant and Papist, yea, between Protestant and
Protestant, as if it were a matter of more then words or names (as Gallio said)
and of some mighty consequence, whenas indeed it is not, neither has any
inference of any force or fruit anexed unto it, whose name soever it bear.

Some will have it to be PAVLS, and for prooffe they plead: 1 The style, and
strain of it to be so like his every where, that it must needs be his own
here: 2 The close, or conclusion of this Epistle cap. 13.25. being the same
which Paul says he saluted his friends, and shutt up all his Epistles withal:
3 The authority of the Apostle Peter writing (as is thought) to the Hebrews
saying, 2 Pet. 3.15.16. that Paul had written to them, and seems to point at
this Epistle, because of the obscurity and difficulty of diverse things therein:
and together with these, diverse other observable things are instanced, and
urged in the body of the Epistle, (too long for us now to relate) which make
much probability that Paul wrote it.

Some others again will not have it to be Paul's, but are persuaded some other
holy man of God had the penning of it, and they plead: 1 That his name is not
to it, whereas Paul's manner was to set his name to all that are undoubtedly
his: 2 That, he who wrote this Epistle seems not to have had the matter
thereof jmmediately from God (which Paul evermore had) but mediately from some
other, who heard it from Christ, as the words cap. 2.1.2.3. do jmport:
together with some other likely passages which do jmprooue Paul's penning of it.

And this unnecessary controversy has cost much time, and pains, even among
men of great learning and godliness, who yet I am persuaded, cannot but know,
that neither the Inscriptions, nor Subscriptions of these Epistles which have
been written by several Apostles, are, or can in any good reason be accounted
Scripture, considering how many just exceptions may be alleged against sundry
of both sorts, to make them mistrusted, and subject to undeniable ambiguity,
whereas all Scripture is absolutely infallible. How is it then that men lay out
their money for that which is not bread? Isa. 55.2.
and take such pains for things that cannot proffit? Sum up all the Items
urged of either side, what will the Total amount unto, but this, that inasmuch
as some probability lies on either part, there is assurance on neither.
Again, admit and suppose it were sure on one side, either the affirmative,
that it were Paul's, what are we the better, or the wiser in the way to heaven
for the certanity hereof? or on the negative that it was none of Paul's, but
that Luke (as some think) or Barnabas, or Clement (as others conceive) did pen
it, what holiness or happiness is woonne, when all this is done? surely none. The
most that can come of the former is only this, that we may call it [the Epistle
of Paul to the Hebrewes] and put his name into our coppies, as it is in all
others except one (as one observes). The least that can come of the latter,
is, that we leave out Paul's name, and all names, and call it as we find it,
[the Epistle to the Hebrewes] which title or inscription, being indifferent to
either side, we will rest in the same as it is, without further contention or
inquisition, seeing either Paul's, or any other name noted before, may be
probabely put in, and yet safely left out, let us take it without any at all,
and so proceed from the writer, to the matter contained in that which is
written, especially in that little parcel which has been read, and in the
revealing whereof, we intend (by Gods grace) to insist at this time.

And that we may the better come to comprehend what the will and mind of the
Lord is therein, it shall be good to go back a little, to look upon the general
state of the whole chapter, and to take such a view of the same, as may further
us in the particular of these words.

And what is this chapter (being well considered) but a kind of summary or
abridgment, of the old Testament in that part thereof especially, which is
historical, and contains the discovery of things done in matter of fact, by
those most famous worthyes of the Lord, the eminency of whose faith, and
excellency of the fruits of the same, have here a most glorions remembrance,
being left upon an everlasting record that cannot fail, but must and shall
remain to the blessed memorial of those just men, 1 Pet. 1.7
shall be found unto (the Lords, and their own) praise, and honor, and glory,
at the appearance of Jesus Christ.

Of which worthyes (both men and women) we have here a particular catalogue,
many of them being (by name) personally expressed, from the beginning of the
chapter to the 33. verse: and others apparently included (though not named)
from thence to the end. And in this catalogue it pleases the holy Ghost to
keep an excellent decorum, in an orderly and methodicall distribution of the
persons, according to the times wherein they lived, and the Chronology of the
world, in the most famous Periods of the same under the old Testament.

It begins with righteous Abell ver. 4. who lived not long after the
creation (being the second from Adam) and goes on from him to Enoch the
seventh from Adam (as Jude call's him:) ver. 14.
and from Enoch to Noah, and so finisheth the first famous period of the
world, from the Creation, to the Flood; and begin's the second from the flood
to Abraham, and the rest of those peerless Patriarchs, who lived after the
Flood, and before the Law till Moses; who overliving them all, did finish the
second famous period from the Flood to the giving of the Law, and made entrance
into the third, from Moses and the Law given, to the time of the Judges: and
so from thence-forward to the change of the civil government of the Jews,
from Judges to Kings: and under their Kings, both during the time of their
settled and peaceable state, and also thence, unto those interrupted and
miserable days where-in captivity prevayled; both at the first, in part to
their disturbance once, and again for a time; and at the last to the total
and final, downfall and overthrow of that nation, as touching any visible
face either of a civil, or an ecclesiastical estate.

Now in this Camp Royal, of such as are here numbered, named, and made
glorious by the notable fruits of their faith; some have renowned themselves
(as servants) actively by doing, others have been approoved (as soldiers)
passively by suffering; but Moses (being the man meant in our text) is truly
interessed into either condition, and has made double declaration of his
faith, in both kinds of those things that are reported of him, for we find
both what he did, and what he endured, and so much of either, as does manifest
him for one of the rarest mirrours among those many, who are mustered and
magnified here, to have sought the good fight of faith; and that, in all those
occurrents that came to pass (on his part) either before Israel went out of
Egypt, or after; for within one of these two computations of time, all is
comprehended which is recorded of him, and for which he is here applauded by
the holy Ghost.

The powerful work of faith appearing in him before the Israelites departure
from under Pharaoh, had a twofolde operation.

1. While he was yet a Courtier, (and great in Court too) being for so long
time the adopted, and reputed son of Pharaohs daughter, in which time faith
wrought in his heart a gracious resolution, to give over that glorious condition.

2. When he put this resolution into practice, casting of the Court, and
forsaking Egypt for a season, and afterward returning by warrant from God,
(and as the Lords Ambassador) to work out the peoples freedom: and these
passages are particulated unto us, in the 24.25.26. and 27. verses.

The further efficacy wherein his faith shyned, after he had left Egypt
altogether, and was gone thence with Gods people, is evident in such relation
as is made thereof, ver. 28.29.

Our text is a part of the former power of his faith, while he was yet in
Egypt, wherein, (and that while he was yet a great Peer, among these Pagans)
the Lord mightily, and extraordinarily, wrought in him jmmediately by himself,
without all ordinary means (that man can jmagine) this great grace of Faith,
which by a holy kind of heavenly and divine violence, enforced him to these 3.
things which lie in these 3. verses.

Pharachs daughter, yet faith make's no thing of these mighty things, but he
freely forsakes all, and willingly refuses to be called or accounted her Son,
ver. 24.

royalty) the miserable and most afflicted state of the people of God, who were
in the greatest slavery, and under the most grevious tyranny that could be,
ver. 25.

refusing and choosing, to be lawful, and good, and well pleasing to the Lord,
ver. 26.

And this third is the only thing, where with we have to do, yet before we
enter upon it in particular, Faith wrought extraordinarily.
we have one observable thing to note in the general, to wit; That those
graces which are jmmediately, and extraordinarily wrought in man by the Lord,
do carry man's heart extraordinarily toward the Lord. If God work faith
extraordinarily in Abraham he will leave his conutrey; he will sacrifice his
son, do any thing, deny nothing, at Gods command. If in Moses he will leave
all the honor, and riches, and happiness in the world, and expose himself to
any misery, danger, and infamy for the honor of God. The same might be said of
Joseph, of Esther, and many other, whose graces have yielded rare and
wonderful fruit, because they sprung from more then an ordinary root. The
more jmmediate any man's graces are from God, the more admirable are the
manifestations of those graces before God.

But we intend not to stay here: The parts of the text.
let us therefore set forward to this third effect of Moses faith in the words
of the 26. ver: (containing the estimation of his said acts) and in them, we
have to consider 3. things.

1. The guide and ground of this his estimation, to wit, FAITH; not common
sense, nor carnal reason, for neither of these would have endured any such
proceedings.

reproach of Christ, and the riches of Egypt, and these being balanced by
faith, and laid one, against the other, the former is found to be much better,
and far beyond the latter.

present and sensible, but only and wholly from the happy apprehension, and
assurance that he had of that invisible, and infinite recompense of reward laid
up for those who can forgo all things for Gods glory.

And these are the parts of this verse; touching which, we shall not need to
make any stay upon the interpretation of any of them, there being noe
obscurity, or ambiguity, but all being easy and open to the meanest capacity:
we will therefore hasten to the matter of instruction which they do administer
unto us.

And here, A special property of Faith.
in the very first word [Esteeming] (inasmuch as his faith made him thus to
esteem) we might note unto you, one excellent property, and power of true
faith, which is, to alter the mind, opinion, and judgment of man from that it
was, touching the world, and all things therein; to esteem the best things
therein so base as to prefer, and choose the basest estate in the world,
before that which in the eye of the world is the best.

Time was, that Moses could make use of, and posesse the honors of Egypt, for
forty years together, but now (unto faith) affliction is better then
promotion, slavery then honor; he will rather be a captive with Gods people,
then a gallant courtier, even the son of a Kings daughter: he is now otherwise
conceited, opinionated, and persuaded then before he was; Faith has so
altered the case with him, that he is nothing so minded as he was.

It is no marvel that the holy Ghost opposes faith, and sense, and that the
Apostle says, [ we walk by faith, Cor.
and not by sight] for they looked not on things that were seen, but lived by
faith, which fed it self, and fastened them, on things not seens, and so they
accounted and judged all things base and vile, Phil. 3.8.
yea loss and dung, (yea as most loathsome and excecrable excrements, as the
word signifyes:) and could well brook to have themselves accounted the base
ofscouring of all things, through the excellency of faith that was in them.

Let no man vainly boast of this virtue, or jmagine he has himself posest of
this singular grace, to whose mind, judgment, and estimation, all things are
not so base and abominable, that he can (being put to it by God) most
willingly abandon, and abhor all riches and glory; and freely take up all
affliction, wretchedness and misery; yea, and rather (as our Moses here) make a
good choice of the worst, then make an ill use of the best, that the world can
afford. True faith (where it is) is of a noble, heroical, heavenly, and divine
disposition, and carries the heart of man into high contempt of the things which
before he had in highest esteem, scorning in the least, to stoop to the
greatest and most glorious lure, that can be offered of the things that are
below, and does disdain to look after those advantages which are most dear
unto others.

But we must not dwell here neither, neither is it our present purpose to
prosecute this point, but to set forward unto that whereon we intend (by Gods
grace) to insist: and that is taken from the second consideration; which is of
the things esteemed, and they (being compared one with another) the [reproach
of Christ] is found far to exceed, and to be much better, then the treasures
in Egypt.] From wence the main thing which we have to learn for our
instruction is thus much.

That the worst estate of a child of God, is better, then the best estate of
any wicked man.

Note it well; we say and avouch, that the worst estate of Gods child, is
better then the best of a wicked man.

For the better understanding and believing of which point, because at first
sight, it may seem a strange Paradexe, and a proposition jmpossible to be true;
it shall be necessary before we come to prove the same, to explane it before you,
and to give all men to understand, what we mean by the worst estate of Gods
child, and by the best estate of a wicked man.

And (in a word) thus we mean: that, look what the world (that is, the men of
the world) do esteem and judge (on the one part) to be the meanest and most
miserable state of any good man: and also what they themselves do again
conceive (on the other part) to be their own most happy and comfortable
condition, that (on either part) we intend in this our instruction.

Now all men do know, that the world does repute, affliction, disgrace,
tyranny, persecution, and all kind of cruelty, and slavery, to be the
unhappiest case a man can possibly be in: and on the other side, the honor,
wealth, prosperity, and abundance of all things which the heart of man can wish,
when every thing goes with him as he would have it, and all things settle upon
him to his souls content: this is adjudged the happiest state of him, or them
that have it. And this is that we account the best of the one; and the worst of
the other, even that, which themselves do account so, we ask no other
interpreters of our meaning, then the men of the earth, in their ordinary and
universal opinion.

And of these estates being thus understood, we are to prove, and make good,
that the former (being the worst) is better to a child of God, then the latter
(being the best) can be, to any ungodly man: yea, that the very gall and
wormwood, and the most bitter and envenomed things which the world can give
the goldly to drink; are happier, and more wholesome to digest, then the
sweetest portion of their cup, who are ungodly, when it is filled up to the
brym, and running over with all the rarest, and most pleasant compositions
which the world can power into it, of all manner of delicacies and deights that
are to be desired, either for pleasure, or for proffit, or for honor, or for
ease, or for ought else, which may take up and bewitch the mind of a worldly
man. And thus our meaning being explayned, the matter remains now to be
proved.

The full confirmation whereof, will soon arise out of the due consideration of
our text, and the true contents of the same, in case we take such true notice
of them is we ought.

Were there no other man but Moses, no other evidence or example to make good
the point but healone, in that which he has here done; he only were able to
avouch the truth we teach against all gaynesayers whatsoever; inasmuch as we
find his practice to be of worthy approbation with God, and also worthy to be
a most worthy president unto us from God, and that it is recorded, not only for
his commendation, but for our mitation also: in which act of his let us note
these particular and singular passages, which may lead us the more to believe
the truth we are to confirm.

First, how he was brought into the favor of Pharaoh, to wit, by a strange and
extraordinary providence of God, disposing his parents there to hyde him, where
the daughter of Pharaoh must discover him, and in disposing her heart (having
found him) to commiserate the miserable and helples condition of this forlorn
and desolate infant, whom his own father and mother durst not own, or
acknowledge, but being the Kings decree enforced to cast him out, the Kings
daughter is directed by the Lord to pity, him for the present, and to provide
to have him nursed and nurtured, as her own son, by adoption, for time to come.

Secondly, being thus adopted by her, and nursed, (by his own mother as the
almighty did order and manage it) she took further care and order for his
education so, as he might be made meet for honor and advancement in her
fathers house and service; whereas she might have brought him up, in some base
and servile manner, according to the quality of a captives child, yea, and the
Lord filled him with understanding and capacity to become furnished in all the
learning of the Egyptians. Act 7.22


Thirdly, being thus qualifyed, he came to eminency and grew great in court;
Pharaoh not refusing to prefer him, though he could not but (in all
likelihood) know him to be an Ebrew child; and his preferment seeme's to be to
some great office of worth, and revenew, and that brought him in abandance of
wealth; why else, are the treasures of Egypt (on Moses part) opposed to the
reproach of Christ? it may be he was Lord Treasurer of Egypt. (who can tell the
contrary?)

Fourthly, being thus invested into honor, Act 7.48
and wealth, he continued therein for no small time, but full forty years,
which length of time did so season him in the sweetness of what he had, as
might (in all reason) make him most loath, and unwilling to leave the same.

Fifthly, having thus long enjoyed all this favor, he was free to hold it
still if he would, no man does basely undermine him by suborning Pharaoh
against him, or by detection of him to have been a base Ebrew bratt from the
beginning, and so to enrage the King against him for that he had crept in thus
far, and kept in thus long; neither is any thing attempted by any man, which
might make Moses to be discontent with his present state and so resolve in a
humor to leave it, but he might hold what he had at his pleasure, even for
perpetuity.

Sixthly, add to all these, that if he will be going, hence, either Egypt will be
to hott for him, or if he will tarry therein, and join himself to his own
people, he could not but see Pharaohs tyranny, and their misery much
increasing.

Their burdens heavier, Their taskmasters feircer, Their bondage sorer,
And his own among them, (if he will neede's make one) to be more extreme and
extraordinary then all the rest, because he left so much honor, and ease, and
wealth, willingly to come to calamity it were pity (would Pharaoh say) but he
should have enough of it that was so willing to it, and therefore let him (of
all men) be most vexed, persued and oppressed above others, who was so wittles
that he could not tell, when he was well, and tarry in that happiness which was
so graciously and freely conferd upon him, and wherein he might have continued
(through the Kings kindness and grace) the longest day of his life, and would
not.

These few (with some others more, that might be instanced) being laid together
on a heap, do make up mighty evidence in the eye of carnal reason to
condemn Moses of manifest folly in forsaking his present state, and following
this course whereunto he betook himself at this time.

But bring them all (and all that can be pleaded to the same purpose) and let
faith look upon them, that which was a beam before, is not so much as a
moath now, nor worthy in any wise to be respected; this one grace melts all
these great things into mere nullityes, and make's nothing of every thing that
was before urged to this end: neither the kindness of the Kings daughter, nor
the favor of the King her father, nor all the great things he got by both, nor
his long keeping of them, nor his undoubted danger, and disgrace in leaving
them, nor every of these alone, nor all of them together, could do any thing
with Moses, but he is resolute, (by faith) to forgo the best estate the earth
could yeed him, that he might partake with the worst, and most woeful condition
of Gods people, and to show it, the holy Ghost does witness, that he did
willingly choose the one, and refuse the other, being not forced (by flesh and
blood) to either, that so the power of faith might fully and freely express
it self in both, against all apprehensions, and objections of man whatsoever.

And why should he have done thus, if he had not known our doctrine to be a
most undeniable truth? and how came he to know so much, but by the
extraordinary instinct of Gods jmmediate illumination? who revealed thus much
to him and gave him both faith to believe it, and conscience to do it
accordingly, in spyte of whatsoever might be suggested to the contrary. And why
should not we fully assent to the truth hereof, seeing God has gone before us in
discovering and this man of God in doing, the same? especially seeing besides
Moses practice, Gods approbation, does warrant us; the Lord has set to his
hand (as it were) and confirmed, and commended this act of Moses unto us, as a
fruit of that holiness and piety, which was in him, and should be in us, who are
commanded to follow the faith of such, as (by God) are well reported of unto
us, as this man is, who has a most savoury name, in the midst of this sacred
catalogue, wherein so many saints of rare note, are recorded into us, and as
much (if not more) is spoken of his faith, then of many others, and more of
this one fruit of the same, then of all the rest.

So that, that which is here written of this man, does ratisy the matter we
have in hand, his practice (thus considered as we have said) is plenary proof
of our point; it had been apparent vanity, and gyddynes, not any power, or
truth of godliness in him, of he had not done thus by Gods direction, who by his
spirit informed his mind, and conformed his practice, and (by both) confirmed
this undoubted truth unto us: otherwise, it might have well been thought, he
was more brayne-sick then obedient, and been lead from this glory, to that
misery, by frenzy, rather then by faith. But faith made glorious things vile,
and vile things glorious unto him, and so he left the better state which was
(jndeede) the worse, and chose the worse, which was (jndeede) the better, that
all men might learn to know the lawfullnes of his carriage herein, and the
conscience of their own, if in any such like case, God call them unto the like
course.

Now if besides this of Moses, we should muster up more examples to this end,
it were most easy, (but not very necessary) so to do: this chapter would
furnish us with a multitude of those that have (in like manner) done worthily,
and been famous, for this very thing.

What think you of Abraham, how were his thoughts, how stood his heart this
way? was he not well in this own country? could a man be better, then to
dwell in his own free land, and to have so great abundance as he had of all
good things? yet he must leave all this fee-simple, and whatsoever he had upon
it, to go he knows not whither, only this he knows, that whither so ever it
is, he has not a foot of ground, nor any thing at all there, but must come
from a rich inheritance, and great estate, where he might command; to sojourne
and be entertained as a stranger upon curtesy where he could get food and
lodging for his money. And this he did at Gods command of his own accord and
vnconstrayned, as soon as he heard he did obey, which he had no reason at all
to have done, if faith had not furnished him with this persuasion, and
furthered him to this practice: had he not known the worst place and state God
called him unto, to have been incomparably better then the best God called him
from; he had never stirred his foot; but being convinced of this truth, and
moved of God, he went willingly out, as one that knew well, the worst that he
could go unto to witness his obedience as a child of God, would prove more
happy to him, then all he could enjoy and posesse upon others terms.

It were but a fruitless filling up of time, to add more examples to a thing
so evident, and undeniable as this truth is, we will therefore pass from
these, to the reasons of the doctrine, to understand why these things are so,
and how they come to pass; and hereunto we have the more reason, because this
that we teach, seems to be against all reason, and sense, that man can
commonly conceive.

I do freely profess when first I apprehended it in my heart, it appeared like
a strange Paradoxe to my self, a point, incapable of truth, jmpossible to be
believed; and therefore I do not wonder that it should be so hard of
digestion to corrupt nature, and carnal reason, and that it will not down
with so many: Nature cannot entertain it, it is grace that must first rectify
nature, and then certify it hereof. The Lord never put this opinion into any
man's heart, nor urged the practice of it at his hand, before he had refyned his
understanding from the dross and dotage, ignorance, and error, wherewith it
stand's defiled by corrupt nature: let us then stop the mouth, yea, the breath,
of flesh and blood, and open the passages of the spirit of God, and give free
vent unto them, and they will soon show us the way (and that by good reason
too) to be thoroughly posessed of this point of truth, and that it is most
worthy to be creddited of us, and embraced by us.

And the reasons inducing us hereunto, do arise out of the due consideration,
of a double conclusion, which we will propound and prove unto you, that you may
carry them in mind evermore, as golden and most precious remembrances, worthy
to be engraven deeply and perpetually, in our hearts, that neither Satan, nor
the world, might ever raze them out, but that they might remain with us all
our days, Two Conclusions.
even till death. And the conclusions are these two.

evil to a child of God, but even his worst, is good for him, yea best unto
him. good to a wicked man, but even his best is evil to him, yea worst for
him.
The very worst proue's well to a godly man, and bad is the best, to the
ungodly. And in the clear confirmation of these two conclusions, the reasons
of our doctrine will most evidently arise unto us, for it cannot but follow,
yea flow most naturally in the course of all sound argumentation, that, if the
one's evil be good to him, and the others good become evil to him, then must
the meanest estate of the former, be much more excellent, then the greatest
happiness of the latter.

Now either of these Conclusions rests upon undeniable prooffe and
demonstration,

For the first thus: 1. Conclusion. Prooved.
That estate which comes unto a child of God, accompanied with the infinite
love wisdom, goodness, and power of God, must neede's be best unto him: But his
worst estate comes thus upon him: Therefore it must needs be best to him.
Nothing here is so much as questionable; for sense says the first proposition
is true, that what come's so, come's well. And the word of God in the evidence
thereof, and the work of God in the experience thereof, upon all his afflicted
one's, says the second is as true; the third (then) must issue undoubtedly out
of them both.

Again, that estate which works toward the furtherance of our best good of
all, must needs be best for us; But the worst, the most woeful, and distressed
state of every child of God does work for the best: therefore it is best for
him. In this argument all is sound, for no man can doubt of the first
proposition, and the Apostle putt's the second out of doubt, where he says
[All things, To. 8.28.
(and there he comprehend's the worst things the world can yield) work
together for the best:] the conclusion then come's in of it self. And so the
first ground is clear.

For the second thus. 2. Conclusion. Prooved.
That estate which does so harden man's heart, that he becomes thereby least
capable of mercy, and most liable to justice, (and so furthereth his utmost
confusion, and eternal overthrow) must of necessity be the worst for a man
that may be: But a wicked man's best estate does thus: Therefore even his best
estate is miserable to him. No man can with any color question the first
proposition; and God giue's us sound confirmation of the second, Pro. 1.32
where he says [ease stays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools
destroys them:] here, by the [foole] we must understand the ungodly man, and
by [prosperity] all that which he judges most happy to himself in this life.
Now if nothing bring a wicked man sooner to destruction then that which he most
affects, and desires; surely, the same is worst of all for him.

Again, that must neede's be a man's worst estate which is most accursed of God
to a man: But a wicked man's best estate is most accursed of God unto him:
Therefore his best estate cannot be but worst unto him. The first proposition
is easy, and evident (of it self) to be believed: Deu. 28.17.18.
The second is avouched by Moses, where he curses in the name of the Lord [all
the, increase, and store, and fruit of a wicked man, whether of his body, or
beast, or ground] now if his increase be accursed, then the more he has, the
more accursed he is, and as either himself, or any thing he has abounds,
so does the curse of God abound with it; if he grow from hundreths to
thousands, so also do his curses multiply from the Lord who has cursed the
blessings of every ungodly person. Mal. 2.2.
And it is to be marked, (as a most remarkable curse) that he is not cursed in
the want of fruit, Note.
or barrennes of his body, beasts, or ground, for that would every common man
account a curse indeed, but, he is accursed in the posession, and prosperity,
and growth of these things; and this is a more woeful, by how much it is a more
wonderful curse, that a man should have so much, and be so much the more
unhappy by having it. So then, if thus it be, then is a wicked man's best estate
worst for him, because it is most accursed to him.

And thus these two conclusions stand upon clear and unquestionable grounds,
and are jmpregnable truths, and being so, our main doctrine must needs
issue from them both, as naturally as water from a fountain; and that thus.

If no estate can be evil unto a good man but even his worst is good unto him;
and (on the contrary) if no estate can be good to a wicked man, but even his
best is evil to him; why then, it must needs come to pass, that the worst
estate of Gods child is better then the best of any wicked man: But both these
have been abundantly prooved, and therefore the truth we teach, is fully
confirmed; for can any man so much as once doubt at all, whether the meanest
good estate be to be preferred to the greatest that is evil? or demurre
whether he should choose of the two, (if he were put to it) a poor and
perplexed condition which may help him to heaven, or a prosperous and opulent
estate, which would hasten him to hell? Ceartainely this question would soon
be assoyled, if it were put to any man (had he but common sense) to be
determined, for even natural reason would give quick resolution, that the
worst of that whereby a man might be happy, were to be chosen and preferred,
before the best of that which will procure a man's misery.

Why then, the worst of the one being so good, and the best of the other so
bad, we cannot but yield to our doctrine, being overcome by undeniable evidence
both of example, in him that has tried both estates by his own experience;
and of reason, approoving that which he (upon trial) had practiced in refusing
the best of the one, to choose the worst of the other. So that if we will
believe either Moses (who is the man that has done it) to evidence the truth
of his faith, or God, who has magnifyed Moses in that which he has done, to
be truly faithful, our minds must be thoroughly settled in the assured
persuasion of what we have so plainly propounded, and prooved so
plentifully, and hold it fast unto our own hearts, as our duty to do the like,
if the Lord shall cast any the like occasion upon us, and call us forth, to
try, and declare our faith, by being put to the practice of this truth, to see
whether we will so esteem the reproach of Christ, and the persecution of the
saints, that we will give over and abandon, the riches of the earth, and the
pleasures of sin, to embrace the bitterness of those that are beloved of God,
before the sweetest delicates of those who are abhorred of him. A time may
come, when it may be our turn either to avouch this doctrine by our conformity
thereunto, or deny the Lord who has avouched it to be his truth. And cursed
are they who stand convinced in conscience, of any truth of God, whereunto they
refuse to yield obedience.

We should do well then to do (as the wise man says all wise men do) to
wit, Pro. 10.14.
[lay up knowledg] even the knowledge of this particular, to bring it into
practice, that our good works suitable to it, may make good, this word of God
which has showed it to us, and that therein, every man may become a Moses, to
be thus faithful before the Lord, as he was, in this thing.

And that we may be the better brought unto it, and have our naughty hearts the
more happily provoked to the holy purpose of this heavenly practice; let us now
proceed from the apparent proof of the point, to the powerful application of
the same, unto all such, unto whom it does, or may any way appertain: that
is, all sorts of men, both good and bad, saints and sinners; something it has
to say unto either of them severally, a sunder, and something to them both,
jointly together. There is very little truth (if any at all) that God reveals,
but it looke's every way, and is of some jmportant consequence to all persons
whatsoever, if the sap and juice of it be pressed and wrung out, as it ought
to be.

first place consider of what use it is to Gods own people, Comfort to Gods
children.
and what fruit of comfort his blessed and beloved ones, do receive from the
sacred truth which we have sown, for nothing but heavenly joy, and sweet
consolation, can be reaped and carried in, to them from any thing which the
Lord has revealed from heaven; for it is written, [light is, sown for the
righteous, Ps. 97.11
and joy for the upright in heart.]

And (to speak as the truth is) what child of God can speak of this truth,
or hear of it being spoken, without solace to his very soul, if he have faith
to believe the same? ceartainly, if we be not comforted by it, it is only
because we are not confirmed in it; were we well resolved of it, we could not
but rejoice in the assurance thereof.

For why? what is it that trouble's and perplexe's a child of God, but his
present estate of misery and distress; and the worse a man's misery is, the
more woeful is our distraction through the same, and when it come's to the
worst, many times we grow from distraction to desperation, and begin to throw
our selves into forlorn and hopeles and infernal conceits touching our
present condition, and to give over both our selves, and all expectation of
ever being any more happy; the present clowd of our calamity, is so thick and
dark, that we can see no sunshyne through it, nor dream of any more good
days during our lives, but make account to be perpetually miserable and
unhappy, and to be in so bad case, as none can be in worse, nor many, nay,
scarce any, (as we think) in the like.

Now in this case, what can be more truly said to the saints then that of
Christ to the Sadduces, Mat. 22.29.
[yee err not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God] it is only your
ignorance that make's you ill conceited of the state you are in, and to mistake
both it and your selves so much as you do; did you understand the scriptures,
and the power of this truth of God, as we have made it plain, it would soon
be seen, how wide you were from the truth of your estate, for, whereas you
think (now you are at worst) it is scarce possible that any body should be so
bad, this truth will tell you, and teach you to know, both that you are now no
worse then any child of God may be; as also that no wicked man is, or can be
so well at his best, as you are and shall ever be at your worst.

And indeed so much the more sweet and heavenly is the benefit of this
doctrine, by how much it expell's the deadly venyme and poison, of one of the
most heavy and hellish temptations that does usually sursprize the soul of
them that are affected and humbled of God. And that is, the aim and
estimation, they have taken of themselves and their estate, (not considered in
it self, but) compared Note.
with others, who are wholely free, and feel no such sorrow or extremity as
they do: And commonly the devil carrye's the eye, and settle's the
observation of Gods children, only upon such jmpious, and profane persons, as
escape the misery wherein to they are fallen; and having fastened them upon such
an object, he then turmoyle's the mind, and tyrannizeth over the thoughts, and
double's, yea multiplye's the vexations of their souls, not so much that they
are in distress, but, most of all, that others are out, who are notoriously
ungodly; and hereupon, their thoughts do offer to fly in Gods face, as if he
were nothing so gracious, or righteous, as he is magnifyed to be, seeing he
lett's his own children fare so ill, and suffer's his enemies, who are
rebels against him, and no better then dogs or swyne, (in his account) to be
as well as heart can wish: and it is kindness, or justice, in any earthly father
to use his children worse then his cattle? and if not, how much less love,
and more wrong, must it be in him that is heavenly, who make's himself the
mirror of all mercy, and favor: and then as God is thus censured, so are
wicked men applauded, and the generation of the just condemned.

Satan has not set upon a few with this suggestion, and there are not many who
have been assaulted, but they have been foiled. The stoutest of Gods army
have shrunk shrewdly, and well near fainted through frailty, a man would
wonder to see such mighty champions so miserably dishartened, and
discontented, when they have taken notice how themselves have been afflicted,
and other (most ungodly persons) exempted from the evils wherewith they have
been heavily laden so long.

David was so deeplely discomfited hereat, that he began to conceit well of
wicked men's estate, and to question (yea, and condemn) his own, and all the
people of God, concerning this thing, when he saw the prosperity of sinners,
and the misery of himself. Let himself give us evidence how he was gastard, and
like to have gone quite beside himself, yea to have fallen, right down, the
devil had so mislead him, and trip't up his keeles, that he was even gone and
ready to give over all: Psalm. 73.1.2.3.4.
we have the particulers related by himself at large in the seaventie third
Psalm; where he tell's us, how this very thing had like to have cost him an
jrrecoverable fall, and had wounded him almost incurably; and how much a-doe he
had to bring his heart to the due consideration of this matter, and to temper
his mind which was so mightily distempered, with doting on his own
distresses, and dreaming of their happiness; and when he compared these
together, (to wit, their welfare, and his own affliction) he was in a heavy
taking, and growing toward a hydeous resolution; even (as it were) to hang his
religion on the hedge, and to join himself to such as were hellishly
jrreligious, because at the present they were in better case then he. Neither
was this temptation for a little time, nor did it, (during the time it held
him) trouble him a little, but it stuck long by him, and bitt by the bone;
insomuch that he could not either easily, or quickly, come to settle himself
into better, or sounder thoughts, that he might stay himself upon the truth.
And why, (I pray you) did his own bad, and their good estate trouble and
puzzle him so much? was it not because he was not either at all informed, or
not well advised of this truth we teach from God, who has avouched unto us (as
we have heard) that the worst estate of his own people, is incomparably beyond
the best prosperity of wicked persons? Had David learned this lesson well, all
this labor, and danger, had been spared, and he had been well able, to have
waded happily through the deepest temporary unhappiness, the world could have
brought upon him.

Nor was David the only man in this conflict, but good Jeremiah (a man of no
mean piety, or ordinary parts) he was also very sorely put too'te in this
particular, and never so near a conquest in any combat, as in this: his own
mouth shall say how he was amazed, and put to a pitiful nonplus, when he
considered, Ier. 12.1 2.3:
the course of Gods dispensation of these owtward favors. That God was
righteous he durst not deny, he knew it right well; but a reason why wicked men
should be in rest and peace, and himself so wretched, he could not any way
comprehend: this he saw, that they were had in honor and admiration, he was in
contempt and derision; hereat, he was at his wits end with wondering, and
though he confe'st he durst not enter into disputation with God, yet he is bold
to ask him the question, and entreat him to tell him, how, and why, they are
in peace, and are planted, and do prosper, that transgress rebelliously?
whereas with him (and other of Gods holy one's) it was nothing so, but
contrariwise all misery and calamity that could be, came upon them; how this
should be, he could not tell, he desire's to talk with God about it, not being
sufficient to answer and satisfy himself in this thing. And how came it to
pass that a Prophet of God, of surpassing sanctity and holiness, of
extrrordinary understanding and knowledge, a man mighty in grace, of an
jmpregnable spirit, was thus battered and beaten down with this weapon? why
surely, for ought we can see, the only reason was because he had not yet girt
on the powerful shield of this precious truth, to save him harmeles of the
dreadful dynt of that poisoned sword wherewith he has hurt so many holy
saints of the living God; had he been armed with the evidence of this
doctrine, and able to have said; [thus] why? the very worst of a child of God
is beyond the best of an ungodly man, this point had never made any scruple,
nor been occasion of any doubt, or demurre in his mind, himself had been
soon satiffyed, satan had been soon confuted, all, on all sides had been so
well resolved, that either there would have been a quick end, or no beginning
of this business.

Unto these two, it were too easy to instance many more (in Gods book) as
great, and as good as they, who have been surprised in the same kind, but it
is needles to multiply more that have been so assaulted, for we want not, (if
we look well about us) those that at this day, are in like manner tempted, the
temptor having tried this bayte and found it to ensnare so many, make's use of
it still, and ever will, because of the prevailing experience of the same. Does
he not come upon Gods people now, and (in like manner) upbraid God to them, and
them to themselves; happing to make them weary of the way of God, and to
incline to his course? what (says he to a persecuted and afflicted Christian)
is this the God you thus magnify, for infinite wisdom, power, providence,
kindness, love, mercy and favor, that in all these he is admirable, yea
incomprehensible? and are you those redeemed, and beloved one's, for whom all
this (and I know not what more) is reserved? are you his sons, daughters, his
dear spouse, yea, near as his own members? is it possible, he should be thus
good, and you in so ill case, and others whom he make's you believe he
abhorr's, and neglect's, to enjoy the common mercyes which you want? How can
this stand either with his mercy, or your piety? with his good promises or your
godly practices? it cannot be but either he must not be the God you make
account off; or you not the men you jmagine your selves to be; ceartainely
either his goodness, or yours must fail, seeing so it is, that you are in worse
case then they that are stark naught; were he such a God, or you such men as
is supposed, it would be otherwise then it is, both with you and with these
wicked one's; they should have less prosperity, and you more happiness, you
should be in better condition, and they in worse.

And if once he have but brought us to make question either of Gods goodness, or
our own, he has enough, to make us wholly miserable, in suspecting both the
goodness of Gods nature, and of our own grace, because he well knowe's the Lord
cannot endure, but does abhor, both his own, and his childrens state to be
mistrusted, inasmuch as (befides, the detestable dishonor offered to his own
most glorious majesty, to be brought under the distrust and jealousy of his
creature, as if he were not that he seemed to be) the devil is herein
gratifyed, and his lymmes are applauded, and the gracious saints, and sons of
the most high condemned, as if those who by the word of God seem to be his
best beloved, (in regard of the many glorious things that are spoken of them)
should (by his work) appreare to be most neglected, (in regard of the many
grievous things that lie upon them), and on the other side, such as are laden
with many terrible threatenings in the scriptures, should confute all that is
therein denounced against them, by the perpetual experience of a prosperious
condition for the greatest part of their days.

And this was the thing about which Jobs friends lay at him so hard from day
to day, and would have had him given up all, and granted himself an
hypprocrite, being persuaded themselves, and doing their best to persuade him,
that it was an absolute jmpossibility, and a thing simply incompatible Both
with Gods justice and mercy, And with Jobs religion, and piety.


That he who was (by Gods own mouth once and again) commended to be the best,
Job. 1.8. cap. 2.3.
(one of them) in the world for goodness, should become the woeful spectacle of
the whole world for extraordinary evil of affliction and distress. But Job
himself was wonderful happy in this passage, and knew well how it was with him
before the Lord, and all that they could urge, did not make him start a hair
from his integrity; hence he call's them miserable comforters, and Physicians
of noe value, and comfort's himself with that assurance which his soul did
find in the undoubted evidence of his eternal happiness, which the eye of his
faith could clearly, and comfortably discern, through the thickest of his
present calamity and tribulation.

He well knew (which we must all learn, and labor to know) that our present
estate in this world is no good glass, or spectacle to look through, and to
represent a child of God so to us, as the Lord looke's upon him, and as
before the Lord we must esteem him; noe, nothing is more deceivable, and less
to be trusted, then the visible condition of any man, in respect of his
temporalityes, which may flow, yea overflow, to the most profane, and fall,
and ebb, even a-dry, to the last drop, from the heirs of heaven, as most
usually they do; and though they do, yet are they much more happy when they
are wholly empty, then the other can be in their most abundant fullnes; and
better in the depth of their misery, then the men of the world in their highest
strain, and greatest stream of prosperity. And were our understandings so
enlightened herein, that we could be steadfastly settled in the infallible
persuasion hereof, this prevayling plea of the temptor, would prove a mere
nullity, a very vanity, and we should be able, not only to endure, or hold
out, in such a hard time, as we cannot shun (as diverse of Gods dear children
have done) but with Moses, rather make choice of such a mean state, and
forsake a better, to approve, our obedience, then to dwell in the tents, and
enjoy the delights of the ungodly, upon such terms, as ordinarily their
tenure is taken, and holden, (between the devil, and them) here in this world.

Let no man's temporal condition then, be the least occasion to call his
spiritual, or eternal state into question, be it far from every faithful
man to judge according Note.
to such owtward and vnceartaine appearance, God never built his goodness to us,
nor our happiness before him, upon such sand, which will swell, and sincke, upon
the shift of every wynd, and surges of every tide, the foundation of his love
is more firm and vnmooveable. And know, there is no happiness in the whole
earth, good enough to be the least toke^ of his true love, nor any earthly
evil under heaven, bad enough (even at the worst) to distemper the hearts of
his elect, in the least, yea though all the poison and malignity thereof, were
possible to be emptyed upon one man. He that has assured us that our worst,
does exceed the best of other men, would have us harten our selves, and solace
our souls herein, knowing that the true weight of this most worthy truth, will
overpoyze and bear down all temporary affliction that hangs on, or presses
down in this present evil world.

Be it granted, (for it cannot be denied) that the worst end of the staff is
in the hand of Gods people, and that it is ill with them, when worse men fare
well, let the devil have thus much yielded, if he will dispute the case; (
truth is able give error some advantage, and yet conquer too) well, what will
he hereupon infer? what shall be his forced and infernal conclusion of this
our free concession? why this that Gods people are in worse case then wicked
wen; well, be it so, and what of that? say, they are, will any thing follow to
their true discomfort, whose souls the Lord would not have made sad? if any
thing more then this, let the devil say his worst, and produce, and press it,
to the utmost, but if this be all, all is nothing: Satan is confounded, we are
confirmed, wicked men are befoold', in all this; for why? though (in some
earthly, and temporary sense) we may say, our case may be worse then theirs,
and theirs better then ours, yet God has given us to know, that in spiritual
and heavenly consideration our worst is better then their best, and this
proposition we do, and dare avouch, in the face of our feircest adversary the
devil, or the most furious of those tyrants which he provokes against us; who
thought to infer some hydeous and hopeles consequence out of these poor
premises, whereas nothing can issue from our perplexity, and their peace, by
any sound evidence, but that which will be Glorious to the Lord, Joyous to his
people, Grievous to the ungodly, and Mischeivous to the devil himself,


Who observing us thus compleately armed, against his mightiest engyne, must
now, either with shame give over his old trade of tempting, or with sorrow
give over his jdle hope of prevayling, and begin to think himself less able
to conquer us, and every child of God (who has this hope) to be more then a
conqueror through Christ, who has loved them, To. 8.3^.
and in his love made thus much known unto them, to make them most hearty, in
their hardest estate.

And now (beloved) is the accuser of our brethren (and of our selves) cast
out, and overcome; we have woone, Rev. 18.10.
he is down, for at the lowest, he see's that we know our selves to be far
above all his lymms, even all the highest, and happiest, they can be in: and
seeing he perceive's that we now understand this truth, what hope has he to
make us by any means miserable, seeing we can believe that we are more happy
then any of his can be, in our greatest misery.

And that we may be the better enabled in our selves to overbeare him, let us
descend from the general notice hereof, unto those particular instances of all
kinds of evil whereunto we are incident, and we shall find true cause
tryumphantly to outface him in every of them, from one to another, as we may
have occasion to enquire into them in order.

Put the case where you please, nay let Satan have leave (if you will) to
particulate where he will, in those miseryes; which he imagine's may be most
for his advantage, and our damage: whether poverty, or captivity, or infamy, or
tyranny, or death it self; we shall sufficiently solace our selves, and
silence him, in each of these.

Let us look a little into them severally: Poverty.
Is not the poverty of a child of God better then the wealth of the wicked?
let Lazarus, and Dives be the men that shall decide the matter; I dare say you
have read, and heard of them both, in Gods book; the one is described by his
penury and want, the other by his superfluity and abundance: the one fared
deliciously every day, and was sumptuosly arrayed in purple and fine lynnen; the
other had but rags (and scarce them) to cover him, and desired but the offall
or relics of the rich man's table to refresh his hungry body, and to fill his
empty belly. Now, (I pray you) which of these two, was in the better case, and
which of their two conditions would you choose, all things considered? I suppose
no man that has heard all the truth that is told of them both, but he had
much rather be in Lazarus poor state, then have the riches of the other, and
so the poverty of Gods child, is happier then the ungodly man's abundance; and
that which was here but parabolically propounded, Ps. 37.16 Prove. 15 16. cap.
16.8.
under these two persons, will be found really true between any two in the
world, in their condition. [ Better is a little (says David, first, and Solomon
once and again) that the righteous has, then the plenty and store of a wicked
man, nay, of many wicked me^.] Our least does much exceed their most, in every
respect whether of money, meats, apparel, or watsoever. Imprisonement.


Again, is not our restraint, and jmprisonement, better then their liberty and
freedom? Let Gods child be the prisoner, and the jmpious person be free at
pleasure; a prison will be found happier to him, then a palace to the other. It
may soon be tried between Peter, Act. 12.
and Herod, the one was in hard restraint, even in chains, the other might go
where he would; yet (I warrant you) he that reade's the story of these two, and
count's the middle and both ends, would rather be Peter in the loathsome
dungeon, then Herod in the highest admiration. Base vermin devour Herod in
all his pomp, magnificence, and royallty: the Angel of God guards, Peter in
restraint, and bring's him out miraculously, and joyfully; and this is left
recorded of God to comfort us (inasmuch as nothing is more against nature, then
to be caged up, and kept in) that we might know, that our God can make that
restraint more happy to his, then another man's enlargement can be to him. The
byrd it is kept in a cage is safe, and well provided for, of all things meet
to make him sing; but the vulture, and kyte, often prey upon those that fly in
the open firmament of heaven.

Nay, say it come to captivity, Captivity.
(which is a strain of extraordinary restraint) put case Gods child be taken
captive, and kept in slavery, and that Gods enemy be the party in authority to
detayne him there, and to tyrannize over him in a strange land: I make no
question but the captivity of Gods people shall be found to be a condition more
truly comfortable, the^ another man's eminency, yea soveraignity, though he were
the King of that country wherein they are kept in bondage. Daniell and
Nebuchadnezzar shall decide it, the one (viz: Daniell) was the captive, the
other was the King, let any man say (who has considered what is said of them
both) which of the two he would choose to be. Surely, if the odd's had not been
extraordinary, in the comparison, and proportion of these estates, Moses had
made no good match, in leaving to be a Courtier to become a Captive; but he
well knew that the meanest and most oppressed Israelite in Egypt, was more
happy then that mighty Monarch, that kept them under. Soveraignity in a Pagan,
is not comporable to slavery in a Christian. Let God give sentence by his
revealed word, and it will be apparent to be a truth undeniable and undoubted. A
throne, and a crown cannot be so good to another, as a cottage, yea, a
dunghill to those that are the Lords. Again, Persecution.
is not our persecution better then their pleasure? and are not our very
distresses, beyond their delights? I think the three children in the fiery
furnace, will soon satisfy us for that, Dan. 3.
for they were in more comfortable plight in the midst of these feircest
flames, the^ he was who cast them in; and that the tyrant himself is forced to
confess, and also makes decrees to confirm the same unto others, that out of
his mouth, all men may know the power and favor of the Lord to his own, in
sweetening their extremest bitterness; and his wrath and vengeance against all
ungodly ones, in envenoming and poisoning their greatest sweetness. God has
many precious comforts for the persecuted, but nothing but curses and plagues
for persecutors. The very infamy and reproach, of such as suffer for the truth,
does surpass the honor and reputation of those that cast contempt upon them;
for the Lord does renown the one, and renounce the other: Men fawn upon
mighty tyrants with glorious titles, but God does frown upon them as base and
ignominious persons. How many pages of his sacred book are perfumed, with the
odor of their sweet names, who have been disgraced for God? and how many
stories do record the rotten, and stinking memory of their oppressors? the
one go for glorious martyrs, the other for egregious and defamed malefactors.
And this made some who mocked the Apostles at the first, Act. 2.
when they had afterward better bethought themselves, they left mocking, and
became disciples; they gave over reproaching, and fell to professing the
gospel; and they had no reason thus to do, had they not known that it had
been more excellent to have been an infamous Christian, then an honorable
infidel.

But passing over all these, and supposing the worst that can come, Heb. 12.4.
(if the worst do come to the worst) if men must resist to blood, and that
Death must end all the foresaid afflictions, of poverty jmprisonement,
captivity, persecution, infamy, and whatsoever can be endured in this life. Is
not our Death, better then their life? yea, God has said it, as it may appear
in that which he has enforced from the mouth of a most wicked man to witness
it. What say you to Balaams wish, (and that upon his best thoughts) when he had
but the taste, and seen (as yet) but the glympse of the happiness, and glory of
Gods people? even Balaam who came of purpose to curse and malign them, and
therefore, (unto him) it may well be thought, the life of Gods people was as
bad, as a death, and worthy of his utmost excecration; yet noe sooner had God
shyned a little upon him, only with some little light, (without all life) of this
truth; but the man is more in love with the death of the righteous, then with
his own life, and would gladly cease to live as he did, to dye as they do;
his wish shewe's enough to make this good with advantage, how earnestly does he
utter it? Number. 23 10.
[Let my soul dye the death of the Righteous, let my last end be like unto
his] and no man in common sense can wish any thing but that which either is
indeed, (or in his apprehension) for his own welfare. Moreover how many
singular respects are there wherein, the death of Gods child is to be
preferred to the life of a wicked man?

Our death is precious, Psa. 116.15. Psa. 15.4 Phi. 1.23 2 Pet. 2.10. 1 Cor. 15.
Their life is vile, Our death desiderable, Their life abominable.
Thus in the last enemy which is death, we overgoe the ungodly, and are, (or
ought to be) so far from changing lives with them, that we will not give our
death (which is the worst that can befall us in this world) for their life,
which is the only darling they desire beyond all other, to enjoy upon the earth.

And so we have seen in all these particulers severally, how the odd's is
ours in all respects, there is more to be got by our greatest evils, then by
all their best good, instance where you will, it is evident, in every thing
which can be named, or conceited.

I will now speak but once more; and that shall be of all, and every of our
evils summed up together, and gathered into a total, that as in the Items
before, so now in them all at once, it may appear, that the whole mass of
our misery, or the greatest measure thereof, that can be powered in, pressed
down, even till it run over upon us, is more happy, and much better, then all
the good things, that can be cast upon wicked persons, yea though the whole
world should empty all her fullnes, and excellency, to give them the largest
contentment, that could be wished.

And we will give you sufficient security for the truth hereof, in one that is
beyond all exception, to wit, Jesus Christ, who was a man of sorrows, a
mirror of miseryes, in whom all kind of calamity did combyne, and settled it
self upon his sacred person, (considered as he was man) seizing both upon soul
and body at once, and in inexpressible manner upon both, and either. It would
be too tedious to particulate those several passions which he felt, neither
indeed is it more possible for us to declare them, then to endure them: How
was he handled, and humbled, of God, of men, of devils?

Of God, in justice, seeing he suffered in man's stead. Of men, in malice, being
instigated by the devil. Of the devil, in outrage, being permitted of God to
afflict him.
The severity of Gods law, the extremity of man's cruelty, the utmost of the
devils tyranny, was excercised upon him; between these three, he carried (at
once) the vengeance of heaven, the malignity of the earth, and the despite of
hell, all these envenomed vyalls being full of his fathers feircest wrath, and
most dreadful indignation even to the loathsome lee's, and poisonous dreggs,
were powered upon his precious soul and body, so that he was all over
drentch't into the most woeful condition that a creature could be, as carrying
the malediction of the most mighty God, and that whole curse, which was due,
(by divine law) to mankindes corrupt nature in the elect.

Now take him at the very worst, and utmost of all this evil, jmagine him as
betrayed by Judas, apprehended by the High Priests servants, pynnioned, and
arraigned before Pilate, and there reproached blindfolded, buffeted, and every
way most barbarously abused, with thorns, rods, and whatsoever could be done
to his jgnominy, and misery, follow him from thence to his Cross, and think
what he endured there, in sight of all men, besides the unseen sufferings of
his soul, before in the garden, and now again, which made him fill the
firmament of heaven with strong, and strange cries, as being simply insufferable
to a mere creature, (without the utter destruction of the same) unless it had
a Duty to support it. And in this basest, bitterest, and most heavy condition,
set by him some one among the sons of the mighty, and conceit that man in a
complete contrariety to all this, put upon him all the pomp, pleasure,
principality, power, honor, and whatsoever heart would have; aignify him with
the dominion of the whole world, and let all the crowns under heaven be
brought into one, and set upon his head; nay, diesy him (as Herod would have
been) and make him the only Monarch of mankind and that nothing may be
wanting to his absolute welfare in a temporary, and terrenall estate let all
mines yield him treasure, all fruits give him pleasure; yea think him as much
more happy above all men, as Christ was more miserable then any man. And when
these two shall stand together (thus) in thy thoughts, say which of the two
thou judge in better case, and in whethers estate thou would choose to
stand; either in Christ's at the morst, or this man's at the best. I make no
question but every true Christian would quickly determine the case, and make
his choice, and none but the Atheist, or infidel, would take any part with the
other. Why then, is it not plain that the greatest heap of most heavy
unhappiness, being piled up together, and thrown upon the person of a child of
God, is more light, and easy to bear, beyond all comparison, then mountains,
or mines, yea, or whole worlds of wealth, and whatsoever else of the best
things, that can be either devised, or desired, to fill the sensual heart of
sinful man. These two then, (thus considered) do clear the case, and make
our comfort unquestionable that all our evil exceeds all their good, and
that therefore, though the Lord, do please to lay his heavy hand upon his
own, and to let those prosane one's go free, and untouched, and so to seem
to be in better case then we, yet now we see not only by prooffe of evidence,
but also by powerful experience, that the worst we have, is better then the
best they can have; our miseries are beyond their mercyes, yea, our hell,
exceede's their heaven, and so they sillily insult over us, but we justly over
them; and Satan is but a fool to turmoyle us with these perplexed thoughts, of
the welbeing of his vassalls, and our ill condition, unless he could
overturne, and take away the ground of this glorious truth, which overturne's
him, and make's us to glory and triumph in our most grievous tribulations,
under the blessed hope of much present, and of infinite and everlasting
faelicity to come to us, for ever and ever, in due time.

And beloved, upon these premises (thus considered) we ought to be so far
from wondering at our miseries, that we should rather turn all our admiration
upon our selves, and begin to wonder at our own weakness, ignorance, and
infidelity, and to be wayle our wonderful want of faith in this heavenly
truth; which if it were well believed, and applied of us, might and would, be
so far from increasing our cares, Jam. 1.2.
that it would rather cause us to [account it exceeding joy when we fall into
many tribulations] and in stead of blessing ungodly men in our thoughts, at
their best, we would bless God for the basest, and most dejected state
whereinto it should please him to suffer them to cast us: did we know all, we
would soon be weary of their welfare, and most willing to undergo that
condition which is reputed most wretched and woeful.

Shall we lanch a little further into the deep, and discover the rich, rare,
and hydden treasures of this heavenly truth? that by our knowledge of them, we
may truly find, 2 Cor. 1.5
that [ as our afflictions do abound for Christ, our consolations should
abound, (yea superabound) much more, by Christ,] and also, that the surther we
wade in the particulers of our woe, we shall still descry more abundance of
blessed joy, and celestial consolation flowing so fast upon us, that therein
we may swym and bath our selves, in our greatest bitterness, and by it, be
sweetly saved from sinking in that sea of sorrow and distress, wherein so
many do most miserably (as in a bottomless gulf) drown and overwhelme
themselves irrecoverablely. Assuredly if we come to survey the happy, and
worthy, differences of our worst estate, and their best, and what singular and
surpassing advantages we have of them every way; we should (at once) gather
both much more abundant assurance of this truth, and also evidence of
jncomparable comfort from the same: inasmuch as it will vndeniablely appear,
that in our heaviest estate, our state is so heavenly, as may, and will,
(being rightly balanced) wholly overbeare all discomforts that can come upon
us; and teach us to trample tribulation under our feet, as a thing more fit
for our holy contempt and scorn, then for our carnal care or fear.

Let us then make our approach, and draw near to some few, of those
innumerable particulars, which we might readily produce; instancing in such
only, as for evidence are most unquestionable, and for consequence most
comfortable. And the nearer we come, the more will our joy arise, and increase
upon us, by the bright beams of that blessed and celestial light, that
shyneth from heaven so gloriously, in every several difference and advantage
between their best, and our worst estate. For you must know, that as the
difference. so the advantage, between our condition and theirs, is exceeding
great, and beyond all dimension, yet we will ay me and guess, as we are able,
to unfold such as we shall find most plain, and most plentiful to our
propose in hand. To come to them the^: The first is this.

1. Advantage.
1. A child of God is blessed in his worst estate, and an ungodly man is
accursed in his best.
Can there be a wyder difference, or a worthyer advantage then this? the
difference between things blessed and cursed of God, is the most that may be,
for God make's these two, the utmost extremes, both of all natural,
spiritual, and eternal good, and evil, and the advantage is the same with
the difference, that is to say, as much as can be uttered or expressed: but let
us try the truth hereof in this particular, whereof we speak.

And that we may soon do, for we have a most sure word of our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ to secure our souls of the same, Look we into that part
of his own most excellent sermon which we find Luke. 6. Luke 6.
where he brings in, both the righteous, and the sinner, and presents
either of them unto us, in their own habit.

The godly at the worst, ver. 20.21.22.23. The ungodly at the best, ver.
24.25.26.
The former ( viz.: the faithful) are considered in their Poverty, Hunger,
Sorrow, and Contempt, but they are blessed in them all: no Poverty but blessed,
[ Blessed be ye poor, ver. 20.] no Hunger but blessed, [ Blessed be ye that
hunger, ver. 21.] no Sorrow but blessed, [ Blessed be ye that mourn, ver.
21.] no Contempt but blessed, [ Blessed are ye when men revile you etc. ver.
22.23.] And (beloved) are not they a blessed people, and their state blessed
every way, whose very crosses, yea curses (as the world accounts them) are
blessed? Can they want any thing to make them infinitely blessed, whose very
want of some blessings is so blessed to them? Had not he [ who is God to be
blessed for ever] preached this point, To. 1.15.
who could have consented, and set to his seal that it had been true? but
himself was hungry, and blessed; poor, sorrowful, contemptible, and blessed
in all these, he spoke what himself in our nature did feel, and what his
members (partakers of his nature) by grace, should feel; to wit, that if the
world and the devil will keep them every way perplexed; he will ever keep
them (as God his father kept him) happy and blessed. If they must be poor, and
hungry, greived, and defamed, it shall be Blessed hunger, Blessed poverty,
Blessed reproach, and Blessed grief,
do the world and the devil what they can; when they have done their worst to
Gods children, the worst they can do, shall be well, and happy to them.

The latter (viz: the profane) they, (on the other side) are set out to the
utmost, the most is made of them that can be, we have them brought in ruffling
in their Riches, Saciety, Iollity, and Honor, but they are woeful in all
these: no wealth but woeful, [ woe be to you that are rich: ver. 24.] no
fullnes but woeful, [ woe be to you that are full, ver. 25. no mirth but
woeful, [ woe be to you that laugh, ver. 25.] no honor, but woeful, [ woe be
to you when men applaud you, ver. 26.] And are not they a woeful people, to
whom all wealth and welfare is woeful? whose very comforts and blessings (as
the world accounts them) are accursed? Can they want any thing to make them
infinitely miserable, whose very mercyes; are miseryes to them? The Lord has
entayled an eternal woe, to all those things wherein they place their welfare.
Their blessings and Gods curse, cannot be severed; they are simply inseparable,
and shall so deaue unto each other for ever, that as they can laue no joy in
any happiness appertayning to others, so they shall have none, in that which
they posesse themselves; but whenever they read, or hear any thing, out of
Gods book, touching any temporal benefit coming toward them, it must be
understood with a vengeance adhaering to it, (so far as their part goes in
it) before they shall enjoy it.

Now what a mercy is it, to have every bitter thing sweetened, every evil
blessed? And what a misery is it to have every sweet thing poisoned, every
good thing accursed?

This is our first advantage, and the odds standing upon these terms, of an
evil state blessed, and a good condition accursed, every jdiot would soon
determine which of the two, to choose; Is not a good estate to be desired on any
terms, and a bad, on none? I think every man would be glad of a blessing
upon any condition, and entertayne a curse, upon none. And now judge (I pray
you) between saints, and sinners, which of both are in better case, howsoever
it stand with either of them, in the best the one may have, and the worst that
can befall the other; and according to this apparent evidence, give upright
sentence, whether the most unhappy among the children of God, be not in more
happy case, then the most happy among the children of this world.

And thus far concerning our first advantage. The second is this.

2. Advantage.
2. A child of God at his worst, has no true, or real evil up pon him, but
only the appearance, or outside of the same. A wicked man at his best, has
nothing but that which seems to be good, and is (jndeede) evil.
And this advantage is most evident on either part and undeniable in both. For
first, for the child of God he has his part and interest in Christ who having
taken part of all the evils incident to the elect, has by his own suffering
and enduring of them, deprived them of their venyme and poison, pulled out
their sting, and abolished whatsoever was truly evil in them, and sanctified
them so, as that he alone did bear them as curses, we (at the most, and the
worst) do undergo them only as crosses; unto him, they were as just
punishments for us, unto us, they are nothing but merciful chastisemets: they
were due to him (in our nature) by law, Pro. 3.1^ He. 12.1^
and became part of the malediction thereof; they come to us, only as tokens of
kindness and love, so says the spirit of God once and again.

Again, for the ungodly man, he is miserably gul'd, and cosned, as concerning
his condition, having somethings which seem to be good, but being well sifted,
and searched into, are found to be nothing but real evils. For why? we know,
sin and rebellion did not only bring in plagues, wants, and miseryes; but also
it brought mischeife, and rottennes, and wretchedness, upon the good things God
created for us, and made them evil to us, not in their privation alone, but
even in our posession of them also, as was noted in the former advantage. Now
this curse that by sin cleaves to the blessings of God, is (as was also
aforesaid) inseparable, to the sinner; because his sin is not remooved from
him, or satistyed for him, by Christ, unto God, in whom, he himself having no
part or portion, but remaining under the power and rage of sin, and right and
posession of Satan, so do also, all those things likewise which he does
enjoy, remain under the malediction of Almighty God, and in them, he is as
much deceived as he is in himself, who though Note.
he seem to be, (at least to himself) as good as any, yea, it may be better,
(in his own conceit) then the best of the Lords beloved ones; is yet, but a
lymme of Satan, an ympe of hell, and no such man as he made account he was. So
that himself is no such person, and all he has, are nosuch things, as they are
conceited to be, being reputed good, but discovered to be stark naught. I ooke
what we are before the Lord, such are all things to us which we have, they can
be noe other in his sight.

But shall we hear the Holy Ghest speak in this point, and that from them (or
rather in them) whose experience does actually justify that which we do
avouch. Look (I pray) and observe, yea admire, the Apostle Paul's evidence in
this particular, he was a man that had tried the worst that could be endured,
and the worst (he says) of that he felt, is only this, that it only seemed to
be worse then jndeede it was found to be; nay, (on the contrary,) that it was
but a shadow of evil, 2 Cor. 6.8 9.10.11.
and a mere appearance thereof, without any substance, or real sense of the
same at all. Take we notice of his words, as we find them, and we shall see
this point jmpreguable: he speake's (purposely) of his miseryes, persecutions,
and distresses, of all sorts, and in them all, what says he? why even this,
that the worst of them were not the things themselves they seemed to be, but
only some shows, or outsides of them: their sorrow was no more but this, [As
sorrowing and yet all ways rejoycing] their poverty but this, [ As being
poor, yet making many rich their want but thus, [As having nothing, yet
posessing all things] and so of the rest, insomuch that he breake's out most
affectionately, ver. 11. O Corinthans etc. as if he should say, Oh dear
Christians if you did but know how well it is with us at our worst, how the
Lord does grossly infatuate the Devil, and befoole wicked men, in suffering
them to conceit how unhappy we are, through the evils they cast upon us; and
how he does graciously comfort us, in taking away the evil, of all these
evils from us, so as that, we are nothing so afflicted, or distressed, as
they dream us to be, but (on the quite contrary) we are cheered, comforted,
and encouraged, that we can, and do rejoice excedingly, in the utmost
extreamityes of all, that they are able by might, or malice, to inflict upon
us: if this were but known to you as it is felt of us, you would rejoice
together with us, and be persuaded (as we are) that no more misery can come to
a true Christian for the profession of religion, then may remain, and well
consort with all the joy, peace, solace, and happiness, which heart can wish. And
in this declaration the Lord has enlarged our hearts to tell you that truth
which the world cannot receive, nor believe; to wit, that the worst we can
endure, may consist, with the best we can desire. The mischeifs men bring upon
us, of sorrow, want, etc, are but pictures or jmages of these things; but the
joy, fullnes, etc, the Lord giue's in the midst of them all, are true, and
real, sound and substantial consolations.

But now on the other side, for the ungodly, it is not so with them: all their
good things are evils indeed, how good soever they seem to be. Have we not
showed them to be all in the general denounced as curses to them from Gods
own mouth, Deuteronomy. 28. and if we come to particulers, will not every several
blessing, prove a curse unto them, upon due search?

They have mirth, Pro. 14.13.
but such as [in the midst whereof the heart is heavy], and do they not droope
many times jnwardly, when outwardly they are frolike and joviall? God says
they do, and some of them have showed it to be too true; it is but mock-myrth
they have, lent them by Satan to delude them a little while, and to be taken
from them by God, at a moments warning, whenever he shall but offer to frown
upon them in the least.

They have wealth, (and the world says, that they who have that, have the
blessing of God) but what is their wealth? seemingly good, yea that which
make's them the best men, in men's judgment: but if you will be judged by God, who
has spoken it, he call's it by so many odious epithets as must needs persuade
any man that it is nothing less then good jndeede: take a few for a taste, is
it not called Hurtful, Eccle. 5.12. Deceitful, Mat. 13.22. Dangerous, 1 Timothy
6.17. Filthy lucre, 1 Pet. 5.2. Unrighteous mammon, Luke 16.


With a multitude more of most loathsome appellations to the same purpose, by
any one of which, nothing that is truly good, was ever entitled.

And what we say of their wealth, and mirth, might be said of the honor, and
pleasure, of these men, and of all their contentments whatsoever; all and every
of which, upon true and serious inquisition, would be found no such matters, as
they are made account to be, in the weak jmaginations of wicked men; but
things, quite contrary to the great opinion they have of them.

Now what a wide difference, and what a worthy advantage is here? that a child
of Gods worst, is but seeming evil, and true good, and an ungodly man's best,
is but seeming good, and true evil? Surely a little deliberation would serve,
to a full resolution of any man's choice of these two, which he would have,
whether the former condition, or the latter. And this is our second advantage.
The third follows. And that is this.

3. Advantage.
3. That the soul of a child of God is safe, in the worst estate he can be
in, in this life; but a wicked man's soul is in most danger when his estate is
at best.
Let the Lord speak for both, out of his blessed word, we know he will not,
nay, cannot but say true for either side. For the faithful and their safety
first. Christ fortell's Peter of as much misery as might befall him, Luke 22.31.
when he signifves unto him that [ Satan had a desire to wynnow him (with the
rest) as wheate] that is, thoroughly, exactly, to the utmost; by which words he
meant to give Peter to understand what miseryes he was like (for the truths
sake) to undergo, and how it came to pass accordingly, by Gods permission of
the Devil, and the power, and malice of his adhaerents, the story of his
denial before Christ's death; and the relation of his life, and death, in the
book of the Acts of the Apostles, does abundantly evidence, and declare. But
wherewith did Christ comfort Peter, when he told him of this outward
discomfort and danger? why even with this very thing, ver. 32.
[but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not] which was as much as to
say; though many persecutions, and perils may surprise thee, to the
endangering of thy life, even unto the death, yet know, thy souls estate
shall be secured, the power of grace in thee, the assurance of glory to thee,
shall in no wise fail, that shall stand fast for ever, whatsoever becomes of
thy temporal part, which will perish.

And not to Peter alone, was thus much spoken, but our Lord Jesus Christ said
as much to all that are of upright hearts, when he spoke that parable of the
shepherd and the sheep, Ioh. 10.
whereof we read in the gospel. He compares himself to the good shepherd, and
his saints to his sheep: now because no creatures do more miscarry through
the violence, cruelty, and outrage, of devouring beasts, then sheep do, and
none are in so much danger to be torn in pieces as they, and no sheep that
men have, are in half the danger that Christ's sheep are; Christ does of
purpose provide, to prevent (I say not the danger it self, as if he meant, that
never, wolf, or bear, should come near his fold, but) that fear, that
might follow the danger, whereunto they are incident, saying [my father who
gave them to me is greater then all, ver. 26.
and none can take them out of my fathers hand] as if he should tell them, it
were very possible, easy, and ordinary, for tyrants to break into the fold,
and fetch a way a sheep, or two, and scatter (if not devour) a whole flock;
but (says Christ) though your fleeces should be shorn, yea though your flesh
should be torn, and you taken from house and home, yea from the earth; yet
know, that your best part is safest, your souls shall none be able to touch,
or take out of my fathers hand, who holds you fast, and will not let you go
from himself, Psa. 73.33.24.
upon any terms; but will [hold you by his right hand, and guide you by his
counsel, and afterward bring you to glory,] though, it may be through the
butchers hands.

And the Apostle Peter himself tell's us, (it may well be out of the happy
experience, of the feeling of that which Christ said to himself before) that
the saints of God in those times did rejoyee (and that in the middst of many
heavy temptations) with joy unspeakable and glorious, be cause they were
secured (touching their souls estate) of that jmmortall, and never fading
inheritance, which was reserved for them (through the favor of God) in the
heavens, and they preserved (through the power of God) unto it. In some
uncomfortable heavines they were, because of their present afflictions, but the
joy they felt by this blessed assurance of their souls estate, was so much,
that it was unspeakable.

But now for the ungodly and the sinner, on the other side, the case is altered
with them in this thing; his body and state, may be both very secure, and every
thing may go with him, as he would have it, he may be planted, and rooted, and
grow rank and increase mightily, in all contentments to the defire of his
heart, but in the mean while, though all his external things seem to be built
on the rock, yet his souls estate is founded on the sand, and that so
loosely, that every puff of wind, every wave of water, beare's it down, by
reason of the perpetual peril wherein it is.

We have too many witnesses of this woeful truth: A whole world fell at once
when they thought themsel ues firm, and fast in the days of Noah; neither
were the bodies of them all nearer drowning, then the souls (I will not say of
all, 1 Pet. 4.^
for the Apostle seeme's to me, to control it, but) of the most of them, were
to demnation.

The Prophet Esaiah, Isa. 5.15.
bring's in a merry crew of such as neither cared for, nor feared, any thing,
but passed their time with merriment and music, and so exceeded in jollity as
it pass^t: but on a sudden, the next news we hear of these good fellows,
is that [hell had enlarged it self and opened her mouth without measure to
receive them] as if hell were hungry for them, and could not be satisfied till
it had them; and are not they in most danger, after whom hell is thus eager?

The rich glutton in the gospel, was so well lyn'd, and grown so warm in
his wool, having jun'd all his corn, enlarged every barn, and brought all
things so about, that now he was at hearts ease, and could let himself a lease
for many years, of peace, safety, fullnes, and all kind of contentment; as if
he thought, that not a man among a thousand was better vnderlayd then himself,
and that, (as David once dreamed) his rock was made so strong that their had
been no styrring of it; alas, alas, what plight was his soul in, all this
while? Noe sooner had he breathed out the words that argued his conceited
safety, but instantly another voice was heard from heaven, a voice doleful,
heavy, and terrible, arguing his dangerous, nay, his desperate, nay, his damned
estate, now jmminent, and hanging over his head, and jmmediately to be
excecuted upon him, [thou fool this night shall they take away thy soule] was
ever man nearer mischeife, that thought himself so far from it? he talks of
many years happiness; God tell's him of that perdition that the Propher
speake's of [destruction shall come upon the wicked, Isa.
and he shall not see the morning thereof] that is, such confusion as shall
soon come, and make quick dispatch of all, when it does come.

Thus are the souls of Gods saints bound fast up [in the bundle of life] by
the Lord himself, the Lord of life; who has bound himself by his own truth,
and faithfullnes, yea, sworn by himself, and his holiness, to save them wholly
harmeles, at the worst that can come unto them in this world. But for the
souls of wicked persons, they are in woeful plight, in their bodies best
estate, and lie so scattered, neglected, and unregarded, (as things of naught)
that God in justice, let us them alone to be seized by Satan's malice, to be a
prey to that devouring lion, who will soon make everlasting havoc of them in
hell.

And this is the third difference, and the saints third advantage, beyond all
ungodly men, wherein how easy is it to determine, who has the better end, or
which is the happier state? any man that has but a man's soul, jndued with
reason, will soon prefer safety to danger in themselves, but whosoever has
a Christians soul seasoned with religion, will prefer the former upon any
terms, even the very worst, and accept the latter upon noe terms, no not
the best. The fourth advantage follows.

4. Advantage.
4. A child of God at the worst he can be in, in this world has no true cause
of fear: And a wicked man at his best, is in a state most fearful.
The most afflicted condition of the faithful is void of fear, and the
fairest estate of a wicked man is full of fear. Gods book giue's abundant
testimony of both; fully freeing the saint from fear, and filling the sinners
heart with little else. Let us take notice of that which is revealed for the
people of God in this particular.

The Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 43.1.2.3.
for tell's marve lous misery unto the Church, under the names of fire, and
water, both which do resemble, both great distresses, and great abundance of
them also: you know they are merciles and outrageous creatures, that do wholly
burn, and utterly overturne, all they prevail upon; and like unto them must
the calamityes be, that are likened (to us) by them. Now, though the very
naming of fire, and water, of floods, and flames, (especially to this end, to
be metaphors of more heavy miseryes) were enough to terrify and affright men,
and to cause fear to overflow all hope of any happiness; yet the Lord will in
no wise have his children afraid, but laye's it upon them by express
inhibition here, (as he also does many a time elsewhere) [Feare not O Jacob my
servant] and because this might seem an exceeding strange injunction, he
giue's them a strong and excellent reason for it: [For I am with thee, the
waters shall not drown, the fire shall not burn thee etc.] Behold, when he
tell's them of things most fearful, he will not have them fear at all.

And the Apostle is of the same mind, with the Prophet, writing to the Church
at Philippi, (and in those days, the times were terrible, tyranny and extreme
persecution prevayled exceedingly upon all such, as could be found to profess
Christianity) and exhorting them [ in nothing to fear the adversayes] (for
[our] is not originally expressed). Phi. 1.28
Observe how general the exhortation is, both touching the adversaryes, and
the things to be feared in them [in nothing, fear the adversaryes] let them be
who they may be, never so merciles, feirce, or inhumane: let, their rage be
what it will be, never so vile, villainous, dyrefull, yea diabolical, yet when
both are come to the most, and worst, that can be, neither is worth fearing.

In like manner, John writting to the Church of Smyrna, giue's them the same
comfortable counsel, and encouragement, against their persecutions now
approaching, saying, [Feare nothing that thou shall suffer] and yet he tell's
them that their tribulation shall be so extreme, and extraordinary, as if the
devil were broke loose among them, and come from hell it self, to make the
earth a kind of hell unto them, (for in what sense their to rmentors are
called Devils, their torments may be called hell) and yet he would not have
them fear, at all, though he tell them of that which would fear, yea
affright, yea (almost) amaze any body, to think that their enemies are
devils, that is, so exceedingly surpassing and beyond all ordinary
oppressors, that none is bad enough to represent them, but the devil himself.

These are the general accquittances that the Lord has given his servants to
free them from all fears in all afflictions; yea, let them seem never so
fearful, or insernall, they are not all of them (noe not at the worst) worth
fearing in the least. [ Thou drewest near (says good Jeremiah) in the day of
my trouble, Lam. 38.55.56.57.
and saydst unto me Fear not, and that when I was, in the low dungeon.] [
Though I walk in the valey of the shadow of death, (that is, in the most
discomfortable state of death it self) yet I will fear noe evill] says good
David. Ps. 23.4.
And (in a word) our Lord Jesus Christ gave this for one among those many most
gracious lessons he left behind him, [ Fear not them, (let the men be as
many, Mat. 10.28.
as mighty, as malicious, as they may be) that can kill the body] (be their
manner of killing, as tyrannous, torturous, yea barbarous, and cruel as it can
be) as if he would say, neither persecutors, nor persecutions of any kind are
cause of any fear in the faithful; he who spoke it (as man) well knew what he
said, (as God) and therefore we stand bound to obey him as Christ, both God and
man; knowing right well, that if any thing in man's power, might have been just
matter of fear, to the faithful, he would not have laid this jnjunction upon
them; but being man, and accquanited with humane frailety, and being God,
having command over such corruptions, as he knew would flow from the same; he
forbids all fear, in all cases, because no such fear in us, can consist with
the freedom of his graces; 1. Ioh.
for as true love, so true faith [casteth out fear,] and so does every saving
grace which he has given us.

But now on the other side the fear of the profane does overflow him at his
best, and in the fullest stream of his external happiness, it breake's in upon
him to the disturbance of his heart, yea to the fearful destroying of himself,
even when he feare's nothing.

Pharaoh followed Israel with a resoved mind to reposesse and re-enslaue them
unto him for ever, he has all the success, heart can wish, the sea is holden
up for him, by the same miraculous hand of the Almighty, which kept it for his
own people to pass over, why should he fear any ordinary danger of drowning
who had an extraordinary means of preservation? and now that he see's God to
seem (at least) to favor him, he is bold and adventurous, and feare's not,
but he may follow them close; but you know the fearful issue of this
feare-les attempt, to wit, his own, and his peoples helples overthrow, in the
middst of that sea, wherein he supposed himself as safe, as Gods saints were,
and besides the woeful perishing of his body, the loss of his soul was most
heavy of all.

Belshazzar, Dan. 5.
was were he would be (you know) when he had his princes, his peers, his wives
and concubines, about him, to quaffe, swill, and carouse, in the sacred
vessels of Gods house; how frolike, joviall, and merry that King was we may
easily conceive, and how far he had put away all fear of any dismal
accident from him, we may also well jmagine. Howbeit behold, when he
suspected, nay surmized, nothing, that might any way disaffect, much less
amaze him, he has such a suddayne, and dreadful object in his eye, as the
like has never been heard, or read off before; a mooving hand, writting
woeful things against him on the wall; and there with was he so distempered,
terrifyed, and in such a taking as his chattering teeth, his throbbing heart,
his knocking knee's, (and the rest of his quaking members though not mentioned)
may signify the state of his perplexed spirit, and distracted mind.

It were most easy to multiply many of this fearful crew, whom the Lord has
accursed many ways, and among the rest, with such forlorn, nay infernal
fears, as many a time are threatened unto them from him, who is FEAR it self,
even the most fearful and terrible GOD, who has showed all men now far he
can and does, and will, for ever, keep them (eve^ at their best) under the
bondage of base fare; showing himself unto them evermore, both it his word, by
those terryfying titles of a Judge, an Avenger, a Consuming fire, and in his
work, by those amazing, and souledistracting accidents, which do most
unexpectedly overtake them, and are (as it were) the very beginnings of hell
unto them, wherein there shall be an infinite and endless (I say not consummation,
bu) combynation, of all fearful things for ever to abide, and abound, upon
them.

And this is the fourth difference, between the righteous and the jrreligious,
and the fourth advantage we (who are Gods) have of the other. The faithful are
free from fear, the profane are full of it; it has scarce, (and ought not to
have at all) a being, in those that are the Lords, and belong to his love, and
in the rest nothing is more powerful, not only being in them, but being the
greatest predominant that bears rule, and overbeareth, both themselves (and
that when they are best at ease,) and all those things wherein they do most
boast, and bless themselves, as their manner is to do. And which of these two
to take, is most easily, and quickly determined, by any man who is not feared
out of his wits. The fifth advantage follows.

5 Advanage.
5. That the very worst that ever befell any child of God in this world, was
sent of purpose to prevent the worst of all, ( viz: perdition in the world to
come) but the best that ever wicked man had, was but to help him the nearer to
hell.
The scripture is plain and plentiful for either part we will take a taste of
both. The Apostle writting to the Corinthians (and in them to all true
Christians) does assure us that what correction or chastisement, we endure
here, is to save us from confusion for ever [ we are (says he) chastened of
the Lord, ^ Cor. 11.32.
that we might not be condemned with the world the Lord does, as good parents,
do to bad children, bestow many a whipping upon us, to save us from hanging;
his sharpest rod, is but to prevent a sharper sword, is it not better to smart
then to bleed? or to bleed a little by the gracious hand of a good father,
then to bleed to death by the severe hand of a rigorous excecutioner?

Surely there was somewhat in it, Psa. 119.17.
that David tell's us it was so [good for him that he had been afflicted,]
which intimate's he had been in an ill case, if it had not been so: Heb 11.8
And what may be that [sweete fruit that come's to such as have been (not
once, (or so) smitten, but) excercised often under affliction?] if it be not
this we speak of? Or what color of reason can be rendered, Romans
why we should not only rejoice, but even glory in tribulation, if it were not
a sanctified and assured means to escape destruction? [ Thy Rod and thy Staff
(says good David) they comfort me] why? how so? it were a sencles speech and
untrue, if he had not told us before, that the Lord was his shepherd, and
dealt with him as careful shepherds do, use the rod, and staff, to save
them from the bear, and wolf, and thereupon he tell's us, that no danger can
affright him, because the Lord (by correction) deliver's him, from the ruyine
whereinto else he would run: Better the shepherd smite, then the wolf byte;
they are good strokes that keep us from the paws and jaws of the devourer.
And this was smel't of one of Jobs friends long before these days, who tell's
him, Job. 33.18.19.
(and God tell's us in him) that when the Lord means to [saue a man's soul
from the pit, etc, he chasteneth him with pain, etc:] scourging him severely,
that he may save him graciously: And wherein, but in this alone, could his love
unto us, and his chastisement of us, go together?

But on the ungodly man's part, you have heard before, that his best estate
helpe's him to hell, nothing does more further his eternal misery, the^ the
things he accounts his greatest mercy,

What said the Lord to Isaiah: Is. 6.9.10
[make the heart of this people fatt, their ears heavy etc,] let them remain
insensible of any instruction, incapable of any humiliation; stir them not,
never trouble them, but give them their own way and will, that they may be at
hearts ease; but to what end is all this granted? why, that their endless misery
may be hastened, to prevent their salvation, which they refused, to procure
their damnation which they deserved. And the same said Christ (out of this
Prophet) to those of his time, who resting in the same condition, were reserved
to the same destruction.

Do we not read of some that were free from all miseryes, and had a kind of
exemption from all afflictions, Job. 21.11.12.13.
all their days, and passed their time as merrily as ever men did, (in royott
and revelling,) and the next news we hear of them, is their everlasting
overthrow for ever and ever? what was it which was said to Dives being in hell
torments, Luke 16.25.
even this, [thou in thy life time had thy pleasure, etc: but now thou art
tormented] as if he should say, thy pleasure, ease, delicacy, etc, were the
things that hastened this perdition wherein thou art. Note.
And you must jmagine this one to be the emblem, or person representative of
all that Great one's that ever came or shall come into hell: nothings is a
surer harbinger of eternal damnation to an ungodly man, then his freedom from
temporal affliction.

Did you not hear before, that [Therefore hell had enlarged her self and
opened her mouth, Isa. 5.15.
etc,] because it seemed most greedy to devour the fattest, and greatest, of
those that were never taken down nor abated, by any earthly calamity, as if
such men were the sweetest morsells, hell could have?

And do you not read again on the contrary, that, Reu. 7.14.15.
[ Therefore the saints of God are in his glorious presence day and night for
ever, and ever, and have all tears wyped from their eyes,] because they came
out of great tribulation and persecution, and had been so miserablely handled
here in this world, that being so thynne, and lean, so poor, and bare, for
Christ, they might the better (even for that cause) come to be partakers of
this celestial blessedness with Christ.

And this is the fifth difference, and the saints fifth advantage, and it is no
mean, but a mighty odd's that we have of them herein: Our temporal misery
preventeth our eternal; their temporary happiness does hasten their everlasting
misery. What man in his right mind, would not soon say, which of the two he
would take, whether the worst of this world, with assurance of no evil in that
which is to come; or that which may be best here, with ceartainety of the worst
that hell can yield him afterward. Always we see, a child of God at his
worst, has his best estate be hynde, and a wicked man's worst is to come, when
he has had the best this world could afford him. This earth is our hell,
(even all the hell we shall have;) heaven shall surely follow it. It is their
heaven, (even all the heaven they can have) and hell must shall surely ensue,
and succeed it. And this is our fist advantage. The sixth and last follows,
and that is this.

6. Advantage
6. That a child of God at his worst, even in all his evil whatsoever, is
evermore in actual posession of all his excellencyes: but a wicked man, has
nothing but ignominy and baseness, at his best, even in all this honors.
Take a child of God, and conceit him to be clothed with all the calamity and
contempt, you can jmagine, suppose him under all the reproach and misery, that
is possible to be put upon him, yet now in Gods account he is, A child of God,
An heir of heaven, A coheire with Christ, A King, and more then a conqueror,


And jndeede more then can be uttered by us, or conceived by himself,
according to that of the Apostle: 1 Ioh. 3.2
[we are now the sons of God, but it does not appear what we shalbe] as if he
should say, we know we have a state to come, whose excellency cannot be known
here; all the world cannot devise a name good enough to declare it; the utmost
here is to be called the sons of God; but what we shall be, is such a state as
can be called by no name on earth, we have [a life which is hid with Christ in
God] and till he be revealed from heaven, Gol. 3.3
at his second coming, the glory of this our condition cannot be discovered.

But on the other side, how base and worthless, contemptible and contumelious,
is every ungodly man, in the midst of all his glory and renown, and all the
applause the world putt's upon him? he that take's notice by what terms the
Holy Ghost does enstile them, cannot but say, we say the truth, at least in
part; for their full infamy being infinite, that is also reserved, till the
infinite honor of the elect shall be manifested. In the mean time are the not
called, Children of hell, Slaves of Satan. Vile persons, Dogs, swyne, vypers,
yea devils,


With many other more, of the like loathsome kind, inspired by the Lord,
penned by his secretaryes, recorded in his scriptures, preached by his
messengers, and remaining for ever, as the righteous brands, and most proper
appellations, that God himself has put upon them, and which they must bear
from him, who is too great, and too good, to unsay, one jot, or tittle, of that
he has spoken.

To instance particular persons were to little purpose, all that are mentioned
by name, or comprehended, and meant, in that peereles catalogue which we have
in this chapter, though they were exposed to the worst and utmost contempts
that could be, for infamy, and to the most tyrannous and villainous torments
that could be for extremity; ver. 13.39. ver. 38.
yet the worst word we hear of them is this: [All these dyed in the faith, and
obtained a good report] and again [Of whom the world was not worthy] lo, a
world [nay more then a world) of honor, in two or three words, for the whole
world, (to wit, of worldly and ungodly persons,) is not valued at the worth of
one child of God, no not by God himself, who has bought them at a high price,
yet gave no more for them, then he thought them worth, and has made known
their worth to the world, by the price he bestowed on them, viz: the most
precious blood of his only son, which it pleased him not to think too good, to
be given for the purchase of their redemption, and glory. So that they are not
overvalued, at this invaluable rate, seeing the most wise God out of his own
wisdom, and love, has set thus much upon them, and in not accounting the
world worthy of them, has also pleased (through the meritts of the Lord that
bought them) to account them worthy of the world to come, Reu.
and of all that glory, jmmortality, life and belessednes, there, which all the
wit, reason, and utmost reach, of mortal man, is not so much as able once to
gresse at; for it being so absolutely infinite, it does in finitely surpass
all possibility of man to aim at it, much less comprehend.

On the contrary now, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? or what
shall be accounted of them, if the Lord come to give sentence upon them at the
very best of their estate? what are they worth? how are they esteemed before
him? why nothing, vanity, Psalm. Isa. 40.
yea, less then nothing, lighter then vanity; more vile then the basest
vermyne they tread upon, yea more vile then the earth which harbors both
them and all base vermyne whatsoever; no creature so bad as they, upon the
whole earth, only the Devil in hell, he is somewhat worse, and by how much he
is worse then they, (because he made them naught,) by so much are they worse
then all other creatures, who were by them, and for their sakes, accursed.

To be entitled dogs, swyne, vypers and such like, is only to show their
baseness, as these creatures seem to us, Job.
not as they are in themselves; for so says Job, [they are not to be compared
to the dogs of my flock;] for these creatures, God made them exceeding good,
only sin (their sin) has made them so naught, as we usually account them to
be; in themselves they have no sin, nor ought else that is bad, but only by
them, by whose sins they are corrupted, and degenerate from that noble
excellency, and those notable qualityes of their nature, which once they had,
when they had an estate as pure in nature, as we our selves in our created
condition. Now therefore as the Devil only is worst of all, because he made
wicked men so bad, so they (next him) are the worst in the world, because all
other things are jmbased by them.

Besides, take the mightiest among the men of the world, have not their names
pilaished with them? and are beome as rotten as their bodies? yea worse?
because whereas the carkase is consumed in the earth and anoye's none, their
name liue's like carryon above ground unburied, and stinks more, and more
strongly from one age to another, and shall live to rott through all
generations to come for ever, till they shall be again raised out of rottennes,
to live and meet their living loathsome names before the Lords judgments
seat, who shall then, and there, put an end to both, by throwing both, into
the bottomless pit of endless perdition, they being the men that must rise (to
fall) to everlasting shame and contempt.

To particulate Cayne, Saul, Ahitophell, Ahab, Judas, or the rest of that
beaad-role of branded persons whom the living and most glorious God, has
marked for remarkable infamy, were not to much purpose, and we have had
occasion to note them before: it suffices to know, that their glory is with
shame, and that all the reputation they have had with men at the greatest, has
but made their reproach greater with God. Men have heaped honorable titles of
greatness upon them to dignify and renown them, which have been but the poor
vapors of their ayery words, breathed out either for fear or for flattery,
and have vanished in the very utterance; and God has laden them with heavy,
and most ignominious appellations; which his mouth having spoken, and his pen
having written, must remain to cleave for ever, unto that most unworthy, and
miserable memorial which the world has of them, who knowe's them by no names,
or titles, but only by those that are worse then none at all.

And touching both (in this last difference) it may be well and safely
observed, that the worse words the world has given Gods saints, the better and
more glorious titles are given them of God himself: and the more men have
renowned the other, the more has the Lord abhorred them, and made them
abominable, to all eyes and ears.

His own son (our savior) when in the days of his flesh he dwelt among us,
had as bad, yea, and far worse language given him, then any that ever lived;
he that reads his life knowe's how often he was abused, and most basely
vilyfied, he was a Samaritane, he was mad, he had a devil, etc: but the Lord
God (his father, Ioh. 20.17. Phil. 2.9
and our father,) has given him a name above all names, and honor and glory
above all principalityes and powers; and so much the more gloriously exalted
him, by how much among men he was become the scorn, and contempt of the
people. And in like manner does he deal with Christians (as he did with
Christ) according to the eminency of their piety (for which, the greater it is,
they suffer greater reproach,) he giue's them more excellent glory, even in the
eyes of men, as we might show in many examples. And this is our sixth and last
Advantage.

And now (beloved and longed for in the Lord) what shall we say to these
things? here we have had a short, and summary survey of those singular, and
celestial advantages, that the Lords people have, (even at their worst) of all
ungodly men at their best. I say a short and summary survey of them, for if we
should enlarge our selves in the discovery of them so far as we might, when
should we have done? or where should we end? or, if we could manifest them as
they are, (which mortality cannot do) there could be neither end, nor measure,
of our discourse; nay, it might be truly said of these excellent things, as the
Evangelist speaks of the rest of the acts, and sayings of Christ, which are
unwritten, Ioh. 21.25.
that [the whole world would not contain the books, etc,] that must contain,
the full declaration of those infinite things, wherein the true comfort of the
saints does consist; for they are (in truth) unutterable, nay indeed,
unsearchable, as the Apostle does plainly signify when he says he heard
(being wrapped into the third heaven) things not to be uttered.] And if of the
mysteryes and secrets of the gospel (which elsewhere he speaks of,) much more
may it be most truly said of the consolation, benefit, and reward of the
faithful and persecuted professors of the same, that they are such [as eye
has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9
ear has not heard, nor have entered into the heart of man to apprehend,] the
natural man is meant in the former, the spiritual, may be understood in the
latter: For grace is as unable (mixed with infirmity) to comprehend heavenly
things that are glorious, as nature (void of grace) is, to conceive aright and
reach, those that be holy and gracious. Why then, what shall we say to these
heavenly things, thus heaped up together, to make us wholly happy? if the Lord
have laid them up in his book should not we lay them up in our bosoms? and
bless him abundantly who has so over abundantly blessed us with these
benedictions, which are sent us, so to sweeten the bitterest cup of our
calamity, that we might drink the bottom of it with all cheerfullnes and
rejoicing? what said the good Prophet of God once, in a case of this kind,
[Rejoyce O heaven, and be joyful O earth, break forth into praises O ye
mountains for the Lord has comforted his people, and showed mercy upon his
afflicted] and even this, may and ought all Gods people now to speak
(considering the pemisses) in the particulers that we have revealed.

How came the good Christians of the primitive times when persecution was so
sore and extreme, not only (as was noted before) [to rejoice, but even to
glory in tribulation?] To. 5.3. Heb. 10.34. Act. 5.40 41.
[ to suffer with joy (yea with much joy) the spoiling of their goods?] to go
from the consistory with bloody shoulders, yet [glad hearts, rejoicing that were
accounted worthy to undergo the worst for Christ?] And the Apostle who was so
abundant, above all the rest, (not only in the labors, but in the sufferings of
the gospel, 2 Cor. 7.4
also) tells us plainly [ Great is my rejoicing, I am full of comfort, I have
(not only abundant joy, but) joy over-abundant in all my tribulations.] These
are strange words, yet true, and such as he says, he has already in
posession, and not only in some lighter afflictions, but in his heavyest
distresses, even in all his tribulations, To have Great joy, To be full of
comfort, yea To be over-full, or to over-abounde,
is such a strain of speech, as never fell from man, by any sense or reason of
flesh and blood, but only from the spirit of God, and the power of his grace,
which had persuaded his soul of the sweetness of this saving truth that we
teach; that a man at his worst should not only be full, but overflow with
comfort and joy, which is more then any wicked man can say of his best, for all
the happiness under heaven cannot fill, much less over-fill the heart of man, he
cannot be satisfied, much less can he be glutted indeed, or surfett intruth,
with all temporal delights, he that had the largest share in them of any
mortal man that ever lived, (even Solomon) tell's us they cannot give full
contentment, and again [the eye cannot be satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 5.10.
nor the ear with hearing, etc:] but here, at our very worst, we have our
measure of joy and solace, pressed down to the bottom, filled up to the brym,
and running over upon us, from the Lord, who tells us, that these light and
short troubles, 2 Cor. 4.17.
(do not only thus consist with our great rejoicing here present, but) they [
procure unto us in heaven, an exceeding excessive (for so the words do sound
in their true sense) eternal weight of glory:] lo, what words the Holy Ghost
uses to express these things to us, [exceeding,] [excessiue,] to give us to
know, that these being the greatest words which can show any thing to us, the
things intended in them, are greater then all words can express.

And why then do we droope, or faint under any thing (dearly beloved?) how
ill does sorrow or fear (of this sort) become a Saint? 1 These. 5.16. Phil.
4.13.
who is not only commanded to [rejoyce in the Lord, evermore,] but has reason
give^ him so to do, in the things (thus far) declared by us. Questionless,
if we could settle our thoughts upon these divine things they would produce
very divine effects in our hearts, and put us (as it were) into heaven
beforehand, (in part,) and make us much the more meet, for the absolute
posession of the perfections thereof in due time.

And this is the first use of this most worthy point of truth, wherein though
we have seemed long to insist; yet know, it is such good being here, (as Peter
once said) that we could even build tabernacles in the blessed comfort of the
same, as finding it to be much harder to get out, then to go on further in the
discovery hereof, wherein a faithful man is (after a sort) transfigured, and
mounted aloft far beyond all mortality, misery, and vexation, of men, or
devils in this world; which now, (thus raised) either he sees not, or if he
do, he beholds them as far under his feet, with a Christian, and holy
contempt, and himself has (his heart being settled on these things) his seat on
high with the Lord, and his blessed and beloved ones, unto whom he seems to
be translated, in the sweet apprehensions of his soul, while he is conversant
in these sacred, and supernatural meditations; and beholds the glorious face
of God, shyning upon him, and his own heart so dazeled with the heavenly
luster of this most blessed light, that he cannot well tell (for the time)
where he is, whether in the body or not, his soul soaring aloft, and finding
such inconceivable contentment in these consolations.

But we must put an end to our discourse of these comforts and leave the rest,
to that time when we shall come into actual and full posession of endless life,
where we shall enjoy the infinite fullnes of those things, whereof, all that
can be said of the best things that are here, are, but the beginnings, and
first fruits, of that which we shall have there.

a second use of the this blessed truth which concerns wicked men, Terror. to
presecutors.
unto whom we must change our note, and sing another tune, from the true
consequence of the same; for it sounds (as all heavenly truth does) heavily,
in their ears, and was not more sweetly musical to the saints, then it is
dolefully miserable, to sinners. We need not say much to them, the loss of
all the aforesaid happiness and faelicity of the faithful, is more then a
little, inasmuch as we have seen, (as we have gone all a-long from one passage
to another,) their misery and unhappiness, has still been entwisted
(oppositely) to the joy of Gods chosen, and entayled thereunto, so that they
are not only deprived of so much joy, as has appeared to the faithful in
every particular, from point to point; but are further assured of as many, and
as great mischeifs, as our mercyes do amount unto; every comfort to us,
carrying with it a curse also unto them,

Yet over and above all that we have said, there is somewhat more falling upon
them, (to their further terror) from this truth; and that is meant unto the
persecutors and tormentors of Gods people, who do full often affright, and
terrify, those whom they have in their power, with big, and bitter words, with
cruel, and cursed speakings; viz: that this, and that they will do, and they
shall, (I, that they shall) well know, that it is in their power to exercise
their pleasure, and to have their will upon them: Just, as insolent and
jmperious as Pilate, [knowest thou not that I have power to bind thee, etc,]
and these tyrants will jmprison, will torture, will kill, what will they not
do? and what shall not Gods child endure, if either vile words, or villainous
deeds, may put them into dread, distraction, yea, desperation?

But will thou know, Iam. 2.20.
O thou vain man], and vile miscreant, how jdlely all this is uttered to
terrify him, who can by virtue of the glorious light of this gracious truth,
tryumphantly retort all this upon thy self, to thine own terror and amazement
of heart, and tell thee to thy teeth, that seeing the worst of Gods child is
better then the best, of any wicked man, therefore all thou can say, or do,
cannot make him half so miserable as thy self art, who do thus menace the
members of Jesus Christ. When thou have spett-out all thy malice, spued up all
the venyme, spent, and emptyed upon them, all the malignity and gall the devil
ever engendered, and increased in thee; yet even then, thou have not made him
half so unhappy, as thou now art in thy conceited happiness, and exemption,
from all these extreamityes,

And the poor distressed Martyr of the Lord Jesus, may say in the triumph, of
a true and powerful faith, O Tyrant, or Oppressor, know, that now in this
agony, in these anguishes, I will not change states with thee, my case is
better then thine, all thou can do, cannot make me so bad as thy self; my
tortures are to he preferred to thy pleasures, my racks, chains, scourges,
etc, cannot make me so miserable, as thy palace, prosperity, case, honor, and
power make's thee: I am more joyous under all these great greivances, then thou
can be in all thy greatest gloryes: doc thou persecute I will joy, do thou
afflict I will pray; smite thou, I will smile; my God has laid a sweet, a
sovereign, a healing, yea a heavenly plaster, to all these bitter sores,
which fully cure's them, and comforts me: namely, that he has taught me to
learn, that which now, I have learned to feel, that my worst estate, is
better then thy best, the sweetness of which lesson, make's all evils casy to
swallow, and of quick, and comfortable digestion, even at the extremest, that
they can be. And herein I joy, and will joy, maugre all the devils in hell,
and hell hounds on earth.

Would not this, (or the like speech unto this) make the ears of tyrants to
tingle, and their hearts to tremble? would it not vex and torture their very
spirits within them, to here these voices sounding from the mouths of those,
who are under their heaviest vexations?

Ceartainely, it would work one way or other with them, if they could but
believe it; either it would cause repentance unto salvation, and make them
weary of their wickedness, and most willing to become as one of them whom they
thus abuse; or to frett and fume, and gnaw own their own bowels, to see
themselves defeated in all the jmpious purposes, which being to make the Lords
people most miserable of all men, cannot by the most, and worst, and all, they
can do, make them any way so miserable as themselves, who (in their own
opinion) are more happy then any. Do you think it would not make their hearts
to boil, yea to burn, within them, and chafe them so thoroughly, that they
should be forced to foame at mouth, with indignation, and distemper? Were a man
but in their bosoms, to see how they frett, and vex jnwardly, when they
perceive, God himself to laugh them to scorn in heaven, and his people to
laugh at them on earth, to see, that all the malice and villainy the devil can
arm them withal, cannot make another estate at worst, so bad then their
own, at best; then would something appear, as the effect and efficacy of this
truth, which we have told them; it may be they would cease their bloody hands
against the blessed of the Lord, and begin to lay them on themselves, as Judas,
(and some other of their praedicessors,) have done. But our God, the God of
heaven, 2 Cor. 4.4
does suffer the Devil, the [God of this world to blyndefolde their eyes that
they should not see,] or know, or acknowledge this truth, and so by the
ignorance thereof, they work out, at once Their own perdition, Phi. 1.28
and Our salvation, and make Us, blessed Martyrs Themselves, accursed
Malefactors,
in despite of all that they (contrarily) intend; and her: of, if they might,
or could be persuaded, no question were to be made, but they would quickly
become, either better, or worse. But it is misery enough that they cannot be
brought to believe the same; oh, what says the Apostle [if our gospel be hid,
2 Cor. 4.3
it is hid to them that are lost:] A heavy sentence, inasmuch as by ignorance
(especially wilful) of any truth, more sin is multiplied against God, more
service, is done to the Devil, more mischeife to men, Romans 2.
and (consequently) more plagues heaped on, and wrath stored up against the day
of wrath, to be powered by the mighty arm of Almighty God, upon the heads of
all those, that have thus increased their jmpietyes before him, who shall not
escape the full poison of all those his envenomed vyalls which he has revealed
from heaven, to be reserved in hell for them.

But we will now leave these men, as men left of God, and not so happy as once
to give us, the hearing, or the Lord, the believing of this truth; but given
over to be drunk with their own delusions, to their own damnation,
persuading themselves so well of their own evil estate, and being so ill
persuaded of the good, and blessed condition of Gods children, that they mean
to continue as they are, and to proceed in their jmpiety against the Lord, and
oppression against his people, till they have wrought out, their own eternal
confusion by both, and provoked the dreadful indignation of the Lord God, to
come upon them to the uttermost, through this double jniquity, committed
against his highest majesty.

last use we will turn our speech to all manner of persons, endeavoring to
do our best, Instruction to all men.
to give them that true information, which flows from this point whereof we
now treat, and the premises of the same, which have been so particulerly and
plentifully related, at large unto us.

And the consequence of this truth for matter of instruction looks, both at
the saints of God themselves, and also at all others, that are not yet revealed
to be such.

For the former, viz: those who have been already found and approoved to be
faithful, whose happy interest is therefore undeniable in this heavenly truth,
it call's for their constant, continual, and perpetual perseverance, in that
their estate of grace and holiness, the worst whereof, is so good, as we have
heard. For if our first being in grace (while we are yet but babes, or
beginners therein) do give us assurance of so much consolation, doubtless, if
we continue and hold out to the end, as we grow, and go on, in grace, so does
the sweet savor of this happiness increase and multiply upon us. But I hope
the discovery of the comforts aforesaid, is such, as may save me the labor, of
any further pressing of this point upon them, and that their taste of the
blessedness of them is so pleasant, as they have sensible arguments within them
sufficient, both to persuade them to tarry where they are; and to oppose, and
repulse all suggestions to the contrary. And therefore I will not pursue them
with more words, for whose sakes especially, all that is past, has been
uttered, and whose settled resolutions touching their state of grace, are such,
and so immovable as was the Apostles, who said, [I am sure, that neither
death, Romans 8.38.39.
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalityes, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor heigh nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate me from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.] This was
his, of himself, and the Romans; this is, and ought to be ours, of our selves,
and of all true Christians; and therein we will rest, and turno our last
speech, unto those that yet are not turned to the Lord, by any visible
manifestation of that faith, the virtue whereof, does give them their part, and
portion in the saving peace, and comfort, of that which has been uttered.

And what can we urge (either more, or less) upon them, then that they should
now (at last) learn to leave their former sinful, and ungodly condition, and
cleave to the Lord in the power, and truth of sincerity, and sanctification;
that inasmuch as they are not yet cannonized of the Lord for saints, nor have
their names written in the book of life, (so far as their life shows unto
men) they might now (once) bethink themselves what they are, and come out of
that estate, wherein they cannot be happy.

And what more weighty, or worthy argument can we use, then this which is so
powerful to persuade, if it be duly pondered of them: For it is drawn from
that which nature affects, and desires (in all men) above all things, to
wit, the having of a good, yea the best estate, and condition, that is to be
had in this world, and a much more better, in heaven, then can be had upon any
terms here. And can there be a better estate, then that? or any so good as
that? which Is impossible to be had, at the worst, and The worst whereof, is
better then the best of any other.


Behold, out of this estate all prosperity is misery, and in it, all misery is
prosserity: have we not made it more then manifest, by such abundance of most
infallible, divine, and undoubted evidence, as neither devils, nor men, can
colourably gainesay? And is not such a state worth seeking among those to whom
it is solely, and wholey, appropriated of the Lord? who would not be a Saint
upon such terms, and embrace piety, because of the precious and peerlesse
blessedness, it bring's with it, upon a man's universal state here, and that
which is eternal in heaven? why, let men learn to reason and dispute thus.

If there be a sort of people, who are in such a state as has been said, the
worst whereof is simply good, and jncomparably better then the best estate of
any other whatsoever; what do I, what am I, out of that society? I see my self
miserable (as I am) at my best, I will surely out of my self, and strive with
all my strength to be one of those men, among whom the meanest fare so well,
when they are in the worst estate that can be.

And if (thus) God make us able to begin to argue (for his glory) against our
selves, when these first propositions be well understood, and applied of us, we
shall be able (by his grace) to frame more comfortable premises, and to go
forward in this divine disceptation, with consideration of those further
things, the conclusion and inference whereof, will minister unto us yet more
courage, to cleave unto the Lord in the communion of his saints.

For why? the former argument was taken from the miseryes, greivances,
persecutions, and oppressions of Gods people, and yet it is powerful, and able
to conclude, both a necessity, (and includes also an excellency) of our
separation from sinners, to become of that number who are so happy, in their
very misery: but this latter may be taken from the graces of the same men from
whose distresses alone, we reasoned before; and for the further wooing, and
faster glewing of us unto the heavenly corporation, of such as are happily
incorporated into Chrict Jesus, it may (in the second place) be framed thus.

If the worst of Gods people viz: their troubles, miseryes, and oppressions, be
such as do exceed all the wellbeing of other men, if in their greivances and
vexations, it go so well with them, how happy must these men be considered in
their graces, and the employment of them? if their bitter sorrows be so
sweet, how will the sweet sap, and savor of God spirit taste, and relish in
them? if out of cruelty, tyranny, and all manner of evil so much good may
issue, when they have to do with wicked and unreasonable men, who can conceive
the consolation that shall accrue unto them, in the free and peaceable
exercise of their graces, wherein they deal only with Gods own majesty, and
such of their fellow brethren and sisters, as are truly gracious with
themselves? if the troubled waters, which are so muddyed with the foul fruit
of Satan's, and men's malice, may yield such joy, what will flow from the
blessed jnfluence of God himself think ye, when he shall lead them to those
wells of salvation, whence they shall draw freely, and drink their fill, of
those pure crystal streams, which himself has distilled? Surely every man
must needs (in all reason) think, that if their worst estate of grief and
misery be so good, this of grace and peace, cannot but be better, and yield
sweeter fruit then the former; and so the best estate of a wicked man, being
so far behind their worst, must needs be much more behind this, and
utterly incomparable thereunto.

And yet, though this be much, the most, and best of all, is yet to come, viz:
their state of glory, which shall be the reward both of their greivances, and
graces also; and from that, a man whose heart were set aright, might lastly
reason thus.

These men (Gods saints) were happier then I, at the worst of their miseryes,
even in the midst of their enemies; They were yet more happy then so, when
with their God, and with each other among themselves, they might peaceably use
their graces; the least of these two, was more then a little beyond my best: But
their best of all, being yet to come, to wit, their blessedness and glory in
heaven, with the God of heaven; what shall I conceive of their inconceivable
faelicity, then and there? and how infinitely unhappy are I, that am so short
of the good they have, in their very evil? and am not yet come so far, as to
be equal with them in their meanest, and most afflicted condition? Surely it
being so well with them in their greivances; it cannot but be much better with
them in their graces, and best of all in their glory. O the hydden, (yet
heavenly) estate of these holy ones; which is so heavenly, that it must be
hydden, there being no possibility on earth to reveal it. Who would be out of
that state, wherein is so much excellency, that every evil therein, is
exceeding good, and every good exceeds each other? If a man's heart be not
chayned to the Devil, and by the Devil, to the world, to be kept here, in
that perpetual prison of infidelity, and profanes, which will bring him to
that perdition which is due there unto; he cannot but be drawn out of himself,
and his sinful state, with this threefolde cord, and be tied fast for ever
(as one enamoured and enflamed) to the Lord God, in the fellowship of those his
saints, who having been faithful before him here, (both in doing his will,
and suffering for the same) have now received the wages, both of their faith,
and sufferings, in the Kingdom for which they suffered, wherein they shall see
him as he is, 1 Ioh. 3.2
and with him, his blessed Son, his eternal Spirit, his beloved Saints, in
that life and jmmortality, bliss, and faelicity, which God who is faithful,
has performed to them, promised to us, and to all the rest of his holy ones,
Heb. 11.40.
keeping them, who are already in actual pofession, not absolutely perfect (as
being yet without us) till we shall be brought unto them, and both they, and we,
(and all the elect) unto the Lord our God, at the last day, to be complete in
that entyre, and eternal perfection of glory, the hope whereof, giue's us heart,
and make's us wait, and sigh in our souls, looking and longing for that
glorious appearance of his, which shall make us to appear in glory with him,
for ever and ever.

AMEN.

