The pleasant and Stately Moral, of the three Lords and three Ladies of
London.

With the great Joy and Pomp, Solemnized at their Marriages: Commically
interlaced with much honest Mirth, for pleasure and recreation, among many
Moral observations and other important matters of due Regard. by R. W.



LONDON. Printed by R. Ihones, at the Rose and Crown near Holburne Bridge.
1590.

The Actors names.
Policy, the three Lords of London. Wit. their pages. Pomp, the three Lords
of London. Wealth. their pages. Pleasure, the three Lords of London. Will. their
pages. Nemo, a grave old man. Love, three Ladies of London. Lucre, three Ladies
of London. Conscience, three Ladies of London. Honest Industry, three Sages.
Pure zeal, three Sages. Sincerity, three Sages. Pride, three Lords of
Spain, Shame, their pages, Ambition, three Lords of Spain, Treachery, their
pages, Tyranny, three Lords of Spain, Terror, their pages, Desire, three
Lords of Lincoln. Delight, three Lords of Lincoln. Devotion, three Lords
of Lincoln. Sorrow, a Iayler. Simplicity, a poor Free man of London.
Painful Penury, his wife. Diligence, a Post, or an Officer. Fealty, two
Heraldes at Arms. Shealtie, two Heraldes at Arms. Fraud, Four Gallantes.
Usury, Four Gallantes. Dissimulation, Four Gallantes. Simony, Four
Gallantes. Falsehood. two that belong to Fraud and Dissimulation. Double
dealing. two that belong to Fraud and Dissimulation.
Enter for the Preface, a Lady very richly attyred, representing London, having
two Angels before her, and two after her with bright Rapiers in their hands.
London speaks. LO, Gentles, thus the Lord does London guard,
Not for my sake, but for his own delight:
For all in vain the Centonels watch and ward,
Except he keep the City day and night.
Now may my foes in vain both spurn and spite,
My foes I mean, that London represent,
Guarded from heaven by Angels excellent.
This blessing is not my sole benefit,
All England is, and so preserved has been,
Not by man's strength, his policy and wit,
But by a power and providence unseen.
Even for the love wherewith God loves our Queen:
In whom, for whom, by whom we do possess
More grace, more good, than London can express.
And that has bred our plenty and our peace,
And they do breed the sportes you come to see,
And joy it is, that I enjoy increase,
My former fruits were lovely Ladies three,
Now of three Lords to talk is Londons glee.
Whose deeds I wish may to your liking frame,
For London bids you welcome to the same.

Finis.
The pleasant and stately Moral of the three Lords of London.
Enter the three Lords and their pages: First, Policy with his page Wit
before him, bearing a shield: the ympreze, a Tortoys, the word, Prouidens
securus. Next Pomp, with his page Wealth bearing his shield, the word, Glory
sauns peer: the ympreze a Lilly. Last, Pleasure, his page Will, his ympreze, a
Faulcon, the word, Pour temps: Pol. attired in black, Pomp in rich roabes,
and Pleasure in colors. Policy. HEre I advance my shield and hang it up,
To challenge him who ever dare deny,
That one of those three London Ladies rare
Ought not of right be matched with Policy:
A London Lord, the which I represent.
Pom. And pomp prouides his challenge in his word,
(Glory sauns peer) claiming the one of them,
Not by compulsion, but by common right,
Yet maugre men my shield is here aduaunc'd
For one matchless, a London Lady best
Beseems Pomp (a London Lord) to have.

Plea. Pleasure has soared as does his ympreze show,
To lo^ke alooffe on earthly Ladies all,
Yet never could my curious eye discern
A Dame of worth, for Londons Pleasures love,
But one, and she does shine as silver Dooue.
Of self bred soil, of London is her race,
For whom in challenge I my shield advance.

Pol. Thus each in honor of his Mistress
And in regard of his well daring mind,
Has here ymprizde the challenge of his right:
But Lordings both, and brethren bred and sworn,
A caution must be had in this conceit,
That all our thoughts aspire not to one heaven,
Nor all our ships do sail for one self haven,
I mean that all our suites and services
We tend and tender to one only Dame,
All choosing one, refusing the other two.

Pom. A great mislike amongst us that might breed.


Plea. I seek but one and her unto my self.


Pom. And one with I sauns partner of my loves.


Pol. It stands with honor to be sole or none.


Pom. Whom love thou pleasure?


Plea. Hark ye. Whisper in his ear.


Pom. Lush, ye lie.


Will. If my master were a soldier, that word would have the stab.


Wit. Well Will, still you will be a saucie Scab.


pom. Why Pleasure? Pomp has chosen Lucres love.


plea. Why pomp? But pleasure honors Lucre most.


pol. And policy may Lady Lucre gain
Before you both: but let us not contend,
For Nemo does the Ladies prisoners keep,
Though they were slaundered late with Liberti^
And marriage to three far borne Forriners.
Then first it fits we practice their release,
And see them, and by sight our liking place,
For yet we love as Gossips tell their tales,
By hearsay: Fame, not Favor has us yet enflamed.

pom. Lord policy with reason has discuss pleasure consent, and so our love
shall hold.


ple. Ye never found that Londons Pleasure erred
From reason, or from pomp and policy.

pol. Come on sir boy, attend you well your charge, To his page Wit.
VVait in this place to watch and ward this shield,
If any man in honor of his love,
So hardy be with stroke of sword to attaint
This shield, and challenge him that hereby challenges,
Say for thy Lord as should a trusty Page,
That policy does dare him to perform
A hardier task than common challengers.
If he demand what policy may be,
A Lord of London say, one of the three.

pom. And you (sir boy) for pomp perform the like, To Wea^th.
Bid him that dare this Ympreze batter once,
Be well aduisde he be no beggars brat,
Nor base of courage, nor of bad conceit:
To match himself with such magnificence,
As fits Lord pomp of London for his love:
Call if he come that can encounter me,
Or move me not for each envious swad.

plea. Will, be not wanton nor of waiward mood, To Will.
Wait as do these, use faith and diligence,
And mark him well that dare disdain this shield,
Which Londons Lord that pleasure has to name,
Has here aduaunc'd in honor of his Dame.
I bid thee mark him well, what ever he be,
That Londons pleasure does in malice scorn,
For he is a Rascal, or a stranger borne.
Good boy mark well his iesture and his look,
His eye, his gate, his weapon and attire,
And dog him to his lodging, or his den,
For I will make him scomme and scorn of men,
No better boy than Will, when Will is pleased,
Be pleased my boy, and so be my good Will.

pol. And so good boys farewell, look to your charge,
Watch well good Wit, who scorneth Londons policy,
Be wary Wit, for thou can well discern.

pom. Wealth watch for pomp for thou can well defend


plea. Will can do something too when pleases him.


Wit. Will is a good boy where better is none. Exeunt ^he ^. Lords.


Will. Nay Wit were the best boy if will were gone.


Wea. Nay wealth is the best boy, sirs let that alone.


Wit. I wisse he says true will, this wealth's a gay lad,


Will. I care not for him, curmudgenly Swad.


Wea. Well, miss me a while and you will go near to be sad.


Wit. Will, ye are will fool, if of him ye be not glad.


VVil. Nay wit if thou want him, thou'ilt go near to be mad.


Wea. To keep us still quiet, I would other talk we had,


Wit. I hope we'^l not fall out being none but we three.


Wea. If Wealth were away, Wit and Will would agree.


Will. Nay, Wit and will are at strife, when there is no body but we.


Wit. Let pass, and of our shields (sirs) let us make a little glee,

Will, what gives thy master here? a Buzzard or a Ryte.


will. Wit, you show your self a Gentleman by g^ssing so right,
A Buzzard? thou Buzyard, Wit, have no more skill
Then take a Faulcon for a Buzzard.

Wit. O be quiet good Will:
It was but for sport, for I know the bird else,

Wea. Thou might see it was no Buzzard man by the bells:


wit. What Is the reason of this Faulcon, I pray thee Will show.


Will. Thou know that a Faulcon wares hie, and stoupes low,
So does pleasure.

Wit. And what is the word?


Will. Pour temps, for time.


Wit. A very pretty one, I would it were in rhyme.


Wea. In rhyme Wit, why so?


Wit. Because it wantes reason.


Will. Look for my fist Wit, if ye rap out such treason.


Wit. Treason, to what, boy?


Will. To my masters bird.


Wit. Now Will my thombe wags, it was but to his word.


Will. It Is a pleasant Gentleman, this young mast. Wit,
Your master has samething too, I pray ye what is it.

Wit. Look will, and guess.


Will. It Is a Load in a shell.


Wea. I had as leeue ye had said, a Frog in a well.


Wit. Is It not a great Butterfly, Will, can thou t^ll?


Will. What is it in sadness?


Wit. A Tortoys my boy, whose shell is so hard, that a laden ^art may go
over and not break it, and so she is safe within, and wheresoever she goes,
she bears it on her back, needing neither other succor or shilter but her
shell: the word underneath her is Prouidens securus, the provident is safe,
like to the Tortoys, armed with his own defense, and defended with his own
armor: in shape somewhat round, signifying compass, wherein always the
provident forsee to keep themselves within their own compass, my boy.


will. wittily spoken, now wealths may. has got a Daffadowndilly.


Wea. If Will had not been wilful, now he might have said a Lilly, whose
glory is without comparison, and beauty matchless. for Solomon the most
sumptuo^s King that ever was, was never comparable in glory with the Lilly,
neither is there any cities matchable with the pomp of London, mistake me not
good boys, that this pomp tendes to pride, yet London has enough, but my
Lord pomp does rightly represent the stately magnificence and sumptuous
estate without pride or vain glory to London accomodate, and therefore the
word is well applied to the ympreze (Glory sauns peer) for that the Lilly
is neither proud of the beauty, nor vainglorious of the pomp: No more is
London, but if it be joyful of any thing, it is of the peace and plenty, both
flowing from two such fountains as becomes not us to name. Now therefore, my
g^od boys, know that my Master is rather Magnificence than pomp in bad
sense, and rather pomp than Pride in the best sense.


will. And my Lord is not pleasure sprung of Voluptuousnes, but of such
honorable and honest kind conceit, as heaven and humanity well brooks and
allows pleasure pleasing not perniti^us.


wit. Who would have thought that will had been philosophous, But what means the
word pour temps in the shield, for time?


will. Wit, shall I call thee fool? the best pleasure of al lasts but a time,
For of all pleasures most pleasing to sight,
Me thinks there is none to the Faulcons hie slight,
Yet diseases end it, the breach of a wing,
Nay, the breach of a fether spoils that sweet thing:

wit And so my master has the vantage will ye or no, pomp and pleasure may be
il.


Will. May not policy be bad?


weal. Wit, well overtaken by VVil that crafty Lad.


wit. A crafty Goose, the Gander gives him health,
Bad pollici's seldom found in so Christian a common wealth,
As London is I trust, where my master is a Lord.

will. And ours so too.


wea. Well, let us acco^d, for wit's a good thing, yet may be il applied


wit. and so may wealth, be it employed in pride,
And will worst of all, when it disdaines a guide.

will. A Jack an Apes has wit.


Wit. And so he has Will.


Wea. But he never has wealth: now ye are both still.


Wit. Yes, he wears a chain.


Will. Well spoke, and like a bearward.


Wea. If ye be Non plus let the matter fall.


Will. Wit, do thou see? thus goes wealth away with all.


Wit. Let Us reason no further for we shall have glee,
Here is a challenger to our shields, step we aside.

Enter Simplicity in bare black, like a poor Citizen. Will. He will eat them
I think, for he gapes very wide.


Wea. Say nothing to him, and ye shall see the fool go by.


Will. Sir, gape not so wide for fear of a fly.


Simp. Fly, flam flurt: why? Can a fly do hurt?


Wit. Yea, have ye not heard that the fly has her spleen
And the Ant her gall?

Sim. My Uncle has so I ween, for its an angry old fellow
When his gall runs over: children good day,
Whose pretty lads are you three?

Wit. Three, are ye sure?


Sim. I Will not swear till I have told you: one, two, three.


Will. I beshrew thee.


Sim. Me boy, why? I am beshrewed already, for I am married.


Wea. Then thou have a wife?


Sim. Yea, I would thou had her, if thou could stay her tongue,


Wea. I thy wise man? Why, I am too young.


Sim. And I am too old, but in good ernest good boys, be not angry,
that I call you boys, for ye are no men yet, ye have no beardes
And yet I have seen boys angry for being called boys:
Forsooth they would be called youths: well, yet a boy is a boy
And a youth is a yout^: well, if ye be not ashamed of the boy,
Good boys, whose ^^yes are ye?

Wit. No whit ashamed sir of that that we are, nor ashamed at all of those
whom we serve, for boys we be, and as we be, we serve the three Lords of
London, to weet, policy, pomp, and pleasure.


Sim. A pretty spoken Child and of a pretty wit.


VVil VVit's his name indeed, are ye one of his Godfathers, ye hit it so right?


Sim. It is more then I know, then is thy name wit boy? Now of mine honesty
welcome, for I have wanted thee a great while.


Wit. Welcome sir, how so? why do ye entertain me so kindly? I cannot dwell
with you for I have a master already.


Sim. So have I too, but she learnes me little wit: my wife I mean Well, all this
while I stand here my wares are not abroad, and so I may loose both my
customers and market.


Wea. VVares sir, have ye wares? what wares do ye sell?


Sim. Truly Child, I sell Ballades: soft, whose wares are these that are up
already? I paid rent for my standing, and other folks wares shall be placed
before mine, this is wise indeed.


Wit. O, the finenes of the wares (man) deserve to have good place.


Sim. They are fine indeed, who sels them, can ye tell? Is he free?


Wit. Our masters be, we wait on this ware, and yet we are no chapmen.


Sim. Chapmen, no that is true, for you are no men, neither Chapmen nor chopmen,
nor chipmen nor shipmen, but if ye be chappers, choppers or chippers, ye are
but chapboyes, and chapboyes ye are double.


VVil. Double, how is it? Teach me that and you will make me laugh a little.


Wea. And me a little:


Wit. And me a little.


Sim. Then your three little laughes will make one great laugh:


Wit. True, for if three fools were one fool, that were a great fool. But
how are we double chapboies? Point to Simplicity.


Sim. Because ye have two chaps, an upper chap and a nether chap.


will. Ha, ha, ha.


wit. Ha, ha, ha.


wea. Ha, ha, ha.


simp. You said you would laugh but a little, but you laugh a great deal, why
do ye laugh so much?


will. Because your wit was so great in expounding your meaning


sim. Ye, you may see it is a good thing to have wit.


wit. I thank you sir.


wea. And what say you to wealth?


sim. wealth? Marie wealth is better.


wea. I thank you sir.


will. And how say ye to will?


Sim. Indeed, good will is a great matter,


will. Yea between a maid and a bacheler.


Sim. Why? you are not in love boy?


Will. yes but I am, and in charity too.


Sim. Charity? alas poor child, thou in chariti^, ha, ha, now must I laugh.


wit. But you laugh a great while, and you laugh very loud,


Sim. Then I ow you nothing for laughing, and you hear me the (...)


Wea. But now laugh not we.


Sim. No, you may be maddle, coddle: well here is three passing fine lads, if a
man were able to keep them all: let me see wealth, oh that is a sweet lad: then
wit, oh that is a sine lad: Will, oh that is a pretty lad. Will, wit, and wealth,
God lend ye health. I would I could guile their masters of two of them. If I
had Fraud here that served Lady Lucre, he would teach me: he would teach me to
tice one of them from his master: which of them now, if a man should steal
one? will? Nay, I care not for will outsep he be good will: Wit, a pretty child,
but a man can not live by wit: wealth, yea marie sir, I would I could win that
wealth, for then I need neither will, nor wit, nor I need sell no Ballad^ but
live like a mouse in a mill and have another to grind my meal^ for me, I Will
have a fling at one of them anon.


Wea. Do you not forget your self gaffar.


wit. Have you not wares to sell gaffar?


will. When do you show gaffar?


Sim. Well remembered pretty lads, ye may see, children can teach old folks, I
am an unthrift indeed: well, my wares shall out now. But sir^, how sell ye your
wares, how many of these for a groat?


wea. Our wares are not to be sold.


sim. Not for silver nor gold? why hang they then in the open market?


will. To be seen, not bought.


Sim. Then they are like ripe plummes upon a rich man's tree that set men's teeth
a watering when they be not to be bought: but what call ye these things?


wit. Scutchions.


Sim. Cushens, alas it were pity to sit on such fine cu^hens: but come my
boys if you'il buy any of my wares, here is my stall, and Il^ open and show
strait.


Wea. What dainty fine Ballad have you now to be sold?


sim. Marie child, I have chipping Norton a mile from Chapel oath heath, A
lamentable ballad of burning the Popes dog: The sweet Ballade of the Lincoln
shire bagpipes, And Peggy and Willy, But now he is dead and gone: Mine own
sweet Willy is laid in his grave la, la, la, lan ti dan derry, dan da dan, lan
ti dan, dan tan derry, dan do.


Wit^ It is a doleful discourse, and sung as dolefully.


Sim. Why, you can not mend it, can ye?


Wit What will you lay on that? For I my self dare lay six groats to six of
your balde Ballades, that you your self shall say I sing better than you.


Sim. What a brag boy is this to comparison with a man, but boy boy, I will not
lay six Ballades to six groates, but I will lay six Ballades to six ierkes at
your buttockes, that you shall not sing so well as I.


Wit. That I shall not? No, possible you will not let me sing.


Sim. I not let you? Is that spoken like wit? It is spoken like a Woodcocke,
how can I stay thee if thou will sing out thy throat?


Wit. Well then, to our bargain, six Ballades to six stripes, and who shall
keep stakes?


Sim. Neither of your companions, for that is ask my fellow if I be a thief.


Will. Will you keep the stakes your self?


Sim. Best of all, for I mean plainly and will pay if I loose, here is my six
Ballades, they be ready: now how shall I come by your six stripes boy?


Wit. Down with your breeches, I Will fetch a rod and deliver them straight.


sim. Nay then I care not if thou keep stakes.


Wit. You speak too late gaffar, having challenged pre-eminence.


sim. Then let us lay no wager but sing for good fellowship.


Wit. Agreed, who shall begin?


sim. O boy, who is the elder? Have thou not heard give Flounders to thy elder?


Wit. You mistake the fish, trust me I am sure it is give place, but begin with
good grace.


Here simp. sings first, and Wit after, dialoguewise, both to music if ye
will. Wit. Now sirs, which singes best?


Sim. Tush, your copesmetes shall not judge: friend, what say you, which of us
sings best? to one of the auditory.


will. To s^y truth there is but had choice, How will you sell the ballad you sang,
for I Will not buy the voice.


Sim. Why will thou not buy my voice?


will. Because it will cost me more money to buy sallet oil to keep it from
rusting, than it is worth: but I pray ye honest man, what'^ this?


Sim. Read and then shall see.


will. I cannot read.


Sim. Not read and brought up in London, wru^st thou never to schols


will. Yes, but I would not learn.


Sim. Thou wast the more fool: if thou cannot read I Will tell thi^, this is
Tarltons picture: did thou never know Tarlton*


Will. No: what was that Tarlton? I never knew him.


Sim. What was be: a prentice in his youth of this honorable city, God be with
him: when he was young he was leaning to the trade that my wife uses now, and
I have used, vide lice shirt, water-bearing: I wis he has tossed a Tankard in
Cornehil er now, if thou knew him not I will not call thee ingram, but if
thou knew not him, thou knew no body: I warrant here is two crackropes knew
him.


Wit. I dwelt with him.


Sim. Did thou? now give me thy hand, I love thee the better.


Will. And I too sometime.


Sim. you child, did you dwell with him sometime?

wit dwelt with him indeed, as appeared by his rhyme,

And served him well, and will was with him now and than, but soft, thy name is
wealth, I think in earnest he was little acquainted with th^e O it was a fine
fellow as ere was borne, there will never come his like while the earth can
corn. O passing fine Tarlton I would thou had lined yet.


Wea. He might have some, but thou showest small wit, there is no such finenes
in the picture that I see.


sim. And thou art no Cinque Port man, thou art not wit free,
the finenes was within, for without he was plain,
But it was the merriest fellow and had such iestes in store,
that if thou had seen him, thou would have laughed thy heart sore.

weal, Because of thy praise, what is the price of the picture.


sim. I Will tell thee my lad, come hither, if thou will be ruled by me thou shall
pay nothing, I Will give it thee, if thou will dwell with me, and I promise thee
this counsel is for thy prefarming, had not thou better serve a free man of
the City, and learn a trade to live another day, than to be a serving boy in
thy youth and to have no occupation in thine age, I can make thee free if thou will be my prontice.


wea. Why, wealth is free every where, what need I serve you^. My Lord is a
freeman if that may do me good.


sim. I cry ye mercy M. boy, then your master is free of the lords company and
you serve him that ye may be a Lord when ye come out of your years.


wit. Wealth is a proud boy, gaffar what say you to me?


sim. Thy name is wit, will thou dwell with me?


wit. If I like your name and science, perchance wee'il agree


simp. Nay, my name and mine honesty is al one, it is well known He Is a very
fool that cannot beguile me, for my name is simplicity.


Will. Coads gaffar were not you a meal-man once and dwelt with Lady Conscience?


sim. Yes, for want of a better.


will. What, a better man?


sim. No, for want of a better mistress, she was as very a fool as I We dwelt
so long together that we went both on begging.


Wit. Indeed they that use a good conscience cannot suddenly be rich, But I Will
not dwell with ye, you are too simple a master for me.


Will. Nor I Will not dwell with you for all this worlds treasure.


sim. No, why whom serve you Will?


W^l. I serve my Lord pleasure.


sim. And whom serve you wit?


Wit. I serve my Lord pollicie^


simp. And whom serve you wealth?


wea. I serve my Lord pomp.


sim. You should be served al with my Lord Birchley if you were well served,
these lads are so lordly that louts care not for them: for wealth serves Pomp,
Wit serves policy, and will serves pleasure. wealth, will you buy this picture
for your Lord? Show Tarltons picture,


wea. No, it is too hase a Present for pomp.


Wit. And policy seldom regardes such a trisle.


Will. Come on gaffar, come on, I must be your best chapman,
I Will buy it for pleasure, hold, there is a great:

sim. Gramercie good will, my wife shall love thee still,
And since I can neither get Wit nor wealth,
Let my wife have her will, and let me have my health.
God forgive me, I think I never name her, but it coniures her, look
where she comes, be mannerly boys that she knock ye not with her
staff: keep your own counsel, and I Will make ye laugh.
What do ye lack, what lack ye.
Stand away these boys from my wares,
Get ye from my stall, or I Will wring you by the ears.
Let my customers see the wares: what lack ye what would ye hau^ bought.

Enter painful Penury, attired like a waterbearing woman with her Tankard.
Pen. You have customers inow and if they were ought,
What do ye with these boys here to filtch away your ware?
You show all your wit, you'il never have more care.

Will. Content ye good wife, we do not f^ltch, but buy.


Pen. I meant not you, young master, Gods blessing on your heart
You have bought indeed sir I see, for your part.
Be these two young Gentlemen of your company,
Buy Gentlemen, buy ballads to make your friends merry.

wit. To stand long with your burden, me thinks you should be weary


Pen. True Gentlemen, but you may see poor painful penury
Is feign to carry three Tankerds for a penie.
But husband I say, come not home to dinner, its Ember day,
You must eat nothing till night, but fast and pray.
I shall loose my draught at Conduit, and therefore I Will away.
Young Gentlemen God be with ye.

sim. Wife, must I not dine to day?


Pen. No sir by my say. Exit Penury.


sim. If I must not eat, I mean to drink the more.
What I spare in bread, in ale I Will set on the skore.
How say ye my lade? And do I not speak wisely?

Wit. Me thinks ye do, and it is pretty, that simplicity
Has gotten to his wife plain painful Penury.

sim. Yea, I thank God though she be poor and scarce cleanly, yet she is
homely, careful and comely.


One call within. Wit, wealth and will, come to your Lords quickly. will. Must the
Scutchions hang still?
One within. yea, let them alone.

wit. Farewell Master simplicity. Exeunt.


sim. Farewell good M. boys ene heartily, ene heartily, heartily.
And hear ye will, I thank you for your hansel truly.
Pretty lads, hark ye sirs how? will, wit, wealth.

Enter Wit. wit. What Is the matter you call us back so suddenly.


sim. I forgot to ask you whither your three Lords of London be courtiers or
Cittiners?


wit. Citizens borne and courtiers brought up: Is this all? Farewell. Exit.


sim. Citizens borne and Courtiers brought up, I think so, for they that be
borne in London are half Courtiers before they see the Court, for finesse and
manerlinesse oh passing, my manners and misbehauiour is mended half in half
since I gave over being a meal-man and came to dw^ll in London: ye may see Time
does much, Time wears out iron horshooes: Time tears out milstones: Time
seasons a pudding well, and Time has made me a free man, as free to bear
water and sell Ballades, as the best of our copulation: I would have thought
once my horse should have been free as soon as my self, and sooner too, for he
would have stombled with a sack of meal and lien along in the channel with
it when he had done, and that some calls freedom, but it is but a durtie
freedom, but ye may see, bad horses were but ^ades in those days: But soft,
here comes customers: What lack ye, what is it ye lack, what lack ye? Come
along and buy nothing: fine Ballades, new Ballades, what lack ye?


Enter Nemo and the three Lords. Ne. My Lords come on, what suits have you to
me?


Pol. Renowned Nemo, the most only one
That draws no breath but of the eternal air,
That know our suit before we bound to speak
For thou art the very O^acle of thoughts:
Whose virtues do encompasse thee about,
As the air surroundes this m^ssie globe of earth.
Who have in power what ever pleases thee,
And can bestow much more than we may crave,
To thee we seek, to thee on knees we sue,
That thou will deigne from thraldom to release,
Those lovely Dames, that London Ladies are.

Ne. What, those three caitiefs long ago condemned?
Love, Lucre, Conscience, well deserving death,
Being corrupt with all contagion:
The spotted Ladies of that stately town.

pom. Love, Lucre, Conscience we of thee desire,
Which in thy self have all perfection,
Accomplished with all integrity:
And need no help so do what pleases thee,
Who hold Fame and Fortune both thy slaves,
And do compel the Destinies draw the coatch:
To thee we sue, since power thou have thereto,
To set those Ladies at their liberty.

plea. At liberty, thou spotless Magistrat^,
That of the cause do carry all regard,
Careless of bribes, of birth and parentage,
Because thy self art only borne to bliss,
Bless us so much that Lords of London are,
That those three Ladies borne and bred with us
May by our suites, release of thraldom ^^nd.

Ne. Release my Lords? why seek ye their relase?
That have perpetual prison for their doom.

pol. But Nemo can from thence redeem them all.


Ne. Their deeds were cause, not Nemo of their thral.


Pom. Yet Nemo was the Judge that sentence gave.


Ne. But Nemo never spilled, whom he could save:


plea. Thou from perpetual prison may revoke.


Pol. Death has no power against him to strike a strok


Pom. Thou only mild and courteous sir, vouchsafe
To grant our suit, and set those Ladies free.

Ne. What Is your purpose in this earnest suit?


Plea. To marie them, and make them honest wives.


Ne. But may it be that men of your regard,
Lords of such fortune, and so famous place,
Will link your selves with Ladies so forlorn,
And so disteined with more then common crimes?

Pol. Marriage does make amends for many amiss.


Pom. And love does cover hears of combrous evils.


plea. And does forget the faults that were before.


Ne. Mean as you say, ye need to say no more.


pol. In token that we mean what we have said,
Lo here our shieldes the prizes of our love:
To challenge all except thy self that dare
Deny those Ladies to be ours by right.

Ne. Woo them and win them, win them and wear the^ too,
I shall both comfort and discourage you my Lords,
The comfort's this, of all those former crimes^
Wherewith the world was wont those dames to charge
I have them cleared and made them all as free
As they were borne: no blemish left to see.
But the discourage (gentle Lords) is this,
The time of their indurance has been long,
Whereby their clothes of cost and curious stuff
Are worn to rags, and give them much disgrace.

Pom. Alas good Ladies, was there none that sued
For their release, before we took't in hand?

Ne. Yes, diverse for fair L^cre sought release,
And some for Love would feign have paid the sees,
But silly Conscience sat without regard,
In Sorrows dungeon, sighing by her self:
Which when I saw that some did sue for Love,
And most for Lucre, none for Conscience:
A vow I made, which now I shall perform,
Til some should sue to have release for all,
Judged as they were, they should remain in thrail:
But you that crave their freedoms all at once
Shall have your suit, and see them here ere long,
A little while you must have p^tience,
And leave this place: go in my Lords before.

Pom. Becomes us to wait on Nemo still,


Ne. Not so: but Lordings, ^he condition more
You promise me, since they are in my power,
I shall dispose them when they are released
Upon you three, as I shall think it best.

Pom. Do but command and we shall all subscribe.


Ne. Then go your ways, for I have here to do. Exeunt 3. Lord
Enter Sorrow. Sorrow draw near, to morrow bring thou forth
Love, Lucre, Conscience, whom thou have in thrall,
Upon these stones to sit, and take the air,
But set no watch or spyall what they do. Exeunt ambo.

Enter Fraud, Usury, Dissimulation, Simony and Simplicity. Frau. How happy
may we call this merry day my mates, Wherein we meet, that once were desperate,
I think, ever to have seen one another, when Nemo that upright Judge had by
imprisoning our Mistresses, banished us (by setting such dilligent watch for us)
out of London, and almost out of the world. But live we yet? And are we met?
and near our old seat? Usury is it thou? Let me see, or has some other stolen
thy face? Speak thou man?


Vsu. No Fraud, though many have counterfeited both thee and me,
We are our selves yet, and no changlings I see:
And why should thou ask me man if I live:
The silly Ass can not feed on harder forage than usury,
She upon thistles, and I upon a brown crust of a month old.

simp. So that Usury and an ass are two of the profitablest beasts that a man
can keep, yet the one has sharper teeth than the other.


Frau. But what means Dissimulation? He droopes me thinks, What cheer man?
Why cosen, frolic a fit, art thou not glad of this meeting? What Is the cause
of thy melancholy?


Dis. Not melancholic, but musing how it comes to pass that we are thus
fortunate to meet as we do.


simo. I Will tell thee why we met, because we are no mountains.


simp. But ye are as ill, for ye are monsters.


simo. And men may meet though mountains cannot.


Frau, In token that this meeting is joyful to us all,
Let us embrace altogether with hearts joy and affection.

simp. I see many of these old proverbs prove true, it is merry when knaves
meet:


Frau. How sir, what is that?


Sim. If a man had a casting net, he might catch all you.


Frau. Art not thou Simplicity?


Simp. Goodman Simp. for I am married, and it like your maistership,
And you are mast. Fraud too, a pox on your worship.
I see, a fox and a false knave have all one luck, the better for banning,
And many of you crafty knaves live merilyer than we honest men.

Frau. Sir, bridle your tongue if you'il be welcome to our c^mpany
No girdes nor old grudges, but congratulate this meeting,
And sirs, if you say it, let us tell how we have lived since our parting.

simp. O it is great pity.


Vsu. What? to tell how we have lived:


simp. No, that ye do live.


Frau. Yet again sir. Usury, as for thee it were folly to ask, for thou
live but too well, but Dissimulation and simony, how have you two lived?
discourse I pray you heartily.


simp. Faith even like two mice in an amberie that eat up all the meat, and
when they have done, gnaw holes in the cupbord.


Dis. Fraud, after my scaping away at the Sessions where I shifted as thou
know in three sundry shapes, one of a Friar, and they can dissemble: another
like a woman, and they do little else: the third as a Saint and a Devil, and
so is a woman. I was banished out of London by Nemo, to the country went I,
amongst my old friends and never better loved than among the russet coats:
once in a month I stole in oath market day to Leaden Hall and about, and
sometime to Westminster hall. Now hearing some speech, that the Ladies should
be sued for, for I am come in hope of my old intertaiment, supposing my self
not known of many, and hoping the three Lords will prevail in their suit, and
I to serve one of them.


simp. He shall do well that gives thee a coat, but he should do better, that
could take of thy skin.


simo. And I have been a traueiler abroad in other realms, for here I am so
cried out against by preachers (and yet some ministers that be none, could be
content to use me) that I was glad to be gone now in some other lands, and
not very far of, I am secretly fostered, saving in Scotland, and the low
Countries, they are reformed, they can not abide me. Well now and then hither I
came stealing over sea, and hearing as you here intend as you do.


Frau. And for mine own part, amongst artificers and among^^ a few bad
cons^ienced Lawyers, I have found such ente^tainment, as does pass, yet would
I with Lucre feign be ^s I was.


simp. Fraud is as ill as a cutpurse, by the mass.


Vsu. And for Usury, the longer I live, the greater love I find Yet would I be
with Lucre, again to please my mind.


Frau. Here Is a good fellow too, one of our acquaintance, how have thou lived
Simplicity?


simp. More honestly then all the rest of thy company: for when I might beg no
longer, as begging was but bad, for you c^son'd me once of an alms, I fell to
tankard bearing* and so ^os a wife of the same science. painful penury, then
got I my freedom, and feeling my shoulder grow weary of the tankard, set up an
easier trade to sell balla^s.


Frau. Had thou a stock to set up withal?


Simp Wise enough to tell you, I, and yonder is my stal, but bewar^ I loose
nothing, for if I do, I Will lay it straight to some of you, for I saw none so
like the^ues I promise you, since I set up.


Frau. Ye are a wiseman when your nose is in the cup, but soft who comes here?
step we close aside, for these be the three Ladies for my life brought out of
prison by their k^eper, let us be whist and we shall hear and s^e all, Sir
you must say nothing.


Enter Sorrow and the three Ladies, he sets them on three stones on the stage.
simp. not til ye speak for I am afraid of him that is with ye wom^n*


Con. O Sorrow when? when sorrow will thou cease
To blow the spark that burns my troubled soul?
To feed the worm that stings my fainting breast,
And sharp the steel that goares my dieng heart?
My thoughts are thorns, my tears hot drops of lead,
I plain, I pine, I die, yet never dead.
If world would end, my woe should but begin,
Lo, this the case of Conscience for her sin:
And sin the food wherewith my worm was fed,
That sting^ me now to death, yet never dead.

Love. Yet never dead, and yet Love does not th^^,
Love that to loss in life her folly lent,
Folly the food whereon her frailty fed,
Frailty the milk that Natures breast did gi^e,
Life, loss and folly, frailty, food and kind,
Worm, sting, thorns, fire and torment to the mind,
Life but a breath, and folly but a flower,
Frailty claie, dust the food, that fancy scorns,
Love a sweet bait to cover losses sower.
Flesh breeds the fire that kindles lustful thorns,
Lust, fire, bait, scorn, dust, flower, and feeble breath
Die, quench, deceive, fly, fade, and yield to death,
To death? O good, if death might finish all,
We die each day, and yet for death we call.

Lucre. For death we call, yet death is still in sight,
Lucre does sealed in drops of melting gold,
Accusing Rust, calls on eternal might,
Where flames consume, and yet we freeze with cold:
Sorrow adds Sulphur unto Furies heat,
And chops them ye, whose chattering teeth do beat,
But sulphur, snow, flame, frost nor hideous crieng
Can cause them die, that ever are in dying.
Nor make the pain diminish or increase,
sorrow is slack, and yet will never cease.

Sor. When Sorrow cease, Shame shall then begin,
With those that wallow senseless in their sin:
But Ladies I have drawn you from my Den,
To open air to mittigate some moan.
Conscience, sit down upon that sweating stone,
And let that Flint (love) serve thee for a seat,
And Lady Lucre, on that stone rest you.
And Ladies thus I leave you here alone,
Mourn ye, but moan not, I shall absent be,
Yet good it were sometime to think on me. Exit

Con. Comfort it is to think on Sorrow past.


Love. Sorrow remains when joy is but a blast.


Luc. A blast of wind is worlds felicity,


Con. A blasting wind and full of misery.


Love. O Conscience, thou have most tormented me.


Luc. Me has thy worm O Conscience, stong too deep.


Con. But more my self my thoughts tormented have
Than both of you in sorrows sullen cave.
From whence drawn forth I find but little rest,
A seat uneasy, wet, and scalding hot,
On this hard stone has sorrow me assignde,

Love. and on my seat my self I frozen fin^.
No flint more hard, no y^e more cold then this.

Lucre. I think my seat some mineral stone to be.
I cold from it, it draws heat from me.
Ladies consent, and we our seats will view.

Con. Dare we for shame our stained faces show.


Love. My double face is single grown again.


Lucre. My spots are gone, my skin is smooth and plain.


Con, Doffe we our veiles and greet this gladsom light.
The ^haser of glome sorrows heavy might.

Love. Hail cheerful air and clearest crystal sky.


Lucre. Hail shining sun and fairest firmament,
Comfort to those that time in woe have spent.

Con. Upon my weeping stone is set remorse in brazen letters.


Love. And on this Flint in lead is Charity.


Lucre. In golden letters on my stone is Care.


Con. Then Lucre fits upon the stone of care.


Lucre, And Conscience on the Marble of remorse,


Love. Love on the flint of frozen Charity,
Ladies alas, what tattered souls are we?

Con. Sorrow our hearts, and time our clothes has torn


Lucre, Then sit we down like silly souls forlorn^,
And hide our faces that we be not known,
For Sorrows plagues tormented me no more,
Than will their fight that knew me heretofore.

Love. then will their sight that knew us heretofore
Draw ruth and help from them for our relief:

Con. For our relief? for Conscience and for Love,
No help, small ruth that our distress may move:

Love, O Conscience thou would lead me to despair,
But that I see the way to hope is fair,
And Hope to heaven directs a ready way,
And heaven to help is pressed, to them that pray.

Lucre, That pray with faith, and with vnsain'd remors^
For true belief and tears make prayer of force:

Con. Then ^eile our selves, and silent let us stay, till heavens shall please
to send some friends this way: Sit all dow^


Frau. Ladies unmasked, blush not for base attire,
Here are none but friends and servants all, deer Lady Lucre,
Deerer unto us than daily breath we draw from sweetest air;
Dearer then life, dearer then heaven it self,
Deigne to discover those alluring lamps,
Those lovely eyes more clear than Venus Star,
Whose bright aspectes worlds wonder do produce,
Vnueile I say that, beauty more divine,
than Nature (save in thee) did ever paint:
that we sworn slaves unto our mistr^sse, may
Once more behold those stately lovely looks,
And do those duties which us well beseemes,
Such duties as we all desire to do.

Con. I know that tongue Lucre, beware of Fraud.


Luc. Of Fraud? Indeed by speech it should be he. Fra. what seek tho^


Frau. Lucre, to honor thee with wit, with worth, with life, with all I have, to
be thy servant as I was before, to get thee clothes, and what thou want else.


Lucre. No Fraud, farewell, I must be won no more, to keep such servants as
I kept before.


Simo. Sweet Lady Lucre, me thou may accept.


Lucre. How art thou called?


Simo. Simon.


Lucre. I? No, sir, Conscience says.


Con: No Lucre, now beware, false not thy faith,
For Simoni's subject to perpetual curse.

Dis. As you two have sped, I would desire to speed no wors^,


Frau. Make you a suit, you may chance to speed better:


Dis. Not I, for of al, my tongue is best known,
But if I speak, it shall be to her that was once mine own^:
Good Lady Love, thou little know the grief^
that I thy friend sustain for thy distress,
And less beleeuest what care I have of thee:
Look up good Love, and to supply thy wants,
Ask what thou will, and thou shall have of me,
Of me that joy more in thy liberty,
Than in this life our light that comforts me.

Love. O gall in hunnie, serpent in the grass,
O bifold fountain of two bitter streams,
Dissimulation fed with Vipers flesh,
Whose words are oylt, whose deeds the darts of death:
Thy tongue I know, that tongue that me be guil'd,
Thy self a Devil, made me a Monster vild.
From thee well known, well may I bless my self,
Dear bought repentance bids me shun thy snare.

Con. O happy Love, if now thou can beware.


simp. Marie, but hear ye motley-beard, I think this blindfold buzzardly
hedge-wench spoke to ye, she knows ye though she see ye not, hark ye, you
women, if you'il go to the alehouse, I Will bestow two p^ts on ye, and we'il get a
pair of Carde^ and some company, and winn^ twenty pots more, for you play the
best at a game called smelling of the four knaves that ever I saw.


Vsu. Four? soft, yet they have not smelt thee.


Simp. No, I am one more than is in the deck, but you'il be smeld as soon as
ye begin to speak, I Will see what they'il say to me: hear ye you women, wives,
widows, maids, men's daughters, What shall I call ye? these four fellows
(hark ye, shall I call ye ^^afty knaves) make me believe that you are the three
that were the three fair Ladies of London.


Con. Gentle Simplicity we are unhappy they.


Sim. Now ye bad fellows, which of ye had such a word as gentle fir^*


Vsu. Bad fellows ye Rascal? If ere you bring me pawn I Will pinch ye for
that word.


sim. I cry you mercy M. Injury, M. usury I meant not you,


Frau. If you mean us, we may be even with ye too.


Simp. Tut, I knew you an Ostler, and a thief beside, you have rubbed my horse
heels er now for all your pri^e: but Ladies, if ye be the three ladies, which of
ye dwelt in Kent street? one of ye did, but I know not which is she, ye look
all so like broom-wenches, I was once her servant, I Will nere be ashamed of her
though I be rich, and I she be poor, yet if she that has been my dame, or he
that has bin my m^ister come in place, I Will speak to the^ sure, I Will do my duty,
which is Lady Consc?


Con. Even I am she Simplicity.


Sim. I am glad ye are out of prison, I thought ye had forgot me, I went a
begging from you til ^he bedles snapt me up, now I am free and keep a stall of
Ba^lades, I may buy and sell, I would you had as good a gown now as I ca^ried
once of yours to pawn to Usury here.


Con. Gramercy good ^imp will thou be with me now?


simp. No I thank you heartily, I Will beg no more, I can not be with ye though I
would for I am married to painful penury: Look now my proud stately masters, I
may if I will, and you would if ye might.


Frau. No, not dwell with such a beggar as Conscience.


simp. No, Fraud nere loved Conscience since he was an Ostler.


Vsu. Who cares for Conscience but dies a beggar?


sim. That will not Usury do, he will first take 3. score pound in the hundred.


Dis. love, look on me and I will give thee clothes.


love. I will no more by thee be so disguised.


simp. Ye do the wiser, for his face looks like a cloakbacke:


Dis. In thy affections I had once a place:


love. Those fond affections wrought me soul disgrace,


Dis. I Will make amends, if ought amiss were done:


love. Who once are burned, the fire will ever shun.


Dis. And yet once burned to warm again may prove:


love. Not at thy fire, I will be perfect love?


simp. I promise you the wenches have learned to answer wittily,
Here Is many fair proffers to Lucre, and love,
But who clothes poor Conscience, she may sit long enough.

Vsu. I will cloth her straight: Usury takes Frauds cloak, and casts it on Cons


simp Will you master Usury, that is honestly spoke.
Ha, that is no gramercie to cloth her with another man's cloak,
But I see you have a craft in the doing M. Usury,
Usury cou^rs Conscience with Frauds cloak very cunningly.

Con. Alas who loades m^ shoulders with this heavy weed,
Fie, how it stinks, this is perfumed indeed,

Fra. Marie geppe goody Conscience, indeed I do you wrong,
But I Will quickly right it, my cloak shall not comber you long.

Vsu. All this while Lucre knows not I am here,
But now will I to her, mark how I sp^ed.
Lady the fairest that Nature ever fourmed,
Lodestone of Love, that draws ^ff^ctions darte^.
The only object to all human eyes,
And sole destred Dainty of the world,
thy Vassal here, a virtue in thy need
Whom thou by license of the law may use,
tenders himself, and all his services
to do thy will in duty as to fore,
Glad of thy freedom as his proper life.

Simp. Lady Lucre, you love an apple, take heed the Caterpill^^ consume not
your fruit.


Lucre. Why who is it that makes this latest suit?


Simp. It Is usury. aloud in her ear^.


Lucre. Great is the service he has done for me,
But Usury now I may not deal with thee.

Vsu. the Law allows me Madam, in some sort.


Con. But God and I would have thy bounds cut short.


Vsu. For you I recke not, but if God me hate,
Why does the Law allow me in some rate?

Con, Usury slanders both Law and state,
the Law allows not though it tolerate,
And thou art sure be shut out at heaven gate.

Vsu, You were ever nice, no matter what you pra^e:


Simp, Then it will be with him as it is at a great man^ house in dinner time:
he that knockes when the door is shut comes too late,


Lucre. Well Usury, Fraud, and Simony
Dissimulation hearken unto me,
My tongue (although in memory it be green)
Cannot declare what horrors I have seen,
He can it enter into mortal ears
Unmortified: the furies, f^res and fears.
the shrikes, the groans, the tortures and the pains,
that any soul for each of you sustaines.
No pen can write, how Conscience has me scourged.
When with your faults my soul she ever urged:
Arithmeticke does fail to number all,
the plagues of sorrow in the Den of thrall:
then tempt me not, nor trouble me no more,
I must not use you as I did before,
If you be found within fair Londons gate.
You must to prison, whence we came of late.
Conscience will accuse ye if ye be in sight.

Frau. That scuruie Conscience works us all the spite:


Enter Nemo, Vsu. Well Lucre, yet in thee we have delight.


Dis. Yonder come some, we must take our flight. Exeunt omnes


Simp. Birds of a fether will fly together, but when they be taken then are
they baken, yonder comes a customer, I Will to my stall:

Love, Lucre, and Conscience, blindman buffe to you all.


Ne. Conscience, Love, Lucre, Ladies al what cheer?
How do ye like the seats you sit upon.

Con. O pure unspotted Nemo sole paragon,
Of Love, of Conscience and perfection,
The Marble of Remorse I sit upon
Sweats scalding drops, like bitter brinish tears.

Ne. So should remorse when Conscience feels her gilt
But gentle Love how feel thou thy flint?

Love. O sharp and cold, I freeze unto my seat,
The Flint holds fire, and yet I feel no heat,
But am benumbed and frozen every joint.

Ne. O Love, so cold is charity in these times:
Lucre, how sit you?

Lu. Upon a heavy stone, not half so cold, not half so hot as theirs,
But of some secret power, for I do find and sensibly I feel,
That I from it exhale an earthly cold,
And it from me does draw a kindly heat.

Ne. Such force has Care of Lucre in it self,
To cool the heart and draw the vital spirits,
And such the true condition of you three:
Remorse of Conscience, Charity of Love,
And Care of Lucre, such your uses be:
But Ladies now your sorrow lay aside,
Frolic fair Dames, an unexpected good
Is imminent through me unto you all:
Three Lords there be your native countrymen,
In London bred, as you your selves have been.
Which covet you for honorable wives,
And presently will come to visit you,
Be not abashed at your base attire,
I shall provide you friends to deck you all.
If I command, stand up, else sit you still. Enter the 3. Lord.
Lo, where they come: my Lords the Dames be here.

pol, Why are they wympled? shall they not unmask theme


Ne. It is for your sake, for Policy they do it:


Pom. Much may their fortune and their feature be.
But what it is we cannot thus discern.

Ne. You shall in time Lord Pomp, be yet consent.


plea. Their same is more then cause or reason would,
May one of these be pleasures paragon?

Ne. Pleasure, be pleased and use no prejudice.
Madames stand up, mislike not their attire,
That shall be mended as your selued desire.

Pol. Their port, and their proportion well contente^.


Pom. Right stately dames, if they were well attir'^:


Plea. May we not see their beauty what it is?


Ne. Yes Lordings yes, Lucre, lift up thy veil.


Pol. Of beauty excellent.


Pom. Of rare perfection.


Plea. A dainty face.


Ne. Unmask Love.


Pol. Sweet love indeed.


pom. A lovely face.


Plea. A gallant grace.


Ne. Conscience, uncover.


pol. Beauty divine.


Pom A face angelical.


Plea. Sweet creature of the world.


Ne. Enough for once, Ladies sit down again:
As cunning chapmen do by curious wares, to the audie^^^
Which seldom showen do most inflame the mind,
So must I deal, being dainty of these Dames,
Who seldom seen shall best allure these Lords:
A while my Lords, I leave you with these three,
Converse, confer on good conditions,
I will right soon return with such good friends
As it concerns to cloth these dainty one^
If any in my absence visit them,
Know their intent, and use your skill therein. Exi^

pol Ladies, to call to mind your former lives
Were to recount your sorrows on a row,
Omitting then what you have been or be,
What you may be I Will speak, so it please you,
Wives to us three, Ladies to London Lords,
pomp, Pleasure policy, men of such regard,
As shall you guard from evil, once matched with us,
And Policy presents this good to you.

pom. With Londons Pomp may one of you be ioin'd,
Possessing more than Fortune can afford,
Fortune's a fool, but heavenly providence
Guards Londons pomp, and her that shall be his:

plea. And Londons pleasure, peerles in delights,
Will deigne to make one of these Dames his own,
Who may with him in more contentment live,
Than ever did the Queen of Ethiope.

Con. Though silence Lords, our modesty enforce,
Nemo can tell the secrets of our thoughts,
Nemo that women's minds can constant keep,
He shall for us you answer good my Lords,
I speak for all, though il beseeming me. Enter Falshod and doub. dealing

pol. You speak but well: My Lords step we aside
To note these fellows, what they do intend.

Pom. Nemo can tell, for he does follow them. Enter Nemo.


Falsh. Ladies to you, to some of you, we come,
Sent from such friends as much affect your good,
With garments, and with complements of cost
Accordant well to dames of such degree: I come to Lucre.

D. Dea. I to love am sent with no less cost then could be got for coin
Which with my message I deliver would,
Could I discern which of these Dames were she,

Love. Friend, I am Love, what bring thou there to me?


Con. Beware good Love, from whom and what thou take.


Ne. No whispering friend, but show it openly,
The matter good, you need not be ashamed:
From whom come thou?

D.Dea. That I conceile from any but from love,


Ne. From whom come you sir?


Falsh. That shall lucre know, and none but she.


Ne. Then speak aloud, for whispering here is barred.


Falsh. Then neither will I do nor speak at al.


Ne. Then I will speak and tell what you are both,
Thy self art Falsehood, and art sent from Fraud,
To compass Lucre with a cloak of craft,
With lawne of lies, and call of golden guile.

Pol. Pack you my friend, for if you stay a while
You shall return no more to him that sent you.

Ne. Thou from Dissimulation art sent,
And bring'st a gown of glosing, lived wish lust,
A Vardingale of haine boast, and fan of flattery,
A Ruff of riot, and a cap of pride,
And double dealing is thy name and office both.

D. Dea. Falsehood, let us go, we are disciphered.


Falsh. Lucre, thou loosest here a priucely gift. Exeunt (...)


Ne. lucre censumes being won by Fraud or shift,
Thus Lords you see how these are qualified,
And how these Ladies shun that sharp rebuke,
Which some deserve by taking of such toies,
As women weak are tempted soon with gifts,
But here they come that must these Ladies deck.
lucre, arise, come from the stone of Care:

Enter honest Industry, pure Zeal, and Sincerity. ho. Indust. Fair lucre, lo
what honest Industry
To thee has brought, to deck thy dainty self,
Lucre by honest Industry atchieu'd
Shall prosper, flourish, and continue long, Exit Lucre with ho. Industry.
Come to thy chamber to attire thee there.

Ne. Thou may depart with honest Industry.


P.Zeal. And Love arise from Charities cold Flint,
Pure Zeal has purchased roabes to cover Love,
Whiles love is single, Zeal shall her attire
With kind affection, mortifying lust,
Come love with me these garments to put on:

Ne. love, follow zeal and take his ornaments. Exit Love with p. zeal


Sincer. Rise Conscience from that Marble of Remorse,
That weeping stone that scaldes thy partched skin,
sincerity such roabes for thee has brought,
As best beseemes good Conscience to adorne^:
Come follow, that thou may go put them on,
For Conscience clothed by sincerity,
Is armed well against the enemy.

Ne. Follow him Consc. fear not, thou art right. Exit Con. with Si^


pol. Most reverend Nemo thanks for this good sight, lucre is clothed by
honest Industry.


Pom. love by pure zeal.


plea. And Conscience by sincerity.


Ne. Lordings, thus have you seen them at the first,
And thus you see them, trust me, at the worst,
Depart we now, come hence a day or two,
And see them decked as dainty Ladies should,
And make such choice as may content you al.

pol. Thanks righteous Nemo we the London Lords
Only to thee our selves acknowledge bound. Exeunt omnes

Enter painful Penury and Simplicity. pen. Come on gentle husband, let us lay
our heads together, our purses together, and our reckonings together, to see
whether we win or loose, thrive or not, go forward or backward, do you keep
a book or a skore?


Sim. A skore wife? you mean for the Alehouse, do you not? I would have her
examine me thereof no further, for I am in too far there, more then I would
she should know.


Pen. I mean no alehouse skore, but a note of your wares, let me see, First
you began to set up with a Royal, how much money have ye? what ware, and what
gain?


Sim. I have five shillings in money, two shillinges in wares, or thereabout,
and I owe two shillings and eight pence upon the skore, how much is that? five
shillings, two shillings, and two shillings and eight pence.


pen. That is nine shillings and eight pence, so we are worse by a a groat then
when we began, well once again I Will set ye up, here is four groates I have got by
bearing water this week, make up your stock, and run no more behind* Who comes
here?


Enter Fraud like an Artificer. Simp. What lack ye? What d^^ ye lack?


Frau. Me lack^ da moons pour de frene very seen Franche knack da feene gold
buttoone, de brave bugla lace, a da feene gold ring^, you be free man, me vn'
Fortiner, you buy a me ware, you gain teene pownd by lay out teene shelleng^.


Sim. Wife, what hard luck have we that cannot make x. shillings now to gain x.
pound: why, x. pound would set us up for ever.


pen. Husband see the ware, and if ten shilling will buy it, it shall go hard but
we will make that money: Friend, show my husband your wares


Frau. Look you dear mastra de seen buttoone de la gold, de ring^ de gold, de
bugla sheane, two shelleng vne doozen de buttoone, vne shellinga vne Ring, it is
worth x, shelleng, but mastra and matressa me mussa make money to go over in
my own country, but me loose teen^ pownd pour have to go next tide or to
morrow.


pen. Here is five shillings buy them of this stranger.


simp. Friend you have not stolen them, but you make them, well, I Will buy them
ithe open market, and then I care not, here is ten shillings, deliver me the
wares.


Frau. Deer mastra, oh pouer necessitee maka me selpour graund, graund loss,
you shall gein x. pound at least, gor boy.


simp. What Is your name?


Frau. Mechant, I think I am even with ye now for calling me Ostler, you'il
thrive well with such bargains, if ye buy, ye know not what, Fraud has
fitted ye with worse than your ballades.


pen. You'il warrant them gold sir,


Frau. We, so good goll as you pay for: Adieu Mounster. Exit.


simp. Adieu Mounster: Adieu fool, sell such gold buttons and ringes for so
little money, good Lord what peniworths these strangers can afford: now wife let
me see, x. pound, when we have ten pound, we'il have a large shop, and sell all
manner of wares, and buy more of these, and get ten pound more, and then ten
pound, and ten pound, and twenty pound, then thou shall have a taffata hat and
a guarded gown, and I a gown and a new cap, and a stik doublet, and a fair
house.


Pen. I thank ye husband, well, till then look well to your^ wares, and I Will ply
my waterbearing and save and get, and get and save till we be rich, but bring
these wares home every night with ye:


simp. Tush, I shall sell them before night for ten pound, gow wife, gow, I may
tell you I am glad this French fellow came with these wares, we had fallen to
eramining the Ale-skore else, and then we had fallen cut, and the ale wife and
my wife had scolded: Well, a man may see, he that is ordained to be rich, shall be
rich: gow woman. Exeunt


Enter Nemo and the three Lords, as though they had been chyding. Ne. From
whence good Lords grew this hot argument?


pol. Thou know already, yet if thou will hear,
For this we strive: fond pleasure makes account
Somming his bills without an auditorie,
That Lady Lucre ought of right be his.

plea. So I affirm, and so I will maintain
That Lady Lucre ought of right be his.

plea. So I affirm, and so I will maintain
That pleasure ought by right Dame Lucre have,
To bear the charge of sportes and of delights.

pom. Nay to support the haughty magnificence
And lordly Pomp of Londons excellence,
Befits it rather Lucre join with me,
By whom her honor shall be most advanced.

pol. More fit for pomp than pleasure, but most fit
That Policy with Lucre should be matched,
As guerdon of my studies and my cares
And high employments in the common wealth:

plea. What pleasure can be fostered without cost:


pom, What Pomp or port without respect of gaine^


pol, What policy without preferment lives?


ple. Pleasure must have Lucre:


pom. pomp has need of Lucre:


pol, policy merits lucre:


ple, Pleasure dies without Lucre,


pom, Pomp decaies without Lucre,


pol, policy droopes without lucre:


Ne, Thus Lords you show your imperfections:
Subject to passions, straining honors bounds,
Be well aduisde, you promised to be ruled,
And have those Dames, by me disposed to you,
But since I see that human humors often
Makes men forgetful of their greater good.
Be here a while, Dame lucre shall be brought
By me, to choose which Lord she likes best,
So you allow her choice with patience. Exit.

Plea. Go, we abide thy doom til thy return,


Pom. If lucre be not mad she will be mine,


Pol. If she regard her good she will be mine.


Plea. If she love happy life, she will be mine,
Women love Pleasure.

pom. Women love Pomp.


pol. Women use Policy: and here she comes that must decide the doubt.


Enter Nemo with Conscience al in white. Ne. Conscience content thee with a
queint conceit,
Conceile thy name to work a special good,
Thou art not known to any of these Lords,
By face or feature, til they hear thy name,
Which must be lucre for a fine device,
And Conscience clear indeed's the greatest gain,
Lo, Lordings here fair lucre whom ye love:
lucre, the choice is left unto thy self,
Which of these three thou will for husband choose.

Con. The modesty that does our sex beseem
Forbids my tongue therein to tell my thought,
But may it please my Lords to pardon me,
Which of you three shall deigne to make such choice,
Him shall I answer to his own content,

pol, If lucre please to match with Policy,
She shall be mistress over many men.

Pom. If lucre like to match with Londons Pomp,
In stately port all others she shall pass.

plea. If pleasure may for wife fair lucre gain,
Her life shall be an earthly Paradise.

Ne. Lo, Lucre, men, and port, and pleasant life
Are here propounded, Which will thou accept?

Con. Lord policy, Love were the only choice
Me thinks for you, that all your cares employ
And studies for the love of common wealth,
For you Lord pleasure, Conscience were a wife,
To measure your delights by reasons rule,
In recreation Conscience help to use.

plea, Were Conscience half so sweet as is thy self,
Her would I seek with suites and services.

Ne, No less accomplished in perf^ction
Is Conscience, then this Lady I protest,

plea, But on this Dame has pleasure fixed his heart,
And this or death the period of his love.

Con. Lucre with pomp most aptly might combine


ple. Lucre, or Love if case thou will be mine,
Let pass thy name, thy self do I desire,
Thee will I have except thy self deny,
With thee to live* or else for thee to die.

Ne. What if I deny?


ple. Then will I have her.


pol If we deny?


ple. So much the rather.


pom. The rather in d^spight of us? Not so.


Ne. My Lords, no quarrel, let t^is Lady go,
And if ye trust me. I Will content ye both,
pleasure, this is not lucre:

ple She Is Luc^e unto me: but be she Love or Conscience, this is she.


pol. Whom you will, have?


ple. Spite of the Devil, I will.


Con, Must it not be my Lord if I agree?


ple. Agree.


Con. Some further proo^e it fits of you to see:


ple, Receive a pawn, my heart, my hand, and oath,
To be thy own in love, in faith, and troth.

Con. Thus you are fast, and yet my self am free:


ple. I know in ruth thou will me not refuse:


Con. I know not that, but other I Will not choose.


Ne. It is enough, Lord pleasure, do not fear,
Conscience will use you as becomes her best.

plea. And art thou Conscience? welcommer to me than either love or Lucre,


Con. God send grace I be,


Ne. My Lords be pleased, ere long shall you be sped,
As much to your contents as pleasure is,
Say but the word* my self shall soon present
Lucre and love, well worthy such as you.

pol, Right thankfully those favors we'il receive,


Enter Diligence, in have Dil. My Lords, if your affairs in present be not
great
Greater than any, save regard of life,
Yea even the greatest of the common wealth,
Prepare ye to withstand a stratagem,
Such as this Land nor London ever knew.
The Spanish forces Lordings are prepared,
In bravery and boast, beyond all bounds
T'inuade, to win, to conquer all this land.
They chiefly aim at Londons stately pomp,
At Londons pleasure, wealth and policy.
Intending to dispoile her of them all,
And over all those lovely Ladies three.
Love, lucre, Conscience, peerlesse of the rarest price.
to tyrannize and carry hardest hand.
From Spain they come with Engine and intent
to slay, subdue, to triumph and torment:
My self (so heaven would) spiall of them had,
And Diligence, dear Lords, they call my name.
If you vouchsafe to credit my report,
You do me right, and to your selves no wrong,
Provided, that you arm you, being warned.

pol. Diligence, thy service shall be known,
and well rewarded: Nemo, for a time
Conceal this Dame, and live secure unseen,
Let us alone whom most it does concern,
to meet and match our ever weening foes.

Pom. Nemo keep cloase, and Conscience pray for us.
Be gone and recommend us to our God.

Con. My Lords, if ever, show your honors now,
Those proud usurping Spanish tyrants come,
To reaue from you what you do most regard,
to take away your credit and your fame.
to race and spoil our right renowned town:
And if you love or lucre do regard,
Or have of Conscience any kind of care,
The world shall witness by this action,
And of the love that you to us pretend,
In this, your valor shall assurance give:
More would I speak, but daunger's in delay,
You know my mind, and heavens record my thoughts,
When I with prayers for you will penitrate,
And will in heart be present in your fight:
Now pleasure, show what you will do for me.

ple. I will be turned to pain for thy sweet sake.


pol. Fair Conscience fear not, but assure thy self
What kind affection we so ever bear
to Love and Lucre, in this action
Chiefly for thee our service shall be done.

pom. For Conscience sake more than for Lucre now,


pol, For Love and Conscience, not dispising Lucre.


ple. Only for Conscience will I hazard all.


Ne. And I from hence will her convey a space,
Till you return with happy victory. Exeunt Ne. and Con.

Con. Farewell my Lords, for me my Lords, for me.


pol. Diligence, what number may there be?


Dil. A mighty host, and chiefly led by three,
Who brave it out in show, as men assured
Of victory, sauns venture, or repulse.

pol. How near be they?


Dil. So near my Lords, that each delay is death,
Stand on your guard, they come as challengers,
to bruise your shieldes, and bear away your prize,
Mounting the seas, and measuring the land
With strong imaginations of success,

pol. Well, Diligence go get in readiness
Men and munition, bid our pages plie
To see that all our furniture be well,
W^t, Wealth and Will to further wars be fit, Exit Dil^^.
My Lords, I would I might advise ye now,
To carry as it were a careless regard,
Of these Castilians, and their accustomed brauado:
Lord Pomp, let nothing that is magnificall,
Or that may tend to Londons graceful state
Be vnperfourm'd. As shows and solemn feaste^,
Watches in armor, triumphs, Cresset-lightes,
Bonefiers, belles, and peales of ordinance.
And pleasure, see that plays be published,
Mai-games and maskes, with mirth and minstrelsse,
Pageants and school-feastes* bears, and puppit plays,
My self will muster upon Mile-end green,
As though we saw, and feared not to be seen:
Which will their spies in such a wonder set,
To see us recke so little such a foe,
Whom all the world admires, save only we:
And we respect our sport more than his spite,
That John the Spaniard will in rage run mad,
To see us bend like Oaks with his vain breath.

pom. In this device such liking I conceive,
As London shall not lack what pomp can do,
And well I know that worthy Citizens
Do carry minds so frank and bountiful,
As for their honor they will spare no cost:
Especially, to let their enemy know.
Honor in England, not in Spain does grow.

ple. And for the time that they in pleasure spend,
It Is limmitted to such an honest end,
Namely, for recreatien of the mind,
With no great cost, yet liberal in that kind,
That pleasure vows with all delights he can
To do them good, till death to be their man.

pol. Of policy they trial have at large:


pom. Then let us go and each man to his charge*


Exeunt the three Lords. Enter Simplicity led in by Usury. simp. I sir? Why
alas I bought them of a stranger, an old French man for good gold, and to be
worth ten pound, for so be told me, I have good witness, for my own wife was
by, and lent me part of the money.


Vsu. And what did they cost you?


Simp. Ten shillings every penny.


Vsu. That argues you are guilty: Why? could ye buy so many rings and buttons
of gold think ye for ten shillings? Of whom did ye buy them?


simp. Of an old French man, the old French disease take him.


Vsu. And where dwells that old French man?


simp. In France I think, for he told me he was to go over the next tide, or
the next day, my wife can tell as well as I, if ye think I lie, for she was by.


Vsu. A good answer, he dwells in France and you dwell here, and for ut^ering
copper for gold you are like to loose both your ears upon the pillorie, and
besides loose your freedom.


simp. Nay, if I loose my ears, I care not for my freedom, keep you my
freedom, so I may keep my ears, is there no remedy for this M. Usury?


usury. None, except you can find out that old French man.


simp. Peradventure I can, if you'il let me go into France to seek him:


Vsu, So we may loos^ you, and never see him, nay that may not be.


simp, You have a good pawn there, good master Usury be good unto me.


Vsu N^y, now I Will pinch ye, you villain, ye know how ye have ever used me, but
now off goes your ears at least,


Sim. Nay* good master Usury take all my goods and let me go,


Enter ^raud, Dissimulation, Simonie in canuas coats like Sailers. Frau.
What Is the matter Usury, that this poor knave cries so:


Simp. O Master Fraud, speak to him to let me go:


Frau. Fraud? Ye villain, call me not by my name, and ye shall see I will speak
to him to let ye go free: Usury, of al old fellowship let this poor knave
pack, if the matter be not too heinous.


Vsu. No sir, his fault is odious, look here what stuff he would utter for
gold, flat copper, and he says, he bought them of an old frenchman


Frau. But thou did not sell them, did thou?


Sim. No sir, I would have but laid them to pawn for five pounds to him.


Frau. That was more than they be worth, I promise thee a foul matter, well,
thou must loose thy ware and be glad to escape, so Usury, at my request ye
shall let the poor man go.


Vsu. Well, for this once I will, sir, get ye packing, and take heed of such
a piece of work again while ye live.


simp. There is diverse pieces of work in that box, pray ye give me some of my
goods again, a ring or something.


Vsu. Not an inch, and be glad ye escape as ye do,


Simp. Alas, I am undone, there is all the wealth and stock I have.


Fra. Do ye long to loose your ears, be gone ye foolish knave.


Sim. I thank ye Master Fraud: I Will not go so far, but I Will be near to hear
and see what the meaning of these fellows in this canuas should be, for I know
Fraud, Dissimulation, and simony to be those three: here I think I am unseen.
Simplicity hides him near them.


Frau. Usury, thank me for this go^d booty, for it is I that holy ye to it,
for I sold them to him for gold indeed in the shape of an old French
artificer, come give me half for I deserve it, for my part was the first
beginning of this Comedy, I was ever afraid, least the fool should have
known me, for ye see now though disguisde, he calm by my name.


simp. Did a so? I am glad I have found the french man, now I Will raise the
street, but I Will have my wares again, and prove ye as ye were, ever both false
knaves I believe. Exit sim.


Frau. Kill him, stab him, out villain, he will betray us all.


Vsu. What a fool were you to speak before ^e was gone, now you have lost
your part of this too, for he will go complain, you will be sought for, and
I made to restore these things again.


Fra. Not if thou be wise, thou will not tarry the reckoning, for see thou
not us three? Dissimulation simony and my self?


Vsu. Yes: What means these canuas suites? Will ye be Sailers?


Fra. Usury make one, this is our intent: let us see that none hear us now: the
Spaniards are coming thou hear with great power, here is no living for us
in London, men are grown so full of conscience and religion, that Fraud,
Dissimulation and Simony are disciphered, and being disciphered are also
despised: and therefore we will slip to the sea, and meet and join with the
enemy, and if they conquer as they may, for they are a great army by report,
our credit may rise again with them, if they fail and retire, we may either
go with them and live in Spain, where we and such good fellows are
tolerated and used, or come sitly again hither, so long as none knows but
friends.


Vsu. But will you do thus you two?


Dis. And thou too I hope, why, what should we do?


Vsu. Whatsoever ye do, be not traitors to your native country.


Simo. It Is not our native country, thou know, I Simony am a Roman,
Dissimulation a Mongrel, half an Italian, half a Dutchman Fraud so too, half
French, and half Scottish: and thy parents were both Jews, though thou were
borne in London, and here Usury thou art cried out against by the preachers:
join with us man to better thy state, for in Spain preaching touches us not.


Vsu. ^o better my state, nay, to alter my state, for here where I am, I know
the government, here can I live for all their threatening, if strangers
p^euaile, I know not their laws nor their usage, they may be oppressore, and
take al I have, and it is like they are so, for they s^^k that is not their
own. Therefore here will I stay sure, to keep what I have, rather than be a
traitor upon hap and had I wist: and stay you if ye be wise, and pray as I
pray, that the preachers and all other good men may die, and then we shall
flourish, but never trust to strangers courtesy.


Fra. We shall trust but to our friends and kin, yo'il not go with us, yet for
old acquaintance ke^p counsel, betray us not, for we'il be gone to sea, I am
afraid yen foolish knave have belaied the streets for us.


Vsu. Let me go before ye, if any such thing be, I Will give ye inkling. Exit


Fra. Do, farewell Usury: and as he goes one way, we'il go another, follow sirs,
n^uer trust a shrinker, if he be your own brother. Exeunt omnes.


Enter the three Lords with their Pages and Fealty a Heral^ before them, his
coat having the arms of London before. and an Olive tree behind. pol: Fealty,
thou faithful Herald of our town,
Thou true truce-keeper, and sure friend in peace,
Take down our shields, and give them to our boys:
Now Fealty, prepare thy wits for war, he delivers the^
To parlie with the proud Castillians
Approaching fast the frontiers of our coast:
Wit, here, my Page in every message shall
Attend on thee, to note them and their deeds:
I need not tell thee, they are poor and proud,
Vaunters, vaineglorious, tyrants, truce breakers,
Envious, irefull, and ambitious,
For thou have found their facing and their brags,
Their backs, their coffers, and their wealth, their rag^,
But let me tell thee what we crave of thee,
To scanne with judgment what their leaders be,
To note their presence and observe their grace,
And truly to advertise what they seem,
Whether to be experienced in arms,
Or men of name those three that lead the rest,
the rest refer we to thy own conceit,

Feal, I hope in this my duty to discharge, as heretofore


Simplicity, make a great noise within, and enter with three or four weaponed.
Simp. Clubs, clubs, nay come neighbors come, for here they be, here I left
them, arrant thieves, rogues, cosoners, I charge ye as you will answer, prebend
them, for they have undone me, and robbed me, and made me the poorest free man
that ever kept a ballad stall:


A Constable, I charge ye keep the peace and lay down your weapons: To the
three Lords.


pomp, Who raised this tumult? Speak, what means this stir?


simp. O I am undone, robbed, spoiled of all my stock, let me see, where be
they? Keep every street and door, samine all that comes for Fraud that
cosoner.


pol, Masters, what mean you in these troublous times to keep this coile?


Constable, Alas my Lord, here is a poor man robbed, or cosoned.


simp. I am robbed O my boys, my pretty boys, I am undone, saw ye no thieves,
nor no crafty knaves, what be all these?


Wit. Simplicity, away, these be our Lords, offend them not for fear.


Simp. I seek not them, I seek for Fraud that robbed me.


plea. Go seek else where, for here is no place for such.


Pol. My friends depart, and qualify this stir,
And see peace kept within the walls I charge ye.

Constable. I will my Lord, come


Simp. we came too late to find your losses. Exeunt.


simp. Pray for me my boys, I thin^ (...) shall hang my self I come ever too
late to speed.


pol. Now Lords, let Honors fire inflame on? thoughts,
And let us arm our courage with our cause,
And so dispose our selves to welcome them,
Do me the favor (if I may entreat)
To be the first to front the foe in face,
The Vauntgard let be Policies this once,
Pompes the maine baittaile pleasures the Rereward:
And so bestow us if you think it good.

Pom. I think it good, and time that it were done.


Plea. I think it good, and wish the enemy come.


Enter Diligence. Dil. And here they come, as brave as Philips son,
And his Ephestion, wont to be arraied
In glittering gold, and party colored plumes,
With curious pendents on their Lances Ext,
Their shieldes Ymprez'd with gilt copertiments,
Their Pages careless, plaieng at their backs,
As if with conquest they triumphing came.

Pol. If they be conquered greater is their shame,
But Diligence go post along the coast,
To tell the news, and look to welcome them,
Let us alone: My Lords you hear the news,
More words were vain, I know ye well resolved. Exit Dil.

Pom. And here they come, Oh proud Castillians.


Enter first Shealty the Herald: then Pride, bearing his shield himself, his
ympreze, a Peacocke: the word, Non par illi His Page Shame after him with a
Lance, having appendent gilt, with this word in it, Sur le Ciel, Ambition, his
ympreze, a black Horse salliant, with one hinder foot upon the Globe of the
earth, one for^ foot stretching toward the clouds, his word, Non sufficit
o^bis: His page Treachery after him, his pendent Argent and Azure, an armed
A^me catching at the Sun beams, the word in it, Et gloriam Phoebi. Last,
Tyranny, His ympreze, a naked Child on a spears point bleeding, his word,
Pour sangue, His page, Terror, his pendent ^ules, in it, a Tigers head out of
a cloud, licking a bloody heart: The word in it, Cura Cruor. March once about
the stage, then stand and view the Lords of London, who shall martch toward
them, and they give back, then the Lords of London wheel about to their
standing, and the other come again into their places, then Policy sendes
Fealty: their Herraldes coat must have the arms of Spain before, and a
burning ship behind. pol. My Lords, what mean these gallants to perform,
Come these Castilian Cowardes but to brave?
Do all these mountains move to breed a mouse?
Fealty, go fetch their answer resolute
How they dare be so bold, and what they dare do here.

Shea. What would thou Herald? As Feal is going toward the^, they send
forth Sheal.


Fea. Parlle with those three, Herald.


Shea. They scorn to grace so mean a man as thou with parlie or with presence.


Fea: Do they scorn? what, are thy masters, Monarchs every one?
Or be they Gods? or rather be they Devils?
Scorn they a Heraldes presence and his speech?
Name them, that I may know their mightines,
And so avoid of duties some neglect.

shea. Monarchs in minds, and Gods in high conceits,
That scorn you English, as the scomme of men,
Whom I ne dare without their license name,
Fore whom thy duties all are few and base,

Fea. Imperious Spaniard, do a Herald right.
Thy self art one, their Trowch man if thou be,
Be thou my Trunk, that I my message may
through thee conueigh to them from London Lords.

shea. Base English groom, from beggars sent belike,
Who for their mate thee malapert account,
Dare I (think thou) these Lords magnificent,
Without their special pleasure understood,
Once move with message, or with show of speech?

Fea. More servile thou to loose a Heraldes due,
That is in field a kings companion,
But if thou dare not my Embassage do,
Stand by and stop not my access to them.

Shea. Rather will I return and know their minds.


Pol. Now boy, what news. When Sheal goes to the^, Wit goes to the 3. Lords of
Land.


Wit, The fearful Herald of yen famous crew
Durst not your message to his masters tell,
Til Fealty with contumelions words,
(Yet was the Spaniard brave and hot in terms)
Enforced him for their answer resolute. The Span. whisper with their Her.

Pom. Which now belike our Herald shall receive,
For theirs comes to him.

sheal. It pleases them to be magnifical,
And of their special graces to vouchsafe
And counteruiew of Pages, and of shields.
A countermessage by us Heraldes done:
A favor which they seldom grant to foes,
Go thou for those, I meet thee will with these.

Fea. My Lords yen brauing Spaniards wish
A counteruiew of Pages and of shieldes,
But what they mean or be I know not yet:
Happily you may by their ymprezes view,
Or I by parlle some conjecture give,
So please it you your pages and your shieldes
With me to send, their Herald comes with theirs.

pol. Our shields I reck not, but to send our Wealth


Feal. Accompanied with Wit and Will, no peril.


Pom. It is my wealth, but keep him if they dare,
I Will fetch him double if they do my Lords,

Plea. Boys, take our sheildes and spears, for they come on.


Wit. Veil Spaniard, couch thy Lance and pendent both, know where thou
art? Here will we bear no braues


When the English boys meet the other, cause them to put down the tops of
their Lances, but they bear up theirs. Wea. Down with your point, no loft
borne Lances here
By any stranger be he foe or friend.

Will. Well do thou note the couching of thy Lance,
Mine had ere this else goar'd your Spanish skin.

Feal. Well done my boys, but now all reverence.


Shea. Advance again your Lances now my boys hold up again


S. Pride. Dicito nobis ideo qui ades, quid sibi velint isthaec Emblemata?
Dicito (inquam) lingua materna: nos enim omnes belle intelligimus, quamuis
Anglice loqui dedignamur.


Fea. Then know Castillian Caualieros this,
The owners of these Emblemes are three Lords
Those three that now are viewing of your shieldes,
Of London, our chief city are they Lords,
Policy, pomp, and pleasure be their names:
And they in honor of their mistresses,
Love, Lucre, Conscience, London Ladies three,
Emblazoned these Scutchens, challenging
Whom durst compare, or challenge one of them,
And Policy a Tortoys has Emprez'd,
Encompast with her shel, her native walls,
And prouidens securus is his word:
His page is Wit, his Maistresse Lady Love.
pomp in his shield a Lilly has pourtrai'd,
As paragon of beauty, and boon grace:
Glory sauns peer his word, and true it is,
With Londons Pomp Castile cannot compare,
His Page is wealth, his maistresse Lucre hight.
Pleasure, the dainty of that famous town,
A Faulcon has emblazon'd, soaring hie,
To show the pitch that Londons Pleasure flies:
His word Pour temps, yet never stoupes to train,
But unto Conscience, chosen for his dear.
His Page is Will, and thus the effect you hear.

S. Pride. Buena buena per los Lutheranos Angleses.


Fea. Mala, mala per Catholicos Castillianos.


Pol. Loqueris Anglice?


Shea. Maxim Domine.


Pol. Agedum, Go too then and declare thy Lords, their shields, their pages,
and their purpose.
Speak man, fear not, though Spain use messengers il,
It Is Englands guise to entreat them courteously.

Shea. Three Caualieros Castillianos here,
Without Compeeres in compass of this world:
Are come to conquer, as full well they shall
this mool-hill Isle, that little England hight,
With London that proud paltrie market town,
And take those Dames Love, Lucre, Conscience
Prisoners, to use or force as pleases them.
The first (now quake) is Spanish Majesty,
That for his ympreze gives Queen Iunoes Bird,
Whose train is spangd with Argus hundred eyes,
the Queen of Gods scorns not to grace him so.
His word is Non par illi, none his like:
Yet is his page or hench-man Modesty,
Lucre the Lady that shall be his prize:
And in his pendent on his Lances point,
Sur le Ciel his word, above the heavens.

pol. Whileme indeed above the heavens he was,
Could be have kept him in that blessed state,
From thence for pride he fell to pit of pain,
And is he now become the pride of Spain?
And so his page not Modesty but Shame.
Well, on the rest.

sheal. Don Honor is the next grand peer of spain,
Whose ympreze is a Courser saliant.
Of color Sables, darkening air and earth,
Pressing the Globe with his disdainful foot.
And sallieng to aspire to rolling skies,
Non sufficit orbis is his haughty word,
The world suffices not high Hono^^ thoughts,
And on the pendent fixed en his Lance,
A hand is catching at the sunnie beams:
and gloriam Phoebi, and the Suns bright coatch.
Honor would guide, if he might have his will.
His Page is Action tempering still with state.

pol. Himself Ambition, whom the heavens do hate,


shea. and Love the Lady that he hopes to gain,


pol. His thoughts distract from foul distempered brain
Proves him the very firebrand of Spain:
And in his shield his black disordered beast,
Scaling the skies, scornful to tread the ground,
And both his words, proud words prove perfectly
Action his page to be but Treachery,
Ever attendant on Ambition: but to the third.

Sheal. The third ground Caualiero is Government,
Severe in Justice, and in judgment deep:
His ympreze is a naked Infant goar'd
Upon a Lance, signifing, severity.
His word, pour sangue, for blood of enemies
He bendes his sorces: on his pendent is
A Lyger licking of a bleeding heart:
And Cura Cruor is the word thereon,
His care's for blood of those that dare resist:
Yet hight his Page that follows him, Regard,
and he for Conscience to this conquest comes.

pol. The Government of spain is Tyranny,
as do his ympreze and his words declare,
His Page is Terror: for a Tyrant fears
His death, in diet, in his bed, in sleep,
In conscience: Spite the Spanish tyranny
Has shed a sea of most unguilty blood: Well, what is the end?

Shea. The end is best you yield, submitting you to mercy of these Lords.


Pom. Before we fight? soft sic, ye brave too fast.
Castilians, know that Englishmen will knock, but say.
Does Spanish Pride for Londons Lucre gape,

ple. And would their Tyranny Conscience captive have?


pol: Does their Ambition Londons love affect?


sheal. All this they will, and pray upon your town,
And give your lands away before your face:
alas, what is England to the power of spain?
a Molehil, to be placed where it pleases them.

pom. But in this Molehil many Plsmyres be,
All which will sting before they be remoou'd,
What is thy name?

sheal. Shealty,


pol. An Irish word, signifieng liberty, rather remisnes, loosnes if ye will,
why has thy coat a burning ship behind?


shea. to signify ye burning of your fleet by us Castillia^s.


pol: It rather means your common wealth's on fire,
about your ears, and you were best look home,
a common wealth's compared to a ship,
If yours do flame, your country is hot, beware.

Feal. I see Castilians, that you marvel much
at this same Emblem of the Olive tree
Upon my back: Lo this it signifies.
Spain is in wars, but London lives in peace,
Your native fruit does wither on your soil,
and prospers where it never planted was.
This Londons Fealty does avouch for truth,
Herald of war, and Porter of their peace,
Command ye me no service to my Lords.

S. Pride. Quid tibi cum domini mox seruient miseri nobis: diseede.


Feal. Quid mihi cum dominis seruietis miseri meis*


pom. shealty, say unto yen Thrasos three.
The Lords of London dare them to the field,
Wittieng their pride and their Ambition,
Scerning their Tyranny, and yet fearing this,
That they are come from home and dare not fight,
But if they dare in joint or several arms,
Battle or combat, him that Lucre seeks,
Your Spanish pride, him dare I from the rest.

ple. That bloody curre, your Spanish Tyranny,
That Londons Conscience would force with cruelty,
I challenge him for Conscience sake to fight,
a Lord of London, and I pleasure hight.
And shealty, when Citizens dare them thus,
Judge what our Nobles and our courtiers dar^*

Pol. Say if thou will that Londons policy
Discernes that proud Ambition of sp^^^e,
And for he comes enflamde with Lon^^^s love,
In combat let him conquer me and have her,
this is Loves favor, I her servant am.

pom. This Lucres favor, Pomp for her will fight.


Plea. this Conscience favor, she my mistress is.


shea. You crauen English ^n your donghils crow.


Pom. You Spanish Fesants crow upon your perch,
But when we fire your coats about your ears,
And take your ships before your walled towns,
We make a donghill of your rotten boanes,
And cram our chickens with your grains of gold.

shea. You will not yield?


ple, Yes, the last month.


shea. Farewell. Retire Heraldes with the pages to their places.


S. Pride. Vade.


pol. Herald, how now?


Fea. Yen proud Castillians look for your service.


Pom. So do we for theirs: but Fealty, can thou declare to me the cause why
all their pages follow them, when ours in shows do ever go before.


Fea. In war they follow, and the Spaniard is warring in mind


pol. But that is not now the cause, yen three are Pride, Ambition Tyranny.
shame follows pride, as we a proverb have,
pride goes before, and shame comes after,
Treachery ever attendes upon Ambiton.
And Terror always with a fearful watc^,
Does wait upon il conscienced Tyranny:
But why stay we to give them space to breath:
Come, Courage, let us charge them all at once.

Let the three Lords pass toward the Spaniards, and the Spaniardes make show
of coming forward and suddenly depart. Pom. What brauing cowards these
Castillians be,
My Lords let us hang our Scutchens up again,
And shroud our selves but not far off unseen,
To prove if that may draw them to some deed,
Be it but to batter our ymprezed shieldes.

plea. Agreed, here Fealty, hang them up a space.


They hang up their shieldes, and step out of sight. The Spaniardes come and
flourish their rapiers near them, but touch them not, and the^ hang up theirs,
which the Lords of London perceiving, take their own and batter theirs: The
Spaniards making a little show to rescue, do suddenly slip away an^ come no
more. pol. Facing, faint-hearted, proud and insolent,
That bear no edge within their painted sheaths,
That durst not strike our silly patient shieldes.

Pom. Up have they set their own, see if we dare
Batter on them, and beat their brauing Lords.

ple. Let them not yonder hang vnbackt, my Lords.


Pol. With good advise, that we be not surprised, and good enough.


pom. My self will onset give on Prides, at your Peacocke sir.


plea. At Tyrannies will I bestow my blow, wishing the master.


Pol. I at Ambitions strike, have at his pampered Jade.


Enter S. Pride. S. Pride. Fuoro Viliagos, fuoro Lutheranos Angleses, fuoro sa,
sa, sa.


Pom. Their shieldes are ours, they fled away with shame,
But Lordings, whiles the stratageum is fresh,
And memory of their misfortune green,
Their hearts yet fainting with the novel grief,
Let us pursue them flieng, if you say it,
Happily, we may prevent their passage yet.

pol. With speed and heed the matter must be done,


ple. Therefore you Policy shall our leader be.


Exeunt omne^. Enter three Ladies and Nemo. Ne. The day is ours, fair Ladies
let us joy,
The joyful day that all men may rejoice,
Yet only I am thankful for this good.
And your good day at hand approaches fast.
Wherein you shall be ioinde to three such Lords,
As all the cities under heavens bright cope,
Cannot with all their glory match in worth,
Lucre, Lord Pomp a victor comes to thee:
Love, look thou for Lord policy as well:
And Conscience for her well reformed Fere,
pleasure, that only made his choice of her.
Upon that day triumphant shall we feast,
Wherein (Madames) your honors nil be least.

Lucre. Against their coming might my read be hard,
Prepare would we garlands of Laurel green,
To welcome them, more for the common good,
Than for affection private that we bear.

Love. To meet them coming will not be amiss,
But what know we how they will take such work,

Con. Report may be much more than there is cause,
We may them meet and greet with joyful hearts,
And make them garlands when we know their minds.

Enter the three Lords with the Spanish Shieldes and Diligence Ne. And here
they come with new ymprezed shields,
My Lords well met, and welcome from your foes.

Lucre. Lord pomp, well met, and welcome home again.


Love. Lord policy, well met, and welcome home again.


Con. Lord pleasure, welcome with unfeigned heart.


ple. Fair joy and Lady xx. thousand thanks.


pol. Fair Love, and Lady, twice as many thankes^


Pom. Fair and beloved Lucre, though I speak last,
As kindly I thy welcome do accept,
As heart can think, pen write, or tongue can tell.

Ne. Now speak my Lords, how have ye sped?


pol. Right well: thanks unto him yt gave the day to us,
The pride of Spain was cloak'd with Majesty,
And Shame his page, (nicknamed) Modesty,
Spanish Ambition, Honor would be called,
And Treachery his page, termed Action.
Their Tyranny was cleped Government,
Terror his page, was (falsely) named Regard,
But God above has given them their reward.
They with dishonor left their shields behind,
The only prises purchased by us now,
And those (fair Ladies) we present to you,
Love, this is thine, and he that gives it thee.

Ne. In lieu whereof your gift and her I give
Again to you, that merit more than both.

pol. The greatest gift and good could me befall.


pom. Fair lucre, lo, my present and my self.


Lucre. Which I with Nemos license gladly take.


Ne. Take her Lord pomp, I give her unto thee,
Wishing your good may ten times doubled be.

pom. the wished good this world could give to me.


ple. Of duty I (my dear) must give thee this, that art my comfort and my
earthly bliss.


Ne. Now Lords, I h^pe you are contented all,
pomp with his Lucre, policy with Love:
pleasure with Conscience, joy fall you from above:
And thus to you my promise is perfourm'd,
And I expect that yours as well be kept,
That present preparation may be made
to honor those with holy marriage rites,
that I in presence of the world may give
these as my daughters unto you my sons.

Pol. By my consent one day shall serve us all,
Which shall be kept for ever festival.

pom. And on that day in honor of these Dames,
these shields in triumph shall be borne about.

Plea. with pageants, plates, and what delights may be to entertain the time
and company.


Ne. So it please you Lordings, me thinks it were meet,
that the Ladies took care to provide their own toies.
My self need to help them, who know their minds well,
For I can keep women both quiet and constant.

pol. It pleases us well that you will take the pains.
Fair ones, for a while we betake you to your business.

Pom. Ladies, adue. the Lords bring the^ to the door, and they go out and Ne.


ple. Beloved, farewell. Fra. gives Pol. a paper, which he reads and then saie^


pol. It seems by this writing sir, you would serve me,
Is your name Skill? whom did you serve last?

Frau. An ill master, my Lord, I served none but my self.


pol. Have ye never served any heretofore?


Fra. Yes, diverse my Lord, both beyond sea and here with your patience, my good
Lord, not offending the same, I think I am your poor kinsman, your Lordship,
policy, and I Skill, if it like ye.


pol. You say very well, and it is very like, I will answer ye anon.


Diss. gives Plea. a paper which he reads, and says. ple. Is your name fair
semblance that wish to serve me.


Dis. Please it your Lordship, fair semblance, I am well seen, though I say it,
in sundry languages, meet for your Lordship, or any noble service, to teach
diverse tongues, and other rare things.


Plea. I like ye very well, stay a while for your answer,


Enter Usury and gives a paper to Pomp which he reads, and says, pom.
Master Usury, I thank ye that ye offer me your service, it seems to be for
your old maistresse sake, Lady lucre, stay but a while, I will answer you with
reason.


The three Lords go together, and whisper, and call Diligence, Diligence goes
out for a marking iron, and returns. Frau. How now my hearts, think ye we shall
speed.


pol. Diligence, Come hither.


Vsu. I cannot tell what you shall, but I am sure I shall.


Dis. I am as like as any of ye both.


Vsu. Fraud.


Dis. Whist man, he is Skill.


Vsu. Skill, Why do thou seek to serve Lady Love?
What profit will that he?

Fra. Cut hold thee content, I Will serve but a while, and serve mine own turn
and away.


pom. Master Usury come hither, you desire to serve me, you have done Lady
Lucre good service you say, but it was against God and Conscience you did it,
neither ever in your life did ye any thing for Love: Well to be short, serve
me you shall not, and I would I could banish you from London for ever, or keep
you cloase prisoner, but that is not in me, but what is or may be, that strait
you shall see: By policies counsel this shall be done, Diligence bring that
iron, help me my Lords.


Enter Diligence. pol. Give me the iron Pomp, Cosen Skill help to hold him,

Fraud lays hold on him but Diss. slip away. Sir, policy gives you this
mark, do you see,
A little x. standing in the amidst of a great. C,
Meaning thereby to let all men understand,
that you must not take above bare x. pound in the hundred at any hand,
And that too much too, and so be packing quietly:
And know that Londons Pomp is not sustained by usury,
But by well ventured merchandise and honest industry.

Vsu. I would I had never seen ye, if this be your courtesy.


Exit Usury. pol, Now Cosen Skill, alias, filthy Fraud,
No kinsman to Policy, nor friend to the state.
In steed of serving me, Diligence take him to Newgate,
Ask not why, sir, but Diligence if he do strive,
Raise the street he is unweaponed, and thou have a weapon on:
And now Lords when ye will, about our affairs, let us be gone,

ple. Agreed, but what is become of fair semblance my man.


pom. A craf^ie villain, perceiving how we meant to Usury, slipped away.


Enter Simplicity in have, and give the Lords a paper to read. Simp. All hail,
all rain, all frost, and all snow, be to you three Lord^s of London on a row:
Read my supplantation and my suit ye shall know,
Even for Gods sake above, and three Ladies sakes below.

Frau. M. Diligence, Do me favor, you know I am a gentleman.


Dil. Step aside til my Lords be gone, I Will do for you what I can.


slip aside. pom. What Is here my boy, what is here? pleasure, this suit is sure
to you, for it is mad stuff, and I know not what it means.


ple Neither do I: sir, your writing is so intricate, that you must speak
your mind, otherwise, we shall not know your meaning.


pol. You sue for three things here, and what be they tell them:


simp. Cannot you three tell, and the suit to you three? I am glad a simple
fellow yet, can go beyond you three great Lords of London. Why my suite,
look ye, is such a suite, as you are bound in honor to hear, for it is for
the puppet like wealth, I would have no new orders, nor new sciences set up in
the city, whereof I am a poor freeman, and please ye, as ye may read in my
bil there, simplicity freeman. But my Lords, I would have three old trades,
which are not for the common wealth, put down.


Ple. And after all this circumstance, sir what be they?


simp. they be not three what lack yees, as what do ye lack, fine Lockerome,
fine Canuas, or fine Holland cloth: or what lack ye, fine Ballades, fine
Sonets: or what lack ye, a purse or a glass, or a pair of fine knives: but
they be three, have ye anies, which me thinks are neither sciences nor
occupations, and if they be trades, they are very malapert trades, and more
than reason.


pol. As how sir? Name them.


sim. Will you banish them as readily as I can name them? the first is, have ye
any old iron, old male, or old harn^is?


pom. And what fault find ye with this?


simp. What fault? I promise ye a great fault, what have you or any man else to
do to ask me if I have any old iron? What if I have, or what if I have not?
Why should you be so saucie to ask?


plea. Why fool, it is for thy good to give thee money for that, that might lie
and rust by thee.


simp. No my Lord, no. I may not call you fool: it is to mark the houses
where such stuff is, that against rebels rise, there is harneis and weapon
ready for them in such and such houses, and what then? the rustie weapon does
wound past surgerie, and kills the Queens good subjects: and the rest of the old
trash will make them guns too, so it is good luck to find old iron, but it is
naught to keep it, and the trade is crafty, and now my L. policy, I speak to
you, it were well to put it down.


pol. Wisely said, which is your second? Is that as perilous?


simp. Yea, and worse: It is, have ye any ends of gold and silue^? this is a
perilous trade, covetous, and a ticement to murder, for, mark ye, If they
that ask this should be evil given, as Gods forbod* they see who has this
gold and silver, may not they come in the night break in at their houses, and
cut their throats for it? I tell ye, gold and silver has caused as much
mischief to be done as that, down with it.


pom. they that have it need not show it.


Sim, tush, they need ask no such question, many a man has delight to show
what he has, the trad^'s a ticing trade, down with it:


pol, Now your third sir:


sim, that is the craftiest of all, wherein I am disbus's, for that goes under
the color of simplicity, have ye any wood to clean?


ple. A perilous thing, what hurt is there in this sir?


Sim. O do you not perceive the subtlety? why sir, the Woodmongers hires these
poor men to go up and down with their betles and wedges on their backs,
crieng, have ye any wood to cleave, and laugh to see them travel so laden with
wood and iron: now sir, if the poor men go two or three days and be not set a
work (as sometimes they do) the Woodmongers pay them and gain by it, for
then know they there is no wood in the city, then raise they the price of
billets so bie, that the poor can buy none. Now sir, if these fellows were
barred from asking, whether there were wood to cleave or not, the woodmongers
need not know but that there were wood, and so billets and fagots would be
sold al at one rate, down with this trade, we shall sit a cold else my Lords.


Ple. I promise you a wise suit, and done with great discretion.


sim. Yea, is it not? might ye not do well to make me of your counsel I believe
I could spy more faults in a week, than you could mend in a month:


pol. Well, for these three faults the time serves not now to redress:


sim. No marie, for you three must be married suddenly, and your feast must be
dres^:


pom, Against which feast, repair you to Diligence, and he shall appoint you
furniture and money, and a place in the show, till when farewell. Exeunt


sim. Farewell my Lords, farewell my three Lords, and remember that I have set
each of ye a fault to mend: well, I Will go seek M. Diligence that he may give me
forty pence against the feast sir reverence: Exit


Dil. what is it M. Fraud, ye would demand of me? Dil and Frau. step out


Frau. Sir this you know, though your self be a man of good reckoning, yet are
ye known an offi^er unto these thr^e Lords, and what discredit it were to me,
being a noted m^n to pass through the streets with you being officer, or if
any of my friends should suspect me with you, and dog us, and see me committed
to Newgate, I were utterly discredited, here is a purse sir, and in it two
hundred Angels, look sir, you shall tell them.


Dil. Here are so indeed, what mean ye by this, I will not take these to let
ye escape. deliver Fraud the purse again.


Fra. I mean not so sir, nor I will not give half of them to be suffered to
escape, for I have done no offense, though it please them to imprision me, and
it is but on commandment, I shall not stay long, but I will give you this purse
and gold in pawn to be true prisoner, only give me leave to go some other
way, and home to my lodging, for my boots and other necessaries, for there I Will
leave word I am ridden out of town, and with all the have that possibly I may,
I will meet you at Newgate, and give you an Angel for your courtesy: there is
the purse.


Fraud gives him a purse like the other. Dil. I hazard (as you know) my Lords
displeasure herein, and yet to pleasure you I will venture this once, but I
pray ye make have that I be not shent, I would not for ten Angels it were
known.


Fra. If I tarry above an hour, take that gold for your tarieng.


Exit. Dil. I do not fear that you will forfeit so much for so little cause. Exit.


Enter Nemo with Desire, Delight, and Devotion, the three Lords of Lincoln.
Ne. My Lords of Lincoln, have you such title and such interest
To Love, Lucre, and Conscience, as ye say?
Who gave you leave to have access to them?
I am their father by adoption,
I never knew of Love twixt them and you:
And to perpetual prison they were doomed,
From whence I only might deliver them.
Which at the suit of three most matchless Lords,
Their countrymen, in London bred as they,
I have perfourm'd and freed them from their bonds,
And yet have bound them in their freedom too
To Policy, to pleasure, and to pomp,
Three Lords of London, whose they are in right,
Contracted wives, and done by my consent,
And even to morrow is the marriage day,
Except your coming stay or break it off,
I will go call their Lords to answer you,
The (pvnder covert Baron) meddle not. Exit.

Desire. Fetch them Lord Nemo, we will here attend.


Delight. Attend we may, but unto little end,
The Ladies are in hucksters handling now,

Deuo. I would I had my time in praieng spent,
That I in woing Conscience did consume.

Enter the three Lords of London and Nemo. Desire. Here come the Lords, let us
show good countenance man.


Pom. Yet more ado before we can enjoy
The ioies of marriage with our mistresses?
Be these the Lords that title do pretend?
My Lords of Lincoln, so we hear you be.
What are your names?

Del. Devotion, Desire, and Delight.


pom. Which comes for Lucre?


Desire. I Desire.


ple. Which for Conscience?


Deuo. I Devotion.


pol. Which for Love?


Del. I Delight.


pol. You shall be answered straight.


ple. I can answer them quickly: ye cannot have them, nor ye shall not have
them.


pol. Stay pleasure, soft: My Lord Desire, you Lucre seek, Desire of lucre (be
it without reproach to you my Lord) is covetousness which cannot be separated
long from that: read my Lord.


Point to the stone of Care. Desire. In golden letters on this stone is written
Care.


pol. Care with desire of lucre well agrees, the rather for that Londons Lucre
may not be separated from Londons Pomp, so you may take that stone if ye will,
but the Lady you cannot have.


Desire. And a stone is a cold comfor in steed of Lucre.


pol. Devotion to Conscience (I speak now to you my Lord that are learned) is
sorrow for sin, or in one word read.


point to the stone of Remorse. Deuot. On this sweating stone in brass is set
Remorse.


pol. And that is your portion, for Conscience is bestowed on Londons Pleasure,
because London maks a conscience what pleasure they use and admit, and what
time they bestow therein, and to what end: s^ my Lord Devotion, either that or
nothing.


Deuo. A stone is a hard lot in stod of a Lady.


pol. My Lord Delight, that to delight in Love, you must I love, for making
choice of mine. Love is my portion, and that Flint is yours.


Del. Here in lead is written, Charity: and what of this?


pol. If you be (as I doubt not) honest delight in love, then in the best
sen^e, you can have but Charity, if you be (which I suspect not) other Delight
in Love, you must be noted for Concupiscence, and that you will blush to be:
well Charity is your best, then that is your portion: For, mark ye, Londons
policy ioines with Londons Love: to show, that all our po^licie is for love of
Londons common wealth: and so our love cannot be seper^te from our policy, you
bear this.


Delight. A Flint's a hard change for so fair a wife.


pol. And thus Lords, Desire of Lucre may take Care, Devotion of Conscience may
have Remorse, and Delight of Love may have Charity, other recompense none.


ple. And so we three leave you three with Care, Remorse, and charity.


Exeunt. Desire. With Care and Remorse I swear, ye do leave us, but what
charity I cannot tell.


Deuot. Well. yet must we use Charity though we fail of our desire, and we are
answered with such reason as is not to be gainsaid.


Del. Indeed my Lord your calling is to persuade to Charity, but if I use
patience, it shall be perforce.


Deuo. Yet being so wisely warned, me thinks we should be armed And take this
in worth, that the world wonder no further, I will take up my hard burden of
Remorse and be gone.


Exit. Desire. It is good to follow examples of good, I Will take this heavy
burden of Care, and follow as I may.


Exit Del. Because I Will not be slagular, I Will frame my self to follow, taking
this cold portion of Charity as my share. exit


Enter Simplicity with Diligence. Simp. Come on M. Didligence, I have been
seeking ye, as a man should seek a load of hay in a needles eye.


Dil. And why have thou sought me (I pray thee) so earnestly?


simp. Why? For this ointment, these shells, these pleasure, do ye not know this
Countu^ mountus cum this d^ mihi?


Dil. What money, why? Do I owe thee any money?


Simp. Owe me? Tush, no man, what do ye talk of owing? Come, and yet I must
have some certain sigillatum and deliberatum in praesentia. Do you not
understand sir? Forty pence and furniture by my Lord pompes pointment, against
the wedding day: to be one of the show-makers, I do not say shoo-makers, and
yet they be honest men.


Dil. I understand thee now, and thou shall want neither money nor furniture for
that: saw thou not Fraud lately?


Sim. No, a For ferit him, for if I could find him, I would make him fast
enough for cosoning me of ten shillings for certain copper buttons and rings, I
thought to have been a haberdasher, and he has made me worse than a hay-maker.


Dil. I may say to thee in counsel, but I Will have no words of it, he has
ouerreacht me too: but if thou spy him first, let me understand, and if I see
him first thou shall have knowledge, for I Will tell thee, but laugh not, he
showed me a purse with a hundred pound in Angels, which he would deliver me in
pawn to be my true prisoner, because for his credit, ^e was loath to go with
me through the streets to Newgate: I refused it at first, but at last by his
entreaty I was content to take his pawn, and thinking he had given me the
right purse of gold, he had another like it, which he gave me with counters,
and so went away, I never did see him since, but mum, no words of it.


simp. No words quoth a, that is a state test, would you be coson'd so?


Dil. Well, so it is now, come follow me for thy furniture and money. exeunt


Enter Dissimulation and Fraud in caps, and as the rest must be for the show.
Dis. The coast is clear, come follow Fraud and fear not, for who can
discipher us in this disguise, thus may we shufl^ into the show with the rest,
and see and not be seen, doing as they do, that are attired like our selves.


Fra. That is, to stand amongst them, and take as they take, torches or any
thing to furnish the show, now if we we can pass but this day unseen, let to
morrow shift for it self as it may, I promise thee Dissimulation thou art
very formal.


Dis. Not more than thy self Fraud, I would thou saw thy picture


Frau. Picture here, picture there, let us follow our business. Exeunt.


Enter a Mench singing. Strowe the fair flowers and herbs that be green,
To grace the gaiest wedding that ever was seen.
If London list to look, the streets were nere so cleene,
Except it was when best it might, in welcome of our Queen:
Three lovely Lords of London shall thr^e London Ladies wed,
Strowe sweetest flowers upon the stones, perfume the bridal bed.
Strowe the fair flowers. etc.
Enter first Diligence with a Truncheon, then a boy with Policies Lance and
shield, then Policy and Love hand in hand: then Fraud in a blew gown, red
cap and red sleeves, with Ambitions Lance and shield, then a boy with Pomps
Lance and shield, then Pomp and Lucre hand in hand: then Dissimulation with
Prides Lance and shield, then a boy with Pleasures Lance and shield: then
Pleasure and Conscience hand in hand: then Simplicity with Tirannies Lance and
shield: they al going out, Nemo stays and speaks. Ne. These Lords and Ladies
thus to church are gone,
An honored action to solemnize there,
With greater joy will they return anon,
Than Caesar did in Rome his Laurel wear.
Lord policy has Love unto his Fere.
Lord pomp has Lucre to maintain his port,
Lord pleasure Conscience to direct his sport.
Usury is marked to be known,
Dissimulation like a shadow fleetes,
And Simony is out of knowledge grown,
And Fraud unfound in London but by fits.
Simplicity with painful penury sits.
For Hospitality that was wont to feed him,
Was slain long since and now the poor do need him.
That Hospitality was an honest man,
But had few friends (alas) if he had any,
But Usury which cut his throat as than
Was succored, and sued for by many.
Would Liberality had been by thy side,
Then Hospitality, thou had never died.
But what mean I, one of the marriage train,
To mourn for him will nere be had again.
His Ghost may walk to mock the people rude:
Ghostes are but shadows, and do sense delude:
I talk too long, for so this lovely crew
Are coming back, and have perfourm'd their due.

Return as they went, saving that the blew gowns that bare shields, must now
bear torches: Simplicity going about, spies Fraud, and falls on his knees
before Pleasure and Conscience, saying. Simp* O Lady Conscience that art married
to Lord pleasure,
Help thy servant simplicity to recover his lost treasure:
A boon my Lords, all for Love and Lucre sake,
Even as you are true Lords, help a false lout to take,

plea. Thou shall have help, speak, what is the matter?


simp. See you yen fellow with the torch in his hand?
One the falsest villain that is in this land,
Let him be laid hold on that he run not away,
And then ye shall hear what I have to say.

ple. Diligence bring him bether, good Lords and Ladies stay,


simp. O Master Fraud, welcome to the buts,
Now I Will have my ten shillings in spite of your guts,
The French Tanker consume ye, you were an old Frenchman,
Da goll buttoone, goll renga, bugla lase, you coson'd me than,
My Lords I beseech ye that at tyborne he may ^otter,
For in steed of gold, the villain sold me copper.

plea. Is this true M. Skill?


Fra. It is true in a sort my Lord, I thought to be pleasant with him being my
old acquaince, and disguised my self like an old French Artificer and having a
few copper knacks, I sold them to him to make sport for ten shillings, which
money I am content to pay him again so shall he have no loss though he have
made a little sport.


ple. First give him an Angel before my face. Simplicity, art thou pleased?


Sim. Truly I am pleased to take a good Angel for ten shillinges, speciouslie
of such a debtor as M. Fraud: but now I am to be pleased otherwise, that is,
to see him punished, I promise ye the people love him well, for they would
leave work and make half ^oli^ay to see him hanged.


ple. That his punishment may please thee the better, thou shall punish him thy
self: he shall be bound fast to yen post, and thou shall be blindfold, and
with thy torch shall run as it were at tilt, charging thy light against his
lips, and so (if thou can) burn out his tongue, that it never speak more
guile.


Sim. O Singulariter Nominatiuo, wise Lord pleasure: Genetiuo bind him to that
post, Datiuo, give me my torch, Accusat. For I say he is a cosoner. Vocat. O
give me room to run at him. Ablat. take and blind me. Pluraliter, per omnes
casus. Laugh all you to see me in my choler adust to burn and to broile that
false Fraud to dust.


Bind Fraud, blind Simplicity, turn him thrife about, set his face toward the
contrary post, at which he runs, and all to burns it, Dis. standing behind
Fraud, vnbindes him, and whiles all the rest behold Simp. they two slip away:
Pleasure missing Fraud says. plea. Wisely perfourm'd, but soft sirs, where is
Fraud? O noble villain, gone whiles we beheld the other: Who loosed him? Who
let him slip? well, one day he will pay for all: vnblind Simplicity.


Simp. How now, Have I beated his lips? have I warmed his nose? and scortched
his face? Let me see, how looks the villain? Have I burned him?


Dil. Thou have done more, for thou have quite consumed him into nothing,
look, here is no sign of him, no not so much as his ashes.


Simp. Very few ashes if there be any, ye may see what a hot thing anger is, I
think that the Torch did not waste him so much as my wrath: well, al London,
nay, all England is beholding to me, for putting Fraud out of this world, I
have consumed him and brought him to nothing and I Will tread his ashes under my
feet, yt no more Frauds shall ever spring of them: But let me see, I shall have
much anger, for the Tanners will miss him in their lether, the Tailors in
cutting out of garments, the Shoo-maker in closing, the Tapsters in filling
pots, and the very oistermen to mingle their oisters at Billinsgate, yet it is
no matter the world is well rid of such a crafty knave.


plea. Well now thou art satisfied, I wish all here as well contented,
And we my Lords that praise this happy day,
Fall we on knees and humbly let us pray.

pom. First that from heaven upon our gracious Queen,
All manner blessings may be multiplied,
That as her reign most prosperous has been,
During worlds length so may it still abide,
And after that with saints be glorified^
Lord grant her here health, hearts-ease, joy and mirth.
And heaven at last, after long life on earth.

pol, Her counsel wise, and Nobles of this land
Bless, and preserve O Lord with thy right hand.

plea. On all the rest that in this Land do dwell,
Chiefly in London, Lord pour down thy grace,
Who living in thy fear and dying well,
In heaven with Angels they may have a place.

FINIS.

