MERCY and TRVTH. OR CHARITY MAINTAINED by Catholics.

By way of Reply upon an Answer lately framed by D. POTTER to a Treatise which
had formerly proved, That CHARITY was MISTAKEN by Protestants: With the want
whereof Catholics are unjustly charged for affirming, That Protestancy
unrepented destroys SALVATION.

Divided into two Parts.

Mercy and Truth have met together.

Psalm. 84. v. 11. Better are the wounds of him that loves, then the
fraudulent kisses of him that hates.

Prou. cap. 27. v. 6. We love you Brethren, and desire the same things for you,
which we do for our selves.

S. Aug. Ep. 166. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXXIIII.

TO THE MOST HIGH Mighty, Just, and Clement Prince, CHARLES King of
Great-Brittaine, France, and Ireland, etc.
THese Titles (most gracious Sovereign) partly flowing from your Royal
Authority, and partly appropriated to your Sacred Person, have by their happy
conjunction emboldened me to lay at your Princely Feet, with most humble
respects, and profound submission, this REPLY of mine to a Book, lately
written in obedience, as the Author thereof affirms, to your Majesty's
particular Command.

For, though your Regal Authority may seem to be an Object of only Dread and
Awe; yet does it not so much auert, as inuit men to a confident approach,
when it appears so svvetly tempered, and adorned with such rare Personal
Qualities as your Majesty's are; Justice to all; Clemency to every one of your
meanest Subjects; VVisdome to discern with quicknes and depth, and to
determine with great maturity of Judgment, between right and vvrong; A
Princely disdain, and just indignation against the least dissimulation, which
may be repugnant to the secret testimony of Conscience; An heroical Affection,
and even as it were a natural kind of sympathy with all Sincerity, and Truth.

So that, when your Majesty thought fit to impose a Commandment of vvriting
upon one; I could not but conceive it to be also your gracious Pleasure and
Will, that in Virtue of the same Royal Command, others who are of contrary
Judgment, were suffered at least, if not obliged, to answer for themselves;
but yet with all due respect, and Christian moderation: Which, I have as
carefully endeavored to observe, as if I had written by the express
Command, and spoken in the Hearing, and acted the part of Truth, in the
presence of so Great, so Modest, and so Judicious a Monarch, as your Majesty is.

I was therefore supported by contemplation of these your rare Endovvments of
Mind: which, as they are the Happiness of all your Subjects; so were they no
less a Hope to me, that your Majesty would not disdain to cast an eye of
Grace upon this REPLY, not according to the face of present times, but with
regard to the Plea's of Truth, appearing in times more ancient, and in places
more diffused, by the allegation of one, who does so cordially profess
himself your Majesty's most humble subject, as that from the depth of a
sincere heart, and with all the powers of his soul, he vvishes that God be no
longer merciful, and good to him, and all your other Catholics Subjects,
then they, and he shall both in desire, and deed, approve themselves upon all
occasions, sincerely Loyal to the most Excellent Person, and thrice hopeful
Issue of your Sacred Majesty.

This our Catholic Religion teaches us to profess and perform: and
heervvith I lay this poor Work, and prostrate the Author thereof, at the
Throne of your Royal Feet.

Your Majesty's most humble and most loyal Subject. I. H.

Advertisement of the Printer.
THis REPLY, Good Reader, was indeed long since finished by the Author: but by
reason of some impediment, it could not be commodiously transported, so soon
as he wished, and desired it should.

TO THE READER.
GIVE me leave (good Reader) to inform thee, by way of Preface, of three
points The first concerns D. Potters Answer to Charity Mistaken. The second
relates to this Reply of mine. And the third contains some Premonitions, or
Prescriptions in case D. Potter, or any in his behalf think fit to reioyne.

2. For the first point concerning D. Potters Answer, I say in general, A
general consideration of D. Potters Answer.
reserving particulars to their prroper places, that in his whole Book he has
not so much as once truly and really fallen upon the point in question, which
was, Whether both Catholics and Protestants can be saved in their several
professions. And therefore Charity Mistaken iudiciously pressing those
particulars, wherein the difficulty does precisely consist, proves in
general, that there is but one true Church; that all Christians are obliged to
hearken to her; that she must be ever visible, and infallible; that to separate
ones self from her Communion is Schism, and to dissent from her doctrine is
Heresy, though it be in points never so few, or never so small in their own
nature; and therefore that the distinction of points fundamental, and not
fundamental is wholly vain, as it is applied by Protestants. These (I say) and
some other general grounds Charity Mistaken handles, and out of them does
clearly euince, that any least difference in faith cannot stand with salvation
on both sides: and therefore since it is apparent, that Catholics and
Protestants disagree in very many points of Faith, they both cannot hope to be
saved without repentance: and consequently, as we hold, that Protestancy
unrepented destroies Salvation; so must they also believe that we cannot be
saved, if they judge their own Religion to be true, and ours to be false. And
whosoever disguizeth this truth, is an enemy to souls, which he deceiues with
ungrounded false hopes of salvation, indifferent Faiths, and Religions. And
this, Charity Mistaken performed exactly, according to that which appears to
have been his design, which was not to descend to particular disputes, as D.
Potter affectedly does, namely, Whether or no the Roman Church be the only true
Church of Christ; and much less whether General Councels be infallible;
whether the Pope may err in his Decrees common to the whole Church; whether he
be above a General Council; whether all points of faith be contained in
Scripture; whether Faith be resolved into the authority of the Church, as into
his last formal Object, and Motive; and least of all did he discourse of
Images, Communion under both kinds, public Service in an unknown Tongue,
Seven Sacraments, Sacrifice of the Mass, Indulgences, and Index
Expurgatorius: all which and diverse other articles D. Potter (as I said) draws
by violence into his Book. and he might as well have brought in Pope loan, or
Antichrist, or the Jews who are permitted to live in Rome, which are common
Themes for men that want better matter, as D. Potter was forced to fetch in the
aforsayd Controversies, that so he might dazzle the eyes, and distract the mind
of the Reader, and hinder him from perceiving that in his whole Answer he
uttered nothing to the purpose, and point in question: which if he had followed
closely, I dare well say, he might have dispatched his whole Book in two or
three sheets of paper. But the truth is, he was loath to affirm plainly,
that generally both Catholics and Protestants may be saved: and yet seeing it
to be most evident that Protestants cannot pretend to have any true Church
before Luther except the Roman, and such as agreed with her, and consequently
that they cannot hope for salvation, if they deny it to us; he thought best to
avoid this difficulty by confusion of language, and to fill up his Book with
points which make nothing to the purpose. Wherein he is less excusable,
because he must grant, that those very particulers to which he digresseth, are
not fundamental errors, though it should be granted that they be errors, which
indeed are Catholic verities. For since they be not fundamental, nor
destructive of salvation, what imports it whether we hold them or no, for as
much as concerns our possibility to be saved?

3. In one thing only he will perhaps seem to have touched the point in
question, to wit, in his distinction of points fundamental, and not
fundamental: because some may think, that a difference in points which are
not fundamental breaks not the Unity of Faith, and hinders not the hope of
salvation in persons so disagreeing. And yet in this very distinction, he never
speaks to the purpose indeed, but only says, that there are some points so
fundamental, as that all are obliged to know and believe them explicitly, but
never tells us, whether there be any other points of faith, which a man may
deny or disbelieue, though they be sufficiently presented to his understanding,
as truths revealed, or testified by almighty God; which was the only thing in
question. For if it be damnable, as certainly it is, to deny, or disbelieue any
one truth witnessed by almighty God, though the thing be not in it self of any
great consequence, or moment; and since of two disagreeing in matters of faith,
one must necessarily deny some such truth; it clearly follows that amongst men
of different Faiths, or Religions, one only can be saved, though their
difference consist of diverse, or but even one point, which is not in his own
nature fundamental, as I declare at large in diverse places of my first Part.
So that it is clear, D. Potter even in this his last refuge and distinction,
never comes to the point in question: to say nothing that he himself does
quite overthrow it, and plainly contradict his whole design, as I show in the
third Chapter of my first Part.

4. And as for D. Potters manner of handling those very points, which are
utterly beside the purpose, it consists, only in bringing vulgar mean
objections, which have been answered a thousand times, yea, and some of them
are clearly answered even in Charity Mistaken; but he takes no knowledge at
all of any such answers, and much less does he apply himself to confute them.
He alleges also Authors with so great corruption and fraud, as I would not
have believed, if I had not found it by clear, and frequent experience. In his
second Edition, he has indeed left out one or two gross corruptions, amongst
many others no less notorious, having as it seems been warned by some
friends, that they could not stand with his credit: but even in this his second
Edition he retracts them not at all, nor declares that he was mistaken in the
First, and so his Reader of the first Edition shall ever be deceived by him,
though withal he read the Second. For preventing of which inconvenience, I
have thought it necessary to take notice of them, and to discover them in my
Reply.

5. And for conclusion of this point I will only say, that D. Potter might well
have spared his pains if he had ingenuously acknowledged, where the whole
substance, yea and sometime the very words and phrases of his book may be
found in far briefer manner, namely, in a Sermon of D. Vshers preached before
our late sovereign Lord King James the 20. of June. 1624. at Wansted,
containing A Declaration of the Universality of the Church of Christ, and the
Unity of Faith, professed therein, which Sermon having been roundly and wittily
confuted by a Catholic Divine, under the name of Paulus Veridicus, within the
compass of about 4. sheets of Paper, D. Potters Answer to Charity Mistaken
was in effect confuted before it appeared. And this may suffice for a general
Censure of his Answer to Charity Mistaken.

6. For the second, touching my Reply: if you wonder at the Bulk thereof,
compared either with Charity Mistaken, or D. Potters Answer, Concerning my
Reply.
I desire you to consider well of what now I am about to say, and then I hope
you will see, that I was cast upon a mere necessity of not being so short, as
otherwise might peradventure be desired. Charity Mistaken is short I grant, and
yet very full, and large for as much as concerned his design, which you see
was not to treat of particular Controversies in Religion, no not so much as to
debate, whether or no the Roman Church be the only true Church of Christ,
which indeed would have required a larger Volume, as I have understood there
was one then coming forth, if it had not been prevented by the Treatise of
Charity Mistaken, which seemed to make the other intended work a little less
seasonable at that time. But Charity Mistaken proves only in General out of
some Universal Principles, well backed and made good by choice and solid
authorities, that of two disagreeing in points of Faith, one ^nely without
repentance can be saved; which aim exacted no great bulk. And as for D.
Potters Answer, even that also is not so short as it may seem. For if his
marginall notes printed in a small letter were transfered into the Text, the
Book would appear to be of some bulk: though indeed it might have been very
short, if he had kept himself to the point treated by Charity Mistaken, as
shall be declared anon. But contrarily, because the question debated betwixt
Charity Mistaken and D. Potter, is a point of the highest consequence that can
be imagined, and in regard that there is not a more pernicious Heresy, or
rather indeed ground of Atheism, then a persuasion that men of different
Religions may be saved, if otherwise forsooth they lead a kind of civil and
moral life: I conceived, that my chief endeavor was not to be employed in
answering D. Potter, but that it was necessary to handle the Question it self
somewhat at large, and not only to prove in general, that both Protestants and
Catholics cannot be saved; but to show also, that Salvation cannot be hoped
for out of the Catholic Roman Church; and yet withal, not to omit to answer
all the particules of D Potters Book which may any way import. To this end I
thought it fit, to divide my Reply into two Parts: in the former whereof, the
maine question is handled by a continued discourse without ste^^ping aside to
confute the particulers of D. Potters Answer, though yet so, as that even in
this first Part, I omit not to answer such passages of his, as I find directly
in my way, and naturally belong to the points whereof I treat: and in the second
Part I answer D. Potters Treatise, Section by Section, as they lie in order I
here therefore entreat the Reader, that if heartily he desire satisfaction in
this so important question, he do not content himself with that which I say to
Doctor Potter in my second Part, but that he take the First before him, either
all, or at least so much as may serve most to his purpose of being satisfied in
those doubts which press him most. For which purpose I have caused a Table of
the Chapters of the first Part, together with their Titles and Arguments, to be
prefixed before my Reply.

7. This was then a chief reason why I could not be very short. But yet there
wanted not also diverse other causes of the same effect. For there are so
several kinds of Protestants, through the difference of Tenets which they
hold, as that if a man convince but one kind of them, the rest will conceive
themselves to be as truly unsatisfied and even unspoken to, as if nothing had
been said therein at all. As for example, some hold a necessity of a perpetual
visible Church, and some hold no such necessity. Some of them hold it necessary
to be able to prove it distinct from ours; and others, that their business is
dispatched when they have proved ours to have been always visible: for then
they will conceive that theirs has been so: and the like may be truly said of
very many other particulers. Besides, it is D. Potters fashion, (wherein as he
is very far from being the first, so I pray God he prove the last of that
humor) to touch in a word many triuiall old obiectio^s, which if they be not
all answered, it will, and must serve the turn, to make the more ignorant sort
of men believe, and brag, as if some maine unanswerable matter had been subtily
and purposely omitted; and every body knows that some objection may be very
plausibly made in few words the clear and solid answer whereof will require
more leaves of paper then one. And in particular D. Potter does couch his
corruption of Authors within the compass of so few lines, and with so great
confuseones and fraud, that it requires much time, pains, and paper to open
them so distinctly, as that they may appear to every man's eye. It was also
necessary to show, what D. Potter omits in Charity Mistaken, and the importance
of what is omitted, and sometimes to set down the very words themselves that
are omitted, all which could not but add to the quantity of my Reply. And as
for the quality thereof, I desire thee (good Reader) to believe, that whereas
nothing is more necessary the^ Books for answering of Books: yet I was so ill
furnished in this kind, that I was forced to omit the examination of diverse
Authors cited by D. Potter, merely upon necessity; though I did very well
perceive by most apparent circumstances, that I must probably have been sure
enough to find them plainly misalleadged, and much wronged: and for the few
which are examined, there has not wanted some difficulties to do it. For the
times are not for all men alike; and D. Potter has much advantage therein. But
Truth is Truth, and will ever be able to justify it self in the midst of all
difficulties which may occur. As for me, when I allege Protestant Writers as
well domestical, as foreign, I willingly and thankefully acknowledge my self
obliged for diverse of them to the Author of the Book entitled, The
Protestants Apology for the Roman Church, who calls himself John Brereley,
whose care, exactnes, and fidelity is so extraordinary great, as that he does
not only cite the Books, but the Editions also, with the place and time of
their printing, yea and often the very page, and line where the words are to be
had. And if you happen not to find what he cites, yet suspend your judgment,
till you have read the corrections placed at the end of his book; though it be
also true, that after all diligence and faithfulness on his behalf, it was not
in his power to amend all the faults of the print: in which prints we have
difficulty enough for many evident reasons, which must needs occur to any
prudent man.

8. And for as much as concerns the manner of my Reply, I have procured to do
it without all bitterness, or gall of inuectiue words, both for as much as may
import either Protestants in general, or D. Potters person in particular;
unless, for example, he will call it bitterness for me to term a gross
impertinency, a slight, or a corruption, by those very names, without which I
do not know how to express the things: and yet wherein I can truly affirm
that I have studied how to deliver them in the most moderate way, to the end I
might give as little offense as possibly I could, without betraying the Cause.
And if any unfit phrase may peradventure have escaped my pen (as I hope none
has) it was beside, and against my intention, though I must needs profess,
that D. Potter gives so many and so just occasions of being round with him, as
that perhaps some will judge me to have been rather remiss, then moderate. But
since in the very Title of my Reply I profess to maintain Charity, I conceive
that the excess will be more excusable amongst all kinds of men, if it fall to
be in mildnes, then if it had appeared in too much zeal. And if D. Potter have
a mind to charge me with ignorance or any thing of that nature, I can, and will
ease him of that labor, by acknowledging in my self as many and more
personal defects, then he can heap upon me. Truth only and sincerity I so
much value and profess, as that he shall never be able to prove the contrary
in any one least passage or particle against me.

9. Rules to be observed if D. Potter intend a Re^oynders.
In the third and last place, I have thought fit to express my self thus. If
D. Potter, or any other resolve to answer my Reply; I desire that he will
observe some things which may tend to his own reputation, the saving of my
unnecessary pains, and especially to the greater advantage of truth. I wish
then that he would be careful to consider, wherein the point of every
difficulty consists, and not impertinently to shoot at Rouers, and affectedly
mistake one thing for another. As for example, to what purpose (for as much as
co^cernes the question between D. Potter and Charity Mistaken) does he so
often and seriously labor to prove, that faith is not resolved into the
Authority of the Church, as into the formal Object and Motive thereof? Or that
all points of Faith are contained in Scripture? Or that the Church cannot make
new Articles of faith? Or that the Church of Rome, as it signifies that
particular Church or diocese, is not all one with the universal Church? Or
that the Pope as a private Doctor may err? With many other such points as
will easily appear in their proper places. It will also be necessary for him
not to put certain Doctrines upon us, from which he knows we disclaim as
much as himself.

10. I must in like manner entreat him not to recite my reasons and discourses
by halfes, but to set the^ down faithfully and entirely, for as much as in very
deed concerns the whole substance of the thing in question; because the want
sometime of one word may chance to make void, or lessen the force of the whole
argument. And I am the more solicitous about giving this particular caveat,
because I find how ill he has complied with the promise which he made in his
Preface to the Reader, not to omit without answer any one thing of moment in
all the discourse of Charity Mistaken. Neither will this course be a cause that
his Reioynder grow too large, but it will be occasion of breuity to him, and
free me also from the pains of setting down all the words which he omits, and
himself of demonstrating that what he omitted was not material. Nay I will
assure him, that if he keep himself to the point of every difficulty, and not
weary the Reader, and ouercharge his margent, with unnecessary quotations of
Authors in Greek and Latin, and sometime also in Italian and French, together
with proverbs, sentences of Poets, and such grammatical stuff, nor affect to
cite a multitude of our Catholic School deuines to no purpose at all; his
Book will not exceed a competent size, nor will any man in reason be offended
with that length which is regulated by necessity. Again before he come to set
down his answer, or propose his Arguments, let him consider very well what may
be replied, and whether his own objections may not be retorted against
himself, as the Reader will perceive to have happened often to his disadvantage
in my Reply against him But especially I expect, and Truth it self exacts at
his hand, that he speak clearly and distinctly, and not seek to walk in
darkness, so to delude and deceive his Reader, now saying, and then denying, and
always speaking with such ambiguity, as that his greatest care may seem to
consist in a certain art to find a shift, as his occasions might chance,
either now, or hereafter to require, and as he might fall out to be urged by
diuernty of several arguments. And to the end it may appear, that I deal
plainly, as I would have him also do, I desire that he declare himself
concerning these points.

11. First, whether our Savior Christ have not always had, and be not ever to
have a visible true Church on earth: and whether the contrary doctrine be not a
damnable Heresy.

12. Secondly, what visible Church there was before Luther, disagreeing from
the Roman Church, and agreeing with the pretended Church of Protestants.

13. Thirdly, Since he will be forced to grant that there ca^ be assigned no
visible true Church of Christ, distinct from the Church of Rome, and such
Churches as agreed with her when Luther first appeared, whether it do not
follow, that she has not erred fundamentally; because every such error
destroies the nature and being of the Church, and so our Savior Christ should
have had no visible Church on earth.

14. Fourthly, if the Roman Church did not fall into any fundamental error,
let him tell us how it can be damnable to live in her Communion, or to
maintain errors, which are known and confessed, not to be fundamental, or
damnable.

15. Fifthly, if her Errors were not damnable, nor did exclude salvation, how
can they be excused from Schism, who forsook her Communion upon pretense of
errors, which were not damnable?

16. Sixthly, if D. Potter have a mind to say, that her Errors are damnable, or
fundamental, let him do us so much charity, as to tell us in particular what
those fundamental errors be. But he must still remember (and my self must be
excused, for repeating it) that if he say the Roman Church e^^ed fundamentally,
he will not be able to show, that Christ our Lord had any visible Church on
earth, when Luther appeared: and let him tell us how Protestants had, or can
have any Church which was universal, and extended herself to all ages, if
once he grant, that the Roman Church ceased to be the true Church of Christ;
and consequenly how they can hope for Salvation, if they deny it to us.

17. Seauenthly, whether any one Error maintained against any one Truth though
never so small in it self, yet sufficiently propounded as testified or
revealed by almighty God, do not destroy the Nature and Unity of Faith, or at
least is not a grievous offense excluding Salvation.

18. Eighthly, if this be so, how can Lutherans, Caluinists, Zuinglians, and all
the rest of disagreeing Protestants, hope for salvation, since it is manifest
that some of them must needs err against some such truth as is testified by
almighty God, either fundamental, or at least not fundamental.

19. Ninthly, we constantly urge, and require to have a particular Catalogue of
such points as he calls fundamental. A catalogue, I say, in particular, and
not only some general definition, or description, wherein Protestants may
perhaps agree, though we see that they differ when they come to assign what
points in particular be fundamental; and yet upon such a particular Catalogue
much depends: as for example in particular, whether or no a man do not err in
some point fundamental or necessary to salvation; and whether or no Lutherans,
Caluinists, and the rest do disagree in fundamentals, which if they do, the
same Heaven cannot receive them all.

20. Tenthly, and lastly I desire that in answering to these points, he would
let us know distinctly, what is the doctrine of the Prot^stant English Church
concerning them, and what he vtters only as his own private opinion.

21. These are the questions which for the present I find it fit and necessary
for me to ask of D. Potter, or any other who will defend his cause, or impugn
ours. And it will be in vain to speak vainly, and to tell me, that a Fool
may ask more questions in an hour, then a wiseman can answer in a year;
with such idle Proverbs as that. For I ask but such questions as for which he
gives occasion in his Book, and where he declares not himself but after so
ambiguous and confused a manner, as that Truth it self can scarce tell how to
convince him so, but that with ignorant and ill-iudging men he will seem to
have somewhat left to say for himself, though Papists (as he calls them) and
Puritans should press him contrary ways at the same time: and these questions
concern things also of high importance, as whereupon the knowledge of Gods
Church, and true Religion, and consequently Salvation of the soul depends. And
now because he shall not tax me with being like those men in the Gospel whom
our blessed Lord and Savior charged with laying heavy burdens upon other men's
shoulders, who yet would not touch them with their finger: I oblige my self to
answer upon any demand of his, both to all these Questions, if he find that I
have not done it already, and to any other concerning matter of faith that he
shall ask. And I will tell him very plainly, what is Catholic doctrine, and
what is not, that is, what is defined or what is not defined, and rests but in
discussion among Deuines.

22. And it will be here expected, that he perform these things, as a man who
professes learning should do, not flying from questions which concern things
as they are considered in their own nature, to accidental, or rare
circumstances of ignorance, incapacity, want of means to be instructed,
erroneous conscience, and the like, which being very various and different,
cannot be well comprehended under any general Rule. But in delivering general
doctrines we must consider things as they be ex naturarei, or per se loquendo
(as Deuines speak) that is, according to their natures, if all circumstances
concur proportionable thereunto. As for example some may for a time have
invincible ignorance, even of some fundamental article of faith, through want
of capacity, instruction, or the like, and so not offend either in such
ignorance or error; and yet we must absolutely say, that error in any one
fundamental point is damnable, because so it is, if we consider things in
themselves, abstracting from accidental circumstances in particular persons:
as contrarily if some man judge some act of virtue, or some indifferent action
to be a sin, in him it is a sin indeed, by reason of his erroneous
conscience; and yet we ought not to say absolutely, that virtuous, or
indifferent actions are sins: and in all sciences we must distinguish the
general Rules from their particular Exceptions. And therefore when, for
example, he answers to our demand, whether he hold that Catholics may be
saved, or whether their pretended errors be fundamental and damnable, he is
not to change the state of the question, and have recourse to Ignorance, and
the like, but to answer concerning the errors being considered what they are
apt to be in themselves, and as they are neither increased nor diminished, by
accidental circumstances.

23. And the like I say of all the other points, to which I once again desire
an answer without any of these, or the like ambiguous terms, in some sort, in
some sease, in some degree, which may be explicated afterward as strictly or
largely as may best serve his turn; but let him tell us roundly and
particulerly, in what sort, in what sense, in what degree he understands those,
and the like obscure mincing phrases. If he proceed solidly after this manner,
and not by way of mere words, more like a Preacher to a vulgar Auditour, then
like a learned man with a pen in his hand, thy patience shall be the less
abused, and truth will also receive more right. And since we have already laid
the grounds of the question, much may be said hereafter in few words, if (as I
said) he keep close to the real point of every difficulty without wandering
into impertinent disputes, multiplying vulgar and threed-bare objections and
arguments, or laboring to prove what no man denies, or making a vain
ostentation by citing a number of Schoolmen, which every Puny brought up in
Schools is able to do; and if he cite his Authors with such sincerity, as no
time need be spent in opening his corruptions* and finally if he set himself a
work with this consideration, that we are to give a most strict account to a
most just, and impartial Judge, of every period, line, and word that passes
under our pen. For if at the later day we shall be arraigned for every idle
word which is spoken, so much more will that be done for every idle word which
is written, as the deliberation wherewith it passes makes a man guilty of more
malice, and as the importance of the matter which is treated of in books
concerning true faith and religion, without which no Soul can be saved, makes
a man's Errors more material, then they would be, if question were but of
toys.

A TABLE OF THE Chapters, and Contents of this ensuing First Part of Reply.
CHAP. I.
THE true state of the Question: With a Summary of the Reasons, for which,
amongst men of different Religions, one side only can be saved.

CHAP. II.
What is that means vvherby the revealed truths of God are conveyed to our
Understanding, and which must determine Controversies in Faith and Religion.

CHAP. III.
That the distinction of points fundamental, and not fundamental, is neither
pertinent, nor true in our present Controversy. And that the Catholic visible
Church cannot err in either kind of the said points.

CHAP. IIII.
To say, that the Creed contains all points necessarily to be believed, is
neither pertinent to the Question in hand, nor in it self true.

CHAP. V.
That Luther, Calvin, their associates, and all who began, or continue the
separation from the external Communion of the Roman Church, are guilty of the
proper, and formal sin of Schism.

CHAP. VI.
That Luther, and therest of Protestants have added Heresy to Schism.

CHAP. VII.
In regard of the Precept of Charity toward ones self, Protestants are in
state of Sin, as long as they remain separated from the Roman Church.

THE FIRST PART.
The State of the Question; with a Summary of the reasons for which amongst
men of different Religions, one side only can be saved. CHAP. I.
NEVER is Malice more indiscreet, then when it charge others with imputation
of that, to which it self becoms more liable, even by that very act of
accusing others. For, though guiltines be the effect of some error, yet
usually it begets a kind of Moderation, so far forth, as not to let men cast
such aspersions upon others, as must apparently reflect upon themselves. Thus
cannot the Poet endure, Quis tulerit Gracchum etc.
that Gracchus, who was a factious and unquiet man, should be inueighing
against Sedition: and the Roman Orator rebukes Philosophers who, to wax
glorious, superscribed their Names upon those very Books which they entitled,
Of the contempt of glory. What then shall we say of D. Potter, who in the
Title, and Text of his whole Book does so tragically charge Want of Charity on
all such Romanists, as dare affirm, that Protestancy destroys Salvation;
while he himself is in act of pronouncing the like heavy doom against Roman
Catholics? For, not satisfied with much uncivil language, in affirming the
Roman Church many Page 11.
ways to have played the Harlot, and in that regard deserved a bill of divorce
from Christ, and detestation of Christians; in stiling her, that proud Ibid.
and cursed Dame of Rome, which takes upon her to revel in the House of God; in
talking of an Idol Page 4. Edit. 1.
to be worshipped at Rome; he comes at length to thunder out this fearful
sentence against her: For that Page 20
Mass of Errors (says he) in judgment and practice, which is proper to her,
and wherein she differs from us, we judge a reconciliation impossible, and to
us (who are convicted in conscience of her corruptions) damnable. And in
another place he says: For us who Page 81.
are convinced in conscience, that she ers in many things, a necessity lies
upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake her in those Errors By the
acerbity of which Censure, he does not only make himself guilty of that, which
he judges to be a heinous offense in others, but freeth us also from all
color of crime by this his unadvised recrimination. For, if Roman Catholics
be likewise convicted in conscience of the Errors of Protestants; they may,
and must, in conformity to the Doctors own rule, judge a reconciliation with
them to be also damnable. And thus, all the Want of Charity so deeply charged
on us, dissolues it self into this poor wonder, Roman Catholics believe in
their conscience, that the Religion which they profess is true, and the
contrary false.

2. Nevertheless, we earnestly desire, and take care, that our doctrine may
not be defamed by misinterpretation. Far be it from us, by way of insultation,
to apply it against Protestants, otherwise then as they are comprehended under
the generality of those who are divided from the only one true Church of Christ
our Lord, within the Communion whereof he has confined salvation. Neither do
we understand, why our most dear Country men should be offended, if the
Universality be particularized under the Name of Protestants, first given
Sleidan. l. 6. fol. 84.
to certain Lutherans, who protesting that they would stand out against the
Imperial decrees, in defense of the Confession exhibited at Ausburge, were
termed Protestants, in reguard of such their protesting: which Confessio
Augustana disclayming from, and being disclaymed by Caluinists, and Zuinglians,
our naming or exemplifying a general doctrine under the particular name of
Protestantisme, ought not in any particular manner to be odious in England.

3. Moreover, our meaning is not, as misinformed persons may conceive, that we
give Protestants over to reprobation; that we offer no prayers in hope of their
salvation; that we hold their case desperate. God forbid! We hope, we pray for
their Conversion; and sometimes we find happy effects of our charitable
desires. Neither is our Censure immediately directed to particular persons. The
Tribunal of particular Judgment is Gods alone. When any man esteemed a
Protestant, leaves to live in this world, we do not instantly with
precipitation avouch, that he is lodged in Hell. For we are not always
acquainted with what sufficiency or means he was furnished for instruction; we
do not penetrate his capacity to understand his Catechist; we have no
revelation what light might have cleared his errors, or Contrition retracted
his sins, in the last moment before his death. In such particular cases, we
wish more apparent signs of salvation but do not give any dogmaticall sentence
of perdition How grievous sins, Disobedience, Schism, and Heresy are, is
well known. But to discern how far the natural malignity of those great
offenses might be checked by Ignorance, or by some such lessening circumstance,
is the office, rather of Prudence, then of Faith.

4. Thus we allow Protestants as much Charity, as D. Potter spares us, for
whom, in the words above mentioned, and else where, he See Page 39.
makes Ignorance the best hope of salvation. Much less comfort, can we expect
from the fierce doctrine of those chief Protestants, who teach that for many
ages before Luther, Christ had no visible Church upon earth. Not these men
alone, or such as they, but even the 39. Articles, to which the English
Protestant Clergy subscribes, censure our belief so deeply, that Ignorance can
scarce, or rather not at all, excuse us from damnation. Our doctrine of
Transubstantiation, is affirmed to be repugnant to the plain words of Art. 28.
Scripture; our Masses to be blasphemous Art. 31.
Fables, with much more to be seen in the Articles themselves. In a certain
Confession of the Christian faith, at the end of their books of Psalms
collected into Meeter, and printed Cum priuilegio Regis Regali, they call us
Idolaters, and limbs of Antichrist; and having set down a Catalogue of our
doctrines, they conclude that for the^ we shall after the General Resurrection
be damned to unquenchable fire.

5. But yet lest any man should flatter himself with our charitable
Mitigations, and thereby wax careless in search of the true Church, we desire
him to read the Conclusion of the Second Part, where this matter is more
explayned.

6. And, because we cannot determine, what Judgment may be esteemed rash, or
prudent, except by weighing the reasons upon which it is grounded, we will
here, under one aspect, present a Summary of those Principles, from which we
infer, that Protestancy in it self unrepented destroys Salvation: intending
afterward to prove the truth of every one of the grounds, till, by a
concatenation of sequels, we fall upon the Conclusion, for which we are charged
with Want of Charity.

7. Now, this is our gradation of reasons. Almighty God, having ordained
Mankind to a supernatural End of eternal felicity; has in his holy
Providence settled competent and convenient Means, whereby that end may be
attained. The universal grand Origin of all such means, is the Incarnation
and Death of our Blessed Savior, whereby he merited internal grace for us;
and founded an external visible Church, provided and stored with all those
helps which might be necessary for Salvation. From hence it follows, that in
this Church amongst other advantages, there must be some effectual means to
beget, and conserve faith, to maintain Unity, to discover and condemn
Heresies, to appease and reduce Schisms, and to determine all Controversies in
Religion. For without such means, the Church should not be furnished with
helps sufficient to salvation, not God affoard sufficient means to attain
that End, to which himself ordained Mankind. This means to decide
Controversies in faith and Religion (whether it should be the holy Scripture,
or whatsoever else) must be endued with an Universal Infallibility, in
whatsoever it propounds for a divine truth, that is, as revealed, spoken, or
testified by Almighty God, whether the matter of its nature, be great or small.
For if it were subject to error in any one thing, we could not in any other
yield it infallible assent; because we might with good reason doubt, whether it
chanced not to err in that particular.

8. Thus far all must agree to what we have said, unless they have a mind to
reduce Faith to Opinion. And even out of these grounds alone, without further
proceeding, it vndenyably follows, that of two men dissenting in matters of
faith, great or small, few or many, the one cannot be saved without repentance,
unless Ignorance accidentally may in some particular person, plead excuse. For
in that case of contrary belief, one must of necessity be held to oppose Gods
word, or Revelation sufficiently represented to his understanding by an
infallible Propounder; which oppositio^ to the Testimony of God is undoubtedly a
damnable sin, whether otherwise, the thing so testified, be in it self great
or small. And thus we have already made good, what was promised in the argument
of this Chapter, that amongst men of different Religions, one is only capable
of being saved.

9. Nevertheless, to the end that men may know in particular what is the said
infallible means upon which we are to rely in all things concerning Faith, and
accordingly may be able to judge in what safety or danger, more or less they
live; and because D. Potter descends to diverse particulers about Scriptures
and the Church etc. we will go forward, and prove, that although Scripture be
in it self most sacred, infallible, and divine; yet it alone cannot be to us a
Rule, or Judge, fit and able to end all doubts and debates emergent in matters
of Religion; but that there must be some external, visible, public, living
Judge, to whom all sorts of persons both l^a^ned and unlearned, may without
danger of ^^^our, have recourse; and in whose Judgment they may rest, for the
interpreting and propounding of Gods Word or Reuclation. And this living Judge,
we will most evidently prove to be no other, but that Holy, Catholic,
Apostolic, and Visible Church, which our Savior purchased with the effusion
of his most precious blood.

10. If once therefore it be granted, that the Church is that means, which God
has left for deciding all Controversies in faith, it manifestly will follow,
that she must be infallible in all her determinations, whether the matters of
themselves be great or small; because as we said above, it must be agreed on
all sides, that if that means which God has left to determine Controversies
were not infallible in all things proposed by it as truths revealed by Almighty
God, it could not settle in our minds a firm, and infallible belief of any
one.

11. From this Universal Infallibility of God's Church it follows, that
whosoever wittingly denies any one point proposed by her, as revealed by God,
is injurious to his divine Majesty, as if he could either deceive, or be
deceived in what he testifies. The auerring whereof were not only a
fundamental error, but would overthrow the very foundation of all fundamental
points, and therefore without repentance could not possibly stand with
salvation.

12 Out of these grounds, we will show, that although the distinction of points
fundamental, and not fundamental, be good and useful, as it is delivered and
applied by Catholic Deuines, to teach what principal Articles of faith,
Christians are obliged explicitly to believe: yet that it is impertinent to
the present purpose of excusing any man from grievous sin, who knowingly
disbelieues, that is, belieues the contrary of that which Gods Church proposes
as divine Truth. For it is one thing not to know explicitly some thing
testified by God, and another positiuely to oppose what we know he has
testified. The former may often be excused from sin, but never the latter,
which only is the case in Question.

13. In the same manner shall be demonstrated, that to allege the Creed, as
containing all Articles of faith necessary to be explicitly believed, is not
pertinent to free from sin the voluntary denial of any other point known to
be defined by Gods Church. And this were sufficient to overthrow all that D.
Potter alleges, concerning the Creed: though yet by way of Supererogation,
we will prove, that there are diverse importa^t matters of Faith which are not
mentioned at all in the Creed.

14. From the aforesaid maine principle, that God has always had, and always
will have on earth, a Church Visible, within whose Communion Salvation must be
hoped, and infallible, whose definitions we ought to believe; we will prove,
that Luther, Calvin, and all other, who continue the division in Communion, or
Faith, from that Visible Church, which at, and before Luthers appearance, was
spread over the world, cannot be excused from Schism, and Heresy, although
they opposed her faith but in on^ only point; whereas it is manifest, they
dissent from her, in many and weighty matters, concerning as well belief, as
practice.

15. To these reasons drawn from the virtue of Faith, we will add one other
taken from Charitas propria, the Virtue of Charity, as it obliges us, not to
expose our soul to hazard of perdition, when we can put our selves in a way
much more secure, as we will prove, that of the Roman Catholics to be.

16. We are then to prove these points. First, that the infallible means to
determine controversies in matters of faith, is the visible Church of Christ.
Secondly, that the distinction of points fundamental, and not fundamental,
makes nothing to our present Question. Thirdly, that to say the Creed
contains all fundamental points of faith, is neither pertinent, nor true.
Fourthly, that both Luther, and all they who after him, persist in division,
from the Communion, and Faith of the Roman Church, cannot be excused from
Schism Fifthly, nor from Heresy Sixthly and lastly, that in regard of the
precept of Charity toward ones self, Protestants be in state of sin, as
long as they remain divided from the Roman Church. And these six points, shall
be several Arguments for so many ensuing Chapters.

17. Only I will here observe, that it seems very strange, that Protestants
should charge us so deeply with Want of Charity, for only teaching that both
they, and we cannot be saved, seeing themselves must affirm the like of
whosoever opposes any least point delivered in Scripture, which they hold to
be the sole Rule of Faith Out of which ground they must be enforced to let all
our former Inferences pass for good. For, is it not a grievous sin, to deny
any one truth contained in holy Writ? Is there in such denial, any distinction
betwixt points fundamental, and not fundamental, sufficient to excuse from
heresy? Is it not impertinent, to allege the Creed containing all
fundamental points of faith, as if believing it alone, we were at liberty to
deny all other points of Scripture? In a word: According to Protestants; Oppose
not Scripture, there is no Error against faith. Oppose it in any least point,
the error (if Scripture be sufficiently proposed, which proposition is also
required before a man can be obliged to believe even fundame^tall points) must
be damnable. What is this, but to say with us, Of persons contrary in
whatsoever point of belief, one party only can be saved? And D. Potter must
not take it ill, if Catholics believe they may be saved in that Religion for
which they suffer. And if by occasion of this doctrine, men will still be
charging us with Want of Charity, and be resolved to take scandal where none
is given; we must comfort our selves with that grave, and true saying of S.
Gregory: If scandal S. Greg. Hom. 7. in Ezes.
be taken from declaring a truth, it is better to permit scandal, then forsake
the truth. But the solid grounds of our Assertion, and the sincerity of
intention in uttering what we think, yield us confidence, that all will hold
for most reasonable the saying of Pope Gelasius to Anastasius the Emperor:
Far be it from the Roman Emperor that he should hold it for a wrong to have
truth declared to him. Let us therefore begin with that point which is the
first that can be controuerted betwixt Protestats and us, for as much as
concerns the present Question, and is contained in the Argument of the next
ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. II. What is that means, vvherby the revealed Truths of God are
conveyed to our Understanding, and which must determine Controversies in Faith
and Religion.
OF our estimation, respect, and reverence to holy Scripture even Protestants
themselves do in fact give testimony, while they possess it from us, and take
it upon the integrity of our custody No cause imaginable could auert our will
from giving the function of supreme and sole Judge to holy Writ if both the
thing were not impossible in it self and if both reason and experience did not
convince our understanding, that by this assertion Contentions are increased,
and not ended. We acknowledge holy Scripture, to be a most perfect Rule, for as
much as a writing can be a Rule: We only deny that it excludes either divine
Tradition though it be unwritten, or an external Judge to keep, to propose, to
interpret it in a true, Orthodoxe, and Catholic sense. Every single Book,
every Chapter, yea every period of holy Scripture is infallibly true, and wants
no due perfection. But must we therefore infer, that all other Books of
Scripture, are to be excluded, least by addition of them, we may seem to
derogate from the perfection of the former? When the first Books of the old
and New Testament were written, they did not exclude unwritten Traditions, nor
the Authority of the Church to decide Controversies; and who has then so
altered their nature, and filled them with such iealousies, as that now they
cannot agree for fear of mutual ^isparageme^t? What greater wrong is it for
the written Word, to be compartner now with the unwritten, then for the
unwritten, which was once alone, to be afterward joined with the written? Who
ever heard, that to commend the fidelity of a Keeper, were to disauthorize the
thing committed to his custody? Or that, to extol the integrity and knowledge,
and to avouch the necessity of a Judge in suits of law, were to deny perfection
in the law? Are there not in Common wealths besides the laws written and
unwritten customs, Judges appointed to declare both the one, the other, as
several occasions may require?

2. That the Scripture alone cannot be Judge in Controversies of faith, we
gather very clearly. From the quality of a writing in general: From the nature
of holy Writ in particular, which must be believed as true, and infallible:
From the Editions, and Translations of it: From the difficulty to understand it
without hazard of Error: From the inconveniences that must follow upon the
ascribing of sole Judicature to it: and finally from the Confessions of our
Adversaries. And on the other side, all these difficulties ceasing, and all
other qualities requisite to a Judge concurring in the visible Church of Christ
our Lord, we must conclude, that ^he it is, to whom in doubts concerning Faith
and religion, all Christians ought to have recourse.

3. The name, notion, nature, and properties of a Judge cannot in common reason
agree to any mere writing, which, be it otherwise in its kind, never so highly
qualified with sanctity and infallibility; yet it must ever be, as all writings
are, deaf, dumb, and inanimate. By a Judge, all wise men understand a Person
end^ed with life, and reason, able to hear, to examine, to declare his mind to
the disagreeing parties in such sort as that each one may know whether the
sentence be in favor of his cause, or against his pretense; and he must be
appliable and able to do all this, as the diversity of Controversies persons,
occasions, and circumstances may require. There is a great and plain
distinction betwixt a Judge and a Rule. For as in a kingdom, the Judge has
his Rule to follow which are the received Laws and customs; so are not they
fit or able to declare, or be Judges to themselves, but that office must belong
to a living Judge. The holy Scripture may be, and is a Rule, but cannot be a
Judge, because it being always the same, cannot declare it self any one time,
or upon any one occasion more particularly then upon any other; and let it be
read over an hundred times, it will be still the same, and no more fit alone to
terminate controversies in faith, then the Law would be to end suites, if it
were given over to the phansy, and gloss of every single man.

4. This difference betwixt a Judge and a Rule, D. Potter perceived, when more
then once, having styled the Scripture a Judge, by way of correcting that
term, he adds or rather a Rule, because he knew that an inanimate writing
could not be a Judge. From hence also it was, that though Protestants in their
beginning, affirmed Scripture alone to be the Judge of Controversies; yet upon
a more advised reflection, they changed the phrase, and said, that not
Scripture, but the Holy Ghost speaking in Scripture, is Judge in Controversies.
A difference without a disparity. The Holy Ghost speaking only in Scripture is
no more intelligible to us, then the Scripture in which he speaks; as a man
speaking only Latin, can be no better understood, then the tongue wherein he
speaks. And therefore to say, a Judge is necessary for deciding
controversies, about the meaning of Scripture, is as much as to say, he is
necessary to decide what the Holy Ghost speaks in Scripture. And it were a
conceyt, equally foolish and pernicious, if one should seek to take away all
Judges in the kingdom, upon this nicity, that albeit Laws cannot be Judges,
yet the Lawmaker speaking in the Law, may perform that Office; as if the
Lawmakers speaking in the Law, were with more perspicuity understood, then the
Law whereby he speaks.

5. But though some writing were granted to have a privilege, to declare it
self upon supposition that it were maintained in being, and preserved entire
from corruptions; yet it is manifest, that no writing can conserve it self,
nor can complain, or denounce the falsifier of it; and therefore it stands in
need of some watchful and not erring eye, to guard it, by means of whose
assured vigilance, we may undoubtedly receive it sincere and pure.

6. And suppose it could defend it self from corruption, how could it assure
us that it self were Canonical, and of infallible Verity? By saying so? Of
this very affirmation, there will remain the same Question still; how it can
prove it self to be infallibly true? Neither can there ever be an end of the
like multiplied demands, till we rest in the external Authority of some person
or persons bearing witness to the world, that such, or such a book is
Scripture: and yet upon this point according to Protestants all other
Controversies in faith depend.

7. That Scripture cannot assure us, that it self is Canonical Scripture, is
acknowledged by some Protestants in express words, and by all of them in
deeds. M. Hooker, whom D. Potter ranketh Page 131.
among men of great learning and judgment, says: Of things In his first
book of Eccles. Policy Sect. 14. page 6^.
necessary, the very chiefest is to know what books we are to esteem holy;
which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. And
this he proves by the same argument, which we lately used, saying thas: It is
not Ibid. lib. 2. Sect. 4. p. 102.
the word of God which does, or possibly can, assure us, that we do well to
think it his word. For if any one Book of Scripture did give testimony of
all, yet still that Scripture which gives testimony to the rest, would require
another Scripture to give credit unto it. Neither could we come to any pause
whereon to rest, unless besides Scripture, there were something which might
assure us etc. And this he acknowledges to be the l. 3. Sect. 8. page 1. 146.
and alibi
Church. By the way. If, Of things necessary the very chiefest cannot possibly
be taught by Scripture, as this man of so great learning and judgment
affirms, and demonstratiuely proves; how can the Protestant Clergy of
England subscribe to their sixth Article? Wherein it is said of the Scripture:
Whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith, or
be thought requisite or necessary to salvation: and, concerning their belief
and profession of this Article, they are particulerly examined when they be
ordained Priests and Bishops. With, Hooker, his defendant Couell does
punctually agree. Whitaker likewise confesses, that the question about
Canonical Scriptures, is defined to us, not by testimony of the private
spirit, which (says he) being private and secret, is Aduersus Stapl. l. 2.
cap. 6. page 270 and page 357.
unfit to teach and refell others; but (as he acknowledges) by the Aduersus
Stapl. l. 2. c. 4. page 300.
Ecclesiastical Tradition: An argument (says he) whereby may be argued, and
convinced what books be Canonical, and what be not. Luther says: This lib.
de capt. Babyl. tom. 2. Wittomb. fol. 8^.
indeed the Church has, that she can discern the word of God, from the word
of men: as Augustine confesses, that he believed the Gospel, being moved by
the authority of the Church, which did preach this to be the Gospel. Fulke
teaches, that the Church In his answer to a countefaite Catholic page 5.
has judgment to discern true writings from counterfaite, and the word of God
from the writing of men, and that this judgment she has not of herself, but
of the Holy Ghost. And to the end that you may not be ignorant, from what
Church you must receive Scriptures, hear your first Patriarch Luther speaking
against the^, who (as he says) brought in Anabaptisme, that so they might
despite the Pope. Verily (says he) these Epist. co^t. Anabap. ad dnos
Parochos tom. 2: Germ. Wittemb.
men build upon a weak foundation. For by this means they ought to deny the
whole Scripture, and the Office of Preaching. For, all these we have from the
Pope: otherwise we must go make a new Scripture.

8. But now in deeds, they all make good, that without the Churches authority,
no certainty can be had what Scripture is Canonical, while they cannot agree
in assigning the Canon of holy Scripture. Of the Epistle of S. James, Luther
has these words: The Praefat. in epist. lac. inedit. Ienensi.
Epistle of ^ames is contentions, swelling, dry strawy and unworthy of an
Apostolical Spirit. Which censure of Luther, Illyricus acknowledges and
maintains. Kemnitius teaches, that the second Epistle In Enchirid. page 63.
of Peter, the second and third of John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse of John are
Apocryphal, as not having sufficient Testimony In exa. min. Conc. Trid. part.
1. page 55.
of their authority, and therefore that nothing in controversy can be proved
out of these Ibid.
Books The same is taught by diverse other Lutherans: and if some other amongst
them be of a contrary opinion since Luthers time, I wonder what new infallible
ground they can allege, why they leave their Master, and so many of his
prime Scholars? I know no better ground, then because they may with as much
freedom abandon him, as he was bold to alter that Canon of Scripture, which
he found received in Gods Church.

9. What Books of Scripture the Protestants of England hold for Canonical, is
not easy to affirm In their sixth Article they say: In the name of the Holy
Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose authority was never any doub^^ in the Church. What mean
they by these words? That by the Churches consent they are assured what
Scriptures be Canonical? This were to make the Church Judge, and not
Scriptures alone. Do they only understand the agreement of the Church to be a
probable inducement? Probability is no sufficient ground for an infallible
assent of faith. By this rule (of whose authority was NEVER any doubt in the
Church) the whole book of Esther must quit the Canon because some in the
Church have excluded it from the Canon, as Apud Eus^b. l. 4. hist. cap. 26.
Melito Asianus, in Synop.
Athana^us, and In c^rm. de genu^^^s Scripturis.
Gregory Nazianzen. And Luther (if Prote stants will be content that he be in
the Church) says: The Jews lib de seruo arbitr^o contra Eras. tom. 2. Wit.
fol. 471.
place the book of Esther in the Canon, which yet, if I might be Judge, does
rather deserve to be put out of the Canon. And of Ecclesiastes he says: This
In latinis Sermonibus conuiuialibus Francof. in 8. impr. Anno 1571.
book is not full; there are in it many abrupt things: he wants boots and
spurs, that is, he has no perfect sentence, he rides upon a long reed like me
when I was in the Monastery And much more is to be read in him: who In
Germanicis colloq. Lutheri ab Aurtfabro editis Francofurti tit. de libris
veteris and noui Test. fol. 379.
says further, that the said book was not written by Solomon, but by Syrach
in the time of the Machabees, and that it is like to the Talmud (the Jews
bible) out of many books heaped into one work, perhaps out of the Library of
king Ptolomous And further he says, that Ibid. tit. de Patriarchis and Prophet
fol. 282.
he does not be lieue all to have been done as (...) is ^^t down. And he
teaches the Tit de lib. Vet. and ^out Test.
book of Job to be as it were an argument for a fable (or Comedy) to set
before us an example of Patience. And he Fol. 380.
delivers this general censure of the Prophets Books: The Sermons of no
Prophet, were written whole, and perfect, but their disciples, and Auditors
snatched, now one sentence, and then another, and so put them all into one
book, and by this means the Bible was conserved. If this were so, the Books
of the Prophets, being not written by themselves, but promiscuously, and
casually, by their Disciples, will soon be called in question. Are not these
errors of Luther, fundamental? and yet if Protestants deny the infallibility
of the Church, upon what certain ground can they disprove these Lutherian, and
Luciferian blasphemies? o godly Reformer of the Roman Church! But to return to
our English Canon of Scripture. In the New Testament by the above mentioned
rule (of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church) diverse Books of
the New Testament must be discanonized, to wit, all those of which some
Ancients have doubted, and those which diverse Lutherans have of late denied. It
is worth the observation how the before mentioned sixth Article, does specify by
name all the Books of the Old Testament which they hold for Canonical; but
those of the New, without naming any one, they shuffle over with this
generality: All the Books of the New Testame^^^ as they are commonly received,
we do receive, and account them Canonical. The mystery is easily to be
unfolded. If they had descended to particulers, they must have contradicted
some of their chiefest Brethren. As they are commonly received etc. I ask: By
whom? By the Church of Rome? Then, by the same reason they must receive diverse
Books of the Old Testament, which they reject. By Lutherans? Then with
Lutherans they may deny some Books of the New Testament. If it be the greater,
or less number of voices, that must cry up, or down, the Canon of Scripture,
our Roman Canon will prevail: and among Protestants the Certainty of their
Faith must be reduced to an Uncertain Controversy of Fact, whether the number
of those who reject, or of those others who receive such and such Scriptures,
be greater. Their faith must alter according to years, and days. When Luther
first appeared, he, and his Disciples were the greater number of that new
Church; and so this claim (Of being commonly received) stood for them, till
Zvinglius and Calvin grew to some equal, or greater number then that of the
Lutherans, and then this rule of (Commonly received) will canonize their Canon
against the Lutherans. I would gladly know, why in the former part of their
Article, they say both of the Old and New Testament: In the name of the Holy
Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church; and in the
latter part, speaking again of the New Testament, they give a far different
rule, saying: All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly
received, we do receive, and account them Canonical. This I say is a rule much
different from the former (Of whose authority was NEVER any doubt in the
Church.) For some Books might be said to be Commonly received, although they
were sometime doubted of by some. If to be Commonly received, pass for a good
rule to know the Canon of the New Testament; why not of the Old? Above all we
desire to know, upon what infallible ground, in some Books they agree with us
against Luther, and diverse principal Lutherans, and in others iump with Luther
against us? But seeing they disagree among themselves, it is evident that they
have no certain rule to know the Canon of Scripture, in assigning whereof some
of them must of necessity err, because of contradictory propositions both
cannot be true.

10. Moreover the letters, syllables, words, phrase, or matter contained in
holy Scripture have no necessary, or natural connection with divine Revelation
or Inspiration: and therefore by seeing, reading, or understanding them, we
cannot infer that they proceed from God, or be confirmed by divine authority,
as because Creatures inuolue a necessary relation, connection, and dependence on
their Creator, Philosophers may by the light of natural reason, demonstrate
the existence of one prime cause of all things. In Holy Writ there are
innumerable truths not surpassing the sphere of humane wit, which are, or may
be delivered by Pagan Writers, in the self same words and phrase as they are
in Scripture. And as for some truths peculiar to Christians, (for Example, the
mystery of the Blessed Trinity etc.) the only setting them down in Writing is
not enough to be assured that such a Writing is the undoubted word of God:
otherwise some sayings of Plato, Trismegistus, Sybills, Ovid etc. must be
esteemed Canonical Scripture, because they fall upon some truths proper to
Christian Religion. The internal light, and inspiration which directed and
moved the Authors of Canonical Scriptures, is a hidden Quality infused into
their understanding and will, and has no such particular sensible influence
into the external Writing, that in it we can discover, or from it demonstrate
any such secret light, and inspiration; and therefore to be assured that such a
Writing is divine we cannot know from it self alone, but by some other
extrinsecall authority.

11. And here we appeal to any man of Judgment, whether it be not a vain
brag of some Protestants to tell us, that they wot full well what is Scripture,
by the light of Scripture it self, or (as D. Potter word's it) by Page 14^.
that glorious beam of divine light which shines therein; even as our eye
distinguishes light from darkness, without any other help then light it self;
and as our ear knows a voice, by the voice it self alone. But this vanity is
refuted, by what we said even now; that the external Scripture has no
apparent or necessary connection with divine inspiration, or revelation. Will D.
Potter hold all his Brethren for blind men, for not seeing that glorious beam
of divine light which shines in Scripture, about which they cannot agree?
Corporal light may be discerned by it self alone, as being evident,
proportionate, and connatural to our faculty of seeing. That Scripture is
divine, and inspired by God, is a truth exceeding the natural capacity and
compass of ma^s understanding, to us obscure, and to be believed by divine
faith, which according to the Apostle is; argumentum Heb. v. 1
non apparentium; an argument, or conviction, of things not evident: and
therefore no wonder if Scripture do not manifest it self by it self alone,
but must require some other means for applying it to our understanding. Never
theles their own similitudes and instances, make against themselves. For
suppose a man had never read, or heard of Sun, Moon, Fire, Candle etc. and
should be brought to behold a light, yet in such sort as that the Agent, or
Cause Efficient from which it proceeded, were kept hidden from him; could such
an one, by only beholding the light, certainly know, whether it were produduced
by the Sun, or Moon etc? Or if one hear a voice, and had never known the
speaker, could he know from whom in particular that voice proceeded? They who
look upon Scripture, may well see, that some one wrote it, but that it was
written by divine inspiration, how shall they know? Nay, they cannot so much as
know who wrote it, unless they first know the writer, and what hand he writes:
as likewise I cannot know whose voice it is which I hear, unless I first both
know the person who speaks, and with what voice he uses to speak; and yet
even all this supposed, I may perhaps be deceived. For there may be voices so
like, and Hand so counterfaited, that men may be deceived by them, as birds
were by the grapes of that skillfull Painter. Now since Protestants affirm
knowledge concerning God as our supernatural end, must be taken from
Scripture, they cannot in Scripture alone discern that it is his voice, or
writing, because they cannot know from whom a writing, or voice proceeds,
vnle, first they know the person who speaks, or writes Nay I say more: By
Scripture alone, they cannot so much as know, that any person does in it, or by
it, speak any thing at all: because one may write without intent to signify,
or affirm any thing, but only to set down, or as it were paint, such
characters, syllables, and words, as men are wont to set copies, not caring
what the signification of the words imports; or as one transcribes a writing
which himself understands not: or when one writes what another dictates, and
in other such cases, wherein it is clear, that the writer speaks, or
signifies nothing in such his writing; and therefore by it we cannot hear, or
understand his voice. With what certainty then can any man affirm, that by
Scripture it self they can see, that the writers did inte^d to signify any
thing at all; that they were Apostles, or other Canonical Authors; that they
wrote their own sense, and not what was dictated by some other man; and
finally, and especially, that they wrote by the infallible direction of the
Holy Ghost?

12. But let us be liberal, and for the present suppose (not grant) that
Scripture is like to corporal light, by it self alone able to determine, and
move our understanding to assent; yet the similitude proves against themselves.
For light is not visible, except to such as have eyes, which are not made by
the light, but must be presupposed as produced by some other cause. And
therefore, to hold the similitude, Scripture can be clear only to those who
are endewed with the eye of faith; or, as D. Potter above cited says, to all
that have Page 141.
eyes to discern the shining beams thereof; that is, to the belieuer, as
immediately after he speaks. Faith then must not originally proceed from
Scripture, but is to be presupposed, before we can see the light thereof; and
consequently there must be some other means precedent to Scripture to beget
Faith, which can be no other then the Church.

13. Others affirm, that they know Canonical Scriptures to be such, by the
Title of the Books. But how shall we know such Inscriptions, or Titles to be
infallibly true? From this their Answer, our argument is strengthened, because
diverse Apocryphal writings have appeared, under the Titles, and Names of
sacred Authors, as the Gospel of Thomas mentioned by S Cont. Adimantum c. 17.
Augustine: the Gospel of Peter, which the Nazaraei did use, as l. 2.
haeretic fab.
Theodoret witnesses, with which Scraphion a Catholic Bishop, was for
sometime deceived, as may be read in lib. 6. cap. 10.
Eusebius, who also speaks of the Apocalypse of lib. 6. cap. 11.
Peter. The like may be said of the Ghospells of Barnabas, Bartholomew, and
other such writings specifyed by Pope Did. Can. Sancta Romana.
Gelasius. Protestants reject likewise some part of Esther and Daniel, which
bear the same Titles with the rest of those Books, as also both we, and they
hold for Apochryphall the third and fourth Books which go under the name of
Esdras, and yet both of us receive his first and second book. Wherefore Titles
are not sufficient assurances what books be Canonical: which In his defense
art. 4. Page 31.
D. Couell acknowledges in these words: It is not the word of God, which does,
or possibly can assure us, that we do well to think it is the word of God:
the first outward motion leading men so to esteem of the Scripture, is the
Authority of Gods Church, which teaches us to receive Marks Gospel, who was
not an Apostle, and to refuse the Gospel of Thomas who was an Apostle: and to
retain Lukes Gospel who saw not Christ, and to reject the Gospel of
Nicodemus who saw him.

14. Another Answer, or rather Objection they are wont to bring: That the
Scripture being a principle needs no proof among Christians. So D. Page 234
Potter. But this neither a plain begging of the question, or manifestly
untrue, and is directly against their own octrine, and practice. If they
mean, that Scripture is one of those principles, which being the first, and
the most known in all Sciences cannot be demonstrated by other Principles,
they suppose that which is in question whether there be not some principle (for
example, the Church) whereby we may come to the knowledge of Scripture If they
intend, that Scripture is a Principle, but not the first, and most known in
Christianity, then Scripture may be proved. For principles, that are not the
first, nor known of themselves may, and ought to be proved, before we can
yield assent, either to them, or to other verities depending on them. It is
repugnant to their own doctrine, and practice, in as much as they are wont to
affirm, that one part of Scripture may be known to be Canonical, and may be
interpreted by another. And since every scripture is a principle sufficient,
upon which to ground divine faith, they must grant, that one Principle may, and
sometime must be proved by another. Yea this their Answer, upon due
ponderation, falls out to prove, what we affirm. For since all Principles
cannot be proved, we must (that our labor may not be endless) come at length to
rest in some principle, which may not require any other proof. Such is
Tradition, which inuolues an evidence of fact, and from hand to hand, and age
to age, bringing us up to the times, and persons of the Apostles, and our
Savior himself comes to be confirmed by all those miracles, and other
arguments, whereby they convinced their doctrine to be true. Wherefore the
ancient Fathers avouch that we must receive the sacred Canon upon the credit of
Gods Church. S. In Synopsi.
Athanasius says, that only four Gospels are to be received, because the
Canons of the Holy, and Catholic Church have so determined. The third
Council of Can. 47.
Carthage having set down the Books of holy Scripture gives the reason,
because, We have received from our Fathers that these are to be read in the
Church. S. Augustine Cont. ep. Funaam. c. 5.
speaking of the Acts of the Apostles, says: To which book I must give
credit, if I give credit to the Gospel, because the Catholic Church does a
like reco^mend to me both these Books. And in the same place he has also
these words: I would not believe the Gospel unless the authority of the
Catholic Church did move me. A saying so plain, that Zuinglius, is forced to
cry out: Here I Tom. 1. fol. 135.
implore your equity to speak freely, whether this saying of Augustine seem
not ouerbould, or else unadvisedly to have fallen from him.

15. But suppose they were assured what Books were Canonical, this will
little avail them, unless they be likewise certain in what language they
remain uncorrupted, or what Translations be true. Calvin Instit. c. 6.. 11.
acknowledges corruption in the Hebrew Text; which if it be taken without
points, is so ambiguous, that scarcely any one Chapter, yea period, can be
securely understood without the help of some Translation. If with points: These
were after S. Hierom's time, invented by the persidious Jews, who either by
ignorance might mistake, or upon malice force the Text, to favor their
impieties. And that the Hebrew Text still retains much ambiguity, is apparent
by the disagreeing Translations of Nouellists; which also proves the Greek for
the New Testament, not to be void of doubtfulnes, as Calvin Instit. ca. 7.. 12.
confesses it to be corrupted. And although both the Hebrew and Greek were
pure, what does this help, if only Scripture be the rule of faith, and so very
few be able to examine the Text in these languages. All then must be reduced to
the certainty of Translations into other tongues, wherein no private man having
any promise, or assurance of infallibility, Protestants who rely upon Scripture
alone, will find no certain ground for their faith: as accordingly Whitaker
lib. de sancta Scriptura p. 523.
affirms: Those who understand not the Hebrew and Greek do err often, and
unavoidably.

16. Now concerning the Translations of Protestants, it will be sufficient to
set down what the laborious, exact, and judicious Author of the Protestants
Apology etc. dedicated to our late King James of famous memory, has to this
Tract. 1. Sect. 10. subd. 4. joined with tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 10. subd. 2.
purpose. To omit (says he) particulers, whose recital would be infinite, and
to touch this point but generally only, the Translation of the New Testament by
Luther is condemned by Andreas, Osiander, Keckermannus, and Zuinglius, who
says hereof to Luther. Thou do corrupt the word of God, thou art seen to be
a manifest and common corrupter of the holy Scriptures: how much are we ashamed
of thee who have hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prove thee
to be such a man? And in like manner does Luther reject the Translation of the
Zuinglians terming them in matter of divinity, fools, Asses, Antichrists,
deceauers, and of Asse-like understanding. In so much that when Proscheuerus
the Zwinglian Printer of Zurich sent him a Bible translated by the divines
there, Luther would not receive the same, but sending it back rejected it, as
the Protestant Writers Hospinians, and Lauatherus witness. The translation set
forth by Oecolampadius, and the Deuines of Basil, is reproved by Beza, who
affirms that the Basil Translation is in many places wicked, and altogether
differing from the mind of the Holy Ghost. The translation of Castalio is
condemned by Beza, as being sacrilegious, wicked, and Ethnicall. As concerning
Caluins translation, that learned Protestant Writer Carolus Molinaeus says
thereof: Calvin in his Harmony makes the Text of the Gospel to leap up and
down: he uses violence to the letter of the Gospel; and besides this adds
to the Text. As touching Beza's translation (to omit the dislike had thereof by
Seluccerus the German Protestant of the University of Iena) the foresaid
Molinaeus says of him, de facto mutat textum; he actually changes the text;
and gives further sundry instances of his corruptions: as also Castalio that
learned Caluinist, and most learned in the tongues, reprehendeth Beza in a
whole book of this matter, and says; that to note all his errors in
translation, would require a great volume. And M. Parkes says: As for the
Geneua Bibles, it is to be wished that either they may be purged from those
manifold errors, which are both in the text, and in the margent, or else utterly
prohibited. All which confirms your Majesty's grave and learned Censure, in
your thinking the Geneua translation to be worst of all; and that in the
Marginall notes annoxed to the Geneua translation, some are very partial,
untrue, seditious, etc. Lastly concerning the English Translations, the
Puritanes say: Our translation of the Psalms comprised in our Book of Common
Prayer, does in addition, subtraction, and alteration, differ from the Truth of
the Hebrew in two hundred places at the least. In so much as they do therefore
profess to rest doubtful, whether a man with a safe conscience may subscribe
thereto. And M. Caerlile says of the English Translators, that they have
depraved the sense, obscured the truth, and deceived the ignorant; that in many
places they do detort the Scriptures from the right sense. And that, they show
themselves to love darkness more then light, falsehood more then truth. And the
Ministers of Lincoln Diocese give their public testimony, terming the
English Translation: A Translation that takes away from the Text; that adds
to the Text; and that, sometime to the changing, or obscuring of the meaning of
the Holy Ghost. Not without cause therefore did your Majesty affirm, that you
could never yet see a Bible well translated into English. Thus far the Author
of the Protestants Apology etc. And I cannot forbear to mention in particular
that famous corruption of Luther, who in the Text where it is said ( Romans 3. v.
28.) We account a man to be instified by faith, without the works of the Law,
in favor of Justification by faith alone, translateth (Justified by faith A
LONE.) As likewise the falsification of Zuinglius is no less notorious, who in
the Gospels of S. Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and in S. Paul, in place of, This is
my Body; This is my blood; translates, This signifies my Body; This signifies
my blood. And here let Protestants consider duly of these points. Salvation
cannot be hoped for without true faith: Faith according to them relies upon
Scripture alone: Scripture must be delivered to most of them by the
Translations: Translations depend on the skill and honesty of men, in whom
nothing is more certain then a most certain possibility to err, and no
greater evidence of Truth, then that it is evident some of them embrace
falsehood, by reason of their contrary translations. What then remains, but
that truth, faith, salvation, and all, must in them rely upon a fallible, and
uncertain ground? How many poor souls are lamentably seduced, while from
preaching Ministers, they admire a multitude of Texts of divine Scripture, but
are indeed the false translations, and corruptions of erring men? Let them
therefore, if they will be assured of true Scriptures, fly to the always
visible Catholic Church, against which the gates of hell can never so far
prevail, as that she shall be permitted to deceive the Christian world with
false Scriptures. And Luther himself, by unfortunate experience, was at length
forced to confess thus much, saying: If the lib cont, Zwingl, de verit. corp.
Christi in Euchar.
world last longer, it will be again necessary to receive the Decrees of
Councels, and to have recourse to them, by reason of diverse interpretations of
Scripture which now reign. On the contrary side, the Translation approved by
the Roman Church, is commended even by our Adversaries: and D. Couell in
particular says, that it was used in the Church, one thousand In his answer
unto M. John Burges page 94.
three hundred years ago, and doubts not to prefer Ibid.
that Translation before others. In so much, that whereas the English
translations be many, and among themselves disagreeing, he concludes, that of
all those the approved translation authorized by the Church of England, is that
which comes nearest to the vulgar, and is commonly called the Bishops Bible.
So that the truth of that translation which we use, must be the rule to judge
of the goodness of their Bibles: and therefore they are obliged to maintain
our Translation if it were but for their own sake.

17. But does indeed the source of their manifold uncertainties stop here? No!
The chiefest difficulty remains, concerning the true meaning of Scripture: for
attayning whereof, if Protestants had any certainty, they could not disagree so
hugely as they do. Hence M. Hooker says: We are In his Preface to his Books
of Ecclesiastical Policy. Sect. 6. 26.
right sure of this, that Nature, Scripture, and Experience have all taught the
world to seek for the ending of contentions, by submitting it self unto some
judicial, and definitive sentence, whereunto neither part that contendeth may,
under any pretense, refuse to stand. D. Fields words are remarkable to this
purpose: Seeing (says he) the controversies In his Treatise of the Church In
his Epistle dedicatory to the L. Archbishop.
of Religion in our times are grown in number so many, and in nature so
intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of under standing to
examine them; what remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to search out which among all the societyes in the
world, is that blessed Company of holy Ones, that hou^^^ould of Faith, that
Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the Pillar and ground
of Truth, that so they may embrace her communion, follow her directions, and
rest in her judgment.

18. And now that the true Interpretation of Scripture, ought to be received
from the Church, it is also proved by what we have already demonstrated, that
she it is, who must declare what Books be true Scripture; wherein if she be
assisted by the Holy Ghost, why should we not believe her, to be infallibly
directed concerning the true meaning of them. Let Protestants therefore either
bring some proof out of Scripture that the Church is guided by the Holy Ghost
in discerning true Scripture, and not in delivering the true sense thereof; Or
else give us leave to apply against them, the argument, which S. Augustine
opposed to the Manicheans, in these words: I would not Cont. ep. Fund. cap. 5.
believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Church did move me. Them
therefore whom I obeyed saying, Believe the Gospel, why should I not obey
saying to me, Do not believe Manichaeus (Luther, Calvin, etc.) Choose what thou
please. If thou shall say, Believe the Catholics; They warn me not to give
any credit to you. If therefore I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If thou
say, Do not believe the Catholics, thou shall not do well in forcing me to
the faith of Manichaeus, because by the preaching of Catholics I believed the
Gospel it self. If thou say, you did well to believe them (Catholics)
commending the Gospel, but you did not well to believe them, discommending
Manichaeus; Do thou think me so very foolish, that without any reason at
all, I should believe what thou wilts, and not believe what thou wilts not? And
do not Protestants perfectly resemble these men, to whom S. Augustine spoke,
when they will have men to believe the Roman Church delivering Scripture, but
not to believe her condemning Luther, and the rest? Against whom, when they
first opposed themselves to the Roman Church, S. Augustine may seem to have
spoken no less prophetically, then doctrinally, when he said: Why should I not
most lib. de vtil. cre. cap. 14.
diligenily inquire what Christ commanded of them before all others, by whose
authority I was moved to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing? Can
thou better declare to me what he said, whom I would not have thought to have
been, or to be, if the belief thereof had been recommended by thee to me? This
therefore I believed by fame, strengthened with celebrity, consent, Antiquity.
But every one may see that you, so few, so turbulent, so new, can produce
nothing deserving authority. What madness is this? Believe them (Catholics)
that wrought to believe Christ; but learn of us what Christ said. Why I
beseech thee? Surely if they (Catholics) were not at all, and could not teach
me any thing, I would more easily persuade my self, that I were not to believe
Christ, then that I should learn any thing concerning him from any other then
them by whom I believed him. If therefore we receive the knowledge of Christ,
and Scriptures from the Church, from her also must we take his doctrine, and
the interpretation thereof.

19. But besides all this, the Scriptures cannot be Judge of Controversies, who
ought to be such, as that to him not only the learned, or Veterans, but also
the unlearned, and Nouices, may have recourse; for these being capable of
salvation, and endued with faith of the same nature with that of the learned,
there must be some universal Judge, which the ignorant may understand, and to
whom the greatest Clerks must submit. Such is the Church: and the Scripture is
not such.

20. Now, the inconveniences which follow by referring all Controversies to
Scripture alone, are very clear. For by this principle, all is finally in very
deed and truth reduced to the internal private Spirit, because there is really
no middle way betwixt a public external, and a private internal voice; and
whosoever refuses the one, must of necessity adhere to the other.

21. This Tenet also of Protestants, by taking the office of Judicature from
the Church, comes to confer it upon every particular man, who being driven
from submission to the Church, cannot be blamed if he trust himself as far
as any other, his conscience dictating, that wittingly he means not to cozen
himself, as others maliciously may do. Which inference is so manifest, that it
has extorted from diverse Protestants the open Confession of so vast an
absurdity. Hear Luther: The Governors Tom. 2. Wittemberg. fol. 375.
of Churches and Pastors of Christ's sheep have indeed power to teach, but the
sheep ought to give Judgment whether they propound the voice of Christ, or of
Aliens. Lubbertus says: As we have In lib. de principi^s Christian. dogm. lib.
6. cap. 13.
demonstrated that all public Judges may be deceived in interpreting; so we
affirm, that they may err in judging. All faithful men are prinate Judges,
and they also have power to Judge of doctrines and interpretations. Whitaker,
even of the unlearned, says: They De Sacra Scriptura page 529.
ought to have recourse unto the more learned, but in the mean time we must be
careful not to attribute to them overmuch, but so, that still we retain our
own freedom. Bilson also affirms; that, The people In his true difference
part. 2.
must be discerners, and Judges of that which is taught. This same pernicious
doctrine is delivered by Brentius, Zanchius, Cartwright, and others exactly
cited by Tract. 2. cap. 1. Sect. 1.
Brereley; and nothing is more common in every Protestants mouth, then that he
admits of Fathers, Counsels, Church etc. as far as they agree with Scripture;
which upon the matter is himself. Thus Heresy ever falls upon extremes: It
pretends to have Scripture alone for Judge of Controversies, and in the mean
time sets up as many Judges, as there are men, and women in the Christian
world. What good Statesmen would they be, who should ideate, or fancy such a
Common wealth, as these men have framed to themselves a Church? They verify
what S. Augustine obiecteth against certain Heretics. You sce lib 32. cont.
Faust.
that you go about to overthrow all authority of Scripture, and that every
man's mind may be to himself a Rule, what he is to allow, or disallow in every
Scripture.

22. Moreover what confusion to the Church, what danger to the Common wealth,
this denial of the authority of the Church, may bring, I leave to the
consideration of any Judicious, indifferent man. I will only set down some
words of D. Potter, who speaking of the Proposition of revealed Truths,
sufficient to prove him that gain says them to be an Heretic, says thus:
This Proposition page 247
of revealed truths, is not by the infallible determination of Pope, or Church;
(Pope, and Church being excluded, let us hear what more secure rule he will
prescribe) but by whatsoever means a man may be convinced in conscience of
divine revelation. If a Preacher do clear any point of faith to his Hearers;
if a private Christian do make it appear to his Neighbor, that any
conclusion, or point of faith is delivered by divine revelation of Gods word;
if a man himself (without any Teacher) by reading the Scriptures, or hearing
them read, be convinced of the truth of any such coclusion: this is a
sufficient proposition to prove him that gain says any such proof, to be an
Heretic, and obstinate opposer of the faith. Behold what goodly safe
Propounders of faith arise in place of Gods universal visible Church, which
must yield to a single Preacher, a Neighbor, a man himself if he can read, or
at least have ears to hear Scripture read. Verily I do not see, but that
every well -- governed Civil Commonwealth, ought to concur toward the
exterminating of this doctrine, whereby the Interpretation of Scripture is
taken from the Church, and conferred upon every man, who, whatsoever is
pretended to the contrary, may be a passionate seditions creature.

23. Moreover, there was no Scripture, or written word for about two thousand
years from Adam to Moses, whom all acknowledge to have been the first Author
of Canonical Scripture: And again for about two thousand years more, from
Moses to Christ our Lord, holy Scripture was only among the people of Israel;
and yet there were Gentiles endewed in those days with divine Faith, as
appears in Job, and his friends. Wherefore during so many ages, the Church
alone was the decider of Controversies, and Instructor of the faithful.
Neither did the Word written by Moses, deprive that Church of her former
Infallibility, or other qualities requisite for a Judge: yea D. Potter
acknowledges, that besides the Law, there was a living Judge in the Jewish
Church, endewed with an absolutely infallible direction in cases of moment; as
all points belonging to divine Faith are. Now, the Church of Christ our Lord,
was before the Scriptures of the New Testament, which were not written
instantly, nor all at one time, but successively upon several occasions; and
some after the decease of most of the Apostles: and after they were written,
they were not presently known to all Churches: and of some there was doubt in
the Church for some Ages after our Savior. Shall we then say, that according
as the Church by little and little received holy Scripture, she was by the like
degrees deuested of her possessed Infallibility, and power to decide
Controversies in Religion? That some Churches had one Judge of Controversies,
and others another? That with months, or years, as new Canonical Scripture
grew to be published, the Church altered her whole Rule of faith, or Judge of
Controversies? After the Apostles time, and after the writing of Scriptures,
Heresies would be sure to rise, requiring in Gods Church for their discovery
and condemnation, Infallibility, either to write new Canonical Scripture as
was done in the Apostles time by occasion of emergent heresies; or
infallibility to interpret Scriptures, already written, or, without Scripture,
by divine un written Traditions, and affistance of the holy Ghost to determine
all Controversies, as Tertullian says: The soul is De test. antm. cap. 5.
before the letter; and speech before Books; and sense before style. Certainly
such addition of Scripture, with derogation, or subtraction from the former
power and infallibility of the Church, would have brought to the world division
in matters of faith, and the Church had rather lost, then gained by holy
Scripture (which ought to be far from our tongues and thoughts,) it being
manifest, that for decision of Controversies, infallibility settled in a living
Judge, is incomparably more useful and fit, then if it were conceived, as
inherent in some inanimate writing. Is there such repugnance betwixt
Infallibility in the Church, and Existence of Scripture, that the production of
the one, must be the destruction of the other? Must the Church wax dry, by
giving to her Children the milk of sacred Writ? No, No. Her Infallibility was,
and is derived from an inexhausted fountain. If Protestants will have the
Scripture alone for their Judge, let them first produce some Scripture
affirming, that by the entering thereof, Infallibility went out of the Church.
D. Potter may remember what himself teaches; That the Church is still endewed
with infallibility in points fundamental, and consequently, that infallibility
in the Church does well agree with the truth, the sanctity, yea with the
sufficiency of Scripture, for all matters necessary to Salvation. I would
therefore gla^ly know, out of what Text he imagines that the Church by the
coming of Scripture, was deprived of infallibility in some points, and not in
others? He affirms that the Jewish Synagogue retained infallibility in her
self, notwithstanding the writing of the Old Testament; and will he so
unworthily and unjustly deprive the Church of Christ of infallibility by reason
of the New Testament? Especially of we consider, that in the Old Testament,
Laws, Ceremonies, Rites Punishments, judgments, Sacraments, Sacrifices etc.
were more particulerly, and minutely delivered to the Jews, then in the New
Testament is done; our Savior leaving the determination, or declaration of
particulers to his Spouse the Church, which therefore stands in need of
Infallibility more then the Jewish Synagogue. D. Potter, Page 24.
against this argument drawn from the power and infallibility of the
Synagogue, objects; that we might as well infer, that Christians must have one
sovereign Prince over all, because the Jews had one chief Judge. But the
disparity is very clear. The Synagogue was a type, and figure of the Church of
Christ, not so their civil government of Christian Commonwealths, or
kingdoms. The Church succeeded to the Synagogue, but not Christian Princes to
Jewish Magistrates: And the Church is compared to a house, or Heb. 13.
family; to an Cant. 2.
Army, to a 1. Cor. 10. Ephesians. 4.
body; to a Matt. 12
kingdom etc. all which require one Master, one General, one head, one
Magistrate, one spiritual King; as our blessed Savior with fiet Vnum ouile,
Joan. c. 10.
joined Vnus Pastor: One sheepefold, one Pastor. But all distinct kingdoms,
or Commonwealths, are not one Army, Family, etc. And finally, it is necessary
to salvation, that all have recourse to one Church; but for temporal weal,
there is no need that all submit, or depend upon one temporal Prince,
kingdom, or Commonwealth: and therefore our Samour has left to his whole
Church, as being One, one Law, one Scripture, the same Sacraments etc. Whereas
kingdoms have their several Laws, disterent governments, diversity of
Powers, Magistracy etc. And so this objection returns upon D. Potter. For as
in the One Community of the Jews, there was one Power and Judge, to end
debates, and resolve difficulties: so in the Church of Christ, which is One,
there must be some one Authority to decide all Controversies in Religion.

24. This discourse is excellently proved by ancient S. Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 4
in these words: What if the Apostles had not left Scriptures, ought we not to
have followed the order of Tradition which they delivered to those to whom they
committed the Churches? to which order many Nations yield assent, who believe
in Christ, having salvation written in their hearts by the spirit of God,
without letters or Ink, and diligently keeping ancient Tradition. It is easy
to receive the truth from God's Church, seeing the Apostles have most fully
deposited in her, as in a rich Storehowse, all things belonging to truth. For
what? if there should arise any contention of some small question, ought we not
to have recourse to the most ancient Churches, and from them to receive what is
certain and clear concerning the present question?

25 Besides all this, the doctrine of Protestants is destructive of it self.
For either they have certain, and infallible means not to err in
interpreting Scripture; or they have not. If not; then the Scripture (to them)
cannot be a sufficient ground for infallible faith, nor a meet Judge of
Controversies. If they have certain infallible means, and so cannot err in
their interpretations of Scriptures; then they are able with infallibility to
hear, examine, and determine all controversies of faith, and so they may be,
and are Judges of Controversies, although they use the Scripture as a Rule. And
thus, against their own doctrine, they constitute an other Judge of
Controversies, besides Scripture alone.

26. Lastly, I ask D. Potter, whether this Assertion, (Scripture alone is
Judge of all Controversies in faith,) be a fundamental point of faith, or no?
He must be well advised, before he say, that it is a fundamental point. For he
will have against him, as many Protestants as teach that by Scripture alone, it
is impossible to know what Books be Scripture, which yet to Protestants is the
most necessary and chief point of all other. D. Couell expressly says:
Doubtless In his defense of M. Hokers books art. 4. p. 31.
it is a tolerable opinion in the Church of Rome, if they go no further, as
some of them do not (he should have said as none of them do) to affirm, that
the Scriptures are holy and divine in themselves, but so esteemed by us, for
the authority of the Church. He will likewise oppose himself to those his
Brethren, who grant that Controversies cannot be ended, without some external
living authority, as we noted before. Besides, how can it be in us a
fundamental error to say, the Scripture alone is not Judge of Controversies,
seeing (notwithstanding this our belief) we use for interpreting of Scripture,
all the means which they prescribe, as Prayer, Conferring of places,
Consulting the Originals etc. and to these add the Instruction, and Authority
of God's Church, which even by his Confession cannot err damnably, and may
affoard us more help, then can be expected from the industry, learning, or wit
of any private person: and finally D Potter grants, that the Church of Rome
does not maintain any fundamental error against faith; and consequently, he
cannot affirm that our doctrine in this present Controversy is damnable. If he
answer, that their Tenet, about the Scriptures being the only Judge of
Controversies, is not a fundamental point of faith: then, as he teaches that
the universal Church may err in points not fundamental; so I hope he will
not deny, but particular Churches, and private men, are much more obnoxious to
error in such points; and in particular in this, that Scripture alone is Judge
of Controversies: And so, the very principle upon which their whole faith is
grounded, remains to them uncertain; and on the other side, for the self
same reason, they are not certain, but that the Church is Judge of
Controversies, which if she be, then their case is lamentable, who in general
deny her this authority, and in particular Controversies oppose her
definitions. Besides among public Conclusions defended in Oxford the year
1633. to the questions, Whether the Church have authority to determent
Controversies in faith; And, To interpret holy Scripture? The answer to both
is Affirmative.

27. Since then, the Visible Church of Christ our Lord is that infallible
Means whereby the reucaled Truths of Almighty God are conveyed to our
Understanding; it follows that to oppose her definitions is to resist God
himself; which blessed S. Augustine plainly affirms, when speaking of the
Controversy about Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics, he
says. This Devnit. Eccles. c. 22.
is neither openly, nor evidently read, neither by you nor by me; yet if there
were any wise man of whom our Savior had given testimony, and that he should
be consulted in this question, we should make no doubt to perform what he
should say, least we might seem to gainsay not him so much as Christ, by whose
testimony he was recommended. Now Christ bears witness to his Church. And a
little after: Whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church, does
resist our Savior himself, who by his testimony recommends the Church. I
conclude therefore with this argument. Whosoever resists that means which
infallibly proposes to us God's Word or Revelation, commits a sin, which,
unrepented, excluds salvation: But whosoever resists Christ's visible Church,
does resist that means, which infallibly proposes God's word or revelation to
us: Therefore whosoever resists Christ's visible Church, commits a sin,
which, unrepented, excluds salvation. Now, what visible Church was extant, when
Luther began his pretended Reformation, whether it were the Roman, or
Protestant Church; and whether he, and other Protestants do not oppose that
visible Church, which was spread over the world, before, and in Luthers time,
is easy to be determined, and imports every one most seriously to ponder, as
a thing whereon eternal salvation depends. And because our Adversaries do
here most insist upon the distinction of points fundamental, and not
fundamental, and in particular teach, that the Church may err in points not
fundamental, it will be necessary to examine the truth, and weight of this
evasion, which shall be done in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. That the distinction of points fundamental and not fundamental,
is neither pertinent, nor true in our present Controversy. And that the
Catholic Visible Church cannot err, in either kind of the said points.
THIS distinction is abused by Protestants to many purposes of theirs, and
therefore if it be either untrue or impertinent (as they understand, and apply
it) the whole edifice built thereon, must be ruinous and false. For if you
object their bitter and continued discords in matters of faith, without any
means of agreement; they instantly tell you (as Charity Mistaken plainly
shows) that they differ only in points not fundamental. If you convince them,
even by their own Confessions, that the ancient Fathers taught diverse points
held by the Roman Church against Protestants; they reply, that those Fathers
may nevertheless be saved, because those errors were not fundamental. If you
will them to remember, that Christ must always have a visible Church on earth,
with administration of Sacraments, and succession of Pastors, and that when
Luther appeared there was no Church distinct from the Roman, whose Communion
and Doctrine, Luther then forsook, and for that cause must be guilty of
Schism and Heresy; they have an Answer (such as it is) that the Catholic
Church cannot perish, yet may err in points not fundamental, and therefore
Luther and other Protestants were obliged to forsake her for such errors, under
pain of Damnation; as if (forsooth) it were Damnable, to hold an error not
Fundamental, nor Damnable. If you wonder how they can teach, that both
Catholics, and Protestants may be saved in their several professions; they
salve this contradiction, by saying, that we both agree in all fundamental
points of faith, which is enough for salvation. And yet, which is prodigiously
strange, they could never be induced to give a Catalogue what points in
particular be fundamental, but only by some general description, or by
referring us to the Apostles Creed, without determining, what points therein be
fundamental, or not fundamental for the matter; and in what sense, they be,
or be not such: and yet concerning the meaning of diverse points contained, or
reduced to the Creed, they differ both from us, and among themselves. And
indeed, it being impossible for them to exhibit any such Catalogue, the said
distinction of points, although it were pertinent, and true, cannot serve them
to any purpose, but still they must remain uncertain, whether or not they
disagree from one another; from the ancient Fathers; and from the Catholic
Church, in points fundamental: which is to say, they have no certainty,
whether they enjoy the substance of Christian Faith, without which they cannot
hope to be saved. But of this more hereafter.

2. And to the end, that what shall be said concerning this distinction, may be
better understood, we are to observe; that there be two precepts, which
concern the virtue of faith, or our obligation to believe divine truths. The
one is by Deuines called Affirmative, whereby we are obliged to have a positive,
explicit belief of some chief Articles of Christian faith. The other is
termed Negative, which strictly binds us not to disbelieue, that is, not to
believe the contrary of any one point sufficiently represented to our
vndersta^cing, as revealed, or spoken by Almighty God The said Affirmative
Precept (according to the nature of such commands) inioynes some act to be
performed, but not at all times, nor does it equally bind all sorts of persons,
in respect of all Objects to be believed. For objects; we grant that some are
more necessary to be explicitly, and several believed then other: either
because they are in themselves more great, and weighty; or else in regard they
instruct us in some necessary Christian duty toward God, our selves, or our
Neighbor. For persons; no doubt but some are obliged to know distinctly more
then others, by reason of their office, vocation, capacity or the like. For
times; we are not obliged to be still in act of exercising acts of faith, but
according as several occasions permit, or require The second kind of precept
called Negative, does (according to the nature of all such commands) oblige
universally, all persons, in respect of all objects; and at all times; semper
and pro semper, as Deuines speak. This general doctrine will be more clear
by examples. I am not obliged to be always helping my Neighbor, because the
Affirmative precept of Charity, binds only in some particular cases: But I
am always bound by a Negative precept, never to do him any hurt, or wrong. I
am not always bound to utter what I know to be true: yet I am obliged, never
to speak any one least untruth, against my knowledge. And (to come to our
present purpose) there is no Affirmative precept, commanding us to be at al
times actually believing any one, or all Articles of faith: But we are obliged,
never to exercise any act against any one truth, known to be revealed. All
sorts of persons are not bound explicitly, and distinctly to know all things
testified by God either in Scripture, or otherwise: but every one is obliged,
not to believe the contrary of any one point, known to be testified by God.
For that were in fact to affirm, that God could be deceived, or would deceive;
which were to over throw the whole certainty of our faith, wherein the thing
most principal, is not the point which we believe, which Deuines call the
Material Object, but the chiefest is the Motive for which we believe, to wit,
Almighty God's infallible revelation, or authority which they term the Formal
object of our faith. In two senses therefore, and with a double relation,
points of faith may be called fundamental, and necessary to salvation. The one
is taken with reference to the Affirmative Precept, when the points are of such
quality that there is obligation to know and believe them explicitly and
severally. In this sense we grant that there is difference betwixt points of
faith, which D: Potter Page 209
to no purpose labors to prove against his Adversary, who in express words
does grant and explicate Charity Mistaken c. 8. page 75.
it. But the Doctor thought good to dissemble the matter, and not say one
pertinent word in defense of his distinction, as it was impugned by Charity
Mistaken, and as it is wont to be applied by Protestants. The other sense,
according to which, points of faith may be called Fundamental, and necessary
to salvation, with reference to the Negative precept of faith, is such, that we
cannot not without grievous sin, and forfeiture of salvation, disbelieue any
one point, sufficiently propounded, as revealed by Almighty God. And in this
sense we avouch, that there is no distinction in points of faith, as if to
reject some must be damnable, and to reject others, equally proposed as God's
word, might stand with salvation. Yea the obligation of the Negative precept is
far more strict, then is that of the Affirmative, which God freely imposed, and
may freely release. But it is impossible, that he can dispense, or give leave
to disbelieue, or deny what he affirms: and in this sense, sin and
damnation are more inseparable from error in points not fundamental, then from
ignorance in Articles fundamental. All this I show by an Example, which I wish
to be particularly noted for the present, and for diverse other occasions
hereafter. The Creed of the Apostles contains diverse fundamental points of
faith, as the Deity, Trinity of Persons, Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection
of our Savior Christ etc. It contains also some points, for their matter, and
narure in themselves not fundamental, as under what Judge our Savior
suffered, that he was buried, the circumstance of the time of his Resurrection
the third day etc. But yet nevertheless, whosoever once knows that these
points are contained in the Apostles Creed, the denial of them is damnable,
and is in that sense a fundamental error: and this is the precise point of the
present question.

3. And all that hitherto has been said, is so manifestly true, that no
Protestant or Christian, if he do but understand the terms, and state of the
Question, can possibly deny it: In so much as I am amazed, that men who
otherwise are endued with excellent wits, should so enslaue themselves to their
Predecessors in Protestantisme, as still to harp on this distinction, and never
regard how impertinently, and untruly it was applied by them at first, to make
all Protestants seem to be of one faith, because forsooth they agree in
fundamental points. For the difference among Protestants, consists not in that
some believe some points, of which others are ignorant, or not bound expressly
to know (as the distinction ought to be applied;) but that some of them
disbelieue, and directly, wittingly, and willingly oppose what others do
believe to be testified by the word of God, wherein there is no difference
between points fundamental, and not fundamental; Because till points
fundamental be sufficiently proposed as revealed by God, it is not against
faith to reject them, or rather without sufficient proposition it is not
possible prudently to believe them; and the like is of points not fundamental,
which as soon as they come to be sufficiently propounded as divine Truths, they
can no more be denied, then points fundamental propounded after the same
manner. Neither will it avail them to their other end, that for preservation of
the Church in being, it is sufficient that she do not err in poins
fundamental. For if in the mean time she maintain any one Error against
Gods revelation, be the thing in it self never so small, her Error is
damnable, and destructive of salvation.

4. But D. Potter forgetting to what purpose Protestants make use of their
distinction, does finally over throw it, and yields to as much as we can
desire. For, speaking of that measure page 211.
and quantity of faith without which none can be saved, he says: It is enough
to believe some things by a vertuall faith, or by a general, and as it were, a
negative faith, whereby they are not denied or contradicted. Now our question
is in case that divine truths, although not fundamental, be denied and
contradicted; and therefore, even according to him, all such denial excludes
salvation. After, he speaks more plainly. It is true (says he) whatsoever
page 212.
is revealed in Scripture, or prepounded by the Church out of Scripture, is in
some sense fundamental, in regard of the divine authority of God, and his
word, by which it is recommended: that is, such as may not be denied, or
contradicted without Infidelity: such as every Christian is bound with
himility, and reverence to believe, whenever the knowledge thereof is offered
to him. And further: Where page 250.
the revealed will or word of God is sufficiently propounded; there he that
opposes, is convinced of error, and he who is thus convinced is an Heretic,
and Heresy is a work of the flesh which excludes from heaven. ( Gal.
5.20.21.) And hence it follows, that it is FVNDAMENTALL to a Christians
FAITH, and necessary for his salvation, that he believe all revealed Truths of
God, whereof he may be convinced that they are from God. Can any thing be
spoken more crearely or directly for us, that it is a Fundamental error to
deny any one point, though never so small, if once it be sufficiently
propounded, as a divine truth, and that there is, in this sense, no distinction
betwixt points fundamental, and not fundamental? And if any should chance to
imagine, that it is against the foundation of faith, not to believe points
Fundamental, although they be not sufficiently propounded, D. Potter does not
admit of this Page 246.
difference betwixt points fundamental, and not fundamental. For he teaches,
that sufficient proposition of revealed truth is required before a man can be
convinced, and for want of sufficient conviction he excuses the Disciples from
heresy, although they believed not our Saviors Resurrection, page 246.
which is a very fundamental point of faith. Thus then I argue out of D.
Potters own confesson: No error is damnable unless the contrary truth be
sufficiently propounded as revealed by God: Every error is damnable, if the
contrary truth be sufficiently propounded as revealed by God: Therefore all
errors are alike for the general effect of damnation, if the difference arise
not from the manner of being propounded. And what now is become of their
distinction?

5. I will therefore conclude with this Argument. According to all Philosophy
and Divinity, the Unity, and distinction of every thing follows the Nature
and Essence thereof, and therefore if the Nature and being of faith, be not
taken from the matter which a man belieues, but from the motive for which he
belieues, (which is God's word or Revelation) we must likewise affirm that the
Unity, and Diversity of faith, must be measured by God's revelation (which is
alike for all objects) and not by the smalnes, or greatness of the matter which
we believe. Now, that the nature of faith is not taken from the greatness, or
smallnes of the things believed, is manifest; because otherwise one who
belieues only fundamental points, and another who together with them, does
also believe points not fundamental, should have faith of different natures,
yea there should be as many differences of faith, as there are different points
which men believe, according to different capacities, or instruction etc. all
which consequences are absurd, and therefore we must say, that Unity in Faith
does not depend upon points fundamental, or not fundamental, but upon God's
revelation equally or unequally proposed: and Protestants pretending an Unity
only by reason of their agreement in fundamental points, do indeed induce as
great a multiplicity of faith as there is multitude of different objects which
are believed by them, and since they disagree in things Equally revealed by
Almighty God, it is evident that they forsake the very Formal motive of faith,
which is Gods revelation and consequently loose all Faith, and Unity therein.

6. The first part of the Title of this Chapter (That the distinction of points
fundamental and not fundamental in the sense of Protestants, is both
impertinent and untrue) being demonstrated; let us now come to the second: That
the Church is infallible in all her definitions, whether they concern points
fundamental, or not fundamental. And this I prove by these reasons.

7. It has been showed in the prcedent Chapter, that the Church is Judge of
Controversies in Religion; which she could not be, if she could err in any one
point, as Doctor Potter would not deny, if he were once persuaded that she is
Judge. Because if she could err in some points, we could not rely upon her
Authority and Judgment in any one thing.

8. This same is proved by the reason we alleged before, that seeing the
Church was infallible in all her definitions ere Scripture was written (unless
we will take away all certainty of faith for that time) we cannot with any show
of reason affirm, that she has been deprived thereof by the adioined comfort,
and help of sacred Writ.

9. Moreover to say, that the Catholic Church may propose any false doctrine,
makes her liable to damnable sin and error; and yet D. Potter teaches that
the Church cannot err damnably. For if in that kind of Oath, which Deuines
call Assertorium, wherein God is called to witness, every falsehood is a deadly
sin in any private person whatsoever, although the thing be of it self
neither material, nor prejudicial to any; because the quantity, or greatness
of that sin is not measured so much by the thing which is affirmed, as by the
manner, and authority whereby it is avouched, and by the injury that is offered
to Almighty God in applying his testimony to a falsehood: in which respect it is
the unanimous consent of all Deuines, that in such kind of Oaths, no leuitas
materiae, that is, smallnes of matter, can excuse from a mortal sacrilege,
against the moral virtue of Religion which respects worship due to God: If, I
say, every least falsehood be deadly sin in the foresaid kind of Oath; much
more pernicious a sin must it be in the public person of the Catholic
Church to propound untrue Articles of faith, thereby fastening Gods prime Verity
to falsehood, and inducing and obliging the world to do the same. Besides,
according to the doctrine of all Deuines, it is not only injurious to Gods
Eternal Verity, to disbelieue things by him revealed, but also to propose as
revealed truths, things not revealed: as in commonwealths it is a heinous
offense to coin either by counterfeyting the metal or the stamp, or to apply
the Kings seal to a writing counterfeyt, although the contents were supposed
to be true. And whereas, to show the detestable sin of such pernicious
fictions, the Church does most exemplarly punish all broachers of faygned
revelations, visions, miracles, prophecies etc. as in particular appears in
the Council of Sub Leon. 10. Sess. 11.
Lateran, excommunicating such persons; if the Church her self could propose
false revelations, she herself should have been the first, and chiefest
deseruer to have been censured, and as it were excommunicated by herself. For
(as they holy Ghost says in Cap. 13. v. 7.
Job) does God need your lie, that for him you may speak deceypts? And that of
the Apocalypse is most truly verifyed in fictitious revelations: If any Cap.
vlt. v. 18.
shals add to these things, God will add unto him the plagues which are written
in this Book: and D. Potter says, To add page 222.
to it (speaking of the Creed) is high presumption, almost as great as to
detract from it. And therefore to say the Church may add false Revelations, is
to accuse her of high presumption, and of pernicious error excluding salvation.

10. Perhaps some will here reply that although the Church may err, yet it is
not imputed to her for sin, by reason she does not err upon malice, or
wittingly, but by ignorance, or mistake.

11. But it is easily demonstrated that this excuse cannot serve. For if the
Church be assisted only for points fundamental, she cannot but know, that she
may err in points not fundamental, at least she cannot be certain that she
cannot err, and therefore cannot be excused from headlong and pernicious
temerity, in proposing points not fundame^tall, to be believed by Christians,
as matters of faith, wherein she can have no certainty, yea which always imply
a falsehood. For although the thing might chance to be true, and perhaps also
revealed; yet for the matter she, for her part, does always expose herself to
danger of falsehood and error; and in fact does always err in the manner in
which she does propound any matter not fundamental; because she proposes it
as a point of faith certainly true, which yet is always uncertain, if she in
such things may be deceived.

12. Besides, if the Church may err in points not fundamental, she may err
in proposing some Scripture for Canonical, which is not such: or else err in
keeping and conseruing from corruptions such Scriptures as are already believed
to be Canonical. For I will suppose, that in such Apocryphal Scripture as she
delivers, there is no fundamental error against faith, or that there is no
falsehood at all but only want of divine testification in which case D. Potter
must either grant, that it is a fundamental error, to apply divine revelation
to any point not revealed, or else must yield, that the Church may err in her
Proposition, or Custody of the Canon of Scripture: And so we cannot be sure
whether she have not been deceived already, in Books recommended by her, and
accepted by Christians. And thus we shall have no certainty of Scripture, if
the Church want certainty in all her definitions. And it is worthy to be
observed, that some Books of Scripture which were not always known to be
Canonical, have been afterward received for such; but never any one Book, or
syllable defined by the Church to be Canonical, was afterward questioned, or
rejected for Apocryphal. A sign, that God's Church is infallibly assisted by
the holy Ghost, never to propose as divine truth, any thing not revealed by
God: and that, Omission to define points not sufficiently discussed is
laudable, but Commission in propounding things not revealed, inexcusable; into
which precipitation our Savior Christ never has, nor never will permit his
Church to fall.

13. Nay, to limit the general promises of our Savior Christ made to his
Church to points only fundame^tall, namely, that the gates Matt. 16.18.
of hell shall not prevail against her: and that, the holy Ghost Joan. 16.13.
shall lead her into all truth etc. is to destroy all Faith. For we may by that
doctrine, and manner of interpreting the Scripture, limit the Infallibility of
the Apostles words, and preaching, only to points fundamental: and whatsoever
general Texts of Scripture shall be alleged for their Infallibility, they
may, by D. Potters example be explicated, and restrained to points
fundamental. By the same reason it may be further affirmed, that the Apostles,
and other Writers of Canonical Scripture, were endued with infallibility, only
in setting down points fundamental. For if it be urged, that all Scripture is
divinely inspired; that it is the word of God etc. D. Potter has affoarded you
a ready answer to say, that Scripture is inspired etc. only in those parts, or
parcels, wherein it delivers fundamental points. In this manner D. Fotherby
says: The Apostle In his Sermo^sserm: 2. page 50.
twice in one Chapter professed, that this he speaks, and not the Lord; He is
very well content that where he lacks the warrant of the express word of God,
that part of his writings should be esteemed as the word of man. D. Potter also
speaks very dangerously toward this purpose, Sect. 5. where he endeavors
to prove, that the infallibility of the Church is limited to points
fundame^tall, because as Nature, so God is neither defective in page 150.
necessaries, nor lavish in superfluities. Which reason does likewise prove
that the infallibility of Scripture, and of the Apostles must be restrained to
points necessary to salvation, that so God be not accused, as defective in
necessaries, or lavish in superfluities. In the same place he has a discourse
much tending to this purpose, where speaking of these words: The Spirit shall
lead you into all truth, and shall abide with Joan. c. 16.13. etc. 14.16.
you for ever, he says: Though that promise was Page 151.152.
directly, and primarily made to the Apostles (who had the Spirits guidance in
a more high and absolute manner, then any since them) yet it was made to them
for the behoof of the Church, and is verified in the Church Universal. But
all truth is not simply all, but all of some kind. To be led into all truths,
is to know, and believe them. And who is so simple as to be ignorant, that
there are many millions of truths (in Nature, History, Divinity) whereof the
Church is simply ignorant. How many truths lie vnrouealed in the infinite
treasury of God's wisdom, wherewith the Church is not acquainted etc. so then,
the truth it self enforces us to understand by (all truths) not simply all,
not all which God can possibly reveal, but all pertaining to the substance of
faith, all truth absolutely necessary to salvation. Mark what he says. That
promise (The spirit shall lead you into all truth,) was made directly to the
Apostles, and is verified in the universal Church, but by all truth is not
understood simply all, but all appertayning to the substance of faith, and
absolutely necessary to salvation. Does it not hence follow, that the promise
made to the Apostles of being led into all truth, is to be understood only of
all truth absolutely necessary to salvation? and consequently their preaching,
and writing, were not infallible in points not fundamental? or if the Apostles
were infallible in all things which they proposed as divine truth, the like
must be affirmed of the Church, because D. Potter teaches, the said promise to
be verifyed in the Churh. And as he limits the aforesaid words to points
fundamental; so may he restrain what other text soever that can be brought
for the universal infallibility of the Apostles or Seriptures. So he may; and
so he must, least otherwise he receive this answer of his own from himseife,
How many truths lie unrevealed in the infinite treasury of Gods wisdom,
wherewith the Church is not acquainted? And therefore to verify such general
sayings, they must be understood of truths absolutely necessary to Salvation.
Are not these fearful co^sequences? And yet D. Potter will never be able to
avoid them, till he come to acknowledge the Infallibility of the Church in all
points by her proposed as divine truths; and thus it is universally true that
she is lead into al truth, in regard that our Savior never permits her to
define, or teach any falsehood.

14. All, that with any color may be replied to this argument is; That if once
we call any one Book, or parcel of Scripture in question; although for the
matter it contain no fundamental error, yet it is of great importance and
fundamental, by reason of the consequence; because if once we doubt of one
Book received for Canonical, the whole Canon is made doubtful and
uncertain, and therefore the Infallibility of Scripture must be universal,
and not confined within compass of points fundamental.

15. I answer: For the thing it self it is very true, that if I doubt of any
one parcel of Scripture received for such, I may doubt of all: And thence by
the same parity I infer, that if we did doubt of the Churches Infallibility
in some points, we could not believe her in any one, and consequently not in
propounding Canonical Books, or any other points fundamental, or not
fundamental; which thing being most absurd, and withal most impious, we must
take away the ground thereof, and believe that she cannot err in any point
great or small: and so this reply does much more strengthen what we intended to
prove. Yet I add, that Protestants cannot make use of this reply, with any good
coherence to this their distinction, and some other doctrines which they
defend. For if D. Potter can tell what points in particular be fundamental (as
in his 7. Sect. he pretends) then he may be sure, that whenever he meets
with such points in Scripture, in them it is infallibly true, although it might
err in others: and not only true, but clear, because Protestants teach, that
in matters necessary to Salvation, the Scripture is so clear, that all such
necessary Truths are either manifestly contained therein, or may be clearly
deduced from it. Which doctrines being put together, to wit: That Scriptures
cannot err in points fundamental; that they clearly contain all such
points; and that they can tell what points in particular be such, I mean
fundamental; it is manifest, that it is sussicie^t for Salvation, that
Scripture be infallible only in points fundamental. For supposing these
doctrines of theirs to be true, they may be sure to find in Scripture all
points necessary to salvation, although it were fallible in other points of
less moment. Neither will they be able to avoid this impiety against holy
Scripture, till they renounce their other doctrines: and in particular, till
they believe that Christ's promises to his Church, are not limited to points
fundamental.

16. Besides, from the fallibility of Christ's Catholic Church in some points,
it follows, that no true Protestant learned, or unlearned, does or can with
assurance believe the universal Church in any one point of doctrine. Not in
points of lesser moment, which they call not fundamental; because they believe
that in such points she may err. Not in fundamentalls; because they must know
what points be fundamental, before they go to learn of her, least other wise
they be rather deluded, then instructed; in regard that her certain, and
infallible direction extends only to points fundamental. Now, if before they
address themselves to the Church, they must know what points are fundamental,
they learn not of her, but will be be as fit to teach, as to be taught by her:
How then are all Christians so often, so seriously, upon so dreadful menaces,
by Fathers, Scriptures, and our blessed Savior himself, counseled and
commanded to seek, to hear, to obey the Church? S. Augustine was of a very
different mind from Protestants: If (says he) the Epist. 118.
Church through the whole world practice any of these things, to dispute
whether that ought to be so done, is a most insolent madness. And in another
place he says. That which lib. 4. de Bapt. c. 24.
the whole Church holds, and is not ordained by Councils, but has always
been kept, is most rightly believed to be delivered by Apostolical authority.
The same holy Father teaches, that the custom of baptizing children cannot be
proved by Scripture alone, and yet that it is to be believed, as derived from
the Apostles. The custom of our Mother the lib. 10. de Genesi ad liter. cap.
23.
Church (says he) in baptizing infants is in no wise to be contemned, nor to
be accounted superfluous, nor is it at all to be believed, unless it were an
Apostolical Tradition. And elsewhere. Christ Sermon. 54. de verbis Apost. c. 18.
is of profit to Children baptized; Is he therefore of profit to persons not
believing? But God forbid, that I should say Infants do not believe. I have
already said, he belieues in another, who sinned in another. It is said, he
belieues, and it is of force, and he is reckoned among the faithful that are
baptized. This the authority of our Mother the Church has; against this
st^e^gth, against this invincible wall whosoever rusheth shall be crushed in
pieces. To this argument the Protestants in the Conference at Ratisbon, gave
this round answer: Nos ab Augustino See Protocoll. Monac. edit. 2. page 367.
hac in part libere dissentimus. In this we plainly disagree from Augustine.
Now if this doctrine of baptizing Infants be not fundamental in D. Potters
sense, then according to S. Augustine, the infallibility of the Church extends
to points not fundamental. But if on the other side it be a fundamental
point; then according to the same holy Doctor, we must rely on the authority
of the Church, for some fundamental point, not contained in Scripture, but
delivered by Tradition. The like argument I frame out of the same Father about
the not rebaptizing of those who were baptized by Heretics, whereof he
excellently to our present purpose speaks in this manner. We follow lib. 1.
cont. Crescon. cap. 32. and 33.
indeed in this matter even the most certain authority of Canonical
Scriptures. But how? Consider his words: Although verily there be brought no
example for this point out of the Canonical Scriptures, yet even in this point
the truth of the same Scriptures is held by us, while we do that, which the
authority of Scriptures does recommend, that so, because the holy Scripture
cannot deceive us, whosoever is afraid to be deceived by the obscurity of this
question, must have recourse to the same Church concerning it, which without
any ambiguity the holy Scripture does demonstrate to us. Among many other
points in the aforesaid words, we are to observe, that according to this holy
Father, when we prove some points not particulerly contained in Scripture, by
the authority of the Church, even in that case we ought not to be said to
believe such points without Scripture, because Scripture it self recommends
the Church; and therefore relying on her we rely on Scripture, without danger of
being deceived by the obscurity of any question defined by the Church. And else
where he says: Seeing this is De unit. Eccles. c. 19.
written in no Scripture, we must believe the testimony of the Church, which
Christ declares to speak the truth. But it seems D. Potter is of opinion
that this doctrine about not rebaptizing such as were baptized by Heretics,
is no necessary point of faith, nor the contrary an heresy: wherein he
co^tradicteth S. Augustine, from whom we have now heard, that what the Church
teaches, is truly said to be taught by Scripture; and consequently to deny
this particular point, delivered by the Church, is to oppose Scripture it
self. Yet if he will needs hold, that this point is not fundamental, we must
conclude out of S. Augustine, (as we did concerning the baptizing of Children)
that the infallibility of the Church reaches to points not fundamental. The
same Father in another place, concerning this very question of the validity of
Baptism conferred by Heretics, says: The De Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap.
23.
Apostles indeed have prescribed nothing of this, but this Custom ought to be
believed to be originally taken from their tradition, as there are many things
that the universal Church observes which are therefore with good reason
believed to have been commanded by the Apostles, although they be not written.
No less clear is S. Chrysostom for the infallibility of the Traditions of
the Church. For treating these words (2 Thessalonians. 2. Stand, and hold the
Traditions which you have learned whether by speech or by our Epistle) says:
Hence it is Hom. 4.
manifest that they delivered not all things by letter, but many things also
without writing, and these also are worthy of belief. Let us therefore account
the tradition of the Church to be worthy of belief. It is a Tradition: Seek
no more. Which words are so plain against Protestants, that Whitaker is as
plain with S. Chrysostom, saying: I answer De Sacra Script. page 678.
that this is an inconsiderate speech, and unworthy so great a Father. But let
us conclude with S. Augustine, that the Church cannot approve any error against
faith, or good manners. The Church (says he) being Ep. 119.
placed betwixt much chasse and cockle, does tolerate many things; but yet she
does not approve, nor dissemble, nor do those things which are against faith,
or good life.

17. And as I have proved that Protestants, according to their grounds, cannot
yield infallible assent to the Church in any one point: so by the same reason I
prove, that they cannot rely upon Scripture it self in any one point of says.
Not in points of lesser moment (or not fundamental,) because in such points
the Catholic Church, (according to D. Potter) and much more any Protestant
may err, and think it is contained in Scripture, when it is not. Not in
points fundamental, because they must first know what points be fundamental,
before they can be assured, that they cannot err in understanding the
Scripture, and consequently independantly of Scripture, they must foreknow all
fundamental points of faith: and therefore they do not indeed rely upon
Scripture, either for fundamental, or not fundamental points.

18. Besides, I mainely urge D. Potter, and other Protestants, that they tell
us of certain points which they call fundamental, and we cannot wrest from
them a list in particular of such points, without which no man can tell whether
or no he err in points fundamental, and be capable of salvation. And which is
most lamentable, instead of giving us such a Catalogue, they fall to wrangle
among themselves about the making of it.

19. Calvin holds the Instit. l. 4. cap. 2.
Popes Primacy. Invocation of Saints, Freewill, and such like, to be
fundamental errors overthrowing the Gospel. Others are not of his mind, as
Melancthon who says, in Cent. Ep. Theolog. cp. 74.
the opinion of himself, and other his Brethren, That the Monarchy of the
Bishop of Rome is of use, or profit to this end, that Consent of Doctrine may
be retained. An agreement therefore may easily be established in this Article of
the Popes Primacy, if other Articles could be agreed upon. If the Popes Primacy
be a means, that consent of Doctrine may be retained, first submit to it, and
other articles will be easily agreed upon. Luther also says of the Popes
Primacy, it may be borne In Assertionibus art. 36.
with^^. And why then, O Luther, did you not bear with it? And how can you,
and your followers be excused from damnable Schism, who chose rather to divide
Gods Church, then to bear with that, which you confess may be borne withal?
But let us go forward. That the doctrine of freewill, Prayer for the dead,
worshipping of Images, Worship and Invocation of Saints, Real presence,
Transubstantiation, Receiving under one kind, Satisfaction, and Merit of
works, and the Mass, be not fundamental Errors, is taught (respective) by
diverse Protestants, carefully alleged in the Protestants Tract 2. cap. 2.
Sect. 14. after F.
Apology etc. as namely by Perkins, Cartwright, Frith, Fulke, Henry Spark,
Goade, Luther, Reynolds, Whitaker, Tindall, Francis Fohnson, with others.
Contrary to these, is the Confession of the Christian faith, so called by
Protestants, which I mentioned Cap. 1. n. 4.
heertofore, wherein we are damned unto unquenchable fire, for the doctrine of
Mass, Prayer to Saints, and for the dead, Freewill, Presence at Idol-seruice,
Man's merit, with such like. Justification by says alone is by some Protestants
affirmed to be the soul of the Chark. in the Tower disputation the 4. days
conference.
Church: The only principal origin of Fox Act. Monn. page 402.
Salvation: of all other points of The Confession of Bohemia in the Harmony of
Confessions page 253.
dectrine the chiefest and weighti^st. Which yet, as we have seen, is contrary
to other Protestants, who teach that merit of good works is not a fundamental
Error; yea, diverse Protestants defend merit of good works, as may be seen in
Tract. 3. Sect. 7. under nt. n. 15.
Brereley. One would think that the Kings Supremacy, for which some blessed
men lost their lives was once among Protestants held for a Capital point; but
now D. Andrews late of Winchester in his book against Bellarmine tells us,
that it is sufficient to reckon it among true doctrines. And Wotton denies that
Protestants In his answer to a Popish pamphlet. p. 68.
Hold the Kings Supremacy to be an essential point of faith. O freedom of the
new Gospel? Hold with Catholics, the Pope; or with Protestants, the King;
or with Puritanes, neither Pope, nor King, to be Head of the Church, all is
one, you may be saved. Some, as Castalio, Vid. Gul. Reginald. Caln. Turcism.
lib. 2. cap. 6.
and the whole Sect of the Academicall Protestants, hold, that doctrines about
the Supper, Baptism, the state and office of Christ, how he is one with his
Father, the Trinity, Predestination, and diverse other such questions are not
necessary to Salvation. And (that you may observe how ungrounded, and partial
their Assertions be) Perkins teaches, that the Real presence of our Saviors
Body in the Sacrament as it is believed by Catholics, is a fundamental
error; and yet affirms the Consubstantiation of Lutherans not to be such,
notwithstanding that diverse chief Lutherans, to their Consubstantiation join
the prodigious Heresy of Vbiquitation. D. Vshher in his Sermon of the Unity of
the Catholic faith, grants Salvation to the Aethiopians, who yet with
Christian Baptism join Circumcision D. Potter Page 113.114.
cites the doctrine of some whom he terms men of great learning and
judgment: that, all who profess to love and honor JESUS CHRIST are in the
visible Christian Church, and by Catholics to be reputed Brethren. One of
these men of great learning and judgment, is Thomas Morton by D. Potter cited
in his Margent, whose love and honor to Jesus Christ, you may perceive, by his
saying, that the Churches of Arians (who denied our Savior Christ to be God)
are to be accounted the Church of God, because they do hold the foundation of
the Gospel, Morton in his Treatise of the King dome of Israel. page 94.
which is Faith in Jesus Christ the Son of God, and Savior of the world.
And, which is more, it seems by these charitable men, that for being a member
of the Church it is not necessary to believe one only God. For D. Potter page
121.
among the arguments to prove Hookers, and Mortons opinion, brings this: The
people of the ten Tribes after their defection, notwithstanding their gross
corruptions, and Idolatry, remained still a true Church. We may also, as it
seems by these men's reasoning, deny the Resurrection, and yet be members of
the true Church. For a learned man (says D. Potter page 122.
in behalf of Hookers, and Mortons opinion) was anciently made a Bishop of the
Catholic Church, though he did professedly doubt of the last Resurrection of
our bodies. Dear Sautour! What times do we behold? If one may be a member of
the true Church, and yet deny the Trinity of Persons, the God head of our
Savior, the necessity of Baptism, if we may use Circumcision, and with the
worship of God join Idolatry, wherein do we differ from Turks, and Jews? or
rather are we not worse, then either of them? If they who deny our Saviors
divinity might be accounted the Church of God, how will they deny that favor
to those ancient Heretics, who denied our Saviors true humanity? and so the
total deny all of Christ will not exclude one from being a member of the true
Church. S. Huary Comme^t. in Matt. c. 16.
makes it of equal necessity for Salvation, that we believe our Savior to be
true God, and true Man, saying: This manner of Confession we are to hold, that
we remember him to be the Son of God, and the Son of Man, because the one
without the other, can give no hope of Salvation. And yet D. Potter says of
the aforesaid doctrine of Hooker and Morton: The page 123.
Reader may be pleased to approve, or reject it, as he shall find cause. And in
another place page 253.
he shows so much good liking of this doctrine, that he explicateth and
proves the Churches perpetual Visibility by it. And in the second Edition of
his book, he is careful to declare, and illustrate it more at large then he
had done before: howsoever, this sufficiently shows, that they have no
certainty, what points be fundamental. As for the Arians in particular, the
Author whom D. Potter cites for a moderate Catholic, but is indeed a plain
Heretic, or rather Atheist, Lucian-like resting at all Religion, places
Arianisme among fundamental errors: But A moderate examination etc. c. 1.
paulo post initiu^^.
contrarily an English Protestant Divine masked under the name of Irenaeus
Philalethes, in a little Book in Latin entitled, Dissertatio de pace and
concordiae Ecclesiae, endeavors to prove, that even the denial of the
blessed Trinity may stand with salvation. Diverse Protestants have taught, that
the Roman Church, erreth in fundamental points: But D. Potter, and others
teach the contrary, which could not happen if they could agree what be
fundamental points. You brand the Donatists with the note of an Error, in the
matter page 126
and nature of it properly heretical; because they taught that the Church
remained only with them, in the part of Donatus: And yet many Protestants are
so far from holding that Doctrine to be a fundamental error, that themselves
go further, and say; that for diverse ages before Luther there was no true
visible Church at all. It is then too too apparent, that you have no agreement
in specifying, what be fundamental points; neither have you any means to
determine what they be; for if you have any such means, why do you not agree?
You tell us, the Creed contains all points fundamental, which although it
were true, yet you see it serves not to bring you to a particular knowledge,
and agreement in such points. And no wonder. For (besides what I have said
already in the beginning of this Chapter, and am to deliver more at large in
the next) after so much labor and paperspent to prove that the Creed co^taynes
all fundamental points, you conclude: It remains page 241.
very probable, that the Creed is the perfect Summary of those fundament all
truths, whereof consists the Unity of faith, and of the Catholic Church. Very
probable? Then, according to all good Logic, the contrary may remain very
probable, and so all remain as full of uncertainty, as before. The whole Rule,
say you, and the fol Judge of your faith, must be Scripture. Scripture does
indeed deliver divine Truths, but feldome does qualify them, or declare whether
they be, or be not, absolutely necessary to salvation. You fall page 215
heavy upon Charity Mistaken, because he demands a particular Catalogue of
fundamental points, which yet you are obliged in conscience to do, if you be
able. For without such a Catalogue, no man can be assured whether or no, he
have faith sufficient to Salvation. And therefore take it not in ill part, if
we again and again demand such a Catalogue. And that you may see we proceed
fairly, I will perform, on our behalf, what we request of you, and do here
deliver a Catalogue, wherein are comprised all points by us taught to be
necessary to Salvation, in these words: We are obliged, under pain of
damnation, to believe whatsoever the Catholic visible Church of Christ
proposes, as renealed by Almighty God. If any be of another mind, all
Catholics denounce him to be no Catholic. But enough of this. And I go
forward with the Infallibility of the Church in all points.

20. For, even out of your own doctrine that the Church cannot err in points
necessary to salvation, any wise man will infer, that it behooues all, who have
care of their souls, not to forsake her in any one point. 1. Because they are
assured, that although her doctrine proved not to be true in some point, yet
even according to D. Potter, the error cannot be fundamental, nor destructive
of faith, and salvation: neither can they be accused of any least imprudence in
erring (if it were possible) with the universal Church. Secondly, since she
is, under pain of eternal damnation, to be believed, and obeyed in some
things, wherein confessedly she is endewed with infallibility; I cannot in
wisdom suspect her credit in matters of less moment. For who would trust
another in matters of highest consequence, and be afraid to rely on him in
things of less moment? Thirdly, since (as I said) we are undoubtedly obliged
not to forsake her in the chiefest, or fundamental points, and that there is
no Rule to know precisely what, and how many those fundamental points be; I
cannot without hazard of my soul, leave her in any one point, lest perhaps
that point or points wherein I forsake her, prove indeed to be fundamental, and
necessary to salvation. Fourthly, that visible Church which can not err in
points fundamental, does without distinction, propound all her Definitions
concerning matters of faith to be believed under Anathema's or Curses,
esteeming all those who resist, to be deservedly cast out of her Communion, and
holding it as a point necessary to salvation, that we believe she cannot err:
wherein if she speak true, then to deny any one point in particular, which she
defines, or to affirm in general, that she may err, puts a man into state
of damnation. Whereas to believe her in such points as are not necessary to
salvation, can not endanger salvation; as likewise to remain in her Communion,
can bring no great harm, because she cannot maintain any damnable error, or
practice: but to be divided from her (she being Christ's Catholic Church) is
most certainly damnable. Fifthly, the true Church, being in lawful, and
certain possession of Superiority and Power, to command and require Obedience,
from all Christians in some things; I cannot without grievous sin withdraw my
obedience in any one, unless I evidently know, that the thing commanded comes
not within the compass of those things to which her Power extends. And who
can better inform me, how far God's Church can proceed, then God's Church
herself? Or to what Doctor can the Children, and Schoollers, with greater
reason, and more security, fly for direction, then to the Mother, and appointed
Teacher of all Christians? In following her, I shall sooner be excused, then in
cleaving to any particular Sect, or Person, teaching, or applying Scriptures
against her doctrine, or interpretation. Sixthly, the fearful examples of
innumerable persons who forsaking the Church upon pretense of her errors, have
failed, even in fundamental points, and suffered ship wrack of their
Salvation ought to deter all Christians, from opposing her in any one doctrine,
or practice: as (to omit other, both ancient and modern heresies) we see that
diverse chief Protestants, pretending to reform the corruptions of the Church,
are come to affirm, that for many Ages, she erred to death, and wholly
perished; which D. Potter, cannot deny to be a fundamental Error against that
Article of our Creed, I believe the Catholic Church, as he affirms it of the
Donatists, because they confined the universal Church within Afirica, or some
other small tract of soil. Least therefore I may fall into some fundamental
error, it is most safe for me to believe all the Decrees of that Church, which
cannot err fundamentally: especially if we add; That according to the Doctrine
of Catholic Deuines, one error in faith, whether it be for the matter if
self, great or small, destroys faith, as is hewed in Charity Mistaken; and
consequently to accuse the Church of any one Error, is to affirm, that the
lost all faith, and erred damnably: which very saying is damnable, because at
leaves Christ no visible Church on earth.

21. To all these arguments I add this demo^stration: D. Potter teaches, that
there neither was page 75.
nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no more then
from Christ himself. But if the Church of Christ can err in some points of
faith, men not only may, but must forsake her in those, (unless D. Potter will
have them to believe one thing, and profess another:) and if such errors, and
corruptions should fall out to be about the Churches Liturgy, public Service,
administration of Sacraments, and the like; they who perceive such errors,
must of necessity leave her external Communion. And therefore if once we grant
the Church may err, it follows that men may, and ought to forsake her (which
is against D. Potters own words,) or else they are inexcusable who left the
Communion of the Roman Church, under pretense of Errors, which they grant, not
to be fundamental. And if D. Potter think good to answer this argument, he
must remember his own doctrine to be, that even the Catholic Church may err
in points not fundamental.

22. An other argument for the universal infallibility of the Church, I take
out of D. Potters own words. If (says he) we page 97.
did not dissent in some opinions from the present Roman Church, we could not
agree with the Church truly Catholic. These words cannot be true, unless he
presuppose that the Church truly Catholic, cannot err in points not
fundamental. For if she may err in such points, the Roman Church which he
affirms to err only in points not fundamental, may agree with the Church
truly Catholic, if she likewise may err in points not fundamental. Therefore
either he must acknowledge a plain contradiction in his own words, or else
must grant, that the Church truly Catholic cannot err in points not
fundamental, which is what we intended to prove.

23. If Words cannot persuade you, that in all Controversies you must rely upon
the infallibility of the Church; at least yield your assent to Deeds. Hither to
I have produced Arguments drawn, as it were, ex natura rei, from the Wisdom,
and Goodness of God, who cannot fail to have left some infallible means to
determine Controversies, which, as we have proved, can be no other, except a
Visible Church, infallible in all her Definitions. But because both Catholics
and Protestants, receive holy Scripture, we may thence also prove the
infallibility of the Church in all matters which concern Faith and Religion.
Our Savior speaks clearly: The gates of Hell Matt. 16.
shall not prevail against her. And, I will ask my Joan. 14.
Father, and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for
ever, the Spirit of truth. And, But when he, the Spirit of Joan. 16.
truth comes, he shall teach you all truth. The Apostle says, that the Church
is, the Pillar, and ground 1. Tim. cap. 3.
of Truth. And, He gave, some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some
Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the
Saints, unto the work of the Ministry, unto the edifying of the body of
Christ: until we meet all into the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son
of God, into a perfect man, into the measure of the age of the fulness of
Christ: that now we be not Children wavering, and carried about with every wind
of dectrine in the wiekednes of men, in craftines, to the circumuention Ephesians.
4.
of Error. All which words seem clearly enough to prove, that the Church is
universally infallible, without which, Unity of faith could not be conserved
against every wind of Doctrine: And yet Doctor Potter page 151.153.
limits these promises and privileges to fundamental points, in which he
grants the Church cannot err. I urge the words of Scripture, which are
universal, and do not mention any such restraint. I allege that most
reasonable, and received Rule, that Scripture is to be understood literally, as
it sounds, unless some manifest absurdity force us to the contrary. But all
will not serve, to accord our different interpretations. In the mean time
diverse of Doctor Potters Brethren step in, and reject his limitation, as over
large, and some what tasting of Papistry: And therefore they restrain the
mentioned Texts, either to the Infallibility which the Apostles, and other
sacred Writers had in penning of Scripture: or else to the invisible Church of
the Elect; and to them, not absolutely, but with a double restriction, that
they shall not fall damnably, and finally; and other men have as much right as
these, to interpose their opinion, and interpretation. Behold we are three at
debate about the self same words of Scripture: We confer diverse places and
Text: We consult the Originals: We examine Translations: We endeavor to pray
heartily: We profess to speak sincerely; To seek nothing but truth and
salvation of our own souls, and that of our Neighbors; and finally we use
all those means, which by Protestants themselves are prescribed for finding
out the true meaning of Scripture: Nevertheless we neither do, or have any
possible means to agree, as long as we are left to our selves; and when we
should chance to be agreed, the doubt would still remain whether the thing it
self be a fundamental point or no: And yet it were great impiety to imagine
that God, the Lover of souls, has left no certain infallible means, to
decide both this, and all other differences arising about the interpretation of
Scripture, or upon any other occasion. Our remedy therefore in these contentions
must be, to consult, and hear God's Visible Church, with submissiue
acknowledgment of her Power, and Infallibility in whatsoever she proposes as a
revealed truth: according to that divine advice of S. Augustine in these words.
If at length De vtil. pred. oap. 8.
thou seem to be sufficiently tossed, and have a desire to put an end to thy
pains, follow the way of the Catholic Discipline, which from Christ himself
by the Apostles has come down even to us, and from us shall descend to all
posterity. And though I conceive that the distinction of points fundamental,
and not fundamental has now been sufficiently confuted; yet that no shadow
of difficulty may remain, I will particulerly refell a common saying of
Protestants, that it is sufficient for salvation, to believe the Apostles
Creed, which they hold to be a Summary of all fundamental points of Faith.

CHAP. IIII. To say, that the Creed contains all points necessarily to be
believed, is neither pertinent to the Question in hand, nor in it self true.
ISAY, neither pertinent, nor true. Not pertinent: Because our Question is not,
what points are necessary to be explicitly believed; but what points may be
lawfully disbelieued, or rejected after sufficient Proposition that they are
divine Truths. You say, the Creed co^taynes all points necessary to be
believed. Be it so. But does it likewise contain all points not to be
disbelieued? Certainly it does nor. For how many truths are there in holy
Scripture not contained in the Creed, which we are not obliged distinctly, and
particulerly to know and believe, but are bound under pain of damnation not to
reject, as soon as we come to know that they are found in holy Scripture? And
we having already showed, that whatsoever is proposed by Gods Church as a point
of faith, is infallibly a truth revealed by God; it follows that whosoever
denies any such point, opposes Gods sacred testimony, whether that point be
contained in the Creed, or no. In vain then was your care employed to prove
that al points of faith necessary to be explicitly believed, are contained in
the Creed. Neither was that the Catalogue which Charity Mistaken demanded. His
demand was (and it was most reasonable) that you would once give us a list of
all fundamentals, the denial whereof destroys Salvation; whereas the denial
of other points not fundamental, may stand with salvation, although both these
kinds of points be equally proposed as revealed by God. For if they be not
equally proposed, the difference will arise from diversity of the Proposal,
and not of the Matter fundamentull, or not fundamental. This Catalogue only,
can show how far Protestants may disagree without breach of Unity in faith;
and upon this many other matters depend, according to the ground of
Protestants. But you will never adventure to publish such a Catalogue. I say
more: You cannot assign any one point so great, or fundamental, that the
denial thereof will make a man an Heretic, if it be not sufficiently
propounded, as a divine Truth: Nor can you assign any one point so small, that
it can without heresy be rejected, if once it be sufficiently represented as
revealed by God.

2. Nay, this your instance in the Creed, is not only impertinent but directly
against you. For, all points in the Creed are not of their own nature
fundamental, as I showed Chap. 3. n. 3.
before: And yet it is damnable to deny any one point contained in the Creed.
So that it is clear, that to make an error damnable, it is not necessary that
the matter be of it self fundamental.

3. Moreover you cannot ground any certainty upon the Creed it self, unless
first you presuppose that the authority of the Church is universally
infallible, and consequently that it is damnable to oppose her declarations,
whether they concern matters great, or small, contained, or not contained in
the Creed. This is clear. Because we must receive the Creed it self upon the
credit of the Church, without which we could not know that there was any such
thing as that which we call the Apostles Creed: and yet the arguments whereby
you endeavor to prove, that the Creed contaynes all fundamental points, are
grounded upon supposition, that the Creed was made either by the Apostles
themselves, or by the page 216
Church of their times from them: which thing we could not certainly know, if
the succeeding and still continued Church, may err in her Traditions: neither
can we be assured, whether all fundamental Articles which you say were out of
the Scriptures, summed, and contracted into the Apostles Creed, were faithfully
summed and co^tracted, and not one pretermitted, altered, or mistaken, unless
we undoubtedly know that the Apostles composed the Creed; and that they
intended to contract all fundamental points of faith into it; or at least that
the Church of their times (for it seems you doubt whether indeed it were
composed by the Apostles themselves) did understand the Apostles aright; and
that the Church of their times, did intend that the Creed should contain all
fundamental points. For if the Church may err in points not fundamental, may
she not also err in the particulers which I have specifyed? Can you show it to
be a fundamental point of faith, that the Apostles intended to co^prize all
points of faith necessary to Salvation in the Creed? Your self say no more
then that it is very page 241.
probable; which is far from reaching to a fundamental point of faith. Your
probability is grounded upon the Judgment of Antiquity, and even of the Roman
Doctors, as you say in the same place. But if the Catholic Church may err,
what certainty can you expect from Antiquity, or Doctors? Scripture is your
total Rule of faith. Cite therefore some Text of Scripture, to prove that the
Apostles, or the Church of their times composed the Creed, and composed it with
a purpose that it shonld contain all fundamental points of faith. Which being
impossible to be done, you must for the Creed it self rely upon the
infallibility of the Church.

4. Moreover, the Creed consists not so much in the words, as in their sense
and meaning. All such as pretend to the name of Christians, recite the Creed,
and yet many have erred fundamentally, as well against the Articles of the
Creed as other points of faith. It is then very frivolous to say, the Creed
contains all fundamental points, without specifying, both in what sense the
Articles of the Creed be true, and also in what true sense, they be
fundamental. For, both these taskes, you are to perform, who teach that all
truth is not fundamental: and you do but delude the ignorant, when you say,
that the Creed, taken in a Catholic page 216.
sense, comprehends all points fundamental; because with you, all Catholic
sense is not fundamental: for so it were necessary to salvation that all
Christians should know the whole Scripture, wherein every least point has a
Catholic sense. Or if by Catholic sense, you understand that sense which is
so universally to be known, and believed by all, that whosoever fails therein
cannot be saved, you trifle and say no more then this: All points of the Creed
in a sense necessary to salvation, are necessary to salvation. Or: All points
fundamental, are fundamental. After this manner it were an easy thing to make
many true Prognostications, by saying it will certainly rain, when it
raineth. You say the Creed page 216.
was opened and explaned, in some parts in the Creeds of Nice etc. but how
shall we understand the other parts, not explaned in those Creeds?

5. For what Article in the Creed is more fundamental, or may seem more
clear, then that, wherein we believe JESUS CHRIST to be the Mediator,
Redeemer, and Savior of mankind, and the founder, and foundation of a
Catholic Church expressed in the Creed? And yet about this Article, how many
different doctrines are there, not only of old Heretics, as Arius, Nestorius,
Eutiches etc. but also of Protestants, partly against Catholics, and partly
against one another? For the said maine Article of Christ's being the only
Savior of the world etc. according to different senses of disagreeing Sects,
does inuolue these, and many other such questions; That Faith in JESUS CHRIST
does justify alone; That Sacraments have no efficiency in Justification; That
Baptism does not avail Infants for salvation; unless they have an Act of
faith; That there is no Sacerdotall Absolution from sins; That good works
proceeding from God's grace are not meritorious; That there can be no
Satisfaction for the temporal punishment due to sin after the guilt, or
offense is pardoned; No, Purgatory; No Prayers for the dead; No Sacrifice of
the Mass; No Invocation; No Mediation, or intercession of Saints; No inherent
Justice: No supreme Pastor, yea no Bishop by divine Ordinance; No Real
presence, no Transubstantiation, with diverse others. And why? Because
(forsooth) these Doctrines derogate from the Titles of Mediator, Redeemer,
Advocate, Foundation etc. Yea and are against the truth of our Saviors humane
nature, if we believe diverse Protestants, writing against Transubstantiation.
Let then any judicious man consider, whether Doctor Potter, or others do
really satisfy, when they send men to the Creed for a perfect Catalogue, to
distinguish points fundamental, from those which they say are not
fundamental. If he will speak indeed to some purpose, let him say: This
Article is understood in this sense: and in this sense it is fundamental. That
other is to be under stood in such a meaning; yet according to that meaning, it
is not so fundamental, but that men may disagree, and deny it without
damnation. But it were no policy for any Protestant to deal so plainly.

6. But to what end should we use many arguments? Even your self are forced to
limit your own Doctrine, and come to say, that the Creed is a perfect
Catalogue of fundamental points, taken as it was further opened and explained
in some parts (by occasion of emergent Horisies) in the other Catholic Creeds
of Nice, Constantinople, page 216.
Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Athanasius. But this explication, or restriction
overthrows your Assertion. For as the Apostles Creed was not to us a
sufficient Catalogue, till it was explained by the first Council, nor then
till it was declared by another etc. so now also, as new Heresies may arise, it
will need particular explanation against such emergent errors; and so it is not
yet, nor ever will be of it self alone, a particular Catalogue, sufficient to
distinguish betwixt fundamental, and not fundamental points.

7. I come to the second part: That the Creed does not contain all maine and
principal points of faith. And to the end we may not strive about things
either granted by us both, or nothing concerning the point in question, I must
premise these observations.

8. First: That it cannot be denied, but that the Creed is most full and
complete, to that purpose for which the holy Apostles, inspired by God, meant
that it should serve, and in that manner as they did intend it, which was, not
to comprehend all particular points of faith, but such general heads, as were
most befitting, and requisite for preaching the faith of Christ to Jews, and
Gentiles, and might be briefly, and compendiously set down, and easily
learned, and remembered. And therefore, in respect of Gentiles, the Creed does
mention God, as Creator of all things; and for both Jews and Gentiles, the
Trinity, the Messiah, and Savior, his birth, life, death, resurrection, and
glory, from whom they were to hope remission of sins, and life everlasting,
and by whose sacred Name they were to be distinguished from all other
professions, by being called Christians. According to which purpose S. Thomas
of Aquine 2.2. g. 1. art. 8.
does distinguish all the Articles of the Creed into these general heads: That
some belong to the Majesty of the Godhead; others to the Mystery of our Savior
Christ's Humane nature: Which two general objects of faith, the holy Ghost does
express, and conioyne Joan. 17. Haec est vita aterna etc. This is life
everlasting, that they know thee true GOD, and whom thou have sent JESUS
CHRIST. But it was not their meaning to give us as it were a course of
Divinity, or a Catechism, or a particular Expression of all points of Faith,
leaving those things to be performed, as occasion should require, by their own
word or writing, for their time, and afterward by their Successors in the
Catholic Church. Our question then is not, whether the Creed be perfect, as
far as the end for which it was composed, did require; For we believe and are
ready to give our lives for this: but only we deny, that the Apostles did
intend to comprize therein all particular points of belief, necessary to
salvation, as even by D. Potters own page 235.215.
confession, it does not comprehend agenda, or things belonging to practice, as
Sacraments, Commandments, the Acts of Hope, and duties of Charity, which we
are obliged not only to practice, but also to beliene by divine infallible
faith. Will he therefore infer that the Creed is not perfect, because it
contaynes not all those necessary, and fundamental Objects of faith? He will
answer. No: because the Apostles intended only to express credenda, things
to be believed, not practiced. Let him therefore give us leave to say, that the
Creed is perfect, because it wants none of those Objects of belief which
were intended to be set down, as we explicated before.

9. The second observation is, that to satisfy our question what points in
particular be^ fundamental, it will not be sufficient to alledg the Creed,
unless it contain all such points either expressly and immediately; or else in
such manner, that by evident, and necessary consequence they may be deduced
from Articles both clearly, and particulerly contained therein. For if the
deduction be doubtful, we shall not be sure, that such Conclusions be
fundamental: or if the Articles themselves which are said to be fundamental,
be not distinctly, and particulerly expressed, they will not serve us to know,
and distinguish all points fundamental, from those which they call, not
fundamental. We do not deny, but that all points of faith, both fundamental,
and not fundamental, may be said to be contained in the Creed in some sense;
as for example, implicitly, generally, or in some such inuolued manner. For
when we explicitly believe the Catholic Church, we do implicitly believe
whatsoever she proposes as belonging to faith. Or else by way of reduction,
that is, when we are once instructed in the belief of particular points of
faith, not expressed, nor by necessary consequence deducible from the Creed; we
may afterward, by some analogy, or proportion, and resemblance, reduce it to
one, or more of those Articles which are explicitly contained in the Symbol.
Thus S. Thomas the Cherubim among Deuines teaches 2. 23 q. ^^ art. 8. ad 6.
that the miraculous existence of our Blessed Saviors body in the Eucharist,
as likewise all his other miracles, are reduced to Gods Omnipotency, expressed
in the Creed. And Doctor Potter says: The Eucharist page 2^^.
being a seal of that holy Union which we have with Christ our head, by his
Spirit and Faith, and with the Saints his members by Charity, is evidently
included in the Communion of Saints. But this reductiue way, is far from
being sufficient to infer out of the Articles of Gods Omnipotency, or of the
Communion of Saints, that our Saviors body is in the Eucharist, and much less
whether it be only in figure, or else in reality; by Transubstantiation, or
Consubstantiation etc. and least of all, whether or no these points be
fundamental. And you hyperbolize, in saying, the Eucharist is evidently
included in the Communion of Saints, as if there could not have been, or was
not a Communion of Saints, before the Blessed Sacrament was instituted. Yet it
is true, that after we know, and believe, there is such a Sacrament, we may
refer it to some of those heads expressed in the Creed, and yet so, as S.
Thomas referrs it to one Article, and D. Potter to another; and in respect of
different analogies or effects, it may be referred to several Articles. The
like I say of other points of faith, which may in some sort be reduced to the
Creed, but nothing to D. Potters purpose: But contrarily it shows, that your
affirming such and such points to be fundamental or not fundamental, is
merely arbitrary, to serve your turn, as necessity, and your occasions may
require. Which was an old custom amongst Heretics, as we read in De peccat.
Orig. cont. Pelag. l. 2. cap. 22.
S. Augustine. Pelagius and Celestius, desiring fraudulently to avoid the
hateful name of Heresies, affirmed that the question of Original Sin may be
disputed without danger of faith. But this holy Father affirms that it belongs
to the foundation of faith. We may (says he) endure a disputant who erres in
other questions not yet diligently examined, not yet diligently established by
the whole authority of the Church, their error may be borne with: but it must
not pass so far as to attempt to shake the foundation of the Church. We see S.
Augustine places the being of a point fundamental or not fundamental, in that
it has been examined, and established by the Church, although the point of
which he speaks, namely Original Sin, be not contained in the Creed.

10. Out of that which has been said, I infer, that Doctor Potters pains
in alleging Catholic Doctors, the ancient Fathers, and the Council of
Trent, to prove that the Creed contains all points of faith, was needless,
since we grant it in manner aforesaid. But Doctor Potter, can not in his
conscience believe, that Catholic Deuines, or the Council of Trent, and the
holy Fathers did intend, that all points in particular which we are obliged to
believe, are contained explicitly in the Creed; he knowing well enough, that
all Catholics hold themselves obliged, to believe all those points which the
said Council defines to be believed under an Anathema, and that all Christians
believe the commandments, Sacraments etc. which are not expressed in the Creed.

11. Neither must this seem strange. For who is ignorant, that Summaries,
Epitom'es, and the like brief Abstracts, are not intended to specify all
particulars of that Science, or Subject to which they belong. For as the Creed
is said to contain all points of Faith; so the Decalogue comprehends all
Articles, (as I may term them) which concern Charity, and good life: and yet
this cannot be so understood, as if we were disobliged from performance of any
duty, or the eschewing of any vice, unless it be expressed in the ten
Commandments. For, (to omit the precepts of receiving Sacraments, which belong
to practice, or manners, and yet are not contained in the Decalogue) there are
many sins, even against the Law of nature, and light of reason, which are not
contained in the ten Commandments, except only by similitude, analogy,
reduction, or some such way. For example, we find not expressed in the
Decalogue, either diverse sins, as Gluttony, Drunkenness, Pride, Sloth,
Covetousness in desiring either things superfluous, or with too much greedines;
or diverse of our chief obligations, as Obedience to Princes, and all
Superiors, not only Ecclesiastical but also Civil, whose Laws Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin, and some other Protestants do dangerously affirm not to
oblige in conscience, and yet these men think they know the ten Commandments:
as likewise diverse Protestants defend Usury, to be lawful; and the many
Treatises of Ciuilians, Canonists, and Casuists, are witnesses, that diverse
sins against the light of reason, and Law of nature are not distinctly
expressed in the ten Commandments; although when by other diligences they are
found to be unlawful, they may be reduced to some of the Commandments, and yet
not so evidently, and particularly, but that diverse do it in diverse manners.

12. My third Observation is: That our present question being, whether or no
the Creed contain so fully all fundamental points of faith, that whosoever do
not agree in all, and every one of those fundamental Articles, cannot have the
same substance of faith, nor hope of Salvation; if I can produce one, or more
points, not contained in the Creed, in which if two do not agree, both of them
cannot expect to be saved, I shall have performed as much as I intend; and D.
Potter must seek out some other Catalogue for points fundamental, then the
Creed. Neither is it material to the said purpose, whether such fundamental
points rest only in knowledge, and speculation or belief, or else be further
referred to work and practice. For the Habit, or Virtue of Faith, which
inclines and enableth us to believe both speculatiue, and practical verities,
is of one and the self same nature, and essence. For example, by the same
Faith, whereby I speculatiuely believe there is a God, I likewise believe, that
he is to be adored, served, and loved, which belong to practice. The reason is,
because the Formal Object, or motive, for which I yield assent to those
different sorts of material objects, is the same in both, to wit, the
revelation, or word of God. Where by the way I note, that if the Unity, or
Distinction, and nature of Faith, were to be taken from the diversity of things
revealed, by one Faith I should believe speculatiue verities, and by another
such as tend to practice, which I doubt whether D. Potter himself will admit.

13. Hence it follows, that whosoever denies any one maine practical
revealed truth, is no less an Heretic, then if he should deny a point
resting in belief alone. So that when D. Potter, (to avoid our argument, that
all fundamental points are not contained in the Creed, because in it there is
no mention of the Sacraments, which yet are points of so maine importance, that
Protestants make the due administration of them to be necessary and essential
to constitute a Church) answers, that the Sacraments are to be page 235.
reckoned, rather among the Agenda of the Church, then the Credenda; they are
rather divine rites and ceremonies, then Doctrines, he either grants what we
affirm, or in effect says; Of two kinds of revealed truths, which are
necessary to be believed, the Creed contains one sort only, ergo, it contains
all kind of revealed truths necessary to be believed. Our question is not, de
nomine but re; not what be called points of Faith, or of practice, but what
points indeed be necessarily to be believed, whether they be termed Agenda, or
Credenda: especially the chiefest part of Christian perfection consisting more
in Action, then in barren Speculation; in good works, then bare belief; in
doing, then knowing. And there are no less contentions concerning practical,
then speculatiue truths: as Sacraments, obtaining remission of sin,
Invocation of Saints, Prayers for dead, Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament,
and many other: all which do so much the more import, as on them, beside right
belief, does also depend our practice, and the ordering of our life. Though D.
Potter could therefore give us (as he will never be able to do) a minute, and
exact Catalogue of all truths to be believed; that would not make me able
enough to know, whether or no I have faith sufficient for salvation; till he
also did bring in a particular List, of all believed truths, which tend to
practice, declaring which of them be fundamental, which not, that so every man
might know whether he be not in some Damnable Error, for some Article of
faith, which further might give influence into Damnable works.

14. These Observations being premised, I come to prove, that the Creed does
not contain all points of Faith necessary to be known, and believed. And, to
omit that in general it does not tell us, what points be fundamental, or not
fundamental, which in the way of Protestants, is most necessary to be known;
in particular, there is no mention of the greatest Evils, from which man's
calamity proceeded, I mean, the sin of the Angels, of Auam, and of Original
sin in us: not of the greatest good from which we expect all good, to wit,
the necessity of Grace for all works tending to piety. Nay, there is no mention
of Angels, good, or bad. The meaning of that most general head (Oportet
accedentem etc. It behooues Heb. 11.6.
him that comes to God, to believe that he is, and is a remunerator,) is
questioned, by the denial of Merit, which makes God, a Giver, but not a
Rewarder. It is not expressed whether the Article of Remission of sins be
understood by faith alone, or else may admit the efficiency of Sacraments.
There is no mention of Ecclesiastical, Apostolical, Divine Traditions, one
way or other; or of holy Scriptures in general, and much less of every book
in particular; nor of the Name, Nature, Number, Effects, Matter, Form,
Minister, Intention, Necessity of Sacraments, and yet the due administration of
Sacraments, is with Protestants an essential Note of the Church. There is
nothing for Baptism of Children, nor against Rebaptization. There is no
mention in favor, or against the Sacrifice of the Mass, of Power in the
Church to institute Rites, Holy days etc. and to inflict Excommunication, or
other Censures: of Priesthood, Bishops, and the whole Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, which are very fundamental points; of S. Peter's Primacy, which to
Calvin seems a fundamental error; nor of the possibility, or impossibility
to keep Gods commandments; of the procession of the holy Ghost from the Father
and the Son; of Purgatory, or Prayer for the dead, in any sense: And yet D.
Potter does not deny, but that Aerius was esteemed an Heretic, for denying
page 35.
all sort of Commemoration for the dead. Nothing of the Churches Visibility or
Inuisibility, Fallibility or Infallibility; nor of other points controuerted
betwixt Protestants themselves, and between Ptotestants and Catholics, which
to D. Potter seem so heinous corruptions, that they cannot without damnation
join with us in profession thereof. There is no mention of the Cessation of the
Old Law, which yet is a very maine point of faith. And many other might be also
added.

15. But what need we labor to specify particulars? There are as many
importa^t points of faith not expressed in the Creed, as since the worlds
beginning now, and for all future times, there have been, are, and may be
innumerable, gross, damnable, Heresies, whose contrary truths are not
contained in the Creed. For, every fundamental Error must have a contrary
fundamental truth; because of two contradictory propositions, in the same
degree, the one is false, the other must be true. As for example, if it be a
damnable error to deny the Bl. Trinity, or the Godhead of our Savior, the
belief of them must be a truth necessary to salvation; or rather, if we will
speak properly, the Error is damnable, because the opposite Truth is
necessary, as death is frightfull, because life is sweet; and according to
Philosophy, the Privation is measured by the Form to which it is repugnant. If
therefore the Creed contain in particular all fundamental points of faith, it
must explicitly, or by clear consequence, comprehend all truths opposite to
innumerable Heresies of all Ages past, present, and to come, which no man in
his wits will affirm it to do.

16. And here I cannot omit to signify how you page 255.
applaude the saying of D. Usher. That in those Propositions which without all
controversy are universally received in the whole Christian world, so much
Truth is contained, as being joined with holy Obedience may be sufficient to
bring a man to everlasting salvation; Neither have we cause to doubt, but that
as many as walk according to this Rule (neither overthrowing that which they
have builded, by superinducing any damnable heresies thereupon, nor otherwise
vi^iating their holy faith with a lewd and wicked con^ersation) peace shall be
upon them, and upon the Israel of God. Now, D. Potter knows, that the Mystery
of the B. Trinity is not universally received in the whole Christian world, as
appears in very many Heretics, in Polony, Hungary, and Transiluania, and
therefore according to this Rule of D. Usher, approved by D. Potter, the denial
of the B. Trinity, shall not exclude salvation.

17. Let me note by the way, that you might easily have espied a foul
contradiction in the said words of D. Usher, by you recited, and so much
applauded. For he supposes, that a man agrees with other Churches in belief,
which joined with holy Obedience may bring him to everlasting salvation, and
yet, that he may superinduce damnable heresies. For how can he superinduce
damnable heresies, who is supposed to believe all Truths necessary to
salvation? Can there be any damnable heresy, unless it contradict some
necessary truth, which cannot happen in one who is supposed to believe all
necessary Truths? Besides if one believing all fundamental Articles in the
Creed, may superinduce damnable heresies; it follows that the fundame^tall
truths contrary to those damnable heresies, are not contained in the Creed.

18. According to this Model of D. Potters foundation, consisting in the
agreement of scarcely one point of faith; what a strange Church would he make
of men concurring in some one of few Articles of belief, who yet for the rest
should be holding conceyts plainly contradictory: so patching up a Religion of
me^ who agree only in the Article, that Christ is our Savior, but for the
rest, are like to the parts of a Chimaera, having the head of a man, the neck
of a horse, the shoulders of an Ox, the foot of a Lion etc. I wrong them not
herein. For in good Philosophy there is greater repugnancy between assent and
dissent, affirmation and negation, est est, non non (especially when all these
contrradictories pretend to rely upon one and the self same Motive, the
ininfallible Truth of Almighty God) then between the integrall parts, as head,
neck, etc. of a man, horse, lion, etc. And thus Protestants are far more
bold to disagree even in matters of faith, then Catholic Deuines in questions
merely Philosophical, or not determined by the Church. And while thus they
stand only upon fundamental Articles, they do by their own confession destroy
the Church, which is the house of God. For the foundation alone of a house, is
not a house, nor can they in such an imaginary Church any more expect
Salvation, then the foundation alone of a house is fit to affoard a man
habitation.

19. Moreover, it is most evident that Protestants by this Chaos rather then
Church, do give unavoidable occasion of desperation to poor souls. Let some
one who is desirous to save his soul repair to D. Potter, who maintaynes
these grounds, to know upon whom he may rely, in a matter of so great
consequence; I suppose the Doctors answer will be: Upon the truly Catholic
Church. She cannot err danably. What understand you by the Catholic Church?
Cannot general Counsels, which are the Church representative, err? Yes, they
may weakly, or page 167.
wilfully misapply, or misunderstand, or neglect Scripture, and so err
damnably. To whom then shall I go for my particular instruction? I cannot
confer with the united body of the whole Church about my particular
difficulties, as your self affirms, that the Catholic Church cannot be told
page 27.
of private injuries. Must I then consult with every particular person of the
Catholic Church? So it seems, by what you write in these words: The whole
page 150.151.
militant Church (that is all the members of it) cannot possibly err, either
in the whole faith, or any necessary Article of it. You say, M. Doctor, I
cannot for my instruction acquaint the universal Church with my particular
scruples: You say, the Prelates of Gods Church meeting in a lawful general
Council may err damnably: It remaynes then, that for my necessary instruction,
I must repair to every particular member of the universal Church spread over
the face of the earth: and yet you teach that the promises page 151.
which our Lord has made unto his Church for his assistance, are intended not
to any particular persons or Churches, but only to the Church Catholic, with
which (as I said) it is impossible for me to confer. Alas, O most uncomfortable
Ghostly Father, you drive me to desperation. How shall I confer with every
Christian soul, man and woman, by sea and by land, close prisoner, or at
liberty etc.? Yet upon supposall of this miraculous Pilgrimage for Faith,
before I have the faith of Miracles, how shall I proceed at our meeting? Or how
shall I know the man on whom I may securely rely? Procure (will you say) to
know whether he believe all fundamental points of faith. For if he do, his
faith, for point of belief, is sufficient for salvation, though he err in a
hundred things of less moment. But how shall I know whether he hold all
fundamental points or no? For til you tell me this, I cannot know whether or no
his belief be sound in all fundamental points. Can you say the Creed? Yes.
And so can many damnable Heretics. But why do you ask me this question?
Because the Creed contains all fundamental points of faith. Are you sure of
that? not sure: I hold it very probable page 241.
. Shall I hazard my soul on probabilities, or even wagers? This yields a new
cause of despair. But what? does the Creed contain all points necessary to be
believed, whether they rest in the understanding, or else do further extend to
practice? No. It was composed to deliver Credenda, not Agenda to us; Faith, not
Practice. How then shall I know what points of belief, which direct my
practice, be necessary to salvation? Still you chalk out new paths for
Desperation. Well, are all Articles of the Creed, for their nature and matter,
fundamental? I cannot say so. How then, shall I know which in particular be,
and which be not fundamental? Read my Answer to a late Popish Pamphlet
entitled Charity Mistaken etc. there you shall find, that fundamental
doctrines are such Catholic Verities, as principally, and essentially
pertain page 211.213.214.
to the Faith, such as properly constitute a Church, and are necessary (in
ordinary course) to be distinctly believed by every Christian that will be
saved. They are those grand, and capital doctrines which make up our Faith in
Christ; that is, that common faith which is alike precious in all, being one
and the same in the highest Apostle, and the meanest belieuer, which the
Apostle elsewhere calls the first principles of the oracles of God, and the
form of sound words. But how shall I apply these general definitions, or
descriptions, or (to say the truth) these only varied words, and phrases (for I
understand the word, fundamental, as well as the words, principal,
essential, grand, and capital doctrines etc.) to the particular Articles of
the Creed, in such sort, as that I may be able precisely, exactly, particularly
to distinguish fundamental Articles, from points of less moment? You labor
to tell us what fundamental points be, but not which they be: and yet unless
you do this, your Doctrine serves only, either to make men despair, or else to
have recourse to those whom you call Papists, and who give one certain Rule,
that all points defined by Christ's visible Church belong to the foundation of
Faith, in such sense, as that to deny any one cannot stand with salvation. And
seeing your self acknowledges that these men do not err in points
fundamental, I cannot but hold it most safe for me to loyne with them, for the
securing of my soul, and the avoiding of desperation, into which this your
doctrine must cast all them who understand, and believe it. For the whole
discourse, and inferences which here I have made, are either your own direct
Assertions, or evident consequences clearly deduced from them.

20. But now let us answer some few Objections of D. Potters, against that
which we have said before, to avoid our argument, That the Scripture is not so
much as mentioned in the Creed, he says: The Creed is an abstract of such page
234.
necessary Doctrines as are delivered in Scripture, or collected out of it; and
therefore needs not express the authority of that which it supposes.

21. This answer makes for us. For by giving a reason why it was needles that
Scripture should be expressed in the Creed, you grant as much as we desire,
namely that the Apostles judged it needles to express all necessary points of
faith in their Creed. Neither does the Creed suppose, or depend on Scripture,
in such sort as that we can by any probable consequence, infer from the
Articles of the Creed, that there is any Canonical Scripture at all; and much
less that such Books in particular be Canonical: Yea the Creed might have
been the same although holy Scripture had never been written; and, which is
more, the Creed even in priority of time, was before all the Scripture of the
new Testament, except the Gospel of S. Matthew. And so according to this reason
of his the Scripture should not mention Articles contained in the Creed And I
note in a word, how little connection D. Potters arguments have, while he tells
us, that the Creed page 234.
is an Abstract of such necessary doctrines as are delivered in Scripture, or
collected out of it, and therefore needs not express the authority of that
which it supposes; it does not follow: The Articles of the Creed are delivered
in Scripture: therefore the Creed supposes Scripture. For two distinct writings
may well deliver the same truths, and yet one of them not suppose the other,
unless D. Potter be of opinion that two Doctors cannot, at one time, speak
the same truth.

22. And notwithstanding, that D. Potter has now told us, it was needles that
the Creed should express Scripture, whose Authority it supposes, he comes at
length to say, that the Nicene Fathers in their Creed confessing that the holy
Ghost spoke by the Prophets, does thereby sufficiently auow the divine Authority
of all Canonical Scripture. But I would ask him, whether the Nicene Creed be
not also an Abstract of Doctrines delivered in Scripture, as he said of the
Apostles Creed, and thence did infer, that it was needles to express
Scripture, whose authority it supposes? Besides we do not only believe in
general, that Canonical Scripture is of divine authority, but we are also
bound under pain of damnation to believe, that such and such particular
Books, not mentioned in the Nicene Creed, are Canonical. And lastly D. Potter
in this Answer grants as much as we desire, which is that all points of faith
are not contained in the Apostles Creed, even as it is explained by other
Creeds. For these words (who spoke by the Prophets) are no ways contained in
the Apostles Creed, and therefore contain an Addition, not an Explanation thereof

23. But, how can it be necessary (says D. Potter) for any Christian, to have
more in his Creed then the page 221.
Apostles had, and the Church of their times? I answer; You trifle, not
distinguish between the Apostles belief, and that abridgement of some
Articles of faith, which we call the Apostles Creed; and withal you beg the
question, by supposing that the Apostles believed no more, then is contained in
their Creed, which every unlearned person knows and belieues: and I hope you
will not deny but the Apostles were endued with greater knowledge then ordinary
persons.

24. Your pretended proof out of the Acts, that the Apostles revealed to the
Church the whole Counsel of God, keeping Act. 20.27.
back nothing, with your gloss (needful for our salvation) is no proof
unless you still beg the question, and do suppose, that whatsoever the
Apostles revealed to the Church, is contained in the Creed. And I wonder you do
not reflect that those words were by S. Paul particularly directed to Pastors,
and Governors of the Church, as is clear by the other words; He called the
Ancients of the Church. And afterward: Take heed to your selves, and to the
whole flock wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to rule the Church.
And your self say, that more knowledge is page 244
necessary in Bishops, and Priests, to whom is committed the government of the
Church, and the care of souls, then in vulgar Laickes. Do you think that the
Apostles taught Christians nothing but their Creed? Said they nothing of the
Sacraments, Co^mandments, Duties of Hope, Charity etc?

25. Upon the same affected ambiguity is grounded your other objection: To say
the whole faith of those times page 222.223.
is not contained in the Apoles Creed, is all one, as if a man should say, this
is not the Apostles Creed, but a part of it. For the faith of the Apostles is
not all one with that which we commonly call their Creed. Did not, I pray you,
S. Matthew, and S. John believe their writings to be Canonical Scripture? and
yet their writings are not mentioned in the Creed. It is therefore more then
clear, that the Faith of the Apostles is of a larger extent, then the Apostles
Creed.

26. To your demand, why amongst many things of equal necessity to be
believed, the Apostles should page 225.
so distinctly set down some, and be altogether silent of others? I answer:
That you must answer your own demand. For in the Creed there be diverse
points in their nature, not fundamental, or necessary to be explicitly and
distinctly believed, as above we showed; why are these points which are not
fundamental expressed, rather then other of the same quality? Why our Saviors
descent to Hell, and Burial expressed, and not his Circumcision, his
manifestation to the three Kings, working of Miracles etc? Why did they not
express Scriptures, Sacraments, and all fundamental points of Faith tending
to practice, as well as those which rest in belief? Their intention was,
particularly to deliver such Articles as were fittest for those times,
concerning the Deity, Trinity, and Messiah (as heretofore I have declared)
leaving many things to be taught by the Catholic Church, which in the Creed
we all profess to believe. Neither does it follow, as you infer, That as well,
nay better, they might have given no Article, but that (of the Church) and sent
us to the Church for all the rest. For in setting down others besides that,
and not all, they make us believe we have all, when page 223.
we have not all. For by this kind of arguing, what may not be deduced? One
might, quite contrary to your inference, say: If the Apostles Creed contain
all points necessary to salvation, what need we any Church to teach us? and
consequently what need of the Article concerning the Church? What need we the
Creeds of Nice, Constantinople etc. Superfluous are your Catechisms, wherein
beside the Articles of the Creed, you add diverse other particulars. These would
be poor consequences, and so is yours. But shall I tell you news? For so you
are pleased to esteem it. We grant your inference, thus far: That our Savior
Christ referred us to his Church, by her to be taught, and by her alone. For,
she was before the Creed, and Scriptures; And she to discharge this imposed
office of instructing us, has delivered us the Creed, but not it alone, as if
nothing else were to be believed. We have besides it, holy Scripture; we have
unwritten, divine, Apostolical Ecclesiastical Traditions. It were a childish
argument: The Creed contains not all things which are necessary to be
believed: Ergo, it is not profitable. Or; The Church alone is sufficient to
teach us by some convenient means: Ergo, she must teach us without all means,
without Creeds, without Councels, without Scripture etc. If the Apostles had
expressed no Article, but that of the Catholic Church, she must have taught
us the other Articles in particular, by Creeds, or other means, as in fact we
have even the Apostles Creed from the Tradition of the Church. If you will
believe you have all in the Creed, when you have not all, it is not the
Apostles, or the Church, that makes you so believe, but it is your own error,
whereby you will needs believe, that the Creed must contain all. For neither
the Apostles, nor the Church, nor the Creed it self tell you any such matter;
and what necessity is there, that one means of instruction, must inuolue
whatsoever is contained in all the rest? We are not to recite the Creed with
anticipated persuasion, that it must contain what we imagine it ought, for
better maintayning some opinions of our own; but we ought to say, and believe
that it contains what we find in it; of which one Article is to believe the
Catholic Church, surely to be taught by her, which presupposes that we need
other instruction beside the Creed: and in particular we may learn of her,
what points be contained in the Creed, what otherwise; and so we shall not be
deceived, by believing we have all in the Creed, when we have not all: and you
may in the same manner say: As well, nay better, the Apostles might have given
us no Articles at all, as have left out Articles tending to practice. For in
setting down one sort of articles, and not the other, they make us believe we
have all, when we have not all.

27 To our argument, that Baptism is not contained in the Creed; D. Potter,
besides his answer, that Sacraments belong rather to practice then faith,
(which I have already confuted, and which indeed makes against himself, and
serves only to show that the Apostles intended not to comprize all points in
the Creed which we are bound to believe) adds, that the Creed of page 237.
Nice expressed Baptism by name; confess one Baptism for the remission of
Sin Which answer is directly against himself, and manifestly proves that
Baptism is an Article of faith, and yet is not contained in the Apostles
Creed, neither explicitly, nor by any necessary consequence from other
Articles expressed therein. If to make it an Article of faith be sufficient
that it is contained in in the Nicene Council; he will find that Protestants
maintain many errors against faith, as being repugnant to definitions of
General Councels: as in particular, that the very Council of Nice (which
says M. Whitgift, In his defense page 330.
is of all wise and learned men reverenced, esteemed and embraced, next unto
the Scriptures themselves) decreed that, to those who were chosen to the
Ministry unmarried, it was not lawful to take any wife afterward, is affirmed
by Protestants. And your grand Reformer Luther (lib. de Concilijs part. prima)
says, that he understands not the Holy Ghost in that Council. For in one
Canon it says that those who have gelded themselves are not fit to be made
Priests; in another it forbids them to have wives. Has (says he) the Holy
Ghost nothing to do in Counsels, but to bind, and load his Ministers which
impossblie, dangerous, and unnecessary laws? I forbear to show that this very
Article I confess one Baptism for the remission of sins, will be understood
by Protestants in a far different sense from Catholics, yea Protestants
among themselves do not agree, how Baptism forgiues sins, nor what grace it
confers. Only concerning the Unity of Baptism against rebaptization of such as
were once baptized (which I noted as a point not contained in the Apostles
Creed) I cannot omit an excellent place of S. Augustine, where speaking of the
Donatists he has these words. They are so bold as lib. de Haeres. in 69.
to rebaptize Catholics, wherein they show themselves to be the greater
Heretics, since it has pleased the universal Catholic Church not to make
Baptism void even in the very Heretics themselves. In which few words this
holy Father delivers against the Donatists these points which do also make
against Protestants; That to make an Heresy, or an Heretic, known for such,
it is sufficient, to oppose the definition of Gods Church; That a proposition
may be Heretical though it be not repugnant to any Texts of Scripture. For S.
Augustine teaches that the doctrine of rebaptization, is heretical, and yet
acknowledges it cannot be co^uinced for such out of Scripture. And that
neither the Heresy of rebaptization of those who were baptized by Heretics,
nor the contrary Catholic truth being expressed in the Apostles Creed, it
follows that it does not contain all points of faith necessary to salvation.
And so we must conclude that to believe the Creed is not sufficient for Unity
of faith, and Spirit in the same Church, unless there be also a total agreement
both in belief of other points of faith, and in external profession, and
Communion also (whereof we are to speak in the next Chapter) according to the
saying of S. Augustine: You are Aug. ep. 48.
with us in Baptism, and in the Creed; but in the Spirit of Unity, and bond of
peace, and lastly in the Catholic Church you are not with us.

CHAP. V. That Luther, Calvin, their associates, and all who began, or
continue the separation from the external Communion of the Roman Church, are
guilty of the proper, and formal sin of Schism.
THE Searcher of all Hearts, is witness with how unwilling minds, we
Catholics are drawn to fasten the denomination of Schismatiques, or
Heretics, on them, for whoses souls, if they employed their best blood, they
would judge that it could not be better spent If we rejoice, that they are
contristated at such titles, our joy rises not from their trouble or grief,
but, as that of the Apostles did, from the fountain of Charity, because they
are contristated to repentance; that so after impartial examination, they
finding themselves to be what we say, may by Gods holy grace, begin to
dislike, what themselves are. For our part, we must remember that our
obligation is, to keep within the mean, betwixt uncharitable bitterness, and
pernicious flatery; not yielding to worldly respects, nor offending Christian
Modesty, but uttering the substance of truth in so Caritable manner, that not
so much we, as Truth, and Charity may seem to speak, according to the
wholesome advise of S. Gregory Nazianzen in these divine words: We do not
affect peace with Orat. 32.
prejudice of the true doctrine, that so we may get a name of being gentle, and
mild: and yet we seek to conserve peace, fighting in a lawful manner, and
containing our selves within our compass, and the rule of Spirit. And of these
things my judgment is, and for my part I prescribe the same Law to all that
deal with souls, and treat of true doctrine, that neither they exasperate
men's minds by harshnes, nor make the^ haughty or insolent, by submission; but
that in the cause of faith they behave themselves prudently, and advisedly, and
do not in either of these things exceed the mean. With whom agrees S. Leo
saying: It be houeth us in such causes to be Epist. 8.
most careful, that without noise of contentions, both Charity be conserved,
and Truth maintained.

2. For better Method, we will handle these points in order. First we will set
down the nature, and essence, or as I may call it, the Quality of Schism. In
the second place, the greatness and grieuousnes, or (so to term it) the
Quantity thereof. For the Nature, or Quality will tell us, who may without
injury be judged Schismatiques: and by the greatness, or quantity, such as find
themselves guilty thereof, will remain acquainted with the true state of their
soul, and whether they may conceive any hope of salvation or no. And because
Schism will be found to be a division from the Church, which could not happen,
unless there were always a visible Church; we will, Thirdly prove, or rather
take it as a point to be granted by all Christians, that in all ages there has
been such a Visible Congregation of Faithful People. Fourthly, we will
demonstrate, that Luther, Calvin, and the rest, did separate themselves from
the Communion of that always visible Church of Christ, and therefore were
guilty of Schism. And fifthly we will make it evident, that the visible true
Church of Christ, out of which Luther and his followers departed, was no other
but the Roman Church, and consequently that both they, and all others who
persist in the same division, are Schismatiques by reason of their separation
from the Church of Rome.

3. For the first point touching the Nature, 1. Point.
or Quality of Schism: as the natural perfection of man consists in his being
the image of God his Creator, by the powers of his soul; so his supernatural
perfection is placed in similitude with God, as his last End and Felicity; The
nature of Schism.
and by having the said spiritual faculties, his Understanding and Will linked
to him. His Understanding is united to God by Faith; his Will, by Charity. The
former relies upon his infallible Truth: The latter carries us to his infinite
Goodness. Faith has a deadly opposite, Heresy. Contrary to the Union, or Unity
of Charity, is Separation and Division. Charity is twofold. As it respects God,
his Opposite Vice is Hatred against God: as it unites us to our Neighbor, his
contrary is Separation or division of affections, and will from our Neighbor.
Our Neighbor may be considered, either as one private person has a single
relation to another, or as all concur to make one Company or Congregation,
which we call the Church; and this is the most principal reference and Union
of one man with another: because the chiefest Unity is that of the Whole, to
which the particular Unity of Parts is subordinate. This Unity, or Oneness (if
so I may call it) is effected by Charity uniting all the members of the Church
in one Mystical Body; contrrary to which, is Schism, from the Greek word
signifying Scissure, or Division. Wherefore upon the whole matter, we find that
Schism, as the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas defines it, is; A voluntary
separation 2. 2. q. 39 art. in corp. and ad 3.
from the Unity of that Charity, whereby all the members of the Church are
united. From hence he deduceth, that Schism is a special and particular vice,
distinct from Heresy, because they are opposite to two different Virtues:
Heresy, to Faith: Schism, to Charity. To which purpose he fitly alleges S.
Hierome upon these words, ( Tit. 3.) A man that is an Heretic after the first
and second admonition avoid, saying: I conceive that there is this difference
betwixt Schism and Heresy, that Heresy iauolues some perverse assertion:
Schism for Episcopal dissension does separate men from the Church. The same
doctrine is delivered by S. Augustine in these words: Heretics lib. 1. de
fid. and Symb. cap. 10.
and Schismatiques call their Congregations, Churches: but Heretics corrupt
the Faith by believing of God false things: but Schismatiques by wicked
divisions break from fraternall Charity, although they believe what we
believe. Therefore the Heretic belongs not to the Church, because she loves
God: nor the Schismatique, because she loves her Neighbor. And in another
place he says It is wont to be demanded Quest. Euangel ex Matt. q. 11.
How Schismatiques be distinguished from He retiques: and this difference is
found, that not a diverse faith, but the divided Society of Communion does make
Schismatiques. It is then evident that Schism is different from Heresy.
Nevertheless (says Saint Thomas vbi supra
as he who is deprived of faith must needs want Charity: so every Heretic is
a Schismatique, but not conuersiuely every Schismatique is an Heretic; though
because want of Charity disposes and makes way to the destruction of faith
(according to those words of the Apostle, Which (a good conscience) some
casting off, have suffered shipwreck in their faith) Schism speedily
degenerates to Heresy, as S. Hierome after the rehearsed words teaches,
saying: Though Schism in the beginning may in some sort be understood
different from Heresy; yet there is no Schism which does not faigne some
heresy to it self, that so it may seem to have departed from the Church upon
good reason. Nevertheless when Schism proceeds originally from Heresy, Heresy
as being in that case the predominant quality in these two peccant humors,
gives the denomination of an Heretic; as on the other side we are wont,
especially in the beginning, or for a while, to call Schismatiques, those men
who first began with only Schism, though in process of time they fell into
some Heresy, and by that means are indeed both Schismatiques and Heretics.

4. The reason why both Heresy and Schism are repugnant to the being of a good
Catholic, is: Because the Catholic, or Universal Church signifies One
Congregation, or Company of Faithful people, and therefore implies not only
Faith, to make them Faithful belieuers, but also Communion, or Common Union,
to make them One in Charity, which excludes Separation, and Division: and
therefore in the Apostles Creed, Communion of Saints is immediately joined to
the Catholic Church.

5. From this definition of Schism may be inferred, that the guilt thereof is
contracted, not only by division from the Universal Church; but also, by a
Separation from a particular Church or Diocese which agrees with the
Universal. In this manner Meletius was a Schismatique, but not an Heretic,
because as we read in S. Epiphanus, Haeres. 68.
he was of the right Faith: for his faith was not altered at any time from the
holy Catholic Church etc. He made a Sect, but departed not from Faith. Yet
because he made to himself a particular Congregation against S. Peter
Archbishop of Alexandria his lawful Superior, and by that means brought in a
division in that particular Church, we was a Schismatique. And it is well worth
the noting, that the Meletians building new Churches put this title upon them,
The Church of Martyrs: and upon the ancient Churches of those who succeeded
Peter, was inscribed, The Catholic Church. For so it is. A new Sect must have
a new name which though it be never so gay and specious, as the Church of
Martyrs: the Reformed Church etc. yet the Nouelty shows that it is not the
Catholic, nor a true Church. And that Schism may be committed by division
from a particular Church, we read in Optatus Mileuitanus Lib. 1. cont. Parmen.
these remarkable words, (which do well declare who be Schismatiques) brought
by him to prove that not Caecilianus but Parmenianus was a Schismatique: For
Caecilianus went not out from Maiorinus thy Grandfather (he means his next
predecessor but one, in the Bishopric,) but Maiorinus from Caecilianus:
neither did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or of Cyprian (who was
but a particular Bishop,) but Maiorinus, in whose Chair thou sit which had
no beginning before Maiorinus himself. Seeing it is manifestly known, that
these things were so done, it evidently appears, that you are heirs both of
traditors (that is, of those who delivered up the holy Bible to be burned) and
of Schismatiques. And it seems that this kind of Schism must principally be
admitted by Protestants, who acknowledge no one visible Head of the whole
Church, but hold that every particular Diocese, Church, or Country is
governed by it self independantly of any one Person, or General Council, to
which all Christians have obligation to submit their judgments, and wills.

6. 2. Point.
As for the grieuousnes or quantity of Schism (which was the second point
proposed) S. Thomas teaches, that amongst sins against our Neighbor, The
grieuousnes of Schism.
Schism Supra art. 2. ad 3.
is the most grievous; because it is against the spiritual good of the
multitude, or Community. And therefore as in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, there
is as great difference between the crime of rebellion or sedition, and debates
among private men, as there is inequality betwixt one man, and a whole
kingdom; so in the Church, Schism is as much more grievous then Sedition in a
Kingdom, as the spiritual good of souls surpasses the civil and political
weal. And S. Thomas adds further, that they loose the spiritual Power of
Jurisdiction; and if they go about to absolve from sins, or to
excommunicate, their actions are inualid; which he proves out of the Canon
Nouatianus. Causa 7. quaest. 1. which says: He that keeps neither the Unity
of spirit, nor the peace of agreement, and separates himself from the bond of
the Church, and the College of Priests, can neither have the Power, nor
dignity of a Bishop. The Power also of Order (for example to consecrate the
Eucharist, to ordain Priests etc.) they cannot lawfully exercise.

7. In the judgment of the holy Fathers, Schism is a most grievous offense. S.
Chrysostom Hom. 11. in ep. ad Ephesians.
compares these Schismatic deuiders of Christ's mystical body, to those who
sacrilegiously pierced his natural body, saying: Nothing does so much incense
God, as that the Church should be divided. Although we should do innumerable
good works, if we divide the full Ecclesiastical Congregation, we shall be
punished no less then they who tore his (natural) body. For that was done to
the gain of the whole world, although not with that intention: but this has
no profit at all, but there arises from it most great harm. These things are
spoken, not only to those who bear office, but also to those who are governed
by them. Behold how neither a moral good life (which conceit deceives many)
nor authority of Magistrates, nor any necessity of Obeying Superiors can
excuse Schism from being a most heinous offense. Optatus Mileuitanus lib.
cont. Parmen.
calls Schism, Ingens flagitium: a huge crime. And speaking to the Donatists,
says; that Schism is evil in the highest degree, even you are not able to
deny. No less patheticall is S. Augustine upon this subject. He reckons
Schismatiques among Pagans, Heretics, and Jews, saying: Religion is to be
sought, neither in the confusion of Pagans, nor lib. de vera Relig. cap. 6.
in the filth of Heretics, nor in the languishing of Schismatiques, nor in
the Age of the Jews; but among those alone who are called Christian
Catholics, or Orthodox, that is, lovers of Unity in the whole body, and
followers of truth. Nay he esteems them worse then Infidels and Idolaters,
saying: Those whom the Donatists Cont. Donatist. l. 1. cap. 8.
heal from the wound of Infidelity and Idolatry, they hurt more grieously with
the wound of Schism. Let here those men who are pleased untruly to call us
Idolaters, reflect upon themselves, and consider, that this holy Father judges
Schismatiques (as they are) to be worse then Idolaters, which they absurdly
call us: and this he proves by the example of Core, Dathan, and Abiron and
other rebellious Schismatiques of the Old Testament, who were conuayed alive
down into Hell, and punished more openly then Idolaters. No doubt (says this
holy Father) but Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 6.
that was committed most wickedly, which was punished most severely. In another
place he yoaketh Schism with Heresy, saying upon the Eight Beatitude: Many De
sermon. Dom. in moute ^. 5.
Heretics, under the name of Christians, deceiving men's souls, do suffer
many such things; but therefore they are excluded from this reward, because it
is not only said, Happy are they who suffer persecution, but there is added,
for Justice. But where there is not sound faith, there cannot be justice.
Neither can Schismatiques promise to themselves any part of this reward,
because likewise where there is no Charity, there cannot be justice. And in
another place, yet more effectually he says: Being out of Epist. 204
the Church, and divided from the heap of Unity, and the bond of Charity, thou
should be punished with eternal death, though thou should be burned
alive for the name of Christ. And in another place, he has these words: If he
hear not the Church let him be to cont. aduers. leg. and prophet lib, 2. cap.
17.
thee, as an Heathen or Publican; which is more grievous then if he were
smitten with the sword, consumed with flames, or cast to wild beasts. And else
where: Out of the Catholic Church (says he) one de gest. cum Emerit.
may have Faith, Sacraments, Orders, and in sum, all things except Salvation.
With S. Augustine, his Country man and second self in sympathy of spirit, S.
Fulgentius agrees, saying: Believe this de fide ad Pet.
steadfastly without doubting, that every Heretic, or Schismatique, baptized
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, if before the end of
his life, he be not reconciled to the Catholic Church, what Alms soever he
give, yea though he should shed his blood for the name of Christ, he cannot
obtain Salvation. Mark again how no moral honesty of life, no good deeds,
no Martyrdom, can without repentance avail any Schismatique for salvation.
Let us also add that D. Potter says, Schism is no less page 42.
damnable, then Heresy.

8. But o you Holy, Learned, Zealous Fathers, and Doctors of God's Church; out
of these premises, of the grieuousnes of Schism, and of the certain damnation
which it brings (if unrepented) what conclusion draw you for the instruction
of Christians? S. Augustine makes this wholesome inference. There is Cont.
Parm. lib. 2. cap. ^2.
no just necessity to divide Unity. S. Ireneus concludes: They cannot cont.
haeres. lib. 4. c. 62.
make any so important reformation, as the evil of the Schism is pernicious.
S. Denis of Alexandria says: Certainly Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6.
all things should rather be endured, then to consent to the division of the
Church of God: these Martyrs being no less glorious, that expose themselves to
hinder the dismembring of the Church: then those that suffer rather then they
will effer sacrifice to Idols Would to God all those who divided themselves
from that visible Church of Christ, which was upon earth when Luther appeared,
would rightly consider of these things! And thus much of the second Point.

9. 1. Point.
We have just and necessary occasion, eternally to bless Almighty God, who
has vouchsafed to make us members of the Catholic Roman Church, Perpetual
visibility of the Church
from which while men fall, they precipitate themselves into so vast
absurdities, or rather sacrilegious blasphemies, as is employed in the doctrine
of the total deficiency of the visible Church, which yet is maintained by
diverse chief Protestants, as may at large be seen in Brereley, and others;
out of whom I will here name Jewel saying: The truth was unknown Apolog.
part. 4. cap. 4. diuis. 2 And in his defense printed Ann. 1571. pag^ 426.
at that time, and unheard of, when Martin Luther, and Vlderick Zuinglius first
came unto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel. Perkins says: We say,
that In his exposition upon the Creed page 400.
before the days of Luther for the space of many hundred years an universal
Apostasy ouerspread the whole face of the earth, and that our (Protestant)
Church was not then visible, to the world. Napier upon the Revelations
teaches, that from the year of Propost 37. page 68.
Christ three hundred and sixteen, the Antichristian and papisticall reign
has begun, reigning universally, and without any debatable contradiction one
thousand two hundred sixty years (that is, till Luthers time:) And that, from
the year of Ibid. in cap. 12. page 161. col. 3.
Christ three bundred and sixteen, God has withdrawn his visible Church from
open Assemblies, to the hearts of particular godly men etc. during the space of
one thousand two hundred threescore years: And that, the Ibid. in cap. 11. page
145.
Pope and Clergy have possessed the outward visible Church of Christians, even
one thousand two hundred threescore years. And that, the Ibid. page 191.
true Church abode latent, and invisible. And Brocard fol. 110. and 123.
upon the Revelations, professes to join in opinion with Napier. Fulke
affirms, that in the Answer to a counterfeit Cath. page 16.
time of Boniface the third, which was the year 607. the Church was invisible,
and fled into the wilernes, there to remain a long season. Luther says: Primo
solus eram: At the first In praefat. operum suorum.
I was alone. Jacob Hailbronerus one of the Disputants for the Protestant party
in the Conference at Ratisbone, affirms In suo Acacatholico volum. a. 15.
cap. 9. p. 479.
that the true Church was interrupted by Apostasy from the true Faith. Calvin
says: It is absurd in the very Ep. 141.
beginning to break one from another, after we have been forced to make a
separation from the whole world. It were ouerlong to allege the words of
Ioannes Regius, Daniel Chamierus, Beza, Ochimus, Castalio, and others to the
same purpose. The reason which cast them upon this wicked doctrine, was a
desperate voluntary necessity: because they being resolved not to acknowledge
the Roman Church to be Christ's true Church, and yet being convinced by all
manner of evidence, for that diverse Ages before Luther there was no other
Congregation of Christians, which could be the Church of Christ; there was no
remedy but to affirm, that upon earth Christ had no visible Church: which they
would never have avouched, if they had known how to avoid the foresaid
inconvenience (as they apprehended it) of submitting themselves to the Roman
Church.

10. Against these exterminating spirits, D. Potter, and other more moderate
Protestants, profess, that Christ always had, and always will have upon
earth a visible Church: othertherwise (says he) our Lords page 154
promise of her stable Matt. 16 1^^
edification should be of no value. And in another place, having affirmed that
Protesta^tes have not left the Church of Rome, but her corruptions, and
acknowledging her still to be a member of Christ's body, he seeks to clear
himself and others from Schism, because (says he) the property page 76.
of Schism is (witness the Donatists and Luciferians) to cut off from the
Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation, the Church from which it separates.
And if any Zelotes amongst us have proceeded to he auier censures, their zeal
may be excused, but their Charity and wisdom cannot be justified. And
elsewhere he acknowledges, that the Roman Church has those maine, and Page 83.
essential truths, which give her the name and essence of a Church.

11. It being therefore granted by D. Potter, and the chiefest and best learned
English Protestants, that Christ's visible Church cannot perish, it will be
needles for me in this occasion to prove it. S. Augustine doubted not to say:
The Prophets In Psalm. 30. Com. 2.
spoke more obscurely of Christ, then of the Church: because, as I think, they
did foresee in spirit, that men were to make parties against the Church, and
that they were not to have so great strife concerning Christ: therefore that
was more plainly foretold and more openly prophesied about which greater
contentions were to rise, that it might turn to the condemnation of them, who
have seen it, and yet gone forth. And in another place he says: How do we
confide epist. 48.
to have received manifestly Christ himself from holy Scriptures, if we have
also manifestly received the Church from them? And indeed to what Congregation
shall a man have recourse for the affairs of his soul, if upon earth there be
no visible Church of Christ? Besides, to imagine a company of men believing one
thing in their heart, and with their mouth professing the contrary, (as they
must be supposed to do; for if they had professed what they believed, they
would have become visible) is to dream of a damned crew of dissembling
Sycophants, but not to conceive a right notio^ of the Church of Christ our
Lord. And therefore S. Augustine says: We cannot be saved, unless laboring
also for the S. Aug. de fide and Symbolo c. 1.
salvation of others, we profess with our mouths, the same faith which we
bear in our hearts. And if any man hold it lawful to dissemble, and deny
matters of faith, we cannot be assured, but that they actually dissemble, and
hide Anabaptisme, Arianisme, yea Turcisme, and even Atheism, or any other
false belief, under the outward profession of Caluinisme. Do not Protestants
teach that, preaching of the word, and administration of Sacraments (which
cannot but make a Church visible) are inseparable notes of the true Church? And
therefore they must either grant a visible Church, or none at all. No wonder
then if S. Augustine account this Heresy so gross, that he says against those
who in his time defended the like error: But this Church which In Psalm. 101.
has been of all Nations is no more, she has perished; so say they that are
not in her. O impudent speech! And afterward. This voice so abominable, so
detestable, so full of presumption and falsehood, which is sustained with no
truth, enlightened with no wisdom, seasoned with no salt, vain, rash, heady,
pernicious, the Holy Ghost fore saw etc. And, Peradventure some De ouib. cap. 1.
one may say, there are other Sheep I know not where, with which I am not
acquainted, yet God has care of them. But he is too absurd in humane sense,
that can imagine such things. And these men do not consider, that while they
deny the perpetuity of a visible Church, they destroy their own present
Church, according to the argument which S. Augustine urged against the
Donatists in these words: De Bapt. cont. Donat.
If the Church were lost in Cyprians (we may say in Gregory's) time, from
whence did Donatus (Luther) appear? From what earth did he spring? from what
sea is he come? From what heaven did he drop? And in another place: How can
they vaunt Lib. 3. cont. Parm.
to have any Church. if she have ceased ever since those times? And all Deuines
by defining Schism to be a division from the true Church, suppose, that there
must be a known Church, from which it is possible for men depart. But enough
of this in these few words.

12. Let us now come to the fourth, 4. Point.
and chiefest Point, which was, to examine whether Luther, Calvin, Luther and
all that follow him are Schismatiques.
and the rest did not depart from the external Communion of Christ's visible
Church, and by that separation became guilty of Schism. And that they are
properly Schismatiques clearly follows from the grounds which we have laid,
concerning the nature of Schism, which consists in leaving the external
Cummunion of the visible Church of Christ our Lord: and it is clear by
evidence of fact, that Luther and his followers forsook the Communion of that
Ancient Church. For they did not so much as pretend to join with any
Congregation which had a being before their time; for they would needs conceive
that no visible Company was free from errors in doctrine, and corruption in
practice: And therefore they opposed the doctrine; they withdrew their obedience
from the Prelates; they left participation in Sacraments; they changed the
Liturgy of public service of whatsoever Church then extant. And these things
they pretended to do out of a persuasion, that they were bound (forsooth) in
conscience so to do, unless they would participate with errors, corruptions,
and superstitions. We dare not (says D. Potter) communicate page 68.
with Rome either in her public Liturgy, which is manifestly polluted with
gross superstition etc. or in those corrupt and ungrounded opinions, which she
has added to the Faith of Catholics. But now let D. Potter tell me with what
visible Church extant before Luther, he would have adventured to communicate in
her public Liturgy and Doctrine, since he durst not communicate with Rome? He
will not be able to assign any, even with any little color of common sense. If
then they departed from all visible Communities professing Christ, it follows
that they also left the Communion of the true visible Church, which soever it
was, whether that of Rome, or any other; of which Point I do not for the
present dispute. Yea this the Lutherans do not only acknowledge, but prove, and
brag of If (says a learned Lutheran) there had been right Georgius Minus in
Augustan. Confess. art. 7. de Eccles. page 137.
belieuers which went before Luther in his office, there had then been no need
of a Lutheran Reformation. Another affirms it to be ridiculous, to think
that in the time Benedict. Morge^stern. tract de Eccles. page 145.
before Luther, any had the purity of Doctrine; and that Luther should receive
it from them, and not they from Luther. Another speaks roundly, and says it
is impudency to say, that many learned men Conrad. Schlusselb. in Theolog.
Caluinist. lib. 2. Jol. 130.
in Gormany before Luther, did hold the Doctrine of the Gospel. And I add:
That far greater impudency, it were to affirm that Germany did not agree with
the rest of Europe, and other Christian Catholic Nations, and consequently,
that it is the greatest impudency to deny, that he departed from the Communion
of the visible Catholic Church, spread over the whole world. We have heard
Calvin saying of Protestants in general; We were, even, forced Ep. 141.
to make a separation from the whole world. And, Luther of himself in
particular: In the beginning In praefar. operum suorum.
I was alone. Ergo (say I, by your good leave) you were at least a
Schismatique, divided from the Ancient Church, and a member of no new Church.
For no sole man can constitute a Church; and though he could, yet such a Church
could not be that glorious company, of whose number, greatness, and amplitude,
so much has been spoken both in the old Testament, and in the New.

13. D. Potter endeauours to avoid this evident Argument by diverse euasions;
but by the confutation thereof I will (with Gods holy assistance) take
occasion, even out of his own Answers and grounds, to bring unanswerable
reasons to convince them of Schism.

14. His chief Answer is: That they have not left the Church, but her
Corruptions.

15. I reply. This answer may be given either by those furious people, who
teach that those abuses, and corruptions in the Church were so enormous, that
they could not stand with the nature, or being of a true Church of Christ: Or
else by those other more calm Protestants, who affirm that those errors did
not destroy the being, but only deforme the beauty of the Church. Against both
these sorts of men, I may fitly use that unanswerable Dilemma, which S.
Augustine brings against the Donatists in these concluding words: Tell me
whether the Lib. 2. cont. epist. Gaudent. c. ^.
Church at that time when you say she entertained those who were guilty of all
crimes, by the contagion of those sinful persons, perished, or perished not?
Answer; whether the Church perished, or perished not? Make choice of what you
think. If then she perished, what Church brought forth Donatus? (we may say
Luther.) But if she could not perish, because so many were incorporated into
her (without Baptism (that is, without a second baptism, or rebaptization,
and I may say, without Luthers reformation) answer me I pray you, what madness
did move the Sect of Donatus to separate themselves from her upon pretense to
avoid the Communion of bad men? I beseech the Reader to po^der every one of S.
Augustine words: and to consider whether anything could have been spoken more
directly against Luther, and his followers of what sort soever.

16. And now to answer more in particular; I say to those who teach, that the
visible Church of Christ perished for many Ages, that I can easily affoard them
the courtesy, to free them from mere Schism: but all men touched with any
spark of zeal to vindicate the wisdom, and Goodness of our Savior from
blasphemous injury, cannot choose but believe and proclaim them to be
superlatiue Arch-heretiques. Nevertheless, if they will needs have the honor of
Singularity, and desire to be both formal Heretics, and properly
Schismatiques, I will tell them, that while they dream of an invisible Church
of men, which agreed with them in Faith, they will upon due reflection find
themselves to be Schismatiques, from those corporeal Angels, or invisible men,
because they held external Communion with the visible Church of those times,
the outward Communion of which visible Church these modern hot-spurs forsaking,
were thereby divided from the outward Communion of their hidden Brethren, and so
are Separatists from the external Communion of them, with whom they agree in
faith, which is Schism in the most formal, and proper signification thereof.
Moreover according to D. Potter, these boisterous Creatures are properly
Schismatiques For, the reason why he thinks himself, and such as he is, to be
cleared from Schism, notwithstanding their division from the Roman Church, is
because (according to his Divinity) the property of Page 76.
Schism, is (witness the Donatists and Luciferians) to cut off from the Body
of Christ, and the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separats: But
those Protestants of whom we now speak, cut of from the Body of Christ, and
the hope of Salvation, the Church from which they separated themselves; and
they do it directly as the Donatists (in whom you exe^plify) did by affirming
that the true Church had perished: and therefore they cannot be cleared from
Schism, if you may be their Judge Consider, I pray you, how many prime
Protestants both domestical and foreign, you have at one blow struck off
from hope of Salvation, and condemned to the lowest pit, for the grievous sin
of Schism. And withal it imports you to consider, that you also inuolue your
self, and other moderate Protestants in the self same crime and punishment,
while you communicate with those, who, according to your own principles, are
properly, and formally Schismatiques. For if you held your self obliged under
pain of damnation to forsake the Communion of the Roman Church, by reason of
her Errors and Corruptions, which yet you confess were not fundamental; shall
it not be much more damnable for you, to live in Communion and Confraternity,
with those who defend an error of the failing of the Church, which in the
Donatists you confess page 12^.
to have been properly heretical against the Article of our Creed; I believe
the Church? And I desire the Reader, here to apply an authority of S. Cyprian (
ep. 76.) which he shall find alleged in the next number. And this may suffice
for confutation of the aforesaid Answer, as it might have relation to the
rigid Caluinists.

17. For Confutation of those Protestants, who hold that the Church of Christ
had always a being, and cannot err in points fundamental, and yet teach,
that she may err in matters of less moment, wherein if they forsake her, they
would be accounted not to leave the Church, but only her corruptions; I must
say, that they change the state of our present Question, not distinguishing
between internal Faith, and external Communion, nor between Schism, and
Heresy. This I demonstrate out of D. Potter himself, who in express words
teaches, that the promises which our Lord has made pa. 151.
unto his Church for his assistance, are intended, not to any particular
Persons or Churches, but only to the Church Catholic: and they are to be
extended not to every parcel, or particularity of truth, but only to points of
Faith, or fundamental. And afterward speaking of the Universal Church, he
says: It Is comfort page 155.
enough for the Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure her from all
capital dangers, and conserve her on earth against all enemies; but she may
not hope to triumph over all sin and error, till she be in heau^n. Out of
which words I observe, that, according to D. Potter, the self same Church,
which is the Universal Church, remaining the universal true Church of Christ,
may fall into errors and corruptions: from whence it clearly follows that it
is impossible to leave the External communion of the Church so corrupted, and
retain external communion with the Catholic Church; since the Church
Catholic, and the Church so corrupted is the self same one Church, or
company of men. And the contrary imagination talks in a dream, as if the
errors and infections of the Catholic Church were not inherent in her, but
were separate from her, like to Accidents without any Subject, or rather
indeed, as if they were not Accidents, but Hypostases, or Persons subsisting by
themselves. For men cannot be said to live, in, or out of the Communion of any
dead creature, but with Persons, endued with life and reason; and much less
can men be said to live in the Communion of Accidents, as errors and
corruptions are, and therefore it is an absurd thing to affirm, that
Protestants divided themselves from the corruptions of the Church, but not from
the Church herself, seeing the corruptions of the Church were inherent in the
Church. All this is made more clear, if we consider, that when Luther
appeared, there were not two distinct visible true Catholic Churches, holding
contrary Doctrines, and divided in external Communion; one of the which two
Churches did triumph over all error, and corruption in doctrine and practice;
but the other was stained with both. For to faigne this diversity of two
Churches cannot stand with record of histories, which are silent of any such
matter. It is against D. Potters own grounds, that the Church may err in
points not fundamental, which were not true, if you will imagine a certain
visible Catholic Church free from error even in points not fundamental. It
contradicts the words in which he said, the Church may not hope to triumph
over all error, till she be in heaven. It euacuateth the brag of Protestants,
that Luther reformed the whole Church: and lastly it makes Luther a
Schismatique, for leaving the Communion of all visible Churches, seeing (upon
this supposition) there was a visible Church of Christ free from al corruption,
which therefore could not be forsaken without just imputation of Schism. We
must therefore truly affirm, that since there was but one visible Church of
Christ, which was truly Catholic, and yet was (according to Protestants)
stained with corruption; when Luther left the external Communion of that
corrupted Church, he could not remain in the Communion of the Catholic
Church, no more then it is possible to keep company with Christopher Potter,
and not keep company with the Provost of Queens College in Oxford, if D.
Potter and the Provost be one, and the self same man: For so one should be,
and not be with him at the same time. This very argument drawn from the Unity
of God's Church, S. Cyprian v rgeth to convince, that Nouatianus was cut off
from the Church in these words: The Church is Epist. 16. ad Mag.
One, which being One cannot be both within and without. If she be with
Nouatianus, she was not with Cornelius. But if she were with cornelius, who
succeeded Fabianus, by lawful ordination, Nouatianus is not in the Church. I
purposely here speak only of external Communion with the Catholic Church.
For in this point there is great difference between internal acts of our
Understanding, and will; and of external deeds. Our Understanding and Will are
faculties (as Philosophers speak) abstractiue, and able to distinguish, and as
it were, to part things, though in themselves they be really conjoined. But
real external deeds do take things in gross as they find them, not
separating things which in reality are joined together. Thus, one may consider
and love a sinner as he is a man, friend, benefactor, or the like; and at the
same time not consider him, nor love him as he is a sinner; because these are
acts of our Understanding and Will, which may respect their objects under some
one formality, or consideration, without reference to other things contained in
the self same objects. But if one should strike, or kill a sinful man, he
will not be excused, by alleging, that he killed him, not as a man, but as a
sinner; because the self same person being a man, and the sinner, the
external act of murder fell jointly upon the man, and the sinner. And for the
same reason one cannot avoid the company of a sinner, and at the same time be
really present with that man who is a sinner. And this is our case: and in this
our Adversaries are egregiously, and many of them affectedly, mistaken. For one
may in some points believe as the Church belieueth, and disagree from her in
other. One may love the truth which she holds, and detest her (pretended)
corruptions. But it is impossible that a man should really separate himself
from her external Communion, as she is corrupted, and be really within the
same external Communion as she is sound; because she is the self same Church
which is supposed to be sound in some things, and to err in others. Now, our
question for the present does concern only this point of external Communion:
because Schism, as it is distingu^^hed from Heresy is committed when one
diuides himself from the External Communion of that Church with which he
agrees in Faith; Whereas Heresy does necessarily imply a difference in matter of
Faith, and belief: and therefore to say, that they left not the visible Church,
but her errors, can only excuse them from Heresy (which shall be tried in the
next Chapter) but not from Schism, as long as they are really druided from the
External Communion of the self same visible Church; which, notwithstanding
those errors wherein they do in judgment dissent from her, does still remain
the true Catholic Church of Christ; and therefore while they forsake the
corrupted Church, they forsake the Catholic Church. Thus then it remains
clear, that their chiefest Answer changes the very state of the Question;
confounds internal acts of the Understanding with external Deeds; does not
distinguish between Schism and Heresy; and leaves this demonstrated against
them: That they divided themselves from the Communion of the visible Catholic
Church, because they conceived that she needed Reformation. But whether this
pretense of Reformation will acquit them of Schism, I refer to the impartial
Judges, heretofore Number. 8.
alleged; as to S. Irenaeus who plainly says: They cannot make any so
important REFORMATION, as the Evil of the Schism is pernicious. To S. Denis
of Alexandria, saying: Certainly all things should be endured rather then to
consent to the division of the Church of God: those Martyrs being no less
glorious that expose themselves to hinder the dismembring of the Church, then
those that suffer rather then they will offer sacrifice to Idols. To S.
Augustine, who tells us: That not to hear the Church, is a more grievous thing
then if he were stricken with the sword, consumed with flames, exposed to wild
beasts. And to conclude all in few words, he gives this general
prescription: There is no just necessity, to divide Unity. And D. Potter may
remember his own words: There neither was page 75.
nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ; no more then
from Christ himself. But I have showed that Luther, and the rest departed from
the Church of Christ (if Christ had any Church upon earth:) Therefore there
could be no just cause (of Reformation, or what else soever) to do as they did;
and therefore they must be contented to be held for Schismatiques.

18 Moreover; I demand whether those corruptions which moved them to forsake
the Communion of the visible Church, were in manners, or doctrine? Corruption
in manners yields no sufficient cause to leave the Church, otherwise men must
go not only out of the Church, but out of the world, as the Apostle 1. Cor.
5.10.
says. Our blessed Savior foretold that there would be in the Church tares
with choice corn, and sinners with just men. If then Protestants wax zealous,
with the Servants to pluck up the weeds, let them first harken to the wisdom
of the Master: Let both grow up. And they ought to imitate them, who as S.
Augustine says: tolerate for the Ep. 162.
good of Unity, that which they detest for the good of equity. And to whom the
more frequent, and foul such scandals are; by so much the more is the merit of
their perseverance in the Communion of the Church, and the Martyrdom of their
patience, as the same Saint calls it. If they were offended with the life of
some Ecclesiastical persons, must they therefore deny obedience to their
Pastors, and finally break with Gods Church? The Pastor of Pastors,
teaches us another lesson: Upon the Chair of Moses Mat. 33.
have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees. All things therefore whatsoever they
shall say to you, observe ye, and do ye: but according to their works do
ye not. Must people except against laws, and revolt from Magistrates, because
some are negligent, or corrupt in the execution of the same laws, and
performance of their office? If they intended Reformation of manners, they used
a strange means for the achieuing of such an end, by denying the necessity of
Confession, laughing at austerity of penance, condemning the vows of
Chastity, poverty, obedience, breaking fasts, etc. And no less unfit were the
Men, then the Means. I love not recrimination. But it is well known to how
great crimes, Luther, Calvin, Zwinglius, Beza., and other of the prime
Reformers were notorioussy obnoxious; as might be easily demonstrated by the
only transcribing of what others have delivered upon that subject; whereby it
would appear, that they were very far from being any such Apostolical men
as God is wont to use in so great a work. And whereas they were wont,
especially in the beginning of their revolt, maliciously to exaggerate the
faults of some Clergy men, Erasmus said well (Epist ad fratres inferioris
Germaniae,) Let the riot, lust, ambition, avarice of Priests, and whatsoever
other crimes be gathered together, Heresy alone does exceed all this filthy
lake of vices. Besides, nothing at all was omitted by the sacred Council of
Trent which might tend to reformation of manners. And finally the vices of
others are not hurtful to any but such as imitate, and consent to them;
according to the saying of S. Augustine: We conserve De unit, Eccles. c. 2^
innocence, not by knowing the ill deeds of men, but by not yielding consent to
such as we know, and by not judging rashly of such faults as we know not. If
you answer; that, not corruption in manners, but the approbation of them, does
yield sufficient cause to leave the Church; I reply with S. Augustine; That the
Church does (as the pretended Reformers ought to have done) tolerate or bear
with scandals and corruptions, but neither does, nor can approve them. The
Church (says he) being placed Ep. 116.
betwixt much chafe and cockle, does bear with many things; but does not
approve, nor dissemble, nor act those things which are against faith, and good
life. But because to approve corruption in manners as lawful, were an error
against Faith, it belongs to corruption in doctrine, which was the second part
of my demand.

19. Now then, that corruptions in doctrine (I still speak upon the untrue
supposition of our Adversaries) could not affoard any sufficient cause, or
colorable necessity to depart from that visible Church, which was extant when
Luther rose, I demonstrate out of D. Potters own confession; that the
Catholic Church neither has, nor can err in points fundamental, as we
showed out of his own express words, which he also of set purpose delivers
in diverse other places; and all they are obliged to maintain the same who
teach that Christ had always a visible Church upon earth: because any one
fundamental error overthrows the being of a true Church. Now (as Schoolmen
speak) it is, implicatio in terminis (a contradiction so plain, that one word
destroys the other, as if one should say, a living dead man) to affirm that
the Church does not err in points necessary to salvation, or damnably; and yet
that it is damnable to remain in her Communion because she teaches errors
which are confessed not to be damnable. For if the error be not damnable, nor
against any fundamental Article of Faith, the belief thereof cannot be
damnable. But D. Potter teaches, that the Catholic Church cannot, and that
the Roman Church has not erred against any fundamental Article of Faith
Therefore, it cannot be damnable to remain in her Communion; and so the
pretended corruptions in her doctrine could not induce any obligation to depart
from her Communion, nor could excuse them from Schism, who upon pretense of
necessity in point of conscience, forsook her. And D. Potter will never be
able to salve a manifest contradiction in these his words: To depart from the
Church Page 75.
of Rome in some Doctrine, and practices, there might be necessary cause,
though she wanted nothing necessary to salvation. For if, notwithstanding these
doctrines and practices, she wanted nothing necessary to salvation; how could
it be necessary to salvation to forsake her? And therefore we must still co^
clude that to forsake her, was properly an act of Schism.

20. From the self same ground of the infallibility of the Church in all
fundamental points, I argue after this manner. The visible Church cannot be
forsaken, without damnation, upon pretense that it is damnable to remain in
her Communion, by reason of corruption in doctrine; as long as, for the truth
of her Faith and belief, she performs the duty which she owes to God, and
her Neighbor: As long as she performs what our Savior exacts at her hands:
as long as she does, as much as lies in her power to do. But (even according to
D Potters Assertions) the Church performs all these things, as long as she
erreth not in points fundamental, although she were supposed to err in other
points not fundamental. Therefore, the Communion of the Visible Church cannot
be forsaken without damnation, upon pretense that it is damnable to remain in
her Communion, by reason of corruption in doctrine. The Mayor, or first
Proposition of it self is evident. The Minor, or second Proposition does
necessarily fellow out of D. Potters own doctrine above rehearsed, That, the
promises of our Lord made to his Church for his assistance, are to be Page 151.
extended only to points of Faith, or fundamental: (Let me note here by the
way that by his (Or,) he seems to exclude from Faith all points which are not
fundamental, and so we may deny innumerable Texts of Scripture:) That, It is
page 155.
comfort enough for the Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure her from all
capital dangers etc. but she may not hope to triumph over all sin and error,
till she be in heaven. For it is evident, that the Church (for as much as
concerns the truth of her doctrines and belief) owes no more duty to God and
her Neighbor; neither does our Savior exact more at her hands, nor is it in
her power to do more then God does assist her to do; which assistance is
promised only for points fundamental; and consequently as long as she teaches
no fundamental error, her Communion cannot without damnation be forsaken: And
we may fitly apply against D. Potter a Concionatory declamation which he makes
against us, where he says: page 221.
May the Church of after. Ages make the narrow way to heaven, narrowier then
our Savior left it etc? since he himself obliges men under pain of
damnation to forsake the Church, by reason of errors against which our Savior
thought it needles to promise his assistance, and for which he neither denies
his grace in this life, or glory in the next. Will D. Potter oblige the Church
to do more then she may even hope for? or to perform on earth that which is
proper to heaven alone?

21. And as from your own doctrine concerning the infallibility of the Church
in fundamental points, we have proved that it was a grievous sin to forsake
her: so do we take a strong argument from the fallibility of any who dare
pretend to reform the Church, which any man in his wits will believe to be
endued with at last as much infallibility as private men can challenge: and D.
Potter expressly affirms that Christ's promises of his assistance are not
intended Page 1^1.
to any particular persons or Churches: and therefore to leave the Church by
reason of errors, was at the best hand but to flit from one erring company to
another, without any new hope of triumphing over errors, and without
necessity, or vtility to forsake that Communion of which S. Augustine says,
There is Ep. con^. Parmen. lth. 2. cap. 11.
no just necessity to divide Unity. Which will appear to be much more evident
if we consider that though the Church had maintained some false doctrines, yet
to leave her Communion to remedy the old, were but to add a new increase of
errors, arising from the innumerable disagreements of Sectaries, which must
needs bring with it a mighty mass of falsehoods, because the truth is but one,
and indivisible. And this reason is yet stronger, if we still remember that
even according to D. Potter the visible Church has a blessing not to err in
points fundamental, in which any private Reformer may fail: and therefore they
could not pretend any necessity to forsake that Church, out of whose Communion
they were exposed to danger of falling into many more, and even into damnable
errors. Remember I pray you, what your self affirms ( Page 69.) where
speaking of our Church and yours, you say: All the difference is from the
weeds, which remain there, and beer are taken away; Yet neither here
perfectly, nor every where alike. Behold a fair confession of corruptions,
still remaining in your Church, which you can only excuse by saying they are
not fundame^tal, as like wise those in the Roman Church are confessed to be not
fundamental. What man of judgment will be a Protestant, since that Church is
confessedly a corrupt One?

22. I still proceed to impugn you expressly upon your grounds. You say: that
it is comfort enough for the Church, that the Lord in merey will secure her
from all capital dangers: but she may not hope to triumph over all sin, and
error till she be in heaven. Now if it be comfort enough to be secured from
all capital dangers, which can arise only from error in fundamental points:
why were not your first Reformers content with Enough, but would needs
disme^ber the Church, out of a pernicious greedines of more then Enough? For,
this Enough, which according to you is attained by not erring in points not
fundame^tal, was enjoyed before Luthers reformation, unless you will now
against your self affirm, that long before Luther there was no Church free
from error in fundamental points. Moreover if (as you say) no Church may hope
to triumph over all error till she be in heau^n; You must either grant that
errors not fundamental cannot yield sufficient cause to forsake the Church,
or else you must affirm that all Communities may, and ought to be forsaken, and
so there will be no end of Schisms: or rather indeed there can be no such thing
as Schism, because according to you, all Communities are subject to errors
not fundamental, for which if they may be lawfully forsaken, it follows
clearly that it is not Schism to forsake them. Lastly, since it is not
lawful to leave the Communion of the Church for abuses in life and manners,
because such miseries cannot be avoided in this world of temptation: and since
according to your Assertion no Church may hope to triumph oner all sin and
error; You must grant, that as she ought not to be left by reason of sin; so
neither by reason of errors not fundamental, because both sin, and error
are (according to you) impossible to be avoided til she be in heaven.

23. Furthermore, I ask whether it be the Quantity or Number; or Quality, and
Greatness of doctrinall errors that may yield sufficient cause to relinquish
the Churches Communion? I prove that neither. Not the Quality, which is
supposed to be beneath the degree of points fundamental, or necessary to
salvation. Not the Quantity or Number: For the foundation is strong enough to
support all such unnecessary additions, as you term them. And if they once
weighed so heavy as to overthrow the foundation, they should grow to
fundamental errors, into which your self teach the Church cannot fall. Hay
and stubble (say you) and such page 153.
unprofitable stuff, laid on the roof, destroies not the house, whilst the
maine pillars are standing on the foundation. And tell us, I pray you, the
precise number of errors which cannot be tolerated? I know you cannot do it;
and therefore being uncertain, whether or no you have cause to leave the
Church, you are certainly obliged not to forsake her. Our blessed Savior has
declared his will, that we forgive a private offender seauenty seven times,
that is, without limitation of quantity of time, or quality of trespasses; and
why then dare you allege his command, that you must not pardon his Church for
errors, acknowledged to be not fundamental? What excuse can you faigne to your
selves, who for points not necessary to salvation, have been occasions, causes,
and authors of so many mischiefs, as could not but vnaucydably accompany so
huge a breach in kingdoms, in Common wealths, in private persons, in public
Magistrates, in body, in soul, in goods, in lise, in Church, in the state, by
Schisms, by rebellions, by war, by famine, by plague, by bloodshed, by all
sorts of imaginable calamities upon the whole face of the Earth, wherein as in a
map of Desolation, the heaviness of your crime appears, under which the world
does pant?

24. To say for your excuse, that you left not the Church, but her errors, does
not extenuate, but aggrauate your sin. For by this devise you sow seeds of
endless Schisms, and put into the mouth of all Separatists, a ready answer how
to avoid the note of Schism from your Protestant Church of England, or from
any other Church whatsoever. They will, I say, answer, as you do prompt, that
your Church may be forsaken, if she fall into errors, though they be not
fundamental: And further that no Church must hope to be free from such errors;
which two grounds being once laid, it will not be hard to infer the
consequence, that she may be forsaken.

25. From some other words of D. Potter I like wise prove, that for Errors not
fundamental, the Church ought not to be forsaken. There neither was (says he)
nor can be Page 5.
any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no more then from Christ
himself. To depart from a particular Church, and namely from the Church of
Rome, in some doctrines and practices, there might be just and necessary cause,
though the Church of Rome wanted nothing necessary to salvation. Mark his
doctrine, that there can be no just cause to depart from the Church of Christ:
and yet he teaches that the Church of Christ may err in points not
fundamental; Therefore (say I) we cannot forsake the Roman Church for points
not fundamental, for then we might also forsake the Church of Christ, which
your self deny: and I pray you consider whether you do not plainly contradict
your self, while in the words above recited, you say there can be no just
cause to forsake the Catholic Church; and yet that there may be necessary
cause to depart from the Church of Rome, since you grant that the Church of
Christ may err in points not fundamental; and that the Roman Church has
erred only in such points; as by and by we shall see more in particular. And
thus much be said to disprove their chiefest Answer, that they left not the
Church, but her Corruptions.

26. Another evasion D. Potter brings, to avoid the imputation of Schism,
and it is because they still acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a Member of
the body of Christ, and not cut off from the hope of salvation. And this (says
he) cleares us from page 76.
the imputation of Schism, whose property it is, to cut of from the Body of
Christ, and the hope of salvation, the Church from which it separates.

27. This is an Answer which perhaps you may get some one to approve, if first
you can put him out of his wits. For what prodigious doctrines are these? Those
Protestants who believe that the Church erred in points necessary to salvation,
and for that cause left her, cannot be excused from damnable Schism: But
others who believed that she had no damnable errors, did very well, yea were
obliged to forsake her: and (which is more miraculous, or rather monstrous)
they did well to forsake her formally and precisely, because they judged, that
she retained all means necessary to salvation. I say, because they so judged.
For the very reason for which he acquitteth himself, and condemns those
others as Schismatiques, is because he holds that the Church which both of
them forsook, is not cut of from the Body of Christ, and the hope of
salvation; whereas those other Zealots deny her to be a member of Christ's Body,
or capable of salvation, wherein alone they disagree from D. Potter: for in the
effect of separation they agree, only they do it upon a different motive or
reason. Were it not a strange excuse if a man would think to cloak his
rebellion, by alleging that he held the person against whom he rebelled to be
his lawful Soueraygne? And D. Potter thinks himself free from Schism,
because he forsook the Church of Rome, but yet so, as that still he held her to
be the true Church, and to have all necessary means to Salvation. But I will
no further urge this most solemn foppery, and do much more willingly put all
Catholics in mind, what an unspeakable comfort it is, that out Adversaries
are forced to confess, that they cannot clear themselves from Schism,
otherwise then by acknowledging that they do not, nor cannot cut off from the
Hope of salvation our Church. Which is as much as if they should in plain
terms say: They must be damned, unless we may be saved. Moreover this evasion
does indeed condemn your zealous Brethren of Heresy, for denying the Churches
perpetuity, but does not clear your self from Schism, which consists in
being divided from that true Church, with which a man agrees in all points of
faith, as you must profess your self to agree with the Church of Rome in all
fundamental Articles. For other wise you should cut her off from the hope of
salvation, and so condemn your self of Schism. And lastly even according to
the your own definition of Schism, you cannot clear your self from that
crime, unless you be content to acknowledge a manifest contradiction in your
own Assertions. For if you do not cut us off from the Body of Christ, and the
Hope of salvation; how come you to say in another place that you judge a
reconciliation with us to be page 20.
damnable? That to depart from the Church of Rome, there might be just and
necessary page 75.
cause? That, they that have the understanding and means to discover their
error, and neglect to use them page 79.
we dare not flatter them (say you) with so easy a censure, of hope of
salvation? If then it be (as you say) a property of Schism, to cut off from
the hope of salvation the Church from which it separates: how will you clear
your self from Schism, who dare not flatter us with so easy a censure? and
who affirm that a reconciliation with us is damnable? But the truth is, there
is no constancy in your Assertions, by reason of difficulties which press you
on all sides. For, you are loath to affirm clearly that we may be saved, least
such a grant might be occasion (as in all reason it ought to be) of the
conversion of Protestants to the Roman Church: And on the other side, if you
affirm that our Church erred in points fundamental, or necessary to
salvation, you know not how, nor where, nor among what Company of men, to find
a perpetual visible Church of Christ before Luther: And the fore your best
shift is to say, and unsay as your occasions command. I do not examine your
Assertion that it is the property of Schism to cut of from the Body of Christ,
and the hope of salvation, the Church from which it separates; wherein you are
mightily mistaken, as appears by your own example of the Donatists, who were
most formal and proper Heretics, and not Schismatiques, as Schism is a vice
distinct from Heresy. Besides, although the Donatists, and Luciferians (whom
you also alledg) had been mere Schismatiques, yet it were against all good
Logic, from a particular to infer a general Rule, to determine what is the
property of Schism.

28. A third devise I find in D. Potier to clear his Brethren from Schism.
There is (says he) great difference between Page 75.
a Schism from them, and a Reformation of our selves.

29. This I confess is a quaint subtility, by which all Schism, and Sin may
be as well excused. For what devil incarnate could merely pretend a
separation, and not rather some other motive of virtue, truth, profit, or
pleasure? But now since their pretended Reformation consisted, as they gave
out, in forsaking the corruptions of the Church, the Reformation of themselves,
and their division from us, falls out to be one, and the self same thing. Nay,
we see that although they infinitely disagree in the particulars of their
reformation, yet they symbolize, and consent in the general point of forsaking
our pretended corruptions: An evident sign, that the thing, upon which their
thoughts first pitched, was not any particular Model, or Idaea of Religion,
but a settled resolution to forsake the Church of Rome. Wherefore this
Metaphysicall speculation, that they intended only to reform themselves,
cannot possibly excuse them from Schism, unless first they be able to prove,
that they were obliged to depart from us. Yet for as much as concerns the fact
it self; it is clear, that Luthers revolt did not proceed from any zeal of
Reformation: The motives which put him upon so wretched, and unfortunate a
work, were Covetousness, Ambition, Lust, Pride, Envy, and grudging that the
promulgation of Indulgences was not committed to himself, or such as he
desired. He himself takes God to witness, that he fell into these troubles
casually, and Casu no^ voluntate in has turbas incidi Deum ipsum testor.
against his will (not upon any intention of Reformation) not so much as
dreaming or suspecting any change which might Act. Ex mon. p. 404.
happen. And he began to preach (against Indulgences) when he knew not what
Steidan lib. 16. fol. 232.
the matter meant. For (says he) I scarcely understood Sleid. lib. 13. fol.
177.
then what the name of Indulgences mea^t. In so much as afterward Luther did
much mislike of his own undertaken course, oftentimes (says he) wishing Luth.
in colloq. mensal.
that I had never begun that business. And Fox says: It is apparent that Act.
mon. page 404.
Luther promised Cardinal Caietan to keep silence, provided also his
adversaries would do the like. M. Cowper reports further, that Luther by his
letter submitted Cowp. in his Cronicle.
himself to the Pope, so that he might not be compelled to recant. With much
more, which may be seen in Tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 11. subd. 2.
Brereley. But this is sufficient to show, that Luther was far enough from
intending any Reformation. And if he judged a Reformation to be necessary, what
a huge wickedness was it in him, to promise silence if his adversaries would do
the like? Or to submit himself to the Pope, so that he might not be compelled
to recant? Or if the Reformation were not indeed intended by him, nor judged to
be necessary, how can he be excused from damnable. Schism? And this is the
true manner of Luthers revolt, taken from his own acknowledgme^ts, and the
words of the more ancient Protestants themselves, whereby D. Potters faltring,
and mincing the matter is clearly discovered, and confuted. Upon what motives
our Country was divided from the Roman Church by king Henry the Eight, and how
the Schism was continued by Queen Elizabeth, I have no heart to rip up. The
world knows, it was not upon any zeal of Reformation.

30. But you will prove your former evasion by a couple of similitudes: If a
Monastery page 81.80.
should reform it self, and should reduce into practice, ancient good
discipline, when others would not; in this case could it in reason be charged
with Schism from others, or with Apostasy from its rule and order? Or as in a
society of men universally infected with some disease, they that should free
themselves from the common disease, could not be therefore said to separate from
the society: so neither can the reformed Churches be truly accused for making a
Schism from the Church, seeing all they did was to reform themselves.

31. I was very glad to find you in a Monastery, but sorry when I perceived
that you were inuenting ways how to forsake your Vocation, and to maintain
the lawfulnes of Schism from the Church, and Apostasy from a Religious Order.
Yet before you make your final resolution hear a word of advise. Put case;
That a Monastery did confessedly observe their substantial vows, and all
principal Statutes, or Constitutions of the Order, though with some neglect of
lesser Monastical Obseruances: And that a Reformation were undertaken, not by
authority of lawful Superiors, but by some One, or very few in comparison of
the rest: And those few known to be led, not with any spirit of Reformation,
but by some other sinister intention: And that the Statutes of the house were
even by those busy-fellowes confessed, to have been time out of mind
understood, and practiced as now they were: And further that the pretended
Reformers acknowledged that themselves as soon as they were gone out of their
Monastery, must not hope to be free from those or the like errors and
corruptions, for which they left their Brethren: And (which is more) that they
might fall into more enormous crimes then they did, or could do in their
Monastery, which we suppose to be secured from all substantial corruptions,
for the anoyding of which they have an infallible assistance. Put (I say)
together all these my And's, and then come with your If's, if a Monastery
should reform it self etc. and tell me, if you could excuse such Reformers
from Schism, Sedition, Rebellion, Apostasy, etc? What would you say of such
Reformers in your College? or tumultuous persons in a kingdom? Remember now
your own Tenets, and then reflect how fit a similitude you have picked out, to
prove your self a Schismatique. You teach that the Church may err in points
not fundamental, but that for all fundamental points she is secured from
error: You teach that no particular person, or Church has any promise of
assistance in points fundamental: You, and the whole world can witness that
when Luther began, he being but only One, opposed himself to All, as well
subjects as superiors; and that even then, when he himself confessed that he
had no intention of Reformation: You cannot be ignorant but that many chief
learned Protestants are forced to confess the Antiquity of our doctrine and
practice, and do in several, and many Controversies, acknowledge that the
Ancient Fathers stood on our side: Consider I say these points, and see whether
your similitude do not condemn your Progenitors of Schism from God's visible
Church, yea and of Apostasy also from their Religious Orders, if they were
vowed Regulars, as Luther, and diverse of them were.

32. From the Monastery you are fled into an Hospital of persons universally
infected with some disease, where you find to be true what I supposed, that
after your departure from your Brethren you might fall into greater
inconveniences, and more infectious diseases, then those for which you left
them. But you are also upon the point to abandon these miserable needy persons,
in whose behalf for Charities sake, let me set before you these
considerations. If the disease neither were, nor could be mortal, because in
that Company of men God had placed a Tree of life: If going thence, the sick
man might by curious tasting the Tree of Knowledge eat poison under pretense
of bettering his health: If he could not hope thereby to avoid other diseases
like those for which he had quitted the company of the first infected men: If
by his departure innumerable mischiefs were to ensue; could such a man without
sencelenesse be excused by saying, that he sought to free himself from the
common disease, but not forsooth to separate from the society? Now your self
compare the Church to a man deformed with page 155.
superfluous fingers and toes, but yet who has not lost any vital part: you
acknowledge that out of her society no man is secured from damnable error, and
the world can bear witness what unspeakable mischiefs and calamities ensued
Luthers revolt from the Church. Pronounce then concerning the^, the same
sentence which even now I have showed them to deserve who in the manner
aforesaid should separate from persons universally infected with some disease.

33. But alas, to what pass has Heresy brought men, who term themselves
Christians, and yet blush not to compare the beloved Spouse of our Lord, the
one Dove, the purchase of our Saviors most precious blood, the holy Catholic
Church, I mean that visible Church of Christ which Luther found spread over
the whole world; to a Monastery so disordered that it must be forsaken; to the
Giant in Gath much deformed with superfluous singers and toes; to a society of
men universally infected with some disease? And yet all these comparisons, and
much worse, are neither injurious, nor undeserved, if once it be granted, or
can be proved, that the visible Church of Christ may err in any one point of
Faith, although not fundamental.

34. Before I part from these similitudes, one thing I must observe against the
evasion of D. Potter, that they left not the Church, but her Corruptions. For
as those Reformers of the Monastery, or those other who left the company of men
universally infected with some disease, would deny themselves to be
Schismatiques, or any way blameworthy, but could not deny, but that they left
the said Communities: So Luther and the rest cannot so much as pretend, not to
have left the visible Church, which according to them was infected with many
diseases, but can only pretend that they did not sin in leaving her. And you
speak very strangely when you say: In a Society of men universally infected
with some disease, they that should free themselves from the Common disease,
could not be therefore said to separate from the Society. For if they do not
separate themselves from the Society of the infected persons; how do they free
themselves and depart from the common disease? Do they at the same time remain
in the company, and yet depart from those infected creatures? We must then say,
that they separate themselves from the persons, though it be by occasion of the
disease: Or if you say, they free their own persons from the common disease,
yet so, that they remain still in the Company infected, subject to the
Superiors and Governors thereof, eating and drinking and keeping public
Assemblies with them; you cannot but know, that Luther and your Reformers the
first pretended free persons from the supposed common infectio^ of the Roman
Church, did not so: for they endeavored to force the Society whereof they were
parts, to be healed and reformed as they were: and if it refused, they did,
when they had forces, drive them away, even their Superiors both spiritual
and temporal, as is notorious. Or if they had not power to expel that
supposed infected Community, or Church of that place, they departed from them
corporally, whom mentally they had forsaken before. So that you cannot deny,
but Luther forsook the external Communion, and Company of the Catholic
Church, for which as your self Page 75.
confess, There neither was nor can be any just cause, no more then to depart
from Christ himself. We do therefore infer, that Luther and the rest who
forsook that visible Church which they found upon earth, were truly, and
properly Schismatiques.

35. Moreover, it is evident that there was a division between Luther and that
Church which was Visible when he arose: but that Church cannot be said to have
divided her self from him, before whose time she was, and in comparison of
whom she was a Whole, and he but a part: therefore we must say, that he
divided himself and went out of her; which is to be a Schismatique, or
Heretic, or both. By this argument, Optatus Meliuitanus proves, that not
Caecilianus, but Parmenianus was a Schismatique, saying: For, Caecilianus went
Lib. 1. cont. Parm.
not out of Maiorinus thy Grandfather, but Maiorinus from Caecilianus: neither
did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or Cyprian, but Maiorinus, in
whose Chair thou sit, which had no beginning before Maiorinus. Since it
manifestly appears that these things were acted in this manuer, it is clear
that you are heirs both of the deliuerers up (of the holy Bible to be burned)
and also of Schismatiques. The whole argument of this holy Father makes
directly both against Luther, and all those who continue the division which he
begun; and proves: That, going out, conuinceth those who go out to be
Scismatiques; but not those from whom they depart: That to forsake the Chair
of Peter is Schism; yea, that it is Schism to erect a Chair which had no
origin, or as it were predecessor, before it self: That to continue in a
division begun by others, is to be Heirs of Schismatiques: and lastly; that to
depart from the Communion of a particular Church (as that of S. Cyprian was) is
sufficient to make a man incur the guilt of Schism, and consequently, that
although Protestants, who deny the Pope to be supreme Head of the Church, do
think by that Heresy to clear Luther from Schism, in disobeying the Pope:
Yet that will not serve to free him from Schism, as it imports a division
from the obedience, or Communion of the particular Bishop, Diocese, Church,
and Country, where he lived.

36. But it is not the heresy of Protestants, or any other Sectaries, that can
deprive S. Peter, and his Successors, of the authority which Christ our Lord
conferred upon them over his whole militant Church: which is a point confessed
by learned Protestants to be of great Antiquity, and for which the judgment of
diverse most ancient holy Fathers is reproved by them, as may be seen at large
in Brereley Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subd. 10.
exactly citing the places of such chief Protestants. And we must say with S.
Cyprian: Heresies Epist. 55.
have sprung, and Schisms been bred from no other cause then for that the
Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest and Judge is considered to be for
the time in the Church of God. Which words do plainly condemn Luther, whether
he will understand them as spoken of the Universal, or of every particular
Church. For he withdrew himself both from the obedience of the Pope, and of
all particular Bishops, and Churches. And no less clear is the said Optatus
Meliuitanus, saying: Thou caust not deny Lib 2. cont. Parm.
but that thou know, that in the City of Rome, there was first an
Episcopal Chair placed for Peter, wherein Peter the head of all the Apost es
sat, whereof also he was called Cephas; in which one Chair, Unity was to be
kept by all, least the other Apostles might attribute to themselves, each one
his particular Chair; and that he should be a Schismatique and sinner, who
against that one single Chair should erect another. Many other Authorities of
Fathers might be alleged to this purpose, which I omit, my intention being not
to handle particular controversies.

37. Now, the arguments which hitherto I have brought, prove that Luther, and
his followers were Schismatiques, without examining (for as much as belonges to
this point) whether or no the Church can err in any one thing great or small,
because it is universally true, that there can be no just cause to forsake the
Communion of the Visible Church of Christ, according to S. Augustine, saying:
It is not possible Ep. 48.
that any may have just cause to separate their Communion, from the Communion
of the whole world, and call themselves the Church of Christ, as if they had
separated themselves from the Communion of all Nations upon just cause. But
since indeed the Church cannot err in any one point of doctrine, nor can
approve any corruption in manners; they cannot with any color avoid the just
imputation of eminent Schism, according to the verdict of the same holy Father
in these words: The most manifest De Bapt. Lib. 5. c. 1.
sacrilege of Schism is eminent, when there was no cause of separation.

38. Lastly, I prove that Protestants cannot avoid the note of Schism, at
least by reason of their mutual separation from one another For most certain
it is that there is very great difference, for the outward face of a Church,
and profession of a different faith, between the Lutherans, the rigid
Caluinists, and the Protestants of England So that if Luther were in the right,
those other Protestants who invented Doctrines far different from his, and
divided themselves from him, must be reputed Schismatiques: and the like
argument may proportionably be applied to their further divisions, and
subdiuisions. Which reason I yet urge more strongly out of D Potter, page 20.
who affirms, that to him and to such as are convicted in conscience of the
errors of the Roman Church, a reconciliation is impossible, and damnable: And
yet he teaches, that their difference from the Roman Church, is not in
fundamental points. Now, since among Protestants there is such diversity of
belief, that one denies what the other affirms, they must be co^uicted in
conscience that one part is in error (at least not fundame^tall.) and, if D.
Potter will speak consequently, that a reconciliation between them is
impossible: and what greater division, or Schism can there be, then when one
part must judge a reconciliation with the other to be impossible, and damnable?

39. Out of all which premises, this Conclusion follows: That, Luther and his
followers were Schismatiques; from the universal visible Church; from the Pope
Christ's Vicar on earth, and Successor to S. Peter; from the particular
Diocese in which they received Baptism; from the Country or Nation to which
they belonged; from the Bishop under whom they lived; many of them from the
Religious Order in which they were Professed; from one another; And lastly from
a man's self (as much as is possible) because the self same Protestant to day
is convicted in conscience, that his yesterday's Opinion was an error (as D.
Potter knows a man in the world who from a Puritan was turned to a moderate
Protestant) with whom therefore a reconciliation, according to D. Potters
grounds, is both impossible, and damnable.

40. It seems D. Potters last refuge to excuse himself and his Brethren from
Schism, is because they proceeded according to their conscience, dictating an
obligation under damnation to forsake the errors maintained by the Church of
Rome. His words are: Although we confess the Page 81.
Church of Rome to be (in some sense) a true Church, and her errors to some men
not damnable: yet for us who are convinced in conscience, that she erres in
many things, a necessity lies upon us, even under pain of damnation, to
forsake her in those errors.

41. I answer: It is very strange, that you judge us extremely Uncharitable, in
saying, Protestants cannot be saved; while your self avouch the same of all
learned Catholics, whom ignorance cannot excuse. If this your pretense of
conscience may serve, what Schismatique in the Church, what popular seditious
brain in a kingdom, may not allege the dictamen of conscience to free
themselves from Schism, or Sedition? No man wishes them to do any thing
against their conscience, but we say, that they may, and ought to rectify, and
depose such a conscience, which is easy for them to do, even according to your
own affirmation; that we Catholics want no means necessary to salvation.
Easy to do? Nay not to do so, to any man in his right wits must seem
impossible. For how can these two apprehensions stand together: In the Roman
Church I enjoy all means necessary to salvation, and yet I cannot hope to
besaued in that Church? or, who can conioine in one brain (not cracked) these
assertions. After due examination I judge the Roman errors not to be in
themselves fundamental, or damnable; and yet I judge that according to true
reason, it is damnable to hold them? I say according to true reason. For if you
grant your conscience to be erroneous, in judging that you cannot be saved in
the Roman Church, by reason of her errors; there is no other remedy, but that
you must rectify your erring conscience, by your other Judgment, that her
errors are not fundamental, nor damnable. And this is no more Charity, then
you daily affoard to such other Protestants as you term Brethren, whom you
cannot deny to be in some errors, (unless you will hold, That of contradictory
propositions both may be true) and yet you do not judge it damnable to live in
their Communion, because you hold their errors not to be fundamental. You
ought to know, that according to the doctrine of all Deuines, there is great
difference betwixt a speculatiue persuasion, and a practical dictamen of
conscience; and therefore although they had in speculation conceived the visible
Church to err in some doctrines, of themselves not damnable; yet with that
speculatiue judgment they might, and ought to have entertained this practical
dictamen, that for points not substantial to faith, they neither were bound,
nor lawfully could break the bond of Charity, by breaking unity in Gods
Church. You say that, hay and stubble Page 155.
and such unprofitable stuff (as are Corruptions in points not fundamental)
laid on the roof, destroys not the house, whilst the maine pillars are
standing on the foundation. And you would think him a madman who to be rid of
such stuff, would set his house on fire, that so he might walk in the light,
as you teach that Luther was obliged to forsake the house of God, for an
unnecessary light, not without a combustion formidable to the whole Christian
world; rather then bear with some errors, which did not destroy the
foundation of faith. And as for others who entered in at the breach first made
by Luther, they might, and ought to have guided their consciences by that most
reasonable rule of Vince^tius Lyrinensis, delivered in these words. Indeed it
is a matter of great Aduers. hares. c. 27.
moment, and both most profitable to be learned, and necessary to be remembered,
and which we ought again and again to illustrate, and inculcate with weighty
heaps of examples, that almost all Catholics may know, that they ought to
receive the Doctors with the Church, and not forsake the faith of the Church
with the Doctors: And much less should they forsake the faith of the Church
to follow Luther, Calvin, and such other Nouelists. Moreover though your first
Reformers had conceived their own opinions to be true; yet they might, and
ought to have doubted, whether they were certain: because your self affirm,
that infallibility was not promised to any particular Persons, or Churches. And
since in cases of uncertainties, we are not to leave our Superior, nor cast
off his obedience, or publicly oppose his decrees; your Reformers might
easily have found a safe way to satisfy their zealous conscience, without a
public breach: especially if with this their uncertainty, we call to mind the
peaceable possession, and prescription which by the confession of your own
Brethren, the Church, and Pope of Rome did for many ages enjoy. I wish you
would examine the works of your Brethren, by the words your self sets down
to free S. Cyprian from Schism: every syllable of which words conuinceth
Luther, and his Co^partners to be guilty of that crime, and shows in what
manner they might with great ease, and quietness have rectified their conscience
about the pretended errors of the Church S. Cyprian (say you) was a peaceable
Page 124.
and modest man; dissented from others in his judgment, but without any breach
of Charity; condemned no man (much less any Church) for the contrary opinion.
He believed his own opinion to be true, but believed not, that it was
necessary, and therefore did not proceed rashly and peremptorily to censure
others, but left them to their liberty. Did your Reformers imitate this manner
of proceeding? Did they censure no man, much less any Church? S. Cyprian
believed his own Opinion to be true, but believed not that it was necessary,
and THEREFORE did not proceed rashly, and peremptorily to censure others. You
believe the points wherein Luther differs from us not to be fundamental, or
necessary; and why do you not thence infer the like THEREFORE, he should not
have proceeded to censure others? In a word, since their disagreement from us
concerned only points which were not fundamental, they should have believed
that they might have been deceived, as well as the whole visible Church, which
you say may err in such points; and therefore their doctrines being not
certainly true, and certainly not necessary, they could not give sufficient
cause to depart from the Communion of the Church.

42. In other places you write so much, as may serve us to prove that Luther,
and his followers ought to have deposed, and rectified their consciences: As
for example, when you say. When the Church page 103.
has declared her self in any matter of opinion, or of Rites, her declaration
obliges all her children to peace, and external obedience. Nor is it fit, or
lawful for any private man to oppose his judgment to the public; (as Luther
and his fellows did) He may offer his opinion to be considered of, so he do it
with evidence, or great probability of Scripture, or reason, and very modestly,
still containing himself within the dutiful respect which he owes: but if he
will factiously advance his own conceyts (his own conceyts? and yet grounded
upon evidence of Scripture) and despise the Church so far as to cut of her
Communion; he may be justly branded and condemned for a Schismatique, yea and
an Heretic also in some degree, and in foro exteriori, though his opinion
were true, and much more if it be false. Could any man, even for a Fee, have
spoken more home to condemn your Predecessors of Schism, or Heresy? Could
they have stronger Motives to oppose the doctrine of the Church, and leave her
Communion, then evidence of Scripture? And yet, according to your own words,
they should have answered, and rectifyed their conscience, by your doctrine,
that though their opinion were true, and grounded upon evidence of Scripture,
or reason; yet it was not lawful for any private man to oppose his judgment to
the public, which obliges all Christians to peace and external obedience:
and if they cast of the communion of the Church for maintayning their own
Conceits, they may be branded for Schismatiques, and Heretics in some degree,
and in foro exteriori, that is; all other Christians ought so to esteem of
them, (and why then are we accounted uncharitable for judging so of you?) and
they also are obliged to behave themselves in the face of all Christian
Churches, as if indeed they were not Reformers, but Schismatiques, and
Heretics, or as Pagans, and Publicans. I thank you for your ingenuous
confession, in recompense whereof I will do a deed of Charity by putting you in
mind, into what labyrinths you are brought, by teaching that the Church may
err in some points of faith, and yet that it is not lawful for any man to
oppose his judgment, or leave her Communion, though he have evidence of
Scripture against her. Will you have such a man dissemble against his
conscience, or externally deny a truth known to be contained in holy
Scripture? How much more coherently do Catholics proceed, who believe the
universal infallibility of the Church, and from thence are assured that there
can be no evidence of Scripture, or reason against her definitions, nor any
just cause to forsake her Communion? M. Hooker esteemed by many Protestants an
incomparable man, yields as much as we have alleged out of you. The will of
God is (says he) to have In his Preface to his books of Ecclesiastical
policy. Sect. 6. page 28.
them do whatsoever the sentence of judicial and final docision shall
determine, yea though it seem in their private opinion, to swerve utterly from
that which is right. Does not this man tell Luther what the will of God was,
which he transgressing must of necessity be guilty of Schism? And must not M.
Hooker either acknowledge the universal infallibility of the Church, or else
drive men into the perplexities and labyrinths of distembling against their
conscience, whereof now I spoke? Not unlike to this, is your doctrine delivered
elsewhere. Before the Nicene Council (say you) many page 131.
good Catholic Bishops were of the same opinion with the Donatists, that the
Baptism of Heretics was ineffectuall; and with the Nouatians, that the
Church ought not to absolve some grievous sinners. These errors therefore (if
they had gone no further) were not in themselves Heretical, especially in the
proper, and most heavy, or bitter sense of that word; neither was it in the
Churches intention (or in her power) to make them such by her declaration. Her
intention was to silence all disputes, and to settle peace and Unity in her
government: to which all wise and peaceable men submitted, whatsoever their
opinion was. And those factious people, for their unreasonable and uncharitable
opposition, were very justly branded for Schismatiques. For us, the Mistaker
will never prove that we oppose any declaration of the Catholic Church etc.
and therefore he does unjustly charge us either with Schism, or Heresy. These
words manifestly condemn your Reformers who opposed the visible Church in many
of her declarations, Doctrines, and Commands imposed upon them, for silencing
all disputes, and settling peace and Unity in the government, and therefore they
still remaining obstinately disobedient, are justly charged with Schism, and
Heresy. And it is to be observed that you grant the Donatists to have been very
justly branded for Schismatiques, although their opposition against the Church
did concern (as you hold) a point not fundamental to the Faith, and which
according to S. Augustine cannot be proved out of Scripture alone; and therefore
either does evidently convince that the Church is universally infallible, even
in points not fundamental, or else that it is Schism to oppose her
declarations in those very things wherein she may err; and consequently that
Luther, and his fellows were Schismatiques, by opposing the visible Church for
points not fundamental, though it were (untruly) supposed that she erred in
such points. But by the way, how come you on the sudden to hold the
determination of a General Council (of Nice) to be the declaration of the
Catholic Church, seeing you teach, That General Councels may err even
fundamentally? And do you now say, with us, that to oppose the declaration of
the Church is sufficient that one may be branded with Heresy, which is a point
so often impugned by you?

43. It is therefore most evident, that no pretended scruple of conscience could
excuse Luther, which he might, and ought to have rectified by means inowe, if
Pride, Ambition, Obstinacy etc. had given him leave. I grant he was touched
with scruple of conscience, but it was because he had forsaken the visible
Church of Christ; and I beseech all Protestants for the love they bear to that
sacred ransom of their souls, the Blood of our blessed Savior, attentively to
ponder, and impartially to apply to their own Conscience, what this Man spoke
concerning the feelings, and remorse of his. How often (says he) did my
trembling heart Tom. 2. Germ Jen. fol. 9. and tom 2. Wit. of anno 1562 de
abrong. Miss. prnat. fol. 244.
beat within me, and reprehending me, object against me that most strong
argument; Art thou only wise? Do so many worlds err? Were so many ages
ignorant? What if thou errest, and drawest so many into hell to be damned
eternally with thee? And in another place he says: Do thou who art but One,
and of no Tom. 5. Annot. breniss.
account, take upon thee so great matters? What, if thou, being but one,
offendest? If God permit such, so many, and all to err, why may he not permit
thee to err? To this belong those arguments, the Church, the Church, the
Fathers, the Fathers, the Councels, the Customs, the multitudes and greatness
of wise men: Whom do not these Mountains of arguments, these clouds, yea these
seas of Examples overthrow? And these thoughts wrought so deep in his soul,
that he often wished and desired that he had Colloq. menfal. fol. 158.
never begun this business: wishing yet further that his Writings were burned,
and buried Praefat. in tom. German. Ien.
in eternal oblivion. Behold what remorse Luther felt, and how he wanted no
strength of malice to cross his own conscience: and therefore it was no
scruple, or conceived obligation of conscience, but some other motives which
induced him to oppose the Church. And if yet you doubt of his courage to
encounter, and strength to master all reluctations of conscience, hear an
example or two for that purpose. Of Communion under both kinds, thus he says:
If the Council De formula inissae.
should in any case decree this, least of all would we then use both kinds, yea
rather in despite of the Council, and that Decree, we would use either but
one kind only, or neither, and in no case both. Was not Luther persuaded in
Conscience, that to use neither kind was against our Saviors command? Is this
only to offer his opinion to be considered of, as you said all men ought to do?
And that you may be sure that he spoke from his heart, and if occasion had been
offered, would have been as good as his word; mark what he says of the
Elevation of the Sacrament: I did know In parna Confess.
the Elevation of the Sacrament to be Idolatricall; yet nevertheless I did
retain it in the Church at Wittemberge, to the end I might vex the devil
Carolostadius. Was not this a conscience large and capacious enough, that could
swallow Idolatry? Why would he not toleate Idolatry in the Church of Rome (as
these men are wont to blaspheme) if he could retain it in his own Church at
Wittemberge? If Carolostadius, Luthers of spring, was the Devil, who but
himself must be his damme? Is Almighty God wont to send such furies to preach
the Gospel? And yet further (which makes most directly to the point in hand)
Luther in his Book of abrogaing the Private Mass, exhorts the Augustines
Friars of Wittemberg, who first abrogated the Mass, that even against their
conscience accusing them, they should persist in what they had begun,
acknowledging that in some things he himself had done the like. Vid. Tan. tom.
2. disput. 1. q. 2. dub. 4. n. 108.
And Ioannes Mathefias a Luther an Preacher says Antonius Musa the Parish
Priest In orat. Germ. 12. as Lath.
of Rocklitz, recounted to me that on a time he heartily moaned himself to the
Doctor (he means Luther) that he himself could not believe what he preached to
others: And that D. Luther answered; praise and thanks be to God, that this
happens also to others, for I had thought it had happened only to me. Are not
these conscionable, and fit Reformers? And can they be excused from Schism
under pretense that they held themselves obliged to forsake the Roman Church?
If then it be damnable to proceed against ones conscience, what will become of
Luther, who against his conscience persisted in his division from the Roman
Church?

44. Some are said to flatter themselves with another pernicious conceit, that
they (forsooth) are not guilty of sin; Because they were not the first
Authors, but only are the continuers of the Schism, which was already begun.

45. But it is hard to believe, that any man of judgment, can think this
excuse will subsist, when he shall come to give up his final account. For
according to this reason, no Schism will be damnable, but only to the
Beginners: Whereas contrarily, the longer it continues, the worse it grows to
be, and at length degenerates to Heresy as wine by long keeping grows to be
Vinegar, but not by continuance returns again to his former nature of wine.
Thus S. Augustine says, that Heresy is Lib. 2. cont. Crese. c. 7.
Schism inueterate. And in another place: We object to you only the Ep. 164.
crime of Schism, which you have also made to become H. resy by evil
perseuering therein. And S. Hierom says: Though Schism Upon these words ad
Pit. 3. Haereticum homine^ etc.
in the beginning may be in some sort understood to be different from heresy;
yet there is no Schism which does not faigne to it self some Heresy, that it
may seem to have departed from the Church upon just cause. And so indeed it
falls out. For men may begin upon passion, but afterward by instinct of
corrupt nature seeking to maintain their Schism as lawful, they fall into
some Heresy, without which their Separation could not be justified with any
color, as in our present case the very affirming that it is lawful to
continue a Schism unlawfully begun, is an error against the maine principle
of Christianity, that it is not lawful for any Christian to live our of God's
Church, within which alone Salvation can be had; Or, that it is not damnable to
disobey her Decrees, according to the words of our Savior: If he shall not
sear Matt. 18.
the Church, let him be to thee as a Pagan or Publican. And, He Iue, 10.16.
that despises you, despises me. We heard above Optatus Mileuitanus saying to
Parmenianus, that both he, and all those other who continued in the Schism
begun by Maiorinus, did inherit their Forefathers Schism; and yet Parmenianus
was the third Bishop after Maiorinus in his Sea, and did not begin, but only
continue the Schism. For (says this holy Father) Caecilianus Lib. 2. cont.
Parm.
went not out of Maiorinus thy Grandfather, but Maiorinus from Caecilianus:
neither did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or Cyprian, but
Maiorinus, in whose Chair thou sit, which before Maiorinus (Luther) had no
beginning. Seeing it is evident that these things passed in this manner (that,
for example, Luther departed from the Church, and not the Church from Luther)
it is clear that you be HEIRS both of the giuers up of the Bible to be
burned, and of SCHISMATIQVES. And the Regal Power, or example of Henry the
Eight could not excuse his Subjects from Schism according to what we have
heard out of S. Chrysostom saying: Nothing does so much provoke Hom 11. In ep
st. ad Ep^^s.
the wrath of Almighty God, as that the Church should be divided. Although we
should do innumerable good deeds, if we divide the full Ecclesiastical
Congregation, we shall be punished no less, then they who did rend his
(natural) Body; for that was done to the gain of the whole world, though not
with that intention: but this has no good in it at all, but that the greatest
hurt rises from it. These things are spoken not only to those who be are
office, but to such also as are governed by them. Behold therefore, how liable
both Subjects, and Superiors are to the sin of Schism, if they break the
unity of God's Church. The words of S. Paul can in no occasion be verified more
then in this of which we speak. They who do such things Romans 1.32.
are worthy of death: and not only they that do them, but they also that
consent with the doers. In things which are indifferent of their own nature,
Custom may be occasion, that some act not well begun, may in time come to be
lawfully continued. But no length of Time, no Quality of Persons, no
Circumstance of Necessity can legitimate actions which are of their own mature
unlawful: and therefore division from Christ's my sticall Body, being of the
number of those actions, which Deuines teach to be intrinsece malas, evil of
their own nature and essence, no difference of Persons or Time can ever make
it lawful. D. Potter says: There neither was, nor can be any cause to depart
from the Church of Christ, no more then from Christ himself. And who dares
say, that it is not damnable to continue a Separation from Christ? Prescription
cannot in conscience run, when the first beginner, and his Successors are
conscious that the thing to be prescribed, for example goods or lands, were
unjustly possessed at the first. Christians are not like strayes, that after a
certain time of wandering from their right home, fall from their owner to the
Lord of the Soil; but as long as they retain the indeleble Character of
Baptism, and live upon earth, they are obliged to acknowledge subjection to
God's Church. Human Laws may come to nothing by discontinuance of Time, but
the Law of God, commanding us to conserve Unity in his Church, does still
remain. The continued disobedience of Children cannot deprive Parents of their
paternall right, nor can the Grandchild be undutiful to his Grand Father,
because his Father was unnatural to his own Parent. The longer God's Church
is disobeyed; the profession of her Doctrine denied her Sacraments neglected;
her Liturgy condemned; her Unity violated; the more grievous the fault grows
to be: as the longer a man withholds a due debt, or retains his Neighbors
goods, the greater injustice he commits. Constancy in evil does not extenuate,
but aggrauate the same, which by extension of Time, receives increase of
strength, and addition of greater malice. If these men's conceits were true, the
Church might come to be wholly divided by wicked Schisms, and yet after some
space of time, none could be accused of Schism, nor be obliged to return to
the visible Church of Christ: and so there should remain no One true visible
Church. Let therefore these men who pretend to honor, reverence, and believe
the Doctrine, and practice of the visible Church, and to condemn their
forefathers who fosooke her, and say they would not have done so, if they had
lived in the days of their Fathers, and yet follow their example in remaining
divided from her Communion; consider, how truly these words of our Savior fall
upon them. Woe be to you, because you build Matt. 23. ^. 29. etc.
the Prophets sepulchers, and garnish the monuments of just men, and say: If we
had been in our Fathers days, we had not been their fellows in the blood of
the Prophets. Therefore you are a testimony to your own selves, that you are
the sons of them that killed the Prophets; and fill up the measure of your
Fathers.

46. And thus having demonstrated that Luther, his Associates, and all that
continue in the Schism by them begun, are guilty of Schism, by departing
from the visible true Church of Christ; it remains that we examine what in
particular was that Visible true Church, from which they departed, that so they
may know to what Church in particular they ought to return: and then we shall
have performed what was proposed to be handled in the fifth Point.

47. That the Roman Church (I speak not for the present, of the particular
Diocese of Rome, 5 Point.
but of all visible Churches dispersed throughout the whole world, agreeing in
faith with the Chair of Peter, Luther and the rest departed from the Roman
Church.
whether that Sea were supposed to be in the City of Rome or in any other
place:) That (I say) the Church of Rome, in this sense, was the visible
Catholic Church out of which Luther departed, is proved by your own
Confession, who assign for notes of the Church, the true Preaching of Gods
Church, and due Administration of Sacraments, both which for the substance you
cannot deny to the Roman Church, since you confess that she wa^ted nothing
fundamental, or necessary to salvation; and for that very cause you think to
clear your self from Schism, whose property, as you say, is to cut off from
the page 78.
Body of Christ and the Hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates.
Now that Luther and his fellows were borne and baptized in the Roman Church,
and that she was the Church out of which they departed, is notoriously known:
And therefore you cannot cut her off from the Body of Christ, and Hope of
Salvation, unless you will acknowledge your self to deserve the just imputatio^
of Schism. Neither can you deny her to be truly Catholic by reason of
(pretended) corruptions, not fundamental. For your self avouch, and endeavor
to prove, that the true Catholic Church may err in such points. Moreover, I
hope you will not so much as go about to prove, that when Luther rose, there
was any other true visible Church, disagreeing from the Roman, and agreeing
with Protestants in their particular doctrines: and you cannot deny but that
England in those days agreed with Rome, and other Nations with England: And
therefore either Christ had no visible Church upon Earth, or else you must
grant that it was the Church of Rome. A truth so manifest, that those
Protestants who affirm the Roman Church to have lost the Nature and being of a
true Church, do by inevitable Consequence grant, that for diverse Ages Christ
had no visible Church on Earth: from which error, because D. Potter,
disclaymeth, he must of necessity maintain, that the Roman Church is free from
fundamental, and damnable error, and that she is not cut of from the Body of
Christ, and the Hope of Salvation: And if (says he) any Zelots amongst us have
proceeded Jhid.
to heavier censures, their zeal may be excused, but their Charity and
wisdom cannot be justified.

48. And to touch particulars which perhaps some may object. No man is ignorant
that the Grecians, even the Schismatic Grecians, do in most points agree
with Roman Catholics, and disagree from the Protestant Reformation. They
teach Transubstantiation (which point D. Potter also Page 229.
confesses;) Invocation of Saints, and Angels; veneration of Relics, and
Images; Auricular Confession; enjoined Satisfaction; Confirmation with Chrisme;
Extreme Unction; All the seven Sacraments; Prayer, Sacrifice, Alms for the
dead; Monachisme; That Priests may not marry after their Ordination. In which
points that the Grecians agree with the Roman Church appears by a Treatise
published by the Protestant Deusnes of Wittemberg, entitled, Acta Theologorum
Wittembergensium, and Icremiae Patriarchae Constantinop. de Augustana
Confesaone etc. Wittembergae anno 1584. by the Protestant De statu Eccles. page
233.
Crispinus, and by Sir Edwin Sands in the Relation of the State of Religion of
the West. And I wonder with what color of truth (to say no worse) D. Potter
could affirm that the Doctrines debated between the Protestats page 22^.
and Rome, are only the partial and particular fancies of the Roman Church;
unless happily the opinion of Transubsta^tiation may be excepted, wherein the
latter Grecians seen to agree with the Romanists. Beside the Protestant
Authors already cited, Petrus Arcudius a Grecian and a learned Catholic
Writer, has published a large Volume, the Argument and Title whereof is: Of the
agreement of the Roman, and Greek Church in the seven Sacraments. As for the
Heresy of the Grecians, that the Holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son, I
suppose that Protestants disauow them in that error, as we do.

49. D. Potter will not (I think) so much wrong his reputation, as to tell us,
that the Waldenses, Wicctiffe, Husse, or the like were Protestants, because in
some things they disagreed from Catholics. For he well knows that the
example of such men is subject to these manifest exceptions. They were not of
all Ages, nor in all Countries, but confined to certain places, and were
interrupted in Time, against the notion and nature of the word Catholic. They
had no Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, nor Succession of Bishops, Priests, and
Pastors. They differed among themselves, and from Protestants also. They
agreed in diverse things with us against Protestants. They held doctrines
manifestly absurd and damnable heresies.

50. The Waldenses begun not before the year 1218. so far were they from
Universality of all Ages. For their doctrine: first, they denied all Judgments
which extended to the drawing of blood, and the Sabbath, for which cause they
were called In-sabbatists. Secondly, they taught that Lay men, and women might
consecrate the Sacrament, and preach (no doubt but by this means to make their
Master, Waldo, a mere lay man, capable of such functions.) Thirdly, that
Clergy men ought to have no possessions, or proprieties. Fourthly, that there
should be no division of Parishes, nor Churches, for a walled Church they
reputed as a barn. Fifthly, that men ought not to take an oath in any case.
Sixthly, that those persons sinned mortally, who accompanied without hope of
issue. Seauenthly, they held all things done above the girdle, by kissing,
touching, words, compression of the breasts, etc. to be done in Charity, and
not against Continency. Eighthly, that neither Priest, nor civil Magistrate,
being guilty of mortal sin did enjoy their dignity, or were to be obeyed.
Ninthly, they condemned Princes, and Judges. Tenthly, they affirmed singing in
the Church to be an hellish clamor. Eleauenthly, they taught that men might
dissemble their Religion, and so accordingly they went to Catholic Churches,
dissembling their Faith, and made Offertories, confessions, and communions
after a dissembling manner. Waldo was so unlearned, that (says Act. Mon. page
628.
Fox) he gave rewards to certain learned men to translate the holy Scripture
for him, and being thus helped did (as the same Fox there reports) confer the
form of religion in his time to the infallible word of God. A godly example,
for such as must needs have the Scripture in English, to be read by every
simple body, with such fruit of godly doctrine, as we have seen in the foresaid
gross heresies of Waldo. The followers of Waldo, were like their Master, so
unlearned, that some of them (says Ibid.
Fox) expounded the words, Joan. 1. Suieum non receperunt: Swyne did not
receive him. And to conclude, they agreed in diverse things with Catholics
against Protestants, as may be seen in Tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. subd. 3.
Brereley.

51. Neither can it be pretended, that these are slanders, forged by
Catholics. For, besides that the same things are testified by Protestant
Writers, as Illyr^cus, Cowper, and others, our Authors cannot be suspected of
partiality in disfavor of Protestants, unless you will say perhaps, that they
were Prophets and some hundred years ago, did both foresee that there were to
be Protestants in the world, and that such Protestants were to be like the
Waldenses. Besides, from whence, but from our Histories are Protestants come to
know, that there were any such men as the Waldenses? and that in some points
they agreed with the Protestants, and disagreed from them in others? And upon
what ground can they believe our Authors for that part wherein the Waldenses
were like to Protestants, and imagine they lied in the rest?

52. Neither could Wicliffe continue a Church never interrupted from the time
of the Waldenses, after whom he lived more then one hundred and fifty years to
wit, the year 1371. He agreed with Catholics about the worshipping of
Relics, and Images. and about the Intercession of our blessed Lady, the ever
Immaculate Mother of God, he went so far as to say, It seems to me In sermon. de
Assump. Mart.
impossible, that we should be rewarded without the intercession of the Virgin
Mary. He held seven Saciaments, Purgatory, and other points. And against both
Catholics and Protestants he maintained sundry damnable doctrines, as diverse
Protestant Writers relate. As first: If a Bishop or Priest be in deadly sin,
he does not indeed either give Orders, Consecrate, or Baptize. Secondly, That
Ecclesiastical Ministers ought not to have any temporal possessions, nor
propriety in any thing, but should beg; and yet he himself brake into heresy
because he had been deprived by the Archbishop of Canterbury of a certain
Benefice; as all Schisms, and heresies begin upon passion, which they seek to
cover with the cloak of Reformation. Thirdly he condemned lawful Oaths, like
the Anabaptists. Fourthly, he taught that all things came to pass by absolute
necessity. Fifthly, he defended human merits as the wicked Pelagians did,
namely, as proceeding from natural forces, without the necessary help of God's
grace. Sixthly, that no man is a Civil Magistrate, while he is in mortal
sin; and that the people may at their pleasure correc^t Princes, when they
offend: by which doctrine he proves himself both an Heretic, and a Traitor.

53. As for Husse, his chiefest Doctrines were: That Lay people must receive in
both kinds; and That Civil Lords Prelates, and Bishops loose all right, and
authority, while they are in mortal sin For other things he wholly agreed
with Catholics against Protestants; and the Bohemians his followers being
demanded, in what points they disagreed from the Church of Rome, propounded
only these: The necessity of Communion under both kinds; That all civil
Dominion was forbidden to the Clergy; That Preaching of the word, was free for
all men, and in all places; That open Crimes were in nowise to be permitted for
avoiding of greater evil. By these particulars, it is apparent, that Husse
agreed with Protestants against us, in one only point of both Kinds, which
according to Luther is a thing indifferent; because he teaches that Christ in
this matter In epist. ad Bohemos.
commanded nothing as necessary. And he says further: If thou come to a place
De vtr a^^ que specie Sacram.
where one only kind is administered, use one kind only, as others do.
Melancthon likewise holds it a thing In Cent. epist. Theol. page 225.
indifferent: and the same is the opinion of some other Protestants. All which
considered, it is clear that Protestants cannot challenge the Waldenses,
Wicclifse, and Husse for members of their Church: and although they could, yet
that would advantage them little toward the finding out a perpetual visible
Church of theirs, for the reasons above Number. 49.
specifyed.

54. If D. Potter, would go so far off, as to fetch the Muscouites,
Armenians, Georgians, Aethiopians, or Abissines into his Church, they would
prove over dear bought: For they either hold the damnable heresy of Eutiches,
or use Circumcision, or agree with the Greek, or Roman Church. And it is most
certain that they have nothing to do with the doctrine of Protestants.

55. It being therefore granted that Christ had a visible Church in all ages,
and that there can be none assigned but the Church of Rome; it follows that
she is the true Cath. Church; and that those pretended Corruptions for which
they forsook her, are indeed divine truths, delivered by the visible
Catholic Church of Christ: And, that Luther and his followers departed from
her, and consequently are guily of Schism, by dividing themselves from the
Communion of the Roman Church. Which is clearly convinced out of D. Potter
himself, although the Roman Church were but a particular Church. For he says:
Whoseuer professes Page 70.
himself to forsake the Communion of any one member of the body of Christ,
must confess himself consequently to forsake the whole. Since therefore in
the same place he expressly acknowledges the Church of Rome to be a member of
the Body of Christ, and that it is clear they have forsaken her; it evidently
follows, that they have forsaken the whole, and therefore are most properly
Schismatiques.

56. And lastly, since the crime of Schism is so grievous, that according to
the doctrine of holy Fathers rehearsed above, no multitude of good works, no
moral honesty of life, no cruel death endured even for the profession of some
Article of faith can excuse any one who is guilty of that sin from damnation;
I leave it to be considered, whether it be not true Charity to speak as we
believe, and to believe as all Antiquity has taught us, That whosoever either
begins,, or continues a division for the Roman Church, which we have proved
to be Christ's true Militant Church on earth, cannot without effectual
repentance hope to be a member of his Triumphant Church in heaven. And so I
conclude with these words of blessed Saint Augustine: It is common Cont. Parm.
lib. 2. ^ap. 3.
to all Heretics to be unable to see that thing which in the world is the
most manifest, and placed in the light of all Nations; out of whose Unity
whatsoener they work, though they seem to do it with great care and
diligence, can no more avail them against the wrath of God, then the Spiders
web against the extremity of cold. But now it is high time that we treat of the
other sort of Division from the Church, which is by Heresy.

CHAP. VI. That Luther, and the rest of Protestants, have added Heresy unto
Schism.
BECAUSE Vice is best known by the contrary Virtue, we cannot well determine
what Heresy is, nor who be Heretics, but by the opposite virtue of Faith,
whose Nature being once understood as far as belongs to our present purpose,
we shall pass on with ease to the definition of Heresy, and so be able to
discern who be Heretics. And this I^ntend to do, not by entering into such
particular Questions as are controuerted between Catholics and Protestants,
but only by applying some general grounds, either already proved, or else
yielded to, on all sides.

2. Almighty God having ordained Man to a supernatural End of Beatitude by
supernatural means; it was requisite that his Understanding should be enabled
to apprehend that End, and Means by a supernatural knowledge. And because if
such a knowledge were no more then probable, it could not be able sufficiently
to ouerbeare our Will, and encounter with human probabilities, being backed
with the strength of flesh and blood; It was further necessary, that this
supernatural knowledge should be most certain and infallible; and that Faith
should believe nothing more certainly then that it self is a most certain
Belief, and so be able to beat down all gay probabilities of humane Opinion.
And because the aforesaid Means and End of Beatificall Vision, do far exceed
the reach of natural wit, the certainty of faith could not always be joined
with such evidence of reason, as is wont to be found in the Principles, or
Conclusions of humane natural Sciences; that so all flesh might not glory in
the arm of flesh, but that he, who glories, should glory 2. Cor. 10
in our Lord. Moreover, it was expedient that our belife, or assent to divine
truths, should not only be unknown, or ineuident by any humane discourse, but
that absolutely also it should be obscure in it self, and (ordinarily
speaking) be void even of supernatural evidence; that so we might have
occasion to actuate, and testify the obedience which we owe to our God, not
only by submitting our Will to his Will and Commands, but by subiecting also
our Understanding to his Wisdom and Words, captiuating (as the Apostle
speaks) the same Understanding 2. Cor. 10 ^
to the Obedience of Faith: Which occasion had been wanting, if Almighty God
had made clear to us, the truths which now are certainly, but not evidently
presented to our minds. For where Truth does manifestly open it self; not
obedience, but necessity co^maunds our assent. For this reason, Deuines teach,
that the Objects of Faith being not evident to humane reason, it is in man's
power not only to abstain from believing, by sufpending our Judgment, or
exercising no act one way or other; but also to disbelieue, that is, to believe
the contrary of that which Faith proposes; as the examples of innumerable
Arch-heretiques can bear witness. This obscurity of faith we learn from holy
Scripture, according to those words of the Apostle. Faith is the Heb. 11.
substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not appearing.
And, We see by a glass 1. Cor. 13. v. 12.
in a dark manner: but then face to face. And, accordingly S. Peter says:
Which you do well attending unto, as to 2 Pet. 1. v. 19.
a Candle shining in a dark place.

3. Faith being then obscure (whereby it differs from natural Sciences) and
yet being most certain and infallible (wherein it surpasses humane Opinion) it
must rely upon some motive and ground, which may be able to give it certainty,
and yet not release it from obscurity. For if this motive, ground, or formal
Object of Faith, were any thing evidently presented to our understanding; and
if also we did evidently know, that it had a necessary connection with the
Articles which we believe, our assent to such Articles could not be obscure,
but evident; which, as we said, is against the nature of our Faith. If likewise
the motive or ground of our faith were obscurely propounded to us, but were not
in it self infallible, it would leave our assent in obscurity, but could not
endue it with certainty. We must therefore for the ground of our Faith find out
a motive obscure to us, but most certain in it self, that the act of faith
may remain both obscure, and certain. Such a motive as this, can be no other
but the divine Authority of almighty God, revealing, or speaking those truths
which our faith belieues. For it is manifest, that God's infallible testimony
may transfuse Certainty to our faith, and yet not draw it out of Obscurity;
because no humane discourse, or demonstration can euince, that God reuealeth
any supernatural Truth, since God had been no less perfect then he is,
although he had never revealed any of those objects which we now believe.

4. Nevertheless, because Almighty God out of his infinite wisdom and sweetness,
does concur with his Creatures in such sort as may befit the temper, and
exigence of their natures; and because Man is a Creature endured with reason,
God does not exact of his Will or Understanding any other then, as the Apostle
says, rationabile Kom. 12. and. 1.
Obsequium, an Obedience, sweetened with good reason; which could not so
appear, if our Understanding were summoued to believe with certainty, things
no way represented as infallible and certain. And therefore Almighty God
obliging us under pain of eternal damnation to believe with greatest certainty
diverse verities, not known by the light of natural reason, cannot fail to
furnish our Understanding, with such inducements, motives, and arguments as may
sufficiently persuade any mind which is not partial or passionate, that the
objects which we believe, proceed from an Authority so Wise, that it cannot be
deceived, and so Good that it cannot deceive; according to the words of David:
Thy Testimonies are made Psalm. 92.
credible exceedingly. These inducements are by Deuines, called argumenta
credibilitatis, arguments of credibility, which though they cannot make us
evidently see what we believe, yet they cuidently convince that in true
wisdom, and prudence, the objects of faith deserve credit, and ought to be
accepted as things revealed by God. For without such reasons and inducements
our judgment of faith could not be conceived prudent, holy Scripture telling
us, that, he who soon Eccles. 19
belieues, is light of heart. By these arguments and inducements our
Understanding is both satisfied with evidence of credibility, and the objects
of faith retain their obscurity: because it is a different thing to be
evidently credible, and evidently true; as those who were present at the
Miracles wrought by our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, did not evidently
see their doctrine to be true (for then it had not been Faith but Science, and
all had been necessitated to believe, which we see fell out otherwise) but they
were evidently convinced, that the things confirmed by such Miracles, were most
credible, and worthy to be embraced as truths revealed by God.

5. These evident Arguments of Credibility are in great abundance found in the
Visible Church of Christ, perpetualy existing on earth. For, that there has
been a company of men professing such and such doctrines, we have from our next
Predecessors, and these from theirs upward, till we come to the Apostles, and
our Blessed Savior, which gradiation is known by evidence of sense, by reading
books, or hearing what one man delivers to another. And it is evident that
there was neither cause, nor possibility, that men so distant in place, so
different in temper, so repugnant in private ends, did, or could agree to tell
one and the self same thing, if it had been but a fiction invented by
themselves, as ancient Tertullian well says: How is it likely that so many
Prescript. ^ap. 28.
and so great Churches should err in one faith? Among many events there is not
one issue, the error of the Churches must needs have varied. But that which
amongmany is found to be One, is not mistaken, but delieuered. Dare then any
body say, that they erred who delivered it? With this never interrupted
existence of the Church are joined the many and great miracles wrought by men
of that Congregation or Church; the sanctity of the persons; the renowned
victories over so many persecutions, both of all sorts of men, and of the
infernal spirits; and lastly, the perpetual existence of so holy a Church,
being brought up to the Apostles themselves, she comes to partake of the same
assurance of truth, which They by so many powerful ways, did communicate to
their Doctrine, and to the Church of their times, together with the divine
Certainty which they received from our Blessed Savior himself, revealing to
Mankind what he heard from his Father; and so we conclude with Tertullian: We
receive it from the Churches, the Churches Praesc. c. 21. and 37.
from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from his Father. And if we
once interrupt this line of succession, most certainly made known by means of
holy Tradition, we cannot conioyne the present Church, and doctrine, with the
Church, and doctrine of the Apostles, but must invent some new means, and
arguments sufficient of themselves to find out, and prove a true Church, and
faith independently of the preaching, and writing of the Apostles; neither of
which can be known but by Tradition, as is truly observed by Tertullian
saying: I will prescribe, that Praesc. 5.21.
there is no means to prove what the Apostles preached, but by the same
Churches which they founded.

6. Thus then we are to proceed: By evidence of manifest and incorrupt
Tradition, I know that there has always been a never interrupted Succession
of men from the Apostles time, believing, professing, and practicing such and
such doctrines: By evident arguments of credibility, as Miracles, Sanctity,
Unity etc. and by all those ways whereby the Apostles, and our Blesseed
Savior himself confirmed their doctrine, we are assured that what the said
never interrupted Church proposes, does deserve to be accepted and aknowledged
as a divine truth: By evidence of Sense, we see that the same Church proposes
such and such doctrines as divine truths, that is, as revealed and testified by
Almighty God. By this divine Testimony we are infallibly assured of what we
believe: and so the last period, ground, motive, and formal object of our
Faith, is the infallible testimony of that supreme Verity, which neither can
deceive, nor be deceived.

7. By this orderly deduction our Faith comes to be endued with these
qualities which we said were requisite thereto; namely Certainly, Obscurity,
and Pruderce. Certaimy proceeds from the infallible Testimony of God propounded
and conveyed to our understanding by such a mean, as is infallible in it
self, and to us is evidently known that it proposes this point or that, and
which can manifestly declare in what sense it proposes them; which means we
have proved to be only the visible Church of Christ. Obscurity from the manner
in which God speaks to Mankind, which ordinarily is such, that it does not
manifestly show the person who speaks, nor the truth of the thing spoken.
Prudence is not wanting, because our faith is accompanied with so many
arguments of Credibility, that every well disposed Understanding, may and ought
to judge, that the doctrines so confirmed deserve to be believed, as proceeding
from Authority.

8. And thus from what has been said, we may easily gather the particular
nature, or definition of Faith. For, it is a voluntary, or free, infallible
obscure assent to some truth, because it is testified by God, and is
sufficiently propounded to us for such: which proposal is ordinarily made by
the visible Church of Christ. I say, Sufficiently proposed by the Church; not
that I purpose to dispute whether the proposal of the Church enter into the
formal Object, or motive of Faith: or whether an error be any heresy, formally
and precisely, because it is against the proposition of the Church, as if such
proposal were the formal Object of faith, which D. Potter to no purpose at
all, labors so very hard to disprove: But I only affirm, that when the Church
propou^ds any Truth, as revealed by God, we are assured that it is such indeed;
and so it instantly grows, to be a fit Object for Christian faith, which
onclines and enables us, to believe whatsoever is duly presented, as a thing
revealed by Almighty God. And in the same manner we are sure that whosoever
opposes any doctrine proposed by the Church, does thereby contradict a truth,
which is testified by God: As when any lawful Superior, notifies his will, by
the means, and as it were proposal of some faithful messenger, the subject
of such a Superior in performing, or neglecting what is delivered by the
messenger, is said to obey, or disobey his own lawful Superior. And therefore
because the testimony of God is notified by the Church, we may, and we do most
truly say, that not to believe what the Church proposes, is to deny God's holy
word or testimony, signified to us by the Church, according to that saying of
S. Irenaeus. We need not go Lib. 3. cont. here is. cap. 4.
to any other to seek the truth, which we may easily receive from the Church.

9. From this definition of faith we may also know what Heresy is, by taking
the contrary terms, as Heresy is contrary to Faith, and saying: Heresy is a
voluntary error against that which God has reucaled, and the Church has
proposed for such. Neither does it import, whether the error concern points in
themselves great or small, fundamental or not fundamental. For more being
required to an act of Virtue, then of Vice, if any truth though never so small
may be believed by Faith as soon as we know it to be testified by divine
rouelation; much more will it be a formal Heresy to deny any least point
sufficiently propounded as a thing witnessed by God.

10. This divine Faith is divided into Actual, and Habitual. Actual faith,
or faith actuated is when we are in act of consideration, and belief of some
mystery of Faith; for example, that our Savior Christ, is true God, and Man,
etc. Habitual faith, is that from which we are denominated Faithful, or
Belieuers, as by actual faith they are styled, Believing. This Habit of faith
is a Quality, enabling us most firmly to believe Objects above human
discourse, and it remains permanently in our Soul, even when we are
sleeping, or not thinking of any Mystery of Faith. This is the first among the
three Theological Virtues. For Charity unites us to God, as he is infinitely
Good in himself; Hope ties us to him, as he is unspeakably Good to us. Faith
ioynes us to him, as he is the Supreme immovable Verity. Charity relies on his
Goodness; Hope on his Power; Faith on his divine Wisdom. From hence it
follows, that Faith being one of the Virtues which Deuines term Infused
(that is, which cannot be acquired by human wit, or industry, but are in their
Nature and Essence, supernatural) it has this property; that it is not
destroyed by little and little, (contrarily to the Habits, called acquisiti,
that is, gotten by human endeavor, which as they are successively produced, so
also are they lost successively, or by little and little) but it must either be
conserved entire, or wholly destroyed: And since it cannot stand entire with any
one act which is directly contrary, it must be totally overthrown, and as it
were demolished, and razed by every such act. Wherefore, as Charity or the Love
of God is expelled from our soul by any one act of Hatred, or any other
mortal sin against his divine Majesty: and as Hope is destroyed by any one
act of voluntary Desperation: so Faith must perish by any one act of Heresy;
because every such act is directly, and formally opposite thereunto. I know that
some sins which (as Deuines speak) are ex genere suo, in in their kind,
grievous and mortal, may be much lessened, and fall to be venial, ob leuit
atem materiae, because they may happen to be exercised in a matter of small
consideration; as for example, to steal a penny, is venial, although theft in
his kind be a deadly sin. But it is likewise true, that this Rule is not
general for all sorts of sins; there being some so inexcusably wicked of
their own nature, that no smalnes of matter, nor paucity in number, can defend
them from being deadly sins. For, to give an instance, what Blasphemy against
God, or voluntary false Oath is not a deadly sin? Certainly, none at all,
although the salvation of the whole world should depend upon swearing such a
falsehood. The like happens in our present case of Heresy, the iniquity whereof
redoundin to the injury of God's supreme wisdom and Goodness, is always great,
and enormous. They were no precious stones which Danid 1. Reg. 17.
picked out of the water, to encounter Golias; and yet if a man take from the
number but one, and say they were but four, against the Scripture affirming
them to have been five; he is instantly guilty of a damnable sin. Why?
Because by this subtraction of One, he does deprive Gods word and Testimony of
all credit and infallibility. For if either he could deceive, or be deceived in
any one thing, it were but wisdom to suspect him in all. And seeing every
Heresy opposes some Truth revealed by God; it is no wonder that no one can be
excused from deadly, and damnable sin. For if voluntary Blasphemy, and
Perjury, which are opposite only to the infused Moral Virtue of Religion, can
never be excused from mortal sin: much less can Heresy be excused, which
opposes the Theological Virtue of Faith.

11. If any object, that Schism may seem to be a greater sin then Heresy;
because the Virtue of Charity (to which Schism is opposite) is greater then
Faith, according to the Apostle, saying: Now there remain 1. Cor. 13.13.
Faith, Hope, Charity; but the greater of these is Charity. S. Thomas answers
in these words: Charity has two Objects: one principal, to wit, the Divine
2.2. q. 39. ar. 2. in corp. and ad 3.
Goodness; and another secondary, namely the good of our Neighbor; But Schism
and other sins which are committed against our Neighbor, are opposite to
Charity in respect of this secondary good, which is less, then the object of
Faith, which is God, as he is the Prime Verity, on which Faith does rely; and
therefore these sins are less then Infidelity. He takes Infidelity after a
general manner, as it comprehends Heresy, and other vices against Faith.

12. Having therefore sufficiently declared, wherein Heresy consists; Let us come
to prove that which we proposed in this Chapter. Where I desire, it be still
remembered: That the visible Catholic Church cannot err damnably, as D.
Potter confesses: And, that when Luther appeared, there was no other visible
true Church of Christ disagreeing from the Roman, as we have demonstrated in
the next precedent Chapter.

13. Now, that Luther and his followers cannot be excused from formal Heresy,
I prove by these reasons. To oppose any truth propounded by the visible true
Church as revealed by God, is formal Heresy, as we have showed out of the
definition of Heresy: But Luther, Calvin, and the rest did oppose diverse truths
propounded by the visible Church as revealed by God; yea they did therefore
oppose her, because she propounded as divine revealed truths, things which they
judged either to be false, or human inventions: Therefore they committed formal
Heresy.

14. Moreover, every Error against any doctrine revealed by God, is damnable
Heresy, whether the matter in it self be great or small, as I proved before:
and therefore either the Protestants, or the Roman Church must be guilty of
form all Heresy, because one of them must err against the word and testimony
of God: but you grant (perforce) that the Roman Church does not err damnably;
and I add that she cannot err damnably, because she is the truly Catholic
Church, which you confess cannot err damnably: Therefore Protestants must be
guilty of formal Heresy.

15. Besides, we have showed that the visible Church, is Judge of Controversies
and therefore must be infallible in all her Proposalls; which being once
supposed, it manifestly follows, that to oppose what she delivers as
revealed by God, is not so much to oppose her, as God himself; and therefore
cannot be excused from grievous Heresy.

16. Again, If Luther were an Heretic for those points wherein he disagreed
from the Roman Church; All they who agree with him in those very points, must
likewise be Heretics. Now, that Luther was a formal Heretic I demonstrate
in this manner. To say, that Gods visible true Church is not universal, but
confined to one only place or corner of the world, is according to your own
express words Tag. 126.
properly Heresy, against that Article of the Creed, wherein we orofesse to
believe the holy Catholic Church: And you brand Donatus with heresy, because
he limited the universal Church to Africa. But it is manifest, and acknowledged
by Luther himself, and other chief Protestants that Luthers Reformation when
it first began (and much more for diverse Ages before) was not Universal. nor
spread over the world, but was confined to that compass of ground which did
contain Luthers body. Therefore his Reformation cannot be excused from formal
Heresy. If S. Augustine in those times said to the Donatists, There are
innumerable testimonies Epist. 50.
of holy Scripture in which it appears that the Church of Christ is not only
in Africa, as these men with most impudent vanity do rave, but that she is
spread over the whole earth: much more may it be said; It appears by
innumerable testimonies of holy Scripture that the Church of Christ ca^. not be
confined to the City of Wittemberg, or to the place where Luthers feet stood,
but must be spread over the whole world. It is therefore must impudent vanity,
and dotage to limit her to Luthers Reformation. In another place also this holy
Father writes no less effectually against Luther then against the Donatists.
For having out of those words, In thy seed all Nations shall be blessed, proved
that Gods Church must be universal, he says: Why De Unit. Eccles. cap. 6.
do you superadde, by saying that Christ remains heir in no part of the
earth, except where he may have Donatus for his Coheyre. Give me this
(Universal) Church if it be among you: show your selves to all Nations, which
we already show to be blessed in this Seed: Give us this (Church) or else
laying aside all fury, receive her from us. But it is evident, that Luther
could not, when he he said, At the beginning I was alone, give us an universal
Church: Therefore happy had he been, if he had then, and his followers would
now, receive her from us. And therefore we must conclude with the same holy
Father, saying in another place of the universal Church: She has this Cont.
lit. Petil. lib. 1. cap. 104.
most certain mark, that she cannot be hidden: She is then known to all
Nations. The Sect of Donatus is unknown to many Nations; therefore that cannot
be she. The Sect of Luther (at least when he began, and much more before his
beginning) was unknown to many Nations, therefore that cannot be she.

17. And that it may yet further appear how perfectly Luther agreed with the
Donatists: It is to be noted, that they never taught, that the Catholic
Church ought not to extend it self further then that part of Africa, where
their faction reigned, but only that in fact it was so confined, because all
the rest of the Church was profaned, by communicating with Caecilianus, whom
they falsely affirmed to have been ordained Bishop by those who were Traditours,
or giuers up of the Bible to the Persecutors to be burned: yea at that very
time they had some of their Sect residing in Rome, and sent thither one Victor,
a Bishop, under color to take care of their Brethren in that City, but indeed
as Baronius Anno 321. nu. 2. Spond.
observes, that the world might account them Catholics, by communicating
with the Bishop of Rome, to communicate with whom was even taken by the Ancient
Fathers as an assured sign of being a true Catholic. They had also, as S.
Augustine witnesses, a pretended De Vni. Eccles. c. 3.
Church in the house and territory of a Spanish Lady called Lucilla, who went
flying out of the Catholic Church, because she had been justly checked by
Caectlianus. And the same Saint speaking of the conference he had with
Fortunius the Donatist, says: Here did he first Ep. 163.
attempt to affirm that his Communion was spread over the whole Earth etc. but
because the thing was evidently false, they got out of this discourse by
confusion of language: whereby nevertheless they sufficiently declared, that they
did not hold, that the true Church ought necessarily to be confined to one
place, but only by mere necessity were forced to yield that it was so in fact,
because their Sect which they held to be the only true Church was not spread
over the world: In which point Fortunius, and the rest were more modest, then
he who should affirm that Luther's reformation in the very beginning was spead
over the whole Earth; being at that time by many degrees not so far diffused as
the Sect of the Donatists. I have no desire to prosecute the similitude of
Protestants with Donatists, by remembering that the Sect of these men was began
and promoted by the passion of Lucilla; and who is ignorant what influence two
women, the Mother and Daughter, ministered to Protestancy in England? Nor will I
stand to observe their very likeness of phrase with the Donatists, who called
the Chair of Rome, the Chair of pestilence, and the Roman Church an Harlot,
which is D. Potter's own phrase, wherein he is less excusable then they,
because he maintains her to be a true Church of Christ: and therefore let him
duly ponder these words of S. Augustine against the Donatists. If I persecute
him justly who detracts Conc. super gest. cust Emeri^
from his Neighbor, why should I not persecute him who detracts from the
Church of Christ, and says, this is not she, but this is an Harlot? And least
of all, will I consider, whether you may not be well compared to one Ticonius a
Donatist, who wrote against Parmenianus likewise a Donatist, who blasphemed,
that the Church of Christ had perished (as you do even in this your Book write
against some of your Protestant Brethren, or as you call them Zelots among you,
who hold the very same or rather a worse Heresy) and yet remained among them,
even after Parmenianus had excommunicated him, (as those your Zealous Brethren
would proceed against you if it were in their power) and yet like Ticonius you
remain in their Communion, and come not into that Church which is, has been,
and shall ever be universal: For which very cause S. Augustine complains of
Ticonius, that although he wrote against the Donatists, yet he was of an heart
De doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 30.
so extremely absurd, as not to forsake them alto gether. And speaking of the
same thing in another place he observes, that although Ticonius did manifestly
confute them who affirmed that the Church had perished; yet, he saw not (says
this holy Father) that which in good consequence Cont. Parm. l. 1. cap. 1.
he should have seen, that those Christians of Africa belonged to the Church
spread over the whole world, who remained united, not with them who were
divided from the communion and unity of the same world, but with such as did
communicate with the whole world. But Parmenianus, and the rest of the
Donatists saw that consequence, and resolved rather to settle their mind in
obstinacy against the most manifest truth which Ticonius maintained, then by
yielding thereto, to be overcome by those Churches in Africa, which enjoyed the
communion of that unity which Ticonius defended, from which they had divided
themselves. How fitly these words agree to Catholics in England in respect of
the Protestants, I desire the Reader to consider. But these and the like
resemblances of Protestants to the Donatistes, I willingly let pass, and only
urge the maine point: That since Luthers Reformed Church was not in being for
diverse Centuries before Luther, and yet was (because so forsooth they will
needs have it) in the Apostles time, they must of necessity affirm heretically
with the Donatists, that the true and unspotted Church of Christ perished; and
that she which remained on earth was (O blasphemy!) an Harlot. Moreover the
same heresy follows out of the doctrine of D. Potter, and other Protestants,
that the Church may err in points not fundamental; because we have showed
that every error against any one revealed truth, is Heresy and damnable,
whether the matter be otherwise of it self, great or small. And how can the
Church more truly be said to perish, then when she is permitted to maintain a
damnable Heresy? Besides, we will hereafter prove, that by any act of Heresy
all divine faith is lost; and to imagine a true Church of faithful persons
without any faith, is as much as to fancy a living man without life. It is
therefore clear, that Donatist-like they hold that the Church of Christ
perished: yea they are worse then the Donatists, who said, that the Church
remained at least in Africa; whereas Protestants must of necessity be forced to
grant, that for a long space before Luther, she was no where at all. But let us
go forward to other reasons.

18. The holy Scripture, and Ancient Fathers do assign Separation from the
Visible Church as a mark of Heresy; according to that of S. John: They went
out 2. Joan, 19.
from us. And, Some who Act. 15.24.
went out from us. And, Our of you shall Act. 203.30.
arise men speaking perverse things. And accordingly Vincentius Lyrinensis
says: Who ever Lib. ad. uersus haer, cap. 34.
began heresies, who did not first separate himself from the Universality,
Antiquity, and Consent of the Catholic Church? But it is manifest, that when
Luther appeared, there was no visible Church distinct from the Roman, out of
which she could depart, as it is likewise well known that Luther, and his
followers departed out of her: Therefore she is no way liable to this Mark of
Heresy, but Protestants cannot possibly avoid it. To this purpose S. Prosper
has these pithy words: A Christian communicating Dimid. temp. cap. 5.
with the universal Church is a Catholic, and he who is divided from her, is
an Heretic, and Antichrist. But Luther in his first Reformation could not
communicate with the visible Catholic Church of those times, because he began
his Reformation by opposing the supposed Errors of the then visible Church: we
must therefore say with S. Prosper, that he was an Heretic etc. Which likewise
is no less clearly proved out of S. Cyprian, saying: Not we Lib. de Unit.
Ecles.
departed from them, but they from us, and since Heresies and Schisms are bred
afterward, while they make to themselves diverse Conuenticles, they have
forsaken the head and origin of Truth.

19, And that we might not remain doubtful what separation it is, which is
the mark of Heresy, the ancient Fathers tell us more in particular, that it is
from the Church of Rome, as it is the Sea of Peter. And therefore D. Potter need
not to be so hot with us, because we say and writ that the Church of Rome, in
that sense as she is the Mother Church of all others, and with which all the
rest agree, is truly callled the Catholic Church. S. Hierome writing to Pope
Damasus says: I am in the Communion Ep. 57. ad Damas.
of the Chair of Peter; I know that the Church is built upon that Rock.
Whoseuer shall eat the La^be out of this house he is profane. If any shall not
be in the Ark of Noah, he shall perish in the time of the deluge: Whosoever
does not gather with thee, does scatter, that is, he that is not of Christ is
of Antichrist. And else where is Which does he Lib. 1. Apolog.
call his faith? That of the Roman Church? Or that which is contained in the
Books of Origin; If he answer, the Roman, then we are Catholics, who have
translated nothing of the error of Origin. And yet further: Know thou, that the
Ibid. lib. 3.
Roman faith commended by the voice of the Apostle does not receive these
delusions, though an Angel should denounce otherwise, then it has once been
preached. S. Ambrose recounting how his Brother Satyrus inquiring for a Church
wherein to give thanks for his delivery from Shipwreck, says: he called unto
him De obitu Satyris fratri.
the Bishop, neither did he esteem any favor to be true, except that of the
true faith, and he asked of him whether he agreed with the Catholic Bishops;
that is, with the Roman Church. And having understood that he was a
Schismatique, that is, separated from the Roman Church, he abstained from
communicating with him. Where we see the privilege of the Roman Church
confirmed both by word and deed, by doctrine and practice. And the same Saint
says of the Roman Church: From thence the Rights lib. 1. ep. 4. ad Jmperatores.
of Venerable Communion do flow to all. S. Cyprian says: They are bold Epist.
55. ad Cornel.
to sail to the Chair of Peter, and to the principal Church, from whence
Priestly Unity has sprung. Neither do they consider, that they are Romans,
whose Faith was commended by the preaching of the Apostle, to whom falsehood
cannot have access. Where we see this holy Father ioynes together the
principal Church, and the Chair of Peter; and affirms that falsehood not
only has not had, but cannot have access to that Sea. And else where: Thou
wrotest that I should send Epist. 52.
a Copy of the same letters to Cornelius our Colleague, that laying aside all
solicitude, he might now be assured that thou did Communicate with him, that
is, with the Catholic Church. What think you M. Doctor of these words? Is it
so strange a thing to take for one and the same thing, to communicate with the
Church and Pope of Rome, and to communicate with the Catholic Church? S.
Irenaeus says: Because it were long to number the successions of all Churches,
Lib. 3. cont. haer. c. 3.
we declaring the Tradition (and faith preached to men, and coming to us by
Tradition) of the most great, most ancient, and most known Church, founded by
the two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul; which Tradition it has from the
Apostles, coming to us by succession of Bishops; We confound all those who any
way either by cuill complacence of themselves, or vain glory, or by blindness,
or ill Opinion do gather otherwise then they ought. For to this Church for a
more powerful Principality, it is necessary that all Churches resort, that is,
all faithful people of what place soever: in which (Roman Church) the
Tradition which is from the Apostles has always been conserved from those who
are every where. S. Augustine says: It gri^^ues us In psalm. cont. part^^n
Donati.
to see you so to ly cut off. Number the Priest even from the Sea of Peter; and
consider in that order of Fathers who succeeded to whom. She is the Rook which
the proud Gates of Hell do not ou^rcome. And in another place, speaking of
Cacilianu he says: He might contemn the conspiring Ep. 162.
multitude of his Enemies, because he knew himself to be united, by
Communicatory letters both to the Roman Church in which the Principality of the
Sea Apostolic did always flourish; and to other Countries from whence the
Gospel came first into Africa. Ancient Tertullian says: If thou be near
Italy, thou have Rome whose Praeser. cap. 36.
Authority is near at hand to us: a happy Church, into which the Apostles have
powered all Doctrine, together with their blood. S. Basil in a letter to the
Bishop of Rome says. In very deed that which was given Epist. ad Pont. Romans
by our Lord to thy Piety, is worthy of that most excellent voice which
proclaimed thee Blessed, to wit, that thou may discern betwixt that which is
counterfeit, and that which is lawful and pure, and without any diminution
may preach the Faith of our Ancestors. Maximianus Bishop of Constantinople
about twelve hundred years ago, said: All the bounds of the earth who have
sincerely acknowledged our Lord, and Catholics through the whole world
professing the true Faith, look upon the power of the Bishop of Rome, as upon
the sun etc. For the Creator of the world, amongst all men of the world
elected him, (he speaks of S. Peter) to whom he granted the Chair of Doctor
to be principally possessed by a perpetual right of Privilege; that whosoever
is desirous to know any divine and profound thing, may have recourse to the
Oracle, and Doctrine of this instruction. John Patriarck of Constantinople,
more then eleauen hundred years ago in an Epistle to Pope Hormisda, writes
thus: Because Epist. ad Hormis. PP.
the beginning of salvation is to conserve the rule of right Faith, and in no
wise to swerve from the tradition of our for-Fathers; because the words of our
Lord cannot fail, saying: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church; the proofs of deeds have made good those words, because in the Sea
Apostolical the Catholic Religion is always conserved inviolable. And
again: We promise hereafter not to recite in the sacred Mysteries the names of
them who are excluded from the Communion of the Catholic Church, that is to
say, who consent not fully with the Sea Apostolic. Many other Authorities of
the ancient Fathers might be produced to this purpose, but these may serve to
show, that both the Latin. and Greek Fathers held for a Note of being a
Catholic, or an Heretic, to have been united, or divided from the Sea of
Rome. And I have purposely alleged only such Authorities of Fathers, as speak
of the privileges of the Sea of Rome, as of things permament, and depending on
our Saviors promise to S. Peter, from which a general rule, and ground ought
to be taken for all Ages, because Heaven and Earth shall Matt. 24.35.
pass, but the word of our Lord shall remain for ever. So that I here
conclude, that seeing it is manifest that Luther and his followers divided
themselves from the Sea of Rome, they bear the inseparable Mark of Heresy.

20. And though my meaning be not to treat the point of Ordination, or
Succession in the Protestants Church, because the Fathers alleged in the last
reason, assign Succession as one mark of the true Church; I must not omit to
say, that according to the grounds of Protestants themselves, they can neither
pretend personal Succession of Bishops, nor Succession of doctrine. For
whereas Succession of Bishops signifies a neuer-interrupted line of Persons,
endued with an indeleble Quality, which Deuines call a Character, which cannot
be taken away by deposition, degradation or other means whatsoever; and endued
also with Jurisdiction and Authority to teach, to preach, to govern the Church
by laws, precepts, censures, etc. Protestants cannot pretend Succession in
either of these. For (besides that there was never Protestant Bishop before
Luther, and that there can be no continuance of Succession, where there was no
beginning to succeed) they commonly acknowledge no Character, and consequently
must affirm that when their pretended Bishops or Priests are deprived of
Jurisdiction, or degraded, they remain mere lay Persons as before their
Ordination; fulfilling what Tert^^^lian objects as a mark of Heresy: To day a
Priest, to morrow Praeser. cap. 41.
a Layman. For if there be no immovable Character, their power of Order must
consist only in Jurisdiction, and authority, or in a kind of moral deputation
to some function, which therefore may be taken away by the same power, by which
it was given. Neither can they pretend Succcession in Authority, or
Jurisdiction. For all the Authority, or Jurisdiction which they had, was
conferred by the Church of Rome, that is, by the Pope: Because the whole Church
collectiuely does not meet to ordain Bishops or Priests, or to give them
Authority. But according to their own doctrine, they believe that the Pope
neither has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this Realm,
which they swear even when they are ordained Bishops, Priests, and Deacons:
How then can the Pope give Jurisdiction where they swear he neither has, nor
OUGHT to have any? Or if yet he had, how could they without Schism withdraw
themselves from his obedience? Besides, the Roman Church never gave them
Authority, to oppose Her, by whom it was given. But grant, their first Bishops
had such Authority from the Church of Rome: after the decease of those men, who
gave Authority to their pretended Successors? The Primate of England? But from
whom had he such Authority? And after his decease, who shall confer
Authority upon his Successors? The temporal Magistrate? King Henry, neither a
Catholic, nor a Protestant? King Edward, a Child? Queen Elizabeth, a Woman?
An Infant of one hours Age, is true King in case of his Predecessors decease:
But shall your Church lie fallow till that Infant-King, and green Head of the
Church come to years of discretion? Do your Bishops, your Hierarchy, your
Succession, your Sacraments, your being or not being Heretics for want of
Succession, depend on this newfound Supremacy-doctrine brought in by such a
man merely upon base occasions, and for shameful ends; impugned by Calvin,
and his followers; derided by the Christian world; and even by chief
Protestants as D. Andrews, Wotton etc. not held for any necessary point of
faith? And from whom I pray you, had Bishops their Authority, when there were
no Christian Kings? Must the Greek Patriarks receive spiritual Jurisdiction
from the Greek Turk. Did the Pope, by the Baptism of Princes, loose the
spiritual Power he formerly had of conferring spiritual Jurisdiction upon
Bishops? Has the temporal Magistrate authority to preach, to assoile from
sins, to inflict excommunications, and other Censures? Why has he not Power
to excommunicate, as well as to dispense in Irregularity, as our late
Sovereign Lord King James, either dispensed with the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, or else gave commission to some Bishops to do ^t? and since they
were subject to their Primate, and not he to them, it is clear, that they had
no Power to dispense with him, but that power must proceed from the Prince, as
Superior to them all, and head of the Protestants Church in England. If he
have no such authority, how can he give to others what himself has not? Your
Ordination, or Consecration of Bishops and Priests imprinting no Character, can
only consist in giving a Power, Authority, Jurisdiction, or (as I said before)
some kind of Deputation to exercise Episcopal, or Priestly functions: If then,
the temporal Magistrate confers this Power etc. he can, nay he cannot choose
but Ordain, and consecrate Bishops, and Priests, as often as he confers
Authority or Jurisdiction: and your Bishops as soon as they are designed and
confirmed by the King, must ipso faclo be Ordained and Consecrated by him
without interuention of Bishops, or Matter and Form of Ordination: Which
absurdities you will be more unwilling to grant, then well able to avoid, if
you will be true to your own doctrines. The Pope from whom originally you must
beg your Succession of Bishops, never received, nor will, nor can acknowledge
to receive any Spiritual Jurisdiction from any Temporal Prince, and therefore
if Jurisdiction must be derived from Princes, he has none at all: and yet
either you must acknowledge, that he has true spiritual Jurisdiction, or that
your Selves can receive none from him.

21. Moreover, this new Reformation, or Reformed Church of Protestants, will by
them be pretended to be Catholic, or Universal, and not confined to England
alone, as the Sect of the Donatists was to Africa: and therefore it must
comprehend all the Reformed Churches in Germany, Holland, Scotland, France etc.
In which number, they of Germany, Holland, and France, are not governed by
Bishops, nor regard any personal Succession, unless of such fat-beneficed
Bishops as Nicolaus Amsfordius, who was consecrated by Luther, (though Luther
himself was never Bishop) as witnesses In Millenario sexto page 187.
Dresserus. And though Scotland has of late admitted some Bishops, I much
doubt whether they hold them to be necessary, or of divine Institution; and so
their enforced admitting of them, does not so much furnish that kingdom with
personal Succession of Bishops, as it does convince them to want Succession of
Doctrine; since in this their neglect of Bishops they disagree both from the
milder Protestants of England, and the true Catholic Church: And by this want
of a continued personal Succession of Bishops, they retain the note of
Schism, and Heresy. So that the Church of Protestants, must either not be
universal, as being confined to England; Or if you will needs comprehend all
those Churches which want Succession, you must confess, that your Church does
not only communicate with Schismatic and Heretical Churches, but is also
compounded of such Churches; and your selves cannot avoid the note of
Schismatiques, or Heretics, if it were but for participating with such
heretical Churches. For it is impossible to retain Communion with the true
Catholic Church, and yet agree with them who are divided from her by Schism,
or Heresy; because that were to affirm, that for the self same time, they
could be within, and without the Catholic Church, as proportionably I
discoursed in the next precedent Chapter, concerning the Communicating of
moderate Protestants with those who maintain that Heresy of the Latency and
Inuisibility of Gods Church, where I brought a place of S. Cyprian to this
purpose, which the Reader may be pleased to reuiew in the Fifth Chapter, and
17. Number.

22. But besides this defect in the personal Succession of Protestant Bishops,
there is another of great moment; which is, that they want the right Form of
ordaining Bishops, and Priests, because the manner which they use is so much
different from that of the Roman Church (at least according to the common
opinion of Deuines) that it cannot be sufficient for the Essence of Ordination;
as I could demonstrate if this were the proper place of such a Treatise, and
will not fail to do if D. Potter give me occasion. In the mean time the
Reader may be pleased to read the Author See Adamum Ta^nerum tom. 4. disp. 7.
quaest. 2. dub. 3. and 4.
cited here in the margent, and then compare the form of our Ordination with
that of Protestants; and to remember that if the form which they use either in
Consecrating Bishops, or in Ordayning Priests be at least doubtful, they can
neither have undoubted Priests, nor Bishops. For Priests cannot be ordained but
by true Bishops, nor can any be a true Bishop, unless he first be Priest. I say,
their Ordination is at least doubtful; because that suffices for my present
purpose. For Bishops and Priests, whose Ordination is notoriously known to be
but doubtful, are not to be esteemed Bishops, or Priests: and no man without
Sacrilege can receive Sacraments from them; all which they administer
unlawfully: And (if we except Baptism, with manifest danger of inualidity, and
with obligation to be at least conditionally repeated) so Protestants must
remain doubtful of Remission of sins, of their Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
and may not pretend to be a true Church, which cannot subsist without undoubted
true Bishops, and Priests, nor without due administration of Sacraments, which
(according to Protestants) is an essential note of the true Church. And it is
a world to observe the proceeding of English Protestants in this point of their
Ordinations. For first, Ann. 3. Edw. 6. cap. 2. when he was a Child about
twelve years of age, It was enacted, that such Dyer fol, 234. term. Mich. 6.
and 7. Eliz.
form of making, and consecrating of Bishops and Priests, as by six Prelates,
and six other to be appointed by the King, should be devised (mark this word,
devised) and set forth under the great Seal; should be used, and none other.
But after, this Act was repealed 1. Mar. Sess. 2. in so much as that when
afterward An. 6. and 7. Reg. Eliz. Bishop Bonner being endicted upon a
certifitate made by D. Horn a Protestant Bishop of Winchester, for his refusal
of the Oath of Supremacy; and he excepting against the endictment because D.
Horn was no Bishop; all the Judges resolved that his exception was good, if
indeed D. Horn was not Bishop; and they were all at a stand, till An. 8. Eliz.
cap. 1. the act of Edw. 6. was renewed and confirmed, with a particular
prouiso, that no man should be impeched or molested by means of any
certificate by any Bishop or Archbishop made before this last Act. Whereby it
is clear, that they made some doubt of their own ordination; and that there
is nothing but uncertainty in the whole business of their Ordination, which
(forsooth) must depend upon six Prelates, the great Seal, Acts of Parlaments
being contrary one to another, and the like.

23. But though they want Personal Succession; yet at least they have
Succession of doctrine as they say, and pretend to prove, because they believe
as the Apostles believed. This is to beg the Question, and to take what they
may be sure, will never be granted. For if they want Personal Succession, and
slight Ecclesiastical Tradition, how will they persuade any man, that they
agree with the doctrine of the Apostles? We have heard Tertullian saying: I
will prescribe Sup. (...)
against all Heretics) that there is no means to prove what the Apostles
preached, but by the same Churches which they founded. And S. Irenaeus tells us
that, We may L. 3. (...)
behold the Tradition of the Apostles in every Church, if men be desirous to
bear the truth; and we can number them who were made Bishops by the Apostles
in Churches, and their Successors, even to us. And the same Father in another
place says: We ought to obey L. 4. (...) 43.
those Priests who are in the Church, who have Succession from the Apostles,
and who together with Succession in their Bishoprics have received the
certain gift of truth. S. Augustine says: I am kept in the Church Contr.
epist. Fundam. cap. 4.
by the Succession of Priests from the very Sea of Peter the Apostle, to whom
our Savior after his Resurrection committed his Sheep to be fed, even to the
present Bishop. Origin to this purpose gives us a good and wholesome Rule
(happy, if himself had followed the same) in these excellent words: Since
there be many who think Praef. ad lib. Peri^^^chon.
they believe the things which are of Christ, and some are of different opinion
from those who went before them; let the preaching of the Church be kept, which
is delivered by the Apostles by order of Succession, and remains in the Church
to this very day; that only is to be believed for truth, which in nothing
disagrees from the Tradition of the Church. In vain then do these men brag of
the doctrine of the Apostles, unless first they can demonstrate that they enjoy
a continued Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, and can show us a Church
which according to S. Augustine is deduced by undoubted SVCCESSION from the Sea
Cont. Faust. cap. 2,
of the Apostles, even to the present Bishops.

23. But yet nevertheless, suppose it were granted, that they agreed with the
doctrine of the Apostles; this were not sufficient to prove a Succession in
Doctrine. For Succession, besides agreement or similitude, does also require a
neuer-interrupted conueying of such doctrine, from the time of the Apostles,
till the days of those persons who challenge such a Succession. And so S.
Augustine says: We are to believe that Gospel which from the time of the
Apostles, the Lib. 28. cout. Faust. ^. 2.
Church has brought down to our days by a neuer-interrupted course of times,
and by undoubted succession of connection. Now, that the Reformation begun by
Luther, was interrupted for diverse Ages before him, is manifest out of History,
and by his endeavoring a Reformation which must presuppose abuses. He cannot
therefore pretend a continued Succession of that Doctrine which he sought to
revive, and reduce to the knowledge, and practice of men. And they ought not to
prove that they have Succession of doctrine, because they agree with the
doctrine of the Apostles; but contrarily we must infer, that they agree not
with the Apostles, because they cannot pretend a neuer-interrupted Succession
of doctrine from the times of the Apostles, till Luther. And here it is not
amiss to note, that although the Waldenses, Wicliffe etc. had agreed with
Protestants in all points of doctrine; yet they could not brag of Succession
from them, because their doctrine has not been free from interruption, which
necessarily crosses Succession.

24. And as Want of Succession of Persons and Doctrine, cannot stand with that
Universality of Time, which is inseparable from the Catholic Church; so
likewise the disagreeing Sects which are dispersed throughout diverse Countries,
and Nations, cannot help toward that Vniacrsality of Place, wherewith the true
Church must be endued: but rather such local multiplication, does more and
more lay open their division, and want of Succession in Doctrine. For the
excellent Observation of S. Augustine does punctually agree with all modern
Heretics; wherein this holy Father having cited these words out of the
Prophet Ezechiel, Cap. 24.
My flocks are dispersed upon the whole face of the Earth; he adds this
remarkable sentence: Not all Heretics Lib. de Pastorib. c. 8.
are spread over the face of the Earth, and yet there are Heretics spread over
the whole face of the Earth, some here some there, yet they are wanting in no
place, they know not one another. One Sect for example in Africa, another
Heresy in the East, another in Egypt, another in Mesopotamia. In diverse places
they are diverse: one Mother Pride has begot them all, as our one Mother the
Catholic Church has brought forth all faithful people dispersed throughout
the whole world. No wonder then, if Pride breed Dissension, and Charity Union.
And in another place, applying to Heretics those words of the Canticles: If
thou know not Cant. 1.
thy self, go forth, and follow after the steps of the flocks, and feed thy
kids, he says: If thou know not thy self, go Ep. 48.
thou forth, I do not cast thee out, but go thou out, that it may be said of
thee: They went from us, but they were not of us. Go thou out in the steps of
the flocks; not in my steps, but in the steps of the flocks, nor of one flock,
but of diverse and wandering flocks; And feed thy Kids, not as Peter, to whom is
said, Feed my sheep: but feed thy Kids in the Tabernacles of the Pastors, not
in the Tabernacle of the Pastor, where there is One flock, and one Pastor. In
which words this holy Father does set down the Marks of Heresy to wit, going
out from the Church, and Want of Unity among themselves, which proceed from not
acknowledging one supreme Visible Pastor and Head under Christ. And so it being
proved that Protestants having neither succession of Persons, nor Doctrine, nor
Universality of Time, or Place, cannot avoid the just note of Heresy.

25. Hitherto we have brought arguments to prove, that Luther, and all
Protestants are guilty of Heresy against the Negative Precept of faith, which
obliges us under pain of damnation, not to embrace any one error, contrary to
any truth sufficiently propounded, as testified or revealed by Almighty God.
Which were enough to make good, that among Persons who disagree in any one
point of faith, one part only can be saved: Yet we will now prove that
whosoever erreth in any one point, does also break the Affirmative Precept of
Faith, whereby we are obliged positiuely, to believe some revealed truth with an
infallible, and supernatural Faith, which is necessary to salvation, even
necessitate finis, or medij, as Deuines speak; that is, so necessary that not
any, after he is come to the use of Reason, was or can be saved without it,
according to the words of the Apostle: Without Faith Hebr. 11.6.
it is impossible to please God.

26. In the beginning of this Chapter I showed, that to Christian Catholic
faith are required Certainty, Obscurity, Prudence, and Supernaturality: All
which Conditions we will prove to be wanting in the belief of Protestants,
even in those points which are true in themselves, and to which they yield
assent, as happens in all those particulars, wherein they agree with us; from
whence it will follow, that they wanting true Divine Faith, want means
absolutely necessary to salvation.

27. And first, The faith of Protestants wants Certainty.
that their belief wants Certainty, I prove, because they denying the
Universal infallibility of the Church, can have no certain ground to know
what Objects are revealed, or testified by God. Holy Scripture is in it self
most true and infallible, but-without the direction and declaration of the
Church, we can neither have certain means to know what Scripture is
Canonical; nor what Translations be faithful; nor what is the true meaning of
Scripture. Every Protestant, as I suppose, is persuaded that his own opinions,
be true, and that he has used such means as are wont to be prescribed for
understanding the Scripture, as Prayer, Conferring of diverse Texts etc. and yet
their disagreements show that some of them are deceived: And therefore it is
clear that they have no one certain ground whereon to rely for understanding
of Scripture. And seeing they hold all the Articles of Faith, even concerning
fundamental points, upon the self same ground of Scripture, interpreted, not
by the Churches Authority, but according to some other Rules, which as
experience of their contradictions teach, do sometimes fail; it is clear that
the ground of their faith is infallible in no point at all. And albeit sometime
it chance to hit on the truth, yet it is likewise apt to lead them to error:
As all Arch-heretiques believing some truths, and withal diverse errors upon
the same ground and motive, have indeed no true divine infallible faith, but
only a fallible humane opinion, and persuasion. For if the ground upon which
they rely were certain, it could never produce any error.

28. Another cause of Uncertainty in the faith of Protestants, must rise from
their distinction of points fundamental, and not fundamental. For since they
acknowledge, that every error in fundamental points destroieth the substance
of faith and yet cannot determine what points be fundamental: it follows
that they must remain uncertain whether or no they be not in some
fundamental errrour, and so want the substance of faith, without which there
can be no hope of Salvation.

24. And that he who erreth against any one revealed truth (as certainly some
Protestants must do, because contradictory Propositions cannot both be true)
does loose all Divine faith; is a very true doctrine delivered by Catholic
Deuines, with so general a consent, that the contrary is wont to be censured
as temerarious. The Angelical Doctor S. Thomas proposes this Question:
Whether 2.2. q. 3. ar. 3. in ^orp.
he who denies one Article of faith, may retain faith of other Articles? and
resolves that he cannot: which he proves, (Argumenta sed contra) because; As
deadly sin is opposite to Charity; so to deny one Article of faith is
opposite to faith: But Charity does not remain with any one deadly sin;
therefore faith does not remain after the denial of any one Article of faith.
Whereof he gives this further reason: Because (says he) the nature of every
habit does depend upon the formal Motive and Object thereof, which Motive being
taken away the nature of the habit cannot remain. But the formal Object of
faith is the supreme truth as it is manifested in Scriptures, and in the
doctrine of the Church, which proceeds from the same supreme verity. Whosoever
therefore does not rely upon the doctrine of the Church (which proceeds from
the supreme Verity manifested in Scriptures) as upon an infallible Rule, he
has not the habit of faith, but belieues those things which belong to faith,
by some other means then by faith: as if one should remember some Conclusion,
and not know the reason of that demonstration, it is clear that he has not
certain knowledge, but only Opinion. Now it is manifest, that he who relies on
the doctrine of the Church, as upon an infallible Rule, will yield his assent
to all, that the Church teaches. For if among those things, which she
teaches, he hold what he will, and does not hold what he will not, he does not
rely upon the doctrine of the Church, as upon an infallible Rule, but only upon
his own will. And so it is clear that an Heretic, who with pertinacity
denies one Article of faith, is not ready to follow the doctrine of the Church
in all things: And therefore it is manifest, that whosoever is an Heretic in
any one Article of faith, concerning other Articles, has not faith, but a kind
of Opinion, or his own will. Thus far S. Thomas. And afterward: A man does
believe Ad 2.
all the Articles of faith for one and the self same reason, to wit, for the
Prime Verity proposed to us in the Scripture, understood aright according to
the Doctrine of the Church: and therefore whosoever falls from this reason or
motive, is totally deprived of faith. From this true doctrine we are to infer,
that to retain, or want the substance of faith, does not consist in the
matter, or multitude of the Articles, but in the opposition against Gods divine
Testimony, which is inuolued in every least error against Faith. And since some
Protestants must needs err, and that they have no certain Rule to know, why
rather one then another; it manifestly follows that none of them have any
Certainty for the substance of their faith in any one point. Moreover D.
Potter, being forced to confess that the Roman Church wants not the substance
of faith; it follows that she does not err in any one point against faith,
because as we have seen out of S. Thomas, every such error destroys the
substance of faith. Now if the Roman Church did not err in any one point of
faith, it is manifest that Protestants err in all those points wherein they are
contrary to her. And this may suffice to prove that the faith of Protestants
wants Infallibility.

30. And now for the second Condition of faith, I say: If Protestants have
Certainty, They want the second Condition of Faith, Obscurity.
they want Obscurity, and so have not that faith which, as the Apostle says,
is of things not appearing, or not necessitating our Understanding to an
assent. For the whole edifice of the faith of Protestants, is settled on these
two Principles: These particular Books are Canonical Scripture: And, the
sense and meaning of these Canonical Scriptures, is clear and evident, at
least in all points necessary to Salvation. Now, these Principles being once
supposed, it clearly follows, that what Protestants believe as necessary to
Salvation, is evidently known by them to be true, by this argument: It is
certain and evident, that whatsoever is contained in the word of God, is true.
But it is certain and evident, that these Books in particular are the word of
God: Therefore it is certain and evident, that whatsoever is contained in
these Books is true. Which Conclusion I take for a Mayor in a second Argument,
and say thus: It is certain and evident that whatsouer is contained in these
Books is true: but it is certain and evident, that such particular Articles
(for example, the Trinity, Incarnation, Original sin etc.) are contained in
these Books: Therefore it is certain and evident, that these particular
Objects are true. Neither will it avail you to say, that the said Principles
are not evident by natural discourse, but only to the eye of reason cleared by
grace, as you speak. For supernatural evidence, no less (yea rather more)
draws and excludes obscurity, then natural evidence does: neither can the
party so enlightened be said voluntarily to captiuate his understanding to that
light, but rather his understanding is by a necessity made captive, and forced
not to disbelieued, what is presented by so clear a light: And therefore your
imaginary faith is not the true faith defined by the Apostle, but an invention
of your own.

31. That the faith of Protestants wants the third Condition which was
Prudence, Their faith wants Prudence.
is deduced from all that hitherto has been said. What wisdom was it, to
forsake a Church co^fessedly very ancient, and besides which, there could be
demonstrated no other visible Church of Christ upon earth? A Church
acknowledged to want nothing necessary to Salvation; endued with Succession of
Bishops, with Visibility and Universality of Time and Place; A Church which if
it be not the true Church, her enemies cannot pretend to have any Church,
Ordination, Scriptures, Succession, etc. and are forced for their own sake, to
maintain her perpetual Existence, and Being? To leave, I say, such a Church,
and frame a Community, without either Unity, or means to procure it; a Church
which at Luthers first revolt had no larger extent then where his body was; A
Church without Universality of place or Time; A Church which can pretend no
Visibility, or Being, except only in that former Church which it opposes; A
Church void of Succession of Persons or Doctrine? What wisdom was it to follow
such men as Luther, in an opposition against the visible Church of Christ,
begun upon mere passion? What wisdom is it to receive from Us, a Church,
Ordination, Scriptures, Personal Succession, and not Succession of Doctrine?
Is not this to verify the name of Heresy, which signifies Election or Choice?
Whereby they cannot avoid that note of Imprudency, (or as S. Augustine calls it)
Foolishnes, set down by him against the Manichees, and by me recited before. I
would not (says he) believe Cont. ep. Fund. c. 5.
the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Church did move me. Those therefore
whom I obeyed, saying, Believe the Gospel, why should I not obey the same men
saying to me, Do not believe Manichaeus (Luther, Calvin, etc.) Choose what thou
please: If thou say, Believe the Catholics; they warn me, not to believe
thee. Wherefore if I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If thou say, Do not
believe the Catholics; thou shall not do well, in forcing me to the faith of
Manichaeus, because by the Preaching of Catholics, I believed the Gospel it
self. If thou say; you did well to believe them (Catholics) commending the
Gospel, but you did not well to believe them, discommending Manichaeus; do
thou think me so very FOOLISH, that without any reason at all, I should
believe what thou will, and not believe, what thou will not? Nay this holy
Father is not content to call it Foolishnes, but mere Madness, in these words:
Why should I not most diligently enquire Lib. de vtil. Cred. c. 14.
what Christ commanded of those before all others, by whose Authority I was
moved to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing? Can thou better
declare to me, what he said, whom I would not have thought to have been, or to
be, if the Belief thereof had been recommended by thee to me? This therefore I
believed by fame, strengthened with Celebrity, Consent, Antiquity. But every one
may see that you, so few, so turbulent, so new, can produce nothing which
deserves Authority. What MADNESS is this? Believe them (Catholics) that we
ought to believe Christ; but learn of us, what Christ said. Why I beseech
thee? Surely if they (Catholics) were not at all, and could not teach me any
thing, I would more easily persuade my self, that I were not to believe
Christ, then I should learn any thing concerning him from any other then
those, by whom I believed him. Lastly, I ask what wisdom it could be to leave
all visible Churches, and consequently the true Catholic Church of Christ,
which you confess cannot err in points necessary to salvation, and the Roman
Church which you grant does not err in fundamentalls, and follow private men
who may err even in points necessary to salvation? Especially if we add, that
when Luther rose there was no visible true Catholic Church besides that of
Rome, and them who agreed with her; in which sense, she was, and is, the only
true Church of Christ, and not capable of any Error in faith. Nay, even Luther,
who first opposed the Roman Church yet coming to dispute against other
Heretics, he is forced to give the Lie both to his own words and deeds, in
saying: We freely confess In epist. cont. Anab. ad duos Paerochos. to. 2,
Germ. Wit. fol. 229. and 230.
that in the Papacy there are many good things, worthy the name of Christian,
which have come from them to us. Namely, we confess, that in the Papacy there
is true Scripture, true Baptism, the true Sacrament of the Altar, the true
keys for remission of sins, the true Office of Preaching, true Catechism,
as our Lords Prayer, Ten Commandments, Articles of faith etc. And afterward: I
avouch, that under the Papacy there is true Christianity, yea the Kernel and
Marrow of Christianity, and many pious and great Saints. And again he
affirms, that the Church of Rome has the true Spirit, Gospells, Faith,
Baptism, Sacraments, the Keys, the Office of Preaching, Prayer, Holy
Scripture, and whatsoever Christianity ought to have. And a little before: I
hear and see that they bring in Anabaptisme only to this end, that they may
spite the Pope, as men that will receive nothing from Antichrist; no otherwise
then the Sacramentaries do, who therefore believe only Bread and Wine to be in
the Sacrament, merely in hatred against the Bishop of Rome; and they think
that by this means they shall overcome the Papacy. Verily these men rely upon
a weak ground, for by this means they must deny the whole Scripture, and the
Office of Preaching. For we have all these things from the Pope; otherwise we
must go make a new Scripture. O Truth, more forcible (as S. Augustine says)
to wring out Contra Donat. post collat. cap. 24.
Confession, then is any rack, or torment! And so we may truly say with
Moses: Inimici nostri sunt Iudices: Our very Enemies give Deuteronomy. c. 32. 31.
sentence for us.

32. Lastly, since your faith wants Certainty, and Prudence, it is easy to
infer that it wants the fourth Condition, Supernaturality. Their faith wants
Supernaturality.
For being but an Humane persuasion, or Opinion, it is not in nature, or
Essence Supernatural. And being imprudent, and rash, it cannot proceed from
divine Motion and Grace; and therefore it is neither supernatural in it self,
or in the Cause from which it proceeds.

33. Since therefore we have proved, that whosoever erres against any one point
of faith, loses all divine faith, even concerning those other Articles
wherein he does not err; and that although he could still retain true faith
for some points, yet any one error in whatsoever other matter concerning
faith, is a grievous sin; it clearly follows, that when two or more hold
different doctrines concerning faith and Religion, there can be but one part
saved. For declaring of which truth, if Catholics be charged with Want of
Charity, and Modesty, and be accused of rashness, ambition, and fury, as D.
Potter is very free in this kind; I desire every one to ponder the words of S.
Chrysostom, who teaches, that every least error overthrows all faith, and
whosoever is guilty thereof, is in the Church, like one, who in the
Commonwealth forgeth false Coin: Let them hear (says this holy Father) what
S. Paul says: Namely, that they who brought in some small error Galat. ^. 7.
had overthrown the Gospel. For, to show how a small thing ill mingled does
corrupt the whole, he said, that the Gospel was subueried. For as he who
clips a little of the stamp from the Kings money, makes the whole piece of no
value: so whosoever takes away the least particle of sound faith, is wholly
corrupted, always going from that beginning to worse things. Where then are
they, who condemn us as contentious persons, because we cannot agree with
Heretics, and do often say, that there is no difference betwixt us and them,
but that our disagreement proceeds from Ambition to dominiere? And thus having
showed that Protestants want true Faith, it remains that, according to my
first design, I examine whether they do not also want Charity, as it respects
a man's self.

CHAP. VII. In regard of the Precept of Charity toward ones self,
Protestants are in state of Sin, as long as they remain separated from the
Roman Church.
THAT, due Order is to be observed in the Theological Virtue of Charity,
whereby we are directed to prefer some Objects before others; is a truth
taught by all Deuines, and declared in these words of holy Scripture: He has
ordered Cant. 2. ^
Charity in me. The reason whereof is: because the infinite Goodness of God,
which is the formal Object, or Motive of Charity, and for which all other
things are loved, is differently participated by different Objects; and
therefore the love we bear to them for Gods sake, must accordingly be
unequal. In the virtue of Faith, the case is far otherwise; because all the
Objects, or points which we believe, do equally participate the divine
Testimony, or Revelation, for which we believe a like all things propounded for
such. For it is as impossible for God, to speak an untruth, in a small, as in
a great matter. And this is the ground for which we have so often affirmed,
that any least error against Faith, is injurious to God, and destructive of
Salvation.

2. This order in Charity may be considered; Toward God; Our own soul; The
soul of our Neighbor; Our own life, or Goods; and the life or goods of our
Neighbor. God is to be beloved above all things, both obiectiue (as the
Deuines speak) that is, we must wish or desire to God, a Good more great,
perfect, and noble then to any, or all other things: namely, all that indeed He
is, a Nature Infinite, Independent, Immense etc. and also appretiatiue, that
is, we must sooner loose what good soever, then leave, and abandon Him. In the
other Objects of Charity, of which I spoke, this Order is to be kept. We may,
but are not bound, to prefer the life and goods of our Neighbor before our
own: we are bound to prefer the soul of our Neighbor before our own
temporal goods or life, if he happen to be in extreme spiritual necessity,
and that we by our assistance can succor him, according to the saying of S.
John: In this we have known 1. Joan. 3. v. 16.
the Charity of God, because he has yielded his life for us: and we ought to
yield our life for our Brethren. And S. Augustine likewise says: A Christian
will not doubt De meudac. cap. 6.
to loose his own temporal life, for the eternal life of his Neighbor.
Lastly we are to prefer the spiritual good of our own soul, before both the
spiritual and temporal good of our Neighbor; because as Charity does of its
own Nature, chiefly incline the person in whom it resides, to love God, and to
be united with him: so of it self it enclines him, to procure those things
whereby the said Union with God is effected, rather to himself then to others.
And from hence it follows, that in things necessary to salvation, no man ought
in any case, or in any respect whatsoever, to prefer the spiritual good,
either of any particular person, or of the whole world before his own soul;
according to those words of our Blessed Savior: What does it Matt. 6.
avail a man, if he gain the whole world, and sustain the damage of his own
soul? And therefore (to come to our present purpose) it is directly against the
Order of Charity, or against Charity as it has a reference to our selves,
which Deuines call Charitas propria, to adventure either the omitting of any
means necessary to salvation, or the committing of any thing repugnant to it,
for whatsoever respect; and consequently, if by living out of the Roman Church
we put our selves in hazard, either to want some thing necessarily required to
salvation, or else to perform some act against it, we commit a most grievous
sin, against the virtue of Charity, as it respects our selves, and so cannot
hope for salvation, without repentance.

3. Now, of things necessary to salvation, there are two sorrs, according to
the doctrine of all Divines. Some things (say they) are necessary to salvation,
necessitate praecepti, necessary only because they are commanded; For: If thou will Matt. ^^. 17.
enter into life, keep the Commandments. In which kind of things, as probable
ignorance of the Law, or of the Commandment does excuse the party from all
faulty breach thereof; so likewise does it not exclude salvation in case of
ignorance. Some other things are said to be necessary to salvation necessitate
medij, finis, or salutis; because they are Means appointed by God to attain
our End of eternal salvation, in so strict a manner, that it were presumption
to hope for Salvation without them. And as the former means are said to be
necessary, because they are commanded; so the later are commonly said to be
commanded, because they are necessary, that is: Although there were no other
special precept concerning them; yet supposing they be once appointed as
means absolutely necessary to salvation, there cannot but rise an obligation
of procuring to have them, in virtue of that universal precept of Charity,
which obliges every man to procure the salvation of his own soul. In this
sort divine infallible Faith is necessary to salvation; as likewise repentance
of every deadly sin, and in the doctrine of Catholics, Baptism in re, that
is, in act to Children, and for those who are come to the use of reason, in
voto, or hearty desire, when they cannot have it in act. And as Baptism is
necessary for remission of Original, and actual sin committed before it: so
the Sacrament of Confession, or Penance is necessary in re, or in vote, in act,
or desire, for the remission of mortal sins, committed after Baptism. The
Minister of which Sacrament of Penance being necessarily a true Priest, true
Ordination is necessary in the Church of God for remission of sins by this
Sacrament, as also for other ends not belonging to our present purpose. From
hence it rises, that no ignorance, or impossibility can supply the want of
those means which are absolutely necessary to salvation: As if, for example, a
sinner depart this world without repenting himself of all deadly sins,
although he dye suddenly, or unexpectedly fall out of his wits, and so commit
no new sin by omission of repentance; yet he shall be eternally punished for
his former sins committed, and never repented. If an Infant dye without
Baptism, he cannot be saved, not by reason of any actual sin committed by
him in omitting Baptism, but for Original sin, not forgiven by the means
which God has ordained to that purpose. Which doctrine, all, or most
Protestants will (for ought I know) grant to be true, in the Children of
Infidels, yea not only Lutherans, but also some other Protestants as M. Bilson
late of Winchester In his true difference etc. part. 4 page 368. and 369.
and others hold it to be true, even in the Children of the faithful. And if
Protestants in general disagree from Catholics in this point, it cannot be
denied but that our disagreement is in a point very fundamental. And the like
I say of the Sacrament of Penance, which they deny to be necessary to
salvation, either in act, or in desire; which error is likewise fundamental,
because it concerns (as I said) a thing necessary to salvation: And for the
same reason, if their Priesthood and Ordination be doubtful, as certainly it
is, they are in danger to want a means without which they cannot be saved.
Neither ought this rigor to seem strange, or unjust: For Almighty God having
of his own Goodness, without our merit, first ordained Man to a supernatural
end of eternal felicity; and then, after our fall in Adam vouchsafed to reduce
us to the attayning of that End, if his blessed Will be pleased to limit the
attayning of that End, to some means which in his infinite Wisdom he thinks
most fit; who can say, why do thou so? Or who can hope for that End, without
such means? Blessed be his divine Majesty, for vouchsafing to ordain us, base
creatures, to so sublime an End, by any means at all.

4 Out of the foresaid difference follows another, that (generally speaking)
in things necessary only, because they are commanded, it is sufficient for
auoydnng sin, that we proceed prudently, and by the conduct of some probable
opinion, maturely weighed and approved by men of virtue, learning, and wisdom.
Neither are we always obliged to follow the most strict, and severe, or secure
part, as long as the doctrine which we embrace, proceeds upon such reasons, as
may warrant it to be truly probable, and prudent, though the contrary part want
not also probable grounds. For in humane affairs, and discourse, evidence and
certainty cannot be always expected. But when we treat not precisely of
avoiding sin, but moreover of procuring some thing without which I can not be
saved; I am obliged by the Law, and Order of Charity to procure as great
certainty as morally I am able; and am not to follow every probable Opinion, or
dictamen, but tutiorem partem, the safer part, because if my probability prove
false, I shall not probably, but certainly come short of Salvation. Nay in such
case, I shall incur a new sin against the Virtue of Charity toward my
self, which obliges every one not to expose his soul to the hazard of
eternal perdition, when it is in his power, with the assistance of Gods grace,
to make the matter sure. From this very ground it is, that although some Deuines
be of opinion, that it is not a sin to use some Matter, or Form of
Sacraments, only probable, if we respect precisely the reverence or respect
which is due to Sacraments, as they belong to the Moral infused Virtue of
Religion; yet when they are such Sacraments, as the inualidity thereof may
endanger the salvation of souls, all do with one consent agree, that it is a
grievous offense to use a doubtful, or only probable Matter or Form, when it
is in our power to procure certainty. If therefore it may appear, that though
it were not certain that Protestancy unrepented destroys Salvation (as we
have proved to be very certain) yet at least that is probable, and with all,
that there is a way more safe; it will follow out of the grounds already laid,
that they are obliged by the law of Charity to embrace that safe way.

5. Now, that Protestants have reason at least to doubt in what case they
stand, is deduced from what we have said, and proved about the universal
infallibility of the Church, and of her being Judge of Controversies, to whom
all Christians ought to submit their Judgment (as even some Protestants grant,)
and whom to oppose in any one of her definitions, is a grievous sin: As also
from what we have said of the Unity, Universality, and Visibility of the
Church, and of Succession of Persons, and Doctrine; Of the Conditions of Divine
Faith, Certainty, Obscurity, Prudence, and Supernaturality, which are wanting
in the faith of Protestants; Of the frivolous distinction of points
fundamental and not fundamental, (the cofutation whereof proves that
Heretics disagreeing among themselves in any least point, cannot have the
same faith, nor be of the same Church:) Of Schism; of Heresy; of the Persons
who first revolted from Rome, and of their Motives; of the Nature of Faith,
which is destroyed by any least error, and it is certain that some of them
must be in error, and want the substance of true faith; and since all pretend
the like certainty, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all,
but that they want true faith, which is a means most absolutely necessary to
Salvation. Moreover, as I said heertofore, since it is granted that every
Error in fundamental points is damnable, and that they cannot tell in
particular, what points be fundamental; it follows that none of them knows
whether he, or his Brethren do not err da^nably, it being certain that
amongst so many disagreeing persons some must err. Upon the same ground of not
being able to assign what points be fundamental, I say, they cannot be sure
whether the difference among them be fundamental or no, and consequently
whether they agree in the substance of faith and hope of Salvation. I omit to
add that you want the Sacrament of Penance, instituted for remission of
sins, or at least you must confess that you hold it not necessary; and yet
your own Brethren, for example, the Century Writers do Cent. 3. cap. 6. col.
127.
acknowledge, that in the times of Cyprian, and Tertulian, Private Confession
even of Thoghts was used; and that, it was then commanded, and thought
necessary. The like, I say, concerning your Ordination, which at least is very
doubfull, and consequently all that depends thereon.

6. On the other side, that the Roman Church is the safer way to Heaven (not to
repeat what has been already said upon diverse occasions) I will again put you
in mind, that unless the Roman Church was the true Church, there was no visible
true Church upon Earth. A thing so manifest, that Protestants themselves
confess that more then one thousand years the Roman Church possessed the
whole world, as we have showed heertofore, out of their own Chap. 5. number. 9.
words: from whence it follows, that unless Ours be the true Church, you
cannot pretend to any perpetual visible Church of your Own; but Ours does not
depend on yours, before which it was. And here I wish you to consider with
fear and trembling; how all Roman Catholics, not one excepted; that is,
those very men whom you must hold not to err damnably in their belief,
unless you will destroy your own Church, and salvation, do with unanimous
consent believe, and profess that Protestancy unrepented, destroies Salvation;
and then tell me, as you will answer at the last day, whether it be not more
safe, to live and die in that Church, which even your selves are forced to
acknowledge not to be cut off from hope of salvation (which are your own
words) then to live in a Church, which the said confessedly true Church does
firmly believe, and constantly profess not to be capable of salvation. And
therefore I conclude that by the most strict obligation of Charity toward your
own soul, you are bound to place it in safety, by returning to that Church,
from which your Progenitors Schismatically departed; least too late you find
that saying of the holy Ghost verified in your selves: He that loves Eccles. ^.
27.
the danger, shall perish therein.

7. Against this last argument of the greater security of the Roman Church
drawn from your own confession, you bring an Objection; which in the end will
be found to make for us, against your self. It is taken from the words of the
Donatists, speaking to Catholics in this manner: Your selves confess page
112.
our Baptism, Sacraments, and Faith (here you put an Explication of your own,
and fay, for the most part, as if any small error in faith did not destroy all
Faith) to be good, and auayleable. We deny yours to be so, and say there is no
Church, no salvation amongst you. Therefore it is safest for all to join with
us.

8. By your leave our Argument is not (as you say) for simple people alone, but
for all them who have care to save their souls. Neither is it grounded upon
your Charitable Judgment (as you Page 81.
speak) but upon an inevitable necessity for you, either to grant salvation to
our Church, or to entaile certain damnation upon your own: because yours can
have no being till Luther, unless ours be supposed to have been the true Church
of Christ. And since you term this Argument a Charm, take heed you be none of
those, who according to the Prophet David, do not hear the voice of him Psalm.
v. 6.
who charmeth wisely. But to come to the purpose: Catholics never granted
that the Donatists had a true Church, or might be saved: And therefore you
having cited out of S. Augustine, the words of the Catholics, that the
Donatists had true Baptism, when you come to the contrary words of the
Donatists, you add, No Church, No Salvation; making the Argument to have
quinque terminos; without which Addition you did see, it made nothing against
us: For, as I said, the Catholics never yielded, that among the Donatists
there was a true Church, or hope of salvation. And your self a few leaves
after acknowledge that the Donatists maintained an error, which, was in the
Matter and Nature of it properly heretical, against that Article of the Creed,
wherein we profess to believe the holy page 125.
Catholic Church: and consequently, you cannot allow salvation to them, as
you do, and must do to us. And the^rfore the Donatists could not make the like
argument against Catholics, as Catholics make against you, who grant us
Salvation, which we deny to you. But at least (you will say) this Argument for
the Certainty of their Baptism, was like to Ours touching the Security and
Certainty of our salvation; and therefore that Catholics should have esteemed
the Baptism of the Donatists, more Certain then their own, and so have
allowed Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics, or sinners, as
the Donatists esteemed all Catholics to be. I answer, no. Because it being a
matter of faith, that Baptism administered by Heretics, observing due Matter,
Form etc. is valide; to rebaptize any so baptized, had been both a sacrilege
in reitering a Sacrament not reiterable, and a profession also of a damnable
Heresy, and therefore had not been more safe, but certainly damnable. But you
confess that in the doctrine or practice of the Roman Church, there is no
belief, or profession of any damnable error, which if there were, even your
Church should certainly be no Church. To believe therefore and profess as we
do, cannot exclude Salvation, as Rebaptization must have done. But if the
Donatists could have affirmed with truth, that in the opinion both of
Catholics and themselves their Baptism was good, yea and good in such sort
as that unless theirs was good, that of the Catholics could not be such: but
the^^s might be good, though that of the Catholics were not and further that
it was no damnable error to believe, that Baptism administered by the
Catholics was not good, nor that it was any Sacrilege to reiterate the same
Baptism of Catholics: If, I say, they could have truly affirmed these
things, they had said somewhat, which at least had seemed to the purpose. But
these things they could not say with any color of truth, and therefore their
argument was fond, and impious. But we with truth say to Protestants: You
cannot but confess that our doctrine contains no damnable error, and that our
Church is so certainly a true Church, that unless ours be true you cannot
pretend any; Yea you grant, that you should be guilty of Schism, if you did
cut off our Church from the Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation: But we
neither do, nor can grant that yours is a true Church, or that within it there
is hope of salvation: Therefore it is safest for you, to join with us. And now
against whom has your Objection greatest force?

9. But I wonder not a little, and so I think will every body else, what the
reason may be, that you do not so much as go about to answer the argument of
the Donatists, which you say is all one with Ours, but refer us to S. Augustine
there to read it; as if every one carried with him a Library, or were able to
examine the places in S. Augustine: and yet you might be sure your Reader would
be greedy to see some solid answer to an Argument so often urged by us, and
which indeed, unless you can confute it, ought alone to move every one who has
care of his soul, to take the safest way, by incorporating himself in our
Church. But we may easily imagine the true reason of your silence. For the
answer which S. Augustine gives to the Donatists, is directly against your
self, and the same which I have given: Namely, that Catholics Ad lit. Petil.
lib. 2. cap. 108.
approve the Baptism of Donatists, but abhor their heresy of Rebaptization.
And that as gold is good (which is the similitude used by Contrae Cresc lib. 1.
cap. 21.
S. Augustine) yet not to be sought in company of thieves; so though Baptism be
good, yet it must not be sought for in the Conuenticle of Donatists. But you
free us from damnable heresy, and yield us salvation, which I hope is to be
embraced in whatsoever Company it is found, or rather that Company is to be
embraced before all other, in which all sides agree, that salvation may be
found. We therefore must infer, that it is safest for you to seek salvation
among us. You had good reason to conceal S. Augustins answer to the Donatists.

10. You frame another argument in our behalf, and make us speak thus: If
Protestants believe the page 79.
Religion of Catholics, to be a safe way to Heaven, why do they not follow
it? Which wise argument of your own, you answer at large, and confirm your
answer by this instance: The Jesuits and Dominicans hold different Opinions
touching Predetermination, and the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin:
Yet so, that the Jesuits hold the Dominicans way safe, that is, his error not
damnable, and the Dominicans hold the same of the Jesuits. Yet neither of them
with good Consequence can press the other to believe his opinion, because by
his own Confession it is no damnable error.

11. But what Catholic makes such a wise demand, as you put into our
mouths? If our Religion be a safe way to heaven, that is, not damnable; why do
you not follow it? As if every thing that is good, must be of necessity
embraced by every body But what think you of the Argument framed thus? Our
Religion is safe, even by your Confession, therefore you ought to grant that all
may embrace it. And yet further, thus: Among different Religions and contrary
ways to heaven, one only can be safe: But Ours, by your own Confession, is
safe, whereas we hold that in yours there is no hope of salvation: Therefore you
may, and ought to embrace ours. This is our Argument. And if the Dominicans and
Jesuits did say one to another as we say to you; then one of them might with
good consequence press the other to believe his opinion. You have still the
hard fortune to be beaten with your own weapon.

12. It remains then that both in regard of Faith, and Charity, Protestants
are obliged to unite themselves with the Church of Rome. And I may add also, in
regard of the Theological Virtue of Hope, without which none can hope to be
saved, and which you want, either by excess of Confidence, or defect by
Despair, not unlike to your Faith, which I showed to be either deficient in
Certainty, or excessive in Evidence; as likewise according to the rigid
Caluinists, it is either so strong, that once had, it can never be lost; or so
more then weak, and so much nothing; that it can never be gotten. For the true
Theological Hope of Christians, is a Hope which keeps a mean between
Presumption, and Desperation; which moves us to work our salvation with fear,
and trembling; which conducts us to make sure our salvation by good works, as
holy Scripture advises But contrarily, Protestants do either exclude Hope by
Despair, with the Doctrine that our Savior died not for all, and that such
want grace sufficient to salvation; or else by vain Presumption grounded upon
a fantastical persuasion, that they are Predestinate, which Faith must exclude
all fear, and trembling. Neither can they make their Calling certain by good
works, who do certainly believe that before any good works they are
justified, and justified even by Faith alone, and by that Faith whereby they
certainly believe that they are justified. Which points some Protestants do
expressly affirm to be the soul of the Church; the principal Origin of
salvation; Of all other points of Doctrine the chiefest and weightiest; as
already I have noted Chap. 3. n. 19. And if some Protestants do now relent from
the rigor of the aforesaid doctrine, we must affirm, that at least some of
them want the Theological Virtue of Hope; yea that none of them can have true
Hope, while they hope to be saved in the Communion of those, who defend such
doctrines, as do directly overthrow all true Christian Hope. And for as much
as concerns Faith, we must also infer, that they want Unity therein (and
consequently have none at all) by their disagreement about the soul of the
Church; the principal Origin of salvation; of all other points of Doctrine the
chiefest and weightiest. And if you want true Faith, you must by consequence
want Hope; or if you hold that this point is not to be so indivisible on either
side, but that it has latitude sufficient to embrace all parties, without
prejudice to their salvation; notwithstanding that your Brethren hold it to be
the soul of the Church etc. I must repeat what I have said heertofore, that,
even by this Example, it is clear, you cannot agree what points be
fundamental: And so (to whatsoever answer you fly) I press you in the same
manner, and say, that you have no Certainty whether you agree in fundamental
points, or Unity and substance of Faith, which cannot stand with difference in
fundamental. And so upon the whole matter, I leave it to be considered,
whether, Want of Charity can be justly charged on us, because we affirm, that
they cannot (without repentance) be saved, who want of all other the most
necessary means to salvation, which are, the three Theological Virtues,
FAITH, HOPE, and CHARITY.

13. And now I end this first Part, having as I conceive, complied with my
first design (in that measure, which Time, Commodity, scarcity of Books, and
my own small Abilities could affoard) which was to show, that Amongst men of
different Religions, one side only can be saved. For since there must be some
infallible Means to decide all Controversies concerning Religion, and to
propound truth revealed by Almighty God; and this Means can be no other, but
the Visible Church of Christ, which at the time of Luthers appearance was only
the Church of Rome, and such as agreed with her: We must conclude, that
whosoever opposes himself to her definitions, or forsakes her Communion, does
resist God himself, whose spouse she is, and whose divine truth she propounds;
and therefore becomes guilty of Schism, and Heresy, which since Luther, his
Associates, and Protestants, have done, and still continue to do; it is not
Want of Charity, but abundance of evident cause, that forces us to declare
this necessary Truth, PROTESTANCY UNREPENTED DESTROYS SALVATION.

The End of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART.
THE PREAMBLE.
SINCE I have handled the substance of our present Controversy, and ansvvered
the chief grounds of D. Potter in the First Part; I may well in this Second
be more brief, referring the Reader to those several places, vvherin his
reasons are confuted, and his objections ansvvered. And because in every
Section, he handles so many different points, that they cannot be ranged under
one Title, or Argument; my Chapters must accordingly have no particular Title
as they had in the First Part; but the Reader may be pleased to conceive, and
yet do me no more then Justice therein, that the Argument of every one of my
seven Chapters, is an Answer to his Seven Sections, as they lie in order.
But let us now address our speech to D. Potter.

CHAP. I.
YOU pretend, and profess in your Preface to the Reader, that you have not
omitted without Answer any one thing of moment in all the Discourse of Charity
Mistaken: and yet you omit that, which very much imported to the Question in
hand, namely the moderate Explication of our doctrine, that Protestancy
unrepented destroys Salvation; and that you must say the same of us, if you
believe your own Religion to be true, and Ours to be false: which points are
prudently delivered by Charity Mistaken in his second Chapter; which together
with his First, you undertake to answer in this your First Section. And whereas
he showed by diverse arguments that it is improbable that the Church should want
Charity, your Answer to that point is superficial, and untrue in some things,
and none at all in others, as will easily appear to any that shall read
Charity Mistaken in his first Chapter.

2. You tell us in very confident manner, that hardly Page 33.
any Age in former times may compare with this of Ours (since this Church was
happily purged from Popery) for public expressions of Charity; but you do it
in so general terms, as if you were afraid of being confuted. For I beseech
you, D. Potter, are the Churches which Protestants have built, any thing
comparable to the^ which have been erected by Catholics? Do your Hospitalls
so much deserve as to be named? Have you any thing of that kind in effect of
particular note, saving the fow mean Nurseries of idle beggars and debauched
people, except perhaps Suitons Hospital, which (as I have been informed) was
to take no profit at all till he was dead? He who (as I have also understood)
dyed so without any Children, or Brothers, or Sisters, or known kindred, as
that peradventure it might have eschetead to the King? He who lived a wretched
and penurious life, and drew that mass of wealth together by Usury, in which
case according to good conscience, his estate without asking him leave, was by
the Law of God obnoxious to restitution, and ought to have been applied to
pious uses? Whereas both anciently in this Country, and at all times, and
specially in this last age, men see abundance of heroical actions of this
kind performed in forrayne parts. And if it were not for fear of noting many
other great Cities, as if there were any want of most munificent Hospitalls in
them, wherein they abound; I could tell you of one called the Annunciata in the
City of Naples, which spends three hundred thousand Crowns per annum, which
comes to about fourscore thousand pounds sterling by the year, which ever
feeds, and cures a thousand sick persons, and pays for the nursing and
entertayning of three thousand sucking children of poor people, and has
fourteen other distinct Hospitals under it, where the persons of those poor
creatures are kept, and where they are defrayed of all their necessary charges
every week. I could also tell you of an Hospital in Rome called S. Spirito of
huge revenues, but it is not my meaning to enter into particulars, which would
prove endless. In the mean time it is pretty entertainment for you to believe no
more then you see, which is not much, and to talk in general terms, by
comparing that which comes in your way, with those which are in other
Countries, whereof you seem to know very little. And where I pray you can you
verify that which Charity Mistaken says of our Church in these words. ( page
7.) Persons sick of all diseases are served and attended (after the example of
Christ our Lord) by the own hands of great Princes and Prelates, and of choice
and delicate Ladies and Queens, in the Communion of the holy Catholic
Church? Would to God the first Head of your Church had not destroyed those
innumerable glorious momuments of Charity which he found! But because our
present question about the Saueablenes of Protestants belongs rather to Faith
then Charity, out of your own hyperbolicall affirmation. I will infer: That
seeing the Monuments of Charitable works performed by Catholics, do
incomparably exceed those of yours; and yet, that time for time your Charity
(as you affirm) surpasses ours; it follows very clearly, that our Faith and
Church is far more ancient then yours, and consequently that yours cannot be
Catholic for all Ages. So that by exaggeration of your Charity, you have
overthrown your Faith and Charity also, which cannot subsist without true
Catholic Faith.

3. But yet you are so ingenuous, that you do not so much as pretend to compare
your Charity in converting souls, to that of the Catholics: nor do you so
much as once venture to insinuate that the Protestant Ministers leave their
Country and Commodities, and the howses of rich and loving friends, to
transport themselves into barbarous Nations, with the sufferance of all cruel
inconveniences, and very many times of death it self, for the conversion of
souls to Christ our Lord. For of this you were expressly told, and
consequently how improbable it was, that Catholics should sear the
dangerous state of Protestants, through mere want of Charity; whereas yet for
the only exercise of that virtue, they were content with so much courage and
joy to cast away their lives, and that therefore when we made that judgment of
you, it was rather through our zeal and cordial desire of your good, and
fear of your loss, then for want of charity, or compassion. But of this, as I
was saying, you were so wise as not to speak a word. For that glorious mark
of the Dilatation and Amplitude of Gods Church, by the Conversion of Nations,
Kings, and Kingdoms, so manifestly foretold by the holy Prophets, and ordained
in the Gospel, when our Savior bid the Apostles preach to all Nations, and
yet never performed by Protestants, by evidence of fact, and by the confession
of our Adversaries, does shine most bright in the Church of Rome.

4. But I cannot say, that you omitted to rail against the Jesuits, whom I
will not dishonor so much, as to defend them against that which you offer so
impertinently, vulgarly, and meanly against them, and particularly because in
defense of a common cause I will not be diuerted by the consideration of
particular persons, though by reason of the Eminency of the person of Cardinal
D^ossat, I cannot for bear to tell you, that you falsify him, when you make
him say in his eight Epistle, that he collected from their wicked doctrine and
practices, that they believe neither in Jesus Christ, nor the Pope. For the
Cardinal speaks not those words of any doctrine or practices of the Jesuits:
And in the funeral Oration which was pronounced at the Exequyes of the said
Cardinal, and is prefixed before the Book which you allege, it is affirmed,
that he of his own accord, and without being dealt with to that purpose, did
negociate the read mission of the Jesuits into France. So far was he from
collecting from their doctrine and practices, that they believe neither in
Jesus Christ, nor in the Pope. And as for our doctrine, which concerns the
incompatibility of Protestancy with salvation, as proper to the Jesuits, it is
an idle speech, void of all color of truth. For it is so far from being proper
to them, that it is common to all Roman Catholics in the world, and you shall
never be able to show me any one of an entire fame, who holds the contrary.

5. And whereas you ask: Why may not a Protestant be saved since he belieues
entirely the Scriptures, the Catholic Creeds, and whatsoever the Catholic
Church in all ages has believed as necessary to salvation? You may take the
answer out of my First Part, where I have showed, that he neither keeps the
Commaundments, nor belieues all things necessary to salvation, yea and belieues
not any one point with divine and supernatural faith, who disobeyes, and
disagrees from the visible Church of Christ, in any one thing, propounded by
her as a Divine truth.

6. You tell us, that you are no further departed from the present Roman
Church, then she is departed from herself. But no wise man will believe this,
till you can inform him, what visible Church at, or before Luthers appearance
remained pure, out of which the Roman Church had formerly departed; or else you
must confess that the whole Church of Christ was corrupted. Which because you
will never be able to do, with truth you must be forced to confess, that she
still kept her integrity, without any spot of erroneous doctrine, and therefore
that your departure out of her, cannot be excused from Schism, and Heresy.

7. You say truly, That it is merely impossible Page 10.
the Catholic Church should want Charity, because the good spirit of Truth
and Love ever assists and animates that great Body. But you speak not
consequently to your own Assertion, that the Catholic Church may err in
points of faith not fundamental. For if the good spirit of Truth, may fail to
assist her faith: why may not the good Spirit of Love, fail to direct her
Charity? Nay if we observe it well, the Want of Charity which you impute to us,
is resolved into this doctrinall point, Protestancy unrepented destroies
salvation: Which Doctrine and Assertion, if you hold to be a fundamental
error, you deprive us, of salvation, and become as uncharitable to us as you
say we are to you. If it be not a fundamental point, then (according to your
principles) the Church may err therein, and so want Charity, by judging that
Protestants cannot be saved.

8. What we understand by the Roman Catholic Church, I have explained
heertofore, to wit, all Christians united with the Church of Rome, as it is the
sea of Peter. In which sense it is not a part, but comprehends all the
Catholic Church (which heertofore I proved out of the Fathers;) as, in some
proportion, we do not understand the Tribe of Iuoa alone by the Jewish Church,
though the other Tribes were called by the name of the Jewish People and
Church, from that principal Tribe of Judah. So that your marginall quotations
to prove that the Church of Rome is a particular Church, are emplored to prove
that which no man denies, if we speak of the particular Diocese of Rome, and
not as it is the Sea of Peter, to which all Christian Catholics dispersed
throughout the whole world are united: Which Sea of Peter settled in Rome, being
the Root, the Center, the Fountain, the Idaea of all Ecclesiastical Union in
all Christian Churches, gives them the denomination of Roman Catholics;
which does no more limit the whole Catholic Church, then the name of Jewish
Church, did limit the whole Sinagogue to the Tribe of Judah alone. And therefore
your threadbare Objection, that Catholic Roman Page 11.
are terms repugnant, signifying universal particular, vanishes utterly away
by this different acception of the Roman Church, and serves only to convince by
your own objection, that D. Potter, or the Church of England cannot style
themselves Catholic, because Catholic signifies Universal, and D. Potter
and the Church of England, are things particular. And I would gladly know what
your Brethren mean, when they affirm the Roman Church, for diverse Ages to
have possessed the whole world? Do they think that the particular Diocese of
Rome was lifted over the Alps? Or when your Prelates demand, whether we be
Roman Catholics, do they demand whether we dwell in the City, or Diocese
of Rome? And here I note in a word, what now comes to my mind, that I wonder
D. Andrews, a man so highly esteemed among Protestants, would tell us that the
Roman Church is indiuiduum In Rest. ad Apolog. Card. Bollar. ad ca. 5.
as the Logicians call it, and that Catholic is Genus, or a general kind.
For to omit that the thing it self is ridiculous, it makes directly for us;
because every indiuiduum contains in it self the Genus, as Peter (for
example) is a substance, a sensible creature etc. and so if the Roman Church be
indiuiduum, it must contain Catholic in it self; and so the Roman Church
must of necessity be affirmed to be a Catholic Church. Before I leave this
point I must tell you, that you corrupt Innocentius Tertius. to prove Page 12.
that the Roman Church was anciently esteemed a Topical, or particular Church
distinct from others, and in, and under the universal, in these words: It is
called the Universal Church which consists of all Churches: where you put an
etc. and then add, Ecclesia Romana sic non est vo^uersalis Ecclesia, sed pars
vniuersalis Ecclesiae: The Roman Church is not thus the universal Church, but
part of the universal Church, where you break off. But Innocentius his words
are these: The Universal Church is said to be that which consists of all
Churches, which of the Greek word is called Catholic: and according to this
acception of the Word, the Roman Church is not the Universal Church, but part
of the Universal Church: Yet the first and chief part, as the head in the
body; because in her, fulness of power does exist, but only a part of fulness is
derived to others. And that One Church, which contains under it self all
Churches, is said to be the Universal Church. And according to this
signification of the Word, only the Roman Church is called the Universal
Church, because she alone is preferred before the rest by privilege of
singular dignity. As God is called the universal Lord, not because he is
divided into species etc. but because all things are contained under his
Dominion: For there is One general Church of which Truth it self said to
Peter; Thou art Peter and upon this Rock etc. And the many particular
Churches, of which the Apostle says, Instantia mea etc. One does consist of
all, as the general of particulars, and One has the preeminence before all,
because seeing there is one Body of the Church, of which the Apostle says; We
are all one Body in Christ: she excels the rest, as the Head excels the other
members of the body. Thus far Innocentius; who as you see teaches that the
Roman Church is the Head of all others: That although the Roman Church in one
sense be a particular Church, yet in another sense it both is, and ought to be
called the Universal Church; and finally that your Objection about the
repugnance betwixt the term Universal and particular is frivolous, as he
explicates very well by the example of Almighty God, who is said to be an
Universal Cause, and yet had neither genus, nor species, and besides whom there
are other particular Causes. Is this to affirm, as you say, that the Roman
Church is a topycall, or particular Church in, and under the Universal? Or
that she is only Topicall, or particular, as you would make the Reader believe?

9. Your preaching, rather then proving the Charity of your Church,
Administration of Sacraments etc. must rely upon a voluntary begging of the
Question, that your Religion is true; otherwise the good deeds you mention are
not expressions of Charity, but professions of Heresy; The learned Cardinal
Hosius saying: Whosoever belieues Hosiu: in Confess Petricon. cap. 14.
the Article of the Catholic Church, belieues all things necessary to
Salvation, says no more then you will say, that whosoever belieues the whole
Canon of Scripture, belieues all things necessary to Salvation. And you cannot
but speak against your own conscience, when you say of the Roman Church, (
page 16.) She tells them it is Creed enough for them to believe only in the
Catholic Church: For your self ( page 198.) affirm, that the best advised of
Catholic Deuines yield there are some points necessary to be known of all
sorts, necessitate medi^, in which points implicit faith does not suffice, and
you cite some of our Authors to this purpose ( Chap. 71. and 241.) and refer
us to a great many more. What conscionable dealing is this? I will not stand to
note, that Hosius even as he is cited by you in Latin, does not say, that we
believe in the Church, as you make him speak in your text, but that, we
believe the Church. But enough of this.

10. In your First Edition, I find these words: Never did Page 13.
any Church affoard more plentifully the means of grace, nor more abound with
all helps and advantages of Piety, then this of ours. But in your second
Edition you say: No Church of this Age does affoard etc. Whereby you
acknowledge that at first you did ouerlash, and so do you now. But it comes to
you by kind. Beza makes bold to say: When I compare, even the times which were
next to the Apostles In epist. Theol. epist. 1. page 5.
with ours, I am wont to say, and in my opinion not without cause, that they
had more conscience and less knowledge; and contrarily we have more knowledge
and less conscience. And M. Whitgift, your once Archbishop of Canterbury
says: The doctrine taught and professed In his defense of the answer etc. page
472. and 473.
by our Bishops at this day, is more perfect and sounder then commonly was in
any Age after the Apostles etc. How greatly were almost all the Bishops and
learned Writers of the Greek Church, and Latins also for the most part,
spotted with doctrines of Free will, of Merits, of Invocation of Saints, and
such like. Surely you are not able to reckon in any Age, since the Apostles
times, any Company of Bishops, that taught and held so sound and perfect
doctrine in all points, as the Bishops of England do at this day. And will not
the Puritanes say, that they are more pure then Protestants, and Anabaptists
account themselves more unspotted then Puritanes etc? In the mean time your
own Archbishop grants that, Almost all the Bishops and learned Writers of the
Greek Church, and Latins also, were for the most part spotted with doctrines,
which now you call Popish Superstitions.

11. The rest of this Section contaynes nothing but railing, and untruths,
continually uttered by every Minister, and often answered by our Writers. In
Catholic Countries there may be good reason for not mentioning the needles
praises of condemned Heretics, lest the estimation of their moral parts,
which they abuse against Gods Church, breed a liking, and add authority to
their pestiferous errors. If D. Stapleton, or any other speaking of Heretics
in general, compare them to Magicians etc. (as Tertullian also does) what is
that to you, unless you be resolved to proclaim your self an Heretic? Such
sayings are not directed to their Persons, which we love; but fall upon their
sin: which considered in it self, cannot, I hope, be ouerwronged by ill
language. S. Policarpe called an Heretic the first begotten of the Devil. S.
Paul gives them the name of Philip. 3.2.
Dogs. S. John Ep. 2.7.
terms them Antichrists, as your Ministers are wont to call the Pope. Charity
Mistaken compares you not with Jews, or Turks for impossibility to be saved.
Every deadly sin excludes salvation; yet some are more grievous, and further
from pardon then others.

12. I hope the Mistaker Page 19.
would not wish us converted from our Creed. No: But we wish you converted,
from Erroneous Interpretations thereof, to the Catholic Church, which we
profess in our Creed. In the mean time these are learned arguments which may
serve both sides. Protestants believe the Creed, Ergo, they need not be
couuerted. Catholics believe the Creed, Ergo they need not be converted. You
tell us of a Censure of the Creed, written by some Catholic. And in your
first Edition you put, Censura Symboli Apostolici, ad instar Censurae
Parisiensis. But in your second Edition, being as it seems, sorry for your
former sincerity, you say absolutely, Censura Symboli Apostolici, with an etc.
which helps you in diverse occasions, both to deceive the Reader, and yet to
save your self when you shall be told of corrupting the sentence by leaving
out words, as in this particular the Reader will conceive, that it was an
absolute Censure of the Apostles Creed; whereas contrarily, it supposes that
the Creed, as a thing most sacred, cannot be censured, and out of that
supposition, taxes a certain Censure framed, as he thinks, in such manner
that the Creed it self could not be free from men's Censure, if such a form of
Censure might pass for current. This I say, is the drift of that Censure, and
not to censure the Creed: which thing I touch, but to answer you, who infer
that some Catholics seem very meanly to esteem the Creed. But my intention
is not to meddle any way with that Censure of the Creed, (whose Author in very
deed is unknown to me) or with any Books, or Censures in that kind, wholly
leaving those affairs to the Vicar of Christ, the Successor of S. Peter;
which is a great happiness proper to Catholics, who though they may disagree
as men, yet as Catholics, they have means to end all Controversies, by
recourse and submission to one supreme Authority.

CHAP. II.
YOUR Second Section treates principally of two points: The Unity of the
Church, wherein it consists; and; The Communion of the Church, how far
necessary. Both these points have been handled in the first Part; where I
proved that Difference in any one point of faith destroys the Being and Unity
of Faith, and of the Church. And; That, Communion with the true Visible Church
is so far necessary, that all voluntary error against her definitions, as
Heresy is, and all division from her outward Society, which is Schism,
excludes salvation. By these Rules, we can certainly know what is damnable
Schism, and Heresy; whereas you, placing the Unity of Faith, and truth of a
Church in the belief of points, which you call fundamental, although it be
joined with difference in a thousand other points, and yet not knowing what
Articles in particular be fundamental, must give this final resolution: The
Unity of faith, and of the Church consists in, We know not what. Moreover, if
you measure the Nature, and Unity of faith, not by the formal motive, for
which we believe, to wit, the Word, or Revelation of God, but by the weight of
the particular objects which are believed, you will not be able to show, that
he who erreth in some one, or more fundamental points, does loose divine
infallible faith in respect of those other truths which he belieues: and by
this means, Persons disagreeinge, even in Fundamental points, may retain the
same substance or essence of faith, and be of the self same true Church; which
is most absurd, and makes a fair way to affirm, that Jews, and Turks are of
the same Church with Christians, because they all agree in the belief of one
God. And thus we have answered the substance of your Section. Yet because you
interpose many other unnecessary points we must follow your wa^drings, lest else
you may be thought to have said somewhat to us which is unanswerable.

2. After an unprofitable ostentation of Erudition (which yet required no
deeper learning, then to read some of our Catholic Interpreters) about the
place Deuteronomy. 17. you come in the end to grant, that the High Priest in cases of
moment had an absolutely infallible direction etc. And will you give greater
privilege of infallibility to the Type, then to the Thing signified, to wit,
the true Church of Christ, of which the Synagogue was but a figure? You cite
some Catholic Authors, as affirming that by the Judge is meant the Civil
Magistrate, and by the Priest, not the High Priest alone. Of which Catholic
Authors, I have at the present only the Dowists (as you are pleased to call
them) in their Marginall Note on the 2. Chro. 19. Verse. 1. whom I find you to
falsify. For their words are only these: A most plaien distinction of
spiritual and temporal authority and offices, not instituied by Iosaphat, nor
any other King, but by God himself. And upon the words of Deuteronomy. 17. Verse. 9.
Thou shall come to the Priest of the Leuiticall Stock, and to the Judge that
shall be at that time; they say: In the Council of Priests one supreme Judge,
which was the High Priest. verse. 12. And further they say: There were not many
Presidents at once, but in Succession, one after another. Is this to affirm,
that by the Priest, is meant not the high Priest alone? Do they not say the
quite contrary? And as for your Obiectio^s against our Argument drawn from the
Synagogue, to prove the infallibility of the Church, I have answered them 1.
Part. Chap. 2. n. 23.
heertofore.

3. That Core, Dathan, and Abiron, with all their Company descended alive into
the pit of Hell; you say, is rashly, and Page 29.
uncharitably said by Charity Mistaken. But you falsify his words which are:
The ground Page 16.
opened it self and swallowed them alive, with all their goods into the
profound pit of Hell. Are (goods) and (company) two words of one signification?
And yet in your second Edition, you cite ( with all their company etc.) in a
different letter, as the words of your Adversary. But suppose he had said, as
you allege him (with all their company etc.) what great crime had he
committed? The holy Scripture says of them, and their Accomplices, without
limitation or distinction: The Earth Number. 16. ^. 31.32.33.
brake in sunder under their feet; and opening her mouth, devoured them with
their Tabernacles, and all their substance, and they went down into Hell
quick, covered with the ground, and perished out of the midst of the
multitude. You see the Scripture speaks indefinitely, and so does Charity
Mistaken, without adding any Universal particle, as All, Every one, or the
like, except when he says, with all their Goods, which are the very words of
Scripture. Nay since the Scripture says: They went down into Hell quick, and
perished out of the midst of the multitude; by what authority will you affirm,
that all perished out of the midst of the multitude, but not all went down
into Hell quick?

4. Though it were granted that those words Math. 18.17. If thy Brother offend
thee, tell the Church, are meant of private wrongs: yet it is clear, that from
thence is inferred a fortiori, that all Christians are obliged to obey the
Catholic Church in her decrees. And no man is so ignorant as not to know,
that the holy Fathers do every where apply those words against Schismatiques
and Heretics, as appears by S. Augustine whom heertofore 1. part. cap. 5.
number. 7.
I cited, and S. Cyprian Lib. 1. epist. 3. and Ibid. ep. 6.
and others. And I pray you, if one utter some Heresy, in presence of his
brother; does he not in a very high degree offend his Brother? and
consequently, is he not comprehended in those words of our Savior, If thy
Brother offend thee etc.? Now, if the Church were fallible, how could we be
obliged under pain of being reckoned Pagans and Publicans, to obey her Decrees
and Declarations concerning matters of faith, which is a Virtue, that
necessarily inuolues infallibility? But when did you ever hear any Catholic
say what you impose upon Charity Mistaken, that absolute obedience is due unto
the Church, no appeal being allowed, no not page 28.
to Scriptures though expounded in a Catholic sense, and consonantly to the
judgment of the most ancient and famous members of the Church? With what face
can you utter such stuff? You know we believe, that the Church cannot oppose
Scripture.

5. As for those corruptions of the Text of S. Cyprian in his Book de vnitate
Ecclesiae, which you charge Pamelius to have committed in favor of S. Peter's
Primacy; it is but an old objection borrowed of others, and purposely answered
by Pamelius in his notes upon that Book: where, for his justification he cites
diverse ancient Copies, and one more then nine hundred years old. And as for
the phrase and maine point it self, that Christ built the Church upon Peter,
it is expressly affirmed by S. Cyprian in many other places, which I quote in
the De exhort. Mart. c. 11. ep. 55.69.73. which last is cited by S. Augustine de
Bapt. lib. 3. c. 17. as he cites the like words out of epist. 71. ad Quint.
Margent: whereby it manifestly appears what S. Cyprian believed about the
Authority of Saint Peter: and how much his Book de Vnitate Ecclesiae makes
for the Roman Church: neither can you in all S. Cyprians works, or in this
place in particular, show any thing to the contrary, as you are pleased to Page
30.
affirm. To prove that our unworthy fashion is, to alter and raze many records
and Monuments of Antiquity, you cite a modern English Writer, and Sixtus
Senensis. But both of them are alleged after your fashion: for the first
speaks only of Books written in favor of the Popes Power in temporal
things, wherein nevertheless we can in no wise allow of his saying, nor is he in
this point a competent witness; and the second directly falsified. For you say,
he highly commends Epist. dedie. ad Pium 5.
Pope Pius the fifth for the care which he had to extinguish all dangerous
Books; and, to purge the writings of all Catholic Authors, especially of
the Ancient Fathers, from the silth and poison of Heresy; and there you end the
sentence. But Sixtus Senensis has faecibus haereticorum aetatis nostrae: from
the dregs of the Heretics of our times, understanding nothing else, but that
the said holy Pope cause the false Annotations Glosses, Marginall notes etc. of
Erasmus, and modern Heretics to be blotted, or taken out of the Books of
the holy Fathers. Is not this plain falsification? And so much less
excusable, because it could not be done but wittingly, and willingly; for that
in the Margent you cite the Latin, and when you come to those words,
especially of the ancient Fathers, you break off with an etc. leaving out that
which did directly overthrow the purpose for which you alleged those words.
For want of better matter, you tell us of an Edition of Isidorus Pelusiotes his
Greek Epistles approved, because they contained nothing contrary to the
Catholic Roman Religion: wherein what great harm is there? If the Approbator
had left out Roman, would you have made this objection? To us, Catholic and
Roman are all one, as heertofore I explicated. But it seems (say you) that
they had not passed, but upon that Condition. This is but a poor Consequence
in Logic: For, one effect may be produced by some cause, yet in such manner,
as that the effect would follow, though that cause were taken away; and
accordingly you grant that the aforesaid clause of Approbation is left out in
another Edition. Neither can you be ignorant that Catholics do print, and
reprint the writings of ancient Authors, although they contain Heresies; as
the works of Tertullian, Origin etc And therefore you are less excusable both
for making this Objection in general, and also for falsifying Sixtus Senensis
in particular.

6. The places alleged by you out of S. Augustine against the Donatists, come
far short of proving, that page 32.
Scripture alone is the Judge, or rather (as you correct your self) Rule of
Controversies: and your bringing the^ to that purpose is directly against S.
Augustins words and meaning, as will appear by what now I am about to say. Two
Questions were debated between the Catholics, and Donatists: the one
concerning the Church, whether or no she were confined to that corner of the
world, where the faction of Donatus did reside: The other, whether such as were
baptized by Heretics ought to be rebaptized. We grant that S. Augustine in
the former Question, pressed the Donatists with manifest Scripture to prove the
exeternall apparent Notes, or Marks of the Church, as Visibility, Perpetuity,
Amplitude, Universality etc. And no wonder that he appealed to Scripture. For
that very Question being, whether the Catholics, or Donatists, were the true
Church; to suppose the Catholics to be the true Church, and upon that
supposition to allege their Authority against the Donatists, had been but to
beg the Question: as if there were Controversy, whether some particular Book
were Canonical Scripture, or no, it were an idle thing to allege that very
writing in question, to prove it self Canonical: and on the other side, both
the Catholics and Donatists did acknowledge and believe the same Scriptures,
which as S. Augustine is wont to say, speak more clearly of the Church, then
of Christ himself: and therefore he had good reason to try that Question
concerning the Church by clear, and not doubtful Testimonies of holy Writ;
whereas the Donatists had recourse either to obscure Texts, as that of the
Canticles, Show me where thou feedest, where thou lie in the mid day, to
prove that the Church was co^fined to Africa; or else to humane Testimonies as
Acts of Notaries or Scriueners, to prove that the Catholics had been
Traditores, that is had given up the holy Bible to be burned; Or that they had
sacrificed to Idols; Or had been cause of persecution against Christians; and
that either for these crimes, or for communicating with such as had committed
them, the Church had perished from among Catholics: Or else they produced
their own bare affirmation, or mock-Miracles, and false Councels of THEIR
OWN: All which proofs being very partial, insufficient, and impertinent, S.
Augustine had reason to say: Let these fictions De vnie. Eccles. cap. 19.
of lying men, or fantastical wonders of deceiptfull Spirits, be removed. And:
Let us cap. 3.
not hear; These things I say; These things thou say; but let us hear;
These things our Lord says. And: What are our words cap. 2.
wherein we must not seek her etc. All that we object one against another of
the giving up of the holy Books, of the Sacrificing to Idols, and of the
persecution, are our words. (these words you fraudulently conceal, although
you cite other in the self same Chapter, because they plainly show what S.
Augustine understands by Humane Testimonies, and they answer all your
Objections:) And: The Question between us cap. 2.
is, where the Body of Christ, that is, the Church is? What then are we to do?
Shall we seek her in our words, or in the words of our Lord Iesus-Chris^t her
head? Surely we ought rather to seek her in his words who is Truth, and best
knows his own Body. And: Let this Head cap. 4.
of which we agree, show us his Body, of which we disagree, that our
dissentions may by his words be ended. Which words plainly declare the reason
why he appealed to Scriptures, because both parts agreed about them, but
disagreed concerning the Church. And: That we are in the cap. 19.
True Church of Christ, and that this Church is universally spread over the
earth, we prove not by OUR Doctors, or Councels, or Miracles, but by the
divine Scriptures. The Scriptures are the only (this word only put by you in a
different letter, as if it were S. Augustines, is your own addition:)
Document, and foundation of our cause. These are the places by you alleged so
unfaithfully. And will you in good earnest infer from them, that we must reject
all Councels, never so lawful; all Doctors, never so Orthodox; all Miracles,
never so authentical, even those which were wrought in the Primitive Church,
and particularly in S. Augustines time, which he himself published De ciuit.
Det lib. 22. cap. 8.
approved, and admired? And above all, will you infer, that after we have found
out the true Church by Marks set down in Scripture, her voice for other
particular points of doctrine is not to be heard, but to be esteemed a mere
humane testimony of Notaries etc. as S. Augustine understood humane Testimony
when he writ against the Donatists? Or will you infer that we must learn from
Scripture all that which we are obliged to believe? This you pretend, but with
such success as you are wont; that is, to plead for your Adversary against
your self. Which is manifestly proved by the other Question of Rebaptization,
controuerted with the Donatists, for which they were properly and formally
Heretics: and yet S. Augustine confesses that for this point of belief, he
could not produce Scripture, as appears by his words, which I cited in the
first Chap. ^. number. 16.
Part, and desire the Reader to save me the labor of repeating them here: and
then he will easily see, that there is great difference betwixt the general
question of the Church, and Questions concerning particular Doctrines delivered
by the Church; in which this holy Father says not we must have recourse to
Scripture alone, but that we ought to believe the Church, which is recommended
to us by Scripture And this he teaches in that very book De vnitate
Ecclesiae, out of which you brought the aforesaid places, to prove that all
Controversies must be decided by Scripture. With what modesty then do you say,
The Mistaker was ill advised to send us to this page 33.
Treatise, which both in the general aim, and in the quality of the Arguments
and proofs is so contrary to his pretensions?

7. You leave page 33.
a passage taken out of S. Augustine to Charity Mistaken to ruminate upon:
Whosoever S. Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 4.
will believe aright in Christ the Head, but yet does so dissent from his Body
the Church, that their Communion is not with the whole whersoeuer diffused, but
with themselves several in some part; it is manifest that such are not in the
Catholic Church. Well; suppose all were done as you desire; what other thing
could be concluded, then this? But when Luther appeared, Protestantisme was not
with the whole whersoeuer diffused, but with himself alone: What will follow
from hence, you have so much Logic that you cannot Mistake. Wherefore at this
day, and for ever, we must say of the Catholic Church, as Saint Augustine
said: Every one of those (he speaks of Heretics) is not De Unit Eccles. c. 3.
to be found where she is to be found; but she who is over All, is to be found
in the self same places, where the others are.

8. You made an ill choice of S. Epiphanius, to prove by his example that the
Fathers were wont to confute Heresies by the only Evidence of Scripture. For he
not only approues Traditions as necessary, but also proves them out of
Scripture. We ought (says he) to use also Haeres. 61.
Tradition, for all things cannot be taken from the holy Scripture: the holy
Apostles therefore delivered some things in writing, and some things by
Tradition, as the holy Apostle says: As I delivered to you. And in another
place: So I teach, and so I delivered in the Churches. And the same Father, as
we shall see anon, does most clearly approve Traditions, yea and confutes
Ae^rius by Tradition alone without any Scripture. It is then no wonder, if you
corrupt S. Epiphanius to make men believe that he speaks of Heresies in
general, whereas his words concern some few in particular, as the
Samosatenians, Arians etc. His words as you translate them are these: The
Divine Haeres. 65.
Goodness has forewarned us against Heresies by his Truth, for God foreseeing
the Madness, Impiety, and Fraud of the Samosatenians, Arians, Manichees, and
other Heretics, has secured us by his divine Word against all their
subtilities. But the true Translation of S. Epiphanius is this: Therefore the
holy Scripture does make us secure of every word: That is has secured us how
we are to speak, or what words to use against the deceipts of the
Samosatenians, Arians, and of other Heresies concerning the blessed Trinity, as
it is clear by these words immediately following (which you thought fittest to
conceal:) For he does not say the Father is the Only-begotten. For how can he
be the Only begotten, who is not Begotten? But he calls the Son the only
begotten, that the Son may not be thought to be the Father etc. Where you see
he speaks of Words, or manner of speaking, and concerning particular Heresies,
which yet is made more clear by the words immediately precedent to the sentence
by you cited, which words you also thought good to leave out. For he first
proves out of Scripture that the Word is begotten of the Father, but that the
Father is not Begotten, and therefore the Only-Begotten is the Son. And then
he comes to the words by you cited, and teaches, that holy Scripture has
warned us, what words and manner of speech, or phrase we ought to use in
speaking of the Person, of the Blessed Trinity, which School Deuines call
Proprietates Personarum. Yet that your Corruption might not be void of art (or
rather a double fraud) in your Margent you put in Greek S. Epiphanius his
words, that so to such as understood not Greek, nor perceive your
mistranssation, your fraud might pass for honest dealing, and deceive your
Reader; and to others, you might answer, if need were, that in your Margent,
S. Epiphanius was rightly alleged.

9. These words of Charity Mistaken ( I must needs observe, that (m) he (that
is, S. Augustine) recounts diverse Heresies, which are held by the Protestant
Church at this day, and particularly that of denying Prayers, and Sacrifices
for the dead) you corruptly compendiate when you say: The Mistake^ must needs
observe, that the Protestants hold diverse ancient Heresies, and particularly
Page 3^.
that of denying Prayers for the dead. Where you omit the words (Saint
Augustine recounts diverse Heresies, and in particular, that etc. (to make men
believe that it was but a bare affirmation of Charity Mistaken, and not
collected out of S. Augustine: As likewise you conceal) Sacrifices) lest the
world might believe S. Augustine was a Papist; who nevertheless both in this
Treatise de haeresibus ad Quod-vult-Deum, haer. 35. cited by Charity Mistaken,
and elsewhere, teaches that the dead are helped by the holy De ver^^ Apost.
sermon. 34.
Sacrifice. After this you say: He is very much Page 35.
mistaken in his Observation. The Commemoration of the deceased in the ancient
Church, which Ae^rius without reason disallowed, was a thing much differing
from those Prayers for the dead, which are now in use in the Church of Rome.
Thus having substituted Commemoration of the deceased, instead of Prayers and
Sacrifices for the dead, you add, with your wonted sincerity: Our Roman
Catholics believe (at least they say so) that some souls of the faithful
after their departure hence, are detained in a certain fire bordering upon
Hell till they be thoroughly purged: and their Prayers for them are, that they
may be released, or eased of those torments. But you are still like your self.
You may read in De Purg. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Bellarmine, that concerning the Question, Vbisit Purgatorium, Where Purgatory
is, the Church has defined nothing. And to the other point: Whether in
Purgatory there be true corporeal sire, he answers; Ib. c. 11.
That it is the common Opinion of Deuines that properly there is true fire, and
of the same nature with our fire. Which Doctrine is not indeed a matter of
faith, because it is no where defined by the Church, yea in the Council of
Florence the Grecians openly profess't, that they did not hold there was fire
in Purgatory; nevertheless in the definition which was made in the last Sess. it
was defined that there is a Purgatory, without making any mention of fire:
Nevertheless it is a most probable Opinion, by reason of the agreement of the
Schoole-Deuines, which cannot be rejected without rashness. Thus Bellarmine.

10. Now for the maine point: That Aerius was put in the list of Heretics,
for denying Prayers for the Dead, which are offered to release, or ease them of
their pain, I prove out of Aerius his own words; Out of S. Epiphanius whom
you seem to allege in your behalf; Out of the ancient Fathers, Greek, and
Latin; and out of Protestants themselves; both in regard that they confess
the Doctrine of Purgatory and Prayer for the dead, even as Catholics believe
them, to have been believed by the Ancient Fathers; and also in regard, they
directly acknowledge, that Aerius was condemned by the Fathers for denying
Prayer for the Dead, as we believe, and practice it.

11. Hear then your Progenitor Aerius testifying with his own mouth the
practice of Catholics in those ancient days. How (says he to Catholics)
do you Apud Epiph. haeres. 75.
after Death name, the names of the dead? For if the living pray etc. what will
it profit the dead? Or if the prayers of them who are here, be for those who
are there, then let no man be virtuous, nor let him do any good work, but let
him get friends by what means he will, either by money, or leaving that charge
to his friends at his death, and let them pray for him that he may not SVFFER
any thing there: and that, irremediable sins committed by him may not be laid
to his charge. Is it not clear enough by these words, that this Heretic
taxes Prayers offered for the dead, to release or lessen their pains after
this life, and not only for a bare Co^memoration, or Thanksgiving, or the
like? And that any man may yet further consider, especially if he continue to
be of as Puritanicall a Spirit, as he was who most resembles the spirit of this
Aerius; let us, by the way, add these words of his: Neither ought Ibid.
there to be any appointed fast, for these things are Judicial, and under the
yoke of servitude. For there is no law appointed for the just man, but for
Murderers of their Fathers and Mothers, and such like. But if I be resolved to
fast, I will choose my self any day, and I will fast with freedom.

12. Let us now see what S. Epiphanius in the same place says for your
Commemoration of the deceased: As for pronouncing the names of the Dead (says
he) what can be more profitable, good, and admirable? Because the living
believe that the deceased live, and are not extinct, but have a being, and live
with our Lord: And, that I may utter a most pious doctrine, that there is hope
in those who pray for their Brethren, as for those who are travailed to another
Country. These words you recite out of S. Epiphanius, but leave out those
words which immediately follow, and are directly against the doctrine which you
will prove out of him in that very place. For thus he says: But the Prayers
which are made for them do profit them, although they do not release the whole
sin; in regard as long as we are in this world, we fail, and err both
voluntarily and against our will, to the end that, that also may be mentioned
which is more perfect, we remember both the lust, and Sinners: For Sinners,
imploring the mercy of God: But for the Just, Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Bishops, and Anchorites etc. that
we may put a difference betwixt our Lord Jesus Christ, and all Orders of men,
by that honor which we give to him, and that to him we may give adoration. You
see that S. Epiphanius speaks of forgiveness of sins, and that he makes a
difference between Prayers offered for deceased Sinners, and the Commemoration
of Saints, who by way of Thanksgiving, are remembered as holy men; whereas to
our Savior Christ highest adoration is exhibited as to God; Or (as Bellarmine
De Purg. lib. 1. cap. 9.
says,) we distinguish Saints from Christ, because we offer Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving for Saints, but we do not offer Sacrifice for Christ, but to
him, together with the Father, and the holy Ghost. You likewise falsify S.
Epiphanius, while you say out of him; That the living have hope for the
deceased, as for those which be from home in another Country, and that, at
length they shall attain the state which is more perfect. Which last words are
not in S. Epiphanius, who never taught, that we offer Prayers for Saints, that
they may attain a state which is more perfect. And when S. Epiphanius says,
that those who pray for their Brethren have hope of them as of those who are in
another Country; you leave out Praying, and only put in Hope. And that you may
be assured how contrary S. Epiphanius is to you; not only in the doctrine of
Prayer for the dead, but also in the ground and reason, for which he bel^^ues
it, namely Tradition; mark his words. The Church (says he in the same place)
does necessarily practice this by Tradition received from our Ancestors. And
who can break the Ordination of his Mother, and the Law of his Father? as
Salomo^ says: Hear O Son the words of thy Father, and retect not the
Ordination of thy Mother: Showing by this, that God the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost have taught both by writing, and without writing, (behold divine
Traditions) and our Mother the Church, has also in herself Ordinances
inviolable which cannot be broken: (behold Ecclesiastical Traditions.) Since
therefore there be Ordinances set down in the Church, and that all be right,
and admirable, this Seducer (Aerius) remains confuted. And together with him
all those that follow his heresy And let us yet hear S. Epiphanius speaking a
little before of another point, thus: But who knows most of these things?
Whether this deluded fellow (Aerius) who is yet aliu^^ etc. or those who before
us have yielded Testimony and have had the Tradition of the Church, which also
was delivered from their Forefathers; as they likewise learned of those who
were before them, in which manner the Church does still conserve the true Faith
received from their Forefathers, and also Traditions? Consider now with what
reason you alleged S. Epiphanius, as one who says that all Heresy is to be
confuted by evidence of Scripture; whereas he does clearly avouch Tradition in
general, and does in particular consute the Heresy of Aerius, without
alleging so much as one Text of Scripture.

13. And though S. Epiphanius alone, might suffice both to assure us what was
the Heresy of Aerius in whose time he lived; and also to witness for all the
rest of the Greek Fathers, yea and for the whole Church, (because he avouched
Prayer for the dead to come from the Tradition of Gods Church) yet I will add
some more of the Greek Church, as S. Dionysius Areopagita, who says: Then the
Venerable Eccles. Hierarch, cap. 1.
Bishop does pray over the dead party, that the divine Goodness would pardon all
his sins committed by humane frailty, and transfer him to light, and the
Country of the living. I wonder then how in your Text your could tell us, that
Page 37.
conformably to your Opinion; The ancient Church in her Liturgy remembered all
those that slept in hope of the Resurrection of everlasting life, and
particularly the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs etc. beseeching God to
give the^ rest, and to bring them (you put in a parenthesis at the
Resurrection) to the place where the light of his countenance should shine upon
them for evermore. And in your Margent, you cite S. Dionysius as favoring you,
who nevertheless in the very Chapter which you cite for your Opinion, is directly
against you in the words even now alleged. The like fincerity you show in the
very same Margent in citing S. Cyril, who does clearly affirm, that in the
Sacrifice we remember some that they would pray for us, and others that they
may be relieved by our Prayers and Sacrifices, in these words: When we offer
this Sacrifice Catech. 5.
we make mention of those who are deceased, of Patriarchs etc. that God would
receive our prayers by their intercession. And: we pray for all who are
deceased, believing that it is a most great help to those for whom the
obsecratio^ of that holy and dreadful Sacrifice is offered, S. Gregory Nyssen
says: He cannot after his departure In Orat. pro mortuis.
from the body be made partaker of the Divinity, unless the purging fire shall
cleanse the staynes of his soul.

14. Among the Latin Fathers, Protestants pretend to esteem none more then S.
Augustine, and yet none can speak more plainly against them in this point
then he does, who besides that he ranks Ae^rius among the Heretics, in
another place, he says: Purge me In Psalm. 37.
in this life, in such sort, as that I may not need the correcting, or amending
fire. And afterward: It is said he shall be saved as if it were by fire, and
because it is said, he shall be saved, that fire grows to be contemned. But so
it is; though he shall be saved, yet the pain of that fire is more grievous,
then whatsoever a man can suffer in this life. And elsw where; Some suffer De
ciuit. lib. 21. c. 13.
temporal punishments, only in this life, others after death, others both now
and then. Of which place, Fulke is enforced to say: Augustine concludes very
clearly, Consut. of Purg. page 110.
that some suffer Temporal pains after this life, this may not be denied. And
in another place, S. Augustine says: We ought not De verbis Apost. sermon. 34.
to doubt, but that the dead are helped by the Prayers of the holy Church, and
by the wholesome Sacrifice, and by Ailrnes given for their souls, that our Lord
would avale with them more mercifully then their sins have deserved. For the
whole Church observes this, as delivered from our Fathers. Neither can you
avoid these Authorities by flying to the Requests of Gods mercy that they may
have their Page 39.
serfect Consummation in body and soul, in the kingdom of God at the last
Judgment, as you speak. For (besides that all they who depart this life in
Gods favor are most assured of a perfect Consummation independantly of our
Almsdeeds, Prayers etc.) S. Augustine as you have heard speaks of a Purging
fire, of Temporal Punlishments, after this life etc. And does elsewhere write
as if he had purposely intended to prevent this your Evasion, saying: At the
Altar Tract. 84. in Joan.
we do not remember Martyrs, as we do other deceased who rest in peace, by
praying for them; but rather that they would pray for us. Which difference
between Martyrs and other deceased, cannot stand with your mere Commemoration
of Thanksgiving, or your Request for a perfect Consummation, both which
according to your doctrine concern Martyrs, no less then others. The same
difference is expressed by S. Cyprian, saying: It is one thing to be purged,
Lib. 4. ep. 2. alias epist. 52.
after long torment for ones sins, and to be long cleansed with the fire, and
another thing to have wiped away all the sins by suffering. S. Hierome says:
If Origin affirm that Lib. 1. cont. Pelagianos.
all Creatures endued with reason, are not to be lost, and grants repentance
to the Devil; what belongs that to us, who affirm that the Devil, and all
his Officers, and all sinful and wicked men do eternally perish; and that
Christians, if they be taken away in sin, are to be saved after punishments?
More Fathers may be seen in Bellarmine and other Catholic Writers. These may
suffice to show, what was that Belief and Practice of the Church, which Aerius
opposed in his time, as you do at this day.

15. Lastly, your own Brethren bear witness thus against you. Calvin says:
More then a thousand three hundred Instit. l. 3. c. 5. Sect. ^^.
years ago, it was a Custom to pray for the dead: But I confess they were
all driven into Error. Bucer his words are: Because In his enarrat. in sacra
quatuor Euang. printed Basil. 1536. in Matt. ^. 12.
almost from the beginning of the Church, Prayers and Almsdeeds were offered
for the dead, that opinion which S. Augustine sets down in his Enchiridio cap.
110. crept in by little and little: Neither ought we to deny, that souls are
released by the piety of their living friends, when the Sacrifice of our
Mediator is offered for them etc. Therefore I doubt not, but that from hence
arose that duty of Praying, and offering Sacrifice for them. Fulke speaks
plainly: Aerius taught, that Prayer for the dead In his answer to a
counterfeyt Cath. page 44.
was unprofitable, as witnesses both Epiphanius, and Augustine, which they
count for an Error. He likewise acknowledges, that Ambrose, Chrysostom, and
Augustine allowed Prayer for the dead: That, Tertullian, Augustine, Cyprian,
Hierome, and a great many more do witness, that Prayer for the dead is the
Tradition of the Apostles. And that Fulke understands these Fathers in the
sense of satisfying for Temporal pains after this life, I hope you will not
deny. For it is clear by what we said out of him above; Nay, even in the
Communion Book allowed, and established by Act of Parliament in the second
year of Edward the Sixth. and printed in London by Edward Whitchurch Anno
^549. there is Prayer for the dead: and in the year 1547. the first year of
Edward the Sixth his reign, Stow recounts, that on the 19. of June a Dirige
was sung in every parish Church in London for the French King late deceased;
and a Dirige was also sung in the Church of S. Paul in the same City, and on
the next morrow the Archbishop of Canterbury, assisted of eight Bishops, all in
rich miters, and other their Pontificalls, did sing a Mass of Requiem. And (to
say this by the way) there is in the same Communion Book offering up of our
Prayers by Angels: as likewise in the first year of that Kings reign,
Communion in One Kind, in time of Necessity, is approved, as also in the
Collection in English of Statutes etc. the reason heerof is added, because at
that time the opinion of the Real presence (as the Collector says) was not
removed from us. Which ingenuous confession supposes that Communion in one kind
cannot be disallowed, if we believe the real presence, because indeed the Body
and Blood of our Savior Christ is both under the species of bread, and under
the species of wine.

16. You say, the Ancient Church Page 37.
in her Liturgies remembered all those that slept in hope of the Resurrection of
ever lasting life, and particularly the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles etc.
beseeching God to give unto them rest, and to bring them, ( at the
Resurrection, as you add) to the place where the light of his countenance
should shine upon them for evermore.

17. But read De Purg. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Bellarmine, and you shall find a far different thing in the Greek Liturgy,
of which S. Epiphanius makes mention, whom you also cite in your Margent: We
offer Sacrifice to thee, O Lord, for all the Patriarchs, Apostles, Martyrs, and
especially for the most Blessed Mother of God. And that the Sacrifice was
offered for those Saints only in Thanksgiving, the words following do show:
By whose Prayers O God, look upon us. But for other faithful deceased, the
speech is altered, thus: And be mindful of all the faithful deceased who have
slept in hope of the Resurrection, and grant them to rest where the light of
thy Countenance is seen. Which last words you untruly applied to Patriarchs
etc. and added at the Resurrection; whereas they are referred only to other
faithful people, for whom Sacrifice is offered, that they may come to see the
light of Gods Countenance, even before the Resurrection; that is, as soon as
they have satisfied for their sins. And now how many ways is the Greek
Liturgy repugnant to you? It speaks of Sacrifice, which you turn to
Remembrance; It speaks of some persons whom we entreat to pray for us, and
others for whom we pray: It teaches Prayers to Saints: It teaches that Saints
do already enjoy the Beatificall Vision, and therefore that Sacrifice only of
Thanksgiving is offered for them And as for the latter Schismatic, and
Heretical Crecians, although their Authority weigh not much; yet even they
professed in the Council of Florence, that they believed a Purgatory, and only
denied that the souls were there tormented by fire; teaching nevertheless that
it was a dark place, and full of pain. and your own Vid. Apol. Prot. tract.
1. Sect. 7. subd. 12. at 11.
Brethren Spark, Osiander, and Crispinus affirm; that about Prayer for the
dead they conformed themselves to Rome. And Sr. Edwin In his relation etc.
Sands says; that the Greek Church does concur with Rome in the opinion of
Transubstantiation, in Praying to Saints, in offering Sacrifices, and Prayer
for the dead, Purgatory, etc. And a Treatise published by the Protestant
Divines of Wittemberge Anno 1584. entitled Acta Theologorum Wittembergensium
etc. affirms that the Greek Church at this day belieues Invocation of
Saints, and Prayer for the dead, as heertofore I noted. All which considered,
with what Modesty can you say: The general opinion of Page 36.
the Ancient Doctors Greek and Latin, down almost to these last Ages, was
(and is the opinion of the Greek Church at this day) that all the spirits of
the Righteous deceased, are in Abraham's bosom, or in some outward Court of
heaven etc. And to mend the matter you allege in your Margent, for what you
say about the Greek Church at this day, the Council of Graeei in Conc. Flor.
ante Sess. 1. in Quaest. de Purgat.
Florence; whereas indeed it is affirmed in the Council, that Declaratum fuit
etc. It was at length declared, that the Saints have both attained, and not
attained Perfect Beatitude; that is, that the souls as Souls have attained
perfect Beatitude, yet that they shall receive some perfection with their
bodies, when they shall shine as the sun. And it is to be noted that before
this declaration was made, the Greek Emperor came into the Council, and so
it was done with the common consent of the Grecians.

18. And here let me put you in mind, that if the Heresy of Aerius, (whether
you take it in our, or your own sense) were not fundamental, then you may
learn that to make an Heresy, or Heretic it is sufficient that the error
consist in any point, though the same be not fundamental. If you hold it to be
fundamental; then it follows, that Tradition, and Custom of the Church
extends it self even to fundamental points in such sort, as to oppose such
Tradition is a fundamental error. For as we have seen before, S. Epiphanius,
and S. Augustine prove Prayer for the dead by Tradition, though I grant we want
not Scripture for it: but you who both deny the Machabees, and also turn
Prayer for the Dead, into a bare Commemoration etc. will find no Scripture,
whereby to refute Aerius. Moreover whereas you are wont to impugn a third place
distinct from Heaven and Hell, by those words of Scripture: If the Tree shall
fall to the South Ecclesiast. cap. 11.3.
or the North, in what place soever it shall fall, there shall it be: and such
like Arguments; how come you now to admit a third Temporary place, and so be
forced to solue your own objections?

19. Now, I wish you to consider, that either the Grecians did believe that the
Saints enjoy the Beatificall Vision, and are not (as you teach) in some outward
Court; or else they thought that Invocation of Saints may well be defended,
though they do not see the face of God; which two points you Page 36.
deny, can stand together. For you have heard both out of the Greek Liturgy,
and your Protestant Writers, that the Grecians believe Invocation of Saints.
True it is, if Saints do not enjoy the Beatificall Vision, they cannot hear,
or see our Prayers in verbo, or in the Divine Essence, but yet they may behold
us and our Prayers by particular Revelation, as some Catholic Deuines teach
de facto, of the blessed souls, and Angels.

20. Yet if you will needs suppose that Invocation of Saints cannot be
defended, unless they enjoy the Beatificall Vision; you should not in true
reason deny Invocation because they are not Blessed; but contrarily you ought
to believe that they are in Bliss, because it has always been the practice
of the Ancient Church to invoke them. Nor ought Protestants in geuerall, to
deny prayers to Saints, because they cannot hear us; but they ought on the
other side to believe that they ca^ hear us, because the Church both Greek,
and Latin has always practiced, and allowed Prayers to them. M. Whitgift, as
I said already, confesses; that almost all the Bishops and Writers In his
defense of the answer. page 473.
of the Greek Church and Latin also, for the most part, were spotted with the
doctrines of Freewill, of Merit, of Invocation of Saints, and such like. In
particular, the Saints, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Nazianzen, Basil, Nyssen,
Chrysostom, are taxed by your Brethren for holding Invocation of Saints. And
your Conturists not only charge ancient Origin for praying for himself to holy
Job: but they also say, that there are manifest steps of Invocation of Saints
in the Doctors of that ancient Vid. Apol Prot. tract. 1. Sect. 3. subd. 7
Age. And D. Couel affirms that diverse both of the Greek In his Examination
etc. page 120.
and Latin Church, were spotted with errors about Freewill, Merits, Invocation
of Saints etc. That Vigilantius was condemned as an Heretic for denying
Prayers to Saints, may be seen in Cont. Vigilant. c. 2. and 3.
S. Hierome, and is confessed by In his answer to a counterfeyt Cath. page 46.
Fulke. Thus then we see what the Ancient Church held concerning Innocation of
Saints, and consequently they believed that they hear our Prayers.

21. Your saying, that we invoke Saints as Commissioners page 36.
under God, to whom he has delegated the power of conferring sundry benefias,
deposited in their hands, and to be bestowed at their pleasure; I let pass as
a very vulgar slander, unworthy of a particular answer. For (as the sacred
Council of Trent speaks) we implore Sess. 22. cap. 3.
their assistance, that they would vouchsafe to pray for us in heaven, whose
memory we keep on earth. Which words are also in the Mass.

22. But how solidly Bellarmine De Sanctorum Beatitud lib. 1. cap. 2.3.4. ^. 6.
proves that the Saints enjoy the sight of God, may be seen by weighing his
Arguments drawn from Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, both Greek and Latin, and
Reasons grounded on Scripture: And your affirming, that, It may be page 35.
thought he spoke against his knowledge, and conscience, comes very
unseasonably, besides the gross untruth, and great folly of it, in a Treatise
wherein you tax others for want of Charity. But I remember that S. Thomas among
the causes of suspicion, puts the first of them to proceed from this: That a
man is 2.2. q. 60. art. 3. in corp
ill himself, and therefore being conscious of his own sin, he easily
conceiues ill of others; according to that Eccle s. 10. The foolish man walking
by the way, he himself being foolish, does account all to be Fools. Did your
prime Brethren speak against their conscience, who affirm so many Ancient
Fathers to have been spotted with the Invocation of Saints, which you say
cannot stand with their want of Beatitude?

23. You say; The Roman Writers utterly condemn the page 3^
former doctrine, and practice of Antiquity. One of them fears not to censure
it as absurd and impious: for which last words you cite in your Azor. Instit.
Moral. tom. 1. cap. 20. lib. 8. Neque vero.
Margent, Azor. But it is an egregious untruth, and falsification. For we do
both admitland practice Thanksgiving for the happiness of Saints. And your
further Requests of Gods mercy that they may have their perfect Consummation
both in body and soul in the kingdom of God at the last Judgment, are wholly
needles at lest, because without any dependence, or reference to our Prayers,
they are most assured thereof by the immutable decree of God. And you might in
the same manner make Requests, that they may not loose their happiness in body
and soul, when they shall once have attained it, after the general
Resurrection, which were a Request sauouring of Infidelity, as if the Saints
could be deprived of Beatitude once enjoyed. Now as for Azor, he proves in the
place cited by you, that the Grecians do not altogether take away some kind of
Purging fire, but only seem to deny a certain determinate punishment of
corporal fire, Because (says he) they do truly offer Sacrifice and Prayers to
God for the dead, surely not for the Blessed, nor for those which be damned in
Hell, which were plainly absurd and impious: it must therefore be for them, who
are deceased with faith and Piety, but have not fully satisfied for the
temporal punishment due to their sins. Is this to condemn the doctrine of
Antiquity as absurd, and impious? Did Antiquity offer Sacrifice, and Prayers
for the damned Ghosts, or for the Saints to satisfy for the pain due to their
sins, as Azor means and speaks, and therefore does truly say, it were absurd
and impious? Is not this to corrupt Authors?

24. Wherefore upon the whole matter we must conclude, that Aerius was condemned
by the Church, and was reckoned among Heretics, and particularly by S.
Epiphanius, and S. Augustine, for the self same Error which you maintain. To
which Mayor Proposition, if we add this Minor, (which Charity Mistaken
expressly notes Page 27.
and you conceal:) But S. Augustine says, Whosoever should hold any one of
the Heresies by him recounted, (whereof this of Aerius is one) were not a
Christian Catholic; The Conclusion will follow of it self.

25. Would to God, your self, and all Protestants did seriously consider, what
account will be exacted at the last day, of those who by their erroneous
doctrine, and opposition to the visible Church of Christ, deprive the souls of
faithful people deceased, of the many Prayers, Sacrifices, and other good
deeds, which in all rigor of Justice are due to them by Title of founding
Colleges. Chanonryes, Chantries, Hospitals etc. Less cruelty had it been to
rob them of their Temporal goods, or to bereave them of their corporal lives,
then to have abandoned them to the Torment of a fire, which although as S.
Augustine says In Psalm. 37.
is slighted by worldly men, yet indeed is more grievous then whatsoever can
be endured in this world. Consider I say, whether this manifest Injustice,
though it did not proceed (as it does) from heretical persuasion, were not
alone sufficient to exclude salvation. And so much of this point concerning
Prayer for the dead.

26. The words of S. Thomas, whom you cite ( page 40.) to strengthen your
distinction of points fundamental and not fundamental, do directly overthrow
that sense, and purpose for which you make use of them. For as much (says he)
as belongs to the prime 2.2. q. 2. art. 5. in corpor.
Objects of Belief, which are the Articles of Faith, a man bound explicitly
to believe them, as he is bound to have Faith. But as for other Objects of
faith, a man is not bound to believe them explicitly, but only implicitly, or
in readiness of mind, for as much as he is ready to believe whatsoever the holy
Scripture contains: But he is bound to believe them explicitly, only when it
appears to him that it is contained in the doctrine of faith. Now our Question
is not about nescience, or ignorance of some points of faith, but of
disagreeing concerning them, one denying what another affirms: in which case,
according to the aforesaid doctrine of S. Thomas, there is neither explicit,
nor implicit Belief of such points, but positive and direct error in them:
and therefore such disagreement cannot stand with Unity of faith. It is strange
Divinity, to confound, as you do, points secundary or not fundamental, with
probable points. For how many millions of Truths are there contained in
Scripture, which are not of their own nature prime Articles? Will you therefore
infer that they are but probable? Primary, and secundary respect the matter
which we believe: Probable, and certain are derived from the formal reason,
or motive for which we believe. Let two disagree in some points even
fundamental, yet not sufficiently propounded as revealed Truths, they still
retain the same faith; and contrarily, put case that two agree in all
fundamental points, if they disagree in any secundary point sufficiently
applied to their understanding as a revealed truth, then the one must be an
Heretic, and differ from the other, in the very nature, and substance of
faith. For as in a Musical Consort (say you) a discord page 40.
now and then (so it be in the Descant, and depart not from the ground)
sweetens the Harmony: so say I (retorting your own sweet similitude) because
every least error opposing a revealed Truth is not in the Descant, but departs
from the ground of faith, which is the attestation of God, it does not sweeten
the Harmony, but destroys the substance of Faith. And hereafter it shall be
showed, that you wrong Stapleton, no less Infra chap. 5. number. 17.
then you do S. Thomas.

27. That, Variety of Opinions or Rites in parts of the Church does rather
commend then prejudice the Unity of the whole, you pretend to prove out of
Epist. 75. apud Cypr.
Farmilianus in an Epistle to S. Cyprian; which doctrine though it be true in
some sense, yet according to your application, it is pernicious: as if it were
sufficient to Unity of Faith, that men agree in certain fundamental points,
though they vary in other matters concerning faith. And you should have
observed, that Firmilianus (who wrote that Epistle in favor of S. Cyprians
error about Rebaptization) speaks in that place of the Custom of keeping
Easter: which point after it was once defined, remained no more indifferent,
but grew to be a necessary Object of Belief, in so much that the Heretics
called Quartadecimani were for that point condemned, and anathematized by the
Universal Church in the Councels of Nice, Constantinople, and Ephesus. Whereby
it is evident that though some point be not in it self fundamental; yet if it
be once defined by the Church, the Error degenerates into Heresy. Your Charity
is always Mistaken, aduantaging your Adversary by your own Arguments.

28. I said already that to be separate from the Church for Heresy, or Schism
destroies Salvation, because persons liable to those crimes are in the Church
neither in re, nor in voto; neither in fact, nor in effectual desire; as
Cathecumens are, and as Excommunicate persons may be, if repenting their former
Obstinacy, they cannot by reason of some extrinsecall impediment, obtain
Absolution from the Censure.

29. You extend your Charity so far to Infidels, as to forget fidelity in
relating what Catholic Deuines teach concerning them, not telling whether
they require some supernatural faith at lest, for some Object; and quoting
Authors with so great affected confusion, that a man would think them to
maintain the opinion which they expressly condemn as erroneous, or in the
next degree to Heresy. But because it were a vanity to muster a number of
Writers in a question impertinent to our present design, which is only against
Heresy or Schism, both which exclude invincible ignorance; I hold it best to
pass them over in silence.

30. Your saying, that A man may be a true visible member Page 47.
of the holy Catholic Church, who is not actually (otherwise then in vow) a
member of any true visible Church; destroys it self. For in the same manner
and degree, neither more nor less, a man is a visible member in act, or in
desire of the visible Church, as he is a member of the true Catholic Church,
which is visible. And Bellarmine, whom you cite for your self, is directly
against you. For he teaches that a man may de Eccles. milit. cap. 6. Respondeo.
be in the Church in desire, which is sufficient for Salvation (when he is
inuoluntarily hindered from being actually of the Church) and yet not in the
Church by external Comunion, which properly makes him to be of the visible
Church; which is directly to deny what you affirmed. I might reflect what a
pretty connection you make in saying: who is not actually otherwise then in vow
etc. you might as well have said, who is not actually, otherwise then not in
act etc. But such small matters as these I willingly dissemble. The poor man
in the Gospel was cast out of the Synagogue by notorious injustice, and
therefore still remained a member of the Jewish Church, not only in desire, but
also in act. You say, Athanasius stood single in defense of divine Truth, all
his Brethren the other Patriarchs (not he of Rome excepted) having subscribed
to Arianisme, and cast him out of their Communion. And you refer us to
Baronius cited in your Margent, to what purpose I know not, except to display
your own bad proceeding. For Baronius in the place by you alleged Anno 357.
number. 44. apud Spond.
does (not incidently, or only by the way, but) industriously, and of set
purpose clear Pope Libertu^ from having ever subscribed to Arianisme. He
subscribed indeed to the condemnation of S. Athanasius, which was not for
matter of faith but of fact, to wit, for certain crimes objected against him,
as Bellarmine De Romans Port lib. 4. cap. 9.
affirms, which being false, S. Athanasius did not therefore cease to be a
member of the Catholic Church. If the errors of Tertullian were in themselves
so small, as you would make them, it may serve for an example, that not so much
the matter, as the manner, and obstinacy is that which makes an Heretic;
which overthrows your distinction of points fundamental etc.

31. The proofs which you bring from the Africans, and others, that Communion
with the Roman Church was not always held necessary to Salvation, have been a
thousand times answered by Catholic Writers; and they are such as you could
not have chosen any more disaduantagious to your cause. Heertofore I showed,
that Communion with the Roman Church, was by Antiquity judged to be the mark
of a true Belieuer. And indeed seeing you speak of those times wherein Rome
stood in her purity (as you say) how could any be divided from her faith, and
yet believe aright? Do not your self say: Whosoever professes himself to
forsake Page 76.
the Communion of any one member of the Body of Christ, must confess himself
consequently to forsake the whole? How then could any divide themselves from
the Roman Church while she was in her purity? Even S. Cyprian, whose example
you allege, faith: They Ad Cornel. ep. 33.
presume to sail to the Roman Church, which is the Chair of Peter, and to the
principal Chair, from whence Priestly Unity has sprung. Neither do they
consider that they are Romans, whose faith was commended by the preaching of
the Apostle, to whom falsehood cannot have access. Optatus Mileuitanus, also an
African, says: At Rome has been constituted to Peter (...) Parm. lib. 2.
the Episcopal Chair, that in this only Chair, the Unity of all might be
preserved. And S. Augustine, like wise an African, affirms, that Cacilianus
might despise Epist. 62
the conspiring multitude of his enemies, (that is, of seauenty Bishops of
Africa assembled in Numidia) because he saw himself united by letters
Communicatory with the Roman Church, in which the Principality of the Sea
Apostolic had always flourished. And after Pelagius had been judged in the
East by the Bishops of Palestine, and Celestius his Disciple had been
excommunicated for the same cause in Asrica by the African Bishops; the
Mileuitan Council referred them finally to the Pope, saying: We hope by the
Ep. Conc. Mileu. ad Innocent. inter epist. Aug. epist. 92
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, who vouchsafe to govern thee consulting with
him, and to hear thee praying to him, that those who hold these Doctrines so
perverse and pernicious, will more easily yield to the authority of thy
Holiness, drawn out of the holy Scriptures. Behold the Popes prerogative drawn
out of the holy Scriptures. And it is very strange that you will allege the
Authority of S. Cyprian, and other Bishops of Africa, against Pope Stephen, who
opposed himself to them in the Question of Rebaptization, wherein they agreed
with the Heresy of the Donatists, which was condemned not only by the Pope, but
by the whole Church, yea by those very Bishops who once adhered to S. Cyprian,
as S. Hierome witnesses, saying: Finally they who had been Coutra Lucifer.
of the same opinion, set forth a new decree, saying: What shall we do? So has
it been delivered to them by their Ancestors and ours. And Vincentius
Lyrinensis speaking of Stephen his opposing S. Cyprian, says: Then In Com.
part. 1.
the blessed Stephen resisted, together with, but yet before his Colleagues;
judging it as I conceive to be a thing worthy of him, to excel them as much in
Faith, as he did in the authority of his place.

32. Neither are you more fortunate in the example of Pope Victor, then in the
other of Stephen. For although Eusebius (whom S. Hierome Contra Ruff. Apol. 1.
styles the Ensigne-bearer of the Arian Sect, and who was a professed Enemy of
the Roman Church) does relate that S. Irenaeus Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 24.
reprehended Victor, for having excommunicated the Churches of Asia, for the
question about keeping Easter: yet even he dare not say, that Irenaeus blamed
the Pope for want of Power, but for misapplying it; which supposes a Power to
do it, if the cause had been sufficient. And the success showed, that even in
the use of his Power, Pope Victor was in the right. For after his death, the
Councels of Nice, Constantinople, and Ephesus (which you receive as lawful
General Councels) excommunicated those who held the same Custom with the
Provinces which Victor had excommunicated: and so they came to be ranked among
Heretics under the name of Quartadecimam. You may know what opinion S.
Irenaeus had of Popes by these words: Every Church ought to have recourse
Aduers. Haeres. lib. 3. cap. 3.
to Rome, by reason of her more powerful Principality. And even in this your
instance, Eusebius does only say, that Irenaeus did fitly exhort Pope Victor,
that he should not cut off all the Churches of God, which held this ancient
Tradition. Which exhortation does necessarily imply, that Pope Victor had Power
to do it, as I said already. And now I pray you, reflect upon your
precipitation in saying of Vactor and Stephen. Their Censures Page 50.
were much slighted, and their Pride and Schism in troubling the peace of the
Church much condemned. For they did nothing which was not approved by the
universal Church of God; and the Doctrines which they condemned were no less
then heretical. And therefore (to answer also to what you object page 52.) If
the British and Scottish Bishops did adhere to the Churches of Asta in their
Celebration of Easter, after the matter was known to be defined by the Church,
their example can only be approved by such, as your self; nor can it either
impeach the Authority, or darken the proceeding of the Pope. You cite Baronius
Aun. 604.
in the Margent, who directly against you relates out of Bid; that when our
Apostle S. Augustine, could neither by Arguments, nor by Miracles wrought in
their presence, bow their stifnes, he prophefied that they should perish by the
English, as afterward it happened. But you are a fit Champion for such men, and
they no less fit examples to be alleged against the Authority of the Roman
Church.

33. Your other example, that S. Augustine and diverse other Bishops of Africa,
and their Successors for one hundred years together were senered from the
Roman Communion. is manifestly untrue in S. Augustine, and some other chief
Bishops. For when king Thrasimundus had banished into Sardinia almost all the
Bishops, to wit, two hundred and twenty, Pope Symmachus maintained them at his
own charges, as persons belonging to his Communion. To the Epistle of Boniface
the second to Eulalius Bishop of Alexandria, and the Epistle of Eulalius to the
same Boniface, recited by you, out of which it is gathered, that after the sixth
Council of Carthage for the space of one hundred years, the Bishops of
Carthage were separated from the Communion of the Roman Church, and that in the
end they were reconciled to her, Eulalius submitting himself to the
Apostolic Sea, and anathematizing his Predecessors; Bellarmine de Romans Pont.
l. 2. c. 25.
answers, that these Epistles may justly be suspected to be Apochryphall for
diverse reasons which he alleges, and it seems also by your own words that
you do doubt of them: For you say, If their own Records Page 50:
be true. Yet if they be authentical, their meaning cannot be, that all the
Predecessors of Eulalius were for so long space divided from the Roman Church;
the contrary being most manifest not only in S. Augustine, who kept most strict
amity with Zozimus, Innocentius, and Celestinus Popes, but also in S.
Fulgentius and others: but it must be understood only of some Bishops of
Carthage, and in particular of Eulalius, himself, till he being informed of
the truth, submitted himself to the Roman Church. And you ought rather to have
alleged his submission, and condemnation of his Predecessors to prove the
Popes Authority over the African Church; then to object against it the example
of some of his Predecessors, and of himself who afterward repented, and
condemned his own fact. You do well, only to mention the Protensions and
forgeries of the sea of Rome in the matter of Appeals. For you may know that
Bellarmine Vbisup.
does so fully answer that point, as nothing can be more effectual to prove
the Popes Supremacy in Africa, then the right of Appeals from Africa to Rome,
in causes of greater moment.

34. Your last instance about three Chapters of the Council of Chalcedon,
condemned by the fifth General Council, the Bishop of Rome at length
consenting, for which diverse Bishops of Italy, and also the Bishops of Ireland
did jointly depart from the Church of Rome, is like to your former Objections.
For Baronius whom you cite in your Margent has these words as contrary to
your purpose as may be. Hence was it, that the Ann. 553. number. 14. apud Spond.
Bishops of Venice and the adicyning Regions did gath^^ together a Council at
Aquileia against the Fifth Synod; and the divisions at length went as far as
^reland: for all these relying on the Decree of Vigilius Pope, persuaded
themselves that they might do it. Is this to depart from the Pope, or the
Roman Church; to oppose that which he is thought to oppose, and formally,
because he is thought to oppose it? Now, as for the thing it self, when
Vigilius had afterward condemned the three Chapters, which at the first he
refused to do, and had confirmed the fifth Council which had condemned them,
whosoever opposed that Condemnation, were accounted Schismatiques by the whole
Catholic Church: which plainly shows the Popes Authority, and therefore
whatsoever Bishops had opposed Vigilius, their example could prove no more,
then the faction of rebellious persons can prejudice the right of a lawful
King. And in fine, all this Controversy did nothing concern any matter of
faith, but only in fact; and not doctrine, but persons, as may be seen at large
in Baronius: Neither was it betwixt Catholics and Heretics, but among
Catholics themselves. The rest of your Section needs no answer at all: Only
whereas you say; Whosoever wilfully opposes Page 57
any Catholic Verity maintained by the Catholic Visible Church, as do
Heretics; or peruersly diuides himself from the Catholic Communion, as do
Schismatiques; the Condition of both them is damnable: What understand you by
Catholic verities of the Catholic Church? Are not all Verityes mayntayned
by the Catholic Church, Catholic Verities? or how do you now distinguish
Heresy, and Schism from the Catholic Communion? You tells us, ( page 76.)
that it is the property of Schism to cut off from the Body of Christ, and the
hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separats: and is it not an Heresy
to cut off from the Body of Christ and hope of Salvation, the Catholic Church?
How then can one (according to your principles) be a Schismatique from the
Catholic Church, and not be jointly an Heretic?

CHAP. III.
THE Protestants Page 59.
never intended to erect a new Church, but to purge the Old; The Reformation
did not change the substance of Religion, but only cleansed it from corrupt,
and impure Qualities. Therefore (say we) the visible Church exta^t before those
your cleansing days, had and still has the substance of Religion; and so
according to your own ground we are safe, if you can possibly be saved. But we
have no such dependence upon you. Nay, the same Confession which acquits us,
condemns your selves. For while you confess a Reformation of the Old Church,
and neither do, nor can specify any Visible Church, which in your opinion
needed no Reformation; you must affirm, that the Church which you intended to
reform, was indeed the Visible Catholic Church; if so, then you cannot deny
but that you departed from the Catholic Church, and are guilty of Schism,
yea and of Heresy. For if the Catholic Church was infected with erroneous
doctrine which needed Reformation; it follows, that the errors were
Universal, and that the Reformation conming after those errors, must want
Universality of Place and Time, and therefore be branded with the mark of
Heresy. For in true Divinity a new, and no Church are all one. Moreover, the
very Nature, and Essence of the Church requiring true faith, it is impossible
to alter any lest point of faith, without changing the substance of the Church,
and Religion; and therefore to reform the Church in matters of faith, is as if
you should reform a man by depriving him of a reasonable Soul, whereby he is
a man; And a Reformed Catholic are terms no less repugnant, then a
reasonable unreasonable creature, or a destroyed existing thing. Wherefore to
say, the Reformation did not change the substance of Religion, but only
cleansed it from corrupt and impure qualities, are mere words to deceive
simple souls. And it is a lamentable case, that you can never be brought from
such ridiculous similitudes, as here you bring of Naaman, who was still the
same man before and after he was cured of his leprosy; Of a field ouergrowne
with weeds, thistles etc. (and your Brethren are full of twenty such childish
pretended illustrations:) whereas every body knows that leprosy is accidental
to a man, and weeds to a field, but Faith is essential to the Church; and that
Affirmation, or Negation of any one revealed Truth whatsoever, are differences
no less essential in faith, then reasonable and unreasonable in living
Creatures. And Faith it self being an accident and quality consisting in
Affirmation, or Negation; to cleanse it from the corrupt and impure quality of
affirming, or denying; is to cleanse it from its own Nature, and Essence; which
is not to reform, but to destroy it. Lastly, from this your forced Confession,
not to erect a new Church, but to purge the Old, we must infer that the Roman
Church, which you sought to purge, was the Old Church, and the Catholic Church
of Christ. For if you found any other Old visible Catholic Church, which
needed no Reformation, then you neither intended to erect a new Church, nor to
purge the Old.

2. You say, the things which Protestants Page 61.
believe on their part, and wherein they judge the life and substance of
Religion to be comprised, are most, if not all of them, so evidently and
indisputably true, that their Adversaries themselves do auow, and receive them
as well as they. If this be true, and that the said Verities make up the faith
of Protestants (as you speak) then what needed you a Reformation to teach men
the faith of Protestants, which they believed before Protestants appeared? Or
how can you be excused from Schism, who divided your selves from that visible
Church, which believed those verities which make up your faith? You say, If all
other Christians could be coutent page 61.62.
to keep within these general bounds, the woeful Schisms and ruptures of
Christendom might be more easily healed. O words most powerful to condemn
your selves, who were not content to keep within those general bounds, which
you confess we believed, but would attempt new Reformations, although with so
woeful Schisms and Ruptures of Christendom, as you hold worthy to be lamented
with tears of blood! If our errors were not fundamental, your Reformation
could not be necessary to salvation; as when the wound or disease is known not
to be deadly, the cure cannot be necessary to the conservation of life.

3. The Reformation which zealous Catholics did desire, and with whose words
you vainly load your Margent, were not in faith but manners. For which if it
be lawful to forsake a Church, no Church shall remain vnforsaken. But of this
I have spoken in the First Part. Luther was justly cut of by Excommunication,
as a pernicious member: which yet was not done, till the Pope had used all
means to reclaim him. Prouincial or National Synods may seek to reform
abuses in manners, and endeavor that the faith already established be
conserved: but if they go about to reform the Catholic Church in any one
point, they deserve the name of Conuenticles, and not of Councels.

4. What mean you when you say; that you left the page 67.
Church of Rome in nothing she holds of Christ, or of Apostolic Tradition? Do
you admit Traditions? Are they fallible or infallible? For if they be
infallible, then may they be part of the Rule of faith. If fallible, they are
not Apostolic.

5. You go then about to prove, that our doctrines are, First, doubtful and
perplexed opinions. 2. Doctrines unnecessary, and foreign to the faith: and 3.
Novelties unknown to Antiquity.

6. You pretend they are doubtful, and say: The Roman Doctors do not fully
and absolutely agree in any one point among themselves, but only in such points
wherein they agree with us. If a manifest untruth be a good proof, your
Argument conuinceth. If you think, that disagreement in matters not defined by
the Church, argues difference in matters of faith, you show small reading in
our Deuines, who even in all those Articles wherein you agree with us, have
many different, and contrary Opinions concerning points not defined: as about
some speculatiue questions concerning the Deity, the Blessed Trinity,
Incarnation; yea there are more disputes about those high Mysteries wherein you
agree with us, then in others wherein we disagree: and yet you grant, that such
disputes do not argue those maine points to be doubtful. And so you must
answer your own instance, by which you might as well prove, that Philosophers
do not agree whether there be such things as Time, Motion, Quantity, Heavens,
Elements, etc. because in many particulars concerning those things, they cannot
agree.

7. In the second place you affirm our doctrines to be unnecessary and
superfluous: because a very small measure of explicit knowledge is of absolute
necessity. But this is very clearly nothing at all to the purpose. For our
Question is not what every one is obliged explicitly to believe, but whether
every one be not obliged, not to disbelieue, or deny any one point sufficiently
propounded by the Church, as a divine Truth. Neither do we treat of ignorance
of some points, but of plain opposition, and contradiction both between you
and us, and also among your selves. You cite Bellarmine, saying: The Apostles
never used De verb. Dei lib. 4. cap. 11.
to preach openly to the people, other things, then the Articles of the
Apostles Creed, the Ten Commaundments, and some of the Sacraments, because
these are simply necessary, and profitable for all men: the rest besides, such
as a man may be saved without them. Here you stop, leaving out the words
immediately following, which are directly against you. So that (says
Bellarmine) he have Ibid.
a will ready to embrace and believe them, whenever they shall be
sufficiently propounded to him by the Church. Besides, you falsify Bellarmine
when you make him say, that the Apostles never used to preach to the people
other things then the Articles of the Apostles Creed, the commandments, and
some of the Sacraments, because these are simply necessary, and profitable for
all men; But he says directly the contrary, namely; that the Apostles preached
to all, some things which were not necessary, but only profitable to all (and
therefore not superfluous as you say;) whereas yet he expressly affirms the
knowledge of the Creed, commandments, and some sacraments to be necessary to
all. I wonder what pleasure you can take in corrupting Authors, to your own
discredit? Now since we must have, as Bellarmine rightly teaches, a will ready
to embrace whatsoever is propounded by the Church; it follows, that
notwithstanding your Confidence to the contrary, we cannot but except against
your public Service, or Liturgy. I have neither will nor leisure to examine
particulars: but Exceptions enough offer themselves to any man's first
Consideration. The very occasion and end for which it was framed, proceeded out
of an Heretical spirit, to oppose the true Visible Church: It was turned into
English upon an heretical persuasion, and a popular insinuation, and a crafty
affectation to inueigle the humor of the people, that public Prayers were
unlawful in an unknown tongue. It leaves out Prayers both for deceased
sinners, and to glorious Saints, blotting diverse of them out of their Calendar;
and has abrogated their festival days: and the like they have done
concerning fasts, except those few which they vouchsafe to like: It abolisheth
all memory of S. Peter's Successor: It treats only of two Sacraments,
excluding the rest; and in the one it omitteth most of our Ceremonies, as
superstitious: in the other it professes not to give any thing but the
substance of Bread and wine. It administreth to Lay people both kinds, as
necessary by the institution of Christ our Lord: Mass, or Sacrifice it has
none: It reads and belieues Scripture heretically translated: It mentions no
Relics of Saints: And in a word, it is both in the whole Body, and design,
and in every point a profession of a Church, and faith contrary to Catholics,
and implies a condemnation of our Liturgy as superstitious, and your self
boldly say: We cannot, we Page 68.
dare not communicate with Rome in her public Liturgy, which is manifestly
polluted with gross superstitions; and therefore we Catholics also can no
more approve your practice and Liturgy, then we can embrace your Doctrine, and
faith. I said that I had no desire to examine the particulars of your Liturgy,
neither is it needful. For we may judge of the rest, by the very first words,
or Introite of your Service, beginning with a Text, for which you cite Ezech.
18. At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom
of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the
Lord. But there is no such sentence in Ezechiel, whose words are these, even in
the Bible of the Protestants: But if the wicked will turn from all his sins
which he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die: All his Transgressions which
he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in the righteousness
which he has done, he shall live. Your first Reformers, the soul of whose
Church was solifidian Justification, were loath to hear of possibility to keep
all the Commandments, of working Righteousness, or living in the Righteousness
which he has wrought; as also they were unwilling to particularize with the
Prophet, what is required to true Repentance, knowing full well, the different
opinions of their first Progenitors about this point of Repentance, and
therefore they thought best to corrupt this Text. And which is more strange, in
your seruice-Booke translated into Latin, and printed in London, Per
assignationem Francisci Florae, the sentence is cited at large as it is in the
Prophet, and therefore the corruption still remaining in the English to deceive
the Unlearned, is more inexcusable. Neither (in the same Introite) is the
allegation of Joel. 2. much more truly made: Rent your hearts, and not your
garments, and turn to the Lord your God etc. Out of which place, you know men
are wont to declaime against our corporal Penance of Fasting, Watching,
Hayre-cloth, Disciplines etc. but, even according to your own Translation, the
words are: Turn you even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with
weeping, and with mourning; And rent your hearts, and not your garments etc.
where I believe you will confess that your omission was not used to no purpose.

8. You speak among other things of Images, and we grant that God may be
worshipped without an Image. But we say, that he cannot be truly worshipped by
any one, who denies worship of Images, because true worship of God cannot
stand with any one Heresy. It is highly good, and lawful, and a most holy
thing to pray to God; but yet if one should believe, that we may not also pray
to living men, your self would I think condemn him for an Heretic, because
all Christians entreat their Brethren to pray for them: By which example all
your instances ( page 72.) may be answered. Your saying out of Bellarminine
that the worship, and Invocation of Saints was brought into the Church, rather
by custom then any Precept, is answered hereafter n. 12. And I would gladly
know by what authority your Church can inioyne secret Confession in some case,
as (here page 72.) you say she does, if Christ have left it free? Can a humane
law oblige men to reveal their secret sins, in Confession? especially since
they know not whether your Ministers will not think themselves obliged to
acquaint some Officer therewith, in case the Penitent disclose any crime
punishable by the Laws of the Realm. To which propose I could tell you
strange and true stories: as contrarily because Catholics believe the
Sacrament of Confession to have been instituted by our Savior Christ, as
necessary to Salvation, they consequently teach, that the Seal and Secret
thereof is so sacred and inviolable, that the Pope himself cannot dispense
therein, though it were to save his own life. And now, to follow your
wanderings, you may know that we do not hinder, but give free leave to
unlearned persons to say their prayers in a known language: but the Church does
celebrate public Service in one of the learned Tongues, for weighty reasons,
which have been learnedly set down by our Catholic Writers. And if nothing
must be read but what the People, yea learned men understand, you must give
over reading in public, even in English, diverse Psalms of David, the
Prophets, the Apocalypse, and other parts of Scriptures, the sense and meaning
whereof the people understand no more, then if they were read in Hebrew. Nay, to
understand the words, and not the sense, is not free from danger, because they
may by the^ conceive some error, as we daily see by the example of Sectaries,
and in that ungracious creature, who lately out of Scripture, as he thought,
murdered his Mother, and Brother, for being cause of his Idolatry in kneeling
at the Communion. Happy had it been both for him, and a thousand more, if the
sacred Scriptures in English were not so common among them, but were read with
due circumspection, and not without approbation of such as can judge better of
them, then themselves. And in very truth it seems strange, and not only not
safe but even shameful, that, for example, the Books of Leuiticus, and the
Canticles, besides many passages in other Books, should he promiscuously made
subject to the vulgar eyes of sensual, and vnmortifyed people, who morally will
be sure to make no other use thereof, then to hurt themselves, together with
the abusing and profaning so holy a thing, as every word of holy Scripture is
in it self.

9. Now, to come to your other particulars; we acknowledge and profess all
Merits to be the gift of God, and therefore they cannot withdraw us from relying
on him. You cite Bellarmine, saying: It is safest, not to trust Page 73.
to a man's own Merits, but wholly and solely to cast himself on the mercy of
Jesus Christ. But does Bellarmine say, that it is safest to rely on Gods Mercy
alone, and to deny all Merits, as Protestants do? This indeed were to your
purpose. But let us hear Bellarmine rightly cited: It is (says he) most safe
to place De Justificat. lib. 5. c. 7. Sittertia propositio.
al our trust in the sole mercy and Benignity of God. Here you stay. But
Bellarmine goes on, and says: I explicate my said Proposition: for it is not
to be so understood as if a man with all his forces ought not to attend to good
works: Or that we ought not to confide in them, as if they were not true
Justice, or could not undergo the Judgment of God (for no wonder if Gods own
gifts, as all our merits are, may endure his examination.) but we only say,
that it is more safe, as it were to forget our former Merits, and to look
only upon the mercy of God; Both because no man can without a revelation
certaynely know that he has true merits, or that he is to persevere in them to
the end: And also, because in this place of Temptation nothing is more easy
then to conceive Pride by the consideration of our good works. I leave it
therefore to any man's consideration, what sincerity you have used in alleging
Bellarmine.

10 In the last place you affirm, that our doctrines are confessed Page 13.
Novelties, and you go about to prove it by a few instances; all which being
either nothing to the purpose, or plainly mistaken, or manifestly untrue, do
excellently prove against your self, how ancient our Religion is. Your
instance about the Popes infallibility, is not to the purpose of proving that
the Roman Church teaches any Nouelty. For Bellarmine, out of whom you cite a
few Authors who teach that the Popes Decrees without a Council are not
infallible, says: That, that Doctrine De Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 1.
is yet tolerated by the Church, though he affirm it to be erroneous, and the
next degree to Heresy. The same Answer serves for your other example
concerning the Popes Authority above that of a General Council, of which
Bellarmine says: They are not properly Heretics who hold the contrary; but
De Council. l. 2. cap. 17. Denique Lateranense.
they cannot be excused from great temerity. And you are not ignorant, but that
even those who defend these doctrines do unanimously consent against you, that
the Pope is Head of the Church. But I pray you, what Consequence is it? Some
Authors deny, or doubt of the Popes Infallibility, or his Authority over a
General Council: Ergo, these doctrines are Novelties? May not private men be
mikaken, even in doctrines which of themselves are most ancient; as is known
by experience in many Truths, which both you and we maintain? For how many
Books of Scripture were once doubted of by some, which now your selves receive
as Canonical? Are you therefore Nouelists? You ouerlash then, when you say:
Above a thousand Page 72. Edit. 1.
years after Christ, the Popes judgment was not esteemed infallible, nor his
authority above that of a general Council: and especially when you cite
Bellarmine to make good your sayings. And your affirming out of Bellarmine ( de
Indulg. l. 2. c. 17.) that Eugenius the 3. ( who began his Papacy 1145.) was
Page 72. Edit. 1.
the first that granted Indulgences, is a huge untruth, and falsification of
Bellarmine, who in that very place, directly, expressly, purposely, proves that
other Popes before Eugenius granted Indulgences, and names them in particular.
Whereas you say that the Councels of Constance and Basil, decreed the Council
to be above the Pope; you might have seen the Answer in Bellarmine in the
same Book which you De Council. l 2. c. 19.
cite; that these two Councels at that time were not lawful Councels, or
sufficient to define any matters of Faith.

11. You say, Many of them (meaning Catholic Doctors) yield also, that
Papal Indulgences are things unknown to all Antiquity. And to prove this, you
allege Bellarmine, De Indulg. l. 2. c. 27.
who cites Durand, S. Antoninus, and Roffensis. Neither do these three, which
you by I know not what figure call many, say as you do, that Indulgences are
things unknown to all Antiquity; but only for the first five hundred years,
as Bellarmine says in the place by you cited, and therefore you take to your
self a strange privilege to multiply persons, and enlarge times: and yet
these Authors do not deny Indulgences. And as Bellarmine answers: We ought not
to say that Indulgences are not indeed Ancient, because two or three
Catholics have not read of them in Ancient Authors. And you may, with greater
show, deny diverse Books of Scripture, which more then three Writers did not
only say, they were not received by Antiquity; but did expressly reject them. As
for the thing it self, Bellarmine shows, that Indulgences are no less
ancient then the Vbi supra. c. 3.
beginning of the Church of Christ: and that your own Protestants confess,
that it is hard to know when they began, which is a sign of Antiquity, not of
Nouelty. But we can tell you, when, and who, first began to oppose Indulgences,
namely the Waldenses, who appeared about the year 1170. And therefore the mark
of Nouelty, and Heresy must fall not upon the defenders, but the impugners of
Indulge^ces.

12. You say out of Bellarmine, that Leo the Third was the first that ever
Canonized any Saint, as before ( page 72.) you alleged out of him, that the
worship of Saints, was brought into the Church rather by Custom then by any
Precept; and in your Margent you cite him in Latin saying: Saints began to be
De Saitctorum beat, lib. 1. cap. 8. v^^.
worshipped in the universal Church rather by Custom then by Precept. But
Bellarmine does not there treat in general of worship of Saints, but only
handling the Question, Cuius sit etc. To whom does it belong to Canonize
Saints, and proving that it belongs to the Pope to Canonize them for the whole
Church, and not for some particular Diocese alone; in answer to an Objection,
that there are many worshipped for Saints, who were not Canonized by the Pope,
he has these words: I answer, that the Ancient Saints began to be worshipped
in the Universal Church, not so much by any Law, as by Custom: Where you
break off. But Bellarmine goes forward, and says: But as other Customs have
the force of a Law by the tacit Consent of the Prince, without which they are
of no force etc. So the Worship of any Saint generally introduced by the
Custom of the Churches, has force from the tacit, or express Approbation of
the Pope. First then, you conceal the Question of which Bellarmine treated.
Secondly, you leave out (Veteres) Ancient Saints, and say only Saints, and yet
(Ancient) shows he spoke not of all Saints, but of some who were not expressly
Canonized, or Commanded to be held for Saints, whereas diverse others have been
Canonized by direct command to believe that they are happy. Thirdly, in your
Translation, you leave out Universal, and only put Church; whereas Bellarmine
Primo modo, expressly teaches: That in ancient time every Bishop might Canonize
Saints for his particular Diocese, and de facto, they did command some Feasts
to be kept, as Bellarmine proves; which shows, that the worship of Saints was
held both to be lawful, and was to some particular persons commanded.
Fourthly, you leave out Bellarmines words; That the Worship of some Saint
generally introduced by the custom of the Churches, grows to have the force
of a Law, or Precept, by the tacit, or express Approbation of the Pope; which
is contrary to that, which you cited out of Bellarmine; The worship and
Invocation of Saints was brought into the Church, rather by Custom, then any
Precpt. And now to come to your former Objection out of Bellarmine, what is it
to your purpose if he affirm that Leo the third was the first that ever
Canonized any Saint? Does he affirm that Leo was the first that taught
Worship, and Invocation of Saints? Or that such worship was not practiced by
Custom, yea and by Precept before his Time, as we have seem out of his words
it was? Bellarmine speaks only of such form and solemnity of Canonization as
afterward was used: Which makes nothing for your purpose, to prove that our
doctrine of Worship, or Invocation of Saints, is a Nouelty. If one should
affirm that the sole^nity of Crowning Kings, was not used in all places, or
times alike; should he therefore deny the Antiquity of Kings, or that Obedience
is due to them? You may see not only the error, but the danger also of such
discourse.

13. When one reads in your Book these words in a different letter; Not any
one ancient Writer Page 78.
reckons precisely seven Sacraments; the first Author that mentions that
number is Peter Lombard, and the first Council, that of Florence: and in your
Margent, the names of Valentia, and Bellarmine; Who would not think that in
the opinion of these Authors no ancient Writer before Lombard believed that
there were seven Sacraments, neither more nor fewer? Which is most untrue, and
against their formal words, and express intentio^s. For thus says Valentia
in the very same place which you Tom. 4. disp 3. q. 6. p. 2. Tertie probatur.
cite: The same Assertion, (that there are seven Sacraments) is proved by the
Authority of Fathers. For although the more ancient Writers do not number
seven Sacraments, all together in one place: yet it may be easily showed,
especially by the testimony of S. Augustine that they did acknowledge every one
of these Ceremonies to be a Sacrament. Thus Valentia in general, and then he
proves every one of the seven Sacraments, out of particular places of S.
Augustine, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, Innocentius the first, Chrysostom, Bode,
and Dionysius Areopagita. Now tell me, whether Valentia say: Not any one
Ancient Writer reckons precisely seven Sacraments? Does he not prove out of S.
Augustine every one of the seven Sacraments in particular, as you could not
but see in the very place cited by you? Is it all one to say: Not any one
Ancient Writer reckons precisely seven Sacraments, as you corrupt these
Authors, and to say; The Ancient Writers do not number seven Sacraments all
together in one place? Neither is your falsifying of Bellarmine less
remarkable, who having said that the number of seven Sacraments is proved out
of Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, premiseth this Observation: That, Our
Adversaries ought not to require of us, that Bellarm. de Sacram. lib. 2. c. 25.
we show in Scriptures and Fathers the NAME of seven Sacraments: For neither
can they show the Name of two, or three, or four: for the Scriptures and
Fathers did not write a Catechism, as now we do, by reason of the multitude of
Heresies, but only delivered the things themselves in diverse places: Neither is
this proper to Sacraments, but common to many other things. For the Scripture
reckons the miracles of our Savior, but never reckons how many there be: It
delivers the Articles of Faith, but never says how many they be: The Apostles
afterward published the Creed of twelve Articles for some particular causes. In
like manner they cannot know out of Scripture, how many Canonical Brokes there
be: But Councels afterward set down the Canon, and the particular number,
which they had learned by Tradition. And afterward he notes: That it is
sufficient if we can show out of Fathers and Scriptures, that the Definition of
a Sacrament does agree neither to more nor fewer Rites, then seven. By which
words it is clear, that when Bellarmine says, Lombard was the first that
named the number of seven Sacraments, he only means, as he explicates
himself, of the name of Seven; as Protestants will not find in all Antiquity
the name of two Sacraments. So that from the words of Valentia and Bellarmine,
as they are indeed, nothing can be gathered, except your very unconscionable
Dealing.

14. What you cite out of Bellarmine, that De Enchar. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Scotus teaches Transubstantiation to have been neither named, nor made an
Article of faith before the Council of Lateran, does not prove it to be a
Nouelty, but only that Scotus did think it was not so expressly declared
before that Council; which (says Bellarmine) he affirmed because he had not
read the Council of Rome under Gregory the Seventh, nor had observed the
consent of Fathers. It is a fond thing to say, that every Truth is a Nouelty,
which the Church as occasion serves does declare more expressly then before.
And if all Truths must be declared alike at all times, under pain of being
accounted Novelties; what will become of Luthers Reformation, whereby he
pretended to teach the world so many things which he falsely, and impiously
blasphemed to have been for solo^g time buried in oblivion, and ouer-whelmed
with corruption?

15. You cite Peter Lombard and S. Thomas, as if they affirmed Sacrifice in the
Page 74.
Eucharist to be no other, but the image or Commemoration of our Saviors
Sacrifice upon the Cross. But your conscience cannot but tell you, that these
Authors never doubted whether the Mass be a true Sacrifice or no, and
therefore the Question which they propounded is, Whether Christ in the Mass be
immolated, or S. Thom. 3. p. q. 83 a. 1. in corp.
killed? and according to this sense they answer, that he is immolated in
figure, because the unbloody Oblation of the Eucharist, is a representation of
our Saviors bloody Oblation, or Immolation on the Cross. And that this is so,
you might have seen in S. Thomas in that very place which you Ad 3.
cite, where he teaches that in this manner of being killed, or immolated in
figure, Christ might have been said to have been immolated in the figures of
the Old Testament, which did prefigure his death; and yet you will not
acknowledge your self so perfectly Zwinglianized, that you will from hence
infer, that there is no more in the Eucharist then in the empty figures of
the Old Law: and though you did, yet it would not serve your turn, for even
diverse of those figures were truly and properly Sacrifices; and therefore
though the Eucharist were but a Commemoration, yet it might be a true Sacrifice
withal.

16. You allege Lindanus, that Panopl. lib. 4. part. 2. cap. 56. Hunc igitur.
in former Ages, for 1200. years, the holy Cup was administered to the Laity.
But you deceive your Reader; for Lindanus plainly says; That both kinds were
given to the Laity almost every where, but yet not every where. Which is
sufficient against you, who say, it is against the institution of Christ not to
give both kinds to the Laity. And I showed before, that in the reign of King
Edward the Sixth, Communion in one kind was permitted; and that Melancthon and
Luther held it as a thing indifferent.

17. That divine Sacrifice was celebrated for diverse Ages in a known and vulgar
Tongue, you would prove out of In 1. corp. cap. 14.
Lyra. But what is this to prove our doctrine to be a Nouelty? Do we teach,
that there is any divine Law, either forbidding, or commanding public Service
in a vulgar Tongue? And Lyra in that place teaches that in these times it is
more convenient that it be not celebrated in a known language.

18. That the Fathers generally condemned the worship of Images for fear of
Idolatry, and allowed, yea exhorted the people with diligence, to read the
Scriptures; You seek Page 74.
to prove the former part out of Polydore Virgil, and the latter out of Azor;
but still with your wonted sincerity. For how often have you been told that
Polydore De Innent. lib. 6. cap. 13.
speaks not of the Ancient Fathers of the New Testament, but of those of the
Old, naming Moses, David, and Ezechias, and he proves at large, that in the
New Law, Images are worthily placed in Churches, and worshipped; and concludes,
demanding what man is so dissolute, and so brazen faced, that will, or can
doubt, or dream of the contrary? Azor grants, that in the Moral. Instit. lib.
8. cap. 26. part. 1.. Respo^deo.
times of S. Chrysostom, Laymen were conversant in Scripture, because then
they understood Greek or Latin, in which language the Scriptures were written;
whereas now the common people for the most part understand not the Latin Tongue;
but such Lay people as understand Greek or Latin, do with good reason read the
Scripture. Who would ever imagine, that in so short a compass you could have
corrupted so many Authors?

19. What you say in this your Section, to excuse your Brethren from Schism,
we have answered in the First Part, and have confuted all your euasions and
similitudes. And whereas you say, that Page 77.
although our errors be not damnable to him, who in simplicity of heart
belieueth and professes them; yet that he, that against faith and conscience
shall go along with the stream, to profess and practice them, because they
are but little ones; his case is dangerous, and without repentance desperate. I
answer, that if our errors be not fundamental, how can they be damnable: and
if they be but little ones, that is, not fundamental or damnable, how is it
damnable to embrace them, because they are little ones, that is, because they
are, as indeed they are? If they were indeed little ones, and yet by an
erroneous conscience were esteemed great ones, to such a man they should indeed
be damnable; but to one that knows them to be little ones, and with such a
knowledge, or conscience, for some humane respect, of it self not damnable,
does yet embrace them, they are not damnable. For still we suppose that he
would not embrace them, if his Conscience told him, that they were great ones.
And who can without smiling read these your words: It is the Page 77.
Doctrine of the Roman School, that venial sins to him that commits them,
not of subreption, or of a sudden motion, but of presumption that the matter is
not of moment, change their kind and become mortal? I pray you what School
man teaches that to commit a venial sin, knowing it to be such, makes it
become mortal? For in this sense you must allege this doctrine, if it be to
your purpose: and in this sense it being a false doctrine, does indeed
overthrow that for which you allege it; and proves that to embrace errors not
fundamental, knowing them to be such, cannot be damnable; as it is not a
mortal sin, to do that which one knows to be but venial In the mean time
you do not reflect, that if your doctrine might pass for true, it would be
impossible for both Catholics, and Protestants, Lutherans, and Caluinists to
be saved. For all these differ at lest in points not fundamental, and so you
grant unawares that which chiefly we intend, that of two differing in Religion,
both cannot be saved, whether their differences be great, or small.

20. I have told you already, that the Author of the Moderate Examination etc.
is no Catholic. That other Treatise entitled, Syllabus aliquot Synodorum
etc. I have not seen, but if the Author pretend, as you say, that both
Hugenots, and Catholics may be saved, he can be no Catholic.

21. You would feign avoid the note of Heretics, which is to be named by
Modern names, derived for the most part from their first Sect-Maisters. You
renounce the names of Lutherans, Zwinglians, or Caluinists, and to that purpose
you make half a Sermon; But words will not serve your turn. For they are no
injurious Nicknames as you say, but names imposed by mere necessity, to
distinguish you from those from whom you really differ, and to express the
variety of your late Reformation. If we speak of Christians, or Catholics
without some addition, no man will dream of you, but will think of us, who
had that Name before Luther appeared, and therefore it cannot express the
latter Reformation. If you will be called the Reformed Church; still the doubt
remaynes, whether you mean those who follow Luther, or Calvin, or Zwinglius
etc. Neither will the Reformed Church (if she be in her wits) make her self
liable to all errors of Lutherans, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Puritans etc. And
in this, your prime man D. Field is more ingenious, while he acknowledges a
necessity of the name of Lutherans, in these words: Neither was it possible Of
the Church lib. 2. cap. 9. p. 59.
that so great an alteration should be effected, and not carry some remembrance
of them, by whom it was procured. And Whitaker says: For distinctions sake we
are enforced to use the In his answer to Reynolds Preface. page 44.
name of Protestants. And Grauerus gives a reason why those of the same Sect
with him be called Lutherans, saying: The only reason In his Absurda Absurdoru^
etc. in Praefat.
of it is, that we may be distinguished from Caluinists and Papists, from whom
we cannot be distinguished by the general name either of Christians, or of
Orthed ox, or of Catholics. And Hospinianus likewise says: I abhor the
Schismatic names In his Prologomena.
of Lutherans, Zwinglians, and Caluinist; (mark, the Shismaticall names) yet
for distinction sake I will use these names in this History. The vulgar
Objection which you bring, that amongst us also there are Franciscans,
Dominica^s, Scotistes Loyalists etc. is pertinent only to convince you of
manifest Nouelty: For those Names are not imposed to signify difference in
faith, as the Names of Lutherans, Caluinists, are; but either diverse Institutes
of Religion, as Dominicans, Franciscans etc. or else diversity of opinions
concerning some points not defined by the Church, as Thomists, Scotists etc.
And for as much as these Names be arguments of new and particular Institutes,
and are derived from particular men, they likewise prove that the names of
Lutherans, Caluinists etc. being given upon diversity in faith, must argue a
new beginning, and a new Sect, and Sect-Maisters concerning Faith. D. Field is
full to our purpose, saying: We must observe that they who profess the faith
of Christ Vbi sup. page 58.
have been somtymes in these latter ages of the Church called after the
special names of such men as were the Authors, Beginners, and Deuisers of
such courses of Monastical Profession, as they made choice to follow, as
Benedictins, and such like. And in his other words following, he answers your
objection of the Scotists, and Thomists, affirming their differences to have
been in the Controversies of Religion, not yet determined by consent of the
Universal Church. What can be more clear, that our differences concern not
matters of Faith, and that the names which you mention of Fra^ciscans,
Dominicans etc. signify a Means of that for which they are imposed, and which
they are appointed to signify, and therefore prove that the names of Lutherans
etc. must signify a Nouclty in faith?

22. But you say, that the iarres and divisions between page 87.
the Lntherans, and Caluinists do little concern the Church of England, which
follows none but Christ. And do not Lutherans and Caluinists pretend to
follow Christ as well as you? Who shall be Judge among you? But you may easily
be well assured, that as long as you follow him by contrary ways, you can
never come where he is. And yet indeed, do these ^arres little concern the
Church of England? Have you in your Church none of those who are commonly
called Lutherans, Zwinglians, Caluinists, Puritans etc. Does it not behooue you
to consider, whether your Congregation can be One true Church of Christ, while
you are in Communion with so many disagreeing Sects? Does it little concern
you, whether your first Reformers Lutherans, Caluinists, Zwinglians, Puritanes
be Heretics, or no? How can it be, but that the divisions of Lutherans, and
Caluinists must concern the Church of England? For, your Church cannot agree
with them all; and if you side with one part, you must jar with the other. Or
if you agree with none of them, you disagree with all, and so make a greater
division.

23. And therefore, being really distrustful of this Answer, you come at
length to your maine refuge, namely; that their dissentions Page 87.
are neither many, nor so material, as to shake, or touch the foundation. But
till you can once tell us what points will shake the foundation, you cannot be
sure whether their dissentions be not such. You say, their Page 90.
difference about Consubstantiation, and Vbiquity is not fundamental, because
both agree, that Christ is really, and truly exhibited to each faithful
Communicant, and that in his whole Person he is every where. In this manner you
may reconcile all heresies, and say, the Arians or Nestorians believed Christ
to be truly God; that is, by real, and true affection of Charity, as many
among you say, Christ is really in the Sacrament, that is, by a real figure,
or by a real act of faith, as the Nestorians said of a real act of Charity:
That even according to them who deny the Trinity, there is truly a Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, as in God there is truly Power, Understanding, and Will;
but whether those Persons be really distinct or no, that is (as you say of
Consubstantiation and Vbiquity) a nicecity inscrutable to the wit of man: and
so a man may go discoursing of all other Heresies, which have been condemned
by the Church. Is there not a maine difference of receiving our Saviors body
in real substance, and in figure alone? Or betwixt the immensity of our
Saviors Deity, and the Vbiquity of his Humanity, which destroies the Mysteries
of his Nativity Ascension, etc for who can ascend to the place where he is
already? You specify only the said difference betwixt Lutherans, and
Caluinists, whereas you know there are many more, as about the Canon of
Scripture etc. as also between Protestants and Puritans etc. And I could put
you in mind of your Brethren, who teach that for diverse Ages the visible Church
perished; and yet S. Augustine teaches, that there is nothing more evident in
Scripture, then the Universality of the Church: as also who deny that Bishops
are by divine Institution; who oppose your whole Hierarchy as Antichristian;
who differ from you in the form of Ordination of Ministers; all which are
fundamental points. But I will refer the Reader to the most exact Brereley, who
Tract. 3. Sect. 7. under ^.
reckons no fewer then seauenty seven differences among you, punctually citing
the Books, and pages where you may find them. And yet for the present I will
set down some words of Doctor Willet, testifying your differences. From this
fountain (says he) have sprung In his meditation upon the 122. Psa. page 91.
forth these and such like whirle-points, and bubbles of new doctrine: as for
example, that the Scriptures are not means concerning God of all that
profitably we know: That, they are not alone complete to everlasting felicity:
That, the word of God cannot possibly assure us what is the word of God: That,
there are works of Supererogation: That, the Church of Rome, as it now
stands, is the family of Christ: That, Idolaters and wicked Heretics are
members of the visible Church: (let D. Potter here remember what himself
says of the Roman Church, and what he relates about the opinion of M. Hooker
and M. Morton, that among Heretics there may be a true Church:) That, there
is in Ordination given a indeleble Character: That, they have power to make
Christ's body: That, Sacraments are necessary in their place, and no less
required then belief it self: That, the souls of Infants dying without
Baptism are damned etc. Do you think, that the necessity of Baptism, and
other Sacraments, the sufficiency of sole Scripture, which your English Clergy
professes at their Ordination, and those other points are but small matters?
But besides these, and many more, there are two other maine, general, and
transcendent differences among you. The one, whether you do not differ in maine
points, which though you deny, yet others affirm: The other, what be maine or
fundamental points. Upon which two differences, i^ will necessarily follow,
that you cannot know, whether you have the same substance of faith, and hope of
salvation, or no. But though your differences were all reduced to one, and that
how small soever; that one were sufficient to exclude Unity of faith among you,
as I have often said, and proved. I have no mind to spend time in telling you
how vn-scholler-like you say: Two brothers Page 87.
in their choler may renounce each other, and disclaim their amity; yet that
heat cannot dissolve their inward, and essential relation. For when a man's
Brother dies, does he loose any essential relation? I always thought that
essential relations were inseparable from the essence to which they belong,
and the essence from them; and a man who still remaynes a man, may yet cease to
be a Brother: It is therefore no essential relation.

24. I grant that Differences in Ceremonies, or discipline, do not always
infer diversity of faith; yet when one part condemns the Rites and discipline
of the other as Antichristian, or repugnant to Gods word (as it happens among
Protestants,) then differences in Ceremontes redound to a diversity in faith.

25. Luther tempered by Page 93.
mild Melancthon (that honor of Germany) did much relent and remit of his
rigor against Zwinglius, and began to approve the good Counsels of peace. If
inconstancy concerning matters of Faith be Mildnes, Melancton was, I grant,
extremely mild, in which respect he was noted even by Protestants, and was
disliked by Luther. How much Luther relented of his rigor against Zwinglius,
let himself declare in these words, which you could not but read in
Charity-Mistaken. I having now one of my feet Page 53.
in the grave, will carry this testimony and glory to the Tribunal of God;
That I will with all my heart condemn, and eschew Carolostadius, Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, and their disciples; nor will I have familiarity with any of
them either by letter, writing, words, nor deeds, accordingly as the Lord has
commanded. If in Polonia the followers of Luther, and Calvin have long lived
together in concord, as you would have us believe, the thing being really not
true; they must thank the good Catholic King under whom they live, who is
able, and apt to punish when there is great excess. But if they had the raynes
in their own hand, what greater concord could be hoped for amongst them in
that Kingdom, then is found in other places, where they have more power? In
Polonia there are many Arians, and Trinitarians, who live in outward concord
with the rest; But will you acknowledge them for Brethren to Lutherans,
Caluinists, and your self? The answer will be hardly made, if you stick to
your own grounds, and I may well pass on to the rest.

CHAP. IIII.
YOUR very beginning promises small sincerity in that which follows. For you
make Charity-Mistaken say, that Protestants be Heretics at the lest, if not
Infidels; whereas he only says, and substantially proves, that whosoever does
disbelieue any one Article of faith, does not assent to all the rest, by divine
infallible faith, but by an humane persuasion; which is a point of great
consideration, and of which it seems you are very loath to speak.

2. You take much pains to prove what we do not deny. For it makes nothing to
the purpose, whether or no the Proposition of the Church belong to the formal
Object of faith, as heertofore I have told you. Nor do we deny Scripture to
contain all mattes of faith, if it be rightly understood; because Scripture,
among other Verities, does also recommend unto us the Church and divine
Traditions, though they be unwritten. And you egregiously falsify Page 99.
Edit. 1.
Bellarmine, as if he excluded the Authority of the Church, whereas in the place
by you cited ( de verb. Dei lib. 1. c. 2.) he only speaks against the private
spirit, and even there proves out of S. Augustine, that God will have us learn
of other men. We likewise teach that tho Church does not make any new Articles
of faith, but only propounds, and declares to us the old. Only I would have you
here consider that whether or no Scripture be the sole Rule of faith: or
whether faith be resolved into divine Revelation alone, or else partly into the
Proposition of the Church; all is one, for the maine Question, whether persons
of diverse Religions can be saved. For this remains undoubted, that it cannot
be but damnable to oppose any truth, sufficiently declared to be contained in
Scripture, or revealed by God.

3. No less impertinent is your other discourse concerning the difficulty to
know what is Heresy. For we grant, that it is not always easy to determine in
particular occasions, whether this or that doctrine be such: Because it may be
doubtful, whether it be against any Scripture, or divine Tradition, or
Definition of the Church; and much more, whether the person be an Heretic,
which requires certain conditions (as Capacity, Pertinacy, sufficient
Proposition etc.) which are not always so easily explicated, and discerned:
and for these respects S. Augustine in the place cited Page 102.
by you, had good reason to say: That it is hard to know what makes an
Heretic. But it is strange that you should hold it to be so hard a matter, to
give a general definition of Heresy or Heretic, since in this very Section
you dispatch it quickly, saying: He is justly Page 98.
esteemed an Heretic, who yields not to Scripture sufficiently propounded. Or
(as you say else where,) It is fundamental Page 250.
to a Christians Faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he believe all
revealed Truths of God, whereof he may be convinced that they are from God. Nay,
if you will speak with coherence to your own grounds; it is easy for you to
define in all particular cases what is damnable Heresy: for you (I say) who
measure all Heresy by opposition to Scripture; and further affirm, that
Scripture is clear in all fundamental points. For by this means it will be
easy for you to discern what error opposes those fundamental Truths, which
are clearly contained in Scripture.

4. In your discourse concerning the Controversy between Pope Stephen, and S.
Cyprian, you show a great deal of passion against the Roman Church, which you
impugn out of an Epistle of Firmilianus, who at that time was a party against
the Pope, and who in particular did afterward recant together with the other
Bishops who once joined with S. Cyprian, as we have already showed out of S.
Hierome, and may be also seen in an Epistle of Dionysius Alexandrinus apud
Eusch. hist. l. 6. c. 7. wherein Firmilianus in particular is named (and
therefore you are inexcusable, who say they persisted in their opinion;) whereas
the proceeding of S. Stephen was necessary to prevent a pernicious error of
rebaptizing of such as had been baptized by Heretics, which afterward was
condemned by the whole Church. And as for S. Cyprians mild proceeding, which
you so much commend out of your ill will to S. Stephen, because he was Pope; S.
Augustine says: The things which De Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap. 25.
Cyprian in anger has spread against Stephen, I will not suffer to pass under
my pen. Wherefore you could not have picked out an example more in favor of
Popes then this. And you must give us leave not to credit what you say, That
both Stephen and Cyprian erred in some sense. For Stephen only affirmed, that
Baptism was not inualide precisely because it is given by Heretics, as S.
Cyprian affirmed it to be; but yet if the Heretics erred either in the Matter
or Form of Baptism, Stephen never affirmed such Baptism to be valid, which
had been more then he granted, even to the Baptism of Catholics.

5. Your Argument to prove, that Page 112.
concerning our greater safety, we dispute against you as the Donatists did
against Catholics, I have answered Cap. 7. number. 7.
in the First Part. You would make men believe that we are like the Donatists,
who washed Church wall, and vestments of Catholics, broke their Chalices,
scraped their Altars etc. But I pray you consider, whether Chalices, Vestments,
Palls, or Corporals, and Altars do express the Protestant Church of England,
Scotland, Geneua, Holland etc. or the Church of Rome?

6. You spend diverse pages in propounding Arguments for the opinion of M.
Hooker, and M. Morton: That whersoeuer a company of men Page 113.
do jointly profess the substance of Christian Religion, which is faith in
Jesus Christ the Son of God and Savior of the world, with submission to his
doctrine in mind and will; there is a Church wherein Salvation may be had,
notwithstanding any corruption in ludgment or practice: yea although it be of
that nature that it seem to fight with the very foundation, and so heinous as
that in respect thereof the people stained with this corruption, are worthy to
be abhorred of all men, and unworthy to be called the Church of God. But
because these and such monstrous Assertions proceed from other errors which I
have already both clearly, and at large confuted; to wit, the Fallibility of
the Church, the Distinction of points fundamental and not fundamental etc. I
refer you to those places: and here only observe into what precipices they
fall, who deny the universal Infallibility of the Church. And it is strange
that you your self did not see the manifest contradictions inuolued in this
wicked doctrine. For how can it be a Church wherein Salvation may be had, and
yet be unworthy to be called the Church of God? How can that man have faith in
Jesus Christ, with submission to his doctrine in mind and will, who is supposed
to join with his belief in Jesus Christ, other errors sufficiently propounded
to be repugnant against Gods word, or Revelation? Can submission in mind or
will, or observation of his Commandments stand with actual voluntary error
against his word? Is it not a prime Commandment to believe Gods word? Do not
your self affirm, that it is Infidelity to deny whatsoever is revealed in
Scripture? How then can a Church be said to have means for salvation and life,
wherein is wanting Faith the first ground of salvation? The Fathers sometimes
called the Donatists, Brethren, by reason of their true Baptism, not for their
possibility to be saved, according as S. Augustine said to them: The Sacraments
of Christ Epist. 48.
do not make thee an Heretic, but thy wicked disagreement. And Optatus says:
You cannot Lib. 4^
but be our brethren, whom the same Mother the Church has begotten in the same
bowels of Sacraments, whom God our Father has in the same manner received as
adopted Children; namely, on his behalf, and for as much as concerns the
virtue of Baptism. The Conclusion of your discourse may well beseem the
doctrine for which you bring it: A learned man Page 122.
anciently was made a Bishop of the Catholic Church, although he did
professedly doubt of the last Resurrection of our bodies. You might have added,
that he would not believe that the world should ever have an end; and further
absolutely refused to be baptized: And that he would not, as the History
recou^teth, live a single life as other Priests, but that he would live with a
wife. For Synesius, who is the man you mean, publicly protested all these
things; and you are wise enough to take only what might seem to serve your
turn, as this, concerning the single lives of Priests did not, because it
shows that in those ancient times, Priests could not live with wives. And now
I ask, whether in good earnest you believe, that one may be made a Bishop, who
will not believe the Resurrection, nor will be baptized, or whether he may be
baptized against his will? The Answer therefore may be seen in Baronius, who
Anno 410. n. 6. Spond.
demonstrates out of the Epistles of Synesius himself, that he did these
things, not to be made a Bishop, wishing (as he affirms) rather to dye, then
to endure so great a burden; wherein says Baronius he seems only to have done
in words, that which S. Ambrose pretended in deeds, which was to be esteemed
incontinent, and unmerciful, so to hinder his being made Bishop. But these
extraordinary proceedings may be admired, but ought not to be imitated. To say,
that the ten Tribes, notwithstanding their Idolatries, remained still a true
Church; cannot but make any Christian soul tremble, to consider to what
damnable absurdities, and impieties they fall who leave the Roman Church. You
falfify Magallanus In Tit. 3.11.
as if he with M. Hooker affirmed, that, If an Infidel Page 117.
should pursue to death an Heretic, only for Christian professions sake, the
honor of Martyrdom could not be denied to him: which is contrary to the words
and meaning of Magallanus. For he expressly teaches, that they do not
participate of the grace of the Church, but are dead parts, and consequently
not capable of salvation: Only he says, that they may be called members of the
Church, because the Church can judge and punish them. It is impossible that any
Catholic Author should teach, that an Heretic, remaining an Heretic,
(that is, actually and voluntarily, denying a revealed Truth sufficiently
propounded for such) can be a Martyr. But such as you are may affirm what you
please. The words of Saluianus De Gnbern. lib. ^.
which you cite, and say, that they are very remarkable, do only signify by way
of doubt, whether some of the Heretics of whom he spoke, and who in
simplicity followed their Teachers (as he expressly says) may not be excused by
ignorance. And since you affirm, that he speaks of Arians, I would know,
whether you do not think Arianisme to be a damnable Heresy, unless accidentally
ignorance excuse some particular persons.

7. You say, that Page 131.
the Errors of the Donatists concerning the inualidity of the Baptism given by
Heretics, and of the Nouatians, that the Church ought not to absolve some
grievous sinners, were not in themselves heretical etc. Neither was it in the
Churches intention (or in her power) to make them such by her declaration. If
these errors neither in themselves, nor by the declaration of the Church be
heretical, I pray you, how are they heretical? May a man in these times hold
them without note of Heresy? So you must say, unless you grant the definitions
of Gods Church to be infallible. For S. Augustine professes, that this point
concerning rebaptization cannot be determined out of Scripture alone, as has
been said before. Or if you say, this Error may be confuted out of Scripture,
then you must grant that it is in it self heretical, which you deny. But no
wonder if by denying the infallibility of the Church, you be brought to such
straytes. I go on now to the next.

CHAP. V.
IN this Section, you handle three points. First, that the Church is infallible
only in fundamental points. Secondly, that the General Councels; and,
Thirdly, that the Pope may err in points fundame^tall. Concerning the first, I
have spoken in the first Part; the second and third, are particular disputes,
from which you ought to have abstained, if you had meant to have touched indeed
the point of our Controversy. But since you will needs fill you Book with such
particulars, I must also go out of the way, to answer your objections.

2. If I took pleasure, as you do, to fill my Margent with quotations of
Authors, I could easily show how you mistake and wrong our Schoolmen; as if
they held that something which in it self is not infinite, but really distinct
from the divine Authority, were the chief Motive of faith, the first and
furthest principle into which it resolves: whereas their difference is only in
explicating under what precise and formal consideration, God is the formal
object of faith: some assigning the Divinity it self; others, the authority of
God commanding; others, which is the common opinion, teaching, that it is
resolved into the divine, or Prime Verity: and lastly even those whom it
seems you call unwise, and vnwarry Writers against Luther, do not teach that
the Authority of the Church is the chiefest, first, and furthest principle into
which faith resolves; but at the most, that her Proposition is necessary to an
Act of divine faith; either because they conceive that matter of faith ought to
concern the common good of Religion, and so require a public Authority or
Propounder; or else because they hold that her Proposition in some sort enters
into the formal object of faith in respect of us; Neither are the Authors of
this opinion only Writers against Luther, as you say, but diverse other
Schoole-Deuines.

3. Whereas you say, that there is no question but that Faith is supernatural,
in regard of the Efsicient Cause, and of the Object, both which ought to be
supernatural; it seems you are willing to dissemble the doctrine of your
great Reformer Zwinglius, who Tom. 2. exposit. fidei Christianae fol. 159.
out of his excessive Charity, placed in heaven, Hercules, Theseus, Socrates,
Aristides etc. (who had no supernatural Faith, nor belief of God) as also the
Children of the Heathens dying without Tom. 2. fol. 540.
Baptism. Were not such Charitable men, very fit to reform the Church?

4. You fall again upon the sufficiency of Scripture, which point I have
already answered, and showed in what sense all points of faith may be contained
in Scripture; to wit, in as much as the Scripture does recommend to us the
Church, and divine unwritten Traditions. Neither can you allege any one
Catholic Author, ancient or modern, who speaking of the sufficiency of
Scripture, excludes Tradition, by which even Scripture it self is delivered to
us. And as for S. Augustine, and S. Basil whom you allege for the sufficiency
of Scripture, they be so clearly for Tradition, that they have been taxed by
some Protestants for that cause; as likewise for the same reason some chief
Protestants have blamed Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, Ambrose,
Hierome, Maximus, Theophilus, Damascene, Chrysostom, Tertullian, Cyprian, Leo,
Eusebius, and others, as may be seen in Tract. 1. Sect. 3. Subd. 22.
Brereley. But though Scripture alone did particularly contain all points
necessary to saluarion; does it follow, think you, from thence, that the
Church is not infallible? May not both Scripture, and Church be infallible in
what they deliver? Does not your self grant, that the Church is infallible for
points fundamental; and for the same points the Scripture is also sufficient,
and clear? Which cuidently shows, that you cannot deny, but that the
Infallibility of the Church, may well stand with the sufficiency of Scripture,
and consequently to oppose either the Scripture or Church, is sufficient to
make one an Heretic: and this is sufficient for our purpose. Yea, since you
cannot deny, but that it is Heresy, to oppose the Scripture, and that you also
grant that the Scripture affirms the Church to be infallible in fundamental
points, it follows, that even according to you, every one who opposes the
Church in such points is an Heretic, even because he opposes the Church;
although the further reason heerof be, because he opposes the Scripture, which
recommends the Church. So that all which you have said about the sufficiency of
Scripture alone, is in diverse respects nothing to the purpose.

5. You affirm, that Page 136
Eckius, Pighius, Hosius, Turrianus, Costerus, do every where in their writings
speak wickedly, and contumeliously of the holy Scriptures. And because this is
a common slander of Protestants against Catholic Writers; I do here
challenge you to produce but one, I say, but one only place, either out of any
one of these whom you name, or any other Catholic Doctor, who speaks
wickedly or contumeliously against holy Scriptures. But be sure you do not
confound speaking against Scripture it self, with speaking against the abuse
thereof, or against the letter of Scripture wrested to some heretical sense;
against which our Authors speak, and cannot speak too much. And S. Hierome
with other Father do the same.

6. You proceed, and say: The Testimony Page 139.
of the present Church works very powerfully and probably, first upon Infidels
to win them to a Reverend opinion of Faith and Scriptures etc. Secondly, upon
Nouices, weaklings, and doubters in the faith, to instruct and confirm them,
till they may acquaint themselves with, and understand the. Scriptures, which
the Church delivers as the word of God. Thirdly, upon all within the Church, to
prepare, induce, and persuade the Mind as an outward means to embrace the
faith, to read, and believe the Scriptures. But the faith of a Christian finds
not in all this, any sure ground whereon finally to rest, or settle it self:
Because, divine Faith requires a Testimony absolutely divine, and yet, our
Adversaries yield that the Testimony of the present Church is not absolutely
divine, (to which purpose you cite in your Margent some of our Authors) and
therefore it cannot rely upon the Church.

7. This your discourse is neither pertinent, nor true. For the Question is
not, as I have often told you, whether or no, our faith be resolved into the
Authority of the Church: but whether we may not truly infer, that whosoever
resists the Church in those points which she does infallibly propose as
revealed by God (which infallibility you yield to her for all fundamental
points) be not an Heretic, because at lest by resisting the Church, he
consequently comes to oppose the Testimony or Reuclation of God, which is the
formal object of Faith. Besides, if the Testimony of the Church work but
probably upon Infidels, and Nouices, who by you are taught to believe that she
may err (unless you will circumuent them, by dissembling her fallibility) they
will have wit enough to tell themselves, that since she may err, and speaks
but probably, she cannot work so powerfully upon them, but that they may still
doubt whether she do not actually err, and deceive them. And how can the
Church work upon all within her, to prepare, induce, and persuade the mind to
embrace the faith, to read and believe Scriptures? Are they within the Church
before they have embraced the Faith? Or must they want faith till they read,
and believe the Scriptures? Or rather (since according to your Principles all
faith depends on Scripture) must they not believe the Scripture, before they
embrace the faith, and consequently before they be in the Church? How then does
the Church prepare, induce, and persuade them that are within her, to embrace
the faith, and to read, and believe the Scriptures? If our faith must rest and
settle only upon the Written Word of God, how does S. Irenaeus Lib. 3. cap. 4.
affirm, that many Nations have been converted to Christ without Scriptures?
Were they converted only to an humane faith?

8. And whereas you say, that the Authority of the Church is not absolutely
divine, and therefore cannot be the last, and formal Object of faith, it is but
an Equivocation, and you infer that which we do not deny. Coninck whom you cite
in your Margent, and translated by halues, answers your Objection in the very
words which you allege. Although (says he) the Church Disp. 9. dub. 5.
conel. 2.
be directed by the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, and in that sense
her Testimony do in some sort rely upon the divine Authority, and receive from
it strength (all which words you do not translate) yet it is not truly, or
properly the Testimony or word, and revelation of God, but properly it is a
humane Testimony. You see then, that the Testimony of the Church in some sense
is Divine, that is, infallibly directed by the holy Ghost; which is enough for
our purpose, although it be not Divine in another sense, that is, her words are
not the immediate voice of God, as Scriptures are, because she does not propose
any new Revelations, made immediately to her, but only infallibly declares what
Revelations have been made to Prophets, Apostles, etc. Your self affirm,
that the Church is infallible in Fundamental points, and consequently her
Testimony is not merely humane and fallible, and yet it is not absolutely
divine; and so you must answer your own Argument: and you must grant that the
Church being infallible in some points, may be to us a ground sufficient for
our infallible assent, or belief for such Articles. And if you will tell us
that faith must be resolved into some Authority which is absolutely Divine, as
Divine signifies that which is distinct from all things created, you will find
your self gone too far. For Scripture it self, being a thing created, and not
a God, is not Divine in that sense. And the Apostles, who received immediate
Revelations from God, when afterward they did preach, and declare them to
others; those Declarations, (which supposed the Revelations already made) were
not in the opinion of many Deuines, the testimony or word of God, but of men
infallibly assisted by God: And yet I hope you will not hence infer, that it
had not been Heresy to oppose the Declarations of the Apostles, although they
did not preach new Revelations, but only declare, and propound such as had been
already made to them.

9. Your words (which are indeed but words) That Scripture Page 141.
is of divine Authority, the Belieuer sees by that glorious beam of divine
light which shines in Scripture, I confuted heretofore. And what greater
co^futation can there be then by your own words, the Belieuer sees. For if he
see, how does he believe? Or if he belieues, how does he see? Especially since
you say he belieues, and sees, upon the same formal object, or motive. Yet
that Scripture is known by it self, you prove out of Bellarmine, who saych:
That the Scriptures De verb. Deilib. 1. cap. 2.
which are contained in the Prophetical and Apostolical Writings be most
certain and divine, Scripture it self witnesses. But these words will prove
to be against your self. For Bellarmine in that place disputing against the
Swenckfeldian Heretics, who denied all Scriptures, says: That, he does not
allege Ibid.
Testimonies of Scripture as if he thought that his Adversaries made any great
account of them, but lest the Scriptures, the Authority whereof his Adversaries
did sometimes abuse against us who reverence them, may be thought to favor
their doctrine. Is this to affirm that Scripture is certainly, and evidently
known by Scripture? Or rather contrarily to say, that it must first be
believed, before it be powerful to persuade? And therefore immediately after
the words by you cited which are, The Scripture self witnesses; he adds
these (which you as you are wont, leave out) whose predictions of things to
come if they were true, as the event afterward did manifest, why should not the
Testimonies of things present be true? Where you see, that he proves not the
Scripture by that beam of light which euidenly shines in Scripture, but by
predictions, which we grant to be a good inducement, or, as Divines speak, an
Argument of credibility, and yet no infallible ground of faith to believe that
Scriptures are divine; and much less a beam of light clearly conuincing us,
that Scripture is Scripture. For one may be inspired to prophesy, or speak
truth in some point, and for others be left to humane discourse, or error, as
it happened in Balam, and the friends of Job. And therefore Bellarmine in that
very place, brings other extrinsecall Arguments, as Miracles, exemplar, and
visible strange punishments of such as presumed to abuse holy Scripture etc.
Which evidently shows, that he intended to bring Arguments of Credibility, and
not infallible grounds of faith, whereby we believe that Scripture is Scripture,
which we must take from the infallible Testimony of the Church by means of
Tradition, whereof Bellarmine says: This so necessary a point, to wit, that
Deverb. Dei nonseripro lib. 4. c. 4.
there is some divine Scripture, cannot be had from Scripture it self. Whereby
it is manifest that you plainly corrupt Bellarmines meaning, when you go about
to prove out of him, that Scripture can be proved by Scripture alone, the
contrary whereof he affirms, and proves at large against the Heretics of
these times. The place which you cite of Origin, only proves that those who
already believe the Canonical Books of Scripture may prove out of them, that
Scripture is divinely inspired, as S. Peter Epist. 2. verse. 21.
says. Neither does the Authority of Saluianus prove any thing else.

10. Your saying, that we yield to the Church, an absolute Page 144.145.
unlimited Authority to propound what she pleases, and an unlimited power to
supply the defects of Scripture; I let pass as mere slanders. As also, that
the Authority of the Church is absolute, not Page 144.
depending on Scripture, but on which the Scripture it self depends. And you
cannot be ignorant of that, which has been so often inculcated by Catholic
Writers, that the Scriptures in themselves do not depend on the Church, but
only in respect of us, who learno from her what Books be Canonical Scripture,
which is to say, not the Scriptures, but our weak understanding, and knowledge
of Scripture relies on the Church, which our Savior Christ commandes us to
hear. And your self grant, that the Church Page 142.143.
is the ordinary outward means to present, and propound divine verities to our
Faith. You will not deny that your knowledge of the Trinity, Incarnation etc.
depends on Scripture, will you thence in fer that the Blessed Trinity,
Incarnation etc. in themselves depend on Scripture? as if God had not been God,
unless Scripture had been written. Besides, to such as believe Scripture we
may prove the Church herself by Scripture, and she in all her definitions does
consult, examine, and submit herself to Scripture, against which she never
did, nor ever can define any thing; and in this sense also she depends on
Scripture. But to make good your slander, you Page 144.
cite Bellarmine, after your wonted fashion. If we take away De effect. Sacram.
lib. 2. cap. 25. Tertium testimonium
the Authority of the present Church of Rome, (this of Rome is your addition)
and of the Trent-Councell, the decrees of all other Ancient Councels, and the
whole Christian faith may be questioned as doubtful, for the strength of all
doctrines, and of all Councels depends upon the Authority of the present
Church. Would not one think by these words that the strength of all doctrines
depe^ds on the Church? whereas Bellarmine only says, that we could not
infallibly know, that there were such General Councels, and that they were law
full Councels, and that they defined this or that; but because the present
Church which cannot err does so believe, and teach us. Which words
demonstrate, that Bellarmine does not speak of faith, or doctrines in
themselves, but in respect of us. And do not you your self teach that it is
the Church, which directs us to Scripture, and that she likewise is the
ordinary outward means to present, and propound divine Verities, without which
Propesition no object can be conveyed to our Page 142.143.
faith? And what is this, but to acknowledge, that in the ordinary way, without
the guidance, direction, and Proposition of the Church we have no faith at all.

11. You ^ikewise cite these words out of De Eccles. mil. lib. 3. cap. 10. Ad
haec necesse est.
Bellarmine: The Scriptures, Traditions, and all doctrines whatsoever depend on
the Testimony of the Church (he means say you, that of Rome) without which all
are wholly uncertain. But Bellarmines words are these: Since the Scriptures,
Traditions, and all doctrines whatsoever depend upon the Testimony of the
Church, all things willbe vncertaync, unless we be most assured which is the
true Church. You see Bellarmine speaks not of the particular Church of Rome,
as you in your Pare^thesis would make him seem to speak. And as for the
Universal true Church, what principle of Atheis. me is it, (as you very
exorbitantly page 145
affirm) to say, that if we did not know which were the true Church, we could
have no certainty of Scriptures, Traditions, or any thing else? Do you think
that it were safe to take the Scriptures upon the credit of a false Church? As
well might you take them upon the credit of Turks, or Infidels. And therefore,
not the Assertion of Bellarmine, but the contrary to it, is a plain principle
of Atheism. Do not you prove the necessity of a perpetual visible true
Church, because other wise men should want that ordinary means which God has
appointed for our instruction, Direction, and Salvation? Now, if we might have
Scriptures, and true Faith from a false Church, your more zealous Brethren, who
deny a perpetual visible true Church, might easily answer all your Arguments,
and tell you, that a true Church is not necessery for faith, and Salvation. And
besides, is it not in effect all one to say (for as much as concerns our
instruction) Christ has no visible Church; and to say, that we cannot know
which is the true visible Church of Christ? All the infallibility which we
ascribe to the Church, is acknowledged to proceed from the assistance of God;
how can he be said not to believe a God, who belieues the Church, because she
is assisted by God? Remember that even now I told you, that according to your
own affirmation, the Church is the ordinary means whereby Divine Truth is
conveyed to the understanding: and yet you think your self free from
Atheism. The Apostles of themselves, were but mortal, frail, and subject to
error, and yet I hope, you will not think it a Principle of Atheism to say,
that all our faith depends on them.

12. You tax us for teaching, that much of the Matter, or Object of faith is
not contained in Scripture any way. But I have already more then once said,
that we believe nothing but what is contained in Scripture in some sort, either
in it self, or from some Principle from which it may be certaynely deduced, or
in those places of Scripture which reco^mend the Church, and unwritten
Traditions to us; as if one should in his last Testament express diverse
particulars, and should in the same Testament refer the rest to some third
person, whom be had fully instructed concerning his further will, and meaning;
whatsoever things were performed according to the direction of that third
person, might truly be said to be contained in the Testament; although they
might also be say not to be contained therein, because they are not mentioned
in particular. And according to this explication, Canus, and Stapleton whom
you cite, and other Catholics are to be understood, when they teach, that we
believe diverse things not comprehended in Scripture.

13. But you ask, with what ingenuity Page 146.
or conscience do they pretend Scripture in each Controversy against us, since
by their own Confession many of their Assertions are mere unwritten
Traditions, leaning only on the Authority of their Church? I answer, that some
points of faith are expressly contained in Scripture, yet not so enforcingly as
they might not be colourably eluded, if we took away the declaration of the
Church. Some others, are not contained in Scripture, any other way then in the
general principles of the Churches authority, and divine Traditions; as, for
example, that such Books in particular are Canonical writings. Some others
ar^ comprehended in Scripture, only probably. Others are contained so clearly,
that they may seem sufficiently evident to a man not perverse; and according
to these diversities we do more or less allege Scripture. If one were
disposed to use such Arguments as you bring, I might ask on the other side, to
what purpose do you allege Councels, Fathers, and Reasons, if out of Scripture
alone you can convince all errors against your doctrine? May not diverse
arguments be rightly alleged to prove the self same Conclusion?

14. Once again, you return to the sufficiency of only Scripture (that is,
you return to speak nothing which concerns the Question in hand) which you
prove out of Bellarmine, though heerin (say you) as not seldom (...) 14.
contradicting both himseife, and his fellows. How consonant the writings of
Bellarmine are, both to themselves, and to the common doctrine of other
Catholic Authors, this may serve for a sufficient proof, that all his
Adversaries could never show yet in all his works any one contradiction, but
such as themselves had first forged, and then objected. And although in this
general cause I do not willingly meddle with personal things: yet that you
may learn hereafter to speak with more circumspection, but chiefly for the
merit of a person, so eminent in learning and dignity, and yet more eminent in
sanctity, I will not forbear to assure the world and you, that when some
years since, a perion of high authority in the world, had made himself beneue
that he had discovered many contradictions in Bellarmine, D. Dunne in a
conference that he had with a person of Honor and Worth, from whom I received
it, though I hold it not fit here to give his name, declared that there was no
ground for this, but that all his works were so consonant and coherent to one
another, as if he had been able to write them all in one hours space. And if
you, D. Potter, be of another opinion, you shall do well to produce some
insta^ce to the contrary, which may show a real contradiction between some
passage, and some other of his works, wherein it is odds that you will be
answered, and he be defended. Let us see also for the present what you bring to
make good your asseueration. The Cardinal (say you) grants Bellarm. deverb.
Dei interpret. cap. 10. ad arg. 1^.
that a Proposition is not de fide, unless it be concluded in this Syllogism:
Whatsoever God page 145.
revealed in the Scripture is true: but this or that, God has revealed in
Scripture: ergo, it is true. If matters of faith must be revealed in Scripture,
as this reason supposes, then the Proposal of the Church cannot make any
unwritten Verity to become matter of faith: yet to salve the sovereign power
of his Church, he makes all the strength, and truth in this Syllogism to
depend on the Testimony of the Church, and by consequence the truth of the
Conclusion, which ever resembles the weaker premisse. So as if this be true,
there is no truth in the Scriptures, or in our Religion, without the
attestation of the Church. But now how many corruptions, sleights, and untruths
are couched in these lines? Let us examine them a little. Bellarmine having
taught, and proved at large, that the interpretation of holy Scripture belongs
not to private persons, but to the Church of God, which, in respect of us, is
to judge of Scripture, and of all other Controversies in Religion: and having
made this Objection against himself; If our faith depend Vbi supra
upon the Judgment of the Church, then it depends upon the word of men, and
therefore does rely upon a most weak foundation; he gives this answer: The
word of the Church, that is, of the Council or Pope, when he teaches as out
of his Chair, is not merely the word of man; that is, a word subject to error,
but in some sort the word of God; that is, uttered by the assistance, and
direction of the holy Ghost: nay I say, that the Heretics are those who
indeed lean on a rotten staff: And then he comes to the words which you
cited: For we must know that a Proposition of Faith is concluded in this
Syllogism: Whatsoever God has revealed in Scripture is true: God has
revealed this in Scripture: ergo it is true. Of the premises in this
Syllogism, the first is most certain among all; the second is most firm, or
certain among Catholics, for it relies on the Testimony of the Church,
Council, or Pope (here you break off, but Bellarmine ads) of which we have
in holy Scripture manifest promises that they cannot err. Act. 15. It has
seemed to the Holy Ghost, and to us: And Luke 22. I have prayed for thee, that
thy faith may not fail. But amongst Heretics it does rely only upon
conjectures, or the Judgment of ones own spirit, which for the most part
seems good, and is ill; and since the Conclusion follows the weaker part, it
necessarily follows, that the whole faith of Heretics, is but coniecturall,
and uncertain. Thus far Bellarmine. And now wherein I pray you consists his
contradicting both himself, and his fellows? Perhaps you mean, because here
he teaches that every Proposition of faith must be revealed in Scripture; and
therefore contradicts his other doctrine, that besides Scripture there are
unwritten Traditions. But the vanity of this objection will by and by appear
among your other corruptions, which now I set down. First, you see Bellarmines
speaks not of faith in general, but only of matters of faith contained in
Scripture, his whole question being about the Interpretation thereof, that is.
Whether we are to rely on the private spirit, or humane industry of conferring
places etc. or else upon the Church. And therefore; Secondly, he says not, as
you cite him in a different letter, by way of an universal negation, that a
Proposition is not de fide, or not belonging to faith, unless it be concluded in
this Syllogism: Whatsoever God has revealed in the Scripture is true: but
this, or that God has revealed in Scripture etc. (from whence it would follow
that nothing at all could be believed which is not contained in Scripture) but
he only says that a Proposition of faith is concluded in this Syllogism;
which includes no universal negation, but is meant only of those Propositions
of faith which depend on the interpretation of Scripture, which was the subject
of his discourse. And therefore I wonder why you should say in general; this
reason supposes that matters of faith must be revealed in Scripture. For, to
teach that some matters of faith are in Scripture, does not suppose that all
matters of faith must be contained in Scripture, and yet all the contradiction
that here you find in Bellarmine must be this: Such Propositions of faith as
are contained in Scripture, are concluded in this Syllogism: Whatsoever God
has revealed in the Scripture etc. Ergo all Propositions of faith must be
concluded in this Syllogism; Ergo there are no unwritten Traditions. A goodly
contradiction! Thirdly, where did Bellarmine ever teach that the Proposal of
the Church can make any unwritten Verity to become matter of faith, as you
speak? The Church does not make Verities to be matter of faith, but only
declares them to be such. Fourthly, you leave out the words which clearly
explicate in what sense the Testimony of the Church may be said to be humane,
or divine; by which your Argument to prove that the declaration of the Church
cannot be a sufficient ground of faith, had been answered, and your fallacy
discovered. Fifihly, Bellarmine never affirmed, as you say he did, that the
strength and truth of the Minor in the said Syllogism depends on the Testimony
of the Church, but only that it is most certain among Catholics by the
Testimony of the Church, because, as I have often said, the Church cannot make
any one Article to be true, but only by her declaration can make it certain to
all Catholics, as Bellarmine said. Sixthly, you leave out Bellarmines words,
whereby he proves the infallibility of Church and Pope out of Scripture; and
accordingly in the Scauenth place, that which he expressly says of the
uncertain coniecturall ground of Heretics, which can produce only a
coniecturall and uncertain Faith, because the Conclusion follows the weaker
part you make him apply to the Testimony of the Church as if it were
uncertain, which contrarily in the words by you omitted he proves to be most
certain and infallible; and therefore the Conclusion which relies upon a
Proposition delivered by her, is not subject to error. Eighthly, you return to
the slander, that if Bellarmines doctrine be true, there is no truth in the
Scriptures, or in our Religion, without the attestation of the Church: as if
Bellarmine had taught, that the truth of Scripture, and of all Christian
Religion depends on the attestation of the Church which could not in you
proceed from ignorance, but from a purpose to deceive your Reader. For
Bellarmine in that very place which you cite, declares himself so fully and
clearly that you cannot be excused from wilful slander. I will put down the
place at large, that hereafter you, and your Brethren may either cease to make
the same Objection, or else endeavor to confute the Cardinals answer.
Bellarmine then, makes this objection against himself: If the Pope judge of
Scriptures, it follows that the Pope or Council is above the Scripture: and
if the meaning of Scripture without the Pope or Council be not authentical,
it follows that the word of God takes his force and strength from the word of
men: And then he gives this Answer: I answer, that this Argument of which
Heretics make greatest account, consists in a mere Equivocation. For it may
be understood two manner of ways that the Church does judge of Scriptures: the
one, That she should judge whether that which the Scripture teaches be true, or
false: The other, That putting for a most certain ground, that the words of
Scripture are most true, she should judge what is the true interpretation of
them. Now, if the Church did judge according to the former way, she should
indeed be above the Scripture, but this we do not say, though we be calumniated
by the Heretics as if we did, who every where cry out, that we put the
Scripture under the Popes Feet. But that the Church or Pope does judge of
Scriptures in the latter sense, which we affirm, is not to say, that the
Church is above Scripture, but above the sudgment of private persons. For the
Church does not judge of the Truth of Scripture, but of the understanding of
thee, and me, and others. Neither does the word of God receive strength
thereby, but only my understanding receives it. For the Scripture is not more
true or certain, because it is so expounded by the Church; but my Opinion is
truer, when it is confirmed by the Church. What say you now? Does Bellarmine
teach, that the Truth, or certainety of Scripture, or of the Minor in the
foresaid Syllogism, depe^ds on the Church? But in the mean time how many
corruptions have you committed in this one Citation?

15. You cite page 149.
Wald^^si to prove that the Walden. lib. 2. Doct. fid. art. 2. cap. 19.. 1.
infallibility of the Church is planted only in the Church universal or the
Catholic Body of Christ on earth, comprehending all his members. But though
we cannot allow of Waldensis his doctrine in some points, wherein he contradicts
the consent of other Catholics; yet he does not teach what you affirm, but
only that the infallibility of the Church consists in the succession of Doctors
in the Church, which is against your assertion ( Page 150.) that the whole
Militant Church (that is, all the members of it) cannot possibly err etc. And
therefore the doctrine of Waldensis is sufficient for our maine Question against
you, that whosoever erreth in any one point delivered by Doctors and Pastors
succeeding one another in the visible Church, is an Heretic, and without
repentance cannot be saved, whether the point be of it self fundamental, or
not fundamental. For Waldensis makes no such distinction, as you do: Nay,
which is directly against your present Assertion here, and your doctrine else
where, this Author ( doctrinal. fidei tom. 1. Art. 2. cap. 47.) having prefixed
this Title before that Chapter; That the Pope has infringible power to
determine verities of faith, and to overcome and cancel all heretical
falsities; does in the whole Chapter it self prosecute and prove the said
Title out of the Fathers. And to the next Chapter 48. having also given this
Title: Of the Prerogative of the perpetual immunity, and purity of the Roman
Church from all contagion of Heresy; he proves it in like manner through the
whole Chapter. You must therefore be well advised how you cite Authors out of
one place, without considering, or enquiring what they say in another.

16. Together with Waldensis, you cite Syluester, saying: The Church which is
Summa verb. Ecclesia cap. 1.. 4.
affirmed not to be capable of error, is not the Pope, but the Congregation of
the faithful. But this is a plain falsification. For in that very place he
teaches; That the Pope using the Council of Cardinals, or his members, cannot
err, but may err as he is a particular person. And then adds: In this manner
is to be understood the Gloss, Cause. 24. q. 1. can. a recta. which says the
Church which cannot err is not the Pope, but the Congregation of the
faithful. So as you see that these are not the words of Syluester, as you
affirm, but of another, which yet he interprets plainly against you. And that
you may be wholly inexcusable, he does here refer himself to another place,
namely, Verb. Concilium.. 3. where he expressly proves, that a Council cannot
err, no more then the Church, because if the Council could err, the whole
Church might err. For the Church does not meet together, but only the
Council, or the Pope. Adding further, that the doctrine of the Church upon
which S. Thomas says we are to rely as upon an infallible Rule, is no other
then that of the Council. And as for the Pope, he says, that we must not
stand to the Popes declaration, because he has better reasons then can be
alleged to the contrary; but because he is Head of the Church, whose office is
to determine doubts in faith. And a little after he expressy says: That the
Pope cannot err when recourse is made to him in doubtful matters as to the
Head of the Church, because (says he) this error would redound to the error
of the whole Church. And likewise in this very place of Syluester which you
cite, he also referres himself to Verb. fides.. 2. where at large he proves
the Popes infallibility, saying: That it belongs to faith, that we rely upon
the Popes determination in things belonging to faith or manners, because the
Church cannot err in such things, and consequently he, as head of the Church,
that is, as he is Pope cannot err, although he determined without advice of
the Cardinals. With what conscience then, do you cite this Author against his
words, meaning, and design and ascribe to him words which he cites out of
another, and, as I said, explicates against you? And with the like fidelity,
after Syluester, you do strangely allege the Gloss Cause. 24 can. a recta with
an, Et, as if the words which you cited out of Syluester (The Church which
cannot err is not the Pope etc.) had been different from that Gloss, whereas
they are nothing but that Gloss, and not the words of Syluester.

17. They (you mean Catholic Doctors) grant, that the infallibility of the
Church reaches not page 14^.
to all questions and points in Religion that may arise, but only to such
Articles as may belong to the substance of faith, such as are matters
essential and fundamental, simply necessary for the Church to know and
believe. To omit others D. Stapleton is full Princip. Doctr. lib 8. contr. 4.
cap. 15.
and punctual to this purpose. He distinguishes Controversies of Religion
into two sorts. Some, says he, are about those doctrines of faith which
necessarily pertayne to the public faith of the Church; others about such
matters as do not necessarily belong to the faith, but may be variously held,
and disputed without hurt or prejudice of faith. Here is such a Caos of words,
and corruptions, as I scarce know where to begin to unfold them. Stapleton in
the place by you alleged has this Assertion. The infallibility of teaching in
matters of faith, granted to the Church, has place only in defining
infallibly, and proposing faithfully those doctrines of faith, which either are
called in question, or otherwise belong necessarily to the public faith of
the Church. And afterward he affirms, that those things belong necessarily to
faith, and public doctrine of the Church which all men are bound explicitly
to believe, or else are publicly practiced by the Church, or else which the
Pastors are bound to believe explicitly, and the people implicitly in the
faith of their Pastors. By which words it is clear that Stapleton says not,
that the infallibility of the Church reaches only to such Articles as are
matters essential, and fundamental, and simply necessary for the Church, to
know and believe, as you affirm; but to all points which are called in
question, or which are publicly practiced by the Church, whether they be
fundamental, or not fundamental: and therefore you do misalledge him when you
say, that, he distinguishes Controversies of Religion into two sorts: Some are
about those doctrines of faith, which necessarily pertain to the public
faith of the Church etc. For Stapleton explicates himself, as you have heard,
that whatsoever is called in question, or practiced by the Church, is the
Object of her infallibility, which is the thing we intend to prove against
Protestants; that to oppose, or question any one doctrine, or practice of the
Church is to resist an infallible Authority, and consequently to be an
Heretic. And that Stapleton never dreamed of your imaginary restraining the
infallibility of the Church to points fundamental, is clear by another place
which you Page 40
cite as out of S. Thomas and him, in this manner: Some are primitive Articles,
of the substance of Religion, essential in the object of faith. Others are
secundary, probable, accidental, or obscure points. For Stapleton in that
place says, that certain doctrines Staplet. Rel. controu. 1. q. 3. art. 6.
are either primary Principles of faith, or else, though not primary, yet
defined by the Church, and so, as if they were primary. Others are Conclusions
deduced from those principles, but yet not defined. Of the first kind are the
Articles of faith, and whatsoever is defined in Councels against Heretics
etc. Of the second, are questions, which either belong to the hidden works of
God, or to certain most obscure places of Scripture, which are beside the
faith, and of which we may be ignorant without loss of faith, yet they may be
modestly, and fruitfully disputed of. And afterward he teaches, that whatsoever
the Church does universally hold, either in doctrine or manners, belongs to the
foundation of faith: and proves it out of S. Augustine Sermon. 14. de verbis
Domini. ep. 28.89.96.
who calls the Custom of the Church, Ecclesiae morem fundatissimu^ and sidem
fundatissimam, consu^^udinem Ecclesiae fundatissima^, authoritatem sta
bilissima^ fundatissimae ecclesiae. Could any thing be more clear to show,
that according to Stapleton, the infallibility of the Church reaches further
then to those points which you call fundamental, and that it belongs to the
very foundation of Faith, that we believe whatsoever the Church holds? And that
it is not lawful for any to dispute against such determinatio^s of the Church?
Which does overthrow your distinction of points fundamental and not
fundamental; though you allege the authority of S. Thomas and Stapleton in
favor thereof. For S. Thomas 2.2. q. 2. are. 5.
in the very place by you cited, after he had said, that there are some objects
of faith which we are bound explicitly to believe; adds; that we are bound
to believe all other points, when they are sufficiently propounded to us, as
belonging to faith. You might gain more reputation to your self, and allow
your adversary more ease, if you would once resolve to cite your Authors with
more sincerity.

18. To prove, that the infallibility of the Church extends only to
fundamental points, you also allege Maldonatus, who says: That he will not
repugne In Joan. 24.26.
if one will affirm, that those words 10.14. verse. 16. He shall teach you all
things; be referred to those other words; Whatsoever I have spoken to you: as
if our Savior did say, that the holy Ghost was to teach the^ nothing, but that
which he himself had taught them. But do you in good earnest believe, that our
Savior taught the Aposlles fundamental points alone, which all Christians are
bound explicitly to believe? Or will you say, the Apostles were infallibly
assisted only when they delivered fundamental points of faith? So you must
say, if Christ did teach them only points fundamental, and the holy Ghost
taught them only those things which Christ had taught them, unless you will
say, they were infallible without the assistance of the holy Ghost. You see he
had good reason to say, that First Part. cap. 2. number. 13.
by denying the universal infallibility of the Church, and limiting the
promises of Christ made to her, you opened a gap for men to say that the A
postles in their Preaching and Writing were not universally infallible. And
here I ask, whether it be not a fundamental error against faith, and
Salvation, to deny the truth of any one point sufficiently propounded as
revealed by God? and since without question it is so, you must either grant,
that the Church can err fundamentally and damnably against faith, which yet
your self deny; or else you must yield that her infallibility reaches to all
points sufficiently propounded as divine Truths, whether they be in themselves
fundamental, or not fundamental, which is as much as we desire.

19. Against the infallibility of the Church you bring a long argument, ( page
157.158.) the force whereof is this: Nothing according to us can be believed by
divine faith which has not been defined by the Church: But the Church has
not defined that she is infallible in all her decrees: Therefore we cannot
believe by divine faith that she is infallible in all her decrees.

20. Before I answer your Argument, I must reflect that you do not sincerely
allege these words out of Bellarmine; Until Lib. 4. de Roman. Pont. cap. 14.
Respondeo inprimis.
a doctrine be declared or defined by the Church, so long it might be either
doubted of, or denied without danger. For Bellarmine makes no such general
Rule, but only speaking of the opinion of Pope John the two and twentieth; That
the Saints do not see God before the Resurrection (which is your own error)
he excuses him from Heresy, because at that time the Church had not defined
the matter. Where you see Bellarmine speaks only of a particular point; which
that Pope not conceauing to be contained in Scripture, and the thing having not
been expressly defined by the Church nor evidently known to have been the
universal sense thereof; it was not at that time a matter of faith. And he
himself before his death retracted his error. But to come to your Argument, I
wish you would be carfull not to object against us, what your self must
answer. For do not you teach, that the Church works upon all Page 139.
within her, to prepare, induce, and persuade the mind to embrace the faith, to
read and believe the Scriptures? And that the ordinary means Page 142.143.
appointed by God to present, and propound divine Verities, is the Church? And
therefore we cannot in the ordinary course believe Scriptures, or any other
divine Verity, but by the Proposal of the Church. But this doctrine (that the
Church is the first Inducer to embrace the faith, and the ordinary Means
without which we cannot believe) is not proposed by the Church, and therefore
it is not a thing which we can believe. You likewise grant that the Church is
infallible in all fundamental points. And I ask in what decree, definition,
or declaration has the Church proposed to us, that her self cannot err in
fundamental points, especially with your addition, that she may err in points
not fundamental? Now, to your Argument I an were: First; That it is not
necessary, that the Church should by any particular decree testify her own
infallibility, because it being evident that she is the self same Church which
was founded by our Savior Christ, and continued from the Apostles to this Age,
by a never interrupted succession of Pastors, and faithful people; it
follows that she is the Church of Christ: which being once granted, it is
further inferred, that all are obliged to have recourse to her, and to rest in
her judgment for all other particular points which concern faith, or
Religion; which we could not be obligd to do, if we were persuaded, that she
were subject to error. Which yet is more evident, if we add, that there can be
no Rule given in what points, we should believe her, and in what not: and
therefore we are obliged to believe her in all. Moreover, since the true Church
must be Judge of Controversies in faith, as we have proved, it clearly follows
that she must be infallible in all points. Which vmuersall infallibility being
supposed out of the general ground of Gods providence, which is not defective
in things necessary, we may afterward believe the same infallibility, even by
the Church herself, when she testifies that particular point of her own
infallibility: As the Scripture cannot give Testimony to it self, till first
it be believed to be Gods word, yet this being once presupposed, it may
afterward give Testimony to it self, as S. Paul affirms, that, All Scripture
is divinely 2. Tim. 3.16.
inspired etc. Secondly I answer, that the Church has many ways declared her
own infallibility. which she professes even in the Apostles Creed, I believe
the holy Catholic Church. For she could not be holy, if she were subject to
error in matters of faith, which is the first foundation of all sanctity; she
could not be Catholic, or Universal for all Ages, if at any time she could
err, and be Author that the whole world should err in points revealed by God;
she could not be One, or Apostolical, (as she professes in another Creed) if
she were divided in points of faith, or could swerve from the Doctrine of the
Apostles; she could not be always existent and visible, because every error in
faith destroies all Faith, and the Church. So that while the Church, and every
faithful person, belieues and professes the Sanctity, Universality, Unity, and
Perpetual Visibility of the Church; she, and they believe and proclaim her
infallibility in all matters of faith: which she does also avouch by accursing
all such as believe not her definitions; and while in all occasions of emergent
Controversies, she gathers Councels to determine them, without examining
whether they concern points fundamental, or not fundamental; while in all
such holy Assemblies, she says with the first Council; It has Act. 15.
seemed to the holy Ghost and us, while she proposes diverse points to be
believed, which are not contained in Scripture; as that those who are baptized
by Heretics, cannot without sacrilege be rebaptized; that Baptism of
Infants is lawful; that Easter is to be kept at a certain time against the
Heretics called Quartadecimani; that the Blessed Virgin, the most Immaculate
Mother of God, was eternally a most pure Virgin; that such particular Matter
and Form is necessary for the validity of Sacraments; that such particular
Books, Chapters, and lines are the word of God, with diverse such other points;
of all which we may say, that which S. Augustine said about Rebaptization of
Heretics: The obscurity of this Question Lib. 1. cont. Donat, cap. 7.
before the schism of Donatus did so move mon of great note, and Fathers and
Bishops endued with great Charity, to debate and doubt without breach of peace:
that for a long time in several Regions there were diverse and doubtful
decrees, till that which was truly believed was undoubtedly established by a
full Council of the whole world. And yet the point declared in that Council
was neither fundamental, in your sense, nor contained in Scripture. And to the
same effect are the words of S. Ambrose, who speaking of the Heretics,
condemned in the Council of Nice, says that, They were not condemned by
humane Lib. 1. defid. ad Gratian. cap. 5.
industry, but by the authority of those Fathers: as likewise the last General
Council of Trent defines; That it belongs to the Church 1. Sess. 4.
to judge of the true sense, and interpretation of Scripture, which must needs
suppose her infallibility. And lastly, the thirst that every one, who desires
to save his soul, feels in his soul to find out the true Church; and the
quiet which every one conceiues he shall enjoy, if once he find her, shows
that the very sense, and feeling of all Christians is, that the Church is
infallible. For otherwise what great comfort could any wiseman conceive to be
incorporated in a Church, which is conceived to be subject to error in matters
of faith?

21. For want of better arguments you also allege page 161.
some Authors within the Roman Church of great learning (as you say) who have
declared their opinion, that any particular Churchs, (and by consequence the
Roman) any Councels though General, may err. But though that which you
affirm were true, it would fall short of proving that the Catholic Church is
not infallible in all points. For, besides particular Churches, or General
Councels, there is the common Consent of all Catholics, known by perpetual
sacred Tradition; and there is likewise the continued Succession of Bishops and
Pastors, in which if one should place an universal infallibility, it were
sufficient to overthrow your assertion of the fallibility of the Church. And
even your self teach, that the Church is infallible in all fundamentals, and
yet you affirm that any particular, or General Council may err, even to
Heresy, or Fundamental, and Damnable errors: And therefore you must grant,
that according to your Principles, it is one thing to say, General Councels
may err, and another, that the Catholic Church may err. But yet for the
thing it self, it is a matter of faith, that true General Councels, confirmed
by the Pope, cannot err. And if any hold the contrary, he cannot be excused,
except by ignorance, or inaduertence. And as for the Roman Authors which you
cite, Occham is no competent witness; both because that work of his dialogues
which you cite is condemned, and because he himself was a known enemy, and
rebellious against the sea Apostolic. Besides the words which you cite out of
him against the Authority of Councels are not his opinion, but alleged for
arguments sake, for so he professes expressly in the very preface of that
work, and often repeats it, that he does not intend to deliver any opinion of
his own. Thirdly, whereas he alleges reasons for, and against Councels, he
alleges but fine against them, and seven for them. Lastly before he comes to
dispute against Councels he does in two several Dialog. lib. 5.1. part. cap.
25. etc. 28.
places, and in the very beginning of those Chapters of which the one is by you
cited, deliver his opinion in the person of his Disciple to be directly for the
infallible authority of Councels. So as here is a double corruption, the one,
the citing words for his opinion which are not so: the other, the concealing
those which are his, and directly to the contrary Clemangis his works are
forbidden. That work of Cusanus which you Concord. Cathol.
cite, he afterward retracted. Panormitanus in the place In cap. Significasti.
extra. de Electione.
cited by you, may seem to speak of Counsels, disagreeing from the Pope: and
though he say, that if the Council erred, it did not follow that the whole
Church should err, because the faith might remain in others; yet that does
not convince that he held a General Council together with the Pope might
err: For Canus has the very same Objection and Answer, and yet, as we shall
see anon, he holds it to be a matter of faith, that General Councels confirmed
by the Pope cannot err. Nevertheless if Panormitanus did hold that General
Counsels with the Pope might err, he can only be excused, because he did not
affirm it with pertinacity. Petrus de Aliaco has indeed Quaest. in Vesper.
art. 3.
the words which you cite: but they are not spoken by him as his opinion, but
as the opinion of some others: and so he has also the clean contrary
proposition, viz. that a general Council cannot err, nor even the Remane
Church; which you might as well have alleged for his opinion as the other: but
the truth is, that neither are alleged by him as his own doctrine but as the
opinion of others, as I said, which he expreslly says that he does forbear to
discuss for the present, contenting himself only with these three
Conclusions which express his own opinion. First, that always there is some
Church which is ruled by the law of Christ (which according to his former
explication is as much as to say, that there is always some Church which
cannot err.) The second, that it is not convinced out of Scripture, that any
particular Church is in such manner conformed to the rule of Christ's law. The
third is, that it is convinced out of Scripture, that always there is some
universal Church which never swarues from the rule of Christ. Neither will it
advantage you, that he teaches that any particular Church may err; For as I
have often told you, the Roman Church in the sense which I have heertofore
declared, is all one with the Universal Church, and so his doctrine that the
Universal Church cannot err directly proves, that the Roman cannot err. And
when he teaches, that the Universal Church cannot err, he does not
distinguish betwixt points fundamental, and not fundamental, as you do. You
cite out of Canus these words: I confess Canus loc. lib. 5. c. 5.. At contra.
that every Cenerall Council does represent the whole Church. But when you
urge, that the Church cannot err; it is true in that sense in which faithful
people understand it; which is, that the whole Church together, that is, all
faithful people do not err: But this does not hinder, but that the greater
part of the Church may err. I should scarcely have believed it to be possible
for any man alive who pretends to have credit and common fame to pervert the
sense of this Author, as you do, unless I did see with mine own eyes both what
you write, and indeed what Canus affirms. For in the Chapter next precedent
Cap. 4.. Tertia Co^^lusio.
to that which you cite, he having affirmed, that a General Council confirmed
by the Pope makes a thing certain, and belonging to faith (in respect of us)
adds, that this Conclusion is so certain that the contrary is heretical,
which he proves by diverse good conuincing reasons, and among the rest, that if
such a Council could err, there were no way certain to decide Controversies
of faith. And in the place which you cite afterward, he impugnes their opinion
who affirm that a General Counsel is infallible before it be confirmed by
the Pope, which they endeavored to prove because the Counsel represents the
whole Church, and therefore can err no more then the universal Church it
self. To which Argument he answers in the words which I set down, and which
you allege to prove that Canus held a General Council might err, namely:
(But when you urge that the Church cannot err, it is true in that sense in
which faithful people understand it, which is, that the whole Church together,
that is, all faithful people do not err:) and therefore it is evident that
you bring them directly against his words and meaning, and bring the Objection
for his answer. And besides what we have already related out of him, within
five lines after the words cited by you, he says, The Council would be
infallible if it were confirmed by the Pope. I leave it to your own
consideration, what judgment even you would frame of any other beside your
self, if he should cite Authors in this manner.

22. You have no reason to be so much offended, that we equal divine unwritten
Traditions, with the written word of God. For we have so reverend an opinion of
Gods word, as that whersoeuer we find it, our faith belieues it to be most
infallible: nor can we believe that pen, ink, and paper can add any certainty
to the Truth thereof. Without cause also you accuse the Roman Church of supine
negligence, because she has not as yet given a Catalogue of unwritten
Traditions, as well as of all the Books of Scripture. For you might also
condemn the Ancient Church, which did not for diverse ages deliver any
Catalogue of Canonical Books, which yet afterward, she did as occasion
required. And as the Council of Trent by reason of your heresies, whereby you
denied diverse Canonical Books of Scripture, set down a perfect Canon of
Scripture: so, as just and necessary occasion may require, the holy Ghost by
which she is directed, will not fail to assist her in making a Catalogue of
unwritten Traditions. I cannot find but that your modern Brethren will gladly
admit of some Apostolical Traditions against the Puritans; and why then do
you not make a Catalogue of them, as you have done of the Books of Scripture?
Your famous Archbishop of Canterbury says: For so much as the Original M.
Witgift in his his defense etc. page 351
and beginning of these names, Metropolitan, Archbishop etc. such is their
Antiquity, cannot be found, so far as I have read, it is to he supposed, they
have their Original from the Apostles themselves: for as I remember S.
Augustine has this Rule in his 118. Epistle. And in proof of this Rule of S.
Augustine he adds: It is of credit Vbi sugra page 352.
with the Writers of our time, namely with M. Zwinglius, M. Calvin, M. Gualter;
and surely I think no learned man does dissent from them. Are not I pray you
these, and the like Traditions, upon which your Hierarchy depends, of some
consequence, and worth your labor to put them in a Catalogue? Or do you not
hold the Traditions of the Apostles to be infallible true?

23. It is but a Calumny to affirm, that page 163.
we receive the definitions of the Church, with no less devotion then the holy
Scriptures. For you cite page 169.
that very place of Bellarmine, where he De Cont. l. 2. cap. 12.
sets down at large five singular Prerogatives of the holy Scriptures above
the definitions of the Church, in which respect your fault is less excusable.
It is your own doctrine that the Church is infallible in all fundamentals, and
yet you will not even in respect of such points, equal her Authority with that
of holy Scripture.

24. At length you come to teach that General Councels may err even damnably,
and yet you also teach, that their authority is immediately Page 162
derived from Christ: and that their decrees Ibid.
bind all persons to external Obedience. But will you have men in matters of
faith externally believe themselves, and dissemble against their conscience?
And think that they do so by authority from Christ? The truth is, that you
might as well say, the Church is invisible, as to say, that her infallibility
consists not in General Councels, but in this, that every member of the Church
cannot err damnably: For, toward the effect of instructing men in doubts
concerning faith, all comes to one effect. And with what color of truth, do
you say ( page 164.165.) that you give General Counsels much more respect,
then do most of our Adversaries, since Catholics believe the^ to be
infallible, which you deny?

25. But you would gladly prove, that Councels are fallible, because they are
discoursiue in their deliberations, and Page 167.
use the weights and moments of reason, for the drawing out of Conclusions from
their Principles, wherein it is confessed they may mistake.

26. It is true, we grant that the Church coins no new Revelations, but only
declares such to us, as have been already delivered in the written, or
unwritten word of God; to find which out she uses means, by searching out
true Records of Antiquity, by discussing the writings of Fathers, by consulting
the holy Scriptures, Traditions etc. because it is the will of God that she use
such means. But the thing upon which she finally relyes in her Definitions, ex
part Obiecti, is the Revelation, or attestation of God, which is the Formal
and last Motine of faith; and exparte Subiecti, in behalf of herself, she
relies upon the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, directing her not to
propound any falsehood instead of a revealed truth. Thus we read in the first
Council Act. 15. Cum magna disquisitio sieret: After great search, and
examination of the Case, by citing Scriptures, relating Miracles, and the
blessing of God, declared by the good success, and conversion of so many
Gentiles; the final determination did not rely upon these industries, but,
Visum est Spiritui sancto, and nobis. It has seemed to the Holy Ghost, and us:
Which words express both the formal Motive, and chief efficient Cause of
faith, as also the free, and voluntary concurring of the Apostles, assisted by
the Holy Ghost. And yet I hope you will not out of these diligences, and
discourses of the Apostles infer, that this Council was fallible: Or that
there was no more certainty in the Conclusion, then in the Arguments
themselves, of which some, abstracting from the assistance of the holy Ghost,
and the Authority of the Apostles, were but, as the Deuines speak, Arguments
of Credibility, and dispositions to faith, as Miracles etc. Or will you perhaps
with your first Patriarch Luther, reprehend even this Council of the Apostles,
and say with him: That James, whose In Assert art. 29.
opinion the whole Council followed, changed the verdict of peter, whose
judgment, that the Gentiles should not be constrained to observe the Jewish
Ceremonics, was most true, and consequently the opinion of James and the
Council could not be true? You grant (as I must often put you in mind) that
the Church is infallible in fundamental points, must she therefore use no
industry, to attain to the knowledge of such points? And Protestants, who hold
Scripture to be the only Rule of faith, use means of conferring Text,
consulting the Originals, Prayer, etc. for attayning the true meaning of
Scripture; and yet you will not grant, that your faith is fallible; because you
will say, it does not rely upon those said fallible means, but finally (as you
apprehend) it rests in the word of God. And if any Catholic Author equal the
definitions of the Church with the holy Scripture, his meaning is, that both
the one, and the other, are so infallible, that they cannot deliver any
untruth. For in other respects we grant many singular Prerogatives to the holy
Scripture, more then to the definitions of Councels, as may partly beseen in De
Conc. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Bellarmine.

27. Your objection that the great Council Page 170.
of Chalcedon corrected the Second of Ephesus, and that S. Augustine says,
Provincial Councels De Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 3.
may be corrected by Plenary, and Plenary Councels, the former, by the latter,
has been answered a hundred times; and I doubt not but that you have read
Bellarmine who De Couc. lib. 1. cap. 6.
shows that the second Council of Ephesus proceeded unlawfully, wherein S.
Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople was murdered by the faction of Dioscorus,
and the Popes Legates were driven away, and finally the Eutichian Heresy was
confirmed: for which causes that Council was annulled by Pope Leo. You have
picked out a pretty example to prove that lawful Councels, confirmed by the
Pope may err. To the words of S. Augustine, Bellarmine answers, that De
Consul. lib. 2. c. 7.. Respondeo Primo.
either they are understood of unlawful Councels, such as was the second of
Ephesus; or else, they are to be understood of Questions concerning matter of
fact, as whether Caecilianus had delivered up the Bible; or finally, that
latter Councels may be said to correct the former, because some decrees which
concern manners may by change of circumstances prove inconvenient, although in
the beginning, they were very holy and fit. Which interpretation is gathered
out of S. Augustine himself, who says: That Councels may be corrected, when
Experience does manifest something which before did not appear. Now,
experience has no place in universal doctrines, but in particular facts, or
laws, which respect particular circumstances of time, and place etc. Your
second Citation in your Margent out of S. Augustine, Lib. 3. co^t. Maxim.
whose words you did not recite, Bellarmine answers in the place which I have
cited now. And heertofore I have declared at large in what sense, and upon what
occasion, and reason, S. Augustine against the Donatists made recourse to
Scripture alone.

26. You begin to impugn the Popes infallibility, by saying, that
Charity-Mistaken means by his infallible Church, only the Pope. Which saying
of yours does well declare how fallible your affirmations are. And that if the
Pope define that to be white, which the eye judges to be black, it must be so
admitted by us, you pretend to prove, out of I know not what papers of the
Jesuits found in Padua, in witness whereof you allege Paulus Soarpius, a
seditious, scandalous, and condemned Author: and we must by no means believe
you without better proof. You cite also out of Bellarmine, these words: If he
(the Pope) should De Rom ^. Pont. lib. 4. c. 5.. Quodantens.
err, and command the practice of vice, or forbid the exercise of virtue, the
Church were bound in conscience to believe vices to be good, and virtues to be
bad. Who would not think by these words of Bellarmine, as you corrupt him,
that indeed we might believe Vice to be good, and Vertueil? The direct contrary
whereof he affirms; and from thence infers that the Pope, whom the Church is
obliged to obey as her Head, and Supreme Pastor, cannot err in decrees of
manners prescribed by him, to the whole Church. These be his words. If the Pope
did err in commanding vices, or forbidding Virtue, the Church were bound to
believe that Vice is good and Virtue ill, unless she would sin against her
conscience. For in doubtful things, the Church is bound to subject herself to
the Judgment of the Pope, and to do what he commands, and not to do what he
forbids: and lest she should sin against her conscience, she is bound to
believe, that what he commands is good, and that what he forbids is ill For the
avoiding of which inconvenience he concludes, that the Pope cannot err in
Decrees concerning manners, by forbidding Virtue, or commanding Vice. If one
should prove that Scripture cannot err in things concerning manners, because
otherwise Christians, who are bound to believe whatsoever the Scripture says,
should be obliged to believe Virtue to be ill, and Vice to be good; would you
infer that indeed we are to believe, Virtue to be ill, and Vice to be good? Or
rather that indeed Scripture could not propose or command any such thing? This
is that which Bellarmine says. But your self is he, according to whose
principles we might be obliged to embrace vice etc. For since you affirm, that
the authority Page 1^^.
of General Councels is immediately derived from Christ, and that, their
Decrees bind all persons to external Obedience; and seeing you hold that they
may err perniciously both in faith, and manners; What remains but that we
must be obliged, even by authority immediately derived from Christ himself, to
err with the Council, and at lest externally embrace Vice.

29. You come afterward to discourse thus: These men Page 17^.
deal not plainly with us, when they pretend often in their disputations
against us, Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels and the Church; since in the issue
their final and infallible argument for their faith, is only the Popes
Authority. It were indeed a happy thing, and a most effectual way to end all
Controversies if people would submit themselves to some visible living Judge,
by whom they might be instructed, and by whom it might be declared who allege
Scriptures, and Fathers right or wrong. Which since you, and your Brethren
refuse to do, no wonder, if we be constrained to allege Scriptures, and
Fathers, as you likewise do, though you say, that Scripture is infallible, and
that all Controversies must be decided by it alone. Besides, though the Pope be
infallible, yet he is not so alone, as if he did exclude all other infallible
means: for Scriptures, General Counsels, and the Consent of the whole
Catholic Church are also infallible. And therefore (as I was saying) it is no
wonder that we allege other Arguments besides the decrees of Popes alone. For
since in our disputes with you, we abound with all kind of arguments, why
should we not make use thereof? And if you will know the reason why Counsels be
gathered to the great good of the Church, notwithstanding the Popes
infallibility, you may read Bellarmine, who gives De Romans Pontif lib. 4. cap.
7.. Respondeo Id.
the reason thereof. I hope you will grant that S. Peter was infallible, and yet
he thought good to gather a Council, Act. 15. for greater satisfaction of the
faithful, and to take away all occasions of temptation in the weaker
Christians. What estimation Antiquity made of the Popes Authority I have showed
heertofore. And if some who have written Pleas, or Prescriptions against
Heretics, do not without more ado, appeal Page 173.
all Heretics to the Popes Tribunal, you have no cause to wonder; since
commonly the first error of all Heretics, is to oppose the Pope, and the
Church of Rome, and therefore they must be convinced by other Arguments.
Tertullian in his Prescriptions against Heretics does particularly advise,
and direct that Heretics are not to be admitted to dispute out of Scripture,
and that it is but in vain to seek to convince them by that means: and yet
you hold that the Scripture is not only infallible, but the sole Rule also of
faith: How then do you infer against us, that if the Pope be infallible,
Tertullian should have appealed all Heretics to his Tribunal; since he does
not appeal them to Scripture, which yet he believed to be infallible. And
nevertheless the two Authors whom you cite, Tertullian, and Vincentius
Lyrinensis speak, as much in advantage of the Pope and Church of Rome, as can
be imagined. If (says Tertullian) thou live Praescript. cap. 36.
near Italy, thou have the City of Rome, from thence Authority is near at
hand, even to us (Africans.) A happy Church, into which the Apostles have
powered their whole doctrine together with their blood. And Vincentius
Lyrinensis calls the In sus Com.
Pope, and Church of Rome, the Head, and other Bishops as S. Cyprian from the
South, S. Ambrose from the North etc. and others from other places, the sides
of the world. And I cited these words out of him before, who speaking of
Rebaptization, says: Then In Com. part. 1.
the blessed Stephen resisted, together with, but before his Colleagues,
judging it as I conceive, a thing worthy of him, that he should surmount them
as much in Faith, as he did in the authority of his place. Of the opposition of
some particular men to the Pope we have spoken already, and in your saying that
his Authority has been opposed by General Councels we will not believe you,
til you bring better proof. That the divisions of the Eastern from the Latin
Church proceeded from the ambition, and pretensions of the Bishop of Rome, you
prove by the Authority of Nilus, a Schismatique, an Heretic, and a professed
enemy of the Church of Rome, and of Protestants also, unless they have a mind to
believe that the holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son. And how can Nilus
affirm as he does, that the Pope refuses to have the grounds of that
dissension fayrely heard and discussed in a general Council? For under
Vrbanus the second a Council was held at Barium in Apulia, where the Grecian
Bishops being present, were convicted of error, in denying God the holy Ghost
to proceed from God the Son, S. Anselme Anselm. lib. de protes. Spirit. sanct.
our Primate of Canterbury being the chief disputant in the behalf of the
Latins. Whereupon the Grecian Emperor that then ruled Alexius Comnenus became
Catholic, and caused the Grecian Bishops to hold Communion with the Roman
Church so long as he lived, Baronius tom. 12. An. 1118.
as Baronius shows. And greater cause I have to wonder, that you would now
revive this Cavil of Nilus. For to say nothing of the Council of Lions in
France under Gregory the tenth, Baron. ad an. 1274.
where the Patriarch of Constantinople was present, and other Hierarchs of
Greece to the number of 40. besides innumerable Bishops and Prelates of the
Latins, being more then a thousand in all, some Kings being there in person,
and all by their Ambassadors, namely Michael Paleologus, and Andronicus his
Son Emperors of the East, in whose name their Ambassadors recanted and
abiured all errors against the Roman Church, namely that about the Holy Ghost:
to pretermit (I say) this instance, who does not know, that in the general
Council at Florence, the matter was debated under Eugenius the fourth, where
the Graecians with their Emperor, and their Patriarch, and the Legates of
three other Patriarchs, and the Armenians, and the Deputyes of the Ethiopians
were present, and a perfect concord was then made: from which the Greeks
departing afterward, were subdued and made slaves to the Turk. And that they
might see the cause of their destruction to be pertinacity in their Error
about the Holy Ghost, upon the very feast of Pentecost (as Bellarmine proves)
the City of Constantinople was taken, their Emperor killed, Lib. 2. de
Christo. cap. 30.
and their Empire extinguished. And it is well known that the true cause of
their dissension, whereupon a separation at last ensued, was the Controversy
between Ignatius lawful Patriarch of Constantinople, whom the Pope still kept
in his Communion, and Photius an ambitious Intruder into the Patriarchate, by
strength of the Imperial Power. Which Schism has enlarged it self, by
addition of the heresy, about the procession of the holy Ghost. For want of
better matter, you bring here that old Objection about the Councels of
Constance and Basil, defining that the Council is above the Pope. The Answer
whereof you may read in Bellarmine, that De C^. lib. 2. c. ^^.
the Popes who were deposed, were in time of Schism, when it was not known
who was the true Pope; in which case the Church has power to provide herself
of an undoubted Pastor: To say nothing that two of those Popes voluntarily
renounced their pretense. As for the decree of the Council of Constance, that
all ought to obey a General Council; he answers, that either it is meant for
time of Schism, or if it be universal, that the Council could not make any
such definition of faith, because it was never confirmed by the Pope, for as
much as concerns that point. And the Council of Basil was in that particular
expressly repealed by diverse Popes; and the whole Church received Eugenius as
true Pope, who yet was deposed by that Council. To disprove the Popes
infallibility, you cite Victoria saying: Give me Relect. 4. de Potest. Papae
and Conc. prop. 12. ad fin.
Clements, Linus, Siluesters, and I will leave all to their pleasure. But to
speak no worse of latter Popes, they are much inferior to those ancient Ones.
But you allege this Author according to your wonted manner, that is, very
unfaithfully. For he in that place speaks only of Dispensations in Laws, the
facility and frequency whereof Victoria dislikes in these latter times; Which
being wholly matter of Fact, does nothing prejudice the Popes Infallibility for
points of Faith.

30. To prove that there is nothing but uncertainty in proving the Popes
infallibility, Page 176.
you allege some place out of Bellarmine, but with so great confusion and
fraud, that they serve only to prove the certainty of your ill dealing.
Bellarmine distinguishes two Questions: The one, whether S. Peter had any
Successor in being head of the Church, and this he says is most certain, and
De iure diuino, or by divine institution. The other: whether it be de iure
diuino, or of divine institution, that S. Peter's Successor must be the
particular Bishop of Rome, and this he says is not so certain (though it be
true) because if S. Peter had placed his Sea in some other City, or else had
chosen no particular City at all; yet his Successor had been, iure diuino,
Head of the Church; howbeyt in that case, he had not been the particular
Bishop of Rome. Nevertheless, because S. Peter did in fact, choose Rome, it is
upon that supposall a matter of faith, that the Bishop of Rome, and S. Peter's
Successor is all one. As for example by the Law of God all lawful Superiors
are to be obeyed, and therefore though it be not of divine institution, that
this or that man should be superior; yet supposing that in fact he be
Superior, the general divine Law pitches, and fastens upon him, and obliges
us to obey him in particular. This being presupposed, let us now hear what you
allege out of De Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap. 4.. Restant.
Bellarmine. S. Peter sat many years Bishop of Rome, and there he died You
change the very Question. Bellarmines words in the Title of the Chapter are:
Petrum Romae vsque admortem Episcopum fuisse. That S. Peter was Bishop of Rome
till his death. And he explaines his meaning to be, That S. Peter was Bishop of
Rome, and that he kept that Bishopric till his death: which is a different
thing from what you say; That S. Peter sat many years Bishop of Rome, and
there he died. For he might have been many years Bishop of Rome, and also died
at Rome, and yet not died Bishop of Rome; as one may be Bishop of London for
some years, and die at London, and yet not dye Bishop of London. Now Bellarmine
says, that S. Peter died Bishop of Rome, which indeed was the maine point; and
proves, that the Bishop of Rome is S. Peter's successor; whereas to dye at Rome
is accidental to his being Bishop of Rome, and in fact diverse Bishops of Rome
died in France, and else where. But let us go on. You say that the first reason
by which Bellarmine proves that S. Peter died Bishop of Rome, is so weak, that
himself says only suadere videtur, it seems to persuade. This Bellarmine
says only of one reason, besides which he brings diverse other
demonstrations: neither is it necessary for the certainty of any truth, that
every reason for it, be evident. And it is the doctrine of Philosophers, that
the best method is, to begin with probable Arguments, and then to ascend to
demonstrations. Moreover in this very subject Vdalricus Velenus, a Lutheran,
wrote a Book to prove that S. Peter was never at Rome, and to that purpose he
brings eighteen reasons, which he calls Persuasions, and yet he holds them for
evident Demonstrations. If then Bellarmine, out of his great modesty say, that
his first reason seems to persuade, must you thence infer, that it does not
demonstrate? And indeed it is a very good, and solid argument. After this you
go forward, and cite Bellarmine saying: There God commanded him to fix his
Chair, and to leave his full Power to his heirs and Successors, the Popes.
And then you add: But what certainty of this? Indeed (says Bellarmine) it is
no where De Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap. 12.. Ob seruandum est tertio.
expressed in Scripture, that the Pope (you should add of Rome, as Bellarmine
has it) succeeds Peter, and therefore happily it is not of divine right that
he succeeds him; Yet, it is not improbable, that Ibid. Et quontam.
God commanded him to fasten his Seat at Rome, and it may be devoutly so
believed. And it may be truly believed, that you corrupt Bellarmine. First,
when you speak of Popes, you leave out, of Rome, in which word consists the
maine point. For Bellarmine teaches, that it is most certain, and de iure
diuino, that S. Peter should have Popes to succeed him, but he holds it not
so certain, whether it be of divine institution, that his Successor should be
Pope of Rome; that is, have his Seat fixed at Rome, although de facto it be
there. Bellarmines words are: It is not all one, that a thing be a point of
faith, and that it be of divine institution. For it was not a divine Law that
S. Paul should have a cloak, yet it is a point of faith that S. Paul had a
Cloak. Though then it be not exprsly contained in Scripture, that the Bishop
of Rome should succeed S. Peter (thus far you go, and leave out the words
immediately following, which explicate the whole matter:) Yet it is evidently
deduced out of Scripture that some must succeed S. Peter: but that he who
succeeds him is the Bishop of Rome, we know by the Apostolical Tradition of S.
Peter; which Tradition, General Councels, Decrees of Popes, and Consent of
Fathers, have declared, as hereafter shall be demonstrated. And according to
this clear explication he said a little before: Because S. Marcellus Pope in
his Epistle ad Antiochenos, writes that S. Peter came to Rome by the
Commandment of our Lord; and S. Ambrose In Orat. cont. Auxe^tium.
and S. Athanasius In Apolog. pro fuga sua.
affirm, that S. Peter suffered Martyrdom at Rome by the commandment of
Christ; it is not improbable, that our Lord did also expressly command that S.
Peter should so settle his Seat at Rome, that the Bishop of Rome should
absolutely succeed him. But howsoever this be, at lest this manner of
Succession proceeds not from the first institution of the Popedom, which is
delivered in Scripture. Do you not see what Bellarmine delivers for certain,
and what for less certain? It is certain that S. Peter must have
Successors; it is certain that in fact his Successor is the Bishop of Rome:
but it is not so certain, that by divine institution, his Successor is the
Bishop of Rome, but that might proceed from the act of S. Peter, who actually
lived and died Bishop of Rome, though he might have chosen some other
particular Diocese. These things Bellarmine delivers very clearly; but you do
so inuolue his words, as one would believe, that he held it for uncertain,
whether actually the Pope of Rome be S. Peter's Successor, or whether it be
certain, and of divine institution, that S. Peter left any Successor at all:
both which are plainly against his meaning, and express words.

31. Your other objections are so old and triuiall, that they deserve no
Answer: I said already, that in time of Schism the Church has power to
declare, or elect a true and undoubted Pope; and in the mean time God in his
Providence can govern his Church without new definitions of Popes, of which
there is not always so precise necessity, as that the Church may not subsist
without the^ for a time; as for three hundred years from the Apostles times,
she was without any one General Council; and as the Jews for two thousand
years were without Scripture. If any should enter symonically, and be accepted
by the Churh as Pope, God will either not permit him to define any matter of
faith, or else will assist him not to err perniciously, not for his own sake
but in respect of the Church which cannot be led into error, as she might,
if that reputed Pope could define a falsehood, because the members are obliged
to conform themselves to one whom they esteem their Head. And you your self
must say the same. For since all the spiritual Power, and Jurisdiction of your
first Prelates, was derived from Rome, you must affirm, that a Pope accepted
for such by the Church, is sufficiently enabled for all necessary acts and
functions, notwithstanding that secret impediment: For otherwise you might
endanger the Authority of your own Prelates. And the same you must in
proportion say, of all public Magistrates. The same answer serves to your
other Objection, that we are not sure whether he that is elected Pope be
baptized. For it belongs to Gods providence, not to permit any whom the Church
has elected for her head, to err perniciously, though indeed your
suppositions are never to be admitted; but we are to believe that whosoever in
a time free from Schism, is accepted by the Church for true Pope, is such
indeed. And I wonder you do not reflect, that these objections are also
against your own Bishops. Or if you say, that your spiritual Jurisdiction
comes from the Temporal Prince, the same difficulty will remain concerning
him. For I suppose you will not say that one who is not baptized, and
consequently not a Christian, can merely by virtue of his Temporal Power give
spiritual Jurisdiction. And though you say that it is not want of intention in
the Minister which can make void the Sacrament of Baptism; yet you will not
deny, but that there may be other essential defects, hindering the validity
thereof: as for example, if by error the water be so mingled, that it be not
elementall water; or if the form of the words in Baptism be not pronounced
entierely etc. For in your form of Public Baptism it is said: That water,
and; in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, are
essential parts of Baptism: and this you have gained by your objections. And
finally if your doctrine be true that intention in the Minister is not
necessary, the Pope cannot (according to your doctrine) want Baptism for want
of due intention in the Minister. You proceed.

32. No Papist page 180.
in Europe (excepting only those few, that stand by, and hear his Holiness when
he gives out his Oracles) can be infallibly sure what it is which he has
defined. A goodly Objection! As if there were no means to know what one says,
unless he hear him speak. For ought I know you neither have seen the Pope,
nor Rome, will you therefore think, you are not sure that there is a Pope, and
Rome? Have you all this while spoken against a thing in the air, while you
impugned the Pope? Can no body know what the Apostles spoke, or wrote, except
them who were present at their preaching, or writing? Or can no body be sure
that the Bible is truly printed unless he himself correct the Print? I grant
that you who deny the certainty of Traditions, have cause to believe nothing
beside what you see, or hear. But we acknowledge Traditions, and so must you,
unless you will question both the preaching, and writing of the Apostles. And
beside hearing or seeing, there are other meaning, as History, Letters, true
Relations of many, and the like. And thus we have answered all your objections
against the fallibility of the Church, Councels, and Pope, without descending
to particular Controversies, which are disputed off among Catholics without
breach of faith, or Unity. But here I must put you in mind, that you have left
out many things in the sixth Chapter of Charity Mistaken against your promise,
notwithstanding that to answer it alone, you have employed your third, fourth,
and fifth Section. You have omitted ( page 44) what it is that makes men to be
of the same Religion: and ( page 46.) diverse differences betwixt you, and us;
as about the Canon of Scripture; five Sacraments; necessity of Baptism, and
real presence; unwritten Traditions; Primacy of S. Peter; Judge of
Controversies; Prayer to Saints, and for the souls in Purgatory: and so, that
we are on both sides resolved to persist in these differences etc. Why did you
not say one word to all these particulars? Why did you not answer to his
example of the Quartadecimani, who were ranked for Heretics, although their
error was not Fundamental in your acception? as also to his example of
rebaptizing Heretics, for which the Donatists were accounted Heretics,
although the error be not of it self fundamental? The same I say of his
Example, drawn from the Nouatian Heretics: And of his reason, that if
disobedience to the Church were not the rule whereby heresies, and schisms must
be known, it were impossible to conclude what were an Heresy, or Schism: As
also to his Assertion proved out of S. Thomas, that error against any one
revealed truth destroys all faith etc. But necessity has no law, you were
forced to dissemble what you knew not how to answer.

CHAP. VI.
THIS Section is chiefly employed in relating some debates between
Catholics; and is soon answered, by distinguishing between a potentiall and
actual Unity; that is, we deny not, but that Controversies may arise amongst
Catholic Doctors, as well for matters concerning practice, as speculation:
But still we have a Judge to whose known determinations, we hold our selves
obliged to submit our understanding, and will: whereas your debates must of
necessity be endless, because you acknowledge no subjection to any visible
living Judge, whom you hold to be infallible in his determinations. All the
instances which you allege against us, prove this, and no more. For some of
them concern points not expressly defined by the Church: Others touch upon
matters of fact, and as it were suites of Law in the Catholic Clergy of
England, wherein you ought rather to be edifyed, then to object the^ as any way
prejudicial to the Unity of faith, because Pope Clement the 8. in his time, and
our holy Father Urban the VIII. could, and did, by their decrees end those
Controversies, and forbid writing Books on all sides.

2. I wonder you will, like some of the country Ministers, tell us that we have
enlarged the Creed of Christians one moyty. And to prove it, you cite the Bull
of Pius Quintus, which is properly no Creed, but a Profession of our faith. And
if this be to enlarge the Creed, your Church in her 39. Articles, has enlarged
the twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, more then one moyty thrice told. For
the Church makes no new Articles of faith, as you must likewise say in defense
of your Church-Articles. Was the Creed of Nice, or of S. Athanasius etc. new
Creeds, because they explicate old truths by a new word of Homousion, or
Consubstantiall? It is pretty that you bring Pappus and Flaccus, flat
Heretics, to prove our many Contradictions. Your comparing the Decrees of the
Sacred Council of Trent, which you say, that both the Dominicans and Jesuits
pretend to favor their contrary opinions, to the Devil in the old oracles, is
by your leave wicked; and which you might upon the same pretense as
blasphemously apply to the holy Scriptures, which all Heretics, though never
so contrary in themselves, do allege as favoring them: Which is a sufficient
Argument to show against Protestants, that no writing, though never so perfect,
can be a sufficient Judge to decide Controversies. And you were ill advised, to
make this objection against the Council of Trent, since in his Majesty's
Declaration before the 39. Articles, printed 1631. it is said: We take comfort
in this, that even in those curious points in which the present differences
lie, men of all sorts, take the Articles of the Church of England to be for
them. And it is worthy the observation, that the difference betwixt the
Dominicans and Jesuits, (who as you say do both pretend to have the Council of
Trent on their sides) is concerning a Question, which you conceive to be the
same with that which is disputed among Protestants, and in which Protestants of
all sorts take the Articles of the Church of England to be for them. Your
demand, why the Pope determines not that Controversy betwixt the Dominicans and
Jesuits, might as well be made against the whole Ancient Church, which did not
determine all Controversies at once, nor on a sudden, but after long, and
mature deliberation, sooner, or latter, as occasion did require In the mean
time, the Pope has commanded, that neither part censure the other; and his
Command is most religiously observed by them, with a readiness to submit their
Judgment, when the holy Ghost shall inspire him to decree it, one way or other.
And who assured you, that the point wherein these learned men differ, is a
revealed truth, or capable of definition, or is not rather (as you speak) by
plain Page 112.
Scripture indeterminable, or by any other Rule of faith.

3. It is worthy to be observed, that after you had told us that the
dissentious of the Church of Rome are of greater importance, then any among the
Reformed; you can name only two, which may have any color of difficulty, the
rest being mere Scholasticall disputations in obscure points for the better
explanations of the Mysteries of our Faith against Infidels, and Heretics.
The one concerns the Popes Authority: And in particular his Superiority above
Counsels; to which we have answered more then once: and all Catholics agree
that he is the Vicar of Christ, the Successor of S. Peter, and the Visible
Head of the Church, to whom all particular persons, and Churches are subject.
The other, is touching a Contrariety between Sixtus 5. and Clement the 8. about
the Edition of the Bible: which objection, Adamus Tannerus answers Adam.
Tanner. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 4. dub. 6. ^. 264.
so fully, that I have thought good to set down his words, wherein he affirms,
That this Question having been disputed in the University of Ingolstad, for
being satisfied concerning the truth, he wrote to F. Ferdinandus Alberus, (who
afterward was Vicar General of the Society of JESUS,) and he by letters dated
28. Aug. 1610. answered in these words, which I have thought best to set down in
Latin, as they lie (the sum of them being this, that the Decree of Sixtus was
never sufficiently promulgated;) that such as have not the Book it self, may
read them here. Circa Biblia Sixtina, post diligentem inquisitionem and
discussionem, hanc denique responsionem dederunt ij, qui huic rei incumbebant,
qua omnis tollitur difficultas, and cui omnes merito acquiescent. Responsio sic
habet. Certum est, Bullam de ijs Biblijs non fuisse promulgatam; cuius rei
certissimum indicium est, in Registro huiusmodi promulgationem non reperiri:
and Illustrissimus Cardinalis Bellarminus testatur, se cum ex Gallia Romam
redijsset, a pluribus Cardinalibus audiuisse, Bullam illa^ non fuisse
promulgatam, and id quidem illi se certissime scire aff^rmabant. And the same
F. Alberus adds: Sciat praeterea R. V. haec eadem ex S. D. N. (Pope Paul the
5.) habita fuisse, vt tuto his adhaerere liceat, and oporteat. And in his
letters dated the 4. of September in the same year 1610. for confirmation of
the same matter, he adioyneth these words: Item P. Azor, ^o ipso tempore, quo
caeperunt (typis) publicari illa Biblia, cum instarent aliqui, Papam posse
errare, quia videbatur iam errasse de facto in Biblijs; Respondit public P.
Azar. Bullam illam non fuisse publicatam, quamuis in impressione legeretur
subscriptio Cursorum; nam hoc factum fuisse per anticipationem Typographi, ita
iubente Po^tifice, ne impressio tardaretur. Huius rei testis est P. Andraeas
Eudaemon-Ioannes, qui tunc aderat disputationi. Thus he. And besides all this,
Po. Sixtus himself marking that diverse things had crept in which needed a
second Reuiew, had declared that the whole work should be re-examined, though
he could not do it by reason he was prevented by death, as is affirmed in the
Preface before the Bible set forth by Pope Clement the 8.

4. If any Catholic Writers teach absolutely, that it is sufficient to
believe with an implicit faith alone, you know and acknowledge ( page 198. and
71. and 241.) they are rejected by the rest. And yet that doctrine is neither
so absurd, nor dangerous as the opinion of M. Hooker, and D. Morton as you
relate, with much show of favoring them; Who yet not only grant, that one may
be ignorant of some fundamental Articles, but also may deny them, without
ceasing to be a member of the Church: No, nor so hurtful, as your own
doctrine, who must (if your distinction of points be to any purpose) teach that
an Error against a revealed truth in points not fundamental, is not damnable.
Yea after you have set down the Creed, as a perfect summary Page 241.
of those fundamental truths, wherein consists the Unity of faith, and all men
are bound actually to know necessitate praecepti; you add, but happily not so,
necessitate medij, vel finis; so that upon the matter (speaking of things to be
believed necessitate medij, it will not be easy for you to free your self,
even from that for which you impugn the Authors who do at least say, that we
must believe all Articles implicitly, in the explicit belief of the Article
of the Catholic Church: and yet that Article you do not believe as you ought,
while you deny her universal Infallibility in propounding divine Truths.

5. I will end with a notorious falsification which I find almost in the end of
this your Section. For, in your first Edition ( page 65. Marg.) you cite Tanner
saying ( in Colloquio Ratisbon. Sess. 9.) If the Prelates of the Church did
err in defining any doubt, Christian people by virtue of such a government,
might, yea ought to err. And these words you bring to prove, that whatsoever
the Pope, assisted with some few of his Cardinals and Prelates, shall define,
that must be received though it be false and erroneous; wherein you discover
either intolerable ignorance, or supine negligence, or wilful malice. For
Tannerus in that place proves the infallibility of the Church, that is, of the
Prelates of the Church, because the people are obliged to believe their
Pastors; and since it is absurd to say, that they can be obliged to believe
that which is erroneous, it follows that the Prelates of Gods Church cannot
define any error: yea, in express terms he says; Fol. 10^.
I say not, that the Pope is to be obeyed, when he erres; but say only, that if
the Superior might err, and yet were endued with public authority, the
people might be led to error. And in this very same manner, you falsify
Bellarmine in your second Edition ( page 172) speaking to the same purpose, as
I showed in this second Cap. 5. number. 28.
Part. Lastly, I must put you in mind that you leave out the discourse of
Charity Mistaken ( page 64.) wherein he answers the vulgar objection, that we
have differences among us of Thomists, Scotists, Benedictins etc. and yet (
page 84.) you bring this very same objection as freshly as if it bad never
been answered.

CHAP. VII.
THE maine points treated in your seventh Section are: the distinction of
points fundamental, and that the Creed is a perfect Summary of all
fundamental points of faith. In answer whereof I employed the third, and
fourth Chapter of the First Part.

2. You say, that the Rule of faith, Page 216.
being clearly, but diffusedly set down in the Scriptures, has been
afterward summed up in the Apostles Creed: and in the Margent you cite S.
Thomas, as if he did affirm that the Rule of faith is clearly contained in
Scripture: Whereas he rather says the contrary in these words: The Verities of
faith 2.2. (...) art. 9. ad 1.
are contained in Scripture diffusedly, and in some things obscurely etc. so
that to draw the Verity of faith out of Scripture, there is required long study
and exercise. Is this to say the Scripture is clear, even for fundamental
points?

3. I see not how you can prove that the Creed contains all fundamentalls, out
of those Letters called Formatae, formed; the manner whereof is set down by
Ann. 325. number. 44. and 407. number. 3. apud Spond.
Baronius. Among other things one was, to write the first letter in Greek of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; and of S. Peter: the one, says
Baronius, being to profess their faith against the Arrian Heretics of those
times; the other, to show their Communion with the Catholic Church; because
he was esteemed truly Catholic, who was joined in Communion with the
Successor of S. Peter. And this Baronius proves out of Optatus. Whereby it
appears that the intention of those formed Letters was not to express all
fundamental points of faith, but particularly aimed at the Arrians: and
besides the Articles of our Creed, they contained the Primacy of S. Peter,
teaching us that it is necessary for every true Catholic to be united with
the Sea of Peter. You cite the circular letters of Sophronius, Tarasius,
Pelagius Patriarch of Rome, and Photius of Constantinople and for those of
Pelagius you cite Baronius (Ann. 556. n. 33.) But the letters of Pelagius which
Baronius sets down at large, do not so much as mention the Apostles Creed: and
besides the four six General Councels, he professes to receive the Canons
which the Sea Apostolic (that is, the Roman Sea) has received, the Epistles
of the Popes, Celestine, Sixtus, Leo, Hilarious, Simplicius, Felix, Gelasius
(the first) Anastasius, Hormisda, John, Felix, Boniface, John, Agapetus; and
then adds: This is my Faith. I wonder by what Logic you will infer out of
these Letters, that the Creed alone, explaned by the first Counsels, contains
all Articles of faith, since Pelagius professes to receive diverse other things
not contained in the Creed. Sophronius also ( Sext. Synod. Act. 11.) in his
letters recites, and condemns by name a very great number of particular
Heresies, and Hetetiques which are not mentioned in any of the Creeds, and adds
a full condemnation of all Heretics. Neither are you more fortunate or
faithful in Tarasius, who in his Confession of faith does expressly teach
Invocation of our blessed Lady, Angels, Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors
etc. as also worship of Images, of which he was a most zealous defender against
the Iconomacht, and was the chief in the seventh Synod, who condemned those
Heretics. And since he was a man famous both for sanctity and miracles, we
may note by the way, what persons they were who in ancient times opposed
Protestants in those Iconomachi. Photius likewise is by you misalledged. For he
in his Letter to Pope Nicholas set down by Baronius ( ad Ann. 859.) wherein he
makes a profession of his faith, faith: I receive the seven holy General
Councels. And having mentioned the six Councels, and what Heretics were
condemned by them, he adds: I also receive that holy, and great Council, which
was the second held at Nice, which cast out, and overcame, as filth, the
Iconomachi, that is, the oppugners of Images, who therefore were Christomachi,
that is, oppugners of Christ, as also the impugners of Saints. Tell me now, I
pray you, by what art can you extract out of Photius his Letter, an argument to
prove, that the Apostles Creed as it was explaned in the Creeds of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Athanasius, comprehends a perfect
Catalogue of fundamental truths, and implies a full reiection of fundamental
heresies (as you affirm page 217) since he expressly professes to receive also
the seven General Councels, and that in particular, which condemned the
Impugners of Images, that is, such as your self and other Protestants are?
Will you grant that the Creed implies a reiection of the error of the
Iconomachi, or opposers of Images, as of a Fundamental Heresy? Who will not
wonder at your ill fortune in mis-alledging Authors? Yet I grant that fraud
can never be employed better, then to the disadvantage of him, who uses it.

4. You say, page 226.
to little purpose, that; the learned Cardinal Peron thinks Replique cap. 1.
it probable, that the Article of the Catholic Church, and the Communion of
Saints is all one, the latter being only an Explication of the other. But what
is this for your purpose, which was to prove that Articles not expressed in the
Creed, cannot be reduced to the Catholic Church; Because no learned Romanist
will say that the new doctrines of the Roman Church are contained in the
Communion of Saints? For Cardinal Peron only means, what he says in express
words; That the Catholic Church consists not in the simple number of the
faithful, every one considered a part; but in the joint Communion also of the
whole body of the faithful: From whence it does not follow, that the Church is
not she, who ought to deliver, and propound divine Verities to us as she is the
Mother and Teacher of all Christians. Does not Charity and Communion in the
spirit of Love include Faith; and consequently some infallible Propounder of
the Articles thereof? The Explication of Azor, concerning the Article of the
Catholic Church which you bring, makes nothing in the world to your purpose.
I have told you already, that while we believe the Unity, Universality,
Perpetuity, Sanctity of the Church, we jointly believe her Infallibility, and
freedom from all error in faith. But it is a mere slander to talk, as if we
held that she had sovereign and infallible power to prescribe, or define what
she pleases. You say, that the Creed is a sufficient Rule of faith, to which
nothing essential can be added, or may be detracted: As if the addition of
Material objects, added any thing to the Essence of faith, which is taken, not
from the material Object, or the things which we believe, but from the Formal
Object, and Motive, which is the Testimony of Almighty God.

5. Though it were granted, that the Creed being rightly understood, contaynes
all fundamentals, yet does it not follow that Protestants agree in them, both
because they may disagree in the meaning of some of those Articles; as also,
because disagrement in any one point of Faith, though not fundamental, cannot
stand with the Unity, and substance of faith, even in such points as both of
them believe. As for the Author of the Examen pacifique, I have told you
already, that he is no Catholic.

6. You set down your own opinion about the necessity of good works, which
you know is contrary to many of your prime Brethren; yet, this I will not urge
for the present, but only say, that you forget that Charity Mistaken, among
other instances, alleges this to prove that all points of faith are not
contained in the Creed; to which you give no answer at all, but only tell us
what your own opinion is. And that it may appear how you comply with your
promise, not to omit without Answer any one thing of moment; hear what
Charity Mistaken says to this purpose, in these words. S. Peter says, that S.
Paul in his Epistles had written certain things, which were hard to be
understood, and which the unlearned, and unstable, did pervert to their own
destructions. S. Austen declares upon this place, that the places misunderstood
concerned the doctrine of Justification, which some misconceiued to be by faith
alone. And of purpose to countermine that error, he says, that S. James wrote
his Epistle, and proved therein that good works were absolutely necessary to the
act of Justification. Hereupon we may observe two things; the one, that an
error in this point alone, is by the judgment of S. Peter, to work their
destruction, who embrace it: and the other, that the Apostles Creed which
speaks no one word thereof, is no good rule, to let us know all the
fundamental points of faith. Did not all this discourse deserve some answer
from one, who professes to omit nothing?

7. But now you come to a new business, and say: If the Page 239.
Roman Church be not guilty of Manicheisme; why is single life called
Chastity, and commended as an eminent degree of sanctimony? As if (forsooth)
Marriage must be ill, because a single life is better. Why do you not lay the
same aspersion upon our Savior Christ, who proposed Chastity as one of the
Evangelical Counsels; upon S. Paul, who says that 1. Cor. 7.
he who does not marry, melius facit, does better; and upon the Ancient
Fathers, who so highly extol a single life? You cannot be ignorant but that
among diverse degrees of Chastity, Catholic Deuines do also place Conjugal
Chastity, which they hold to be good, and meritorious, though yet inferior to
the other.

8. You go on, and ask, why Marriage is said to be incompatible with
Innocent. Papa did. 82. can. Proposuisti.
holiness, or with Idem.
Gods favor; nay counted a Bell. de Clericis cap. 19.. I am vero
pollution worse then Coster. Enchirid c. de Caelib.
whoredom? With better reason we may say, why do you pervert and corrupt
Authors against your own conscience? Innocentius, whom you cite says only:
It is not lawful that they should be admitted to sacred functions (that is,
holy Orders) who live with their wives, because it is written: Be holy, because
I am holy, says our Lord. Is this to say absolutely, that Marriage is
incompatible with holiness because it is incompatible with that holiness which by
the Churches Ordination is required in Priests? S. Paul says, that an unmarried
woman I. Cor. 7.
and a Virgin thinks of things belonging to God, that she may be holy in body
and soul. Will you hence infer, that the Apostle affirms, Marriage to be
incompatible with holiness, because it is incompatible with that peculiar
holiness, which Virginity is apt to breed? Those words, Be holy, because I am
holy, are taken out of Leuit. chap. 11. verse. 44. where the Jews are forbidden
to touch certain beasts: and yet I hope you will not accuse God of
Manicheisme, as if the eating of such beasts were incompatible with holiness?
The other words alleged by Innocentius, Those who are in flesh cannot please
God, are understood, as I said, of that particular holiness and pleasing of God,
which is required in those that take holy Orders. To prove that Bellarmine
accounts Marriage a pollution, you allege out of him these words: De Clericis
cap. 19.. Iamvero.
Not only the Marriage of Priests, which is sacrilege and not marriage; but
eue^ the Marriage of holy persons is not exercised without a certain pollution
and turpitude. But why do you take pleasure in alleging Authors against
their own meaning? Bellarmine to prove how co^gruous and convenient it is,
that Priests should lead a single life, after many Authorities of Scriptures,
Councels, and Fathers proves it also by reason it self, in regard that
Marriage is a great impediment to Ecclesiastical functions; and beginning with
the action of sacrificing, he says: Matrimony, as Saint Hierome says lib. 1.
in Iouinian. hinders the office of sacrificing, because there is required most
great purity and sanctity therein, as S. Chrysostom in his sixth Book of
Priesthood does declare; and it cannot be denied, but that in the act of
Marriage there is mingled a certain impurity and pollution, not which is
sin, but which arose from sin. For though Calvin exclayme against Pope
Siricius, who is so ancient that he sat an. 385. because he called the
Marriage of Priests, Pollution; yet that not only the Marriage of Priests,
which is not marriage but sacrilege; but also the Martrimony of holy persons
is not exercised without a certain pollution and turpitude, appears by the
rebellion of nature, and the shamefastnes of men in that act, who always seek
to be hidden, as S. Augustine has observed, lib. 14. de Ciuitate Dei. cap. 17.
Thus Bellarmine: and indeed S. Augustine in the next Chap. expressly speaks de
pudore Concubitus non solum vulgari, sed etiam coniugali. And now what but
malice can reprehend any one tittle in this doctrine of Bellarmine? or rather
in the doctrine of the Fathers by him cited, which contains against you,
Sacrifice, and single life of Priests? Moreover you falsify both Innoce^tius
and Bellarmine, who speak not of Marriage in it self, of which you make them
speak in your Text, but of the act thereof; and therefore Innocentius says:
Qui exercent cum vxore carnale consortium; And Bellarmine says: Non exercetur
sine pollutione quadam etc. Which is not even so much as to say, the act it
self is pollution, but only, Non exercetur sine pollutione etc. and this also
not absolutely, but with a limitation, non sine pollutione quadam etc. For
Matrimony of it self, may stand with most perfect Chastity, yea with
Virginity, as appears in the most Immaculate Mother of God. And at this day,
a married man may be made Priest, if his wife consent, and other Conditions
prescribed in the holy Canons be observed. And whereas you say, It seems by S.
Augustine, they (the Manichees) did not forbid meats, or marriage as
absolutely impure, or to all: only their choice Elect ones must obstaine; the
other vulgar, their Auditors, were left at their liberty: This objection taken
out of Peter Martyr, is answered by Bellarmine in the Chapter next to that
which you cited, that S. Augustine lib. 30. contra Faustum cap. 6. writes, that
the Manichees did absolutely forbid Marriage, because though they did permit it
to their Auditors, yet it was only for that they could not do otherwise. You
cannot (says S. Augustine) say that you do not forbid (Marriage) because
without breach of friendship you tolerate many of your Auditors, being either
not willing, or not able to obey you in this. Thus S. Augustine. But we do not
only permit, or tolerate the Marriage of Christians, but do also commend them.
And besides the Manichees did so permit Marriage to their Auditors for
satisfying their lust, that they jointly warned them to avoid procreation of
Children, which is manifestly to detest Marriage. But Catholics do therefore
chiefly commend Marriage, because it is known to have been instituted by God
for the procreation of Children. Thus Bellarmine. And now I hope you see how
free he is from Manicheisme, and that the places which in your Margent you
allege out of S. Aug. to prove that some of the Manichees might marry, are
brought by you very contrary to his expres words, in the place which now we
have heard Bellarmine cite out of him. The doctrine of Costerus Enchiriae, cap.
de Caelib.
that, though a Priest be guilty of a grievous sacrilege if he commit
fornication; yet he sins more grievously, if he contract Matrimony, is very
true, because Matrimony in a Priest is no Matrimony at all by reason of his
solemn vow of Chastity, and the Churches prohibition, as Bellarmine De Matrim.
Sacr. l. 1. c 21.
proves at large out of Councels and Fathers: and so I say to you, with S. John
Chrysostom, Though you call In Epist. 6. ad Theodorum.
such a Contract Marriage, yet I esteemee it worse then Adultery. What say you
to S. Chrysostom, who says, that Marriage after a solemn vow of Chastity, is
not only worse then fornication, as Costerus said, but even then Adultery? as
S. Ambrose also calls In lib. ad Virginem lapsam. c. 5.
the Marriage of a vowed Virgin, Adultery. Now supposing this doctrine of
Catholics, that the Matrimony of Priests is no Matrimony; it follows that by
attempting to contract Matrimony, besides the sins of fornication and
Sacrilege, he co^mits a grievous disobedience to the Church, a sacrilegious
irreuerence against the Sacrament of Matrimony, which he celebrates inualidly;
and may be presumed also to add a profession of Heresy, as if the Church could
not forbid, or make void the Marriage of Clergy men; as in fact, Luther, and
such Apostata's sinned not only against Continency, against their vow, against
the Sacrament of Marriage, against the precept of the Church; but also against
Faith: and lastly both they and al Priests that marry, do to the uttermost of
their power, add a greater immobility in sin, then if they did commit
fornication, without attempting to marry. But I beseech you does he, who
teaches that a double sin is committed by abusing Marriage, teach thereby
that Marriage is ill, and unlawful; or rather does he not show that in it
self it is holy and must not be abused? If one should not only commit incest
within the forbidden degrees, but also attempt to marry, should not he commit a
greater sin by the abuse of Marriage joined with in (...), then by incest
alone? Or is it not a greater sin both to commit Adultery, and attempt
Marriage with the Adultresse, while his lawful wife lives, then only to
commit Adultery? The one by the laws of the Kingdom is punished with death,
but not the other. So as it is clear that the doctrine of Costerus cannot be
blamed, but by such as oppose the Church, and all Antiquity, about Marriage
after a solemn vow of Chastity. But if Costerus deserve blame, what say you to
your Patriarch Luther, who teaches, that Tom. 2 Ger. fol. 214.
if the Council should grant Churchmen liberty to marry, he would think that
man more in Gods grace, who during his life kept three harlots, then he who
married according to the decree of the Council: and that he would command
under pain of damnation, that no man should marry by the permission of such a
Council, but either live chaste, or if that were impossible, then not to
despair, though he kept a harlot. O holy Reformer of the Roman Church! What
can please these men? If the Church permit them not to marry, they will
Apostatate under pretense of reforming her corruptions; If they be permitted to
marry, they will rather choose to be infamously wicked, then to marry. In your
first Edition, you say, that Marriage is (by us) counted a Crime; and you prove
it out of Pelagius did. 61. can. Catinensis, where it is said: Advise, that
one may be chosen, who neither has a wife, nor children, nor any Crime
repugnant to the Canons. But with what conscience can you deceive your
unlearned Reader, since the Latin, even as you allege it, has the quite
contrary to your English as is evident by the words which I have now set down,
in which, Marriage is distinguished from a Crime? But what if after all this
your obiecting Manicheisme to us, either your self, or at least many chief
Protestants be found more liable to that Heresy, if they will speak with
coherence to their other grounds? For as the Manichees in your opinion did not
forbid Marriage to all, but only to their Elect: so do Protestants say, that
those who have the gift of Chastity not only may, but ought to abstain from
Marriage, because they teach that there are no works of Supererogation, but
that men are bound to perform whatsoever God does inspire them to; and
consequently such Elect Persons should sin against the law of God if they
married, which is more then Catholics affirm, who do not teach that the
prohibition of Priests to marry, proceeds immediately from the law of God.

9. You go from Marriage to Meat, and say: And for Meats; Page 239.
why is abstinence from flesh accounted a perfect Christian fast, yea holy and
meritorious? And why is he that eats flesh in Lent, punished with a more
grievous penance, then he that commonly blasphemes the name of God, or defiles
his Neighbors bed, or abuses himself by drunkenness, or others by railing,
slaundering, etc. But these Arguments might better beseem some illiterate
railing Lecturer, then a man of your place; especially in a Treatise tending to
Pacification. For how do you think we can be saved, if we were indeed guilty
of Manicheisme, and such absurd impieties, as those whereof you talk.
Abstinence from flesh, is meritorious, not because flesh of its own nature is
evil, as neither was the forbidden apple; but because obedience to lawful
Superiors is good: and if fasting to subdue the flesh, and overcome
temptations were not holy, why did not the Ancient Fathers commend feasting, as
highly as fasting? For I will not think you to be so great a stranger to the
Fathers, that you can be ignorant how frequently they extol fasting. And I
desire to know, whether you do not think, that his Majesty's Laws, and in
particular his Proclamations about keeping Lent, do not bind in conscience? And
if you answer me at all, I beseech you forget not this demand; and whether the
observation of them be not holy, and forasmuch as belongs to that particular
object, a perfect Cbristian fast, and meritorious in that sense, and degree,
according to which you grant that other works are meritorious, or deserving a
reward? For the other part of your objection, that he that eats flesh in Lent
is punished with a more grievous penance then he that blasphemes etc. you show
how modest a man you are, and with all, that you are little seen either in the
Canon, or Civil Law. For the Civil Law commands, that In Authentiea, us non
luxurientur homines. Novel. 77.
Blasphemers should be punished with death, because, says the Law, Hunger and
earthquakes, and plagues, come by reason of such crimes. In the Cap. Statuimus
de matedici^^
Canon Law, Blasphemers, beside other punishments, are to stand as Penitents at
the Church door for the space of some Sundays, and for some fridayes to fast
in bread and water etc. and by other decrees of Popes the same sin is
grievously punished, as in particular the Council of Lateran under Leo the 10.
commands, That none be absolved from Blasphemy without a grievous penance: and
to the same purpose Julius III. and Pius V. have made very severe decrees.
Nevertheless it is also true, that greater punishment may in foro externo, be
appointed for some sins which are less then other, as S. Thomas does 1.2. q.
105. ar. 2. ad 9. and, 2.2. q. 39. art. 2. ad 1.
truly affirm. Do not your selves more usually punish such, as without license
eat flesh in Lent, then them who take the Name of God in vain, or abuse
themselves by drunkenness, or wrong their Neighbors by detraction? And besides,
to eat flesh in Lent may be an act of Heresy, which how grievous a sin it
is, has been explicated heertofore.

10. By occasion of mentioning the Manichees, you charge your Margent, as your
fashion is, with a deep piece of erudition, that the name (forsooth) of their
founder Manes, is conform to the Greek word, which signifies Madness. But if
we delighted is take hold of such goodly occasions of Vanity, we could say,
that he was a Persian, and his name was first Cubricus, which he changed into
Mames, which in the Babylonian Tongue signifies Epiph. haeres. 66.
a Vessel. But let us leave these toys to Grammar Scholars.

11. It seems you are willing of set purpose to mistake the point in question,
which was; whether the Creed contain all fundamental points of faith or no?
about which Charity Mistaken, having instanced in some points of faith not
contained in the Creed, as the Scriptures, and Sacraments; he adds these words:
Besides that, there are Page 86.87.
some great differences between them (meaning Protestants) and us about the
understanding of the Article of the descent of Christ our Lord into hell, and
that other of the Holy Catholic Church, and that also of the Communion of
Saints, which we believe, and they deny to inuolue both Prayers for the dead,
and Prayers to Saints, as that we should not be much better, either for our
knowing, or confessing that the Creed contains all fundamental points of
Faith, unless withal there were some certain way how to understand them
aright, and especially unless under the Article which concerns the holy
Catholic Church, they would understand it to be endued with so perfect
infallibility, and great Authority, as that it might teach us all the rest.
This solid discourse you mangle as you please, still forgetting the promise you
made in your Preface to the Reader not to omit any one thing of moment. For you
answer not a word to his particular instances of Prayer for the dead; or to
Saints; nor to his general exception, that we should not be much better for
knowing that the Creed contains all fundamental points of faith, unless
withal there were some way of understanding them aright. If you answer, that
Prayers for the dead, or to Saints, are not Fundamental points, whether they
be denied, or affirmed; then you must grant that you forsook the Church of
Rome for things indifferent, and not fundamental one way or other. For these
two points, and such as these, were the pretended errors, wherewith you seek
to cloak your Schism. To the other you answer; The Church of England Page
240.
questioneth not the sense of those Articles; She takes them in the old
Catholic sense: and the words are so plain, they bear their meaning before
them. Why do you answer to these two points of the Catholic Church, and our
Saviors descent into Hell, rather then to the other which Charity-Mistaken
does mention? And in these two of which you take notice, why do you use so
much tergiuersation? Why do you not plainly, and honestly acquaint us with
the meaning of them. If you say, that by the Catholic Church is understood a
Church always visible, and not capable of error in fundamental points, many
of your chief Brethren will contradict that which you judge to be plain: and
your Church of England speaks so generally, Art. 19. of the Church, that, as
it is affirmed in the Preface, men of all sorts may take that Article to be for
them. And as for the other Article of our Saviors descent, if it beso plain
as it bears the sense before it, how comes Calvin to understand it one way,
Brentius another, Beza another, and other Protestants in another, differently
from Catholics, with whom nevertheless some other Protestants agree, who
teach a Lymbus Patrum, as Lascitius, Oecolampadius, Zwinglius, Peter Martyr,
Bullinger, and Vide Brereley tract. 3. Sect. 7. under M. number. 26.
Bilson, and we may add D. Pott^er as one different from all the rest, who
says, the sense is plain, and yet he keeps it to himself.

12. But, the Roman Doctors Page 2^^.
cannot agree among themselves about this Article. Is there any Catholic that
denies Lymbus Patrum, or that Christ descended to Hell as it signifies Lymbus?
Yes; because, say you, Contr. 3 q. 5. art. 1.
Stapleton affirms the Scripture is silent that Christ descended into Hell,
and that there is a Catholic, and an Apostolic Church. Bellarmine 4. D^
Christo. cap. 6. and 12.
on the contrary is resolute, that the Article of the descent is every where in
Scripture: and Thomas grants 2.2. q. 2. art. 9. ad 1.
as much for the whole Creed. What is all this to the purpose? It is one thing
to disagree in the doctrine of Chists descent, and another, whether that
doctrine which they believe be proved out of Scripture, or delivered by the
Church out of Unwritten Traditions. Among Protestants who hold Scripture only
to be the Rule of faith, it is all one not to be contained in Scripture and not
to be a point of faith; but not so with Catholics, who besides Scripture,
believe infallible unwritten Traditions. And whereas you say; Bellarmine is
resolute, that the Article of the desce^t is every where in Scripture, and in
Latin Scripturae passim hoc docent: Bellarmines words are; All men agree that
Christ descended into Hell aliquo modo, in some manner or sense, because
Scripture every where teaches so much. Why did you leave out aliquo modo, which
words might well have showed that there was no contrariety between Bellarmine
and Stapleton. S. Thomas does not purposely dispute, whether all Articles of
the Creed be contained in Scripture, but only upon an other occasion teaches,
that the Creed is not an Addition to Scripture, out of which it is taken, and
that the truths believed by faith are contained in Scripture diverse ways, and
in some obscurely; which does in no wise exclude the Authority of the Church to
declare the meaning of the Creed. For if some be contained in Scripture but
obscurely, who shall declare them to us, but the Church?

13. As, for the sense of that page 240.
Article, some hold that Christ descended really into Hell. Others, virtually,
and by effect: This virtuall descent is taught by one only, namely Durand, and
therefore your Others is but an exaggeration; and even he does not deny Lymbus
Patrum, or that the Fathers were there, nor that Christ descended thither in
some sort, but only differs from others, whether he descended secundum
substantiam: which doctrine, or rather doubt of his (for he leaves the thing
doubtful) is rejected by all other Deuines, as erroneous.

14. By Hell some page 240.
understand the lowest pit, or the place of the damned, as Bellarmine at first
others the Lymbus Patrum, as Bellarmine at last. Would not one conceive by your
words, that in the opinion of Bellarmine, Christ descended only into the place
of the da^mned? And yet your conscience cannot but tell you, that Bellarmine
never doubted, but that Christ descended into Lymbus Patrum, and only proposed
it as doubtful whether or no he descended into the Hell of the damned, and
resolved probabile est: It is probable that the soul of Christ descended to
all the infernal places, or Hells. But afterward in his Recognitions he
retracted his opinions for as much as concerned the place of the damned;
whereby it is clear, that he never doubted of our Saviors descent to Lymbus;
and that you affirming the contrary, do without doubt, desire to deceive your
Reader.

15. You say, that it is the most important page 242.
and most fundamental of all Articles in the Church to believe, that Jesus
Christ the Son of God, and the Son of Mary, is the only Savior of the world:
wherein you give a deadly blow to D. Morton, who teaches that the Arians denying
our Savior to be God, do notwithstanding make a true Church: and if the
opinion of M. Hooker for which you bring diverse Arguments, be true, you cannot
exclude the Arians, or Trinitarians from being members of a true Church.

16. To clear the co^fusednes of your Church in her 39. Articles, you lay the
fault upon us. But by your leave, if you read, either Catholic Deuines, or
the Council of Trent, you will find, that they speak most clearly and
distinctly. But Charity Mistaken does truly say, that you are very careful not
to be too clearly understood; and therefore in many Controversies whereof that
Book (of the 39. Articles) speaks, it comes not at all to the maine question
between them and us etc. Which affirmation of his, is most true, both in the
points by him specified, and in diverse others; as for example: The third of our
Saviors descent into Hell. The 26. of the Nature and effect of Sacraments. The
27. will have the Baptism of Children to be retained, but does not specify
whether or no it be necessary. The 28. about the Lords Supper, is so general,
and of so large a size, that it may reach to Zuinglians, Caluinists, and
Lutherans, who yet in this Article are known to be as far asunder from each
other, as East from West. I omit other Articles, and only urge that which
Charity Mistaken presses, and you wholly dissemble, that: Those Articles do not
so much as say, that the Articles of doctrine which they deliver are
fundamental, either all, or half, or any one thereof, or that they are
necessarily to be believed by them, or the contrary damnable if it be believed
by us. Is this to keep your promise, not to omit without answer any thing of
moment in all his discourse? Certainly this which Charity Mistaken does urge
here, is according to your principles, the very quintessence of all other
points. I will not stand to examine how truly you affirm, that our Will is
essentially free from all necessity. Such motions of our Will as prevent the
deliberation of reason, are they not necessary? The Will in good Philosophy
cannot suffer coaction, but it may be necessitated, without changing the
essence thereof.

17. To the demand of Charity Mistaken; (Why do they not particularly
enumerate all the Books which they acknowledge to be of the New Testament, as
they had done them of the Old; but only because they must so have named those
Books of S. James, and others for Canonical, which the Lutherans have cast
out of their Canon?) You answer that the Lutherans do now admit the Epistle of
S. James, and the rest, as Canonical: which you prove by D. Gerhard a
Luthera^. But if this be so, you do not answer his Question, what the reason
is, why your Church does not particularly enumerate all the Books which they
acknowledge to be of the New Testament, as she had done them of the old?
Besides, what Authority had D. Gerhard to speak for all the Lutherans, of which
there be diverse sorts, condemning one another? If once you deny the
infallibility of the Church, what infallible ground has D. Gerhard this day to
admit of those Books, which yesterday other Lutherans rejected? In the Bibles
of Luther to this day, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of S. James,
and S. Jude, and the Apocalypse of S. John, are excluded from the Canon.

18. Now that none of those Books which we hold for Canonical, be
Apochryphall, as you teach, Bellarmine De verbo Dei l. 1. per multa capita
proves at large, and answers all your objections. And if any heertofore
doubted of some of them, the Authority of the Visible Catholic Church of
Christ ought to preponderate all doubts of particular persons. And it is
strange that you cite S. Augustine against the Machabees, who in that very
place which you cite, says: The Scripture Cont. ep. Gaudent. lib. 2. c. 23.
of the Machabees is received by the Church not unprofitably, if it be read and
heard soberly: which latter words are understood only against desperate
inferences of the Donatists, who upon the example of Razias in the History of
the Machabees did kill and precipitate themselves; as is clear by his other
ensuing words in the same place. We ought not then to approve by our consent,
all things which we read in the Scriptures to have been done by men, even
adorned with praises by the testimony of God himself, but to mingle our
consideration with discretion, bringing discretion with us, not grounded upon
our own Authority, but upon the Authority of the holy and divine Scriptures,
which permit not us to praise or imitate all the actions even of those, of whom
the Scripture gives good, and glorious Testimony, if they have done any thing,
that has not been well done, or that agrees not with the consent of the
present time. In which words we see S. Augustine calls the Books of the
Machabees, Scriptures, even as afterward he calls Canonical Books in general,
Divine, and holy Scriptures; and that the Sobriety of Circumspection, which he
advises to be observed, in reading them, is not, how far they be true or
false, but whether the example of Razias recounted by them, is to be imitated
more or less. What you allege out of S. Gregory Moral. lib. 19. c. 17.
is easily answered: For he does not call the Machabees, not Canonical, as if
he would exclude them from the number of true, and divine Scriptures, but
because they were not in the Canon of the Jews, or in that which he had at
hand when he wrote his first draught of his Commentaries upon Job, For he was
at that time the Popes Nuncius, or Legate at Constantinople, and the Greek
Rapsody of African Canons had untruly put out of the Canon the two Books of
the Machabees, though they were received in Africa as Canonical, by the decree
of the African Council. And therefore you were ill advised, under color of
commending Pope Gregory, (but indeed the more to impugn us by his authority)
to write Greg: M. or Magnus, the Great, whereas he was not Pope, but only
Deacon, when he first wrote those Commentaries upon Job.

19. You cite S. Hierome praefat. in lib. Salom. The Church reads the Books
of Judith, Tobias, and the Machabees, but she does not receive them among
Canonical writings. But S. Hieromes words are these: As the Church reads
Tobias, Judith, and the Machabees, but receives them not among the Canonical
Books; so may she read Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, for the edification of
the people, but not for the confirmation of Ecclesiastical doctrines. Thus S.
Hierome. And you had reason to cite his words by halues: For he afterward
retracted what he said of the Books of Judith, and Tobias (with which the
Machabees are yet joined in the words cited by you) saying in his Preface upon
the History of Judith: The Book of Judith is read by the Hebrews among the
Hagiographs, whose authority is esteemed less sufficient to decide
Controversies: but for as much as the Council of Nice has reckoned it among
the holy Scriptures, I have obeyed your request. Where you see that S. Hierome
affirms, that the most ancient, and grave Council of Nice, received the Book
of Judith in that sense, in which the Jews did not receive it; and
consequently as a Book esteemed sufficient to decide Controversies, which the
Jews denied. And in another place the same Father says: Ruth, Hester, and
Judith have been Ep. 140.
so glorious, as they have given their names into the sacred Volumes. Where you
see that S. Hierome places Judith with Ruth and Hester, the former whereof you
admit for Canonical, and part of the latter. In his Preface upon the Book of
Tobias, he says: The Hebrews Ep. 100.
cut off the Book of Tobias from the Catalogue of the divine Scriptures. And
again: The iealousy of the Jews, does accuse us, that against their Canon we
translate the Book of Tobias into Latin: but I judge it better to displease
the judgment of the Pharisees, and to obey the Commandment of the Bishops. And
elsewhere he places In Jsa. c. 23.
the Machabees among Canonical Books, saying: The Scripture reports that
Alexander king of the Macedonians came out of the land of Cethim. And wonder
not if S. Hierome spoke not always in the same manner of the Canon of the Old
Testament, since upon experience, examination, and knowledge of the sense of
the Church he might alter his Opinion; as once he said of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, that it Ad Panlinum.
was put out of the number by the greatest part of men: and yet elsewhere he
receives it Ep. ad Dardanum.
as the Epistle of S. Paul. And if you will have a general explication of S.
Hierome concerning his rejecting of Books, not admitted by the Hebrews, hear
it in his own words: Whereas I have reported Ad^. Russ. Apolog. 2.
what the Hebrews used to object against the History of Susanna, and the Hymn
of the three Children, and the Story of the Dragon Bell, which are in the
Hebrew; I have not declared what I thought, but what the Jews were wont to say
against us. And he calls Ruffinus a foolish Sycophant for charging him with the
opinion of the Hebrews about these parts of Daniel. And S. Hierome explayning
himself in this manner, is acknowledged by Answer to Burges. page 87.
Couell, and Conference before his Majesty.
Bankeroft. How then will you excuse your Church, which in her sixth Article
says in general of all the Books which you esteem Apochryphall, among which
are the History of Susanna, the Hymn of the three Children, and that of the
Dragon: (The other Books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for example
of life, and instruction of manners: but yet it does not apply them to
establish any doctrine?) How can she (I say) be excused, since S. Hierome, even
according to the Confession of your own Brethren, does explain himself, that
he uttered only what the Jews were wont to say against us; and calls Ruffinus a
foolish Sycophant for saying the contrary? So as, instead of S. Hierome, and
the Church of God, you put on the person of Ruffinus against S. Hierome, and of
the Synagogue against the Church of Christ our Lord; and so your whole Canon of
the old Testament relies upon the Authority of the Jews. And finally, D.
Potter while he grants that Catholics and Protestants disagree about the very
Canon of Scripture, forgets to answer what Charity-Mistaken ( page 43. and
46.) does thence infer, to wit, that they cannot be accounted of one and the
same Religion, Faith, and Church.

20. The Chymericall Church of your Page 234.
Master, D. Usher, consisting of men agreeing only in fundamental points, is
indeed a Chymera, or non Ens. For it is impossible that there can be a visible
Church, which professing fundamental points, does not in other points either
agree with us, or you, or else disagrees from us both. For either they must
hold, for example, the Real Presence, Transubstantiati, Prayer for the dead,
and to Saints, Worship of Images, Supremacy of the Pope, Sufficiency of one
kind for the Layty etc. and then they agree with us: Or else they deny all these
points, and so agree with you against us. And this is that pernicious fallacy,
whereby you deceive your self, and others; as if there were a visible
Catholic Church, or company of men, holding all fundamental points, and
being neither Roman Catholics, nor Lutherans, nor Caluinists etc. nor any
other Church in particular; which is a mere impossible fiction. For Faith is
not Faith unless it extend to all points sufficiently propounded as divine
Truths, the least whereof if any one deny, he gives his Faith a deadly wound,
and his seeming Belief of other Articles auailes him nothing. To which purpose
this saying of S. Augustine is remarkable: If a man grievously wounded De
Baptism. cont. Donatist. l. 1. c. 8.
in some necessary part of his body, be brought to a Physician, and the
Physician say, if he be not dressed he will dye, I think they who brought him,
will not be so sensles, as to answer the Physician, after they have considered
and viewed his other parts which are sound; What, shall not so many sound parts
have power to preserve him alive? And shall one wounded part have power to
bring him to his death? In vain then do you flatter your selves with a seeming
sound belief of the Articles of the Creed, if in the mean time you receive a
deadly wound, by opposing any one truth revealed by God, and propounded by the
true Catholic Church. For as all the living members of a man's body, are so
united in one life, that a deadly blow received immediately but in one, does
necessarily redound to the destruction of all: so all the objects of faith,
being united in the same Formal Motive of Gods testimony sufficiently
propounded to us, the denial or wounding of any one truth, which is vested
with that formal Motive, and life of faith, does ineuitably redound to the
death, and destruction of all the rest. When by this occasion you cite our late
sovereign Lord king James affirming, that Epist. Casauboni ad Card. Per. ad
Obseruat. 3.
the things which are simply necessary to be believed, are but few in number;
and yet that all things are simply necessary, which the word of God commands us
to believe; it had been your duty to explain the contrariety which appears
betwixt those two sayings. For since the word of God commands us to believe
every Proposition contained in holy Scripture, which are many thousands, how
are the things necessary to be believed, but few in number?

21. But now I must put you in mind of not performing your promise, not to omit
any one thing of moment. For besides other, you omit to set down what Charity
Mistaken writes Page 73.
about the true sense of the distinction of points fundamental and not
fundamental, which if you had set down as he delivers it, it had clearly
appeared, how through your whole Book you had still avoided the true State,
and point of the Question. To which purpose you conceal in particular, what he
alleges out of D. Dunne, late Deane of S. Paul's, who having put great
strength in the distinction of Fundamental and not Fundamental points, he
wipes out with a wet finger the whole substance of his discourse by saying,
That Page 96.
difference in points which are not important is not to prejudice a man's
salvation, unless by not believing them he commits a disobedience withal (as
certainly every one does, who denies any least point sufficiently propounded
to him, as revealed by God, whosoever that Propounder be:) For (says he)
Obedience indeed Page 97.
is of the Essence of Religion.

The Conclusion.
AND thus having in this Second Part answered the particulars in D. Potters
Book, and having proved in the First Part, that this truth, Amongst men of
different Religions, one only side can be saved, is so evidently true, as no
Christian that understands the terms, can call it in question; in so much as
if any will go about to persuade the contrary, we must say with S. Augustine;
He does err De Cinit. Dei. l. 21. cap. 17.
so much the more absurdly, and against the true word of God more peruersly, by
how much he seems to himself to judge more charitably: It cannot but
appear, how much it imports every soul, to seek out that one saving Truth,
which can be found only in the true Visible Catholic Church of Christ.
Wherefore our greatest care must be to find out that one true Church; which we
shall be sure not to miss, if our endeavor be not wanting to his grace, who
desires that 1. Tim. 2.4.
all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the TRVTH. For, the
words of the sacred Council of Trent are most true: God commands not Sest. 6.
cap. 11.
impossible things, but by commanding warnes thee both to do what thou art
able, and to ask what thou art not able, and helps thee, that thou may be
able. Let not men therefore flatter, and deceive themselves, that Ignorance will
excuse them. For if they want any one thing absolutely necessary to salvation,
Ignorance cannot excuse. And there are so many, and so easy, and yet withal so
powerful means to find the true Church, that it is a most dangerous, and
pernicious error, to rely upon the excuse of invincible Ignorance. And I wish
them to consider, that he can least hope for relief by Ignorance, who once
confides therein: because his very alleging of Ignorance, shows that God has
put some thoughts into his mind of seeking the safest way; which if he, relying
on Gods grace, do carefully and constantly endeavor to examine, discuss, and
perfect, he shall not fail to find what he seeks, and to obtain what he
asks. Neither will the search prove so hard and intricate, as men imagine.
For, as God has confined salvation within the Communion of his Visible Church;
so has he endued her with so conspicuous Marks of Unity, and agreement in
doctrine; Universality for Time, and Place; a never interrupted Succession of
Pastors; a perpetual Visibility from the Apostles, to us etc. far beyond any
probable pretense that can be made by any other Congregations; that whosoever
does seriously and impartially weigh these Notes, may easily discern to what
Church they belong. But all this diligence must be used with perfect
indifferency, and constant resolution to proceed in this affair, which is the
most important of all other, as at the hour of their death, and the day of
their final account, they would wish to have done: For nothing can
counterpoyse an Eternity of Felicity, or Misery. Their Prayer will be much
helped with Almsdeeds, offered to this intention of obtaining Light of
Almighty God, according to that saying of the Prophet Esaias: Break thy bread
Cap. 58. V. 7. ^.
to the hungry, and needy, and harbourles; when thou shall see the naked cover
him, and despise not thy flesh. Then shall thy LIGHT break forth as the
Morning, and thy Health shall soon arise, and thy Justice shall go before thy
face, and the Glory of our Lord shall embrace thee. Then shall thou call, and
our Lord will hear: Thou shall cry, and he will say; Lo, here I am. And so he
will not fail to show thee Where he is: Namely, in his own Catholic visible
Church. Fasting likewise gives strength and wings to our Prayer: for Prayer is
good Tob. 12.^.
with fasting. But nothing is more necessary, then that they root out of their
souls, prejudice of Opinion, Fear, Hope, Avarice, Interest, humane Respects,
and such either corruptions of nature, or temptations of our Enemy; to which
men will the more easily be led to yield, by the desire which they have
naturally to lead a life in liberty, and not to adventure the loss of such
conueniences and delights, as they are wont to like so well; as also not to
incur those disaduantages and afflictions to which a contrary course might
make the^ subject. Some of these things, are excellently pointed at by S.
Augustine, when he writes against the Donatist Heretics of his time, which
every man ought seriously to consider how far they may perhaps concern
himself.

How many (says he) being Epist. 48^
convinced by evidence of truth, did desire to be Catholics, but did defer
it from day to day, for fear of offending their friends or kinsfolks? How
many were tied, not by truth, wherein they never much confided, but by the
heavy chain of obdurate custom? How many did believe the faction of Donatus
to be the true Church, because too much assurednes made them drowzy,
disdainefull, and sleuthfull? To how many did the reports of ill Tongues shut
up the way to enter, who said, that we put, I know not what, upon the Altar?
How many thinking that it was no matter on what side one were a Christian, did
therefore remain among the Donatists, because there they were borne?

And afterward: We were frighted to enter, by reason of false reports, which we
should not have known to be false unless we had entered, into the Catholic
Church (as daily we hear from the mouth of Protestants converted to Catholic
Religion.) Others say: We did indeed believe, that it imported nothing, in what
Company, we did hold the faith of Christ. But thanks be to our Lord, who has
gathered us from division, and has showed to us, that it agrees to one God,
that he be worshipped in Unity.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Print.
GOod Reader, whereas through the absence of the Author of this Work, and by
reason of an uncorrected written Copy sent unto the press, many errors and
mistakings have happened in the printing, especially having been constrained,
through the difficulties of these times, to use the help of strangers, and such
as are ignorant in our tongue; It is in all humble manner desired, that (these
said Circumstances duly considered) thou would in no wise heerin condemn
the said Author as accessory heerto, but favorably affoarding thy Censure
heerof, and in reading over the Book, to correct them with thy pen, they being
here exactly gathered by himself, and set down as follows.

EPistle Dedicatory. Page 7. lin. 3. Catholics Corrige Catholic

In the Preface.
Page 2. lin. 26. indifferent Corrige in different Page 7. lin. 26. transfered
Corrige transferred
In the first Part.
Page 38. lin. 26. one, the other Corrige one, and the other Page 44. lin. 6.
contentions Corrige contentious Page 45. lin. 29. as there is Corrige as in Job
is Page 51. lin. 15. affirm knowledge Corrige affirm that our first knowledge
Page 54. lin. 8. it Corrige is Ibid. lin. 24. then Corrige them Page 56. lin.
25. languages. Corrige languages? Page 57. lin. 25. Hospinians Corrige
Hospinianus Page 59. lin. 1. Caerlile corrige Carlisle Page 61. lin. 11. No!
Corrige No. Page 67. lin. 7. seditions corrige seditious Page 78. lin. 6. not
corrige no Page 79. lin. 1. several corrige severally Page 89. lin. 16. they
holy corrige the holy Page 95. lin. 30. deleatur be Page 99. lin. 4. says
corrige he says Page 102. lin. 8. Hold corrige hold Page 103. lin. 1.
Circumcision D. Potter corrige Circumcision D. Potter Page 105. lin. 3.
errors: But (x) corrige errors (x): But etc. for the letter (x) is not
referred to Philaletes, but to the Moderate examination etc. Page 111. lin. 2.
at corrige it Page 113. lin. 9. Text corrige Texts Ibid. lin. 17. or corrige
nor Page 115. lin. 16. nor. corrige not. Page 119. in the Title Chap. 111.
corri^ge Chap. 1111. Page 124. lin. 2. beliene corrige believe Page 126. lin.
25. their corrige there (for in Latin it is (ibi) not (illorum.) Page 135. lin.
17. of few corrige or few Page 136. lin. 22. danably corrige damnably Ibid.
lin. 26. damnably corrige damnably. I mean, it ought not to be in a different
or curciffe letter, because it is not D. Potters word, though it follow out of
his doctrine. Page 140. lin. 5. before, to avoid corrige before. To avoid Page
141. lin. 4. supposes; it does corrige supposes. It does Page 146. lin. 25.
name; confess corrige name; J confess Page 147. lin. 19. which corrige with
Page 149. lin. 10. deleatur we Page 155. lin. 11. we was corrige he was Page
161. lin. 10. and 26. Napier corrige Napper Ibid. lin. 19. goodly corrige godly
Ibid. lin. 29. wilernes corrige wilderness Ibid. lin. 31. Hailbronerus corrige
Hailbronnerus Page 162. lin. 15. for that corrige that for Page lin. 17. conld
corrige could Page 163. lin. 29. have also corrige have not also Page 165. lin.
22. men depart. corrige men to depart. Page 174. lin. 5. Christopher Potter,
corrige D. Christop. Potter, Page 183. lin. 20. at last corrige at least Page
184. lin. 29. your grounds corrige your own grounds Ibid. lin. 30. enough
corrige enough The like also page 185. lin. 2. 6. 7. 8. enough corrige enough
Page 185. lin. 9. deleatur not Page 187. lin. 6. breach in corrige breach, in
Page 190. lin. 1. and 2. And D. Potter corr. And yet D. Potter Page 193. lin.
7. Reformation: corrige Reformation. Page 197. lin. 18. sencelenesse corrige
sencelesnesse Page 200. lin. 25. manuer corrige manner Page 204. lin. 6. after
impossible, add, and damnable: Page 209. lin. 26. correct the parenthesis
this: (What? do you mean that they are his own conceyts, and yet grounded
upon evidence of Scripture?) Page 212. lin. 16. the government corrige her
government Page 215. lin. 18. Augustines corrige Augustine Page 218. lin. 14.
deleatur that Page 221. lin. 16. Gods Church, corrige Gods Word, Page 225. lin.
24. A godly corrige A goodly Page 230. lin. 5. for corrige from Page 233. lin.
18. see by a corrige see now by a Page 235. lin. 2. summoued corrige summoned
Page 238. lin. 22. these corrige those Ibid. lin. 24. certainly corrige
certainty Page 239. lin. 9. from Authority. corrige from divine Authority.
Ibid. lin. 20. any heresy corrige an heresy Page 246. lin. 18. must impudent
corrige most impudent Page 248. lin. 1. even corrige ever Ibid. lin. 28. began
corrige begun Page 251. lin. 25. Our of corrige Out of Page 252. lin. 27. writ
corrige write Page 257. lin. 8. Church, because corrige Church: yet because
Page 259. lin. 23. Greek Turk corrige Great Turk Page 263. lin. 17. the
parenthesis should end after the word baptism) Ibid. lin. 19. repeated) so
corrige repeated: and so Page 264. lin. 8. certifitate corrige certificate Page
271. lin. 23. Argumenta corrige Argument Page 272. lin. 11. should corrige
should Page 274. lin. 26. draws corrige drownes Ibid. lin. 31. disbelieued
corrige disbelieue Page 276. lin. 4. (or as corrige or (as Page 279. lin. 7. or
corrige nor Page 293. lin. 12. reitering corrige reiterating In the title of
page 294. by error, is put 264. Page 298. lin. 25. fundamental corrige
fundamentalls Page 299. lin. 10. truth corrige truths.
In the Second Part.
Page 2. in the tittle Part. 1. Corrige Part. 2. Page 9. lin. 6. do, with truth
you corrige do with truth, you Page 12. lin. 22. the many corrige there are
many Page 14. lin. 3. Chap. corrige Page Page 19. lin. 27. Priest corrige
Priests Page 23. lin. 1. and 2. second directly corrige second is directly Page
28. lin. 19. deleatur will Ibid. lin. 20. does corrige do Page 33. lin. 26.
spirit, as he was who corrige spirit as he was, who Page 37. lin. 8. your Text
your corrige your Text you Page 45. lin. 24. geuerall corrige general Page 50.
lin. 5. man bound corrige man is bound Page 61. lin. 5. in fact corrige of fact
Page 78. lin. 28. seem corrige seen Page 86. lin. 29. ingenious corrige
ingenuous Page 88. lin. 14. Means corrige Newness Page 94. lin. 19. martes
corrige matters Page 97. lin. 18. it is given deleatur it is Ibid lin. 29.
Church wall corrige Church walls Page 103. lin. 5. the General deleatur the
Ibid. lin. 13. you Book corrige your Book Page 141. lin. 7. vnwarry corrige
unwary Ibid. lin. 17. after us; corrige after us. And blot out all the words
following. Neither are the Authors etc. unto the next, and 3. Paragraph, as put
in by error. Page 105. lin. 26. Does not corrige Do not Ibid. lin. 28. and for
corrige and that for Page 109. lin. 3. translated corrige translate Ibid. lin.
30. if you corrige if still you Page 111. lin. 14. self corrige it self Page
127. lin. 20. deleatur may Page 131. lin. 8. he had corrige I had Page 143.
lin. 16. believe corrige belie Page 145. lin. 13. and 14. these words only
[James changed the verdict of Peter] should be put in a different letter, as
the direct affirmation of Luther. Page 162. lin. 2. meaning corrige means
Ibid. lin. 5. fallibility corrige infallibility Page 168. lin. 19. D. Morton
corrige M. Morton Page 169. lin. 3. medij, corrige medij) Page 171. lin. 4.
fundamental, and that corrige fundamental, and not fundamental, and that
Page 177. lin. 16. Counsels corrige Counsels Page 186. lin. 28. Mames corrige
Manes Page 191. lin. 23. D. Morton corrige M. Morton Page 197. lin. 20. are in
corrige are not in Ibid. lin. 25. S. Hierome corrige S. Hieromes
In the Margent. 1. Part.
Page 12. Reioynders corrige Reioynder. Page 61. sect. 6. 26. corrige sect. 6.
page 26. Page 157. lib. cont. Parmen. corrige lib. 1. cont. Parmen.
In the Margent. 2. Part.
Page 13. Petricon. corrige Petricor. Page 92. (c) page 93. corrige (c) page
92.
FINIS.

