Saints by Calling: OR Called to be Saints.

A Godly Treatise of our holy Calling to Christ, by the Gospel.

With the several gifts proper unto the Called: And their Counterfeits in the
Hypocrites which are not partakers of this Effectual Calling.

Written by Thomas Wilson, Minister of Gods Word, at S. Georges Church in
Canterbury.

Ephesians. 4, 2. Walk worthy of the Vocation whereunto ye are called. 2. Pet. 1,
10. Make your Calling and Election sure, and give all diligence thereunto.
Printed by W. Iaggard, dwelling in Barbican, 1620.

TO The Right Honorable, the Countess of Leycester widow, all health and
happiness of soul and body from Christ our Lord, both now and for ever.
Right Honorable,
AFter many Children (Books I mean) which are a fruit that springs out of
wit (as out of a womb) eleven in number, which God has given me in the few
and evil days of my pilgrimage; he has now at length of his goodness,
added unto them a twelfth (a Benjamin) like the twelve sons of Jacob: It is
my last and youngest child, begotten and brought forth in my old age, being
fast forward to the years of a man.

In natural generation, the first borne (Reuben-like) is the beginning of
Parents strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power; Genesis
49. 3. But it is otherwise in this spiritual birth, where the first that come
into the Christian World, (by weakness of judgment in the parents, and want
of years and experience) they are commonly the feeblest and unworthiest; those
proving most strong and excellent which be last borne. Good Madam, I could wish
that I might so speak of this my Benjamin, the son of my right hand, and of
my old age; and surely I have some little reason to hope it will prove so:
(pardon the overmuch indulgence of a father, even holy David could over fancy
Adoniah his child, and good Elie could ouerualew two not good sons) because
this is the off spring and issue that proceeded from me in the greatest
infirmity of my body, but in the best strength of my mind; when I had in an
ancient City, and a great people for the space of thirty four years and
above, been exercised in my Ministry from Sabbath to Sabbath; so as I may
trust this Treatise will have more perfection then his brethren. Which howsoever
it may prove for manner of handling, yet hereof I am well persuaded, that the
matter and argument is most worthy and weighty; for it is about our holy and
effectual calling, to our celestial and eternal King, by the Ministry of
the Gospel; which is the beginning and first step into the state of grace,
after we are entered into this elementary world, and our most excellent dignity
therein. As Constantine the Great acknowledged, that to be a true Christian by
divine vocation, was more esteemed of him then his Crown and Empire, which are
corruptible; the other being incorruptible and never perishing, as the work of
Gods exceeding great power, wherein he uttered no less strength and might,
then in the creation of the World, or in the resurrection of Christ from the
dead; Ephe. I. Verse 19, 20. For in this work of effectual calling, the Elect
being by nature dead, corrupt and blind in mind, perverse in their will and
affections, are by a wonderful force (yet sweetly and with delight) drawn to
the life of faith, being enabled to see Christ, and to love and obey him as
their Savior, calling them out of darkness into his marvelous light.

The reasons moving me to single out your Honor from among many both
honorable and worthy friends of all ranks, unto whom I might dedicate this
Christian Dialogue, are two. First, the report of your true calling to Christ,
and of your sound love and obedience to your caller, and great affection ye
bear to all about you, called to be Saints, both faithful Ministers and
Christians. Secondly, for that ye have been the chief instrument under God, to
call my eldest son to be the first that ever actually enjoyed that great
exhibition, a good while sithence given by your right noble and most honorable
Husband, the Earl of Leycester, for the maintenance of two Scholars for ever
in the University College at Oxford: for the which, if I should not every way
as I am able, show my self thankful to your Honor, I should be most
unworthy of such a benefit, being so freely conferred upon one unknown to your
Honor. The daily prayers of my Family, which are all the better for this good
turn, both have been, and shall be offered up unto God the Father, through
Christ his Son, for his gracious and powerful guiding and keeping of your
Honor in his comfortable and holy service and fear for evermore; Amen.

Your Honors most bounden, Thomas Wilson.

To the Right Worshipful, his approved Friends, Sir George Newman Knight, and
his virtuous Lady: and Master Doctor Bancroft, Master of University College
in Oxford; Grace and peace from Jesus Christ be multiplied.
RIght worshipful, the maine and chief use to be made of this Book or
Treatise, it is to direct (as by an hand) every Christian, which of all other
things is most careful of his own salvation, how to judge and discern of
himself, whether he have any part in that saving holy calling which brings
to Christ, by such gifts of the Spirit as be peculiar to persons effectually
called. The cause is not better known by the effect, or a tree by the fruit,
then a true calling by the Gospel is manifested by such graces as do
accompany it in all the faithful, necessarily, but not equally; as the good
fruits of a good tree be some bigger, some lesser. And lest any should be
deceived in judging themselves (for likeness is the mother of error, which
makes copper and other glittering things to be sometime taken for gold) I have
therefore in the passage of this Book discovered such things as be like unto
the true works of grace, and are but the counterfets and images of them. Now
the same causes which induced me to dedicate this tract and Christian Dialogue
primarily to that most Honorable Christian Lady, my Sons Benefactor in the
University College at Oxford, excited and moved me likewise to join you three
to her in a secondary Dedication, as having through the grace of Christ obtained
like precious faith in your heavenly calling, through the blessed Gospel; and
being by Gods providence stirred up to be the means of my sons preferment,
both to his place, and in his learning. The first motion to this good
exhibition, (which he partly has to the great ease of my charge, and wholly I
trust shall enjoy by your favorable furtherance) began at Canterbury by you
Madam, and was seconded and helped forward at Oxford by you, the worthy Master
of that College where my son is Student; and finally, perfected by that
Right Honorable Countess, Widow to the founder her most Honorable Husband
the Earl of Leycester, long since deceased. Accept I humbly pray you this
poor testimony of my thankful mind (who daily mention you in my prayers,
that all saving blessings may be powered on you, and continued to you) till my
son through Gods mercy prospering in his studies, may express a morefull
measure of a grateful mind unto you all, to whom he has been, and may yet be
so much bounden; which the Lord of his favor in his good time enable him well
to perform. Fare ye well.

From my House in Canterbury, the 10. of July 1620. Yours ever even to his
utmost, Thomas Wilson.

An Advertisement unto the Reader.
COurteous and Christian Reader; there be four several things which I
purposed to effect in this whole Dialogue and Treatise. First, for the Matter,
to deliver so near as my judgment could attain, all those works of the
Spirit, even in their particulars, which are peculiar unto Gods elect children,
who live to be partakers of an outward effectual Calling: that when the
manifold riches of Christ his grace should be in some sort discovered and laid
forth to their eye to view and look upon them, it might stir them up to a
marvelous love and thankfulness toward him, who has called them to such
riches and honor: Also, that finding themselves endued and blessed with such
graces as they shall learn from the Word, to belong only to the chosen of God,
it may settle them in the persuasion and full assurance of their election to
life.

Secondly, for the Manner: Because every one of the works of Christ in his
elect, has his counterfeit in the reprobate, which live in the Church, and
partake only in a general vocation; therefore I have somewhat endeavored to
descry what the truth of every grace wrought in Gods Children, and to discover
it from that appearance and shadow which an Hypocrite has of the same grace;
for this purpose, that whether the godly Reader would prove himself and make
trial of his own sincerity, either in the whole work of Christianity, or in
some special part or duty thereof, here he may find what may further him.

Thirdly, for the Order, I have followed so precisely and truly, as ever my
skill would direct me; that very order of causes in this whole Treatise, which
God himself does keep, in the bestowing and working of the graces,
propounding them to the Reader to be considered, as they have necessary and
natural coherence one with another, and dependence one upon another; setting
causes before effects, and giving chief place to the principal effects. By
this means the careful Christian in the search of himself, shall by effects
be able to find out causes, the root by the fruits, and how to value each
grace and fruit, according to his proper worth. Also, the Conscionable
Minister, which has not (as yet) thought upon such an order, and shall approve
of this as good and sound, may in his teaching help himself to deliver such
things first, as by order of nature ought to have precedence, for the better
edification of their hearers.

Finally, as touching the Persons for whose sake I wrote this Dialogue; I meant
it, though not only, yet chiefly for the godly unlettered Christians, to
further them in this knowledge, how to examine their own estate before God. As
for the more Learned, they can help themselves in this part of our Christian
science: or else may fetch direction from other manner of Lights then mine.
Whatsoever it is that I have performed, I pray thee good Reader take it in good
part, make thy profit of it, and praise God for all. Farewell.

Yours in the Lord, Thomas Wilson.

The particular Contents of the whole Dialogue, divided into ten Portions.
The first Part entreats of Calling.
1. OF common and outward Calling. 2. Of inward and effectual calling. 3. Of
differences between them. 4. What effectual Calling is. 5. Of the means
thereof by the Word of God. 6. Time of Calling, that it is diverse and
uncertain. 7. Persons, who for the most part are incapable thereof. 8. Of what
quality and estate be the persons, which be commonly called with a true
effectual Calling. 9. Effectual Calling may be known of them in whom it is.
10. Of the tokens whereby it is known. 11. Means whereby such are prepared to
Calling, who as yet are not called. 12. Of the sundry ways that God takes in
the work of Calling. 13. The ends or final causes of a true Calling. 14. The
moving cause thereof. 15. Differences amongst those which are called in the act
of their Calling. 16. Election to be judged of by Calling. 17. Rash judgment
about the calling of other men to be avoided.
The second Part of the Dialogue entreats of the Graces which flow from
Calling.
1. ALl saving Graces come together at one time with our Calling. 2. One Grace
before another in order of causes. 3. Of illumination of the Mind, the first
work of Grace. 4. Opening of the heart. 5. Of the engandring of faith, and
what works of the Spirit go thereunto.
The third Part of the Dialogue, entreats of a true and lively Faith.
1. A Lively faith is a fruit of effectual Calling. 2. A gift proper to the
Elect. 3. What it is, and how it differs from the faith of hypocrites and
wicked men. 4. Of the parts of Faith, and of the properties thereof. 5. Of
application by Faith, how it is proved, and what things belong to it.
The fourth Part of the Dialogue, entreats of the degrees of Faith.
1. A Little Faith, and a great Faith, a weak and strong Faith. 2. Wherein
they are like each other. 3. The least measure of Faith, what it is. 4. That it
must, and does labor to increase it self. 5. Of a strong Faith what it is. 6.
Of the sever all measures thereof, and which is the highest degree of
believing. 7. By what steps Gods Children climb up to the greatest degree of
believing in this life.
The fifth Part of the Dialogue, entreats of the rareness, and fruitfulness
of faith.
1. OF the rareness of Faith, or the fewness of believers. 2. Of the signs
or causes thereof, both common and proper to this age. 3. Of the efficacy and
fruitfulness of Faith in general. 4. Of the manifold encouragements to
believe. 5. Of discouragements, and how the objections of Satan, and our
corruption against belief in Christ, are to be repelled.
The sixth Part of the Dialogue, entreats of the fruits of faith in
particular.
1. OF union with Christ, that there is such a gift, and that it is by faith.
2. Two things necessarily required to the working of this union. 3. The nature
and neerenesse of it, expressed by Scripture similitudes. 4. In what respect
this union with Christ is necessary for us. 5. Of the great and several
fruits thereof. 6. Of Justification, the second maine fruit of Faith. 7. What
Justification signifies. 8. In what sense we are instified by Faith. 9. Of
the double righteousness of Christ, active and passive. 10. Of the two parts
of Justification, forgiveness of sins, and imputation of Justice. 11. What a
worthy gift, or instification is. 12. Of Satan's malice against this doctrine.
Experto creed.
The seventh Part of this Dialogue entreats of the nearest effects of
Justification by Faith.
1. IS reconciliation with God. 2. Peace of conscience. 3. Access into the
grace of God. 4. Standing in this grace. 5. Hope of heavenly glory. 6.
Rejoicing under this hope of despair and presumption. 7. Ofioy in
tribulations. 8. Sense of Gods love in the heart. 9. Glorying concerning God.
The eighth Part of the Dialogue, entreats of another fruit of Faith, called
Sanctification.
1. SAnctification, what it is, how it is by faith. 2. The parts and causes of
it. 3. The degree and measure of it. 4. Of the spiritual combat between the
flesh and the Spirit. 5. 'Of Repentance, the consequent of Sanctification. 6.
Ofrenewed Repentance, the beginning and signs of it. 7. Of encouragements to
Repentance. 8. Of the hindrances of Repentance, how to be removed. 9. Of good
works, the fruits of Repentance, the causes, end, and uses of them.
The 9. part of the dialogue, of particular good works, etc.
1 Of love toward God, what it is to love him. 2 By what rule our love is to
be guided 3 Whence it springs, and what be the effects and tokens of it. 4 Of
the fear of God. 5 How it differs from that fear which is in the wicked. 6 Of
the fruits of the true fear of God, and of the measure of it. 7 Of trust in
God, what it is. 8 What be the grounds of it. 9 How the trust of the godly
differs from the vain confidence of the wicked. 10 Encoragements to trust in
God. 11 Of prayer and thankfulness. 12 Differences between bad and good men
in these duties. 13 Of the word and Sacrament. 14 Of the religious use of Gods
name and Sabbath.
10. part of the dialogue, of patience.
1 Afflictions the object of patience. 2 Of common afflictions. 3 The godly
more afflicted then the wicked, and why. 4 The general grounds of patience. 5
Of chastisements, etc. 6 The fruits which by chastisement come to children,
etc. 7 Of trials first by conflict of conscience with sin, 2. of martyrdom. 8
What martyrdom is. 9 The condition of dying for Christ. 10 Preparation to
martyrdom. 11 Of resolution in the suffering of martyrdom. 12 An answer to
objections that flesh and blood makes against martirdom.
11. part of the dialogue, of works as concern our neighbor.
1 Of righteousness and love unto our neighbor. 2 Our neighbor is our enemy
as well as our friend. 3 Difference between a Neighbor and a Brother. 4 The
actions of brotherly love. 5 Brotherly kindness.
The last part of this dialogue, of peace and other effects of love.
1 Of peace, the kinds thereof. 2 It is proper to the godly. 3 Of humility. 4
Of Gravity. 5 Of Gentleness. 6 Of long suffering, etc. 7 Of goodness and
meekness. 8 Meeknes in judgment and affection. 9 Self preservation. 10 Of
truth in speeches and promises. 11 Of contentednes. 12 Duties concerning
superiors and inferiors.
A receipt against Hypocrisy.
1 Hypocrisy what it is. 2 Sundry kinds of hypocrisy. 3 Particular or
universal hypocrisy. 4 Dwelling or reigning. 5 In profession or conversation
6 Gross, or subtle hypocrisy. 7 Causes of hypocrisy both common and
especial. 8 Sundry effects of hypocrisy. 9 Tokens of hypocrisy. 11 The cure
of hypocrisy.
A Confortatiue for sincerity and vprightnes.
1 Who be upright, and what uprightness is. 2 How sincerity does differ from
hypocrisy. 3 Sincerity, how it is gotten. 4 How it is to be preserved. 5 How
to be tried in a man's self. 6 Reasons to stir us up to seek and keep
sincerity.
Finis.
A DIALOGVE between APOLLOS and AQVILA, touching the Works of Christ proper to
the Elect, that is, such works as none but the Elect have, or can have.
Apollos: GOod Friend Aquila, now that we have such opportunity of place,
being here in a pleasant green field, and are at such good leisure, we
should do well to pass our time away in some wholesome communication which may
tend to our edification in godliness.


Aquila. It is a very good motion. For seeing time is a thing so precious as we
must give a reckoning to God of every minute of our time; and having in the
former days of our life spent so much of our time either in doing nothing, or
in doing other things, or doing other things then pertains to us to deal in;
it is therefore meet that we should now redeem the time, and the little
remainder of it to bestow it well, as we may reap a present benefit, and an
everlasting good: for surely, upon the well-husbanding of our time here, there
will follow a blessed harvest of a glorious (...) hereafter. But whereof shall
we talk, what shall be the subject of our speech?


Apollos. I heard you say, that when the works of Christ, which (as the King
of his Church) he works in the elect alone (such as are given to him of his
Father) were taught openly to you and to the rest of your good neighbors: that
you held it a doctrine very worthy the teaching, as being of great use for Gods
Children. Will ye that I try your memory, and put you to call to mind the
principal and maine heads of that doctrine?


Aquila. I did indeed judge it to be a matter very profitable, and still do so
judge: and me thought when I heard so many several fruits of the Spirit
given us together with our Calling, distinctly and in good order propounded to
our consideration, that it was as if one should have led me unto a garden
planted, and set forth with variety of sweet and delicate flowers, whereof I
might take enough to delight my senses withal, both while I was there and
afterward. Therefore if it please you to ask me, I will answer you as far
as I bear away that which I heard.


Apollos. Let me then hear from you, what these graces are, which Christ Jesus
does work peculiarly in the elect.


Aquila. They may al be brought to these two heads. 2. works of the Spirit
proper to the elect Calling, and Gifts.
The first is an effectual calling. Secondly, the fruits that arise and spring
from thence, or the gifts which do accompany and come from that calling.


Apollos. How prove ye that there is a calling proper to the elect, seeing
(...) in the Gospel, That there are many called which are not chosen? Math. 20,
16. It may be also that there be some chosen, which have no calling.


Aquila. It is true, some may be called which were A double calling.
never chosen; and it is alsotrue, that none are chosen, but they be called:
because it is written, Whom he predestined, them he called, To. 8, 30. By
which it is apparent, that there is one calling which is common to the Elect,
and to such Reprobates as line within the bosom of the militant Church, and
this calling is outward only: 1. Outward and common to all
and there is an inward calling, which flows from the grace of predestination,
and is proper unto the Elect, and this is an effectual and inward calling; of
2. Inward and peculiar to some.
which S. Peter speaks when he says, Make your calling and election sure, 2
Peter 1, 10.


Apollos. How differs this effectual calling, from the common calling?


Aquila. First, that draws us to Christ, to become Difference between inward
and outward calling.
members of him: This brings men only to a profession of Christ, to become
outward worshippers of him. Secondly, that enlightneth unto faith, this unto
knowledge only. Thirdly, that works a through change of the heart from evil
to good, as in S. Peter, S. Paul, and those mentioned, Acts 2, 37: this
changes but lightly Effectual calling has 3. inseparable cona panions, first
union with Christ, 2. Justification, 3. Sanctification
and slightly to external civil obedience, or to a restraint only of inward
corruption, as in Judas, Simon Magus, and (...): so as an effectual calling
carries with it, first, union with Christ; secondly, justification; thirdly,
sanctification, Called and (...), Romans 8, 30. Called and sanctified, Jude 1.
Saints by Calling. 1 Cor. 1, 2. all which the common calling lacks.


Apol. How is this (...) calling described in the word of God?


Aquila. Thus: It is a (...) of the elect out of Effectual calling what it is.
the kingdom of darkness; that is, of ignorance and sin, into the kingdom of
Christ, Col. 1, 13. that is, of faith and holiness. Orthus: It is a seuering
of the elect, from the world of (...), to become members of Christ by Faith,
John 15, 19. You are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world.

Thus the case stands: The elect and reprobate being in Adam all revolted and
departed from God, and put under the power of satan, they lie together as an
heap of chafe and wheat in a great floor, or as great and little fish in a
net, until by an effectual calling (as it were by a fan) there be a
separation made, as the wheat is severed from the chafe at winnowing. And
this first separation is begun in this world by the fan of the Gospel, Math.
3, 12: Which has his fan in his hand, etc. and is finished perfectly, at
that great and last separation, in the day mentioned, Math. 25, 32. Where the
Goats shall for ever be severed from the sheep.


Apol. Now that you have showed what an effectual calling is, tell us by what
means Christ works it?


Aquila. Christ Jesus does work it inwardly, by his Inward means
Spirit of wisdom and revelation which he gives to all the elect, not
excepting infants which dye in their infancy, who cannot be saved except they
be called and brought unto Christ, Acts, 4, 12. and other band and No name
given, etc.
link whereby to be knit unto Christ, there is none besides the Spirit, as it
is written, By one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12, 13.

But for such elect as are of discretion and years, the Outward and inward.
Spirit in them works by the outward preaching of the word, calling them
preparatiuely by the preaching of the Law, therein showing them their sins,
and just Law. Spirit of fear
condemnation, to the terrifying of them, and astonishing of their conscience:
but effectually calling them by the preaching of the Gospel, wherein by the
secret and Gospel Spirit of adoption
great force of the Spirit, they are so made to see the mercies of God for the
forgiveness of their sins, unto their salvation by Christ, as they are
persuaded to rest in them: and thus become they that which before they were
not, that is to say, true Christians, the members of Christ his mystical body,
the sons and daughters of God. And this is their effectual calling, which is
nothing else but a making us to be that which we were not, as the Apostle says,
Romans 4, 17. God calls those things which are not, as though they were.
Whereby it appears to be a very easy thing for the mighty God, to call and
draw us to his Son, even as easy as for us to speak a word, and to call one
to us.

Some are called sooner, and some later, as GOD in The time of Calling.
his eternal counsel has ordained the time of every ones calling: which is
shadowed somewhat unto us, in the parable of the Husbandman, calling to work in
his vineyard, some at the third hour of the day, others at the sixth, and
others at the ninth, yea and some at the eleventh, Math. 20, 1, 2, 3. Further,
we do find in Scripture, examples of such as have been called in every part of
man's life. We may gather, that Timothy and Josias 1 Timothy 4. 6.
were called in their childhoode. For, of the one it is testified 2 Timothy 3. 1.
of him, that he knew the Scriptures of a child, and was nourished up in the
words of faith and sound Doctrine: 2 Kings 22, 1.
of the other, that in his young years he sought God. Of John the Baptist, it
is expressly said, Luke 1. that he was filled with the holy Ghost in his
mothers womb. Of Paul, as also of Zacheus, it may appear by the story, that
they were converted about their middle age, in the strength of their life. For
Paul lived long after his calling, and Zacheus at his conversion was so lusty
of body, as he could climb up into a high tree to behold Christ passing by,
and hastily come down at Christ's commandment, Luke 19. which is a sign that
he was not gone far in years. Lastly, we read of one whom Jesus called at
the last hour of the day, to wit, the thief converted at his death: but only
one such we read of, least any presume; yet one, least any which are long
uncalled, should despair.


Apollos. After this which ye have said of the time Persons.
of Calling, let us hear somewhat of the persons who are to be called. Who be
capeable and fit, who be unfit and incapable thereof for the most part; and as
men may judge of it?


Aqu. Such as live out of the precincts of the church, Who not.
they are incapable of this calling to Christ whereof 1. Pagans.
we speak. For God has denied unto them the means. He has not given them his
statutes and his laws: he sends not unto them his messengers with his Word,
but leaves them (for just causes known to himself) in their ignorance. Yet a
calling they have, by the voice Creatures teach somewhat of God, but nothing of
Christ.
and sound of the creatures; which is sufficient thus far, as to take from them
all excuse, as S. Paul affirms of them, Romans 1, 20, 21. but not so far as
to be powerful to their conversion and salvation. For seeing the world by
wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe, (...) Cor. 1. If there be
any among Pagans, which are secretly inspired with the knowledge of the Messiah
to salvation, it is more then we can take knowledge of.

Now, as touching them which are within the visible 2. Proud Iusticiaries.
Church, there are some persons which become incapable of Gods calling, as the
proud, which are puffed up and swollen with conceit and opinion of their own
excellency and righteousness. Christ came not to call the righteous to
repentance, Luke 5, 32. And again, God resists the proud, James 4, 6. to
teach, that there is nothing such an enemy to the work of the Spirit, in
calling and converting unto faith, as pride of heart, when once it has taken
deep root, and is come unto the height; not but that God can take such down,
as appears in the taming of that swelling Pharisie Saul, after made S. Paul.

Moreover, the scornful, which are set down in the 3. Scorners.
chair of pestilence, as David says, Psalm: 1, 1. and as swine and dogs do
wickedly despise, and contemptuously refuse all godly admonitions, raging with
haued against the light, and such as set it before them; to these the holy
things of God are forbid to be offered, Math. 7, 6. Generally, all such make
themselves unfit for calling, 4. Impenitent or obdurate finners.
as have by custom of sin so hardened their hearts, as all fear and feeling of
sin, or wrath due to it is gone: so as they stop their ears at Gods voice, and
withdraw their shoulders from the yoke, and make stiff their necks against
it. These because they hate knowledge, and abhor to be reformed, therefore
God is so farte off from them, as that when they come and call to him, he will
vouchsafe them no answer; yea though they cry unto him in the anguish of their
heart, yet he will not hear; because when he very long, and with all lenity
had called to them, they would not hear: but after their hardness, and heart
that cannot repent, despised the bounty and long suffering patience of God.

Further, this is to be observed that of those which 5. Worldly wise.
live in the Church, such as have great gifts of Nature, more pregnant wit,
sharper capacities, more earthly wisdom, more humane knowledge: These having
much of their own, because they rest in it, are hardly drawn to see their
own wants, their inward spiritual nakedness, and to empty themselves of all
their own worthiness; therefore they are so much the more unfit and
incapable of a calling: as it is written, Ye see your calling, not many wise.
Again, Where is the Scribe? where is the disputer, etc? 1 Cor. 1, 20.

The like is to be said of such as have great store of 6 Worldlyrich
wealth, of worldly honor and pleasure, which are things that blind men, and
keep them from seeing any Example in the Laodiceans, Revel. (...).
great need of Christ; being already full and happy, as they think. These
cannot relish the Doctrine of grace, which leads men wholly out of
themselves, to seek all riches, worthiness, happiness in Christ alone.
Therefore it is also written, 1 Cor. 1, 20, 21. Not many noble, not many
mighty are called. Again, It is as hard for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom ( of Grace) as for a Camel to go through a Needles eye, Mark 10,
24, 25. The way and gate to eternal life, is too strait and narrow for such as
have such a load of worldly wealth and honor on them to press down their souls
to the earth.

Besides this, also Idiots, frantic and lunaticke persons, 7. Idiots:
Lunaticke.
while they be such; and they which are borne deaf and dumb; those though they
live in the Church, 8. Borne deaf and dumb.
yet they are incapable of a calling, if we speak of the ordinary way which
God uses to call by. Howbeit, these being borne of Christian Parents, and
belonging to Gods Covenant, it may please God secretly, in a manner to us
incomprehensible, to work in these for their conversion. As experience has
proved true in some such whom I have heard of, who being from their birth
deprived of hearing and speaking, both dumb and deaf, yet have expressed love
to the persons of Gods Ministers; and more to them then to others: and have by
signs made known that they knew Christ crucified, and used means to signify
their desire to communicate in the Lords Supper. All which argues some
unwonted and wonderful work of the Spirit of Christ in them.


Apollos. Now I have heard ye speak of such persons, as for the most part of
them never partake in this calling which draws to Christ; and perceive that ye
leave to God (as is fit) this royal prerogative, as he may (with a non
obstante) call out of them whomsoever he has ordained to life: let me now
hear what persons ye think to be capable of this calling, and of what quality
they be, which for the most part are vouchsafed the grace and blessing of a
true inward calling.


Aquila. I would have ye know that I judge all men Who be more capable of
calling.
by nature, in regard of the common corruption thereof, alike unfit, and
incapable of effectual calling: and All alike incapable by nature.
that no man can in any measure, by any power left in his nature, prepare, or
make fit himself for grace to receive it, being offered: For we are dead in
trespasses and sins; Ephe. 2. 1. And the power to will, and to do, is of
God; Phil. 2. (...) Of our selves not being able to think a good thought; 2
Cor. 3. All being sin, whatsoever is thought, or done by us, before Faith;
Heb. 11. 5. Howbeit thus In respect of outward condition, some more capable
then other.
much the Word has revealed unto us, for the outward estate and quality of
such persons as be called to Christ, that (for the most part) they are the
simple, the poor, the mean, and little ones, which be contemptible Simple and
needy.
in the World for their parentage, and other outward things, as it is written;
The Gospel is preached to the poor, and they receive it: Mat. 11. 5. Also, I
thank thee Father, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and reuealest them to the simple, and little ones; Mat. 11. 25. Moreover, God
has called the foolish of the world, and the vile, and the things that are
not, to confound the wise, and the mighty; that none should glory in the flesh,
but in Christ: 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29. And this is one reason, why Christ will
build his house of such timber, rear Reasons why such be commonly called, as
be of mean condition in the World.
up his Temple with such stones, as be course and plain, rather then to choose
the tall Cedar, or carved and polished stones. I say the reason why his
banqueting Hall is furnished with such mean guests, as the halt, the maimed,
the poor; that is, the despised of the world, it is even because they which be
called and converted, having nothing in themselves whereunto to attribute their
own conversion, they may ascribe the whole glory and praise of it unto the
grace of Christ; who saw nothing in them, save simplicity, meannesse, and
baseness, to move him to prefer them before others. And on the other side,
when any rich, noble, or worldly wise, are powerfully changed and brought unto
God, to believe in him, and to become his true worshippers, they may understand
that it was no inward endowment of mind, or external gift of body, or goods,
but the mere love of God in Christ that did all. In a word, that they may
perceive and confess that they were borne again, not of flesh and blood, but
of the will of God, because he was pleased to regenerate them, that the praise
might be to him, as the work was from him.

To this we may add another reason, why the more simple and needy are more
commonly drawn to Christ; because such being void of those goodly things
wherein men use to place their felicity, having the less to set their hearts
upon, they are the sooner and more easily brought to see their spiritual
poverty and want, and to seek for the fullness of all good things, out of
themselves in Christ Jesus, In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and
knowledge; Col. 2. 3. Of whose fullness we receive grace for grace; Ioh. 1. 16:
As being the most rich storehouse of all heavenly goods; without whom,
whosoever are rich, they are but poor, and very fools, whosoever are wise
without him.


Apollos. Ye have spoken of the quality and condition of such persons, as are
made partakers of a true calling. Now let me hear you deliver the signs,
whereby one that is called, may know his calling: for I think you are of this
mind, that one which is truly called, may know he is so; and that the Word
has taught marks to discern of their calling.


Aquila. It is right. Whosoever be called (if they be of years) know that they
be so: for so says the Apostle: We know by the Spirit, the things which are
given us of God; 1 Cor. 2. 12. Now amongst other things given It is an opening
Acts 26. 18. A setting at liberty such as were in prison; Luke 4. 18. A
quickening of the dead, a translating from darkness to light, from Satan to
God; Ephe. 5. 8. A separation of the wheat from the chafe; Mat. 3. 12. Now
all these comparisons may teach, that calling is such an action of God, as is
discernable to them in whom it is wrought: for can they be enlightened, being
blind before? Can they come out of a dark dungeon of ignorance, unbelief, and
sin, wherein they were detained as prisoners in snares, and be restored to
liberty in freedom of mind and heart, to serve God, and not perceive it? Is
it possible, that they that were dead before, should live, and do the actions
of a spiritual life; to move, and walk toward Heaven, but that this work
of the Spirit should be somewhat felt? Again, such as truly believe, may know
their Mark 9. 24.
own faith, as the man in the Gospel; I believe Lord: Had he lied, Christ
would not have heard but checked him.
and faith ever goes with an inward calling, therefore our calling may be
known to us. Moreover, we have examples of such as did know themselves to be
called, and have ioyed upon the certainty thereof; as Abraham, Zacheus, the
believers at Samaria, the Eunuch. Yet Acts 8. 4.
further; what Christian comfort, or true inward rejoicing, surely
comprehended. Add hereunto, that no Christian could with any courage or heart,
set himself presently to do the work of Christianity, if his calling It is
revealed by witness of the Spirit, or by such effects as accompany it, and be
afterward mentioned.
and conversion to God, were not revealed to him, to certify him of Gods good
acceptance of himself, and show it through Christ. Finally, our Justification,
and Sanctification, which are the nearest effects of calling, and ever go
together with it; may these I say, be known (as it is written) Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God; Romans 5. 1. And, we know that our
old man is crucified with Christ; Romans 6. 6: and shall not calling, the root
of these graces, be discerned? Yea, by the knowledge of these graces, it is
traced, found out, and descried. Therefore, howsoever at the instant of ones
Three times, wherein ones calling to Christ, hardly or not known
calling, happily a Christian may be so weak, such a babe in Christ; or in a
strange, or strong fit or pang of temptation, when a quaume of soul affliction
and trouble comes over the heart: or after some gross and grievous fall, (a
man being as it were for a certain time in a trance or ecstasy, (...) and
fencelesse) one may in such cases doubt of their calling; yet assuredly, at
other times it does so evidence it self, as the parties called, can with
gladness of heart glory in their caller, and heartily thank him. Which if
others, upon the demonstration of it by the fruits can do, and often do it
in their behalf; as Romans 6. 17. Paul for the Romans, Col. 1. 3.
1 These. 1. 4.
and elsewhere for other Professors of Christ: then much more the called
themselves understand it, and break forth into cheerful mention of it. True
it Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
Phil. 1. 4. 5, 6.
is, and cannot be gaine-saide, that many presume of a true effectual calling,
who indeed were never so called; and thus are deceived, by imagining to have
that which they always lacked: as they, John 8. 41. Which say; God is our
Father. As men that dream, do fancy bags of gold, and fullness of meat,
being empty, poor, and hungry, when they awake: yet they who are in truth made
partakers of this holy calling, in judging themselves to be called, are therein
no whit deceived. For they have a sure witness in themselves; Romans 8. Yea,
sundry witnesses; 1 John 5. 8.

Whereas ye desire to hear the marks and means Tokens of an effectual
calling.
whereby Gods children are brought to the knowledge of their own calling,
beside that which in my former speech I have let fall to that purpose, there be
some other tokens, which I will now rehearse. The first is a spirit of
discretion, enabling them to discern the voice I am the good Shepherd, my
Sheep hear my voice, the voice of a stranger they will not hear, but fly
from him; John 10. 5, 6. And a little after, I know mine, and am known of
mine: Also, Ye have an annointment from that There is a lie in doctrine and
religion, as well as in life and manners, and that is two ways committed, either
by heresy or hypocrisy.
Holy one, and know all things; ye know that no lie is of the truth: 1 Ioh. 2.
20, 21. Meaning hereby, that the truth of heavenly doctrine, by the
illumination of the spirit, was in such clear wise known unto them, as they
could distinguish it from a lie; putting a difference between erroneous and
sound teaching: even as sheep by natural instinct, and partly by custom, can
skill the whistle and call of their own Shepherd, even so Christians, after
the grace of their calling, do very well discover the wholesome call and voice
of Christ, their heavenly and spiritual Shepherd, from the howling of Wolves,
and call of Thieves and hirelings, which speak not, but to deceive and
destroy. You will say Ob.
peradventure, that this token is common to the true Christian, with other who
have but an outward calling; yet by the light of their knowledge which they
have attained, can both bewray and convince error, even whatsoever is contrary
to the voice of Christ. Yea, some of these are able very learnedly, and
iudiciously to do it. Therefore we are to know that the spirit Resp.
of discretion in such as be inwardly called, as well as My sheep hear John 10.
27.
my voice, and they which are of God, bear Gods word. That is, with much
readiness they hear it, and with great and sound pleasure in it: as David
did, I love thy Psalm. 119.
Law, therein is my whole delight. Yea, they hear it For there be sheep by
(...) ction, which are not yet called.
further written, that Christ's sheep (by calling) do hear his voice, and
follow him. Thus they have their care-marke, they hear: and the wooll-marke
too; they follow and obey the doctrine of Christ, according to the measure of
grace received. Lastly, the graces of sanctification, which are given them
together with their calling, and by which they are enabled to believe and
fruitfully practice the doctrine, and to continue and increase inso doing, do
testify for them to themselves and others, their undoubted calling in the
Gospel.


Apollos. Forbear (I pray a while) further speech of this last mark, because
of those graces I will hereafter know your mind; when ye first have told me
what men are to do, which yet have not these tokens of calling; what course
such be to take to bring on their calling, and how others are to behave
themselves, which have good proof and experience of their vocation to God.


Aquila. I will do my best to satisfy you herein. Such as by want of the
former marks, and other ways do but make doubt that as yet they have not
this merciful blessing of a peculiar calling: let them (under good hope of
themselves that they are of the Elect, because that to them God has affoorded
an outward calling, offering unto them therein Christ with all heavenly
treasures) never give any rest to themselves, until to their outward be
joined an inward calling, (which is so needful, as till then men are in a very
bad case:) applying themselves to the diligent and constant use of all such
helps and means, as be profitable thereunto. Of these means some be private,
some be public; the private means available to an inward calling, Private
means
be the often humbling of our lofty stubborn Private fears, and confession of
sins.
hearts, by a search into, and a confession of particular sins against the
Law, upon due and serious consideration of them both: for the huge number being
as the stars of Heaven, and for the fearful filthiness of them, being
against such an infinite divine Justice, and an holy law; and lastly, for their
deep and dreadful danger, being the causes of al Christ's passions, and of
eternal pains in hell fire, to such as they are not forgiven unto; besides
innumerable judgments and woeful plagues, within which they wrap us, even in
this life. By the often Note this well
and careful viewing our selves in the looking glass of the Law, beholding
there our most sinful and most woeful estate, and laboring our selves to have
knowledge with some feeling experience of it, enforcing what we may, to
apprehend with fear and griese the threatening of the Law against all and every
one of our sins; by this means our doleful condition will come before our
eyes, for meekening and taking down in some measure the hauty pride and
obstinacy of our nature, and will cast and strike us into some dread of our
selves, and be some bridle to keep back the headlongnesse of our secure
sinful hearts. For it cannot, but that it will make a man affraide to run upon
such sins as he sees, and confesses against himself, and with his own
mouth pronounces worthy of eternal wretchedness. And having once taken up
such a course of particular acknowledgement of our offenses, after an earnest
and diligent examination of our hearts and ways; let it not be left again,
but continued with such care as men can, not to do it of custom, but
earnestly for humiliation.

Next thing is, there would be a good endeavor used, A bstayning from the act
of sin.
to avoid the outward act of all sin, as to refrain from lewd and
lascivious talk, from lying, swearing, and from the deed of drunkenness,
adultery, theft, contention, fighting, and all such like; which is in a man's
power to do, if we will do but so much as lies in us to do. The Heathens
having attained thus much, as to live ciuilly and vnblamably for their
external behavior. Yea further, even before their calling, men ought 3.
Suppressing of inward lust.
by their endeavor and watchfulness over themselves, not only to forbear
the committing of any outward evil in word or deed, but further to snib and
keep down the rebelling motions and desires of the soul. True it is, that
they cannot so do it as after they are called; when the Spirit of Christ has
put a power into them, for mortifying their lusts, in a true hatred and
abhorring of them, as evils contrary to God, and their own good: yet by the
general light of conscience, and help of restraining grace, they may sore
check and curb them. And in this work and exercise of suppressing sin,
both in the outward fruit and inward root, they shall not a little be
furthered by embracing the company of good men, from whom they shall have 4.
Society of the godly.
many aduertisements by words, or good examples in their deeds, which they may
imitate and follow. Also by eschewing the familiarity of vain and evil men,
5. Avoiding evil company.
whose words and actions are as pitch to defile, as poison to infect, and as
strong pull backs to hold us from coming near to God: and finally, as mighty
prouocations to further unto all hellish life. Therefore of this in any wise,
men that will come to an happy calling, must take heed what manner of men they
make the companions of their life: for such is the force of company, either
good or evil, as one shall quickly become such as they be, with whom he does
associate himself; be then courteous to all, yet acquainted but with a few, and
they of the best. It must not be forgotten, that attentive reading the Bible,
and other good 6. Private reading.
Books, which are wrote of divine matters, especially of the nature and defect
of sin, of the Majesty and power of God, of his severe judgments against
offenders of his Law, will do great stead in this business. The Gospel and
promises would be so far tasted of, as may keep up the heart from sinking:
for this grace of vocation is not given, but to such as the Law has brought
low by the sight of their sins, and wrath due unto them. Add unto all the
former, that not evil company alone, but whatsoever occasions of sin by 7.
Eschewing occasions of sin.
place, persons, times, or things, must be taken heed of: for occasions being
taken hold of, give great strength to our sinful nature; but being taken heed
of, do much pull it in. I would also counsel men sometime to fast, and
refrain from meat and all pleasures of life; for at 8. Private fasting.
certain fit times they can bear it; and always to use great temperance in
meats and drinks, and other lawful delights: but above all, thought and
study must be had, that these private means be helped by the public: Public
means.
That men put themselves under a good Ministry, it being the principal
instrument of our calling: for 1. Word preached.
howsoever the word of God read or preached, if we respect the letters and
sillables, has not any strength at all, nor the action of reading or
preaching, as it is performed by man, how well soever, they be as weak as
water, to this purpose of conversion and calling: yet being both the good and
holy ordinances of God, they become strong, because the God of strength and
might works by them, yet in a several degree. For the Scripture teaches us,
that (ordinarily) it pleases God by preaching Christ, to save such as believe;
1 Cor. 1. 21. That is to say, both to begin their salvation by it, drawing them
effectually out of their infidelity, making them to believe: Also, to build
them up further in their holy faith, and godliness of life, until they come
to possess fully salvation in Heaven. Hence it is, that the preaching of
Christ crucified, is there, verse 18. termed the power of God to save: that is,
the powerful instrument, by which it pleases God mightily to work, for the
saving of the Elect. Moreover, we are taught in Romans 10. 14, 15. that
ordinarily we are not otherwise, (being of years) brought to have faith to
believe in God, then by hearing such Preachers as be sent, and furnished from
God with authority and gifts for that end, as it is written: How shall they
believe in him, except they do hear? and how shall they hear except they
preach? and how shall they preach, except they be sent? In the Acts of
Apostles, Chap. 26. 18. Saint Paul reports, that he was called to this very
end, that by his preaching the Gospel, he might open the eyes of the blind,
turn men from Satan to God, from darkness to light. Finally, to omit
infinite authorities of Scripture, as Ephe. 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. and
such like places, which oftentimes yoke or join preaching and believing, as
cause and effect: Acts 11. 20, 21. and 14. 1. etc. I do beside read of
innumerable souls, even by thousands at once, called to Christ, by the opening
and application Acts 2. 41, 47.
of the word. Albeit then we are to leave to Christ, to engender and increase
faith and sanctification by what mean he himself will; yet for our selves, we
are to depend upon such means, as we find in the word to be ordained for such
works: and this is principally by preaching the word; that is, by a faithful
delivery of the sense of Scripture by the Scripture, with wise and Nehe. 8, 8.
fit application of doctrines to exhortation, confutation, rebukes, comforts,
threatenings, as it is written; He that prophecyeth, speaks to men, to
edification, to exhortation, to consolation: 1 Cor. 14. 3. In the 24, 25.
verses of this Prophesying here is put for interpretation of the will of God
already revealed: and not for foreshewing his will in future events.
Chapter, we may read the mighty operation of this Ordinance of Christ, for
begetting and confirmation of a lively faith, most notably to be commended. If
(says Paul) all prophecy, and there comes in one that believes not, or is
unlearned: he is rebuked of all; and so are the secrets of his heart laid
open, and so he will fall down on his face, and worship God, and say plainly,
that God is in you indeed. By this it is clear, that together with preaching,
God coupleth his own arm Esaias 53. V. I.
and power, both to enlighten the mind to see inward and secret corruption,
hid from us before, and to bow the heart to reverence and obey God. As men
therefore for the health of their bodies, do choose places convenient to dwell
in, where there is wholesome air, sweet water, and other commodities; so they
will much more do this duty to their souls, for the health and safety thereof;
as to provide for it good diet, by the wholesome preaching of the word
ordinarily on the Saboath: 1. Word preached.
which together with Catechizing, and the benefit 2 Catechizing.
of public prayer and Sacraments, shall in Gods appointed 3. Prayer.
hour effect this blessed work of a true calling, 4 Sacraments.
to their present comfort, and everlasting salvation of their souls. Where
these means be not at all used, if so be they may be had, or some, and not
all; or used negligently, or by fits and starts only, there the case will go
hard. For howsoever our calling has God alone for the Author and beginner,
the finisher also and perfiter of it; yet there is a necessity laid upon us,
to serve the gracious providence of Almighty God (as instruments) therein, by
attending and exercising the means appointed. Therefore as Paul, Acts 27.
having a warrant from God of good security, yet said; If these Mariners do
not tarry in the Ship, we cannot be safe: so I may say (Gods ordinary
dispensation considered) that if these means be cast off, and not cared for,
we cannot be called. Now for such as be already called, and can find in
themselves the true marks thereof; as this is the greatest comfort in the
World, so if they will preserve this comfort, then they must see to it, that
such means as it pleased God to bless unto them at first, for the obtaining
of an effectual vocation and conversion; these very means they addict
themselves unto, using them still, and them all, if there be no necessary let;
and being constant without being weary, in a right manner also, sincerely and
humbly, with a fervent desire of Gods glory above all things, being much in
prayer and godly meditations: and as ever they will be thankful for such a
grace as their effectual calling is, let them strive to walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith they are called, in all lowliness and meekness, long
suffering and love; Ephe. 4. 1, 2.


Apol. Friend Aquila, ye have reported unto me very much of that which ye
learned touching effectual calling: now if ye will let us pass on to the
other point, namely, the graces which do necessarily go with this calling,
except ye have somewhat further to speak of this matter; which if ye have, I
will gladly give you the hearing.


Aquila. Yes Sir, I will crave your patience alittle, for I forslowed to tell
you, when ye asked me of the means Sundry ways of God in his calling men.
of calling, that it has seemed good in the eyes of God, to call some
immediately without any ministry of Angels or Men, as Adam in Paradise, Abraham
in Charran, 1. Without means.
Paul in his journey to Damascus; to declare himself to be most free not bound
to the means, which are rather for us then for God; who can without them pull
a sinner out of the hell of his sins, into the heaven of grace here, and of
glory hereafter. Moreover, in the means which God uses to work a calling,
there is to be marked a marvelous great simplicity, (especially 2 Weak means
now under the Gospel) far from worldly show, pomp, and power; having
committed the charge and commission of calling Kingdoms to the faith of the
Gospel, unto his twelve Apostles, who were men much removed from the
glittering glory of this World, being mean men, of low estate and condition
here in earth, and using no other means to effect the conversion of the people
to God, then the preaching of the Gospel in all plainness, without all
wisdom of words, and Such as Orators would use for oftentation of humane
wisdom.
by fervent prayer with patient sufferings. These were the weapons of their
warfare, which having no outward bravery or beauty to allure and draw liking,
or might and external force to compel, yet proved mighty 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4
through God, to cast down strong holds, and very high imaginations, lifting
up themselves against God; 2 Cor. 10. 4. And having once planted Churches, and
called infinite men and women to God, by his simple Apostles, and other their
like helpers, Evangelists and Prophets, it has pleased Christ to have his
mystical body further builded up, his Saints gathered, and the work of the
Ministry done, by Pastors and Teachers in the power of simple and evident
demonstration of his truth. And to this end he would have this heavenly
treasure put into such earthen vessels, that the power of calling, as it is of
God, and not of men; so it might appear and be known, and acknowledged so to
be, to his own Cor. 4. 7.
eternal praise. Also, it would be further considered, that the most good God
in his most wise and gracious 3. Unlikely means.
providence so disposes things here below, as that he causes afflictions and
miseries, crosses, and sundry troubles, which in their own nature are bitter
and grievous, and a part of the curse threatened to man's sin, and more likely
to drive men quite away from God; yet he causes them (I say) very often to
serve his purpose of helping on the calling of his Elect, who by means of such
punishments as are laid upon them by Gods hand for sin, and inordinate
walking in the time of their unbelief before they came to Christ, are not a
little tamed, and so made the fitterto hearken and to stoop to Christ: Whose
voice they presumptuously contemn, till the cross has brought down their
great spirits and stomachs, as is to be seen in Paul; whose sudden and
terrible striking down from his Horse, and amazing him by lightning from
Heaven, made him somewhat mild and tractable: As also in Manasses, and in the
thief upon the Cross, who were called; the one when his body was laden with
Irons in prison, the other when he was fastened to the Cross, suffering a very
painful and infamous punishment. Neither is it only the will of God to use
sometimes no means, or weak means, or unlikely means; but sometimes even
quite contrary means, to help 4. Contrary means.
forwards the conversion of a sinner, to wit, even sin it self: Making some
one gross fall, or many gross sins, which his chosen have run into, and
lived in before their calling, to be as a weight or plummet of lead to bring
and keep down their proud hearts, and so God gives grace to the humble.
to shame and terrify their consciences; so as by that means there is a
passage made for grace more easily to enter in them. Whereas otherwise, they
would have set to both their shoulders and their breast, to have kept it out; if
their fierceness and courage had not been so danted and dismayed with the
sight and horror of their own manifold and monstrous iniquities. And suffer
me here to remember my self in one matter, that Calling, a work easy to God.
whereas I said to you before, that for God to draw one from sin to Christ,
is as easy as for us to call one to us, or to speak a word: I would have ye
to understand it, in regard of the infiniteness of his might, to which the
greatest and hardest things to our sense and opinion, are as easy as the least
and slightest things. When he would create the World, there being no matter
existent before, he needed but command, and it was done; and that unformed
mass, out of which all creatures were hewn, being extant by his commandment,
he did no more but say, Let it be light, and out of it there presently sprang
light; and so of all other things which he made, they were made by his word,
without Instrument or travel, even as now they all consist by his word. It is
right so in the conversion and calling of a sinner. The dead in their sins,
hear the voice of the Son of God, and hearing, they live: Ioh. 5. 25. And
howsoever in this work of new creation, there is not only no present matter
to work on, but an utter repugnancy and rebellion in our nature, fighting and
warring against God, being strengthened and armed with the whole power of Satan
and the World; yet these many and mighty obstacles and hindrances, are without
any difficulty overcome by him, to whom nothing is hard and impossible. In that
he uses such means (as we have spoken of) both for preparing to our calling,
and effecting of it: yet it is not because he could not perform this work by
his very word only, but because so it pleased him, and to enure us to
obedience. Howbeit for all Calling, a work of Gods wonderful power.
this, our calling is not to be held a slight work, as if I speak this any
whit to lessen and diminish the credit and praise of Gods grace and power: but
rather the more to extol and magnify them, in as much as our vocation to
Christ, being a work as glorious and wonderful as our creation of nothing is,
if not more: and as the resurrection from the dead, which yet to the wise men
of the world, those great Philosophers have ever seemed things absurd and
impossible: so as they have scorned the doctrine of these things: Acts 17. 28,
29. May we know, say they, what this new doctrine means; and again verse
32. when they heard of the resurrection from the dead, some mocked: yet in the
calling of a sinner to faith in Christ, there being that exceeding greatness
of divine power set on work, as was expressed in raising Jesus from the grave;
see Ephe. 1. 19, 20. for all this to bring a wretched sinner held and locked up
in the bolts and fetters of his lusts, captiuated to Satan, and under the power
of that mighty Potentate; I say to bring such a one to know, believe in, and to
love Christ, so easily as we would call one to come to us, or as it is to
utter a word, how does this advance the praise of Gods almighty grace; to which
sin, the world, and hell, do quickly, though most unwillingly yield. And
here to shut up this Treatise of calling, because I have been very troublesome
by my long discourse of it, let me tell you, that this is a chief end which
God looked The ends of our calling.
unto in the calling of sinners unto repentance, as in regard 1. The glory of
Gods grace.
of himsele, even the praise of his glorious grace, as the Apostle has three
several times affirmed: Ephe. 1. 2. The salvation of the elect.
7. 12. 14. That there being not only nothing in us to 3. The good of others.
further it, but our selves, and the gates of hell against it, it might be
said; O Lord, this is thy work, thy own hand has done it; even with thine
own hand and arm thou have given us the victory over all our spiritual
hellish enemies. To thee therefore the King everlasting, immortal, invisible,
unto God only wise, be honor, and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.


Apollos. I thank ye for your willingness to enter into, and to continue this
discourse. Also, I commend your good remembrance of these matters, it being so
long since they were taught; but as you help your self in some thing that was
almost slipped from you: so ye shall suffer me to help you in that which I my
self almost had, and as it seems ye have altogether forgot. For by the
closing of your speech, I perceive that ye have spoken what ye are minded to
say of this argument: and yet that you were willing to speak of it what you
remembered; but I marvel not if some things are slid from you, I rather marvel
(the frailety of our memory being considered) that ye kept so many things
Therefore unto all that which has been recorded by you, there be other four
points, which I will briefly add.

First, touching the impulsive and moving cause which inclines God to the
effectual calling of some, whereas he passes by othersome, which are no more
unworthy then such as are called, and have the self same outward means, being
all alike sinners and enemies to God by nature, and all equally partakers of
the word and Ministry: yet some of them are left in their corruption, others
being gathered to Christ. It was told ye, this proceeds merely of the
purpose and good pleasure of God, which is made plain by express authority of
Scripture, which joins Gods purpose and calling together; Even to them that
are called of his purpose: Romans 8. 28. and affirms, that God hides those
things from some, which he reueales to others; even because so it pleases him:
Mat. 11. 26. there being no other reason of Peter's calling, rather then Judas,
but this; it was his good pleasure. For seeing effectual calling (as you well
remembered) flows from election, and is peculiar to the chosen; thereof it
follows, that that which makes the difference between some, who are
otherwise alike in Adam, is the election of God, ordaining some to life, and so
to the means in their calling to Christ, whereas others are refused: yet so
refused in the counsel of God, as they make themselves unworthy and incapable
of calling, by refusing willingly, and rejecting wilfully the voice of Christ;
shutting their eyes that they may not see, and their ears lest they should
hear, and making fat their own hearts, lest they should understand; Acts 28,
27. Which shows thus much, that as the not calling of some is just, so the
calling of othersome is most free, depending upon the good pleasure of Gods
will. This is such a matter, the consideration whereof, must move Gods children
by calling, to be very thankful with great and fervent love toward God, for
this happy work: Since finding nothing in them at all, he did fetch from
himself the cause which moved him to reveal his Son in them by the Gospel;
whereas he would not do so to others, who were by creation as good as they,
and by nature no worse: yet God to leave others, and to give them over to their
blindness; and to open to those the mystery of his will, and that according to
his good pleasure, which he purposed in Christ; how does this deserve, that
they should from the ground of their heart bless God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, for this most gracious spiritual blessing?

The second thing unmentioned by you, because unremembered, was this; that as
amongst men Gods will puts a difference betwixt man and man (as being all
subject to him as clay to the potter) caling these and hardening these; so in
those which are truly called, he keeps not one tenor: some of his elect
children even at the instant of their calling, being strong men in Christ, able
to go, walk, and run; as Zacheus, which at his conversion was filled with Luke
19. 8.
joy, and power given him to shake off his great sins, and to shake himself
presently not only out of them, but out of his goods by restitution of ill
gotten, and contribution of the rest well gotten: which argues a great measure
and force of grace, there being sundry which long after their conversion can
hardly overcome themselves to do that which Zacheus did at his new birth, the
1. hour he came into the world. The like is to be seen in Paul the Apostle, who
immediately upon his calling and coming out of the darkness of Jewish
pharisaisme unto the light of Christianisme, and from Satan to God; he had such
a portion of the strength of grace, as he could preach Christ, and was ready to
suffer for him, being ready to the peril of his life to teach them, whom he
had lately persecuted to death. Now there be others again at the time of their
calling, yea, and a good while after, which are so weak as young Babes, both
for knowledge and practice; as appears in Peter, and in the other Apostles,
who being called even with a more peculiar calling to be the members of Christ,
and not only with a general vocation to be the Ministers and Apostles of
Christ; yet by the story of the Evangelist it does plainly appear, that for a
great while after, even till the ascension of Christ, they were exceeding
infirm both in judgment and affection, not knowing distinctly the means Luke
18. 32, 33, 34.
of their redemption to be Christ's sufferings and resurrection, though it were
most plainly and often told them; and tripping and failing by pride and
ambition, contention, and otherwise. Again, some of his elect children at
their first calling, are brought forth by their Mother the Church, with great
pain and hazard to themselves, being before and about the time of their
calling much afflicted, full offeares and anguishes, by reason of their
manifold grievous sins laid before them by their inward monitor, their
conscience accusing them, and the outward admonition and threatenings of the
Law; the light of Gods Justice shining into their minds, and striking them as
lightning and thunder from Heaven. Thus it fared with the forenamed Paul at
his conversion, which was with trembing and astonishment; Acts 9. 6. As also
with them, Acts 2. 37. whose soule-horrors, as daggers or knives, pricked their
hearts. Now on the other side, some there be which at their first calling
feel no such thing, but are delivered from their bondage to Satan and sin,
with great case, nay, with marvelous joy and alacrity osspirit, Who yet
afterward have their portion of godly forrow.
as it is to be seen in Lydia; Acts 16. 15. who as one feeling nothing less
then anguish, did cheerfully entertain Paul upon her new birth and calling.
The Samaritanes, Acts 8. 9. at their conversion by the preaching of Philip, had
great joy; it being in this case, as in the natural birth, where some come
into this World with great facility, and others with very great danger: and
according to this different proceeding of God in this work, it is, that some
of the Elect do sooner and far more easily see their own calling, then others
do. The consideration of this second point, is for comfort of them who being
certainly called, yet are troubled that the strength of grace is so little,
their infirmities so many, their joy and cheerfulness very small; which
should not so grieve them, if they would remember, that this case has been
the condition of others; and withal, that the troubles and grief which they
find in themselves by reason of their wants, does argue and prove to them
their own conversion to be true and sound; which should more prevail to
comfort them, then the sight of any defect and weakness to discourage: let
them rejoice in the truth of the grace, which cannot rejoice in great measure
of grace.

The third thing which I add, is this, that election necessarily brings
forth a true calling to Christ, as a proper effect of it. Therefore all good
Christians are by their calling, to judge of their own election, and
consequently of their own salvation: for as they must needs be saved which
are elected, because God changes not, and nothing can hinder his purpose: so
they are certainly elect, who be effectually called. It is not then for any to
search curiously into Gods counsel, and to begin there to find the assurance of
their own salvation; but we are to begin at another end: and as we discern
and judge of the root by the fruit, of the fountain by the water which
runs from it, and of the cause by the effect; so we must rise up to the
sight of our election, by the work of our calling, which is an hand to conduct
us into Gods Counsel-house. Thus Paul the Apostle having taught and established
that heavenly doctrine of Predestination; ( Romans 9. at the 24 verse) hoe
declared that the witness of it is to be sought, not out of our selves in Gods
secret will, (which is an object too excellent for our weak eyes directly to
look upon) but in our selves, to wit, in our vocation to be Gods people, which
before were not his people. Also Ioh. 6. 37. it is laid down as a note,
whereby to know who be given to Christ of his Father in his eternal election,
that such shall come unto him and see him; All that the Father gives me (says
Christ) shall come unto me. Now this coming unto him, is upon their obedience
unto his call. To be short (for in a plain matter, few proofs be best,) as
Christ proved the Jews, to whom then he spoke, not to be the elect sheep,
because they refused to hear his voice, and to believe: so he describes his
sheep which are chosen indeed, by this mark, that they hear, and follow.
Wherefore, as in vain they presume of their election, who never were called to
faith in Christ; so whosoever by the due tokens which you before have laid
forth, and are about to do hereafter when ye come to the effects of calling,
shall find their own effectual calling to be soundly and surely wrought; let
them gather thereby infallibly their election to life. Be of good comfort (say
the people unto the blind man in the Gospel) the Master calls thee: so I
say to these, take to ye good heart, for Christ the Master has called you. Not
more certainly by the rays and beams do ye know the Sun to be a lightsome
creature, then ye may determine of the love of Gods gracious purpose toward
you from everlasting, by this fruit of it in your effectual vocation by the
Gospel.

The fourth thing omitted by you, it is this; that the times of calling being
so uncertain, we should never cast away our hope of others, who do live
under the means, though they live wickedly, unless God do give us any
apparent sign of their reiectio^ from grace; as in (...), Julian, and others:
otherwise to keep us from judging, especially of the final estate of any,
because we cannot tell what to morrow day may bring forth. Therefore the
Ministers of the word are still to be sowing, and casting abroad their seed
early and late, they know not which will take place, this, or that; the people
still to approach to Gods house, to hear the word of God calling them. They
cannot tell which shall be the hour of their calling; which as it cannot be
prevented one minute, so being once come, all the strength of hell cannot hold
them from obeying the voice of their caller.


Aquila. Sir, I thank ye for your good remembrance of these things, which
indeed were gone from me. May it please you now, we will resort home, for it
very near draws to night, and defer other things to another time.


Here ends the first part of the dialogue, touching our effectual calling.
The second Part of this Dialogue, concerning the Graces which accompany, and
come from this effectual Calling.
Aquila. SIR, ye are again well met here; I thank ye for your last conference
in this place: my mind has been the more quiet ever since, even as my body
fares the better after a wholesome moderate repast, or sweet rest: may it
please you that we should spend another hour in that sort, setting on there,
where we left, and broke off?


Apollos I am well pleased with your motion, both that we should feed one
another with the fruits of our lips, and that we go forward in that argument
which we have begun. Howbeit, we will alter our course: whereas I put you to
answer my questions, and so put you to the more pain; I will now take up that
burden, and you shall have the easier and lighter end of the staff: do you
ask, and I will answer.


Aquila. It pleases you to favor me; yet I judge it no less hard to propound
wise questions, then to make true answers. One that has any good measure of
knowledge, may better, or as well reply when matter is offered by questions to
work upon, as to invent and devise still to propound new matter: but I will
agree to your order, on this condition, that where my questions shall be short
or vnpertinent, ye will correct faults, and supply wants, to make them more fit
and full. Tell me then what is the first saving Grace, which the holy Spirit
works in our Calling?


Apoll. All the saving graces of the Spirit are wrought Al saving graces come
together with our calling at one time.
in the Elect, to be given them ( simul and semel) at once, and together. In
respect of time, there is not first and second; one before, another after: for
it is not in this new creation, when this our little World of our selves is
brought out of the world of sin and unbelief, unto the Christian World of
grace; as it was in the creation of the great World of Heaven and Earth, when
the parts of that world were made one after another in order of time, the work
being distinguished according to the number of days in the week: but here in
this new creation, we have the blessed saving works and graces of the holy
Spirit powered into us all at one instant. We are not at one time called, and at
another time justified, and at another time sanctified, and then receive graces
of hope, and love, and wisdom, etc. but these come as Joseph's brethren came
into Egypt for Corn, all together: As the prodigal child returning to his
Father, did at once receive all those favors from his kind Father, of kiss,
embracing, ring, robe, and charge to kill the fat Calfe. Indeed the saving
graces for their increase and growth to perfection, require succession of time;
even as Infants become not tall men, till after many years: but these graces
at the beginning, and first begetting, (like grapes in a cluster) do all come
together. Even as it stands with the natural body in the quickening of it,
the soul coming into it, gives power of motion and sense to every member at
one instant; not to one sooner, to another later: so in our new birth, all the
faculties of the mind and body, being before dead in trespasses and sins,
are by grace (the soul of the soul) spiritually at once revived and enabled
to all functions and duties of godliness. The truth whereof appears in that
Paul reports of the Romans; that being Romans 5. 1, 2, 3.
made believers, they were justified: and being justified by faith, they had
withal other graces, as peace with God, hope of glory, joy in that hope, sense
of Gods love. And of the Ephesians he says, that when they were called, and
heard the Gospel (with an obedient care) they also believed, and had the seal
and earnest of the Spirit. Ephesians. 1. 13.
In a word, the Elect coming to Christ at the time of their calling, and
Christ with his merits and graces being so joined, as one cannot have himself,
but withal he has all his: It is therefore an undoubted truth, that howsoever
some saving graces may appear before others, or be felt sooner then others,
yet they are put upon and into the Elect at one and the same time: but in order
of causes one grace does precede before another, and they are to be handled of
us one after another, according to that order, as near as we can hit upon.


Aq. Well then, I yield willingly unto this truth, and acknowledge that that
most mighty God, that at one moment could deck and adorn the firmament of
heaven with so many glorious stars: he also is able to fix so many and sundry
glorious graces at once in the firmamet of man's heart. But seeing the God of
order in this supernatural work does observe a natural order, according to
which some graces must be first as causes, others must follow as effects of
those causes; would it please you then to declare unto me which grace is first
in the order of causes?


Apol. As I conceive of it, I will declare unto you, and The chain of saving
graces; or after what order the saving grace; of the Spirit are given to the
Elect.
I verily trust that I conceive aright; thus the case stands: Before our
effectual calling, our minds are covered with darkness of ignorance and
unbelief, our hearts being full of obstinacy by reason thereof, so as we are
wholly estranged from God. Now in the work of God in our calling, the Spirit of
Christ by the Gospel having mightily cast down these strong holds, and
scattered these foggy mists, does illuminate effectually the mind and
understanding, distinctly and soundly to know and believe 2. Illumination of
the mind
the promises of forgiveness and reconciliation by 3. Opening of the heart.
Christ made (...) the word, withal (...) and opening the heart obediently to
assent to it, and embrace it, with a faith and affiance in the mercy of God the
promiser the by this faith of the promise, the elect is brought even to 4.
Faith.
Christ, to be nearly united and (...) to him, who being a 5. Union with
Christ.
stranger before, now by faith dwells in the heart as a familiar guest, rather
as the master of the Family to guide and rule and keep in order all. Now being
made one with Christ, they straight way have comunion first with his
righteousness, active and passive, for justifying them, to 6. Justification
the great tranquillity and joy of the conscience, and also, 7. Peace of
conscience, and joy in the Spirit.
to the raising up of their hearts to a sure certain hope and expectation of
heavenly glory. Then afterward they 8. Hope.
have fellowship with his Spirit for sanctifying; in which 9. Sanctification.
work of their sanctification, is given that excellent grace 10. Repentance.
of repentance or turning to God; also of hearty love toward God their father
now reconciled, and appearing so to the conscience quieted and (...) through
the atonement 11. Love to God.
felt and perceived: and this begets love to all men, especially to the
Saints, and carries with it all the train of 12. To neighbor.
Christian virtues. It coming hereof that the Elect are patient, temperate,
peaceable, meek, good, long suffering, 13. Peace.
modest, humble, etc. because through that faith and 14. Patience, etc.
hope which they have in God by Christ, they are moved so to love him, and to
be affected to seek his honor, and to do his will, as withal their heart is
affectioned in all things which concern him, themselves, or others, to 15.
Obedience.
please him by obedience and practice of his Word, in sincerity and truth.


Aquila. By that which has been spoken, I perceive what order ye think to be
kept of God, in the working the works proper to the Elect. First, there is
calling, in which there is, 2 illumination or opening of the eye. Thirdly,
opening of the heart. Fourthly, lively faith. Fifthly, union with Christ, or our
incorporation into him. Sixthly, Justification, or imputation of Christ's
righteousness. Seventhly, peace of conscience, Eighthly, Joy in the holy Ghost.
Ninthly, hope of glory. Tenthly, Sanctification. 11. Repentance, called our
turning from sin. 12. Love of God. 13. Charity to our neighbor. 14. Patience
in affliction. 15. Obedience to the will of God. Let me ask of these in order,
what I am desirous to know, for my further instruction: and first touching
illumination, where do ye find ground in Scripture for it? Then describe it,
and show what it is, and what kinds there be of it, and how the illumination
of the Elect, does differ from the work of the Spirit, in illuminating some of
the reprobate.


Apollos. In the calling of a sinner to faith, there are two works of the
Spirit; The one, opening of their eyes: Acts 26. 18. The other, the opening of
their hearts; Acts 16. 14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydea: the former is
Illumination, or enlightening; whereof the holy Ghost speaks in Heb. 6. 4.
They which were once enlightened: Opening the Eyes.
And Luke 1. 79. To give great light to them that sit in darkness. And again,
The people which sat in darkness, saw great light: Mat. 4. 16. In respect of
this work of the Spirit, Christ is said to be the light of the Gentiles; Luke
2. 32. And the Ministers who are but Instruments of this work, are called,
Lights of this Word, and Lights of the blind; Mat. 5. 14. Romans 2. 19. This
work of illumination or enlightening, it is that, whereby the Spirit first
purges the mind and understanding from darkness and vanity, which was in it
through ignorance of God; also, the judgment from that perverse corruption of
it, in things belonging to God; whereby it could not put a difference between
good and evil: and secondly, puts into the understanding and judgment a
new light of knowledge and discretion, whereby the soul knows and discerns
aright the truth of salvation by Christ, even particularly in the several
doctrines. This enlightening is twofold. The first is general

These two kinds of knowledge, whereof the one a wicked man may have, the
other is given to none but to the Elect, though they both be the gifts of the
Spirit, and also be of the same things, yet they differ very much. For first,
the knowledge which a godly man receives

Again, the knowledge of the godly is sufficient to whether it be for avoiding
evil, or for doing any good; but the insight and knowledge of the wicked is
insufficient, and unable to direct them in their singular and particular
actions, either for omission of evil, or practice

In respect of these differences, the knowledge of the Elect for the
cleerenesse, sufficiency, and certainty of it, is likened to the light of the
Sun; and the knowledge of the reprobates for the confusednesse,
insufficiency, and unstableness, is compared to the Lightening, which does not
give any certain light, it does not continue any certain time; and when it is
gone, men see worse then before. So does it fall out with the wicked, for their
knowledge does soon vanish, and while it lasts it is very uncertain; and
there is in them afterward greater and more dangerous darkness then before:
for because they wink with their eyes, and make their hearts fat, striving
willingly not to see that they cannot but see, wilfully blinding and hardening
themselves; therefore as a punishment of this sin, they are given over to
have dull and heavy eyes and ears, so as they shall see and not perceive,
hear, and not understand; Acts 28. 27. Whereas the knowledge of the godly
increases in brightness like the Sun, which shines more and more clearly
unto the perfect day; Prou. 4. 18. So as the godly are very greatly bound to
praise God for such their light of knowledge, and to endeavor to walk in that
light; answering such a grace by thankfulness in tongue, and obedience of lives
and works, as becomes children of such light, translated out of such
darkness.


Aquila. Now that ye have spoken of illumination or opening the eyes, will it
please you to say somewhat of the other work of the Spirit, which ye call the
opening of the heart; what may this signific, or how may it differ from the
former work of enlightening?


Apollos. By the heart (according to Scripture phrase) Opening the heart.
is signified not the fleshy part of the body, which is thought to be the
fountain of life, and seat of the affections; but the faculties of the soul,
especially the understanding and will. For the heart is (as it were) the chair
of estate for the soul, where the soul shows her self in presence;
therefore it is so often put for the soul, and the chief powers thereof; as,
God opened Lydiaes heart, that is, her soul. Now this opening, shows and
teaches us, that the soul is as a Chest fast locked and barred, into which
(while it is so) there can no treasure be put. So it is with the soul before
our effectual calling, it is close shut up, and locked up through ignorance and
unbelief and sin; so as no saving grace can drop into it, but it is kept
from all sight and feeling of Gods peculiar mercies. Therefore this opening of
the heart, besides the illumination already spoken of, whereby the Spirit
piercing into the mind, endued it with that heavenly light before touched,
that it may clearly and certainly understand the whole truth of the Word, but
chiefly the promise of the Gospel; it has also the moving and bowing of the
will, with affection to receive and embrace this promise; the Spirit enduing
the soul with a sweet feeling of the most merciful goodness of God therein.
And of these two works of the Spirit, in opening of the eyes and the heart,
arises that third work, called Faith, which is a gift powered into the soul,
knitting it unto Christ, with whom, being understood and known as he is
revealed in his Word, and embraced with affection both of the mind and will, it
now rests satisfied, as one that has found a rich treasure or great spoil.


Aquila. But I am not yet satisfied with this that you have said, about these
works of the Spirit. Therefore I pray you yet more plainly and particularly
lay forth the actions of the Spirit, tending to the engendring of faith in the
heart of an elect sinner.

Herein I will do mine endeavor to give you satisfaction: the Spirit of God
(as in our first conference you Spirit works by the Law.
rightly told us) works both by the Law and the Gospel. In the preaching of
the law, it works first a knowledge of God, as he is God the Creator and
preserver 1. A knowledge of God, as Creator.
of all things, revealing his most great majesty, power, justice, and wisdom;
making us to see him a mighty and terrible Judge, extremely hating, and
infinitely recompencing 2. As Judge.
all iniquity. Then it goes on by the Law, to show us our sins against this
God: The knowledge of 3. A knowledge of sin.
sin is by the Law; Rom 3. 20. especially revealing unto us, that the very
first motions of our mind and will against God, or our Neighbor, are damnable
sins and breaches of Gods Law; Romans 7. 7. Our sins being thus uttered unto
us in the very particulars, as well actual as original, as well of omission
as of commission, in our thoughts, words, and works; whether they were little
or great, against God or men: after this, there follows 4. Of the punishment
of sin.
a revelation of all the fearful punishments and curses temporal and
eternal, for the plaguing of body and soul, now and for ever; by the
threatening and denunciation whereof, and happily by a sensible experience of 5.
Fear.
some part of it, the holy Spirit breeds terror, fear, and astonishment,
upon the view and apprehension of so many erroneous sins, and such lamentable
doleful estate as is due thereunto: Hereof called the Spirit of fear and
bondage; Romans 8. 15. 2 Timothy 1. 7. Whereupon the said spirit brings to a
special grief upon the sense of Gods heavy wrath for some especial sin,
called, Pricking 6. Grief.
of the heart; Acts 2. 37. whereby it bereaueth men of their chief desires,
puts them out of conceit with the best things in themselves, turning their
mirth to mourning, their chief delight to bitter grief: taking down their
hearts courage, and stomach; because they 7. Discouragement, or casting down
the heart.
see they have to do with a righteous and most rigorous Judge, who will remit
nothing of his justice, but takes revenge upon all sin and iniquities: and
finding no strength or means in themselves to escape his wrath, they despair
of ever obtaining his favor, by any their 8. Despair.
own worth or goodness. These are the works of the Spirit in the ministry of
the Law: and in Ioh. 16. 8. They are called, the rebuking of the world of
sin. Here the office of the Law ceasseth, and can bring no nearer to Christ,
but only to bewray unto us our great need and want of his sufferings and
righteousness: and thereof the Law is termed our Schoolmasters to Christ;
Galat. 3. 24. Thus then the Spirit having brought the sinful soul by the
preaching of the Law, in the Spirit works by the Gospel.
view and dread of her iniquity and misery, to behold what great and extreme
need she has of Christ, and of every drop of his blood, of his 1.
Knowledge of God as a Redeemer.
Spirit, and of every grace thereof; does after this by the Word of the Gospel
begin to open her a door to the grace and favor of God, showing God unto her
as a Redeemer and Savior of sinners, freely offering 2. General sight and
faith of the promises.
mercy for forgiveness and salvation in the promises of the Word, enlightening
the mind to know the truth and certainty of them, moving the judgment to
yield and subscribe unto them, being known to be from God; and then further,
making poor sinners to perceive and believe that all sins how many and
horrible soever, 3. (...) of pardon, that sins be pardonable.
for all the multitude and hugeness of them, are pardonable, and such as may
be forgiven them; as being far and very far lesser then the infinite mercies
of God, 4. Consideration of Christ's sufferings.
and most invaluable merits of Christ's passion and death: the infinite price
and worth whereof, being wrought by the same Gospel to see and consider, the
5. Confession of sins.
distrustful hearts be therewithal stirred up by the holy Ghost to make
particular confession of sins, and to seek mercy and pardon of them from God
by Jesus Christ, with trust of finding it; as also to hunger and thirst after
that perfect righteousness of Christ there 6. Hunger and thirst.
set before them: and finally, by the operation of that Spirit applying to them
the promises concerning Christ and righteousness by him, they are sure'y
persuaded, 7 Persuasion of mercy.
that they belong to themselves: whereupon flying from the terror of justice
threatened in the Law, they dare approach to the Throne of grace; saying, Abba
Father, in respect whereof, the holy Ghost is called, the Spirit of adoption,
of faith, and of a sound mind; Romans 8. 15. 2 Timothy 1. 7.


Aquila. I do acknowledge my self now well content with this your Anatomy and
opening of the works of the Spirit, in calling, illuminating, and opening the
heart, that it may believe Christ to salvation: whereby I see how far many
are from faith, which suppose themselves near to it; and also perceive how
manifoldly and greatly the Elect which do believe, are beholden to God for his
wondrous working in them. And lastly, more and more discern the continual and
sincere preaching of the Law and Gospel to be of great use in the Church, that
Gods Elect thereby may be translated from infidelity to faith. Now if you
think good, we will hold our selves content to have proceeded thus far at
this present, and at our next meeting, we will confer further (if God will)
concerning this great work of Faith, to the creating whereof, we have seen so
many and sundry works of the Spirit, to be behouefull and requisite.


Apollos I am well pleased so to do, for my business calls me away, and it
may be also your Family or calling may crave your presence; and meet it is
that these lesser duties give place to the greater. At our next meeting
together, I will try your knowledge about the nature and office of faith, and
other things which belong to that worthy and noble gift, the Mother-gift and
Queen of all graces, which be inspired into man's hear:.


The third part of the Dialogue concerning a true and lively Faith in Jesus
Christ.
Apollos. WEll said Neighbor Aquila, I see you will not fail me, in that you
keep your appointed time so duly: for you are here even just at the time we
agreed upon.


Aquila. Sir, I love to stand to my word in every thing which is in my power to
perform. I will be advised what I promise, but having once given my faith, I
will not break it willingly. Fidelity in keeping promise with men, is one of
those Christian graces which are proper to Gods children, as there will be
occasion hereafter to declare: but in the mean time, the thing that we are
now to deal in, it is not concerning civil faith between man and man, but
about Christian faith in the promises which God has made to man. Which because
it is a large theme, and will take up much time, I have purposely set apart
some, and overcome othersome business, that we might intend the
through-sifting of this point.


Apollos. And my leisure does serve me very well. Therefore because you
thought it no ease unto you to propound Questions, ye shall now undergo the
burden of an answer, which you liked so well of. Let me see how you prove that
Faith is a fruit of our calling, and a gift proper to the Elect; seeing it is
reported of many, that they have believed, which yet were not Elect, as of
Simon Magus; Acts 8. 13. Also some in John 2. 23, 24. Yea, of the very Devils
that they do believe; James 2. 19. In which place verse 26. the same Apostle
tells us of a dead faith, which one may have, and yet be no true Christian.


Aquila. For your former Question, whether it be a fruit of our effectual
Calling: If there were no evident testimony to prove it, yet the thing is
plain enough; for all know (which know any thing) that in our Calling we are
made to believe, this being the very terminus, or end, wherein the work of our
Calling rests, to bring us to Faith in the Son of God. Of which yet there
is proof by express places, or good consequence out of holy Scripture. When
the Apostle says, Romans 8. 30. Whom he calls, them he instifieth: of this it
follows, that men being called and justified at one time; and all do, or
should know, that there can be no Justification but by Faith: that therefore
in our Calling, we are made to believe unto Justification.

Again, such places as yoke preaching and believing together, as Acts 11. 20,
21. They preached the Lord Jesus, and a great number believed; and Acts 14. 1.
They spoke so as that a great number believed; with innumerable places of the
like kind: These manifestly confirm to us, that where G O D S Spirit
effectually calls to the heart, by the call and voice of the Preacher to the
care, there follows Faith as an immediate work of such a Calling.

Now to your second demand, I answer, not every Faith is a fruit of effectual
calling, and proper to the Elect: for there is a Faith which is so called
improperly, as a painted fire is called fire; or a dead man is named a man.
Such is the faith which does accompany a common outward Calling, and may be
found in hypocrites and wicked men; and in some of them there is historical
faith only, by a general illumination, being made to understand and believe
the doctrine of Scriptures to be of G O D; and therefore to be most true and
worthy of credit: and thus much the Devils do believe, and so far the blind
Scribes and Pharisees came: but in others of them the Spirit works further to
bringthem to have a certain joy and delight in that which they know These do
that in hypocrisy which Gods children do in truth.
and believe, with a kind of love and liking to the Ministers of the word, and
a reverence after a sort unto them and to the message which they bring. Yea,
moreover they are brought by the same Spirit to see and confess a great need
of Christ, and to have some hope that their sins may be pardoned them, to
desire it in some manner, to confess their sins, and that often and
particularly, to ask pardon, and that only in the name, and for the merit of
Christ; and all this while their Faith is but temporary, they never come to be
rooted and grounded in Christ, and so their faith does fail them, and vanish
away. Such was the faith of them which were likened to the stony ground; Mat.
13: also of Simon Magus, of Demas, of Judas, and of all hypocrites, who are
deceived themselves, and do deceive others with the shadow and appearance of
faith, in stead of a true, lively, and substantial faith. Which in Scripture
(for distinction from dead Fath) is called an effectual Faith; 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3
and Faith unfeigned; 1 Timothy 1. 5. and Faith of Christ; and Faith of the
operation of God; Col. 2. 12. and Faith of the Elect; Titus 11. given to them
who are ordained to life; Acts 13. 48. which euidenceth unto us, that there is
a true and lively Faith, which springs from election, as a fruit of it, and is
proper unto the chosen.


Apollos. I desire to hear of you what this lively Faith is: 2. wherein it
differs from the faith of hypocrites and wicked men: 3. what be the parts
thereof: 4. and also if it have any degrees, and what they be?


Aquila. This lively Faith is a precious gift of God, enabling the Christian
soul to know and believe the What a (...) faith is.
whole doctrine of God, as it is contained in the Word; especially that which
concerns salvation by Christ, and to apprehend or receive particularly and
certainly Christ offered in that doctrine unto eternal life in heaven. When I
affirm Faith to be the gift of God, it agrees A gift of God.
with Scripture, Ephe. 2. 8. Faith is the gift of God; which is to teach, that
men have it not by industry, as they have Arts and Sciences; nor by nature, as
they have reason, memory, speech: for then all men might believe; But all men
have not faith: 2 These. 3. 2. Which must admonish the faithful of
thankfulness, in acknowledging that through Gods great goodness it is given
them of God to believe; especially seeing it is no ordinary gift, or common,
which all professors may A precious gift.
have; but a very precious and rare gift: 2 (...). 1. 1. being given to Gods
own peculiar and chosen people, a people purchased with an inualuable price.

This gift of faith looks to the whole word and doctrine It believes the
whole word of God.
of God. Whatsoever is in Scripture taught and set down, it knows and
believes it to be most true; be it a word of rebuke, or admonition, or
exhortation, or threatening, or commandment and precept, it does believe and
know all that God speaks to be most true and faithful, moving the heart, and
that effectually to receive the word of admonition, to grceue at the rebukes of
the word for sin, to obey the word of commanding, to fear at threatenings,
faith having object (...), no other even or equal object but God speaking in
his word; as it is written, Abraham believed God: Genesis 15. 6. And again, The
people believed God, and his servant Moses; Exodus 14. 31. Howbeit the word of
promise, of the Evangelical promise, promising Christ, Especially the promise
of grace.
and with him remission of our sins, righteousness, and life everlasting;
this word is the more special, near and proper object and mark, that the eye
of a lively faith looks unto; and between this faith, and Christ promised,
or the promise of Christ, there is a mutual Relation between faith and the
promise.
relation or reference: the promise being set forth to be believed by faith,
and faith embracing and leaning upon this promise, it finds no stay to rest
on for salvation, till it come to this word of promise. For as man's natural
life is preserved by eating, yet not by eating every thing, but by eating
wholesome and fit food: So the soul is saved by believing; Ephe. 2. 8. yet not
by believing every truth, nor every truth of the Bible, but by believing that
Word of truth, which is the Gospel. This faith of Christ crucified, saves;
there being nothing whereby we can be saved, but Christ only: Acts 4. And no
gift of God whereby we can have Christ, but faith: He dwells in our hearts by
Faith; Ephesians. 3. For this power of receiving Christ unto salvation, belongs to
faith only amongst all the gifts of God. Where of there is clear proof; for
it is never written of any other gift, that thereby Christ is received: but
this is attributed often unto faith, as John 1. 12. Believing in the name of
Christ, and receiving him, are put the one for the other: As many as received
him, to them he gave prerogative to be the Sons of God, even to them which
believe in his name. And Romans 5. 11. By whom we (which before were sinners and
enemies, verse 8. 10.) have now (that is, since we had faith to believe to
instification, verse 1.) received the atonement. And hereunto that in Galat. 3.
14. It is written, that by faith, we receive the promise of the Spirit; that
is, the promise concerning Christ, and righteousness by him, which is called
the Spirit; because the Spirit is Author of it, reuealer of it, and by his
operation, the applier of it. This receiving of Christ by faith, it is done by
a double act or work; one of the mind, renewed, seeing, acknowledging, and
considering him as our own Savior, given to us of God, with all his merits
and rich gifts: the other of our will, renewed, embracing, affecting, and with
joy feeling his mercies, being fully satisfied with him, now made unto us of
God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; 1 Cor. 1. 30. and
become to us as well of water, springing up in us to life everlasting; Ioh. 7.
38. Now the reason why Christ with his benefits are received rather by Why
Christ received by faith only: because God so decreed it.
faith, then by any other gift of the mind, is very plain: for it is so
decreed of God in his eternal counsel, that neither by repentance, hope, or
love, or any other grace then by believing only, we should become partakers of
Christ, and his righteousness: according to that which is written: This is the
will of him that sent me (says Christ) that every one that sees the Son of
God, and believes in him, shall have eternal life; John 6. 40. And Galat. 3.
8. It is said, that the Scripture foreseeing, (that is, God foreseeing; and
fore-appointing, and in Scripture long before it came to pass revealing) that
God would instifie the Gentiles through faith. And this is a sure rule in
Diuiniry, that whatsoever comes to pass in time, was ordained to be before all
time; therefore the Word and experience having taught, that whosoever lay hold
on Christ to their salvation, it is by faith they do it: it must follow
hereof, that it was Gods will from all eternity.

The end of Gods counsel herein, is twofold. First is The second and of Gods
decree.
because this way of receiving Christ with his righteousness 1. His glory.
to life, it takes from us all matter of rejoicing and boasting in our selves,
and gives the whole glory unto God, as it is written; God has set forth
Christ to Romans 3. 25.
be a reconciliation through faith, (to this end) to declare his
righteousness; that is, that he might be known to others (as he is in
himself) to be a most true and merciful God in his promises, to the praise of
his righteousness. And a little after, Where is then the rejoicing? Verse 27.
It is excluded: By what Law? (that is to say, by what doctrine) of works? No:
but by the Law of faith. Therefore it is written, Romans 4. 3. That Abraham had
by his works nothing whereof to rejoice with God; but by his believing the
promises of Christ he had: for when we must go out of our selves for eternal
life, and all that belongs to it, to receive that from another in whole and in
part; what can there be left for us to glory in, and what can be more to the
glory of God, then to be acknowledged to be the Savior of empty miserable
beggars, which have nothing of their own, but the old rags of sin and
wretchedness? And how must not this exceedingly rejoice the believing heart,
to see it self blessed with Christ and all his merits, and that freely?

Another end of Gods counsel herein, was not only 2 Our stablenesse.
to provide for the glory of his own grace, but for the stablenesse of our
minds, that we might be sure of the thing promised; which could not have
been, if it had come to us any other way then by believing the promise:
therefore the promise by Christ, and the heavenly inheritance by him purchased,
it must be by faith, that it might come by grace, and the promise might be
(...) the (...); Romans 4. 16.


Apollos. I have willingly heard you opening the nature and proper office of a
lively faith, the faith of Gods Elect enabling them even to the apprehension of
Christ; which cannot be done by the faith of hypocrites, and wicked men.
Whereof it is, that this finely faith is termed the faith of Christ: not only
because Christ is the giver of it, or the proper and especial object; but
especially because it carries us to Christ. As the sick of the palsy, who
himself could not go, was by others carried to Christ, to be healed of him;
Mat. 8. 1. 2: So we being maimed and lame, yea, dead; yet when we through
grace are quickened to believe the promise, we are carried to Christ, as it
were on the shoulders of our faith; which is also the foot whereby we walk to
him, the eye whereby we see him, the mouth whereby we eat him, the hand of
our soul whereby we receive him, and apply him to our (...): decreed to be
thus by his Father for the manifestation of his truth and mercy, and for our
benefit in the establishing of our minds in the assurance of enjoying of
Christ, and all the good promised by him. Now if ye please branch out this
faith into his parts, and acquaint us with the several measures of it, that so
the doctrine of faith may yet be fuller and cleerer to our understandings! for
I think ye are of this mind, that all have not a like faith, neither do ye
take faith (as some think) to be only a general knowledge and (...) to the
doctrine of Christ: let me hear you what you will say to these masters?


Aquila. Here in I will apply my self to fulfill your desire, if first I do
deliver somewhat unto you of the Qualities of faith.
two adioynts or qualities proper to this faith; to wit, particularity and
certainty: it being a particular and 1. CertaintyParticularity.
certain receiving of Christ Jesus. First for certainty, it is of the nature
of faith, to breed certainty or assurance of the thing believed: we are not
more certain that we see what we see, or do hold what we have in our hands,
then we are certain of having and enjoying that which by faith we see and
receive. In as much as doubting is joined with faith, (the faithful having
many doubts) this comes of the weakness and infirmity of faith; as the
shaking and daddering of the hand proceeds of some natural imbecility and
feebleness, and yet the hand holds surely that it has caught: so it comes
of the frailety of faith, that we stagger and doubt; ( O ye of little faith,
why do ye (...)? Mat. 6.) yet faith for the nature of it does surely receive
and hold the promise. Hence it is, that faith is defined for the certainty and
cleerenesse of it to be the ground or subsistence of things hoped for, the
evidence or demonstration of things which are not seen; Heb. 11. 1. The
meaning whereof So the Greek Scholiast expounds it, as Master Beza cites him.
is thus much, as if the holy Ghost should say; Faith is the very substance or
essence of things hoped for, because the things which be but hoped for, are
yet to Heb. 11. (...) 1.
come, and be void of essence or being: faith therefore whereby they are
believed to be, is a ceraine essence of them, causing them though they be
absent, yet after a sort to be extant and present. And also it is a
demonstration or evidence of things not seen, because to the eye of faith, as
things absent are present, so things (...), become as if they were visible; the
understanding enlightened by faith, seeing those things, which yet cannot be
seen, because they are (...). Now how should this be truly spoken of faith,
were it not a certain and firm comprehension of things. Which further
appears in this, that assurance is attributed to faith, where it is written;
Draw near in assurance of faith. Heb 10. 22. And of Abraham, Romans 4. 20. It is
said, He was assured by faith of the promise made him. Where it is to be
observed, that doubting is an effect of unbelief, is set against assurance the
effect of faith. He doubted not through unbelief, but being strong in faith,
he was assured fully that the promiser was able to do it; Romans 4. 20. 21. For
as upon the holding or receiving a thing into the hand, grows an assurance of
having that thing; and therefore we say, it is in his hands, he is sure of it,
or he is not sure of it; for it is not yet in his hands: so upon our receiving
and holding Christ by the hand of faith, follows an assurance that he is ours,
and that by him God is become our merciful Father, and has forgiven us our
sins and will save us everlastingly from whence comes a boldness and
confidence, that as Children to their Parents, so we can confidently come to
God through Christ believed on: By whom we have boldness, and entrance with
confidence, by faith in him; Ephe. 3. 12. Where note these things, how they
hang together. 1. Faith. 2. Thereupon assurance. 3. Thereupon confidence and
also boldness. The faithful having such a high Priest and Mediator, as is
higher then the heavens, which can do all in all with his Father; they are
more then assured of reconcilement and favor: for they boldly come to the
throne of Grace, with trust and Heb. 4. verse last.
confidence to find help in the time of need. Further, if we cannot be
certain by the certainty of faith, of the promise concerning salvation, then
how could we be said Romans 5. 1.
by faith to have peace with God? What peace and quietness can there be, when
there lacks certainty? and how could it be truly written, that by faith we
stand in grace? for standing notes steadfast firmness. Finally, the word of
promise being more firm then heaven and earth; and the mercies, truth, and
power of the promiser being infinite and unchangeable: what should hinder but
that the believer may assure himself to have the thing promised? And how then
are they too blame which teach the doctrine of doubting, unless we have
special revelation from Heaven? That which they say that in respect of our
selves being variable, we may always and worthily doubt, and also through the
great-nesse of our sins, it is nothing: for our faith rests not upon our
own strength, but upon Gods truth, might, and mercies, which do far exceed
our sins. The greatness whereof in the true believer, does make his truth
and mercies so much the more renowned and illustrious, Romans 3. 4, 5. Therefore
let the faithful strive against motions of doubting, yield not, but grew more
and more assured: and the more strong ye are in faith, the less ye shall
doubt; which ever comes of the weakness of faith, as I have said.

Touching the other thing, that faith is not only a 2. Particularity of faith.
certain, but a particular receiving of Christ; me thinks that should not be
doubted of, that this is of the nature of faith, to appropriate the promise to
the believer; as my hand takes a gift bestowed, to make it mine own.


Apollos. Friend Aquila, spare this labor here to speak now any further of
this matter: for you will be put to it again, when ye are to speak of the
(...) of faith, whereof now time and order requires, that ye say something.

Ye say well. I will follow your counsel. Unto a lively faith there belongs
three things, which ye may 3. Parts of Faith.
well call parts thereof. 1. Knowledge. 2. Assent. 3. Application. There must
necessarily be a knowledge of 1. Knowledge.
things to be believed: For how can we believe him of whom we have not heard?
Romans 10. 14. Hence it is that faith is so often called knowledge: John 17. 3.
This is eternal life to know, etc. and understanding: Col. 2. 2. Full
assurance of understanding, to know the mystery of Christ: and wisdom; Ephe.
1. 8. He has abounded toward us in all wisdom and understanding. There being
no knowledge, wisdom, or understanding, like to this of 1 John 2.
faith, whereby we know the Father and understand the secrets 2 Timothy 3.
of the Kingdom, and are made wise to salvation. Unto What things required to
knowledge.
this knowledge, observe that there be required these five things. First, some
warrant of Scripture to direct our knowledge in things to be believed unto
salvation, that our faith may rest on God. And therefore secondly, such places
as be warrants and grounds of our knowledge, must be perceived for meaning of
words and matter therein contained, or otherwise it cannot be called knowledge.
Thirdiy, together with a faculty to discern the truth so perceived from the
contrary error, which is called a spiritual (...): 1 Cor. 2. 14. Prayed for,
Philip. 1. 9. because it is by virtue of the holy Ghost, enabling a Christian
to judge of doctrines which be of God, and which not. Fourthly, to this must be
joined an ability, to increase in this knowledge: Colos. 1. 10. Increasing in
the knowledge of God. Which (...) by the right use of our former knowledge: as
riches increase by industry, and memory by use does increase and wax stronger;
so does our knowledge of heavenly things: Therefore let Gods children put all
their knowledge to use, according to the nature of the thing known, and their
own occasions. The last and fifth thing, is a power to instruct others, as
namely those under their charge (as children and servants) that which they know
themselves: This was in believing Abraham, Genesis 18. It must be in Abraham's
children. This which I have spoken of knowledge, shuts out the implicit
blind faith of the Papists; amongst whom, one may hold the place of a
faithful man, and yet know nothing more then to rehearse the Creed, and the
Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments; or to believe as the Church believes,
though they know not what that is. The other 2. Assent.
thing required in faith, it is assent; that the mind agree to the thing
known, to hold it for a truth, and be so certainly persuaded thereof, as he
will judge the contrary false whenever he meets with it; and be ready to
endure anything, rather then to deny such truth. Such an assent was in Thomas,
when he saw and felt Christ's hands and side; and in Peter, being persuaded 2
Pet 1. 16.
the thing which he taught concerning Christ, to be no fables; also in Paul,
who was so resolved of the truth of the doctrine which he knew, as he was
willing to suffer even death, rather then to renounce it. All the Martires of
Christ in yielding their lives for Christ, did witness to the world, that they
had firmly assented unto, and were thoroughly resolved of the undoubted truth,
which they knew and professed.

The third part of faith, is application, when the believing 3. (...)
party is persuaded not only of the truth of the doctrine touching Christ, to
yield firm assent thereunto, but that the same truth belongs unto himself.
As this is the greatest, so it is the hardest duty of faith; impugned mightily
by the Papists, who cannot abide to Rellar. de Iustific, lib. 1. 30. denies
that application is in justifying faith.
hear of it: and also it is performed with much difficulty, of the best
Protestants in the time of temptation, when they are sore assailed by their
sins and Satan. But letting other things pass, here I will only prove it to
be the duty of faith, to appropriate the doctrine of Christ touching eternal
salvation by him; to a man's self particularly, and to show that faith makes a
man believe his own salvation; and not only that there is salvation purchased
for sins by Christ, as the Scripture teaches. First, the Commandment is to
believe Reasons for application by faith.
the Gospel; Mark 1. 15. To believe in the name of Christ; 1 (...). 4. 23.
Shall we say that the meaning of this Commandment is no more, but to believe
the doctrine (which teaches Jesus to be the Son of God, and a perfect
Savior of the World) to be of God, and a most true doctrine? What will let
then, but that (...) may be a true believer, and be saved? for either he
believed this, or he believed nothing: yea, he preached this; Mat. 10. 7. And
does not Christ say of some of the Pharisees, that they knew him and also whence
he was? Ioh. 7. 28. and 15. 22; that they had no cloak for their finne, because
by hearing him, they did see and know his doctrine and works to be of God? And
in sooth how could he in Mat. 12. 31, 32. charge them with that (...) of the
Spirit; unless they had been enlightened by the work of the Spirit so far,
as to understand that which he taught and wrote, to be divine, and not from
men, or by humane power? And who can doubt, which will not hoodwinke his eyes
not to see that which is so manifest, that many in the Church come so far as
to see, and to assent unto the whole doctrine of Christ, even to the professing
and declaring it to others distinctly and learnedly? of whom yet there may be
great doubt made, that all such are not true believers endued with this lively
faith, effectual to salvation. Wherefore the Commandment pressing us to
believe the Gospel, has meaning to press us to believe it with
particularitie, that the doctrine of salvation by Christ belongs to our selves,
as the Elect may pass further then a natural man can do.

Secondly, it may appear to be so, because believing John 6. 47. compared with
verse 50, 51. Now every one knows this action of eating to be an
appropriating to a man's own self, a portion of meat which is provided for
all; so is believing an application to a man's self of such promises as are
commonly propounded to the whole Assembly. Tell me, will itsuffice a man for
the nourishing and preserving of his bodily strength, when he comes to a
Table well furnished with meat, to persuade himself that the meat is very
wholesome, good for nourishment, and well dressed; or may he not go away
hungry and feeble, if he do not take the meat, and by eating make it his
own? So when a sinner comes to a Sermon, where he hears the doctrine of
the Gospel so mildly and distinctly taught and proved, will it suffice him to
salvation to credit it certainly to be a divine truth, only able to save poor
sinners, and to have been truly and wisely handled? May he not for all this,
go home in as bad case as he came, as far from salvation, except by belief he
receive that meat of heavenly truth into his own heart particularly to be
refreshed by a sure persuasion of the same, that it appertains to himself.

Moreover, does not the Apostle say, that Christ is put on by faith; Gal. 3.
26, 27. and that he dwells in our hearts by faith? Ephe. 3. 17. And does not
this imply application to be loving to faith? What is putting on, but an
application of a garment to the body for warmth and comeliness? What is
dwelling in our hearts, but the presence of Christ, there by his Spirit to do
all the parts of a Savior to him in whom he dwells? And 1 Ioh. 5. 14.
the will of God, shall be given us, and the forgiveness of our own sins;
also our own salvation to be by the will of God asked in prayer: and yet we
not bound to believe the remission of our own sins, and our own salvation?
Moreover, when Paul said, Christ loved me, and died for me; and says also,
that he lived by faith in the Son of God; Gal. 3. 20. And Mary called Christ
her Savior; (...) 1. 46. And Thomas confessed, saying; My Lord, and my God;
Ioh. 20. 28. And (...); God is my (...), and my salvation; Psalm. 18. 1. Did not
their faith apply that Savior and God particularly to themselves, who is the
common Savior of all believers? And if this were not done by their faith, how
then? And how does the Church in framing prayers, say, Our Father, but in
making confession of faith, say, I believe? If this be not the judgment of
the Church, that every one must have particular faith, to believe the doctrine
for himself, and out of (...) prayers for others with himself? Also, when Sat
an tempts any about particularity of salvation, to doubt that himself cannot
be saved, Christ died not for him; will it not be too weak a buckler to beat
back this assault, to say, I do surely believe the whole truth of doctrine,
concerning redemption by Jesus Christ, that he alone came from God, and is the
only Son of God, and that there is salvation by no other? Nay, will not the
tempter reply, I my self believe so much, and yet tremble? And Julian
believed, and protested so much, and yet an Apostata. Wherefore as when a rich
gift is bestowed amongst many poor people, every one must take to himself a
portion of it; for it will not relieve their poverty, if they only believe it
to be a good gift, and do not take it to themselves: so the gift of Christ
which is offered to poor sinners, in the doctrine of the Word, to enrich them
withal, must of every one by his faith (as by an hand) be applied to
himself, or else they will remain poor and beggarly still. Unto this action
of application of Christ by faith, Five things in application.
there belongs these five works of a renewed soul. The first is to approve
the worthiness of the doctrine 1. Approbation.
of grace, known and believed, to hold and esteem it better then all
Merchandise, precious stones, or the finest gold; (...). 3. 14. yea, and to
judge both these, and whatsoever things else, but dung in respect of Christ;
Phil. 3. 8. Then secondly to desire Christ, and his merits 2. Expetition,
Desire seruent, unfeigned, constant: Ioh. 7.
offered in that doctrine, even as hungry persons desire meat, and as Sampson
thirsted after drink, when he said; Give me drink, or I die: Judges 15. 18.
Thirdly, 3. Firm apprehension.
so to lay hold on Christ, as the man in Acts laid hold (...), (...) not let
go again: and (...) to have (...) hold on a ship, he would not (...) his
hold go, till his hand was stricken off. Fourthly, to delight ones soul 4.
Oblectation.
in Christ, as the gracious Wife delights in her Husbands Psalm. 19. and 115.
love; or as one is delighted with some great treasure, or with the sweetness
of honey. Lastly, looking 5. Expectation.
for the full fruition of Christ, and all his benefits; as David looked for the
promised Kingdom, and the Heb. 9. v last.
people of Israel looked for their full deliverance out of Romans 8. 23.
Egypt and Babylon; or as the Fathers looked for the Messiah his first coming
in the flesh. Thus have I showed you my knowledge about the parts of faith; and
for the degrees thereof, it is sure that there be sundry measures of this
lively faith, as the Apostle (...), when he says; The (...) of God is revealed
from faith to faith: Rom: 1. That is to say, from such a faith as is subject to
waxing and growth, and (...) daily from one degree to another; it being also
plain by other places, that there is a little faith, and a great faith, a
weak faith, and a strong faith; Romans 4. 19. 20. Mat. 16. 8. But seeing this
matter will require some time to discourse it, and we have drawn the day
already to night; we will now depart to visit our Families, and to do such
offices there as belong to our Callings.


Apollos I hold it best so to do; if I say first this one word, that that gift
of faith which requires so many several works of the Spirit, for the (...)
of it, and needs so many actions for the setting it on Faith, what a worthy
and noble gift.
work, and performing that which is the proper (...) of it; it cannot choose
but be a most precious thing, greatly to be sought; and loved of all that live
in (...) Church, and love their own happiness: And now Aquila fare ye well,
till we meet again; which I pray you let it be to morrow at the same hour,
and in this same place if God will.


The fourth part of the Dialogue, touching the degrees, and diverse measures of
a lively Faith.
Aquila. I Have made haste, because I would not disappoint you; and to tell you
truth, I am unlike a Schoole-boy in this case, who when he parts from his
Book, he cares not how long it be ere they meet again: contrariwise, when he
and his play meet, they play loath to depart. Now I, when our conference is
broke off, my fingers itch till we join again; I find no better gain then
that that comes of time thus well bestowed: for this sticks by us, and
enricheth to Godward, when worldly gain fleeteth away apace, and serves for
this life only.


Apollos. I pray you then let us proceed in our purpose. We began to speak of
the degrees of a lively faith, Sundry measures of a true faith.
and to show that neither all Gods Children have like measure of it, nor every
one always the selfsame measure: for indeed it is with the Church of God,
as with a Family or fold, where the persons of the household be some young and
tender, some aged and lusty; and in the flock there are both Lambs and
Sheep: so it is in Christ's Family and fold, there be Christians, of all sorts;
some of ripe age for wisdom, some children in understanding; some like lambs
for their infirmity in knowledge and grace, some like sheep for their
spiritual strength and growth. And as a man differs from himself in (...),
being sometime (...) Infant, and afterward (...) to the full strength and age
of a man: so every true Christian in his spiritual estate differs from
himself, being not so strong in faith at first when he begins to believe, as
afterward. This being the condition of Gods people, to be as trees planted in
an Orchard, which spread themselves, and are more fruitful the longer they
continue: so are the faithful as plants in Gods house, they are more full of
faith and fruit in their old age; Psalm. 92. 13, 14. Whereunto tend those
frequent exhortations in the Word, to increase more and more, and to grow in
grace, and to join grace to grace, and still to hasten to perfection.


Apollos. Sir, seeing you have taken the (...) out of my hand, will it please
you to wield it now you have it? and I will make bold to ask you what I desire
to remember of that which was taught us about this matter of sundry degrees of
faith. And first, seeing the Apostle writes that Faith is one; Ephe. 4. 5. and
that Saint Peter says, All the Elect have attained like precious faith: 2 Pet.
1. 1. how truly then may we affirm that there is a little and great, a weak
and strong faith?


Apollos. Well friend Aquila, you take me at the advantage. Faith little and
great, wherein they are like.
I had meant to have troubled you with this charge, for that I see you can well
discharge it; yet I will not refuse it, seeing you put it upon me. Therefore to
your demand this I say: When Paul says, there is one faith; he speaks not of
the degrees of (...), (and little and great, weak and strong, be but names of
degrees) but he means the substance of (...) to be but one, and the object
to be but one, which is Christ's or one doctrine concerning salvation by him:
and in the other place of Peter, the faith of all the Elect is said indeed to
be like precious, but not like firm and strong. He does not teach that it is
of like quantity and measure, but of like quality and worth: for the faith of
every one of the Elect has the same Author, even the holy Ghost; the same
means, the Gospel, and Word of truth; the same object whereunto it looks.,
Christ and his righteousness: Also one and the same mark whereunto it
tends, the glory of God, and salvation of the soul. In all these things
there is likeness and agreement between the weak and strong faith; yea, and
sundry other things there be wherein this likeness holds: for every faith,
even the strongest is still imperfect; we believe in part, as we do but know
in part: the best believer has need to say; Lord increase my faith. It does
therefore belong to every degree of faith, as a thing common, to take the use
of all means, both private and public, for support and help of it; lest any
tempt God by refusing the means, whereof all have need continually. Beside
this, each faith little and great, may be known of him in whom it is (unless
it be in a great storm of temptation, or at the instant and about the time of
their first conversion:) else Christ would not have asked particular men if
they did believe; nor Paul would have said of himself: I know whom I have
believed; nor exhorted others to examine themselves if they be in the faith, 2
Cor. 13. 6. 2 Timothy 1. Yet moreover, in each faith this is common, that the
things believed, are above compass of natural reason: for if we consider the
things which the Word sets forth to be believed, as for example, that the
World was made of nothing; that a dead body turned into dust, shall live
again; that a Virgin remaining a Virgin, can be a Mother; that God and man is
one person; that so many thousand believers so far distant, are one body; that
Saints in Earth are one with Christ in Heaven, and eat and drink him without
diminishing; that one offense of one man condemned the whole world; that the
righteousness of one man makes millions to be just; that God is then a
Father, when he shows himself an enemy: in these and many such like things,
faith can believe them, (because God has spoken them) when blind reason
cannot see. Lastly, one faith is as sufficient to save as another, a little as
well as a great; because a weak faith can look upon Christ, and lay hold on
him no less truly, then a strong and great faith; even as a weak and sore
eye, might behold the brazen Serpent to health, as well as a sound and clear
eye: but though there be such great and manifold likeness between faith and
faith; yet this lets not, but that there is a difference amongst the godly,
as touching the diverse measures of their faith: even as much as between the
hand of a babe and of a man; between a young plant and a grown tree. The most
wise God distributing his graces as it pleases him, to some thus, to some
otherwise: so as none have cause to disdain such as be infirm, if themselves
be strong; for it was God who established them: nor any to envy others, if
happily they do not so abound in wisdom and faith, as others do; because it
was God that so disposed every man his portion. But the strong must apply
themselves to help the weaker, bearing with infirmities; and the weaker with
reverence and love to honor such as go before them. Even as the foot does not
lift up it self against the head, nor the head does not despise the foot; but
each member respects and cherishes one another, to the preservation of the
whole body: so let believing Christians in respect of God (who does all in them
of his good pleasure) work out their salvation in fear and trembling, every
one being thankful to him for their own measure; knowing that they have
nothing but what is given: thinking themselves happy to have at all any measure
of lively faith; and in respect of themselves, to walk in mutual love, one
supporting and comforting another in all love and modesty, as becomes Saints.


Aquila. Whereas ye have showed many things wherein the two measures of faith
do accord and be alike; let it not be offensive to you, that I put you in mind
of one correspondency between them, which it should seem you thought not upon,
and that is this; It is common to each degree of faith, first, to believe the
promise before they come to any experience, feeling, or comfort from the
apprehension of Gods mercies: as in the woman of Canaan, who verily believed
that Jesus was the Messiah, and would minister help to her distressed
daughter, which was vexed with a Devil, as the Story shows; Mat. 15. 23. when
as yet she had not only no experience, but rather all things went cross and
contrary to her. Therefore it was a fault in Thomas, who would have his senses
the guide of his faith: Except I feel and see (says he) I will in no wise
believe; Ioh. 20. 25. whereas our Savior pronounced them blessed who believe,
and see not. For it is not in supernatural and divine, as it is in humane and
natural things, where by our sense and experience we are led: but in heavenly
matters, first of all Gods children give credit to the promise, striving
against inbred distrust; they do believe God to be true, who has spoken the
word: so as they wait upon God, till in his time he give the feeling and
comfort of that which they trust to be truly promised: a mark worthy to be
thought on, because many esteem of faith by feeling, judging themselves to have
no faith, because they want comfortable and joyous feeling; which is not faith,
but a fruit and consequent of faith, in some more, in some less, and sometime
none at all, as in time of some great trial.


Apollos. No Aquila, I am not offended, that ye did admonish me hereof; I
rather thank you, and wish you still to admonish me: not withstanding, this
matter I knew would come further to be spoken of, in the prosecution of this
doctrine touching the several degrees of faith. But to go forwards, I think
good to deliver unto you severally the difference between these two measures
of faith more distinctly and fully, as their likeness and agreement has been
opened. And first for the least measure and degree of faith, it is this; when
Christians cannot certainly and distinctly say, I believe my own salvation, and
the pardon of all my sins: but being displeased with themselves for their
sins, they do unfeignedly and constantly desire the pardon of them all, and
their reconciliation with God above the whole World; yea, above a world of
worlds. And this their desire of faith, it is a degree of faith, the seed and
beginning of faith, stirred up by the Spirit of adoption; Romans 8. 26. pleasing
God as faith it self, having great promises made to it; Mat. 5. 6. Ioh. 7. 37.
As that indicious Divine Master Perkins has sufficiently proved, both in his
reformed Catholic, and in the Book entitled, the Grain of Mustard seed.
Therefore to let pass the confirmation of that point, it is to be now showed,
who be the persons in whom this weak faith is to be found: which I find to be
of two sorts. The first is of such who have but little knowledge, by reason
whereof their faith must needs be infirm: Examples hereof we have in
Scripture, in Rahab, the Samaritanes; Ioh. 4. 42. the Apostles of Christ at
their first calling, and Cornelius: Cornelius.
whereof some of them did only know the promise touching a Messiah, and did
not so much as know Jesus to be the Christ. Others which knew this, yet were
ignorant Apostles.
by what means he should effect the Worlds redemption, having their heads
troubled with conceit of an earthly Monarchy; full little then thinking that
the life of the Lord and Master, should be the worlds ransom, and that his
resurrection should be the worlds conquest and victory; they dreaming of an
outward glorious reign over the World, and hoping to be great men in great
place under him: howbeit they giving credit to his doctrine, and embracing him
for the Messiah, depending upon his mouth in matter of duty and salvation, they
had a measure of faith, though a little and weak one; as Christ himself does
testify of them all, O ye of little faith: and of Peter by name; O thou Mat. 6.
of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Mat. 14. 31. and as they signify
of themselves by their own petition; Luke 17. 5. Lord increase our fasth. The
other sort of weak ones in faith, be such as having more knowledge in the
mystery of Christ touching the work of salvation, by his sufferings and
righteousness; yet do very weakly apply this their knowledge, not being
persuaded of the forgiveness of their own sins, and of their reconciliation
with God; but earnestly desiring to embrace and believe the promise of it: and
of this sort of believers there have been in all ages very many in the Church
of God, ever since the ascension of Christ, as daily experience proves in many
honest Christians, which can speak well and distinctly of the doctrine of
grace, and yet have laid but poor hold of it for their own safety and
comfort, much doubting themselves.


Aquila. But Sir, by this means it will come to pass, that many which are
far enough from true faith, will be ready to imagine themselves to have some
measure of faith: for every one will by and by allege for himself, that he
has a good desire to believe in Christ, and so be lulled asleep to their own
perdition, presuming of that which they in truth do want.


Apollos. Indeed Aquila you say well, this is a thing may be feared; howbeit
there be diverse good and sure works to discern a sound desire to believe in
Christ, which is the lowest degree of a lively faith, from all vain desires of
wicked men and hypocrites, which may pretend to have it, and yet have it not.
The first is, that Marks of a sound desire.
rather of reconciliation then of salvation; rather to be in grace and favor
with God, then to be happy in heaven: for their desire comes from a bruised
heart, grieved and cast down for the offense of God, and his displeasure
conceived against their sin; so as to have but one good look of God, one
smile of his loving countenance, it is more desired of them then the World;
nay, then the glory of Heaven: as David prays; O lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon us: Psalm. 4. 7. And elsewhere the Church prays, Return,
and let the light of thy countenance shine upon us, and we shall be whole;
Psalm. 80. 3. And in another place, the godly profess saying, In thy favor is
life. It is true, that one cannot have the favor of God, but he is sure to be
saved; and it is lawful to desire salvation: but yet the thing which the
believing broken heart does chiefly look unto, it is to be loved and favored
of God. Again, this godly desire is vehement, not finest gold; Psalm. 19. We
have heard of the desire of the Cananitish woman for her Daughter being vexed
with a Devil; and we read of the chased Heart, breathing and panting after the
cool water brooks; even so the soul chased by temptations, scorched with the
heat of sinful lusts, having begun once to taste the sweetness, or but to
feel the need of saving mercies, does most eagerly and sharply desire to
attain unto them. This earnestness Pilates desire to know the truth; John 18.
which as a weak sparkle quickly died of it self; but it is constant, as is
the desire of a thirsty man, whose desire cease not till his thirst be
quenched; such as Anna her desire was after a child, it was great and
continued, till the thing was granted which she did desire: so it fares with a
sound desire to believe and find Christ, it lasts till faith be formed in
the heart, and Christ be borne in them, they are not quiet till then, nor then
neither; still more and more desiring to be knit and joined nearer to Christ,
their love, their joy, their crown, their treasure. Lastly, this witnesses
the soundness of this godly Balaam would be blessed, but took no thought to
be reconciled to God, or to reform his way. Again, their desires be faint,
and be soon quelled, being neither vehement nor constant; and no marvel, for
they are unsound, rather seeking themselves, that it may be well with them,
then that God may set his heart upon them, and love them, and be glorified in
his mercies toward them: And finally, they desire to be forgiven and saved;
but it is without desire to repent, and amend their lives: they like Heaven
well, but not the way that leads thither; their desire being to be glorified
with God, by having his blessing and joy, and not to glorify him by doing his
will.


Aquila. Will not this, think you, do some hurt, to teach that there is a
desire of faith, which is an acceptance with God for faith it self? may it not
cause men thus to content themselves, seeing now they have some measure of
faith, which is sufficient to save them? Happily it will be thought, that here
they may fix their staff, and set their rest.


Apollos. No Aquila, there is no fear of this in this A fifth mark of a sound
desire.
sound godly desire: that being a portion of saving grace whose property is to
grow still, and wax greater, even as young figs or raysins grow till they be
ripe, and come to their full bigness; as all things which have a vegetative or
sensitive life, their property is to increase unto a certain proportion,
whereunto nature aymeth; as ye may see in plants, and in beasts and birds: so
it is in the spiritual life, it will not stay in beginnings, but loves still
to attain to that proportion and measure appointed to it of God. As by the
exhortation of Peter may be gathered; Grow in grace, and in knowledge of our
Lord: 1 Pet. 5. verse last; for the faithful do that which by him they are
exhorred to do: and by likening faith to a grain of mustard-seede, whose
quality is to grow till it be a large tree; but though this be the nature of
saving grace, to wax and increase, yet exhortations to quicken men's care, they
may do very well. Christians are to be called upon, so to be (...) and
thankful for Reasons why increase of grace is to be sought after.
every true measure of true faith, as withal they never content themselves
with any measure, laboring after perfection. This it is we desire (faith Paul)
even your perfection; 2 Cor. 13. And sure it is the will of God it should be
so: 1 These. 4. 3. I beseech you (...) en increase more and more. The which will
of God, his Children are the rather to hearken unto, because as their faith
increases, so will all their graces and comforts proportionably increase: for
as a man believes, so he loves, and so he fears, and so he obeyes, and so
he prays. And after the measure of faith, and of the fruits thereof, so will
be the measure of glory hereafter: he that had two talents, and the other which
had five, by using and increasing them, gained this of the Lord, to have rule
over the more Cities. The examples of the Prophets, Apostles, and other Saints,
which have continually striuen to increase in godliness, must also stir up
others to do the like: wherein we shall be followers not of them only, but of
Christ Jesus; of whom it is reported, that he increased in stature and
wisdom, and favor with God and men; Luke 2. v. last.


Aquila. If it please ye, let me hear what ye count strength of faith, or a
strong faith, which is the other or second measure of faith before spoken of;
and whether in this measure also there be not differing measures, of strong
faith one to be stronger then another; and which is the highest pitch of faith
that can be attained unto here in this our pilgrimage; and by what steps the
children of God climb up thereunto?


Apollos. Friend Aquila, you will (I see) provide me That there is a strong
faith.
work enough; your questions be like a chain with many linkes, which must be
loosed not all together (for that were a breaking and not a loosing) but apart,
one after another. That there is such a measure of faith, which deserves to be
termed strong, it is very plain by these few Texts following; Abraham being
strong in faith: Romans 4. 20. And O woman, great is thy faith; Mat. 15. 28. and
of the Centurions faith, I have not (says Christ) found so great faith, no not
in Israel; Luke 7. 9. That the Centurion which was a Gentile by nature, a
Soldier by profession, and saw in Christ's person for outward appearance,
nothing save weakness and infirmity, should yet have such firm persuasion of
his power and goodness (having no particular promise) as to believe, and to be
resolved in his mind, that Jesus was able to help his sick servant, and that
without his bodily presence, or touching, only by speaking the word, he
should chase away such an inueterate malady: this was a strong faith indeed.
The like ye may see in Abraham, that he being an hundred years old, and his
wife barren and stricken with age, never hearing of any before to be made
Parents at these years, yet without any former example to believe upon the
word and promise of God, that he should be a father, and that of such a child
of whom should come Nations, and in whom all nations should be blessed; and when
he was to be sacrificed, yet then to be persuaded surely that God would keep
that promise; this was a great faith and a strong. But this is none of the
linkes of your chain, That there be diverse measures of a strong faith, and
what they be.
the first whereof is when faith may be counted strong and great; when by the
work of the Spirit ones heart is carried beyond that desire of pardon, which
before was spoken of, even unto a sure and settled persuasion, that through Gods
mercies in Christ, his own sins are pardoned to him, and he fully
reconciled to God, unto the clear certainty of his own salvation. The weak
faith already described, is truly persuaded, that sins may be forgiven, and
desires to have them forgiven with some certainty to obtain; but this strong
faith besides desire and certainty, has setlednesse and fullness of
persuasion, that all is already remitted and covered. As it is reported of
Abraham's faith, that he was fully assured thereby, that God which had showed
himself willing to promise, was also able to do it; Romans 4. 19. Such a
persuasion was in Job, when he could say; I will trust in God, though he kill
me: Job. 13. 15. And again, I know my Redeemer lives; Job 19. 25. And in
David, when he so confidently professed, that he could lack nothing, because
God was his Shepherd; Psalm. 23. 1. and that God was his shield, and fortress,
his buckler, and his strong Savior; Psalm. 18. 1, 2. Lastly, in Paul and
others, we know, 2 Cor. 5. 1. and Romans 8. 35. I am persuaded neither height nor
depth shall separate us. Yet take this withal, that when I speak of this
strong faith, that it is a full persuasion, I mean it not absolutely, as if
there were any such strength of faith as has no weakness, no wants, or
defects at all; unless happily in some particular thing: as in that which was
said to Abraham, that he should be Father of many Nations; wherein it is said,
he was not weak in faith, or doubted through unbelief; Romans 4. 19. For all
faith (as before was said) is imperfect: but strong faith is called a full
persuasion in comparison of a weaker faith, which has not such a measure of
certainty and persuasion.

Now to the second link, whether this measure of strong faith does not admit
sundry measures and differences? It is true, there is so. Moses might believe
more strongly then Jacob, and Job more strongly then Moses; and David more
strongly then Job, and Paul yet more fully then David, and Abraham more
strongly then they all. Amongst men of strong constitution, some may excel
others in courage and strength: so amongst them which be strong in faith, one
may exceed another in power of believing; but of this strong faith there be Two
measures of strong faith.
two evident degrees. The first is of such as throughfull assurance of faith,
do feel in their hearts unspeakable joy and glorious; 1 Pet. 1. 8. even in
tribulations; Romans 5. 3. Others which be fully persuaded in their souls of
Gods mercies toward them in Christ, and yet are without feeling any comfort
thereof for the time. And sure this is a greater degree of the twain; it is not
a thing of such strength, nor a matter so great, in joyful feelings to believe
Gods love, one having as it were a pawn of it in their hand: as when one has
God frowning upon him, and lies in some grievous distress outward or inward,
or both; then to believe fully and strongly that God is still a Father, and
will save and deliver him, argues a mighty faith. When Abraham saw the day of
Christ, with rejoicing at that sight; and Mary so believed in Christ her
Savior, as her soul rejoiced in him; Luke 1. 46: when Paul, and other
believers, through their strong faith, rejoiced under the hope of glory; Romans
5. 2: This was nothing such a (...) and height of faith (to loose your third
link) as for Job when he was in grievous affliction ( God hiding his face
from him, Job. 13. 24. and taking him for an enemy, shooting his bitter arrows
against him, which pierced his reins; making him to possess the sins of his
youth, to the terror of his soul) then, and in that case to say; I am sure my
Redeemer lives, and I shall see him with the same eyes: Job 19. 25. and If he
should kill me, yet will I trust in him; Job 13. 15. Or for David, when his
soul was castdowne, and unquiet within him, and all the waves of God came over
him; yet then to say, He is my present help, and my God; Psalm. 42. 5, 11. I
will yet give him thanks; Or for the man in the Gospel, who cried with tears,
saying; Help my vnbeleese: yet could then say, Lord, I believe; Mark 9. 24.
And this it is which you did advertise me of, as thinking I had forgotten it;
that there may be a true faith, yea, and a great measure of it too for a time,
where there is no comfortable experience and feeling. For as the Sun may for
a time cast forth his beams to the giving of light, when there is no heat nor
warmth: so the Sun of righteousness Christ Jesus, may kindle a light of some
knowledge in the promise of mercy, before there come to the soul the heat and
warmth of joy and comfort. And where both light and heat have been given, he
may sever them at his pleasure; which he is pleased sometimes to do, denying to
his members a joyful sense of mercies for some space, for very good causes and
respects.

First upon some sin committed, he with-draweth his loving countenance,
taking from them inward joy of heart, that by the absence of it, they may be
humbled for their sin; as a father for the better humbling of his child
after some fault, will deny him wonted favor, and look upon it with a
displeasant eye: and by this means also Gods children are brought the better
to consider the greatness of their offense, not only for humbling, but for
whetting their prayers to move them to more earnestness in (...) of pardon,
and the restoring of their joy unto them; as is to be seen in David's example;
Psalm 51. Also herein God takes great trial of their faith and love, and
has occasion on the other side to express and give his children experience of
his mighty grace, in sustaining and releeuing them; his power is known in
weakness. and lastly, it serves for the awing of others, to keep 2 Cor. 12.
verse 10.
them in fear of offending, lest they also loose the joy of their heart in
Gods countenance; as a Father will show anger to one child, to inform and
terrify the rest: unto which we may add another consideration, that joy is
often clouded or ecclipsed, that when it breaks out again, and the mind is
cheered and refreshed afresh, then the comforts of the Spirit may be more
esteemed, more thankfully received, and carefully retained. Things lightly come
by, are lightly set by; but every thing is more accounted of, the more hardly
we get it: therefore as we see a fair day more welcome after a soul, or a
calm or rest more embraced after a storm or trouble; so is joy of spirit more
valued when it comes after deep heaviness and much anguish of spirit: for
these respects Gods children must have patience, and strive to endure the lack
of comfort, considering it will return with such advantage; yea, and be
thankful for such a schooling that it has pleased God to send them such a
bitter remembrance for so good ends: for though it be the most grievous thing
in the World to have our spirit wounded, which should sustain and bear us out
in all infirmities and afflictions, (Sand and Iron not being so heavy as
anguish of heart) yet surely in all Gods Children it has a comfortable issue:
for which as God is to be waited on till it come, so also he is to be praised
for ministering such strength of faith as to be able to believe in him, when
nothing is seen and felt but terror and grief, and matter of despair. And
where as ye asked how, and by what steps Gods people do climb up unto this
height of belief, in this I will satisfy you; that there are sundry duties
and means, which thorough Gods blessing bring faith in time to such a great
measure. As first of all, the duty of fervent prayer, which David's example
teach this; none oftener in prayer, none more rich in faith. Paul full of
faith, because plentiful in prayer. The second duty to Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28.
Hence it is, that it serves greatly to the increase of faith, especially when
therewithal is joined the diligent and obedient hearing of the Gospel
preached; which as it is David to be much in meditations, as Psalm 119. does
witness: so earnestly to commend it to other; Psalm. 1. 2. Besides all this,
the long experience of Gods mercies and bounty in outward benefits and in
inward graces; Psalm. 23. throughout, and the careful observations both of
them, and of Gods David, 1 Samuel 17. 36. where he grew to that strong confidence
of ouercomming Goliath, by the former trial of Gods might in helping him
against the Lion and the Bear. Also Paul resolved strongly for time to come,
that God would deliver him, because he had delivered him; 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. So
as the faithful should do well to keep a Register of Gods mercies and
deliverances, and often go over them in their remembrance and thoughts, as
Papists supersticiously numbered their prayers over their beads; so to refresh
their faith by recording and numbering Gods several savors, learning more
strongly to trust in him, whom they so well know by experimental knowledge;
Let them which know the Lord, put their trust in him: Psalm. 9. 10. Finally,
amongst other things, I am. 2. 22.
not written in vain, that Abraham's faith was perfected by his works. There
is a great neerenesse of kindred between faith and obedience: as faith in the
promise of mercy breeds obedience to the Commandments, so obedient walking
before God, gives more courage to a faithful man, the more boldly and surely
to expect the performance of the promise, being made to such persons as out of
love to God obey his will. Therefore in Psalm 119. the Prophet often
encourages himself to believe certainly and firmly that God will be good to
him to save him, because he had this testimony within himself, that he
endeavored the keeping of his statutes; Save me O Lord, for I have kept thy
Testimonies: and again; I have great delight in thy Statutes, therefore
quicken me according to thy word: and many suchlike. Thus friend Aquila, in so
short room as I could, I have answered your four demands; and for an
overplus, as before I laid out certain marks to try out the soundness of
desire to believe remission of sins (which is the least measure of faith:) so
I will here deliver some tokens of the strongest faith, whereby it may be known.
The first whereof is this, when a faithful man is able David being a private
man, yea, and persecuted, yet believed the promise of his advancement to the
Kingdom. And Abraham rests in the word of Gods promise for Isaac, and the
blessing of all nations in him, even when Gods own word of commandment to kill
his son did war against the word of promise, to bless all people in that
son. Secondly, in many and manifold dangers yet Heb. 11. They were
imprisoned, scourged, racked, slain with the sword, driven into dens and
caves, and yet they still by faith believed God. Thirdly, when any are able to
rejoice in their suffering, Hob. 10. 34. and the Apostles, that went away
rejoicing Acts 5. 41.
that they were counted worthy to suffer for his name. Lastly, if any be ready
(if the will of God be) to adventure Antipas, as the Martyrs who loved not
their lives unto death: these things, as Aquila, it is meet we should think of
repairing to our own houses, to see if all there be in peace and safety.


Aquila. Sir, I am greatly beholden to you for your good endeavor in opening
these things thus distinctly and plainly, and well content to hearken unto your
motion of returning home, reserving other matters, which now cannot be dealt
in, to our next meeting.


The fifth part of the Dialogue, of the rareness of Faith, and fewness of
Believers. As also of the efficacy and fruitefulnesse of a true faith. Of
encouragement to believe, with answer of Objections against Faith.
Apollos. I Am bound to afford you my best help: for of you Aquila I have
been made to know the way of GOD more perfectly. I will ever acknowledge it, and
be ready to show all thankfulness for it. But our time will slide from us,
and though we have all peace at home, yet it is not good to give prouocations.
Let us therefore fall close to our business, that we may dispatch in due
time. Wherein would you wish us now to deal? me thinks we have said much of
Faith, shall we pass to some other thing?


Aquila. No Sir, I pray you, let us dwell a little longer in this argument. For
I covet to hear you deliver your mind touching the efficacy and
fruitfulness of faith, whereof little has been said, scarce a touch given of
it; and what may be the matter that true Faith, being such a noble and
necessary, such a worthy and wonderful gift; yet there be so few, so very few,
even within the Church of God, living under the Ministry of the Gospel, which
are endued therewith: as is too manifest by their manner of living; for very
many live very il: now one can never live ill, that believes well: as on the
other side, he that believes ill, cannot live well.


Apollos. Herein you say most truly. For true Faith is never idle nor barren,
but working and fruitful in good works. Thence it is called, Effectual
Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 1, 3, and elsewhere it is said, that Faith works by love,
Gal. 5, 6. of Abraham's faith it is said, It wrought with his works, James 2,
22. where the Apostle makes voydnesse of works, or want of charity, a note of
a dead faith. For, as dead men can work no more any humane or natural work,
so that faith that works Of the rarenes of faith, how few do believe, and by
what signs it may be known and perceived to be so 1. Ignorance.
not by charity, is dead. Nothing therefore is such a testimony of the lack of
lively faith, as men's evil and wicked lives. Many other things there be, which
do descry this truth, that Faith is a rare gift, and to be found but in a few;
as namely, the great ignorance of God, and his will. For there being (as we
have seen before) required in faith a competent knowledge; nay faith being for
the nature of it a divine wisdom, put into the heart os the elect; therefore
the gross ignorance of these times does argue the rarenes of faith in this
age. The which is further testified by the contempt of Gods public worship,
and the profanation of his Sabbath, 2. Profanation of the Sabbath.
which does always (as an handmaid) accompany and wait upon ignorance: God
being served by some for mere fashion and (...), or because of the Laws
compelling it; and by others not served at all, the Tauernes, or Alehouses, or
Stew-houses, or gaming places, being the Church they keep. This plainly
shows, how rife infidelity is: whereof this is yet a further demonstration,
even men's failing in Gods private 3. Neglect of private prayer
worship, either not praying at all with their family, but lying down like
Asses, and rising like Hogs; or else performing it negligently, with
coldness and want of devotion. But amongst sundry tokens of the rareness of
true believers in the Church of God, these two are the most notorious. The
former is the unfaithful dealing 4 Want of faithfulness.
of one man toward another, men being so full of craft and subtilty, so cunning
and exercised to beguil, Where shall one find a faithful man?
as one can hardly tell where to trust; (...) shall one find a true and
plaine-hearted man. These being the days wherein affiance cannot be put in a
friend, nor confidence in a counselor, as the Prophet fore-tolde, Mic. 7, 5.
This want of civil faith, does bewray the want of Christian faith. For, did
men truly believe in God, they would surely be careful to deal so, as that
they might deserve to be believed of men. Our keeping of our promise with men,
it being a special fruit of our faith in Gods promises, Ps. 5, 4. Gal. 5, 22.
and yet where is he in a manner to be found, that makes conscience of a
promise? Yea, bonds and oaths will scarce 5. Hatred of good men.
hold men, they are so slippery and untrusty. The other thing, is the general
hatred of true believers, of faithful Christians; who of al others are most
scorned and reviled by all sorts of people. Amongst whom, there is a certain
strife and emulation, who should excel others in malice toward them. If men
did believe in God, and love him which begets, they would love such as are
begotten of him, 1 John 5, 1. If this be the mark of a man translated from
death of unbelief and sin, to the life of grace and faith, that they Love
the Brethren, 1 John 3, 14. as it is there written, Hereby we know we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren; then surely, this
ouer-common hatted and despising of the godly, together with the great
unmercifulness and cruelty which reigns every where, does sufficiently prove
the truth of that which is before spoken in the Word, that Christ when he
comes, should scarce find any faith upon the earth, Luke 18. and this is it
which has been the condition of all times. Few there be that enter the strait
gate, Math. 7. Many called, and few chosen. Few also believed the reports of
the Esaias 53, 1.
Prophets. So few that feared God, as that the holy Ghost has enquired for
such as are rare to be found; Where is the man that fears the Lord? Again,
Psalm, 90, 12. In Noah's time, but his family alone, and therein was a Cham.
Afterward, the house of Abraham and of Isaac, who worshipped God aright, yet
there was an Ismael and an Esau. What was Jacobs family, or the Israelites to
the rest of the world? Yet among them were many hypocrites and wicked men.


Aquila. You have well established me in that which I conceived about the
fewness of believers; but I pray you Sir declare unto me what may be the true
causes thereof, and what benefit may come by this consideration?


Apollos. Some of the causes be common to all times, Causes Of the ratenesse of
faith.
some proper to this age wherein we live. Of the former rank, the want of the
Word, the seed of faith; or where 1. Want Of the Word.
the Word is, the want of sound Interpreters, the hands 2. Want Of Interpreters.
which scatter abroad the seed of the Word; the withdrawing of grace where
Interpretors be: for all increase 3. Withdrawing of grace.
comes from God, who if he pull back his grace, it is in vain for Paul to
plant, or Apollos to water. 4. Man's corruption.
To these we may add the corruption of man's heart, prone to unbelief; and
reason, especially corrupted, is an especial enemy to faith, as nothing more.
For the wisdom of the flesh, is not, nor will be subject unto God; Romans 8. 7.

Satan he ever makes one, always laboring by one 5. Satan's malice.
means or other to make frustrate the Word, because he knows that his
kingdom is so much decayed, as the Word prevails to draw men out of
unbelief unto faith: therefore he sets all his wits and wiles aworke how he
may harden men in infidelity. But the maine and sovereign cause of this
fewness of true believers 6. Gods decree.
which be in the world, it is the decree of god, who has not ordained all to
life eternal, which is the end; and therefore not unto faith, which is the
mean to bring unto that end; and these are more then a good many: for the
saved are fewer then the other which are not saved; Mat. 7. 13, 14.

Now for the causes proper to this age; I take them to be these four
especially. First the extreme rage of Satan, 1. Extreme rage of Satan.
who perceiving his time to be but short, rages so much the more, striving
with all his cunning and might to hold men in the fetters of infidelity, and
keep them back from Christ; to this end both lessening and cutting away the
means where he can, and hindering means where they be. Another thing is
abundance 2. Abundance of imquity.
of iniquity ouerflowing in all places (as a deluge,) this last age being as a
common sink, into which all the filth of all foretimes runs; which
occasioneth God as a just Judge to punish men with hearts slow and hard to
believe. Thirdly, to the increase of unbelief, it 3. Diffention in doctrine.
helps not a little, that there is in the Church amongst professors such
differences in matter of faith and religion, 4. (...) of Teachers.
a great stumbling block. And lastly, the loose lives of such as be Preachers
of the faith, avails much to hold men in their unfaithfulness and sin: for
the benefit which is to be made of this consideration, it is this, so much the
more to increase a care in men to labor for the gift of faith, by how much it
is more rare. Were it so common as Nature is, or as the Word and knowledge is,
there were the less need of any thought or trauane this way; but being a thing
so precious and renowned, much talked of in the World, and little felt and
enjoyed; and there being no Christ nor happiness without it: it stands upon
so much the more to give all diligence, that they may be found rather amongst
the little handful of believers, then in the multitude of Infidels, which
walk the broad way of unbelief and iniquity. Also this admonishes us, as to
sweat about the getting of faith, by use of all the means before mentioned; so
to be exceeding thankful to God for separating and choosing us out of the
world of unbelievers. They shall deserve to lose their faith, that will not
joyfully and much praise God for it, and endeavor greatly and continually to
set it on work. And so to return to the other part of your question, about
the working and efficacy of a true faith, it is a point worthy your
remembrance, and worthy of a more worthy discourser then my self am. Ye can
but have my best performance, and that I promised you.

I find by the Word (as I began to show) that a lively faith is a most
powerful and fruitful gift, bringing forth many, sundry, and excellent works
and effects; whereof that 11. Chapter to the Hebrews gives plentiful proof.
And it will not be amiss, to run through a few of those examples named
there. We read of Enoch, that his person by faith pleased God; and Abels
sacrifice through faith was accepted of him. Noah by faith believed, and feared
the judgment and threatening of God, and prepared the Arc, being moved with
reverence of his authority that commanded it. Abraham by faith, obeyed God,
even to the forsaking of his native country, to go to a strange place which
he knew not, and to the offering of his son Isaac, the son of the promise.
Moses by faith, contemned worldly honors. (...) by faith, being an Heathen and
an Harlor, was made courteous and peaceable to the spies of Israel. Finally, by
faith, other Saints attempted to do very hard, and suffered most heavy
things: yea, even women by faith (...) death and (...) most (...).


Aquila. Now that ye have made entrance into the treatise of the efficacy of
faith, go forwards I pray you, and show me as distinctly as you can, what be
the several works of faith, being once created in the heart, and what the due
meditation thereof ought to work in us.


Apollos. I was minded so to do, but I must do it The great and manifold
effects and works of Faith.
here more breefely, because it must be the subject of all our conference for
the time to come. Of a lively effectual faith, there be some works without
us, which yet nearly concerns us; or some inward or wrought within us, which
are so wrought, as they stick and abide within our selves. For these outward
works we are to note, that a lively faith, it is that effectual instrument
whereby an elect person is united and knit unto Christ, to become a member of
Christ: and that whereby he becomes partaker of Christ his perfect
righteousness, performed by his manhood unto remission of sins, and
justification before God, as it is written; We conclude that man is instified
by Faith, Romans 3: and also of his spirit for sanctification, as it is written,
(...) the Spirit by faith, Galath. 2, 14. and the heart is purified by faith,
Acts, 15. So as our faith carrying us unto Christ, effects for us those three
most excellent graces, of union with him, instification by him, and
sanctification, which I call outward, because faith goes out of our selves to
find them in Christ. Now the inward effect and work offaith, are all those
works of Christ dwelling in our hearts, even whatsoever Christ dwelling in us,
(...) within us, the same are works of faith. As a peaceable and settled
conscience, in regard of finne pardoned; an access unto the gracious presence
of God, a marvelous joy of heart by this means, a certain hope of heavenly
glory, a sense and feeling of the former benefits, and of the infinite love of
God shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, cheerful patience in all
tribulations; all which effects do spring from the application of Christ by
faith, as it is apparent by Romans 5, 1, 2, 3, 4.

Moreover, whatsoever spiritual graces there be, with the increase of them
all, they be the effects of faith; as is clear by this, that often in
Scripture faith is set before other Graces, as the root, mother, and spring of
them all: see 2 Peter 1, 5. Join with your faith virtue, etc. all Graces being
as handmaides to attend upon Faith, as their Mistress and Queen, yea following
and resting upon it as upon their beginning and ground. For faith being the
instrument of our union with Christ, and of our partaking with his righteousness
and Spirit, it must necessarily follow, that the whole train of saving Graces
be the fruits of faith; which as it takes hold on his sufferings and
obedience for our justifying, so it deriueth virtue and force from his death
and resurrection, for the killing of the old man, or for the defacing of the
image of Satan, which consists in all manner of vices; and for the quickening
of the new man, and erecting of the image of God, which consists in
righteousness and holiness: so as he which has true faith, can lack no
saving Graces. And finally, our faith in Christ, is our victory over the world,
1 John 5, 4. treading down in our hearts that corruption which reigns in the
world; strengthening us to bear the reproaches, troubles, and persecution of
the world, and arming to resist, yea enabling to conquer Satan the prince of
the world, 1 Pet. 5, 8, 9. And which is most of all, such is the power of
faith, as it does enable us in some sort to overcome even God himself. For it
was by faith, that Jacob had power to prevail with God, Genesis 32, 28. and that
Moses did (as it were) bind the hands of God to withhold judgment from his
people, whom he was minded to destroy; had not Moses his servant stood in the
breach before him, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them, Psa.
106, 23. And in Exodus, when Moses prayed by faith, Let me alone, faith God,
Exo. 32. as if faith could manacle and bind Gods hands. The due meditation of
all these effects and works of faith, plainly proves men of evil life, to
have no faith. It conuinceth hypocrites to be unfaithful, because professing
faith, they have not the power of it in their hearts. Also, it stops the
mouths of Papists, who charge the (...) to teach and commend an idle faith,
which should give liberty, and open the windows to all licentiousness. Also
it serves to direct every one in whom is true faith, to discern of himself
that he is endewed with it, whereof he feels the proper effects in himself.
Lastly, it must stir up and increase the diligence of all Gods children, to
nourish a gift which is of such force and efficacy, of such mighty power, and
manifold profit.


Aquila. Sir, me thinks ye have (as it were) brought me into a costly banquet,
well set forth with variety of most delicate iunkets, whereof one may feed to
the full: or into a rich wardrobe, full of all sorts of robes and ornaments. For
these works offaith which you have spoken of with so short a breath, they are
the deckings wherewith Christ Jesus does adorn his spouse, even every
Christian soul; and the sweet and pleasant banquet dishes and goodly fruits and
spices where with she again does (...) him, when he comes in to sup with
her; (...). 3. 20. Can our time be better employed then in taking a more
particular and large survey of these iunkets and robes, to satisfy our selves
with some sight and taste of them? But ere this can be done, there is one
office more for you to do, and that is, I would entreat you to acquaint me
with all the encouragements ye can think of, which may whet on our faith, and
provoke us to believe God in his Word, also how the hindrances of our faith
(as blocks in our way) may be removed.


Apollos. Good friend Aquila, but that I may deny, Encouragements to faith.
no service which you will put me to perform, else this task were fitter for
you to undergo, as one that have had your faith much exercised with sundry
conflicts; wherein you have through Gods mercy stood fast, and quitted your
self like a man: therefore if I by lack of experience happily pass by any
matter of moment in this business, do ye recall me, and remember me of it.
Great and many are the impediments to withdraw and pull the faithful from the
hold of their faith, and to draw them to distrust: but on the other side also,
very strong and plentiful are the encouragements which the word from Heaven
affords them, to stay themselves upon Gods promise for all things that
pertain to everlasting happiness. First of all, this is not the least, that
the great God by his commandment has laid a charge 1. Commandment.
upon all his children to believe his promises; and albeit Mark 1.
this alone were sufficient to move them to do so, lest 1 John 3.
they be found disobedient to God, and to strive against his holy will, who
bears them so much good will; yet it pleases him not only to use his
authority in enioyning them to have faith in his Son for their salvation, but
he also in the person of his Ministers, out of his clemency 2 God beseeching us.
descends so far, as to entreat and beseech them that they would accept
reconciliation and peace with him through Christ: We as the Ambassadors of
Christ (says Paul) as though God did beseech you through us, exhort you to be
reconciled to God; 2 Cor. 5. 20. What heart would not relent when his Prince
with (...) in hand (as it were) should (...) to (...) him, being an offender to
accept his pardon. And shall we doubt to believe and give credit to that God,
that is so desirous of atonement with us, as to beseech us to admit it, whom
he might command, compel, (...), confound, if we should distrust him? (...)
that it pleased our most good God to promise Christ, and all 3. Faith, the
condition Of the Covenant.
good things with him; upon no other condition then this, only that we do by
faith believe his promise: for our obedience to the commandment for (...) of
life, is no condition of the promise of grace (...) only of our faith; Romans 6.
22. (...) (...) See Rom 10, Gal. 3.
only condition of the (...) of mercy. As it (...); God so loved the World
that begane his only begotten Son, Ioh. 3. 10.
that whosoever believes in him should (...) for ever. And again in the
foureteenth (...) of that Chapter (...) (...) believes in him, should live
everlastingly. To which (...) Mark (...), 16. He that believes shall be (...)
and (...) (...) 3. 11, 12. (...) (...) and 4. 3. and in (...) other places to
this (...) so (...) a necessity that we constantly believe. For as in humane
contracts there is no enjoying the bargain, if the condition be broken; so it
is here, if we bring not this condition of faith with us, God is not bound to
stand to the covenant: but as Christ says; Except ye repent, ye perish: Luke
13. so much more, Except ye believe, ye perish. For he that believes not,
shall be condemned; Mark 16. 16, 17.

It must be further considered, that God the Author 4. God the promiser, is
Almighty.
of the covenant of grace and life, is omnipotent, to whom nothing is
impossible; who as for his holiness and truth, he will promise no more to his
children then he means in good sooth and earnest to do, so he lacks no
power nor might to effect what he means. The Apostle Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 6.
18. in coupling the almightinesse of God with this covenant, saying, I will be
your Father, and you shall be my children, says the Lord God Almighty;
purposed to minister good heart and courage to the faithful, by this very
consideration, that they are in a league of salvation with him, that can do
what he will do. Abraham strengthened his own heart in belief, by remembering
that God the promiser was able to do it; Romans 4. 20. But when a true believer
takes 5. The truth of God, strengthens faith.
hold on his truth, and joins that with his Almightinesse, by thinking
seriously (especially in the hour of any temptation) that he has to do with
a God which is truth it self, author of all truth in others, and an infinite
lover of it; also a hater and (...) of all falsehood and lies: who has given
proof of his fidelity even in the least promise, concerning this life,
feeding, defending, and otherwise blessing his Children according to his word:
they may with much comfort resolve and set it down in their mind, that his
faithfulness will much more appear in this great promise of remission of
sins, and of eternal life. Thus very often to confirm and establish the
minds of the Saints, Saint Paul tells them, Faithful is he which has
promised, which will do it; 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1 These. 5. 24. David assured himself
of mercy promised him, upon this meditation, that all the words of God were
true; 2 Samuel 7. 28. yea, so true, that he fulfilleth his words even toward
such as are treacherous and persidious to him. Again, 6. The mercifulnes of
God a support to faith.
as God is to be reverenced for his mercies ( There is mercy with thee O Lord,
that thou may be feared; Psalm 130. 4.) so is he to be trusted and believed
in, for his mercies: The eye of the Lord is upon them that trust in his
mercies; Psalm 33. 18. Again, Let thy mercies and truth preserve me; Psalm
40. And Psalm 51, and verse 1, David is encouraged to come to God after his
fall for pardon, with good trust to find it, because of his most merciful
nature ready to forgive poor offenders. And the Apostle in 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
reports, that the mercy which he found, being an oppressor, a blasphemer, a
persecutour, did serve to encourage other sinners in time to come to believe on
God, and to cast themselves on his kindness for pardon. Which is an occasion
to remember a new encouragement to faith in God, namely, 7. Examples of the
faithful, help to our faith.
the example of others, who having sinned much against God, yet believed the
promise, and were forgiven: as Lot, Moses, David, Peter, Paul, and infinite
others mentioned in the holy Scripture; which examples are registered there for
our learning, that thereby we might have comfort and hope; Romans 15. 4.
Therefore let faint sinners pluck up their feeble hands that hang down, and
their weak knees; and the rather calling to mind, 8. Vow in Baptism.
that they have by vow in their Baptism, and by promise often iterated in the
profession of Christianity, bound themselves as to do the commandments, so
to believe the promises of God. And better it were we had never made such a
vow, then to break it, having once made it, Eccl. 5, 5. But what encoragement
should this be to think not only of that band wherewith we have obliged our
selves to God to believe him upon his word, (which as a pure virgin never was
defiled with any untruths) but also to weigh the bond wherewith God has bound
himself to us, not only in our Baptism, but namely in the Lords Supper,
where under his seal he assures every true believer that examineth himself,
and so eats and drinks, that he is as verily partaker of Christ and of his
passion, with all the fruits thereof to remission and mortification of sin, as
he is partaker of the outward pledges of his body and blood, they being
particular testimonies of assurance to every one, of his own salvation by
Christ, according to the tenor of the covenant; so as a token from a most
trusty friend, cannot more confirm our persuasions of his love toward us,
then the Lords Supper, duly received, may warrant and assure our hearts of the
especial love of God in Christ for our eternal happiness.

Unto all this we may add as a spur to quicken us, 9. damages and
discommodities of unbelief.
the great and diverse hurtes which will redound to our selves if we believe not
God; and the marvelous dishonor that thereby should be offered to himself.
For if once unbelief take root in our hearts, a bitter root or root of
bitterness it will prove. For by it, all our Whatsoever is not of faith, it
is sin, Romans 14, 23. And without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11, 3. and to him whose mind and conscience is unclean, through infidelity and
sin, all things are unclean, Titus 1, 5. And what a matter this is let any
man duly consider of it, that as faith gets all sins both to be forgiven,
and to turn to our good, Romans 8, 28. so infidelity gets all our best works to
become naught, and to turn to harm to us, and offense to God. Neither this
only but through unbelief, we do even bind up the hands Capernaum, because of
their unbelief: so our unbelief does after a sort disable God, at the least
it depriues us of his gracious good things and great preseruations.

Neither only does it keep good things from us, but Moses for his distrust
died in the Wilderness, and might not be suffered to enter the Land of Canaan,
Deuterono. cha. 4, 4. Also Zachariah, otherwise a just man, yet for his
unbelief sake, was stricken dumb, and for many months was not able to
speak, Luke chap. 1. verse 22. If the unbelief of the godly (being but an
infirmity of faith) were so sharply chastised, what marvel if the
infidelity of the wicked, being a mere absence of faith, do cause unto them
many heavy plagues in this life?

Examples whereof are rife in the Book of God, and in For without shall be
fearful, unbelievers; Revel. 21. 8. yea, and throws down headlong into
eternal For he that believes not, the wrath of God is upon him; John 3. 36.
and such shall be condemned; Mark 16. 16. So as if obtaining of all promised
good things cannot be offorce sufficient to stir up our dull hearts to embrace
the promises; yet when the manifold and certain evils which befall men for
want of faith, be thought upon, this should help to awake our heavy minds, to
make us abhor every unbelieving thought; chiefly considering that the danger
to our selves by yielding to unbelief, is nothing (though it be much and most
fearful) being compared to the dishonor that will thereby redound to 10.
(...) to God by unbelief.
God: for by our unbelief he is spoiled (as much as in us is) of his essence
and being, namely, his mercy, truth, and power, which is to make him no God.
For if we make him a liar (as every one does, which believes not in the only
begotten Son of God; 1 Ioh. 5. 10.) then we strip him and rob him of his chief
glory; yea, of his very essence. Nay, which is yet more fearful, we do equal
and match him unto Satan, as if there were no more truth in his 11. God
honored by our faith.
sayings, then in the father of lies: as on the one side then they do much
glorify God, that do believe his word, witnessing of him that he is true in
his promises, able for performance; Romans 4. 21. (yea, they do themselves a
special 12. Our faith (...) our selves.
honor: for they do make God a testimonial (as it were) and set to their
hand and seal, that he is faithful; Ioh. 3. 33.) So on the other side, they
do exceedingly dishonor themselves and God also, which do through infidelity
cast away his promises.

Thus you have heard good friend Aquila, the best encouragements which I can
think of, to quicken a fainting faith; which if they hit upon a presuming
heart, will make it more presumptuous: but if they meet with a believing
humbled heart (for whose sake I have collected them) then they will be as dry
sticks heaped upon a dull and dying fire to revive and cheer it. Now that ye
are so well acquainted with the usual discouragements and hindrances of
faith; you having had so many strong assaults made against your faith, if you
will deliver them, and also show how they may be repulsed and overcome, it will
do well in my opinion; and so we will shut up our conference about faith.


Aquila, I have a good mind to do the one, that is, to lay forth the
objections which the flesh and Satan make against the stedtastnesse of faith,
to shake it: but for the other, you that have truly opened the encouragements,
Objections of an afflicted mind.
can also tell how for to fit them for the resistance and beating back of
hindrances. First, how shall I be assured that the gracious promises
offorgiuenesse by Christ, and other promises of the Gospel, are from God, and
not devised by men?


Apollos. Tell me, have you not been moved to doubt whether there be any God at
all?


Aquila. Truth is so, I have, and nothing so much; 1. Ob. Whether Scriptures be
of God.
yea, and of the whole Scriptures, whether they came from God, or not?


Apollos. This indeed is the very high way to destroy all faith in God, to call
in question the Scriptures, and God Author of them. The fool has said in his
heart there is no God; Ps. 14. 1. And the devil will suggest as much unto the
very godliest and wisest heart; but take this for a truth, that therefore there
is a God, and the promises of mercy are hereby proved to be divine, because
ye are tempted to think otherwise. Were there no God indeed, or were not
Euangelical promises and the whole Scriptures from him, ye should never be
troubled with thoughts of these matters. But because they be both most
certain, and the certain believing of both being to the great commodity of
the Christian soul: therefore Satan so busieth himself, to weaken the credit
of them; for he knows that by such unbelief his kingdom is underpropped.
And hold this sure, that that is very good and of God, whatsoever our corrupt
nature and Satan be most against. But as touching the Scripture, Reasons to
prove Scripture to be of God.
the word of faith, that it is the Word of God, and from heaven, there be
sundry and sound arguments to persuade it.

First, the great harmony and constant consent of one 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25.
their reasons and wills being corrupt, are as contrary to the doctrine taught
in these books, as darkness to light, As Foelix, Acts 24.
heaven to hell; yet are they by the mighty efficacy hid in them, reconciled to
them, so as they willingly yield, approve, and honor them also the power of
them makes even the wicked to fear and tremble. Fourthly, the events of all
Prophecies, so many hundred, yea, some thousand years foreshewed and made
before, yet accordingly fulfilled in their due time, does bewray them to be
from that all-seeing verity.

Fifthly, the Penmen As Moses, Job. David, Matthew, Paul.
of the Scriptures discovering Josephus and others; and the witness of an
enemy, it is of no small credit and force. Seauenthly, the strange
preseruations correspondency of all parts of the Bible, the majesty of matter
in plainness of words; the rare effects upon men's consciences for
converting, humbling, comforting, terrifying, such as no humane writings can
work; the certain exhibiting and accomplishment of foretold persons and
things; the uprightness of the Instruments set a work to pen them; the
testimony of the Inditer the holy Spirit, and of the holy martyrs in their
blood shed for it; and the miraculous preservation of the Scriptures in so many
ages, notwithstanding so great means and oportunities of extinguishing them,
every one of these, severally, and all jointly together, do serve to stop
Satan's mouth, when it shall be opened against the divine original of
Scriptures. Proceed now to show the next assault against faith.


Aquila. The promises in Scripture touching salvation 2 Object. Whether the
promises belong to my self.
by Christ, were not made to me, neither did God ever say to me particularly
and by name, that I shall be saved; or has he any where commanded me to
believe this?


Apollos. There be as many promises made to your self, as other the Saints
now, or heretofore have had made to themselves. What promises had Job made to
himself alone, to assure him by name of his own salvation; or yet David, or
Moses, or infinite others? Has God made promises of eternal life, and of
atonement by his Son, and commanded the promises to be propounded and
declared to us, with charge that we should believe them; and has he given
his Sacraments with iniunction to every Christian, to take the elements of
bread and wine as pledges to himself of Christ and his benefits; and has he
commanded and called upon us to pray for pardon of our sins, and everlasting
salvation to the praise of his mercy; and given his Spirit into the hearts of
his Children, as a witness to themselves of their own adoption (a witness
that cannot lie, being the Spirit of truth,) and withal wrought so many
gracious gifts and works in them, which none can have but such as are in his
favor, beloved in his Son; and is not all this in effect as much as if a
particular promise were made by name unto every one of the faithful of their
own happiness? Again, whosoever he be that out of the fit of temptations
believes the promises to belong to himself, that Christ loved him, and died
for him, and does believe it truly; the same may assure himself even in the
pangs of temptation, that the promises still belong unto him, because God is of
an unchangeable nature and will. And does not even this prove that God would
have men to believe firmly their own salvation, because Satan would have us
to doubt of it? Are not God and Satan flat opposites, and contraries? And
whereas you say, ye are no where commanded to believe your own salvation; yes,
even this is commanded, as much as ye are commanded to trust in God for your
temporal preservation and provision of things for this life: ye may as well
say, I am not commanded to believe that God will cloth me.


A. Yet it were great presumption in such a sinner, whose 3 Object. Presumption.
trespasses are so innumerable as the stars of heaven in number, to look for
any such mercy as eternal salvation.


Apollos. If there were no commandment to believe the remission of all our
sins, or if our belief were grounded upon any work in our own selves, that
there were ought in us that could deserve such mercy, or that it could be had
any other way then thorough Christ, this were presumption. But to rest in the
truth of Gods promise, and sufficiency of Christ's (...), this is Christian
submission. And touching the number of your sins, I easily believe they are
wondrous many, and more then you think for, for who knows his offenses? But
then, do you believe also this, that Christ Jesus dyed for all the iniquities
of all the elect, Titus 2, 14. (...) John 2, 2, 3.
to purge them by his blood. So as if all the elects sins were yours, yet the
remedy provided by Christ would be found sufficient.

Again, to the incomprehensible boundless mercies of God, it is as easy to
forgive many sins, as few sins. For, if he will have many pardoned, they are
pardoned: and few be therefore pardoned, because it is his will to blot them
out. He has mercy on whom he will, Romans 9, 15. Set then the multitude of his
mercies against the multitude of your sins, and the. vnvalueable price of
Christ's death, against the huge heap of your innumerable faults. Whereunto
add this, that sinners guilty of as many sins as you be, or can be, have
been saved through faith in Christ. Witness he that said his sins were
gone over his head, and more then his hairs.


Aquila. This is a joyful hearing: but there is another scruple, 4. Objection
Sins against knowledge.
that many of my sins have been sins against knowledge, and done after
repentance, yea, and after promises and vows of amendment: and by one that
have received of God many blessings, both; in things inward and earthly; and so
my unthankfulness deserves Unthankful persidiousnes.
a casting off, and my persidiousnesse is worthy to have the gates of mercy
shut and barred against me.


Apollos. I confess that these circumstances make the case the harder: for
sins against knowledge are very fearful, and gross unthankfulness in
despising great bounty, when it is joined with treacherous persidiousnesse in
breaking solemn vows, does much augment the guiltiness of sin. But is it any
ease to your soul, to bring unbelief, and knit it to your other offenses
which be bad and vile enough already, and had not need to be increased by
addition of infidelity? Again, is there any thing in all that which you have
spoken, which is not remissible, and to be pardoned? Is there any thing which
Gods children may not, yea do not fall into? Did not Jacob break his vows,
for which God did temporally chastise him? Genesis 35, 1, 2. How often had King
David repented, and how often vowed obedience to God, 1. at his Circumcision,
2, and so often also as he came to the Passover, 3. and upon many particular
mercies received, as his Psalms witness, before he fell into those gross
crimes against Bathsheba, Vriah, and the whole host? And what great mercies of
protections and prosperity had he received before? See 2 Samuel 12, 7, 8. May we
not affirm the like of other of Gods faithful children? For I would have it
considered, that all Gods children do perform repentance every day, and yet
every day fall into new sins, and such as howsoever they are to be imputed
to heedlesse carelessness and negligence, yet cannot be but done against their
knowledge, which has informed their minds of such things to be sins as they
daily run into, and daily ask forgiveness of. Which yet being done of
frailty, and not of set purpose, though the doers be such as are culpable of
very great vnthank fullness, forgetting so many and great mercies toward them
and theirs, and have bound themselves by many promises to God; for all this,
upon their renewed repentance, coming to God with sorrow for them, and with
faith in Gods mercies through Christ, they are graciously received. And if it
were not thus, none could be saved. For, who sins not after repentance, and
after receiving of many great blessings, and making many deep promises of a
better life? There is not one but is faulty this way: the most merciful God
causing his grace and mercy to be so much the more illustrious and renowned,
by how much the sins of his children be more abundant, that where sins
abound, there also grace may more abound, Romans 5, ver. 20. Which is spoken for
ease of an heart, groaning and diversely perplexed and humbled with knowledge of
sin, and not to open a window unto iniquity. For the more mercy that any
needs and looks for, and obtains, the less cause he has to offend, the
more reason to please and obey God; as it is written, There is mercy with
thee, O Lord, that thou may be feared, Psalm 130. verse 2.


Aquila. But some of my sins are such as I have (...) objection. Sins of
relapse
often gone over, and after confession particularly made of them, yet again
and again have I gone back to the same sin, as a dog to his vomit; and how
then should I believe that I can be forgiven?


Apollos. All this may be true as you say, and you say that which being true,
is also very heavy. For all relapses be they in bodily or spiritual maladies,
are very dangerous. It were better that a man should have two or three fits of
several sicknesses, or two or three several wounds in several places of the
body, then to have the selfsame sickness renewed by relapse, and one place
of the body twice wounded. Yet all this may happen, and prove recouerable and
curable: else it were woeful with us all. Who is he that does not often go
over common infirmities? The selfsame wants and defects which appear at one
time in our duties, those do again show themselves at another time: yea, and
gross sins are iterated upon new occasions and temptations. Peter did thrice
deny his Lord, Math. 26, 73, 74. Abraham did twice tell a ly, Lot was twice
ouercom with wine and incontinency, Genes. 19, 31, 32. The virgin Mary was
twice checked of Christ for her curiosity, Luke 2, 49. and John 2, 23. The
Disciples of Christ had twice emulations and debates among themselves about
primacy; and yet were all forgiven. If relapses be felt with grief for that is
past, and with fear for time to come, it is a good sign that there is help
for them: and that commandment which biddes us beleeueremission of sins,
does not except sins of relapses.


Aquila. But some of these sins into which relapse 6. Objection. Horrible
greatness of sin and continuance.
has been made, are very foul and marvelous great sins, such as I am
ashamed to name, and I have long lien in them, therefore I cannot believe that
they shall be forgiven me.


Apollos. God has forgiven to such as believe, as great sins as the world
ever had. He forgave drunkenness to Naah; Incest and drunkenness to Lot;
Adultery and murder to David; Idolatry to (...); Oppression, persecution, and
blasphemy to (...); to Peter he forgave denial and abiuring of his son;
incredulity to Moses. If any man's sin were as black as hell, or as devils,
yet the rich mercy of God in Christ can cleanse, and make us white as snow in
Salmon. How can any one great sin hinder God from saving any believer, when
all his sins could not keep him from reconciling him, being an enemy to him?
Yea, such as have slain the Lords Prophets, and offered their Children, and
have long both themselves lived in, and by their authority maintained Idol
service, as Manasses and Solomon; yet have found favor upon their believing.
Yea, he that by his sin plunged the whole World with him into sin and
death, yet was accepted and pardoned, because he believed the promise. And for
lying in sin, you have not abode in them longer then David or Solomon; or if
ye have, yet as no sins, so no space of time does limit God. God may forgive
what he will, and when he will, to whom he will. The these that had lain in
his sins, even till his last breath in a manner, yet finding grace to
believe, found also the grace of pardon, and was taken up into Paradise, there
to be with Christ for ever. That infinite mercy that can overcome the multitude
and ugliness of our sins, can also prevail against our continuance in
sins.


Aquila. I have so gone against the light of my knowledge 7 Object. Blasphemy
of the Spirit.
in the course of my life, as I am often in doubt, lest I have sinned that
unpardonable sin; yea, I have had fearful thoughts against that gracious
divine majesty, whereby I have been moved to fear, lest he had given me
ouervtterly.


Apollos. In all soul temptations lightly, this of sinning against the holy
Ghost, is one, as an ague goes with all bodily diseases; which comes through
ignorance of this sin, or the strong subtilty of Satan Sin against the holy
ghost what it is.
bewitching our minds with fear of this sin; which is not any one, nor many
actions against knowledge: but it is a sin committed in speech, being
contumelious and reproachful against Christ his person, offices, benefits,
doctrine, and works, or against all of these; yet not every such speech is
this sin, unless it proceed of despite and malice of heart against the
truth of Christ, once known by the enlightening of the Spirit. Also this sin
is accompanied with an universal and total Apostasy from truth, and general
pollution in manners, quite contrary to the work of the sanctifying Mark 3 28,
29, 30.
Spirit wrought in them; whereupon it is called the blasphemy 6 Marks, whereby
to know that one be free from it.
of the Spirit. He that dreads this sin never did it. Secondly, he that
truly greeues for any sin, never did this sin. Thirdly, he that can pray
for forgiveness of sin, if it be but with unfeigned desire to be in Gods
favor, he is free from this sin. Fourthly, he that can speak honorably of
Christ, and can abide, nay, like the honorable mention of him and his truth by
others, never did this sin. Fifthly, he that has any good affection to the
Ministers, or other members of Christ, has no part in this finne. Lastly, not
he that fears lest he be given over, but knows certainly that he is indeed
given over to it, is within the compass of this sin; he that fears lest he
be in it, is not in it: for whosoever is in it, knows he is so; this is most
certain, for he is damned of his own conscience.


Aquila. But when I am brought to see that all my 8 Object. No feeling, no
faith.
sins are such as may be forgiven me, then I am troubled with this, that I
have no faith. My heart is dull and dead, full of unbelief, and so all that
can be said, is nothing to my comfort; I feel no more then a stone or block,
except it be great fear sometimes and trembling of heart, with excessive
dolor and heaviness, wherewith I am even overwhelmed.


Apollos. Faith is not feeling, but apprehension; feeling follows as a fruit
of faith, which is in assent, not in sense. What feeling had Christ, when he
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: and my soul is heavy to
death? Mat. 26. and 27. 46. In your heaviness and sorrow you are conformed to
your head, and other his members; to Hezekiah mourning as a Dove, and
chattering as a Crane, Esaias 38. 14: To David, complaining of the disquietnesse
of his heart; Psalm. 42. and confessing that his tears was the water that
washed his Couch; Psalm. 6. 6. To Job, whose grief was like heavy sand, and
Iobe 6.
pressed down his heart to the grave. Then as wheat may be hid in chafe, so
faith is often buried under the heap of our corruptions and discomforts. Say
not therefore ye have no faith, because your heart is dull and dead. They of
whom Christ said, that their hearts were slow to believe, heavy and dull, and
foolish hearts, yet did believe; Luke 24. 25. And howsoever you think all to
be full of unbelief, it comes in you from hence, because (...) believe not
now so strongly and comfortably as you were wont to do; and feel those
motions of incredulity and distrust, which you were not wont to feel. And
howsoever it goes with you now, as with a man in a great sickness that has
lost his taste, and cannot judge of meats; yet you shall hereafter, when health
is restored, say; you were deceived. Finally, if it were some other besides
your self that said, they had no faith; I might be sooner brought to believe
them. And would give them this counsel, that though as yet they believe not,
yet not to despair, or cast off hope: for they may believe hereafter, so they
carefully use the means with waiting upon God, who calls at all hours. It
is darkness in the night, but at due time the Sun arises: so after darkness
of unbelief, covering the firmament of the heart, there will arise the Sun
shine of lively faith to all Gods Elect; in the mean time, to feel unbelief,
with a mislike of it, and with a desire of faith in Christ, it is a good
beginning, as we have heard hereof in the degrees of faith.


Aquila. Sir, you have now well satisfied me in these objections, and in this
whole discourse about faith. I trust hereafter to hear you speak of the
fruits of faith, and namely to lay forth distinctly and clearly our union with
Christ, by means of our faith, and our communion with his righteousness and
Spirit for justification and sanctification, which being matters of great
importance, and our allowance of time being already more then spent, we are to
expect some new occasion for the further dealing in these things.


Apollos. Ye say well, in the mean time I thank you for your good company,
and wish you much good by this conference.


The sixth Dialogue Of Union with Christ. The first maine fruit of Faith.
Apollos. YEa, Neighbor Aquila, are you here already? You got the start of me
this time. I perceive your quality; I may be your Physicion, for I know your
pulse. If once you begin a matter, ye love to see the end of it; you had need
to take in hand good things, and with good aduisement, seeing you are so
constant in prosecuting enterprises. Well, shall we consent and agree to set
upon onr work afresh? For therefore ye are come I am sure.


Aquila. It is so; I come about that very thing, and have here indeed somewhile
expected you. It is my quality, you say right, that first having made choice of
good and rightful things, I love to go through stitch, and like the constant
builder to proceed in laying one stone upon another, till he come to the
loouer. But go we to our task, it is about the first and chief fruit of a
lively faith; which having but lightly mentioned before, as in his passage a
Traveler would look upon a fair Tower: now we are to make a more near and
particular survey, and to dwell upon it; especially the point being of so good
use and great moment? What, will ye Sir, that I do move to you by questions
such things as concern it, or will you put upon me the office of a replyer?
for though I cannot do either to purpose, yet look what ye enjoin me, that
I will frame my self unto, with my best skill.


Apollos. Nay friend Aquila, I mean to be your poser and examiner this day.
First let me understand from you, by what plain place of Scripture ye prove
that there is such an union of the Elect with Christ, and that faith is the
instrument of it?


Aquila. Herein I will quickly satisfy you, if first I Union threefolde.
Nature; so are the Father, Son, and Spirit, one. Secondly, there is an union
of several Natures in one person. Union with Christ, what.
union is our being one with Christ, and Christ his being one with us, by the
band of one Spirit.

For plain places to prove such an union, it is written, 1. Proofs for this
union.
1 John 1, 3. That the Gospel is therefore preached, that we should have
communion with the Father and the Son. Also, it is expressly said, 1 Cor. 10.
That we have communion with his body and blood; 1 Cor. 6. 17. a Christian is
said to be joined to the Lord: And 1 Cor. 12. 12. Christ and his members are
there affirmed to be one body. Also, the faithful are said to be his members;
Flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone: Ephe. 5. 30. All those places wherein we
are affirmed to be in Christ, do prove this union. In John 17. 21. Our Savior
praying, that such as believe, might be one in him, and in his Father, does
teach both that there is such an union, and that faith is 2 It is by faith
the Instrument thereof. Which is cleared also by Ephe. 3. 17. That Christ
dwells in our heart by faith. Unto which we may add that which is written, Gal.
3. 26. For year all the sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ. And in John 1.
12. When Christ had said, that such as believe, have this dignity done them, to
be sons of God; he adds, which be borne anew, not of flesh and blood, but
of the will of God: where he plainly teaches, that our union with Christ,
(where by our new birth we are brought forth into the Christian World, to
become members of Christ, and children of God) that this is effected by faith.
So as this our union with Christ, it is not by touching, or bodily mixture, or
as it were by souldering one soul into another: but it is a spiritual union,
made in a spiritual manner, and by a spiritual band; an infinite divine
power, creating faith in us (as an hand) whereby we graspe and take hold on
Christ, applying him to us, that he may be most nearly joined to us. As the
soul of man conioyneth together the Simile.
head and the foot, which be far asunder; so the mighty Spirit of Christ in
an inexpressible manner, by means of faith, joins him to us, and us to him;
notwithstanding all the distance between us. Whence it is, that though the
faithful be joined to the very substance of his manhood, as well as to his
godhead, touching the operation and efficacy thereof; yet it is a spiritual
union, being from the Spirit as author, by faith as a spiritual Organ, and to
this end, to lead a spiritual life.


Apollos. Show us now more distinctly, first, what is required to the working
of this union; secondly, by what similitudes it is expressed; thirdly, what is
the necessity of it: fourthly, as also the commodities and fruits do come
from it.


Aquila, Two things necessarily required to make Two things necessary to our
vnio^ with Christ.
this union; one, is donation, or free gift of God the Father, freely bestowing
Christ his only Son upon the 1 Donation, or gift.
Elect, and the Elect upon Christ: for thus it is written, That he gave his
Son to us; Es. 9. 9. and for us; Romans 8. 32. And on the other side, it is
said; The Elect are given to Christ: I declared thy name to them whom thou
gave me out of the World; John 17. 6. And John 10. 29. My Father which gave
them me, is greater then all. Unto this donation we must add a second thing,
which is a 2 Mutual consent.
mutual agreement and consent between Christ, and the soul of an elect
sinner, each consenting to be one with the other. Christ comprehends the
faithful soul as his own, the soul apprehending Christ as her own; Phil. 3.
12.

As in marriage, the conjunction between man and Simile.
wife is effected, both by the gift of the parents, each giving their children
to live in married state together, and also by each party agreeing to be joined
to the other, and so they twain become one flesh, and are no more twain: so
it is between Christ, and his Church.

And now (to your second point) this of marriage 2 Union declared by
similitudes taken out of Scripture.
is one, and the most frequent similitude, whereby the near conjunction
between Christ and the faithful is shadowed out. The whole Book of Canticles
alludes 1 Similitude,
to this similitude, and by a continual allegory sets forth under it the
most sweet and happy fellowship between Christ and his Church.

Again, in the Gospel, the similitude of a marriage feast is used; also
Ephesians 5. 24, and Romans 7. verse 3. 4, 5. and in many other places. And
indeed there is no straighter band in humane society, then this of marriage; by
the band whereof, and the virtue of Gods institution, they which were before
twain, are now no more so; but (as it were) one body: which light of Nature
takes notice of.

Therefore by humane Laws there lies no action against the woman, the man
being alive, she is no person to be sued in Law: so as this fellowship was
very apt and meet to declare that most near union which the soul as Spouse
has with Christ as her Husband. For as in marriage, the man communicates his
person, and all his goods whatsoever he has, to the woman; so it is here.
Christ and all his good things whatsoever are bestowed upon every soul
believing in him. And as the woman has given her self into the power of the
man, she, and whatsoever is hers, be now become her husbands: so it is here
likewise, every believing soul gives her self, and all hers again unto
Christ.

The second similitude is of a natural body, wherein 2 Similitude.
the head and the members are well knit and compact together by joints and
sinews, which as ligaments and bands do so link the members amongst
themselves, and to their head; as they, though they be distant one from
another, yet being all quickened by one soul, they all make but one body. So it
is between Christ and the faithful his members: though they be many, and by
place divided amongst themselves, and all from Christ their head; yet the
Spirit of their head, by influence from him, descending into the members, and
quickening them with the life of grace; they are by that Spirit (as a band) so
fastened to their head through faith, and amongst themselves through love, as
that their head and they are mystically, yet truly, but one body, as it is
said; 1 Cor. 12. 12. As the body is one, and has many members, and all the
members of the body which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body:
even so is 1 Cor. 12. 12.
Christ. Where note, that to declare the neerenesse and evenness (as I may so
speak) between the believers and Christ; he, and they are all termed by one
name, even Christ, comprehending in this word the head with the members.
Hitherto also belongs Ephesians. 4. 15. In all things grow up in him, which is the
head, by whom all the body being coupled, etc. The natural body then, and the
head is not more one, then Christ and the faithful. Which is further opened by
the similitude of the Vine 3 Simile.
and branches, and of grafting and planting grafts into 4 Simile.
new stocks; John 15, verse 1, 2. etc. Romans 6. 6. As also of an house, and the
foundation whereon it stands; Ephe. 5 Simile.
2. verse 21, 22. Christ Jesus is the head corner stone, in whom all the
building, etc. For Christ is as the Vine, we are as the branches; he the noble
stock or root of Iesse, we the grafts; he the corner stone, we the building,
laid on him, planted and grafted into him, to be one with him, and to grow up
in him. The necessity of this union with Christ, it is very great; so as
without it we are for ever accursed. For by Adam we all fell from God, lost
his grace and favor, his Spirit, his communion; being through sin become the
very limbs of Satan, held under his power as vassals, and so servants of
sin, heirs of hell and damnation; thus deuoyded of all true life, and
bewrapt in the bands of sin and death, and so remain, till by union with
Christ, we recover our communion with God, his grace and Spirit, his
righteousness and life. Hence it is so peremptorily avouched, that Christ is
the bread which came down from Heaven, of which whosoever eats not, has no
life John 6. 53.
in him. And again, his flesh which he gave for the life of the World, is
said to be meat indeed, his blood drink indeed; and except a man eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, he cannot live for ever; John 6. 51. In which
Chapter, these three things are taught about this matter.

First, that we must have union with Christ, even such Simile.
as is between the nourishment and our substance. And secondly, that this
union is wrought by believing in him, by seeing him, by coming to him, by
hungering and thirsting after him. And thirdly, that upon and by this union
with Christ, we do partake in the life of Christ, which being originally in
the Deity (as it is written) The flesh profits not, it is the Spirit that
quickens: John 6. 25.
and again, God is life, and that life is in God; yet it is conveyed into the
manhood of Christ, personally united to the Godhead; and from his flesh (as
from a Conduite, receiving grace of life from the fountain of the Divinity) it
is by the pipe of faith derived into all his members. To be short, not more
needful that a natural Simile.
member (as hand or foot) be joined to the head, that it may live, have sense,
and motion; or a branch to the Vine conjoined, that it may take juice, to
fructify; then it is needful for the Elect to be coupled to Jesus Christ,
for spiritual life, and everlasting happiness.

And now as concerning our last point moved, touching 4 Union fruitful.
the fruits and commodities of this union, it is evident by this that has
been spoken, that all our good now and for ever depends upon it; it being
the base and foundation of all the benefits whatsoever we have from Christ,
whereof we can have no part, unless we have first a fellowship with himself:
by enjoying of whom, we do together enjoy all his graces here, and all his
glory hereafter, as his members are capable, but not equally with the head;
even as the branch once knit to the Vine, partakes in all the life thereof. And
as the woman being joined in marriage to a rich and mighty Simile.
King, together with her conjunction to his person, has his majesty, glory,
and wealth ((...) far as she is capable of it, and may be for her fullest
contentment) imparted to her. Even so it is here in this spiritual
conjunction: that seeing Christ from his gifts and blessings cannot be divided,
but whosoever has the one, does most certainly communicate in the other;
therefore the elect being united to Christ their head, as there flows from the
natural head to the lowest members power of life, sense, and motion; so from
Jesus Christ there is communicated to his spouse, and his body the Church, and
to every member, all his riches and unsearchable treasures, both power of
grace, and possession of glory. Here of it being said, that Christ is made of
God to us, Wisdom, sanctification, righteousness, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1,
30. and that God having given us Christ, with him will give us all things, Romans
8, 32. and in John 6, 54. All such as eat his flesh, and drink his blood
(that is, have union with himself, first with his manhood, and then by means
thereof with his Godhead) have everlasting life, that is, have all his
benefits, even to their eternal bliss, and glory in heaven.


Apollos. Friend Aquila, it is very right so as you speak. As a man cannot have
a farm as owner of it, but he Simile.
has all fruits, commodities, immunities, royalties, yea the treasure also
(if any happen to be hid in the field) is his; so whosoever is owner of
Christ by believing in him, and Christ again possessing him as his own; the
same party cannot but have all the goods and glory of Christ, even whatsoever
is Christ's, is his; his conception, his birth, his life, his doctrine, his
sufferings, his death, his burial, his resurrection to glory, his ascension,
his kingdom, his Priesthood, his Spirit: all the merits, fruits, profits, and
effects of the former, so far as a member of Christ is capeable, and shall
make for his full felicity, they are assuredly his: therefore it is written, A
child is borne to us, and that Esaias 9 Euke 2.
he fulfilled all righteousness for us, and died for us, and Galath. 4. 4, 5
that (...) are dead and buried with him, and (...) with him, Romans 4. v (...)
Rom 6, 2, 3.
and sit in heavenly places with him. At a word, what is Col. 3. 1.
done to any of his, is done to him; and what is suffered Ephesians. 2, 6
by any of his, it is suffered for him, and with him. Math. 25, 40. 2 Timothy 2,
11.
And on the other side, what he has either suffered or done, it is all
suffered and done for us. For, as marriage Simile.
makes all things both for weal and woe, common to married persons; so fares
it in this spiritual marriage: our sins and our miseries common to him, eke
his justice and blessedness common unto us. But for our better understanding
of the fruits we have by this our union; may it please you to draw them unto
some heads, to set down some special benefits thereof, which contain the
rest, lest our speech run forth at large, without bound or limits.


Aquila. I will agree to this; therefore we are to know, Two special (...) of
our union with Christ.
that being one with the person of Christ in sort as we have heard, we are
immediately one with his righteousness, for our perfect justification before
God: and also with his Spirit, for our imperfect sanctification before men.


Of Justification by Christ, the second maine fruit of Faith.
For the former, that the righteousness of Christ First fruit of our union,
righteousness from Christ, by faith.
becomes ours, and that so soon as we believe by the instrument of our faith;
there is nothing more plainly spoken in Scripture, as in Romans 3. We conclude
that a man is justified by faith: and, God is a iustifier of him which is of
the faith of Jesus, Romans 3, 26. and often in the fourth chapter, is Christ's
righteousness, called the righteousness of Faith, and affirmed to come to us
by imputation of faith. Also 2 Cor. 5. verse last, we are said to be made the
righteousness of God in Christ. And Paul wishes, Phil. 3, 9. to be found,
having the righteousness of Christ by Faith. And Gal. 2, 15. We know that a
man is not justified but by the faith of Jesus Christ. And infinite places of
this kind there be which teach, that Christ his righteousness is ours for
our justification, and that this comes to pass by mean of our faith, as a
spiritual instrument, to convey it to us.

Apollos. For your better proceeding in this point, I will request you, plainly
and yet in as few words as ye can, to show us of justification what manner of
benefit it is; and then in what manner we are justified by faith: Lastly, what
be the nearest effects which immediately flow out of the sense of this benefit.


Aquila. I cannot well tell you what manner of benefit justification is, except
first I show you what manner ones we once were, now are and should be. Once we
were created perfectly just in Adam, having a full Man in his creation holy and
happy.
conformity with God and his will, in our soul and body: as it is written, God
made man righteous, Eccles. 7, 31. The mind in our creation, was enlightened to
perfect knowledge of God, the heart framed to most willing obedience of his
known pleasure; there being neither thought, nor desire, nor affection in man,
which agreed not most perfectly to Gods will; our bodies also being fit
instruments to the soul, for fulfilling all good things rightly desired and
embraced of the mind and will. This perfect righteousness had perfect
happiness joined to it, as an inseperable Companion. Blessedness can no more
be scuered from perfect Romans 4, 4, 5.
righteousness, then God and heaven can be divided. Now when Adam voluntarily
transgressed, he lost perfect justice both for himself, and for all that come
of him: who are not only deprived of perfect innocence, but have the guilt of
Adams disobedience, to make us sinners, To. 5, 19. By which means, as also by
our personal Man by the fall of Adam, lost blessedness and righteousness, and
is under sin and death,
sins, we have not only fallen from blessedness, but are become the
children of Gods wrath, Ephesians. 2, 3. So as we are now plunged into a double
evil; one, that for lack of perfect righteousness, we are spoiled of all
bliss, having no interest in heavenly glory and joy: the other, that thorough
the guilt of Adams and our own disobedience to the Law, we are subject to
everlasting misery and pain in hell. Therefore we stand in need of a double
grace from Christ; one, whereby we may escape damnation in hell; the other,
whereby we may find entrance into Heaven. In which two things, consists that
salvation by Christ whereof so much and comfortable mention is made in
Scripture. For salvation, it is a deliverance from extreme Salvation, what it
is.
evil, and a recovering of supreme good. Hence it was behoouefull and
necessary, that Jesus Christ the second Adam, to make whole the wound which
the first Adam gave us, must perform a double A double righ teousnesse in
Christ.
righteousness: one, Passive (so called of Divines) to free us from deserved
death: the other, called Active righteousness, to give us interest unto
eternal life, which is not bestowed but upon such as bring absolute justice,
according to that is written; Do this, and live: Galathians 3.
Reuelaatio^s 21.
Again, Into the holy City shall come nothing that is unclean: Matthew 19. 17.
and If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. And because this
perfect Justice rests only in the person of Christ, therefore of all men he
only it Christ only has right to eternal life in Heaven, because he alone
is perfectly just: others come thither by his right.
is, that has right to life everlasting in heaven. As it is he only whose
sufferings can free from eternal destruction in hell, because of the infinite
merit of his obedience. It will then be worth our labor to speak something of
this double righteousness of Christ: for so a passage will be opened to talk
of justification with more profit.

The passive righteousness of Christ, is that obedience 1 Passive
righteousness.
which he expressed and performed to his Father in his passion and sufferings,
which began at his birth or cradle, or at his conception rather; and ended in
his death, or at the yielding up of his ghost

Of this passive obedience, ye read; Heb. 5. 8. Though he were the Son, yet
he learned obedience by those things which he suffered: and when that bitter
cup was given him to drink, Math 26. he shows his obedience in saying,
Father, be it as thou will. Howsoever humane infirmity would have declined it;
( Let it pass, if it be possible) yet his most holy will obediently submitted
to his Father; Not as I will. And this commendations is given him of Paul;
Phil. 3. That he was obedient to his Father to the death of the Cross: for
obedience is showed no less to God in suffering what he will, then in doing
what he will; and so our Savior approved himself and his obedience in
suffering (as all other evils which were sent unto him in the whole course of
his life) hunger, thirst, cold, weariness, contempt, reproach, poverty, want,
banishment, conflict with beasts, with Satan, outward troubles, inward
temptations; yet especially those last and greatest evils and afflictions which
at and about the time of his crucifying and sacrifice were for man's sin
inflicted upon him in soul and body, either immediately from the hand of his
most irefull highly offended Father, or mediately from the Devil and wicked
men, Jews and Gentiles outragiously conspiring, and working him all the smart
and shame possible could be put upon him; whatsoever evil, divine justice
would, or hellish malice could heap upon him, and he was capable of, that, and
all that, he (as our surety) in humble submission to his Father did endure for
our iniquities. The which his passive righteousness consisting in his willing
and constant obedience of his manhood under the Cross, has received such
sufficiency of merit and worthiness from his godhead (to which it is
personally united) for the deserving and purchasing for all his Elect, that
most notable benefit which the Scriptures commonly call remission or
forgiveness of sins: Which is an utter acquitting and delivering of all
believers from all guilt come upon them by their own, or Adams sin imputed;
and from all punishment due to them for the same, either in this World, or in
the next. So as West is not so far removed from East, the highest heavens
from the nethermost earth; as guilt and pain, fault and curse, be removed from
the faithful, by this passive obedience of Christ Jesus. Whereunto belong all
those Scriptures which affirm, that we have remission of sins by his blood;
and that he died for Ephesians. I.
our sins, and redeemed us from alliniquity by his death. Romans 4, last verse.
This being his last and greatest suffering, by a Synecdoche Tit. 2.
of the part for the whole, comprehends all other 1 Timothy 2. Heb. 9.
sufferings; which being endured of him with most hearty obedience, have freed
all believers from extreme evil, from damnation in hell, and the whole wrath
of God for sin. Insomuch as howsoever many and great tribulations do chance
to befall them in their life time, and death in the end seize upon the godly,
yet these happen unto them as no part of Gods curse for sin, or as fruits of
his fury and hot indignation; but quite contrary, the crosses of their life
being sanctified by Christ his Cross, they are great furtherances to 1 Cor.
11. ver. 32, 33.
mortification and amendment of life, and good trials of 1 Pet. 1.
their faith and patience, and nourishments of their hope: Romans 5, verse 3. 4,
5.
and death when it comes, having lost his sting, there is nothing remaining in
it which is not beneficial to them; it being but as a bridge or gate to carry
them over, and convey them into their heavenly Country. And as the faithful
do escape all evil by the passive righteousness Simile.
of Christ, his suffering of evils being their acquittance and discharge (as a
surety having answered a debt for thee, enfreeth thee, as if it had been
satisfied with thy own money,) the most just God never exacting one debt
twice; so they find entrance into life by his active justice: for none must
live but the just, which 2 Active righteousness.
have perfect conformity with the strict justice of the Law; The just shall
live. This exact righteousness all flesh lacks: for, No flesh can be
justified in his sight; Psalm. 143. 2. Therefore no more surely was Adam shut
out of earthly Paradise, then we his posterity for lack of perfect justice,
are excluded out of the third heavens, the Paradise which is above. Therefore
as Jesus Christ our Mediator by bearing the whole punishment due to the breach
of the Law, with most sincere obedience, has enfreed us from the curse and
destruction of hell; so by keeping and doing all duties toward God and man
required in the Law, and that in most perfect, love, he has by this his active
obedience merited, and obtained for his people a right and title to the
Kingdom of Heaven. This active righteousness is, doing, and keeping the whole
Law; it is the absolute conformity and agreement of the man Christ in his life,
unto the perfect rule of righteousness given of God, in the Decalogue, or ten
Commandments.

Of this active righteousness there are two parts, one Two parts of active
righteousness.
is the conformity of his nature to the will of God, all the powers and
faculties both of body and soul being rightly framed according to the most
exact justice of He that made Adam without sin, could give Christ our Nature
without our sin, which is but an accident to our Nature.
the moral Law, he being conceived by the holy Ghost; the lump of flesh which
he took, and whereout his manhood was framed, was so severed from all spot of
sin, as there was not to be found in him the least taint of sin and
corruption, no inclination in mind or will against God; but a
through-disposition to all good. Hence called the immaculate Lamb, undefiled,
separate from sinners; and so he behooved to be, that he might offer himself a
spotless sacrifice to God, who under the Law would admit no blemished
oblation. Had ought in his nature been never so little crooked and unright, his
death had no more auayled for remission, or his life for righteousness, then
the death or life of Peter, Paul, or any other Saint: for then himself needing
a Savior, should not have been ours.

The other part of his active obedience, is the conformity which in the course
of his life, he kept and fulfilled: doing all that was commanded in both
Tables, and doing 1. He did all.
it in a perfect manner and measure, with perfect 2. He did all perfectly.
love of God his Father, whom he obeyed to the death; and of men his
neighbors, whom he loved as himself, yea more then himself, giving himself
to a cruel infamous death for them. Also, doing all this to a 3 To a right]
end.
right end, that he might honor his Father, whose glory he sought in all
things. And lastly, being constant John 5
unto the end, continuing in his love and obedience unto 4 Being constant in
doing all was commanded.
the last breath. Hence it is said, He did all things well, he knew no sin,
no guile found in his mouth, and is called, that Holy one, and just and
righteous one: who indeed 2 Cor: 5, v: last Acts 3, 14
alone, has that justice which is able to abide 1 Pet: 3.
the touchstone, even the most rigorous examination of the most severe divine
justice; which having thoroughly and narrowly sifted it, cannot not only find
nothing what to blame in it, but of right must allow it and crown it with
eternal life.

Hence it is, that this righteousness which Christ in his manhood has thus
performed (as we have said) is often in the Epistles of Paul, termed the
righteousness of God, as Romans 3, (...), 22, 26. 2 Cor. 5, verse last. Phil. 3.
Not only because that person which wrought it, was very God, the Son of the
eternal God (though it were wrought in the humane nature assumed:) but
especially to teach us, that this righteousness of the man Christ, it is that,
and that alone, which the most just God approoueth and rewards; not as he
does approve the imperfect obedience of his children in favor, pardoning what
is wanting, and accepting the will for the work; but beholding this justice of
the man Christ, with the eye of his strict Divine justice, he does find naught
in it to mislike: giving to it, De iure, even according to good right, the
recompense of life eternal.

This was well known to the wise and blessed Apostle Paul, who having in his
own person yielded obedience to the moral Law before his conversion, while he
was a Pharisie, but much better, and more obedience after his calling to be a
Christian: yet being well assured, that it could not stand before the tribunal
of Gods justice, which condemns the least obliquity and sweruing from the
Law, therefore he renounceth it, as having no affiance in it, nay rejecting it
as loss and as dung, that he might be found, not having his own, but the
righteousness of Christ, Phil. 3, 6, 7 Teaching all Christians every where in
his Writings, namely, in his Epistles to the Romans and the Galathians, to
seek after their perfect justice, from and in Christ: agreeable to the rest of
Scripture, which exhorts all men, as they will ever enjoy life, to thirst and
hunger after the same. For this all men are to take notice of, that as Christ
Jesus suffered not for himself, but for sinners; so the righteousness which he
wrought in 1 Cor. 1, 30.
his humane Nature, by his active obedience, it belongs to all his members,
being a mantle or robe large and broad enough to cover and cloth both
himself, and all his. Howsoever our garments do but fit one body at once, to
cover it: yet this Wedding garment is able to apparel both husband and
spouse, Christ and his whole invisible church, which is the society of chosen
and believing ones. There being derived from his Godhead, an infinite worth,
value, and price, as to the sufferings of Christ; so also to his passive and
active obedience This righteousness being in Christ, it does become ours, by an
action of God, called imputation, of which afterward.
and works which he did, that he might be able to justify thereby all his
elect. These things being thus opened, now a way is paued for us, to speak
something of that worthy benefit of Justification, which according to your
desire, I will declare what manner of blessing it is, and how it is by faith.


Justification, what it is.
Amongst sundry significations of this word Justification (which I mean not
now to meddle with) there be three especially to be observed: One is, As
sanctify, to make holy: rectify, to make right: mollifye, to make soft:
glorify, to make glorious, etc.
to make just, which except it be with some commodious interpretation, does not
agree to this matter we have in hand (for we are not made just by a justice in
our selves or in our persons.) Secondly, it imports as much as to declare,
show forth, and allow for good and just, that which before was so: as in that
saying, Wisdom is justified of her children, Luke 16, 15. Again, the
Publicans justified God, Luke 10, 29. And in James 2. Abraham is said to be
justified (declared such) by his Works. In a third signification, to justify,
it is (according to the use and custom of speaking among the Hebrews) to
absolve one from guilt, and to pronounce him innocent. As in all these places,
where Justification is set against condemning; as in the Proverbs, He that
justifies the wicked, or that condemns the innocent, both are like
abomination, etc. And Romans 8. who shall condemn, it is God that justifies,
and Acts 13, 39. All that believe in him, are justified from all those things,
etc. and innumerable the like places. It is a word borrowed by the holy Ghost
from Courts of civil Justice; where such as being accused, and are found
guiltless, they be by the mouth of the Judge, absolved and pronounced
innocent.

In this third signification, we use the word here when we speak of the
justification of an elect sinner by faith; not for infusion of justice into us,
whereby we should be made just by an inherent righteousness of our own, nor
for the declaration of our justice before men: but for the absoluing of a
sinner from his guilt of sin, and the accounting or pronouncing him just
before the tribunal of God. In which sense, the word is taken without all
exception to the contrary, in Acts 13, 39, where it is written, Through this
man is preached to you forgiveness of sin, and from all things from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by him every one that believes, is
justified. Which words, in good and right interpretation, can have no other
meaning then this; That whereas by the Law, by the works and ceremonies
thereof, men could not be acquitted and assoyled from their sins, yet by
Jesus Christ (so we by a lively faith lay hold on him) we shall be absolved
from our sins, before the judgment of Almighty God. And in this selfsame
meaning does the blessed Apostle use this word throughout his disputation of
this matter, in his Epistles to the Romans and Galathians; so as now it will
be no hard thing to show, what benefit our justification is.

Justification of an elect sinner before God, it is an Justification what it
is: An imputation of Christ's whole righteousness to the believing man.
action of the most merciful God, freely (according to his covenant of grace)
absoluing him at what time he believes, from his sins, before his Tribunal,
by the passive righteousness or sufferings of his Son imputed; and an
accounting or pronouncing him for perfectly just by the active righteousness
of Christ, imputed also unto such a believing sinner. For the fuller
understanding 1 Imputation.
hereof, we are to note, that in this work of Justification, there is a
twofold action of God to be considered. One is an imputation or reckoning of
all our sins, and the whole punishment thereof unto Christ, upon whom as our
surety or husband they were put by the decree of his Father, and his own
election; that he by bearing them, might so acquit us from them. The second is
an imputation or reckoning of Christ his whole righteousness, both passive and
active to us, for the forgiveness of sins by the merit of the former; and
the acceptance of us as absolutely righteous in his sight for the merit of the
latter. Even as in a marriage, where a Noble man marries a beggar, there is an
exchange made.

The nobility and riches of the Husband, is communicated to the Wife, and her
meannesse or extreme poverty is now esteemed his, or at least extinguished in
his greatness; so it fares here. All our faults and punishments were by
imputation of God the Father so put upon his Son, as if they had been his
own; he was recounted Esaias 53.
a sinner, yea, made a sinner by it, and the chastisements Galat. 3.
of our peace was upon him; he became a curse 2 Cor. 5, verse last.
for us: and on the other side, the whole righteousness of Christ, both in his
keeping the Law, and in his suffering pain and death for the breach of it, is
so beeome and made ours by imputation, as if we in our own person had
suffered and fulfilled all. So as a man's body and soul is no more his own,
his sickness or health is no more his own, then upon Gods imputation, the
passion and obedience of Christ are ours for our Justification. For as Adams
disobedience done in his own person, is yet the fault of all his Progeny, even
to the Romans 5. 19.
subiecting them unto death by Gods imputing it unto them: so is the obedience
of Christ in his nature, actions, and sufferings, though it stick inherently
in his manhood; yet it is verily ours for forgiveness of sins, and for our
accounting righteous by Gods imputation of it unto us.

The reason why this imputation is so requisite in Of imputatio^, Read Romans 4.
the work of our justification, it is apparent, because the righteousness of
Christ being without us in the humane nature of Christ, it can no otherwise
become ours for the absoluing us from our sins, and getting us to be accepted
as just in Gods sight, then by a free imputation of it unto us. God accounting
all the righteousness The merit of right is eternal life.
of his Son unto the elect sinner to be his own, with the whole merit of it,
at what time he believes on his Son by a lively and true faith.

And this the Scripture plentifully and plainly teaches, 2 Faith. These two
actions meet both together at one time, God then accounting and imputing all
Christ's justice to a sinner when he truly believes.
that as on Gods part there is this action of imputing Christ his justice unto
us, so on our part there is required faith to believe the promise hereof made
unto us by his Son. Therefore it is so often said, that we are justified by
faith; and Christ his righteousness is called, the righteousness of faith, in
many Texts of Paul his Epistles. Which is not so to be taken, as if either
faith were a part of righteousness, which is wholly in Christ his doings and
sufferings; or as if the quality and action of faith did deserve remission of
sins (for Romans 4, verse 22, 23, 24.
it is imperfect, as all other graces are in us, and it self with the weak
action of believing, needs pardon from God;) neither as any moving cause of
our righteousness: for it is the only mere grace and undeserved love of God,
which moves him to offer and give us his Son with his righteousness.
Therefore it is written; We are justified by grace: but we are said to be In
what meaning we are justified by faith.
justified by faith; as by an Instrument or hand created in the soul by the
holy Ghost, for this purpose, that it may receive, apprehend, or lay hold on
the perfect justice of Christ, as it is promised and given us of God in his
Word of Grace, even the Gospel of Christ. As it is written; that by faith we
receive the Son of God, and John 1. 12.
the promise of the Spirit, and the righteousness of God. Gal. 3. 14.
This way and mean of receiving Christ his justice by faith, being ordained of
God, as meetest for our humbling, and the praise of his own free grace. For
when Romans 3. 27.
we are brought once to see that we can bring nothing Why God would have his
Elect so justified by faith in Christ.
of our own to justify us, having in us manifest and manifold guiltiness
from Adam and our selves, and an utter emptiness, and deprivation of all
righteousness, and so are driven to go out of our selves to borrow and take
from another, even from Christ his perfect justice, in his works and passions
performed, and have all this reckoned unto us for our own, both for remission
of sins, and for being accounted perfectly rightcous, and that done freely by
the gracious love and favor of God, freely giving his Son for us to death,
offering him in his Gospel preached freely, freely bestowing him with his
righteousness upon us, believing in him; and also freely working that faith by
which alone it is, whereby we receive both Christ and his justice: the due
meditation (...), must needs make greatly as for the abasing of our selves, who
are utterly by this means put from all matter, and cause of glorying and
rejoicing in our selves before God, so also for the honor and commendations of
Gods infinite love and grace, thus enriching us with the most perfect
righteousness Two parts of Justification. 1 Remission of sins. 2 Accounting
justice to us.
of his Son, unto the full pardon of all our sins, and freedom from the
whole curse due to them; and to the obtaining of such absolute justice, whereby
we may stand just before the severe judgment seat of God, and worthy of
eternal life through the same. For Eternal life, the fruit of imputed
righteousness.
this is a necessary consequent of our justification or righteousness imputed,
even the right of eternal life restored; as it is written, The just by his
faith shall (...): Romans 1. 17.
where the Apostle argues, that righteousness is by faith, because we live
by faith. Here are then two effects of faith, one consequent to the other;
Faith brings us to Justice, Justice has life annexed to it. Hence it is
said, Romans 5. 17. That by the gift of this righteousness being received, the
Elect reign in life; that is, they are made partakers of true and everlasting
life, which no more can be severed from righteousness, then death from sin;
which made the Apostle say, that he did Galat. 2. 20.
live, because he did believe in the Son of God. For then he began to live
the life which is eternal in Heaven, at what time his faith did grapple on
Christ, and his righteousness: for this is the compact of God, to give life
unto him which keeps the Law; Do this, and live: which the faithful do in
the person of Christ, to whom they are joined by faith; and therefore the right
of life belongs unto them. So as they can no more be deprived of eternal
life in Heaven, then Christ, who already enioyes it. Thus by the double
righteousness of Christ imputed to the faithful, both death and damnation is
avoided, and everlasting life and blessedness is attained.

Apollos. By this which you have spoken so amply of this second fruit of
faith, to wit, of Justification before God; it may appear that they are
deceived, which will have it to consist only in remission of sins: whereas
beside our absolution from sin by the sufferings of Christ, there is also an
accounting of Christ his active righteousness unto us for our perfect justice.
Secondly, This is Popish error in their second justification, they say, it is
of faith and works.
that they are in an error also, which do teach it to be a grace or quality
powered into our selves, whereby we lead a just and holy life; by which they
say, one is justified. Also, the ignorant Christians seems to be in woeful
The first justification (with the Papist) is remission of sins, apprehended
by faith.
case, who never understand what this great benefit means. But especially
Gods children already called, may herein see their own most happy condition by
their calling to the faith of the Gospel. For as it fares with a bondsman
ransomed out of bondage by his Emperor, Second justification (after their
doctrine) whereby of just already by the first justification, he becomes more
just; this is by our own works in part. This second justification being in
truth our sanctification: there being but one only justification taught in the
word, which for the beginning, middle, and ending by faith, are known.
and advanced to great dignity and riches; or with a poor miserable man
imprisoned for debt unto his Prince, and is not only pardoned his debt, but
has a very great treasure heaped upon him, being one which had never deserved
well, nay, many ways very ill of his Prince, and from whom his Prince could
never look for any benefit and commodity to himself; yet now by this most
frank liberality and grace of his Sovereign, is suddenly of extreme poor and
contemptible, made very rich and glorious. Even so it fares with Gods
Children, being through guilt of sin and corruption of Nature, and by actual
transgressions, bondmen to Satan, enthralled to sin and hell, and most
miserably poor, destitute of all righteousness; indebted to God, the
Sovereign Monarch and just Judge of the World, both to be for ever kept from
eternal life in heaven for fault of perfect holiness, and besides to be
plunged over head and ears into the damnation of hell, through breach of the
Law; yet through the wonderful benignity and grace of God, freely giving them
his Son, with his righteousness active and passive, for the wiping out of
all guilt of sin and desert of punishment, and the adorning and decking them
with perfect holiness and innocence, by the imputation of faith freely made,
they are now of bondmen and beggarly wretches, of heirs of hell, and exiles
from heaven, become most free, rich, and glorious; even heirs, yea, fellow
heirs with Christ, of that excellent inheritance which is immortal in Heaven.
Here is indeed a most happy and joyful change which is happened them by the
justification of faith: so as no marvel though the holy Apostle make so light
account (...) Phil. 3. verse. 9, 10.
all other things whatsoever, in comparison of this. Neither is it to be
wondered, though Satan in all ages have laid such battery against this mount
and bulwark of Christianity. No one point of all Christian doctrine See and
read Luthers Preface before his Commentary to the Galathians.
which he has so dangerously, so often, so many ways assailed as this;
sometime carrying men from Christ to seek forgiveness, and some part of
righteousness at least out of him in some other thing; and sometime
annihilating faith and voyding it, as though there were no power in it at all,
so much as to help toward our justification, by apprehending our
righteousness: for he knows this Article to be the key of all Religion, the
very heart and soul of Christianity, the most comfortable and sure stay, the
very rock and foundation of all hope; so as overthrow this, and overthrow all
preaching, and all believing were in vain, if this one fundamental truth
could be perverted and depraved, either by defacing the gift of Christ's
righteousness, by adding something to it of our own, or by cutting off the
hand and arm that should receive and embrace it. It behooves therefore al Gods
children, and namely, Gods Ministers, so much the more to study and strive to
maintain this truth, and keep it unviolable; also, such as have this grace
imparted to them, to be justified by believing, to make much of it; enforcing
and provoking themselves to all hearty and joyful thankfulness for it in word
and deed, to all earnest care to grow and increase in this grace continually:
I mean in the sense and feeling of it, and in the more full apprehension of it,
even in respect of such wonderful effects as arise thence. But neighbor
Aquila, because the day draws toward an end, and night approaching calls us
home, therefore we will here cease, deferring the prosecution of your third
motion touching the nearest effects and fruits which spring from the true
sense of this benefit, till another time; when we may have more leisure to call
them to mind, and to consider of them.


Aquila. Well pleased I am to have it so: for the opening of these effects
which follow upon our justification by faith, being a thing of that great
consequence, would not be dealt in rawly and slenderly, or passed over in few
words. So fare ye well for this time.


The seventh Dialogue.
The nine effects of Justification by Faith.
Apollos. NOw Neighbor Aquila, may I know of you whence do you come? for ye
were not wont to come that way as ye now do.


Aquila. I came not long sithence from home with a friend of mine that came to
visit me, and drew me out to go with him to set him on his way, which I did
willingly for his good company sake; but I have made the best have I could,
that I might keep touch with you, and it falls out well that I do so
happily, and fitly meet you: for I was somewhat afraid lest you should have
tarried too long for me. Now Sir that we are so well come together, will it
please you to lay forth those nine nearest fruits which spring from the feeling
of justification by faith, what effects use to follow hereupon in the souls
and consciences of justified persons?


Apollos. The blessed Apostle Saint Paul shall give you your answer unto this
question: for having most divinely in the 2. 3. and 4. Chapters to the Romans,
laid forth the doctrine of Justification, and very substantially proved it to
be not by our works, which we do, not only for that we are all sinners, but
because they answer not the justice of the Law, no, not in the regenerate,
which have most grace, and do most good: but by faith, apprehending the
sufferings and death of Christ, full absolution from sin, and his active
obedience to the Law for our perfect justice with God. At the fifth Chapter he
comes to those proper and immediate Romans 5. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6. 11.
effects of this grace of Justification, which you now enquire after, and there
(as I conceive them) he rehearses distinctly these nine; 1. and 2. peace with
God: Peace with God contains 1. reconciliation with God, 2. and peace of
conscience.
3. Access unto his grace: 4. Standing in that grace: 5. Hope of glory. 6.
Rejoicing under that hope. 7. Joy in tribulation. 8. A sense of Gods love in
Christ. 9. A glorying in God.

These are the most secret hidden works of the Spirit, as so many marks to
the Christian soul, whereby to find and try out the truth and certainty of
her own justification. Also being as it were rich Jewels or most precious
ornaments affixed unto that most glorious robe of righteousness wherewith she
is clothed so sumptuously, to the great contentment of Christ her husband, and
her own unspeakable comfort.


Aquila. Of these foresaid effects, I do desire now to hear you speak
somewhat in that order as they are named. And first, touching peace with God,
what do ye understand thereby, make it plain to me what manner of gift that is.


Apollos. These fruits of justifying faith being many First fruit of
justification by Faith.
(nine in number) I had not need to be long in the^, we having so much other
work yet behind: And yet being both weighty matters, and removed from common
understanding, I cannot well tell how to speak briefly, lest I speak not
plainly enough; but this eases me of some care, that these things are spoken
unto one that has them, and feels them by good experience: and therefore can
sooner comprehend the nature and truth of these worthy gifts.

Now touching the first of them it is peace with God, whereby two things are
meant. First, reconciliation or 1. Reconciliation.
truce with God; in which sense, the word is used in Esaias 0, 6.
those Scriptures where Christ is termed our peace, the Ephesians. 2, 14.
Prince of peace, our peacemaker: and peace is made Colos. 1, 20.
by his blood, that is, atonement or reconcilement What it is.
with God, whiles our sins which bredde an enmity between God and us, and
made a separation of us from him, and of him from us (his infinite justice
hating our sins, and we through sin extremely hating God) the guilt of
these sins and punishment, being wholly done away, and freely pardoned by the
merit of Christ his death, we have now God pacified toward us, and of a more
then terrible Judge, become a most amiable and kind Father, taking us now for
sons by grace, who were children of his wrath before.

Secondly, from this peace and reconciliation made 2. Peace of conscience.
with God, our faith accepting the mercy and forgiveness by his gracious
promise freely offered, there follows What.
another peace and happy tranquillity of our conscience, which (the wounds and
terrors of it being now healed and quieted upon that blessed consent between
Gods promise and our faith) instead of accusing and trobling, as it was wont,
does now excuse and acquit us before God with unspeakable rest; so as in the
sense of Gods pacification toward us, we are not greatly terrified with sin
and other enemies of our salvation: and though there be some agreement and
likeness between this true peace of a good conscience, and that false peace
of a dead and benumbed conscience, inasmuch as both are quiet and free from
trouble or anguish, yet there is in other respects as great ods between them
as is between heaven and hell.

1. For first, a dead conscience is quiet, because it 2 How it differs from
false peace of the wicked.
has no feeling of sin at all: like to dead flesh, which you may prick with
a Needle, and yet it feels nothing; so is it with a sleeping dead conscience,
it has no sense of sin or judgment, and thence grows the quietness it has,
which will quickly be shaken off, and horrible terror succeed in the room
with sin reuiueth. And it is awaked by the knowledge and due consideration of
the Law of God. But an holy conscience washed in the blood of Christ, it is
quiet, because it so feels sins, as it (...) them al forgiven, and God
pacified and well pleased in his Son. Hence arises her peace which passes all
understanding.

2. Secondly, a benumbed conscience, though it be quiet, yet it comfort not,
but lies as asleep: there may be in the heart natural liveliness and
comfort, by presence of things pleasing to nature, but no spiritual comfort in
the conscience at all: whereas the truly pacified conscience has great comfort
in it self, chearing up the soul as a man is cheared at a feast, a good
conscience is a continual feast.

3. Thirdly, the benumbed conscience is awlesse and fears not the offense of
God by sin, nor his wrath for sin. Whereas the truly appeased conscience
is fearful to offend such a Father: though it now fear not damnation, which
is taken away by faith in Christ; yet it fears transgression and breach of
the Law, as it is written of Job, that he feared always, and of (...), that he
feared God greatly.


Aquila. Sir, may it please you ere you pass over to 2 How peace of conscieuce
is to be got.
the next fruit: First, to show how this blessing of a peaceable conscience
is gotten, and how to be preserved; and also whether and how far it may be
lost, and what is to be done to recover it?


Apollos. There are two ways whereby to attain this peace. First, by an
unfeigned displeasure and sorrow conceived in our hearts against our own
sins, breaking forth in an humble, sincere, and constant confession of them
particularly, so far as they are known, with an earnest endeavor against
them, to shun all occasions of them. Secondly, by stirring up the heart to
embrace that promise of the Gospel, which offers to us the forgiveness of
them, verily believing them to be indeed remitted to us from God, according to
that his merciful promise, which he can no more break, then he can deny
himself: for he is true, and cannot lie. Now having thus gotten this peace of
mind, there must great care be taken for the preservation of it; seeing it is
no less praise to keep a treasure, then at first to purchase 4 How preserved.
it. And it is to be kept even by the same means by which it was come by, even
by often and earnest confession of our sins, and craving pardon thereof, and
by believing the truth of the promise; but especially by a careful avoiding
of every known sin, even the least, laboring still as to get a cleerer
insight of sins by the lantern of the Law; so as they are more brightly known
and perceived to increase in care and watchfulness over our hearts, to stop
the course of sin in the very thoughts and desires; where sin being yet but
young and weak, may most easily be crushed: never let it go so far, as to
get consent of the will to agree to the motion of it, much less the help
either of tongue or hand, or other part of the body to execute it; for then it
will raise up new storms, and trouble the quiet peace of the soul. Hereunto
join a desire and study how to perform all known duties which concern us in
our general or special calling, with all uprightness and singleness of
heart, as in Gods sight, out of love to please him, and true desire to glorify
him by our obedience to his will. For great is the peace that they have which
walk in his Statutes, says the Psalmist. Therefore that which we cannot do
perfectly, let us strive to do sincerely, and ask forgiveness of our
imperfections: and so it will come to pass, that our peace will not only
stand to us, but increase daily, and more abound in us.

Whereas you desire to know touching this peace, if it may be lost: To this I
answer you, it cannot be lost; none can take it away, no more then
reconciliation with God, or faith can be lost. Indeed this peace of 5. How
far lost.
conscience, as touching the sense and feeling of it, may be, and sometime is
lost; as appears both in the examples of Scripture, as in Job, David,
Ezekiah, and by the experience of others in these our days, who either by
falling into some gross actual sin, or by some 6. By what means lost.
fearful security, not looking to, and watching over theirwayes, or by some
strong fit of temptation, have been for a time in an hell of horror and
soule-sorrow, having no more sense of peace, then a man upon a rack does feel
any ease; complaining in the anguish and bitterness of their grief, that the
terror of God has been upon them, that their soul has been disquietted
within them, that they were cast out of Gods sight, mourning as a Turtle,
chattering as a Crane, weeping and watering their cheeks and couch with
tears; weary of life, wishing for death, finding nothing but fear on every
side; yet all this while their lively faith, the remission of their sins,
their atonement with God, and the blessed peace of mind coming thereof, not
utterly lost; but the sense only of these benefits taken away, it faring with
them as with the Sun, which being under the dark clouds, yet is still in it
self a lightsome creature, and when it has power to scatter the thick
clouds, gives forth his shine afresh; or as the trees in Winter, which having
neither fruit, nor blossom, nor leaf, seem to be dead; yet have life in the
root, which appears in the Spring. Or finally, as with a man in a trance,
who in truth (...), though for the time he have no sense or use of life; even
so it is with Gods own Children in the pang of some soul affliction, or after
some deep fall by sin, there appears in them for a season no fruits, nor
feeling of any saving grace, but all is clouded, and dead to seeming; yet not
so in truth, as both reason and the event declares. For all saving grace is of
that nature, as it perishes not; it never dies, where it once lives,
therefore called immortal. And such as for a season have fear and trouble,
and dullness, with deadness in their conscience, they do afterward recover
themselves; the graces which seemed to be dead, being stirred up by the use of
good means, are again quickened. And the best How recovered.
means for such as have lost their former peace, as touching all sense of it,
they are private prayer to God, though it be with great untowardness, yea,
though they be troubled, when they think on God; yet still to make petitions
unto him in his Sons name. Those very groans and sighs which are so little,
as they cannot be uttered what they are; yet being the work of Christ Romans 8.
26.
his Spirit, they are through the same Christ pleasing to God, who despises
not a contrite and broken heart; therefore Psalm. 51. 17.
let not such forbear to come, but (...) more seriously to renew their
repentance, taking the help of the prayers and comforts of the godly wise, by
whose counsel and supplications many a weak troubled heart has been raised
up to peace and rest in the Lord. For this being Gods ordinance, to pray one
for another, and to confess our sins one to another; James 5. certainly God
will bless it to the good of his Children. Therefore let such take good heart
to them, and for their better relief of their distressed conscience, let them
remember the old mercies of God toward them, and what peace, joy, and comfort,
they have had heretofore in God; and other the works of his grace, which they
have felt, must assure them, that that God which once had so far expressed his
love toward them, will be their God for ever. These private means joined with
the public, namely, the reverent use of the Word and mysteries, will again so
settle their heart in peace, (through Gods powerful blessing) as that they
shall be occasioned to say with the Prophet; Return to thy rest, O my soul,
for the Lord has been beneficial to thee; he has delivered thy soul from
death, and thy eyes from tears; Psalm. 116. verse 7, 8.


Aquila. Let me now remember you to proceed to the second fruit of Justifying
faith, which with the Apostle you called, Access into the grace of God; what
do ye esteem this to be, declare it to me as I may conceive it?


Apollos. This third fruit, which is the access or entrance 3 Fruit of
Justification.
into the grace of God, it is a companion of the former, following it at the
heels; for our conscience being pacified, through the having God pacified and
reconciled toward us, the Christian soul assumeth and takes great liberty in
all necessities, outward and inward, to approach and come unto this God, thus
become gracious and favorable to us in his Son; and this is that access or
entrance into his grace, being the same with that which we read of Ephesians
3. 12. We have entrance with boldness, through confidence and faith in
Christ. And also one with that Heb. 4. 16. We may with boldness come to the
throne of grace, hoping to find help in time of need; or as before, when our
sins were unpardoned, they shut us out of Gods presence: so being now
forgiven, and God reconciled to us. We may freely upon all occasions, and do
with much liberty draw near to him, being made propitious to us, we have a
certain resemblance and shadow of this in natural Children, who dare not come
into the sight of their Father all the while his anger is moved for some fault,
but fly rather his presence, as did Absalon; but atonement being once made,
and they certified thereof, then Absalon dare freely show himself before his
Father: so it fares with Gods Children, they shun and fly from God (as Adam)
all the while they have God angry for their sins, and their consciences in
that regard (...) or disquietted; but upon reconciliation believed, and the
conscience thereby appeased, they now with an holy boldness enter in to God,
to speak to his Grace for themselves and for others, according to all their
wants and distresses: which how great a gift and privilege it is, may be
perceived by the example of a base subject, through some capital crime
obnoxious by the Law to death; and now by the clemency of his Prince, not only
pardoned, but honored so and advanced, as he may at all times have access
unto his Prince, to sue for himself and his friends.

But look how much the favor of God exceeds the favor of all earthly
Monarchs, and is far more able to gratify us in things most nearly
concerning us, enen eternal felicity; so much does this benefit of our access
unto God exceed that other: and it is a benefit that no heart can think, no
tongue can utter the invaluable greatness of it, that poor sinners should
receive As we need not Saints to intercede for us, or merits to commend us to
God.
this honor through the mediation of Christ, and by his merits, to have free
approach into Gods privy chamber, yea, into his secret presence, to acquaint him
with all whatsoever wants we have, and to talk with him as a child with his
loving Father, or one friend with another. Thus considering what need we have
of him, and how able he is to pleasure us, cannot seem but a wondrous great
mercy, our unworthiness and his greatness being also coupled together.


Aquila. The fourth fruit ye called a standing in this grace, 4 Fruit of
justification.
what is this I pray you?


Apollos. It imports as much as a perseverance and continuance of true
believers, in that blessed estate whereinto they are brought by faith in Jesus
Christ, by whom they have God favorable; not by fits, and for days, months,
years, but for ever; and that such a thing is meant here (by standing) not
only our common speech, wherein we call a place of continuance, a station, or
a standing; and of a man that is resolute and constant, we use to say, he
stood well to it: and when we will stir up one to steadfastness, we bid him
stand to it. But the Scriptures also by this word express stablenesse, Stand
in the way (...) sinners.
both in evil; Psalm 1. 1. and in good; Psalm 122. 1 Corinthians 16. 13.
Likewise where it is said by Saint Paul; The justified by faith do stand in
Stand fast.
that grace, whereinto they have sound entrance: He intends to teach thus
much, that the Elect believer, as by the means of Christ absoluing him from
sin, and reconciling him to God, he is set in the estate of Gods favor, has
thereby his conscience sweetly quietted, enjoying this liberty, that he may
upon all just occasions with holy boldness and reverence come to the gracious
God, and enter into his presence. So he is established to abide and remain in
this happy condition for all eternity; so as though through the malice of the
Devil, and by his own unwariness and infirmity, he may be sore assaulted
and shaken, and take some deep and dangerous fall, yea, so far as for a time
and in part he may lose sundry tokens, fruits, and gifts, and feeling of
grace, as peace of conscience, joy of the Spirit, touching the sense of them,
cleerenesse of understanding, affection to goodness, feruency of love,
boldness in confession of God, and such like; as is very manifest in David and
Peter, Psalm. 51. 7, 8, 9. Mat. 26. yet he is preserved so sure, as he cannot
possibly fall wholly and utterly, or for ever, from that grace of atonement,
and such effects as necessarily depend thereon, which they have attained by the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. Because God, who loves the Elect in John 13.
1, 2.
his Son, is unchangeable, loving to the end: also he has received them into
an everlasting covenant, promising Jeremy 32.
so to put his fear in them, as they shall not have the will to go from him;
as he never has the will to cast out whom he has once embraced; being also
of almighty power to maintain them in his fanour, committing them to the
custody of his Son, John 10. 28.
to be kept, who will lose none whom the Father has given him by election, and
which come to him by faith. And though they do often of frailety sin, and
that grievously, whereby they deserve to be forsaken perpetually, yet are they
kept from that unrecoverable downfall; Matthew 12. Hebrews 6. and by the
intercession Romans 8 25.
of Christ, have all their other falls of weakness covered and pardoned. His
Spirit moreover which is in them, and which they have of God, in due time
quickening that is dead, strengthening that is John 16.
weak, raising them up from their falls, stirring up their repentance and
faith, and enabling them to keep on their way until they come to the goal.
And therefore Let them look upon what ground they stand, which think the grace
of God may be finally lost, and wholly.
this I co^fidently hold upon the promised grounds, and would have all to
receive it as a truth of God, which cannot deceive the Elect, being once by a
lively faith united to Christ, through his Spirit, justified by his
righteousness, having their sins forgiven them by his death, and reconciled to
God, to the sound pacification of their conscience before him; and enjoying
this liberty of having access into the gracious presence of God, can never by
all the powers of hell be quite and wholly plucked from this grace. Howsoever
they may (as I said) lose for a space many fruits of grace, and be further
worthy for their offenses to lose all for ever, if God should deal in rigor
(as he never does, nor will do with those to whom he is become so propitious
in Christ, as to justify them, to be reconciled to them, and to admit them as
children to come to him, as to their kind Father.) The consideration hereof, it
is Standing in grace, opens no window to security.
so far from being to be feared or suspected, lest it should breed security,
and Iull men asleep in a carnal presumption; as on the contrary, it is very
auailable to quicken and provoke Gods children to all Christian care and
watchfulness; both because the faithful are so preserved of God in the estate
of Grace, as that the same word which teaches this, does teach also, that
their own fear, endeavor, and vigilance in the careful use of all good
means, and in diligent heed-taking to all their own ways, is required
heereunto, as the means of their standing. Let him that stands, take heed
lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10, 12. And again, Be not high minded, So as where
security reigns, it is a sign that such are not in the state of grace.
but fear, Romans 11, 20. And again, He that is borne of God, preserves
himself, 1 John 5, 18. And secondly, because the elect upon calling to mind
such mercies of God toward them, as they have with their calling to faith,
will be moved unto great thankfulness, to love and honor such a God, as has
brought them and settled them in such a blisseful, sure and steady condition; so
as they will not grow bold to offend and live securely, if it were but in this
regard, that they will not be found ungrateful to such a most kind Father.
But when his honor, and their own safety lies upon it, that they eschew
security, and stand upon their guard: this double cord will strongly hold
them unto their duty.


Aquila. Now I would gladly hear you speak something to the fifth fruit of our
justification by faith, which ye called (after the Apostle) a Rejoicing under
the hope of the glory of God. Where if it please you, I would have you
distinctly to show me these three things. First, what he means by the glory
of God. Secondly, then what is the hope thereof. And lastly, of rejoicing under
that hope; so this fifte fruit will be euidenced to me the better what it is.


Apollos. In all these I will seek to satisfy you, and 5. Fruit of
Justification, hope of glory
that with so few words as such things may well be uttered. The glory spoken
of, Romans 5, 2. it is that blessed 1. Glory of God.
celestial glory which believers shall enjoy in Heaven with God; and it
consistes first in a remoouing from them all manner of sin and misery, from
which they Revel. 7, 21.
shall be absolutely free: the evil of sin and pain shall touch them no more
then it shall touch God.

Secondly, in the presence and having of al good for soul and body, and that
in all perfection: their bodies being made incorruptible, strong, bright, and
glorious, as the Stars or Sun in the Firmament; their souls filled with
holiness, abounding in all love of God, his Angels and Saints: and God
mutually loving and delighting in them. And all this, as without measure, so
without all term or end. Earehath not heard, eye has not seen, heart cannot
conceive and think of the greatness of this glory. None know it, save such as
receive it. This is called the glory of God, not only in this regard, for that
it is his free gift which he bestows on his sons and daughters: but also
for that himself lives in it, and is infinitely clothed with this celestial
glory. He dwells in inaccessible glory, his children being made partakers of
some beams of it, as they are capable, yet so far as to their absolute
felicity for ever.

For the second thing, what may be the hope of 2. Hope of Glory.
that glory. It is that certain and sure expectation of the believing
justified soul, to enjoy in due time this heavenly glory, and whatsoever
serves to lead thereto, as it is certain of such good things, as it enjoys
3 Why it is certain.
already. For, seeing the faithful do hope for heavenly glory, and their hope
shall not make them ashamed, Romans 5, 5. therefore they may surely, and with
certainty, expect eternal glory in heaven. Otherwise, their hope would bring
shame and confound them, if they should miss of the thing hoped for.

Again, the believers are said, to rejoice under this glory, Romans 5, 2. Now
there is no rejoicing with godly wise men, but in things of certainty which be
assured. There is therefore certainty in their hope, otherwise how could they
pray unto God, and call him Father? For his children shall certainly be saved,
and they may certainly look for it: and how could faith be a certain
persuasion of the truth of the promise, if hope were but an uncertain and
wavering looking for the accomplishment of the thing promised? Finally, hope
staying it self upon the infinite truth, mercy, and power of God, which cannot
deceive, alter, or fail; therefore Christian hope of glorious happiness is no
opinion, but a very certain and steady expectation.


Aquila. Sir, let me here interrupt you a little without your offense. Seeing
the nature of hope is but to look for something which as yet we have not, and
is to be had hereafter, as the Apostle, Romans 8. argues, to wit, when he
says, Hope which is seen is no hope, we hope for such things as we see not:
whence then is that certainty and assurance which is affixed and joined unto
hope, there being many things hoped for to be had of us hereafter, which yet
men never have?


Apollos. Neighbor Aquila, this was well and timely moved. For certainty is
not of the nature of hope, 4. How certainty comes to be joined to hope.
which being generally taken, and in it own nature, is no more then as you
have said, an expecting of some future thing which is yet for to come;
therefore certainty or uncertainty goes with hope, according to the nature of
the things hoped for; which if they have contingent causes, so as they may come
to pass or not, then the hope of such things is ever with uncertainty, and no
better then a doubtful opinion. Hence it is, that humane or civil hope, which
is of worldly things (which have no certain causes, but may be or not be) is
ever with doubt and unassured. As for example: when one has promised to come
to my house such a time to make merry with me, or to pay me money, I may say, I
hope such a man thus promising, will come at the appointed time, but this hope
cannot make me sure. For upon good cause he may alter his mind, or fall sick,
or my self may have necessary lets. But now it is otherwise with Christian
hope, which is certain, and assoreth a man of the things hoped for; as
spiritual blessings, and protection on earth, and celestial glory in heaven.
Which things, because they are very certain, proceeding of most certain
causes, as the unchangeable mercy and truth of God, purposing and promising
eternal life, with all things which belong thereunto, and bring thither: and
having already given the elect in the work of their calling, and justifying
them by faith, in pacifying their consciences by the feeling of their sins
forgiven, and allowing them access into his grace, and by other fruits of his
covenant, sure demonstration, and experimental knowledge of his truth and
mercy: Hence it is, that they may with undoubted certainty, and do assuredly
look for that which is yet behind, even their glorious perfection in heaven.
And notwithstanding there be in them still remaining corruption, by strength
whereof, they often fail and offend by many, and sometime very great sins, yea
and their own will is changeable: yet seeing it is so, that unto believers
repenting, all sins are forgiven; and God himself never changes: howsoever
his children are subject thereunto, yet he so renews them, as he confirms
their will, and puts strength into them by the might of his grace, that
though they may change and cease to trust in God, yet they are kept from it.
Hence it is, for all the multitude of their iniquities, and mutablenes of their
mind, that their hope is never utterly quailed and danted, but stands firm
as mount Syon, or as an hill of Brass, so as not only for the present, but
ever for hereafter, their hope shall be firm and good. Which truth, as it much
corrects the error of them, which sever assurance from hope of glory, and
make of it but an opinion and wavering conceit, as of a thing which they may
have or miss of (a thing not to be meruailed, seeing some in part at least,
ground their hope upon the merit of works, and upon their serving of GOD,
weak grounds to bear up certain expectation of glory:) so it ministers much
comfort to the faithful, which have received this Christian hope, insomuch as
whatsoever their afflictions, enemies, or sins be, yet they cannot miss of
glorious bliss in the end. For God is faithful which has promised; and having
also begun a good work in them, he will finish it until the day of Jesus
Christ. Finally, whosoever has this hope of the glory of God, let him purge
himself, even as he is pure. For, if we look for such a glory as is
heavenly, we ought to be very diligent, that we may be found of him in
peace, without spot and blameless.


Aquila. You have satisfied me in this fifth fruit of hope, and by that which
you have delivered, I do well observe how three sorts of persons be hugely
deceived. The first is of them who in some part do build their hope upon their
own good doings, who must needs always floate as a boat upon the water,
with continual uncertainties and doubtings of their salvation; for that they
can never be sure when their works are sufficient, and when they be free from
being in some mortal sin, do still perplex their hearts; beside the great
sins which they commit against God, in whom alone the hope of his children is
to be fixed, as an anchor in the bottom of the water, insomuch as they are
pronounced accursed, which hope in ought save God: and men's works they are not
good, therefore popish hope is an accursed hope. Indeed good works, and a
just and godly life, may be unto the Saints a secondary help, and as it were
some prop to stay their hope, in this regard, that to such persons as live so,
is the promise of eternal life made: but God his infinite mercy, truth, and
his Almightinesse, manifested in the death and resurrection of his Son, is
the true and only foundation of hope. Thanks be unto God (says Saint 1 Peter
1. 3.
Peter) who has begotten us to a lively hope, through the resurrection of
Christ from the dead.

The second sort is of such, as in their ignorance or up in the blade, and well
eared, being herein not right, though they little suspect so much by themselves.

The third sort is of such, as having better knowledge the hope of glory, if it
seem good to you, set upon the next, the sixth fruit; Rejoicing under this
hope, 1 Peter 1.
which is elsewhere called, joy in the Spirit, or joy of the Psalm 51.
holy Ghost, and joy unspeakable and glorious, and joy of salvation; I would
have you open this to me.


Apollos. Joy, or rejoicing, generally taken, it is a 6. Fruit of
justification.
sweet motion of the heart upon the presence, or hope Joy spiritual.
of some good thing. Now as good things (which are the objects of joy) be
diverse, so rejoicing is diverse. If the good thing be such as do tend to the
pleasing or preserving of our Nature, the joy which is taken in it is fleshly
and worldly, such as reprobates and wicked men of all sorts may have. But the
rejoicing, which is peculiar to a believing justified person, it arises, and
is occasioned by heavenly and spiritual graces and blessings, either presently
had and enjoyed; as calling to Christ, remission of sins, reconciliation with
God, peace of conscience, repentance, the graces of the new man, faith, hope,
love, etc. or else certainly hoped for, as eternal bliss and glory in Heaven.
Hence in Scriptures termed, Joy of the Spirit; not only because it is wrought
by the Spirit, but because spiritual blessings are the object of it. And
herein differs Christian rejoicing from worldly, that as this springs from
the having and presence of earthly and perishing good things of this life, and
therefore lasts not, but is suddenly quailed upon the change of estate, and
loss of temporal good things, and ever it ends in bitter sorrow:
Contrariwise, the rejoicing of the faithful, it is lasting, and cannot be
taken away, such as cheereth the heart even in afflictions, as we shall hear
anon; because it comes from a sense of Gods present favor, and the present
enjoying of many excellent heavenly fruits thereof, and an assured expectation
of full blessedness to come: their hearts being truly certified by the holy
Spirit, and assured by faith, that as they now have God propitious and gracious
toward them, for the free remission of all their sins; so the day will come,
when all corruption of sins quite done away, and all tears for sin and
misery being wiped from their eyes, at a word, when all evil being utterly
removed from them, they shall be perfectly blessed and glorified with God; in
which hope they rejoice, and comfort their hearts, lauding and praising God
with Psalms. The which their spiritual joy coming from the feeling of Gods
favor, and the looking for of Gods glory, is a part of Gods Kingdom, Romans 14.
The Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And
therefore of Saint Peter called, Gloriousioy; 1 Pet. 1. Unto which the Apostle
therefore earnestly exhorts the faithful, Rejoice in the Lord: Again, I say
rejoice; Phil. 4. 4. And Rejoice evermore; 1 These. 5. 16. And this David begs,
Joy by hearing.
Psalm. 51. Make me to hear of joy and gladness. Where observe this, that joy
is begotten by the promise of the Gospel being heard. Let me hear even by
that gladsome joyful tidings of forgiveness by Christ, how it is nourished
and increased by that means; and being at any time ouershadowed (as it falls
out sometime with Gods dear Children, that the sun of their joy is hid under
a black cloud of sins and temptations) then it is recovered and had again
by the word of faith, by the message and testimony of forgiveness of sins,
being yours, and believed; therefore it is that David prays to hear of joy.
For when the joy of the Christian heart is turned into bitter grief, there is
nothing will cheer and glad it saving the promises of the Word. I had utterly
fainted in my trouble, had not'thy Word comforted me; Psalm. 119. All other
solaces which we use to follow, for the cheering of our spirit made sad with
sin, are vain and nothing worth. It is the word of promise, only through
the working of that Spirit of comfort, that can fetch again a fainting spirit,
or keep it in joyful plight without fainting. Therefore as God must be sought
to for this joy when any lack it, so he must be waited on in his Word for the
obtaining and increase of it. For sithence both faith, and hope of glory, are
bred and fed by the hearing of the Word of the Gospel; by the same way our
rejoicing, the fruit of our hope, is to be gotten, and preserved. But that we
may not stay too long about any one thing, having so many things to speak of;
we are to understand that this former rejoicing of a Christian heart, under
hope of Gods glory, does bring forth another branch of rejoicing, far more
admirable; and that is, rejoicing in bitter 7. Joy in tribulations.
tribulations, which are grievous to our Nature: for this is not so much to be
marvelled at, if true believers have their hearts moved to joy and gladness,
because they certainly look to be glorified with God in heaven; for the hope
of far less matters uses to cheer up men's hearts: but this is indeed very
wonderful, that afflictions, which have in them matter both of shame and pain,
yea and carry a show of God displeased and angry with us, that yet the godly
believers should be merry and cheerful in the feeling of them: this (I say)
is strange, yet it is most certainly true: the Apostle affirming of them, who
be justified by Faith, That they rejoice even in tribulations: Romans 5. 3. and
experience proves to us the truth hereof: The godly in their affliction, even
in most bitter martyrdom, suffering the spoiling of their goods and lives with
joy. The reason is, because the afflictions proceeding from Gods love and
special favor (as the faithful are well persuaded, being reconciled to him)
and for an especial good end, to try and increase their faith; therefore their
afflictions do nourish in them the hope of their glory (as seals and pledges
thereof unto them,) assuring them that rest will come after their troubles,
according to Gods faithful promise. Now the remembrance of that rest and
happiness (in hope whereof they live) causes all things to be sweet and
pleasant unto them, which they meet with in their way, and as part of their
way, by which they are to pass, toward that glorious and happy end. They
being not a little comforted heerewith in their greatest distresses and
troubles, to know, that being now made partakers with Christ and his
afflictions, suffering and dying with him, they have the Lords own word for
their warrant, that they shall also live and reign with him in glory. So as
with consideration of these things, namely, their conformity with Christ; and
that their light and momentany sufferings, shall be turned into a glory
immortal and weighty: hence it is, that looking for it, and looking upon it,
and not upon their temporal calamities, they are very comfortable and
coragious; the joy of good things to come swallowing (at lest mitigating) much
the grief of evil things present.


Aquila. Sir, you might now (as I think) proceed unto the two last points of
Justification, but that I would entreat you to loose two or three knots. One
is, whether Gods children may embrace worldly comforts. And the second is,
sithence the hope of glory breeds in them such joy, even to the solacing and
gladding of their hearts in most irksome and painful sufferings, how comes
it, that sometimes some of the best and most faithful men, do strangely
despair, and are not only without hope and joy, but exceedingly appalled and
danted, despairing, and full of discomfite?


Apollos. Good friend, albeit something has (by occasion) been said to this
point twice or thrice heretofore (if ye remember) when we spoke of peace of
conscience, and of standing in grace, and elsewhere: yet I will answer your
demand, touching the despaires of the faithful, if first I speak somewhat of
worldly Of worldly joy.
comforts: which as it pleases God sometime to afford his own children, and
that in a good measure, giving them also power to apprehend them: so there is
great fear and danger of being deceived by them, as we see in the woeful
examples of Salomons fall, and Ezekiahs sin, and sundry others, which have
lost the sense of spiritual joy, by being too much carried away with worldly
joys, not keeping a measure in them. Therefore, Gods children are to be
admonished of these few things, about their joy in earthly comforts.

1. First, that simply considered, it is common unto Rules and cautions for
worldly joy.
them, not only with the ungodly, but even with sensual beasts, who are
delighted when they have things liking to their nature. Thus we see the Calves
and Lambs to skip and sport themselves, and the very horse rejoice, when he
has good prouender.

2. Secondly, too much worldly joy, when the heart Let Salomons example prove
this, and cause the godly to fear worldly comforts.
is much and often cheered with pleasures of life, is very perilous; a great
enemy to godliness, having been the bait wherein many a good soul has bin
caught; so as there needs great caution to be taken, about the well using of
it, especially it being so hard for us to govern either our passions of grief
or joy, of fear or love.

3. Thirdly, therefore prayer is to be made unto God to guide them in their
mirth, and to enable them to observe a due measure therein, that the heart be
not deceived thereby.

4. Fourthly, in the midst of mirth and worldly joy, when the heart begins to
cheer much, some sin of our life committed, or some judgment of God which we
have been under for sin, or some threatening of the word against some of our
sins, would be called to mind, to check the immoderatenesse of our
affection, and so to temper and take down our mirth, that it be not with
excess.

5. Fifthly, as Surgeons are feign in some cases, to divert the course of
blood for the healths of their patients; so let Christians endeavor to turn
their worldly mirth into a godly spiritual mirth, by considering with
themselves seriously, that those earthly pleasures and worldly comforts
wherein their heart is delighted, are the fruits of their redemption, pledges
to them of better things to come; and so to learn to rejoice in the use of
them, as testimonies of Gods love and favor in Christ.

6. Sixthly, it would do well in their joy for worldly things, to think how
suddenly and soon they may be lost, and all turned quickly into the contrary.
Also, to remember the afflictions of the Church, and of some chief members
thereof, which mourn now when they rejoice; that by a fellow seeling of others
miseries, their own joy may be laid, and brought into better compass.

7. Seventhly, let them further call to mind, how often they read of Christ's
tears and sighings for sins and miseries of others; how sildome or never they
read of his laughter and mirth. Which though (no doubt) he had, and did
partake of it, being a man like to us, in all things save sin, (and to rejoice
is in it self no sin) yet likely it was sparingly; and surely no mention is
made of it in the story of the Gospel. He was at some feasts indeed, but no
word of his mirth there.

8. Lastly, our mirth as it would be by all good means moderated, so there
would care be taken, that it be referred to a good end, which has a great
stroke in the goodness of any action; namely, to take our worldly comforts
with this purpose and mind, that we may be the more apt to praise God with
cheerfulness of heart, and to go through the laborious and irksome travels
of our calling with more alacrity and liveliness. Thus there will not only
be no harm in our worldly mirth whereof to repent, but it will prove an help
to us unto godliness, and be as an hand-maide to that spiritual rejoicing
under the hope of glory.

Now to your other knot, how it falls our, that believing Christians,
notwithstanding their hope and joy in God, yet are sometime filled with
despair and discomfort; if I should say no more, but that they may often
thank the abuse of worldly joy, as the cause of those heavy gnawings of
despair which come over their stomachs, I should say something, and which were
too true: howbeit I will deliver to you more fully what I judge of the despair
of the believers. And first, I judge it a very strange work of God, that it
should fall Grounds of hope.
out, that a true believer should despair, considering that the hope which is
put into his heart, as an anchor sure and steadfast, has such firm
groundwork as the constant truth, the omnipotent power, the unchangeable
mercies of God the Father; also the precious death, perfect obedience, powerful
resurrection of Christ, our Mediator: finally, the sanctification and graces
of the holy Spirit, which as the first fruits of the Spirit, as the earnest of
our inheritance, the beginnings of life eternal, the peculiar ornaments of
Christ's Spouse, serve to be as under helps and props of hope, there being also
the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and many other means to confirm
hope; I say, that for all this, they should be sometime in that case, as if
they had never heard of God, of life everlasting, or had not known what hope
had meant, it is very strange indeed. Yet all Of the despair of the faithful.
experience both old and new tells us, that as in the Elect before their
calling, there is a mere want and privation of hope; so after their calling,
diverse of them are subject to despair, wherein they profess a want of hope,
(though in truth it be not lost) the operation and work of it being only
stopped, affirming of themselves, that they cannot be saved; that God has
given them over for ever, and such like, which in some happens upon a denial
of the Gospel, through fear, as in The occasions
Francis Spira; in some others it comes from a weakness of faith, meeting
with some strong and deep temptations, which so ouershadow Gods countenance,
as the poor souls think the sun of his favor will never arise and shine
more in their firmament. In some it comes from too deep a sight of their own
sinfulness As in David, has God forgotten to be merciful?
and unworthiness, severed from the consideration of Gods promised mercies,
and finally in other some from the touch and conscience of a foul crime. It
being the nature of sin to be sweet in committing, and sour in reckoning;
honey in the mouth, and gravel in the belly: and the practice of Satan having
once allured to do a sin, by hiding the punishment, afterward to persuade to
draw to despair, by covering and keeping back the promises of mercy.

The counsel of God in all this toward his children, The ends of Gods
counsel in it.
most wise and gracious, purposing by these examples of despair, to let all
men see, that there is no stay or strength in any man, and that the stoutest is
but feebleness, if God leave them; that all may learn to distrust and fear
themselves, being kept from that dangerous sin of presumption, the
break-necke of the soul; and strive to depend wholly upon the might and
strength of God in all humility, with earnest and continual prayer for his
help and supportation, often beseeching, and most fervently praying; Lord lead
us not into temptation: O Lord forsake us not over long; Psalm. 119. 8. Also God
uses to make his own to feel an hell here of horror and despair, that they
may better judge of the love of Christ, in suffering the sorrows of death for
them, wrestling with his Fathers wrath, and have their hearts moved the more to
love him. Further, the anguish and smart which they feel in their pangs of
despair, as it causes them more to long for comfort before it come; so when
it comes, that the sense of Gods love is restored, and their hope of glory
revived, it is as welcome and sweet, even as fair weather after much foul,
liberty after bondage, and a calm after a great storm. For herein the
despair of the godly differs from the despair of the wicked, that whereas
these being void of true hope, therefore in their despair they are wholly
forsaken of God, and finally, or for ever. The faithful on the other side do
despair not wholly, but in part, the work of their hope being stopped, but the
faculty or habit of hope not being quenched; neither finally, but for a time,
they are left to despair, being raised up again to a good and more firm
hope, which afterward The effects of Hope.
workethin them very strongly, to the bringing forth of many excellent effects
in them, begetting in them a desire John 2. 5. Stirring them up also to an
endeavor godly course, not fainting for any troubles, because they by hope look
for a blessed recompense in the end; Heb. 11. Breeding also a contempt of the
vanities and pomp of this World, as it is to be seen in Moses; Hebrews 11.
Engendering a contentment and willingness to die, upon expectation of an
happier life hereafter. And finally, asswaging our grief and sorrow for the
death and departure of our Christian friends; as 1 These. 4. verse last. Which
effects, though always they accompany Christian hope, yet most of all when it
is revived and refreshed after a fit of despair.


Aquila. May it please you to bear with me, if I put you to dissolve another
doubt, how the hope of the faithful may be severed from presumption of
unbelievers, which is so like it, as a simple one can hardly discern them; and
how it falls out, that such as have lively hope, do offend through
presumption, seeing they are two things?


Apollos. It is a thing well moved; for as in other things Hope differs from
presumption.
likeness is the Mother of error, so here many a man's presumption is taken of
him for hope, because of the likeness: yet the truth is, that that which
unbelievers do account their hope, is but their presumption. Whereas they
imagine that their hope is grounded and settled on God his free mercies, and
undeceivable truth, and the merits of Christ Jesus, they do only imagine
this; their hope being in truth fixed upon worldly things, as their wealth,
friends, credit, and such like vanities: and may appear to be so sundry ways.
First, Wicked men have no hope in God.
by express testimonies of holy Scriptures, which evidently affirms their
hope and trust not to be in the Living God, but in their Riches; 1 Timothy 6. 17.
and that riches is their strong Tower; Prou. 18. 11. And their substance is
their hope, and gold their confidence; Job 31. And their trust is in the
multitude of their riches; Psalm. 52. 7. And therefore it is said, Their
portion is here; Psalm. 17. 14. And that they have their comfort in this world;
Luke 6. 24. And that their hope shall perish, and come to an end. Moreover,
there be diverse tokens in the wicked, which do certainly declare it to be
thus; as namely, that they cannot abide their worldly delights and profits to
be spoken against; therefore the Pharisees mocked Christ, when he reproved
their covetousness, which proves their money to be their Idol, and their
belly their God. Secondly, in the presence and abundance of earthly goods, they
have heart and hope; but when these fail and are gone, they wax heartlesse
and hopeless, as is to be seen in Nabal and Belshasser. Thirdly, their great
labor taken, and their great cost bestowed about earthly matters, does bewray
where their heart is, which is further manifested by the speaking so much, and
so willingly of their worldly commodities and comforts. Their language shows
what Countrymen they be, not of Jerusalem, which is from above, but of the
earth here below. But their continuing in a sinful course of life, without all
true remorse or returning, does demonstrate that they have no other hope of
salvation, but a naked presumption: for we have showed before, that true
Christian hope as it strengthens the weakness of faith, so it stirs up
the heart where it is, unto repentance and practice of godliness; hope of
glory will not suffer a man to wallow in the mire and puddle of his filthy and
unclean lusts. Therefore such as serve sin in the lusts and desires thereof,
casting from them care of yielding obedience to the known will of God, in that
they will pretend to have hope in Gods mercies and goodness, and in Christ's
death and passion; they do but abuse the mercies of God, and the merits of
Christ, which are offered and preached unto men, to keep them from sinning,
and to call them to amendment of life, as it is written; There is mercy with
God, that he may be feared; Psalm. 142. 4. And that the kindness of God leads
to repentance: Romans 2. 4. For which purpose read also Romans 12. 1. Tit. 2. 12,
1 John 2. 1. Now the hope of the godly it is so far off, that thereby they do
wax bold to offend, because they hope in Gods grace for pardon, as
contrariwise, they are much moved to all good care of pleasing God, in a new
course of life, to the end. And as it is far from them to grow secure in the
carriage of their life, upon the hope they have of Gods favor and his glory;
so they do not take heart to sin, as the wicked do, upon opinion to repent
at last: for they know and consider, that men may die suddenly. And that as
late repentance is suspicious not to be true, so it is just with God to forsake
them in their death, who have forsaken his commandments in their life: as also
the longer it is ere one repent, the harder it is, sin by custom having
gotten strength; as the further that one goes out of his way, the longer it is
ere he can return. Howbeit, it is certain that Gods faithful Children are
subject unto sins of presumption, else would not the holy Prophet have prayed
against them; Psalm 19. and 119. Yea, and sundry times, what for the better
humbling of them, what for the example of others, to teach all men to fear
themselves, and to live in awe continually of God, and for the more full
manifestation of this mercy toward the godly, in pardoning even their
presumptuous sins; for these and such like respects, they are left of God to
themselves, to presume and be too confident (not in Gods goodness and truth,
for that is the office of their hope) but upon their own strength and outward
prosperity, forgetting the Lords goodness toward them, and their own great
frailty, Hope joined with some presumption.
as may be seen in example of David; Psalm 30. 6. In my prosperity I said, I
shall never be moved. And of Peter Matthew 26. I will never deny thee, I will
die rather; whose presumption cost them much sorrow and many a salt tear:
therefore let all men be warned by their harms. But friend Aquila, ye have
almost made me go out of our way, and kept me but too long in these fruits of
justifying faith, of which there be yet two unhandled, which I will very
quickly go through, that we may come to that other worthy benefit of our
sanctification, Sister, or Daughter rather, unto justification.


Aquila. We have indeed insisted in these matters 8. Fruit of Justification.
through my fault; but say then, the next point is the shedding abroad of Gods
love in our hearts, and our glorying in God through Christ, the two last of the
nine effects of justification: what do ye understand by them?


Apollos. The love of God (that is, not the active love wherewith we love him)
but the passive love where with we are beloved of him, which gives both
strength to our hope, and matter of our joy, is then said to be shed abroad
in our hearts, when the sense and feeling of it is shed and powered into the
hearts of the faithful, whom God loves in his purpose and decree from before
the World was made, and actually loved them at the time of their calling to
faith in his Son; the manifestation whereof unto them, when it is so
expressed to them in the fruits of it, as their hearts be affected with a
joyous feeling of it: this is the shedding of it abroad, which is the eighth
fruit of Justification. It may be somewhat declared by this comparison of the
box of precious ointment mentioned, Matthew 26. which while the woman that had
it, kept shut, gave no savor; but having powered it out, and shed it on Christ's
head, it did yield a sweet and pleasant sent and smell to all which were in
the house: Even so the love of God is shut and pent up in Gods purpose (as it
were) till it be felt of the Elect; but after they have faith to believe the
promise of salvation by Christ, unto their fellowship with Christ himself, and
all his benefits, then his love (as an ointment powered out) does plentifully
refresh their hearts with the comfortable sense and feeling of it, as the
Apostle, Romans 8. 38, 39. and the faithful, to whom Peter wrote, 1 Peter 1. had
good experience. Wherein the wonderful goodness of God does utter it self
toward his chosen in this, that he does not only love them in purpose, but by
special and singular fruits, as pawnes and pledges (and namely by giving his
only begotten Son, to suffer such a reproachful and bitter death for them,
being sinners and his enemies) does assure them so of his love, as they know
and believe they are beloved, and are exceedingly cheered in their hearts, with
a certain persuasion of his love; which verily is a great matter, and serves
them to great good purposes. For as it is nothing to a blind man to know there
is a Sun, a glorious and bright creature, when himself cannot enjoy the
sight of it; or to a very poor man, to know where much treasure is, while
himself cannot come at it to have any part of it: so it is nothing to hear
and know that there is much love hid in God, except our selves feel it, and
become partakers of it; but when the sense of this infinite love of God, is by
a special work of the Spirit given unto the faithful, lo then there arises
joy and gladness in the soul, even unspeakable and glorious joy; 1 Peter 1.
8. Also, a great increase of their hope, in a more full assurance of enjoying
the blessing hoped for: in as much as that God who has so loved and so
testified his love, cannot change and deceive us. And there is moreover by the
sense of Gods love toward us, another love in 1 John 4. 19, 20.
us kindled toward him, and toward all whom he would have us love, as shall
hereafter more largely be showed.

But now I hasten to the ninth and last fruit, which 9. Fruit of
Justification.
I called with the Apostle, Aglorying, concerning God; Romans 5. 11. Which
comes herehence, that believers finding Gods love so far forth declared to
them for his Sons sake, as not only to acquit them of all guilt and
condemnation of sin, by his sufferings and death, whereby of enemies they
were reconciled to God Seeing the sins of the Elect could not hinder their
reconciliation by the death of Christ, their sins done after reconciliation,
cannot keep them From hope of salvation, and in this regard also, they do
glory.
: But furthermore, to allow them his perfect obedience and holiness, to be
their own by imputation, even to the interessing of them into the glorious
inheritance of Heaven; they do thereupon greatly glory, and in a holy manner
boast-and insult in their spirits over all the Enemies of their salvation, that
God is become so exceeding favorable unto them, as being well and thoroughly
resolved, that howsoever the force of Adams disobedience joined to their own
sins, was very great, for the spoiling of them of perfect integrity, and
filling them full of the infection of sin, to the casting them down from an
happy estate to infinite misery; yet the grace of Christ in the merit of his
passive and active righteousness, to wit, of his sufferings and doings, is of
far more exceeding might and virtue for the ouercomming of their sins, and
the restoring of them to a far more surpassing blessedness then that they
lost; grace superabounding above sin. So as their hearts be replenished with
joy and glorying, not only because of the glory they look for in Heaven, but
also in the understanding and belief of that wondrous favor which God the
Father in his Son Christ, and for his sake, bears to them here in their
pilgrimage.


Aquila. Ye are at the length come through this large Sea of doctrine, touching
Justification, and the nine nearest Effects thereof, and are arrived safe at
the doctrine of sanctification; which follows next in order to be spoken of,
but that we have already by our former discourse exceeded the bounds of our
appointed time. Therefore it were meet we did now after this recreation of
mind, repair thither, where we may have some refreshing to our bodies; and if
it please you Sir to go with me, we shall find little fare, and great
welcome.


Apollos. Agreed, friend Aquila, so ye will pass your word to me, that at our
next conference, ye will do as much for my sake; I had rather feed with you
of your little, with such great love as you will sauce it with all, then to
have great abundance of good cheer, with little sound good will.


The eighth Dialogue.
Entreating of Sanctification, the third maine fruit of Faith.
Aquila. SIR, I am glad ye are come, I had so long waited for you, that I began
to doubt lest you had been someway let, that you could not have kept
appointment, which I would have been sorry for.


Apollos. No, good friend, not so; I would have sent you word of it, if there
had been any such matter; my late coming was occasioned by some unlooked for
affairs. It is not with men of my function, as it is with you, and men of your
condition; who having looked to your selves, and some few which depend on you,
or have to deal with you, there is an end of your care: but our care
stretches further, and is public, not private only. We know not when we
have done, so many and sundry occasions of employment offer themselves, so many
soul cases, so many soul necessities there be. Satan will find us work
enough; we must be feign to wake, when others sleep; and though I will not
mention any party to you, yet the matter about which I have been stayed from
you, I will impart unto you. It was of one that did acknowledge himself to
believe truly and unfeignedly in Christ for the remission of his sins, and yet
doubted of his sanctification; he found his heart so encombred and toyled with
the vile corrupt motions of finne, which arise up in him (as he said) even
like sparks out of a burning Furnace, or as vapors out of a low, moist, and
waterish ground.


Aquila. See the notable malice and subtilty of that old Serpent, when he
cannot prevail against Gods Children in the maine, to make them doubt of their
faith, and whether they have their sins forgiven them; he troubles them about
the bye, and will stir up doubting about their sanctification, whether they be
renewed. If he cannot come directly to strike at the heart, yet he will have a
blow at the thigh, or the leg; so as he may wound any where, it is enough to
him: but with his malice he couples unmatchable policy, for by breeding scruple
about our renewing by the Spirit of sanctification, his purpose is to draw the
temptation unto this; That therefore they have no faith, they are not forgiven
their sins, they are none of Gods Children.


Apollos. Ye say right, and very truly touching Satan's drift in this
temptation: but herein Satan declares himself a sot, to seek to persuade
one that has his faith whole and vncrackt, and does believe himself justified
and pardoned, that he is not sanctified. For whomsoever Christ justifies,
them at the same time he does sanctify. These two works in the Justification
and sanctification both together.
soul of a Christian, can no more be divided, then the two natures of God and
man can be divided in Christ: for that death of Christ which has merited
remission of sins to the believer, the same has merited the holy Ghost to be
given him for the creating of holiness in his heart. And that faith which
apprehends the merit of Christ's death and obedience for justification, does
also lay hold upon the virtue and power of his death and resurrection, for the
renewing of the Sanctification, it is by faith.
mind and will unto Gods Image of holiness and righteousness. Faith does as
well purify the heart from filthiness, as deliver it from guiltiness of
sin; Acts 15. And God the Father which gave his Son to be righteousness,
made him also to be sanctification to us; not only in that his holiness
imputed, covers all our profaneness of nature and life: but for that the
effects of his most holy Nature powered into our corrupt nature, changes both
mind and will from darkness of ignorance and sin, to the light of knowledge
and holiness. Therefore Justification and Sanctification Justification and
Sanctification, be as two twins, which came together into the world of the
believing heart; Justification being the elder fister.
be joined in Scripture, as Chickens of one brood; 1 Cor. 6. And Paul when he
had named the Ephesians Saints by calling, and presently adds, the faithful
in Christ Jesus; he would teach not only who be worthy to be entitled Saints,
but also how the Elect come by this grace, even through faith in Christ Jesus;
faith as an Instrument receiving as well the Spirit of Christ unto
sanctification or making us Saints, as his righteousness unto justification,
that we may stand just. And thus faith of the truth, and sanctification of the
Spirit, are put both together; 2 These. 2. because they cannot be severed: but
it is of necessity, that he that believes the truth of the promise for
forgiveness of sin, has a power from the Spirit, applying the virtue of
Christ dead and raised for the destruction of sin, that he may walk holily
Therefore Satan's temptation is thus to be returned: I believe, therefore I am
sanctified: I have my sins forgiven, therefore I am renewed.
And now we are thus put upon this argument of sanctification, if it please you
we will consider of it more distinctly and thoroughly. Let me hear of you by
what names this gift uses to be called in Scripture, and amongst Divines; and
then how ye do describe sanctification, what be the causes and parts of this
benefit, in what measure we hold it; how it is to be discerned in a man's self,
by what marks, and such other things as do concern this doctrine.


Aquila. As union with Christ, incorporation into him, and engrafting or
conjunction or communion with Christ, do all import one thing, or being one
with Christ; and as justification, and imputation of righteousness, remission
of sins, be often used to signify one thing, the absolution of a sinner
before the tribunal of God: so there be certain words, as regeneration,
renewing, or renouation, and sanctification, which import one selfsame action
and work of the Spirit, even that whereby the corruption of sin (as touching
the dominion and the power which it does exercise before our calling) is
destroyed, till it self at length be wholly abolished; and in stead thereof a
new quality of holiness put into the faculties of the soul, that it may begin
to love, and do such things as are pleasing unto God, till it come at last to
perfection, by certain degrees. This work or action of the Spirit, it is
called, renouation, or renewing, because of that new grace and Renewing.
quality powered into the mind and will; the former corruption which is called
the old man, being killed. As in the first work of creation, he that was
nothing before, was made a man: so in this work of renouation, or new
creation, he that was naught before, is made good; as if a new man were borne.
Hence also it is called Regeneration, or new birth indcede, not properly
Regeneration.
nor fitly; for our regeneration is the same with our incorporation or union
with Christ; whereby we become his members, even one body with him. For as by
generation we have our being in this World, and take the essence or nature of
our Parents, to become their Children; so by regeneration we have our being of
Christianity, to become the members of Christ, sons of God; being before
children of wrath, and members of Satan's kingdom, sons of Adam. Thus does
our Savior himself teach us to understand it: for having said, John 1. 12.
That such as believe in Christ, are the sons of God: he presently adds;
Which are borne not of blood, etc. but of God. To declare this unto us, that
our new birth or regeneration, is the making of us the sons of God by faith,
and not the furnishing us with such qualities and properties, as belong to such
as be already sons. Howbeit, for as much as most Divines and best learned men,
do confound regeneration and sanctification, I do therefore follow that
commonly received judgment, and by regeneration understand, that framing of
the heart to Gods Image, in righteousness and true holiness; which because it
is an immediate consequent of our new birth, (wherein we are begotten to be
sons and daughters of God) and as Sanctification.
it were the putting of another and new nature into us, even that divine (as
Peter calls it) therefore is usually 2 Pet. 1. 5.
called by the name of new birth. Now for the last word of sanctification,
whereas that word is sometimes generally used in Scripture, to signify all
that, even whatsoever it is that we have from, or is done in us by Christ, and
is as much as our (...) from the rest 2 Pet. 1. 2.
of this sinful World, to remain and be unto Christ as a thing consecrate to
him: yet in this argument where we distinguish it from union with Christ, and
justification, it is that special work of the Spirit, renewing us in the
spirit of our mind unto a new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and holiness of truth; as Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians 4. 23, 24. Or more
briefly, it is that work of God, whereby our corruption by little and little
is abolished, and holiness perfected by degrees. For in this work, though
Christ minister a power to the believer by his Spirit, against sin, to master
it, and to do the will of God; yet it is not absolute at the first, so as by
it all sin should be utterly done away, not at all to be in the soul; and a
strength given perfectly to work good: for then the Law might be fulfilled of
us in this life, and then we should justify our selves, and (...) died in
vain, and we need not his mediation to make our works accepted. But whereas
in sin, beside the guilt and condemnation wherein we are wrapped, and from
which our Justification has freed us, and in stead thereof has put upon us
righteousness unto life; there is also in it a tyranny, dominion and power,
which by the just judgment of God it exercises, even over the very Elect, who
are the servants of sin, and do willingly offer the faculties of their
souls, and parts or members of their body, as weapons and instruments to fight
and war (...) corruption, that the will and lusts, the desires and motions of
sin may be done; as it is to be seen Romans 6. 13. 17; etc. Now in this work
of our Sanctification, there is strength and force given to the believing
soul, against this tyranny of sin, to beat it down and subdue it, to keep
it as underling; that howsoever it dwell and remains there, egging to evil,
and still soliciting and provoking against God, yet it wants now much of his
former vigor and might, so as it cannot reign and rage with full swinge, as
it was wont to carry us headlong after all ungodliness and unrighteousness;
this we get by our Sanctification.


Apollos. Now let me entreat you to open the several parts of it, with the
causes; and hereafter we may consider of the measure.


Aquila. This is it which I was minded to do in the next place, after I had
showed what the whole work of Sanctification is, then to lay it out into his
parts, and by Parts of Sanctification.
the members laid out particularly, the better to discover the whole body of
this work. Divines use to make two parts, and that according to Scripture The
first is (...), or crucifying of the old man, which has two degrees; First,
the death of sin: Secondly, the burial of sin, which is the progress of
the death of sin. In respect hereof, the faithful are said to be crucified
with Christ, and their body of sin to be crucified with him; Romans 6. 6. And
also, to be dead to sin, to be baptized into his death, to be dead with him,
and to be buried with him; Romans 6. 2, 3, 8. The second part of our
Sanctification, is our walking in new nesse of life, or quickening the new man,
or living to God; Romans 6. 4. In which respect we are said to be raised up
together with Christ, and to live with him; Phil. 3. 1. Romans 6. 8. Here then we
have with the parts of Sanctification, the true cause thereof delivered to us;
which I will for better understanding Cause of Sanctification.
thus declare, and set forth according as I conceive of it.

The first part of Sanctification, is the death of sin, or dying to sin;
which is, when that the strength of our sinful corrupt Nature is taken
down, and by degrees weakened, as the body of Christ languished by degrees
upon the Cross; so as sin cannot bring forth such evil fruits in thoughts,
words, and deeds, as it did while we were under the power of it. This is
effected by force of Christ's death applied unto us: for that same divine power
of Christ which sustained his manhood in the suffering of death, and gave it
merit to deserve for us remission of sins, the same godhead and divine power
works in the members of Christ thereby the death and mortification of sin,
that it should be lessened in force, as well as it wipeth away the guilt of
their sins. Hence it is said, Our sin is dead by his body; and again, Our
Romans 7. 4.
old man is crucified with him; because the body of Christ Romans 6. 6.
crucified, did deserve for us, that his divine power should kill and crucify
sin in them which believe in his death. The second part of Sanctification, is
the burial of sin, which is the continual proceeding of mortification, even
as burial is the proceeding of death; sin wasting in the Elect, touching his
vigor and strength, even as corpse waste and moulder in the grave: this is
wrought by Christ buried, whiles that divine might which preserved the body of
Christ in the grave without putrefaction, does effect in the members of Christ,
by means of his buried body, a greater degree of mortification, even to the
burying and casting mould (as it were) on their sins; then they are said to
be buried with him.

The third part of Sanctification, is the quickening of the new man, which
consists of two parts, to wit, holiness, containing all virtues and duties,
whereby we are fitted for the love and worship of God. 2 Righteousness, which
has all such virtues and duties as enable to love, and profit our neighbor in
all things which concern him. This proceeds from Christ raised again from
the dead; that same divine virtue which wrought in Christ's body, for the
quickening and raising it being dead, working also in the souls of his
members, in whom sin is already wounded by his death and burial, for their
raising up and quickening unto godliness; that they may live to God, having
strength to practice and do the works of God, as before they did the works
of sin. For the Elect being coupled to Christ by faith, and being one with
his manhood touching the substance of it, yet spiritually, are also one with
the godhead touching the efficacy thereof: whence it is, that the godhead which
uttered force and might in Christ, to uphold him in his death, preserving him
from corruption in his grave, and to raise him again the third day; the same
godhead powerfully effects in Christ's members the mortification of sin by
his death and burial, and newness of life by his resurrection. As the graft
which is set in a new stock, takes juice and life from that stock into which
it is newly planted: so the faithful partake of the virtue and power of
Christ, dead and raised, with whom they have communion, being grafted into him
by his Spirit through faith. But this power of Christ communicated to the
believers, to the killing of sin, and to the quickening of them to God, and
all godliness; it does not effect this work all at one time, but after a long
time brings it to perfection. They therefore are in a dangerous error, such
as tends to the making of such swel as do believe it for truth, and others to
tremble, which fear it may be a truth; namely, that the Of all men (...) Adam
before his (...) and the man Christ, void of sin; all others have sin even
til death.
grace of Sanctification does perfectly deliver from sin in this life, so as
thereby one shall be able to live here without doing any sin; which is the
next way to pitch down headlong to despair, such as find not this perfection;
or to lift up unto hellish pride, such as dream they have such a perfection.
Besides the falshhood of it, all Scriptures, both examples and testimonies,
crying the contrary; and every man's own conscience and experience proclaiming
aloude, that we never cease to sin, till we cease to live; and that the
breath of sin and our breath, be both at once stopped. In so plain and
undoubted a matter, proof is needless, yet the form of prayer by Christ
appointed to all Christians to be used of them as a prayer and pattern of all
prayers to be made by them in their pilgrimage, enioyning them to ask
forgiveness of sins past, to crave deliverance from temptations of Satan
and sin for the time to come; and the Sacrament of the Supper, which
belongs not to men which want nothing, but to such as having many and great
wants, do in the sense of them hunger after Christ and his graces: and finally,
the chastisements of God, common to all his children, which are corrected of
God to prevent future faults and offenses; especially that judgment of death,
which takes hold of all, do demonstrate to every one that is not wilfully
blind, that there is none of all the Saints which here in this World do, or
can live without sin. Therefore it will be good to spare this labor, and in
stead of proving this (which were as if one would bring a candle to give light
to the Sun) to declare rather the ends of Gods counsel therein: and withal,
seeing sanctified persons have still sin stirring and striving in them, and
bringing forth most loathsome fruits; how they may perceive that they have the
grace of Sanctification.


Apollos. Friend Aquila, I do well allow of your purpose; for I am of this
mind, that for many proofs in matters not dark, nor doubtful, nor of great
profit, it is but waste time; and rather bewrayes the vanity of the speaker,
(his indiscretion at least) then any whit auailes the hearer: may it please you
then to go to those points which you have propounded? and sithence it is so,
that it had been as easy for God in the regenerating of his Elect, to have
freede them utterly of sin, and put into them absolute holiness, as he did
at first create man righteous, void of all corruption; and this had been much
better for us, as one would think, at once to be rid of such an enemy, and had
also more expressed Gods power to have quelled it at one blow, rather then by
many strokes: what might therefore be the reason why it is otherwise, that his
children after sanctification, not only have sin still abiding, but more
Before their sanctification, the Elect and finne do agree as husband and wife;
afterward they are at variance as two enemies.
troublesome to them then before?


Aquila. That it has pleased God to have it thus, the matter it self
speaks; and being he is most wise, therefore he will have it so for most just
causes. For touching his power, there is no doubt but thereby he could have
caused it to be otherwise: for how could not he quit the soul and body from
sin in the time of life, that can do it at death in one instant? and his
goodness is such, that had it been more expedient for his children to have had
it so, it had surely been so. But the truth is, Gods way, as in all other
things, so in this, is the best way. For as it was Gods wonderful mercy at all
to give them sanctification in any measure, and so to put them out of that
(...) in which they lived, obeying the Prince that rules in the Air; walking
in sins according to the course of the World: so it was not without a very
merciful and gracious respect unto their own good, as well as with zealous
respect of his own glory, The manifold profit which is to be taken by finne.
not to give it them in full measure, during this life. First, in that sin is
suffered still to remain, and to tempt them, it stirs up watchfulness to
have such an enemy 1. Watchfulness.
within the house, yea in the bedchamber, even in the inward heart and spirit
of a man; it will not suffer him to sleep in security. But as in Towns which
are only assaulted outwardly, men stand continually upon the guard: so it
behooves much more Gods Children to do, having their City already surprised,
sin being within their soul. This is it also which will cause them with
awefull watch to join faithful and ardent prayer, for help and strength from
God against it. Whence it is, that our Savior having put his Disciples in
mind of their sinful weakness, The flesh, says he, is weak; that is,
sin and corruption makes you weak, either to resist evil, or to do good:
therefore he commands them, and in them all other Christians to give
themselves to watchfulness and prayer, lest they fall into 2. Prayer.
temptation. For Satan finding us feeble and ready to stumble and fail at
every straw through sin, will be apt enough to take the advantage of our
infirmity, and by his subtle temptations to draw us to wickedness; so as
there will be danger of being conquered by him, except with a watchful eye
Christians look to themselves, and get them for succor unto God, that by his
might they may be made able for to stand. Therefore as the Canaanites which
were left in the Land undestroyed, did both awe the Israelites, awake their
slothfulness, and provoke them in danger to (...) unto God by prayer; so the
corruptions sticking in the Children of God, do through fear of being foiled
by them, drive them unto God, and shake off spiritual slothfulness. Besides,
hence they can with pity and compassion think and speak of other men's sins,
being 3. (...).
always ready with a fellow-feeling heart to reprove, knowing and considering
themselves, how they are compassed with like infirmities; Galat. 6. 1. They are
also provoked to exercise their charity, not this way 4. Charity to the (...).
only, but in prayers for their brethren; by their own experience of sinful
lusts, what they do in them, they can guess how it fares with other. Yea,
they are To Enemies.
by this means not without some grief, to hear of the gross and horrible
wickedness of Gods enemies, remembering that the same inclinations to evils,
and seeds of sin are in themselves, which so break out to the shame and
ruin of others. Moreover, by this 5 Humble confession.
they are often brought to sue for pardon, upon their slippes and fraileties,
and to beg the increase of Gods graces and comforts; and so have manifold
proof of Gods truth and goodness, in standing to his promises, whereby he
has bound himself to fulfill the desires of his people: and can encourage
others, and do quicken them in their faith, to trust in that God, whom they
find so very willing to relieve and refresh them, according to his word. For
when their sins and temptations force them to God, and his mercy and truth
do manifest themselves, being found when he is sought, opening to such as
knock, giving to such as ask, forgiving such as humbly confess themselves: and
as they have their mouths opened to speak forth the Lords praise, and to
glorify him in his righteousness and salvation, to declare them abroad; so
to excite all their fellow Saints to magnify this God, to seek and to rely
upon him with strong confidence. See the practice of this in that holy Prophet
David, who having recourse to God against his sins, and drawing down Psalm.
32. 5, 6.
grace and comforts by his prayers, he is full as of hearty Psalm. 34. 1, 2.
thankfulness for himself, so of holy exhortations toward others, to move
them unto godliness. Yet Modesty and lowliness in our whole life.
further, whereas the great favor which is vouchsafed the Elect in their
calling, and the rare graces put into them from Gods Spirit, might heave and
puff them up; even Paul being subject to pride and arrogance, in regard of
singular blessings vouchsafed him, 2 Corinthians 12: the sight and sense of the
remainders of old Adam, serves as to keep from rash judging of others, so
from taking pride in our own good things; there being more reason to be
abased for filthiness, (for that is our own) then for the holiest gifts (for
they are not our own;) and withal they are blemished and spotted through that
poison and contagion of sin, that mingleth it self with our best prayers,
best words, best actions, best graces, to make our selves and them even odious
to God, should he but with a rigorous eye behold the best things in us, and
done by us. For his pure eye cannot behold any evil, and best men have some
evil joined with their good; yea, there is more evil in that they do, then
good. That were it not for Gods merciful acceptance passing by, and winking at
the evil, pardoning wants and stains, and imputing his Sons righteousness
to the Saints, their holiest endeauours might worthily sink them into
destruction. The due consideration whereof, does preserve them from that most
hateful vice of pride and presumption, which are the break-neckes of so many
thousands.

And also in these, and sundry other respects; as to stir up in the godly a
desire and love to the fellowship of the Saints, to the use of the Lords
Supper, and all other good means of their salvation: to the patient bearing
with, and gently censuring the imperfections of their brethen, and infinite
such other benefits as redound to themselves, by this way of their imperfect
sanctification, God does maruellously work out his own glory. Sins
assaults, and Satan's temptations, 7. Experience of Gods power.
combining themselves with their confederate, the Worlds allurements, by
pleasures and profits, and glory sometime; and sometime fears, threats, and
persecutions, all conspiring together against the poor soul of the Child of
God, as Ammon, Moab, Edomites, did band against the Lords people; does but
minister occasion unto God, the more to evidence his almightinesse and
sufficiency of grace, in that he (...) against all these maintain one weak
heart; not only enabling to the encounter, strengthening to endure it, but
also giving power to overcome and triumph over them; that they may rejoice and
glory in this strong God of their salvation, whose power is so manifested in
their weakness. As the more and fiercer enemies did arise up against Ioshuah
in the Land of Canaan, and against Moses in the Wilderness, the more it turned
to the honor of God and their glory also, to vanquish them, and put them to
flight: so it is here; the name of God is the more advanced in his wonderful
assistance and protection, which he affords unto his Saints against the
gates of hell. Finally (which is an admirable 8. Sins made remedies of sins.
thing) even by the gross sins of his Children, it pleases God to do them
much good, both to grieve them for that is past, to humble them and shame them
for the present, to work more fear and wariness for the time to come.
Besides, it turns greatly to Satan's great confusion, their fales proving
medicines and remedies, and preuentions of future sins; and this as it much
redoundeth to Gods honor, so it cannot choose but vex Satan at the heart,
that such sins as he has drawn 9. Give advantage against Satan.
the godly into with great diligence and long device, hoping thereby to choke
them, and quite to spoil them, should be made means through Gods wonderful
goodness and wisdom, even to whet and sharpen them the more against Satan,
the procurer of their wounds and woe, by stirring up themselves and
strengthening We had need to make some use and benefit of sin, for we take a
great deal of harm by it.
others unto all good duties. He had been better to fit still, then to have
tempted David and Peter to such sins as he did; as I could further prove,
save that in our conference of Repentance, this very thing will be happily
revived, and come again to be spoken of; but it is now meet that we seek
out the marks whereby Sanctification is known to be truly wrought, and to
speak of the duties of sanctified persons.


Apollos. I do well allow of your purpose; only by the way let me put you in
remembrance, that by the remainder of sin in the newborn Christians, and by
those daily bitter fruits which spring from thence, there is more occasion
given to the godly to exercise their faith, touching the forgiveness promised,
and their hope touching the blessedness to come, and all other their graces:
which if they were perfect, and all sin done away at their regeneration, then
what great use of faith or hope, when there should be no unbelief or doubting
within them? or what use of any other virtue, when it lacked the opposition and
resistance of the contrary vice, to set it on work? Here is our warfare, and
there must be a continual strife inwardly in our selves between grace and
sin, as well as out wardly against the wicked. In Heaven our warfare shall be
ended, and not before; and further, by how much the godly oftener sin here, so
much the mercies of God in pardoning, and Christ's righteousness in covering
such and so innumerable transgressions, are manifested to be the more glorious
and excellent. There being no less grace, if not more, expressed in forgiving
sins done after the Spirit of God and faith received, then such as were done
before. Sithence the more Gods Children are beholden to God, and the more
means they have against sin, and the more they are enlightened to understand
their duty, the more grecuous is their fault; which yet being all remitted
freely upon their repentance, it declares the abundance of the grace of God
toward them.


Aquila. It was well thought upon by you, for I had forgotten these things; but
now to follow my purpose. Amidst so much darkness of mind, as yet remains
after regeneration in Gods Children, and so many and great imperfections,
Satan also with his iuglings laboring to trouble their judgments, it seems
then a hard thing to discern that true sanctification of the Elect, How
Sanctification differs from a civil life.
from that general grace whereby a natural man may live for outward comfort
and carriage, as if he were truly sanctified.

There be six or seven tokens by which the Marks of Sanctification.
difference is to be found, and every sanctified person shall by them know of
himself, that he is gone beyond a civil life. First, a sanctified man has
care to order his life, his whole way and every step of it by the knowledge of
the Word, of which he enquireth what he may do, and what not; still taking
counsel from thence, doing all his things as necre as he can, by that divine
direction, and with application of Christ; believing that his weaknesses are in
him hidden, and the uncleanness of his work wiped and purged by his death:
whereas the civil man depends upon the allowance and reputation of men,
which if he obtain, it contents him, he looks no further, but to have a good
estimation in the World. And whereas the sanctified man aymeth at this most,
how to please God, even with the denial and displeasure of his own corrupt
heart: the civil man does not take thought, nor trouble his head about the
pleasing of God, in the good he does, nor in leaving evils for the offense of
God; but seeks and studieth to please himself, and such whose favor he
desires to live in, ordering his course to his own and their liking.

Thirdly, whereas a civil man is very careful in duties that concern
affairs and dealings with men, that he may get a good report that way, and
does religious duties coldly and of custom; the sanctified man, though he will
not be negligent in works that belong to his calling, yet he is cheefely (...)
duties, which concern God and his (...) that both publicly and privately.

Add heereunto fourthly, that civil (...) no great conscience of smaller
sins, as (...), (...) talk, less oaths, gaming. etc: and not at all (...)
against natural corruption to get it killed, nor in (...) bled for it. It is
otherwise with a sanctified man, he labors most against the root of sin,
to get it mortified, to have the fountain drained: he (...) him, and
conceiues much (...), even for the (...) of sin, Psalm. 51, 4, 5. He has a
great care to meet with sin in the bud, to resist it in the (...) and evil
desires, and avoiding conscionably even such offenses as the most men judge but
(...). For he (...) the danger of death, the displeasure of God in every sin,
even the least. David will grieve for touching This would not be forgotten,
that a (...) man, though he (...), (...), yet in some (...) sin will bear
with (...) does not a (...), who though he cannot be free from sins, (...)
none, but (...) is an enemy cuen to his darling (...), (...) if it offend, and
(...) his hand if it offend.
the lap of Saul's garment the Lords anointed. The heart of a godly man will
smite him, eue^ for a vile dishonest thought, for every little over sight, if it
be but in a circumstance of an action. Yet (...), civil men never take any
(...) to avoid the sins of the time, or of their (...) turall peculiar sins;
the sanctified man of all other, most sets himself against these. And to
shut up, because the differences are infinite, the evil man is (...) about the
(...) of grace, to get more strength, against (...) more power to obey God, he
does not mark in himself the decrease of grace, or increase of sin, that
being humbled therefore, he may use the means appointed without (...) and
faintness, not by fits and girds. It (...) with the sanctified person, who
(...) how corruption works, and how grace decays, betakes himself unto the
use of al good means, (...) all good care and conscience for the helping him
(...) a greater measure of the Spirit, that he may grow up in grace and
knowledge. For he considers (...) himself, amongst sundry other things, what
duty he (...) to God, and to his own soul; and that this (...) is laid upon
him by God, that seeing Christ (...) by his (...) put into him, has subdued
his corruption, giving to it a deadly wound by his death; so as though it still
live, yet it can never recover former (...) and has planted the image of God
in his heart, that he may begin to be like unto God, in true holiness and
(...): therefore it stands him upon, not to be wanting to this grace of
Christ, but by all diligence and good endeavor, to be an helper to it, keeping
(...) under, now Christ has pulled it down, and (...) it in the evil motions
and desires, that it never get a kingdom again. Being assured, that he is
bound as carefully and willingly to strive against sin, and to serve Christ,
as before his regeneration he seemed sin, greedily fulfilling the lusts
thereof. And here of also fully assured, that his resisting shall not be in
vain, but through the blessing of God, shall further him to the utter conquest
and rooting out of sin at length. Unto which he is animated, nor only under
Gods (...) promise of a full victory in the end, but also of a blessed fruit
in this life, and glorious reward in the next. For, if we serve (...), by doing
the will of Christ, then our fruit shall be in holiness, and end in ever
lasting life. Wherefore the sanctified man thinks all that he can do to hinder
the reign of sin, and to further his perfection in obedience to God, to be all
too little.


Apollos I thank you good friend Aquila, for helping me to spend the time so
well: and now our allowance and houre-glasse being run out, we will close this
conference. For, if you should enter upon that hard combat which is in every
sanctified person between his old man and his new man, I doubt you would
sooner find an entrance into it, then a way out of it. So we will keep that
in store till our next meeting in this or some other convenient place; and now
I challenge your promise for resorting home with me, where you shall have
little meat, and a great deal of cheer.


Of the Spiritual combat between the Spirit and flesh, Grace and corruption.
Aquila. SIR, I do much thank you for my yester-nights cheer, and especially
for the sauce that I had with my meat; feeding me with the fruits of your
lips, as well as with the fruits of the earth. Me thought we had a
Theological supper, wherein our minds were no less refreshed then our
bodies; so as I went from you well apaid with more then ordinary comfort. But
to see how that cunning and vigilant enemy, which espieth and (...) all our
good, and endeavors to bereave us of it, did attempt to overthrow the joy and
gladness of my soul. For within sour hours after I was gone, in my first
sleep, I had such a sudden and bitter conflict, as I have had many, yet to my
remembrance never any so sharp for the time. But I thank God for his help,
whereby the assault was repulsed and overcome.


Apollos. Good friend Aquila, I perceive that old enemy of yours, and of all
good men, has not done with you; nor indeed will he, till either you be dead,
or he cast and chained up in hell. I am not so sorry for your greefefull
combat, as I am glad of your joyful victory over it. But thus it falls out,
that as after a great calm suddenly arises a rough storm, and then returns
a calm again; so our joys, even when they are of the best sort, are broken
off with some grievous events inward or outward, after which comes matter of
gladness again. So all things here are vneertaine, and keep an unsteady and
uneven course; even as the Kings highway, where it is sometime low as a
valley, sometime over hills, and then down again into the bottom. Thus is our
way of Christianity, not all plain and pleasant, but some rugged, stony, and
cragged paths we have to pass through, ere we can come well to our iournies
end. But tell me Aquila, was your assault all outward in temptations from the
fiend, or felt you inward motions concurring, your self as well as satan
combating against you.


Aquila. Nay Sir, it was a mixed combat. Satan found friends in my own bosom
to help him, even mine own corrupt heart, which troubled me as much and more
too; nearer it was to me, then that that damned dog did: but both together
united their force, and put me to the more molestation. When all is well at
home, that I get the mastery of my sinful affections, I find my battle with
Satan more easy, and my victory more easy: but when my corruption rages,
and ioynes side with the enemy, then it goes harder.


Apollos. The last time of our conference, you did truly affirm, that the
work of Sanctification is imperfect during this life, and that the divine
power of Christ by his death has cracked, but not wholly crushed the strength of
the old man; which by mortification is left as a Soldier that has his brain
pan cracked with a blow, who yet lives, and strugleth still with his adversary;
or as a serpent that has his head bruised, but wriggles still with his tail:
and yet by his rising up, the heart is quickened and made a new man, yet left
as a weak babe or young child, who is in process of time to gather strength,
and to grow up to the age and stature of a man, till he come to a ripe age.
Now this truth Satan knows as well as you, or I, by long observation, as
also being present in the (...), where it is taught; and being a subtle
Spirit, he knows that the old man, howsoever daunted by grace, and much taken
down, yet is still ready to play his part, to arise up against that new
creature, which by the Spirit is framed in the heart. And though he can never
hope to heal his wound again, and to set him in former plight, yet he is
content to conspire with remaining corruption, and to use it as an instrument
to vex and hurt the Children of God, whom he does so extremely hate: yea,
though he oftentimes be not afraid only, but assured to take the foyley yet
that accursed fiend (such is his malice) will be doing, and giving enterprises
and onsets. But now we are entered thus far in this talk of the combat of a
Christian, and you Aquila do so well know by experience what it means, I
will put you to speak of it what you know and feel, for my better
instruction; for one experimental Teacher, is better then ten other.


Aquila. Indeed Sir, my own experience being helped with that which you taught
us, when you handled this point, amongst other the works of grace, does enable
me to say somewhat of this argument, and to fetch it from the beginning. I do
well remember, that you have showed both by Scripture, and common experience,
especially that of Paul, Romans 7. 16, 17. unto the end of the Chapter, a battle
there is in every good Christian; and that it is spiritual and invisible,
fought by invisible combaters and weapons. At length you delivered the
necessity of this battle, by the true causes of Causes of spiritual combat.
it; whereof the first is the will and good pleasure of God, who as he ordained
his own Son, so all his members to this spiritual war and conflict,
through which they are to pass unto the Crown and the Kingdom, which is
prepared for them; as in earth no man is crowned, except first he strive
lawfully; none divide the spoil, which first have not abid the brunt of the
battle, and obtained the victory. The second cause is the extreme malice of
Satan against Christ, the head; and for his sake, against all the Elect his
members, whom he will never cease to tempt, and that with most wonderful
subtilty, as a Serpent long experimented; and with outrageous cruelty, as a
red, fierce, and fell Dragon, or roaring Lion, if it were possible to draw
back again the regenerate unto his kingdom, and having overcome them, to
destroy them; 1 Pet. 5. The third is the repugnancy and contrariety which is
between the Spirit and the flesh, in the newborn Christians, in whom they
continually strive together, as the twins did in Rebeccaes womb; the Spirit
striving against the flesh, and the flesh lusting against the Spirit, without
truce or reconcilement: hell and Heaven, light and darkness, God and Satan,
being no more contrary in quality, then the Spirit and the flesh. Here I call
to mind, that it was taught, that in Scripture phrase, Spirit, grace, new man,
law of the mind, in this argument were Synonyma, and of one signification: also
flesh, old man, corruption, law of the members, were equivalent terms,
importing one thing; so as every regenerate man having these in him, consisted
of a double man, and had two men warring in him perpetually, during his whole
pilgrimage: the old man, which is that remainder of sin, that vicious quality
deprauing and poisoning our Nature, inclining to the breach of Gods Law, which
is usually called, the flesh. That which is borne of flesh, is flesh; John 3.
6. And abstain from the lusts of the flesh; 1 Peter 2. 12. And corruption, as
Ephe. 4. 22. The old man is corrupt, for it causes spiritual unsoundness,
wasting all where it reigns: lastly, Law of the members, because in faculties
and powers of soul and body, it has force of a king, or law to command and
enjoin absolutely in wicked men; but in the regenerate, with resistance. And
the other man, is the new man, which is that quality of holiness created in
mind and will, renewed by the Spirit of God; hence called The Spirit and Grace,
because it is freely given and works things gracious and pleasing to God: and
lastly, The Law of the mind, because there it gouernes as a Law or Commander.
Now the opposition and strife between these two men in the regenerate, it is
this in general; that grace, or the Spirit, or the new man, does raise and
beget godly desires and affections tending to Heaven; and hinders the wicked
motions of corruption, and the old man: and this again engendereth vicious
evil desires and thoughts, crossing and hindering the good counsels and
purposes of the Spirit and new man. In which conflict, sometime sin
prevails against grace, carrying us away, and leading us captive as it were,
fast bound in fetters and chains; Romans 7. 23. and sometime grace mastereth the
lusts of sin, and remains Conqueror. And this always falls out, by
reason of this combat, that a godly person as he cannot do what evil Satan,
sin, and himself, according to his will corrupt would do; because grace
dwelling in him, does put an obstacle and bar unto sinful desires, that they
do not break out as blisters or botches in ones body: so he is not able to
attain to perform either all that good which he would, or in so good a manner
as he would, with such love to God and his Neighbor, as his soul wishes, and
the Law requires; because remaining corruption does oppose it self unto the
work and motions of the Spirit. Which is the thing whereof Paul had experience
in his own person, and has reported in Romans 7. 14, 15. both to the
instruction of all, and great comfort of the weak: that by reason of dwelling
sin, egging and tempting him to evil, pulling and drawing him from God, he
both did the evils which he would not, and left undone the good which he would
do, or did it untowardly and weakly. He could no sooner have a good thought
and motion tending to God ward, but evil was present and at hand, very ready
to quench and smother. This was the condition which he was subject unto; even
like the condition of a sick man newly recovered, or but recovering, who feign
would walk a mile or two for his health: but when he begins to go, his legs
double under him for feebleness, and he can scarce walk two turns about his
chamber. Or as it fares with an escaped prisoner, which desires to fly, and
his heart could serve him to go twenty miles or forty a day; yet his bolts and
fetters so comber him, as he can scarce rid one mile a day. So the Apostle
felt, and so much other regenerated persons feel themselves encombred with
their sinful Nature, as they are enforced even when they do best, to do
their duties with care, wants, and imperfections.


Apollos. In this spiritual combat, there is a material thing to be
enquired into: whether corruption do so far at any time prevail over grace,
as wholly to extinguish it for a time; or the faithful do but only fall into
a spiritual sleep, deeply forgetting themselves, yet still retaining the
life of Grace. The case of David falling so heinously, sinning so deliberately,
lying so long being fallen, causes diverse more then to suspect, that the godly
in their conflict with sin, may take such a foil, as to have grace wholly
beaten out of their hearts for a season, though not finally. For it thoughts,
that he yielded unto sin with his whole will, which cannot be, where any
sparkle of Grace remains.


Aquila. Sir, this is a Question, which it were more meet for you to make
answer to then my self: howbeit, seeing you will have it so, I will speak my
mind in it. When I read in Scripture, that God is unchangeable, his covenant
everlasting, his calling and gifts without repentance, his regenerating grace
to be an immortal seed, to remain in the elect, to be such as none can take
from them; and that the life of grace can no more return to the death, then
Christ can return Romans 6. 9, 10, 11.
to dye again; and that Christ does make intercession for believers, and that
the Comforter which is given them, shall abide in them for ever: Upon these,
and such like grounds, I am resolved, that howsoever saving grace in the Elect
may be wounded, yet not killed; battered and beaten, yet not raced; sore
shaken, yet not plucked up by the roots. For God, who put it into their heart,
still preserving it, and being stronger then all that be against it, how can it
utterly fail? This is it therefore which I judge, that when regenerate persons,
being overcome by the strength of any temptation, or inbred corruption, yield
unto any sin, their whole will does never sin so much only does sin, as is
unregenerate, the regenerate part does never sin, neither can it sin: for it
is impossible that grace should sin, which is as contrary unto sin, as light
is unto darkness. The Spirit and grace, does ever like and love that which is
good, and hate that which is evil. So the Apostle confesses, that when he
did the evil he would not, and did not the good he would, it was dwelling
sin that did it, that is to say, his soul unrenewed was that which sinned;
it was not he, that is, his soul so far as it was unrenewed, that did sin:
For his mind renewed served the law of God, it was his flesh that served the
law of sin: his inward man did even then delight in the law of God, when the
law of his members rebelled against it. And this is the condition of all other
the children of God: amongst whom, when any of them be overcome in this
conflict, their will and mind renewed does still make resistance to sin;
yet so feeble, so faintly, and weakly sometimes, that sin gets the upper
hand, and grace is put to the worst.

Now touching David, and such as do sin in such a sort as he sinned, this is
it which I do judge of them; that it fares with them as with a man going down
a steep hill, whose foot once slipping, he cannot recover himself, but
tumbles down till he meet with some stay. Or, as it does with one in a
swoone or in a Lethargy, whose life is in them, and yet to seeming they are
dead. Or, as a withered tree in winter season, which has neither leaf,
blossom, or beauty, and yet there is life in the root. Or, as with a soldier,
whose braine-pan being cracked with a blow, he lies astonished, and as one
vanquished; yet coming to himself again, renewes the battle, and conquers
his enemy. Or finally, as one taken prisoner against his will, for lack of
power to withstand the assault, being willing and ready to make an escape,
whenever an opportunity is offered. As appears in the example of that
Kingly Prophet, who was so held captive in the hands of sin, as when God did
reach out a hand unto him, to draw him out by the admonition of his Prophet
outwardly, and the motion of his Spirit inwardly, he quickly apprehended it;
and embracing the occasion, gave satan and sin the slip, and (as we say)
showed them a pair of fair heels.


Apollos. I am altogether of your judgment in these points: and surely, as
this is a very true doctrine, so it is comfortable to consider, that God does
so maintain grace in the hearts of his own children, as howsoever for due and
just causes, the gates of helmay very far prevail, yet never so far, as to
displant that which God has planted, nor to destroy that image which God has
set up. But it remains now, that ye speak something more particularly of this
combat, and what weapons are to be used therein, and after what sort we are to
make use of them?


Aquila. Sir, it were a matter of great labor, a very long work, particularly
to rehearse how our knowledge is assaulted by ignorance, our faith by
infidelity, our love by envy and hatred, our holiness by profane lusts; our
chastity and temperancy, by incontinency and riot: also, to declare the
dangerous stratagems, wiles, and enticements that are used by satan and the
world, to undermine and overthrow the poor christian soul. and this happily is
sufficiently performed by some others. Touching the Weapons which we are to use
in this warfare, and how by prayer we are to get the power to use them well,
the Apostle instructs us fully, in the 6. chapter to the Ephesians. And for
the right application of the maine weapon, to wit, the Word of God, we have
Christ's practice in the 4. chap. of Matthew. Therefore if it please you, leaving
this argument, we will pass forward to the doctrine of Repentance. This only
I think meet to say ere we part from this matter, that there is a very great
odds between a regenerate person, and one unregenerate, as touching this fight
against sin: they both fight, but neither with like mind, nor with like
success.

In unregenerate persons, the light of natural reason, and of knowledge
infused into the conscience, do check sin, as well as discover it, leading
the combater to a mislike, and some kind of resistance, whereof the issue and
success is the holding back of the rage of sin, without weakening or killing
it at the root; in so much as when this resistance (such as it is) (...), then
sin like a Giant or a Tyrant mightily assaulteth, and insulteth over the
poor soul, trampling it down, and fiercely oppressing it. Whereas regenerate
persons do more then mislike sin, and make some slender opposition to the
keeping in of the fury of evil lusts; for they do truly detest and hate
sin, as that which is contrary to the will, image, and glory of their Father,
and the cause of curse to their blessed Redeemer: so as there is in them a
conflict, not alone between reason and affection, and between conscience and
sin; but between grace and sin, between the heart renewed by grace, and
remaining sin, which with a loathing is refused of them, when it arises and
tempts; the regenerate setting and bending themselves directly against every
lust of reason and will, as against a most mortal enemy, which it desires and
seeks utterly to destroy: for that end being in continual watch, frequent in
seruent prayer, always fearing infirmity, and Gods dreadful Majesty; the
event and success of which strife is a daily wasting of sin, and mortifying
it at the root, that it may at the length be quite abolished.


Of Repentance, the other consequent of Sanctification.
Apollos. NOW friend Aquila, that we have done with the spiritual combat
betwixt the old man and the new, arising from the imperfect measure of
Sanctification, which when it is full, that combat shall cease: in the next
place, we are to deal with Repentance, which in regard of these foyles and
wounds which the Christian Soldier takes in his spiritual fight, is very
necessary: for they are to be healed and made up again by repentance, even by
our turning unto God through faith in his Son. As it cannot be but in the
combat, the new man is sometime put to the worst; so upon repentance, all is
made whole.


Aquila. Suffer me here a little to stay you in your speech; what may the
differance be between Sanctification and Repentance? seeing Repentance is a
ceassing from evil, and doing of good; a turning from sin to God: and
Sanctification is no other, but a dying to sin, and living to righteousness?


Apollos. I will tell you what I conceive of it; that Difference between
Repentance and Sanctification.
Repentance is a fruit of Sanctification, a consequent of it, which does
immediately follow it, and is joined to it as a companion: the difference I
will express it to you by a similitude, as you may understand it better. In
the work of Sanctification, the holy Spirit does as it were shape a new
garment for the soul; which as it has a robe without, to wit, the perfect
justice of Christ to put on by faith; so it has other garments of less worth,
which be inherent, and stick within it self: and this is the quality of
holiness created in the soul; which we are willed to put on: as Col. 3. Put
on the new man. Again, As the Elect of God, put on compassion, meekness,
etc. And in (...). 6. and 13. Keep your garments pure, and without spot. Now
as in a new garment there happens rents and breaches; so our holiness by
strength of corruption striving against it, and Satan's temptation, does take
some rents and breaches daily, which are to be made up, and restored by
repentance. Sanctification is as the building of an House, our souls and
bodies thereby are made the Temples and habitation of God; Ephe. 2. verse last.
1 Cor. 6. Houses being wind and weather-beaten, will take decays, and need
reparations. Now repentance is the repairing of those wrackes and harms, which
our selves take by the assaults of sin and Satan. Take yet another
comparison. In Sanctification we have given to us the skill and power to war
against sin, Satan, and the World; and weapons put into our hands wherewith
to defend our selves, and to offend them. Now our weapons will wax dull, and
need sharpening, our selves take blows and (...), and need curing: this does
repentance, which (...) the weapons, and makes whole our selves after hurts
received. I have now showed you what my judgment is of the thing you
propounded.


Aquila. Yea, I understand it, and will examine it, and then rest in it, if I
find no just matter of exception; mean time I yet see not, but that ye are
right. But tell me Sir, what Repeutance do you mean? For Repentance even in
Scripture phrase, is attributed sometime to reprobates and wicked men, as where
it is said, that Judas repented him; Math. 27. 1. 2. And there was a certain
repentance even in Cain, Esau, Achab, Simon Magus, and others, as the Story of
Scriptures euidenceth. Beside, the Elect which yet are in their sins, and
want all true saving grace, the holy Ghost uses to exhort them to repentance,
as Acts 3. 19. To those that killed Jesus, Peter says; Repent, and return.
And Acts 17. 30. to the supersticious Athenians Paul says; God admonishes all
men every where to repent. See also Acts 14. 15. by which it may appear that
there is a repentance in some which are never sanctified; and others have a
repentance before their sanctification.


Apollos. This was well moved: for it is true that Repentance has sundry
acceptions in the Word of God, which is the cause that Divines write diversely
of this point, and somewhat confusedly sometime, for not duly distinguishing
those works of God, which he diversely works in men as he pleases. To show
you what I comprehend of this matter, this word Repentance is in Scripture
either taken in evil part, or in good Repentance has sundry acceptions, and
what they be,
part; when it is taken in the evil part, then it signifies a grief of
mind, conceived only for punishment of sin, when yet the sin it self is
not a whit loathed and hated, but still well liked of. Thus is Judas said to
repent, who because of the present horror which his sin bred in his
conscience, and through the fear of future judgment, wished that undone,
which he had done, and so repented: but his heart nothing changed to abhor
his covetousness. When it is taken in good part, then it is either Legal or
Evangelical. Legal Repentance I call that, when by the ministry of the Law,
the Spirit is effectual to work a sight of sins, both secret and gross,
and of the curse and punishment due thereunto, together with a certain grief
and fear, in regard of that sinful and woeful estate which the sinner sees
by the Law himself to lie in. This in the Elect is a preparatiue to the grace
of conversion, and always goes before; which though in it self it be not true
saving grace, yet it is the beginning, the entrance, and way to it, in all the
chosen; and this is meant in part in all those exhortations made to unconverted
elect persons. Repentance Evangelical, is either general or special;
general repentance which is a turning from all sin at once, is that whereby
a sinner being by precepts and threats of the Law stricken with terror, and
humbled upon sight and some sense of his own damnable state through sin, is
by grace converted and changed in his mind and will, so as of an evil man he
become a good, now truly hating all his sins, as offenses of a good God
reconciled in his Son, (and not only for punishment sake,) and loving
righteousness unfeignedly. This is called passive Repentance, or conversion,
and is in truth the same with Sanctification, whereof ye may read in these
Texts, Acts 11. 18. Acts 20. 21. Luke 24. 47. Special Repentance Evangelical,
it is that whereby a sinner that believes forgiveness of his sins, and is
sanctified or converted, and already made good, does repent particularly of
such sins, which by occasion in the course of his life he falls into; this
is of Divines called particular Repentance, Active, and renewed Repentance, and
they do distinguish it from the former. And thus it is taken in all places of
Scriptures, where the Saints are said to repent, or exhorted to repent; as 2
Cor. 7. 9. Revel. 2. 5. and 3. 19. Matthew 18. 3. And thus in this sense do I
speak of it at this time, taking it for the repairing or renewing of those
daily decays and slips which do arise in the practice of godliness. For as
in a garment, namely a beggars garment, there is always something to be
amended; and in an house, though well swept and cleansed, yet there will still
be something to be purged out; and in an healthy body there fall out infirmiries
to be cured: so in the life and conversation of every good Christian there will
be still something to be repented of and amended. Our frailety and Satan's
malice being considered, there would indeed that care and watchfulness be
used, that as near as ever may be, those pure garments of our righteousness
and holiness be kept clean and undefiled, and our Temples of body and soul
to be preserved holy; yet as a material garment, be it never so well looked
unto, gathers spots, and the house which is kept most neatly and curiously,
will have dust and sulledgy: so in the best Christians somewhat will be always
amisle, and therefore the whole life of a Christian must be a continual
repentance. There being some sins not yet espied, therefore not particularly
repented of; some espied, and yet not sufficiently hated, striuen against, and
mastered: and some good duties not yet known to us, and such as are known,
not so zealously followed, nor so wisely, as becomes the redeemed by Christ,
which look for eternal glory.


Aquila. Now Sir you have satisfied me in the acception of Repentance, and
showed me how we are to speak of it, and how it agrees to a man already
called and sanctified. Let me make bold to ask you further touching this
particular euangelical Repentance, which is every day to be renewed, even as a
good House-wife does once a day sweep her House, or as one that writes a
Letter, looks often over it; so our life is often to be looked over, that the
errors thereof may be corrected: but where must this Repentance have his
beginning, wherein does it consist, what be the kinds of it, by what tokens is
it known and bewrayed? And after these things opened, I have certain doubts
and scruples to propound to you about the doctrine and practice of Repentance.


Apollos. This renewed Repentance of the godly, Godly sorrow beginning of
renewed Repentance.
takes the beginning from a godly sorrow, engendered in the heart by the holy
Ghost, upon the discovery of our daily infirmities and falls, as the Apostle
teaches us, 2 Corinthians 7. 10. Godly sorrow brings forth repentance,
whereas worldly sorrow brings forth death. There is to be seen in the wicked,
shadowish and counterfeit Repentance, the ground whereof is wordly sorrow, not
a grief stirred up in the heart, because of displeasing God by some sin, but
in respect of worldly cause, as temporal loss, worldly shame and punishment;
or else for fear, or through feeling of Gods wrath for sin, which is a
grief may be found in a mere natural and worldly man; the end of which
grief is death, occasioned by a despair which is in them of obtaining mercy,
by which they are brought to eternal, yea, and sometime to a temporal
untimely death; as is to be seen in Achitophel and Judas. Therefore they are
to be warned to abandon and put far from their hearts this worldly sorrow,
which not only can profit nothing, but thereby no man can either redeem his
loss or shame, or remove his feared punishment, but brings forth a dangerous
and deadly fruit, and to labor to convert it into a godly sorrow, to grieve
according to God; for this has great commodity in it: for as it pleases God,
being engendered by himself in the heart, which mourns even here hence,
because the most merciful God is offended by transgression of his Law;
therefore worthily called, godly sorrow: so it has a notable blessed Issue,
for it leads to repentance, and that to life or salvation. For as it cannot
be but such as have their heart smitten with heaviness, because of the
displeasure of their loving God by their sin, but they will meditate a
turning from it, and an amendment; so they who enter into this course of
Repentance, and so continue, it will at last lead them to salvation; and in
the mean time it is a good testimony unto them, that they are saved persons,
if it were no more but that the holy Ghost says of hearts contrite and
sorrowful for their sins, that they are a sacrifice to God, and that the
sobs and sighs of a troubled Spirit, grieved for iniquity, do proceed from
the holy Spirit; Psalm. 51. Romans 8. Surely this were sufficient to move every
Christian to pray, and labor for this godly grief, that he may get his heart
touched with it, (the melting heart, the sostened heart, soon moved to grief
upon sense of a sin, is a blessed heart, the very habitation and lodging of
God himself;) yet to hear further that our repentance occasioned by our
grief for sin, is as a way we are to walk in to salvation: this same ought
to cause all men to be willing to have this godly sorrow, and to know how they
may attain it. And albeit that the meditation of the filthiness, and danger
of sin being committed against an infinite Justice, the sovereign goodness,
and a most holy Law, may much help to move the heart, after a sin to be
aggreeued; yet nothing so auailable to this purpose, as the due and serious
consideration of the (...) of Christ's life, and the death and passion of our
Lord; which being so infamous, and sharp intollerably, and the person so
abased and plagued, being the eternal Son of God, and a man most innocent;
and we our selves the proper and immediate cause of all Godly sorrow whence it
arises.
his ignominy and pains, suffering not for his own, but for our sins; this
if any thing else in the world will, and if there be any true grace in the
heart, it will make it even to bleed with griese, that such an one should
suffer, and such hard and heavy things; and for such being but wormes-meate,
ungodly, and his enemies, what heart would not be pricked to think of it, that
the Lord of life, the immaculate Lamb, should endure such fierce wrath from
God and men, for such vile ones. The very Earth trembled at this, and shall not
our hearts fear? the Sun was darkened, the Heaven also put on mourning weed,
and shall not we be troubled? The stones rent, and shall not our hearts be
rent with sorrow, and our eyes gush out with tears, upon the sight and
remembrance of such our sins, as we daily fall into, and by which we
occasioned such an execrable death, with torment, to such an honorable person?
As it cannot be but ill with them who can think of this, and not be displeased
with themselves, and grieved at their sins which procured this; so well is
that man that upon the thought of his Saviors sorrow for sin, can have his
own soul touched, and ready to melt into sorrow. For blessed are they that
mourn, they shall be comforted; Matthew 5. Unto whom does the high God look,
who dwells in the Heavens, but unto him which has a (...) heart? Esaias 66.
This sorrow makes the sinner to become joyful in (...) end; yea, it makes
Angels glad, it rejoices Gods (...), and is his delight; who not so much
detesteth (...), as he loves this godly sorrow, which (...) a sinner aworke
the more to mistike and detest his own sins, and to endeavor more and more
the mortifying and subduing of them, and a departure from them. In this
affection of sorrow, there be two sorts of persons which do somewhat offend in
diverse sort; the one think they never grieve enough for their sins, and
whereas they mourn much and truly, yet they satisfy not themselves, because
they would have and feel more. And the other, who doubt and mistrust
themselves that they do not grieve at all, and so are out of heart, because
they have no hearty greef for their offenses, complaining of the hardness of
their heart this way. Let the former consider that God respects not the
measure so much, as the truth of our sorrow; if it be unfeigned, though it be
not great, yet it is accepted; and if it provoke to repentance, so as after
grief there follow some amendment, then it is unfeigned. And let this serve to
comfort the heart, God being as well pleased to have his Children cheered with
his graces and the work of his Spirit in them, as grieved for their
trespasses; it is not pleasing to him to see them always sad, hanging down
their heads as a bul-rush: there is a time for sorrow, and a time to rejoice.
And for the other, their desire to be truly grieved for sin, and to have a
broken heart, it is accepted for sorrow with that God, who in his Children
accepts the desire for the deed: yea, they grieve that they are not more
grieved; they being sorry that their sorrow is so little, it is a degree of
sorrow. Woe to them which are secure, which sin without all grief, or
suspect of any fault this way, and so lie still in their sin without any
turning or change: and woe to them whose sorrow is worldly, such as is stirred
up not for breach of Gods Law, but for dread or sense of vengeance, which rot
still in their sin; but happy, and thrice happy is the soul which without
respect of Gods rods present, or his judgment to come, without any regard
either of the loss of Heaven, or pain of hell, can be affected with grief
after sin in this only consideration, that they have failed in duty toward
so loving a Father, and deserved by their sin to lose his favor. Of this
sorrow there will follow a Wherein Repentance consists.
repentance, never to be repented of; which I thus open and make plain to you.
If the grief be conceived from an evil (...), which should not have been
done, there will (...) it true Repentance, that is, an holy purpose to (...)
sin, and the occasion of it; an hatred of it in the (...) and seeking the
death of it, endeavoring by (...) means against it, and to do the good
contrary to it. Likewise, if the grief conceived by this godly heart, be for a
good thing left undone which should have been done, there will follow a
strange resolution, with good endeavor to avoid such omission, and to take up
such duties with more care in time to come, saying with the Prophet; I am
utterly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments. Again, I have sworn that
I will walk in thy Statutes; Psalm. 119. Now that we have seen whence this
special renewed repentance does arise, and wherein it consists, the degrees
would be a little examined, and I find that there is an ordinary Repentance
meet to be had for ordinary sins. By ordinary sins, I mean the common
slips of life, the faults that every the most watchful Christian does
ordinarily fall into, daily infirmities, in omission and commission; for these
there would be but ordinary grief, and ordinary repentance, as above it has
been declared. But when any extraordinary sins do happen, such as were
David's, Peter's, Manasses, Salomons, foul and notorious sins, which give a
greater wound to the conscience, and an offense to the Church, and more
dishonor to Gods name, and work a greater decay of godliness in the soul;
there would be used a more extraordinary sorrow, the heart would be wrought to
a deeper humiliation, more fervent and frequent prayer, helped with fasting:
and upon our rising out of such sins, more straight bonds would be taken for
our good abearing afterward, serious vows and protestations for a better
life. Such was Peter's after his fall, he wept bitterly: such also the woman's
that washed Christ's feet with tears; Luke 7. Such was David's, Psalm 51. and
many other, who after some foul and enormious sins, have performed more then
ordinary repentance for daily and ordinary slips; which yet be such
(considering the offense of so great a God in them,) as ought to move much
grief and displeasure with our selves, and more watchfulness. Now for the
tokens or fruits of this renewed Repentance, there be seven reckoned up, 2
Cor. 7. 11. In that you were godly sorry, what great care it has wrought in
you, yea, what apology or clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea,
what fear, yea, what desire, yea, what revenge, yea, what zeal.


Aquila. I pray you Sir let me understand your mind for these seven effects of
renewed Repentance, what ye think every one of them to be, how you distinguish
them one from another?


Apollos. Aquila, I do well know that in these 7. Signs of renewed Repentance.
points all men are not of one mind: and whereas some call them tokens or
signs, others call them rightly as you do, effects or fruits of Repentance,
I judge it all one; they are therefore signs to manifest the truth of
Repentance, because they are the proper and necessary effects of true
Repentance. For their distinction of one from another, and what each is, this I
understand. Care, it is the study of the mind and thought taking, 1. Care.
how to approve the course of our life hereafter, both to God and to our own
conscience, and to the Church of God. As it fares with Travelers which have
by sloth or ignorance lost their way, having found it again, they are more
careful to keep it: so it is with the godly when they repent, their care is
to please God better afterward: the which their care does express it self in
the greatness of it, not only in the general course of their conversation,
but in every particular action, to direct it according to the rules of the
Word, that offense of God and men may be prevented; as Col. 1. the Apostle
prays for the faithful, that they may please God in every thing; and
elsewhere, that they may abound in every good work. Yea, this care in the
godly, as it is in themselves for eschewing one sin as well as another, and
for the doing one duty as well as another; so it stretches it self unto them
of their charge, children, and servants, or flock and subjects, if they be
public persons, as is to be seen in the example of Abraham, Genesis 18. Job,
Jacob, David, Josiah, who all had care of their children and people, no less
then of themselves; and this declares ones care to be sound toward themselves
when it embraces others. Of all which it follows, that all secure person,
which have no further or greater care, but for back and belly, for pleasure
and profit, are surely void of repentance, being void of this care how they
may please God. So on the other side, the more that care increases in any
after their falls, to keep the Word, and stand fast in their obedience to it,
the more sure he may be of the soundness of his repentance: for how must not
his sorrow for losing his way, appear to be true, when his care is double to
that it was, not to lose it again?

The next fruit of Repentance, is clearing of our Clearing (...).
selves, which may be diverse ways performed, as either when we quit and clear
our selves from suspicion of a sin, by shunning the very appearance of evil,
all that has any neerenesse with it, or looks but toward it; or when we
rebuke and punish such as we have thought to bear withal in their sins, or
have in truth borne withal; after which sort it is likely the Corinthians upon
Paul's sharp reprehension, did clear themselves in the case of the incestuous
man, whom they had winked at. Or finally, by an humble and true confessing of
our fault to God and to men, if it were open and public, with hearty craving
of pardon; as in the Publican, Zacheus, David, we have examples of this
clearing: and well also might the godly Corinthians clear themselves to Paul,
that they were displeased with their sin in bearing with such an offendour,
not only by their diligence in censuring him, but by their unfeigned confessing
of the offense both to God and to the Apostle, whom they hadagreeued.

The third fruit it is indignation, which is an holy 3. Anger.
anger stirred up in our hearts, not only against other men's faults, with a
pity toward their person; but especially against some sins which have escaped
our selves, that we-were so beastly and foolish as to do such evils that we
might have avoided; and when we are moved to anger more against our own then
other men's, this is a very good token of a repentant heart.

The fourth fruit is fear, not seruill, but filial and 4 Fear. Blessed is
the man that thus fears.
child-like, arising from the feeling of Gods mercies and our own (...), from
whence comes an holy awe and fear, lest the evils which tofore we have
offended by, or such like, through our corruption break forth again.

The fifth is desire, as impenitent persons have their 5. Desire.
desires to eat, to drink, to sleep, to take their ease and pastime, to fare
deliciously, to go gallantly and bravely in apparel, to grow rich, to be
aloft, to be well thought of and spoken of, although they deserve it not; and
are stuffed with many other such carnal and worldly desires, as tokens of
their natural impenitent heart; so the godly desire to live honestly, to keep
a good conscience, to dwell in the House of God for ever, to enjoy the sincere
milk of the word, to be unburdened of sin, to mortify their lusts, be
dissolved, and to be with Christ; and finally, not to offend again in these
particulars, wherein they have offended God, or his people, are the testimonies
of a truly repentant heart.

The sixth fruit is zeal, which is a great grief conceived 6. Zeal.
for the hurt of Gods glory by sin, and an ardent love to all such things as
God may be honored by; and to hinder in our selves and others whatsoever may
dishonor or displease him; Revel. 3. Repent, and be zealous. Therefore as cold
and lukewarm Christians, are utterly without all grace of true Repentance,
which works a zeal against all sins, and for all good, to cross the one,
and advance the other, according to our places and means: so the truly zealous
man, whose zeal is guided by the knowledge of the Word, and tempered with
charity; such as was in Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14. in Phine as, in Moses, in
David; it is the evidence to our souls, that it is blessed with the grace of
Repentance.

The last fruit is revenge, which is not a requiting of 7. Revenge.
evil for evil toward others, a fruit of the flesh: but a voluntary
punishment which a sinner takes upon himself, for the evils done against his
God and his soul, or his brethren, in laboring more to bridle his unruly
heart from unlawful desires, and moderating it in those which be lawful; for
bearing not sinful delights or profits alone, but even such things as are
within our liberty, if the use of them will be an occasion of finne, either to
our selves or other. This curbing of our selves, and cooping up our affections,
mortifying the flesh, denying our selves, is that revenge here meant. Also,
enforcing ones self to do the things quite contrary to our sins; as the
drunkard to repent, and punish himself with abstinence: also the glutton and
riotous, with fasting; the great talker by keeping silence; the adulterer, by
forbearing all things may provoke lusts. Let me not conceal from you, that I
judge this revenge, if it be referred to the Corinthians, to be their
exercising of that ecclesiastical Authority, which God had given his Church
against sin, with more severity then wonted; that as they had offended by
remissness, so they would henceforth take due revenge upon open sinners,
according to the power given them of God. And this is very like; for it is a
godly revenge to set on work all power, which God gives unto any for stopping
of the course and current of sin. Let Papists who take such unlawful, yet
painful revenge of themselves, by whipping, etc. admonish true Christians to
take all lawful revenge.


Aquila. Now Sir I will propound some doubts unto you touching Repentance, if
first you will call to mind those cautions which ye delivered touching the same
in your public teaching.


Apollos. Herein I will answer your desire. But let Means to quicken our daily
Repentance.
'me tell you by the way, what was said of the means to quicken and stir up
this daily Repentance: Namely, diligent reading of Scripture, and other godly
Books; the humble submission of our minds to all godly admonitions of the
Saints, blessing God in our soul, after the example of David, for such rebukes
as are privately and friendly reached out; yea, thanking God for the reproaches
of enemies, by whom sometime one shall hear his sin told him sooner, then
by a friend, though not in a good manner, nor for any good end on their part:
yet considering God sets them on work, as David the Prophet said; God has
bid him rebuke me: Therefore endeavor our selves to make use of them, giving
good heed both to the checkes of our conscience, which often proves a faithful
monitor, and to the strokes of Gods hand sensible and insensible in soul and
body; seeking to profit by them to amendment, that we fear him the more, yea,
even in the days of our prosperity and peace, making this good use to be
invited by them to speedy and true repentance; and so we shall prevent Gods
chastisements, if we voluntarily fall to judging of our selves. Yet of all
other good means to awaken us, and bring us unto the practice of Repentance,
this is not the least, even our daily examination of our own heart and ways,
to consider particularly what escapes have been in thoughts, words, and deeds,
in omission or commission, with the circumstances of our actions for manner of
doing, and for the end of our works, and the persons, and such like things;
that so we may come to see both what is to be sorrowed for presently, and upon
faithful and humble confession, we may make all even with God through Christ
for that which is past: and also what cause there is to watch over our selves
for time to come, what remains yet to be corrected and amended, that
accordingly our prayers and care may increase. As provident Housekeepers who
have great Families, prevent many losses and damages in their estate, by often
viewing the reckonings and doings of them whom they trust: so may sins be
prevented by this godly examination of a man's own counsels and works. Now for
the cautions herein to be followed, they are briefly these. 12. Cautions about
Repentance.


First let no Christian by his heedfull looking to himself, think that ever
he can attain hereunto, as in nothing to offend. And therefore upon the
finding of his failings, not to be too much discouraged: for this is the common
condition of all the Saints, that none live and sin not. 2. In the
examination of ones self, let no man look to find every failing, there will
be some secret sins. Even David, a man so wise, and well instructed in the
Law, shall not epsy all the motes in his own eye; Psalm. 19. Who can tell his
secret faults? 3. For these privy faults which cannot be found, there would be
a general confession and asking of mercy for them; Lord forgive me my unknown
sins. 4. Known sins, which we shall discover particularly, let them be
speedily repented of; for herein delay is dangerous: and be particularly
acknowledged, the sinner accusing himself for them by name, and adiudging
himself for them to death, with an appeal from Justice to the Throne of Gracc
for remission. 5. Let never a sinner for any known sin, take further grief,
then as he may be able again to comfort himself with promise of mercy. 6. As
in practice of this daily Repentance, coldness by custom is to be be shunned;
so on the other side, lest the heart wax proud through the earnest care and
well performance of it, be not proud of Repentance. 7. Labor still to find out
new sins, and new omissions of duties, and to make them seem more and more
odious and hateful to the soul; a sinner so he keep his hold of Christ,
cannot be too humble for sin. 8. Take special notice amongst all other
sins, of corruption of Nature, and the proannesse thereof to sinning; that
all means be used for the weakening of that root, and the drayning of that
fountain. Let pardon be craved in special for it, and power asked against it.
9 Let not any sin seem little, though a difference in repentance is to be
put, according as the sin is ordinary or extraordinary; yet let not any sin
be thought small, being the offense of a most great God, the breach of a most
holy Law, cause of most bitter pains to Christ, meriting most woeful
destruction. 10. Forget not to repent of negligences, ouersights,
heedlessenesse, and to look well that these grow not too common. 11. For
private sin, private confession is enough; open sins, would have open
repentance, 12. Lastly, when any known sin is begun to be repented of, let
it be thoroughly repented of, even to the shaking it off, and leaving of it. He
that confesses his sin, and forsakes Prou. 28.
it, shall find mercy. Now friend Aquila, let me hear your doubts, that I may
answer them.


Aquila. My first doubt is this; Whether a sinner Some scruples about
Repentance.
may not truly repent, except he leave his sins? Or he may still use a sin,
and yet repent?


Apollos. First, an unknown sin may be repented of, and yet not left. As
amongst the Patriarks polygamie, Of this kind was fornication thought to be
among the Corinthians.
or having at once more wives then one, or Concubines with their wives, was the
secret sin which in those times was not manifested nor reckoned as a sin: 1
Cor. 6.
so they lived in it til their death, yet perished not for it; Held in those
times for nosin but some indiffrent thing.
which they should have done, if being known to them, yet witingly and willingly
with open eyes they had continued in it. But they repented of it generally, as
of other So many amongst us, think of interest for lone of money.
secretsins. Likewise, there be diverse sins amongst us, which are the sins of
the time, yet not so esteemed; whereof the godly may truly repent, as of all
their unknown offenses, and yet not leave them, because they do not take them
to be sins.

Secondly, there is a known sin, (...) He is no sinner, who would be no
sinner. M. (...).
Nature, which cannot be left, but whiles we live we must wrestle against it,
that it get no dominion: and so it is said to be left, because we would leave
it if it were possible. The repentant sinner carries this crookedness of his
heart about him, even as many an one carry a crooked back which troubles
them, but they cannot put it off.

Lastly, there be daily infirmities, such as every day we commonly run into,
accompanying (...), even as a shadow the body; as vain thoughts, idle words,
and evil silence sometime, and waste of time, and innumerable such things;
which the more they are resisted and striuen against, the more they are
lessened, but wholly abolished by repentance they cannot be. Known sins if
they be gross and notorious, especially if they run into the eyes and
offense of the world, must be so repented of, as they be forsaken. We find not
that David, Minasses, Peter, Lot, Noah, after their repentance, to have again
fallen into those soul offenses, Peccata vastantia conscientiam.
which being wittingly continued in, waste and overthrow the (...) of a sinner.


Aquila. But may not (...) Scrupis
gross sin, and ye (...) and be (...)


Ap. Of this Sins of (...) lapse: in the objections against faith in Christ,
for for giuenes of our sins.
something has (...) said before, therefore the less now. If one be but a babe
in Christ, and weak, he may do it more easily. But one of growth in grace, and
being experienced (...) practice of Repentance, and watchful, will hardly do
it. Sure it is a great wound if it do fall out, though not unrecoverable in the
child of God, who is subject to such relapses.


Aquila. May there be true Repentance without shedding of tears?


Apollos. As tears may be shed, and yet repentance false, as in Esau, Heb: 12:
so true repentance may be with dry cheeks. We read of Zacheus repentance,
Repentance upon great and extraordinary falls. is se dome without tears
but nothing of his tears. Also of the Corinthians repentance, we read 2 Cor.
7. and of their sorrow, and many good fruits: but amongst all the effects of
Repentance, 1 Samuel 7. Mat: 26. Luke 7.
the Apostle says not, What tears has it wrought? Tears of Repentance are
precious things: (...) koepeth a boule to put and keep them in; but they are
very rare things. His bottle is not full yet, though it has been filling ever
since Adam.


Aquila. Wicked men and hypocrites may go fat in repentance, grieve, and fear
and humble themselves, and confess, and fast, and weep, and pray, and leave
many sins, and do many good things, as Scripture witnesses of Judas, Achab,
Esau, Felix, and others: what thing is there, whereby the repentance which is
proper to Gods children, may be severed from that counterfelt in reprobates?


Apollos. You have already heard me deliver seven peculiar effects of true
repentance, which indeed hy-pocrites may counterfeit, but not express truly.
But Psalm. 119, 57, 69, 112, 115. Romans 7, 15, 16 17, 18.
these three things (amongst many) are sure notes of hearty and undoubted
repentance. First, a settled distinct purpose of heart, out of a true hatred of
sin, not to offend in any sin, as near as ever frailty will suffer. Whereas
in all evil men (what show soever they make) there is not this purpose, but a
full determination to live in some known sin, or a great security in their
general course.

Secondly, a true persuasion of heart (...) sin Psalm. 51, 1, 2, 3
done, that God will forgive it through Christ, when they ask pardon by him,
with hope of Gods goodness This is not in the repentance of (...). Hereof it
comes to pass, that the (...) has of his repentance most excellent use,
even to testify to him the soundness of his faith, and to be a witness of
the forgiveness of his sin, and of his incorporation into Christ; and
finally, of his salvation by him: forso much as this true repentance can be no
where, where first there is not faith, and true reconciliation with God.

Thirdly, true repentance causes us to abhor and leave our sins, because he
whom we know and belecue to be our Father in Christ, so extremely hates them,
and has so infinitely punished the in his own Son. Hypocrites leave some sins,
but it is for other respects.


Aquila. Certainly this is a goodly encouragement Of encouragements to
Repentance.
to inuit and prouolie all men, without (...) or dalliance, to fall to
repentance, and to persevere in the practice of it; sithence our Christianity is
thereby approved to us, and we are thereby discerned from hypocrites and all
evil men.


Apollos. It is so indeed: for what greater comfort in 1. Truth of our faith
and Christianity, discried by our Repentance.
the world, then to rest assured of our (...), that it is unfeigned: and that
thereby we are in Christ, and be partakers of his merits into faluation? And
baing greatly (...) unto this assurance by our Repentance, how ought we to
apply our selves to the practice of it? Howbeit there want not many other and
weighty encoragements inciting us to take this course. For first of all (to
give you a little (...), in (...) of (...) more full draught) consider of the
sundry and excellent 2. Great promiles made and performed to repenting sinners.
promises made in the word to repentant persons; not only touching things
earthly and transitory, for the removing and freeing them from dangers,
calamities Of earthly things.
and plagues; as that he will not judge them which judge them selves, 1 Cor.
11, 29. That toward such as amend their ways and works, he will repent him
of the plague denounced, Ier. 26, 15. That from such as turn and repent, he
will turn his fierce wrath, and repent him of the evil that he has said he
will do, Jonah 1, 10, 11. To such as rent their hearts, and turn to him with
all their heart, he will repent of the evil. Yea, his promise runs not only
for taking evil things from them, but for temporal good things to be given
them, and that plentifully; as that he will leave a blessing behind him, even
a meace offering, Joel 2, 13, 14. That He will open the Windows of heaven, and
pour out a blessing above measure, Mal. 3, 9, 10. They shall be a pleasant Land,
and a blessed Nation, verse 11, 12. That such as turn to the Almighty, they
shall be built up, and lay up Gold as dust, Job 22, 23. And Such as for sake
their sins, and cease to do evil, and learn to (...) well, should eat the
good things of the Esaias 1.
Land: with innumerable such promises of evil things to be turned from such
as turn to God, and good things to be cast upon them even in this life, not
only made, but performed. Which if it should seem but a light thing, because
it concernet but temporal happiness, yet it cannot be thought small, that God
has passed his Word and Faith for everlasting good Of Spiritual things.
things, such as belong to heavenly happiness, to be bestowed upon persons
truly repentant; as that their sins, both guilt and punishment, should be
blotted out at the day of refreshing; Act: 3. So (...), as that though their
sins (...) as (...), and of a (...) die, yet they should be made white as
wool or snow Esaias Y. 18. Neither only remission of sins, to escape from
iniquity and death, but an entrance into (...) life, duen salvation in Heaven,
(...) from the Lordsown mouth assured those that turn, that they shall (...)
die, but live; Ezekiel 18. 27. yea, and that for (...) for the repentance which
springs from godly sorrow, is to (...) 2 Cor. 7. 10. (...) sarrow (...) vnta
soluation. So as it (...), that they which (...) shall be saved; as it is true,
that except we repent, we shall all perish; Luke 13. 3. Not for the merit of
out work Repentance, a note of a person to be saved, not any cause of
salvation.
of repentance done, but because Repentance is a fruit of that faith, whereby
(...) on (...) unto salvation. These promises shame not be end so (...) made,
but also were as faithfully kept toward repenting Manasses, David, Peter, the
woman in the Gospel, and infinite other.

Add unto all this, that even the (...) of God, when they lie in any known
sin without repentance, 3. Unrepentance, has unfitness for any service of
God; or any good work. Unableness to take any profit by the means of
salvation.
or live securely, then they not only lie open to temporary judgments, and
(...), but all that while their prayers, and all their (...) of God is (...) to
God; Mat. 5. 23, 24. (...). 18. (...) of their salvation, the Word and
Sacraments, become unprofitable, and can do them no good; (...) 26. 28. all
their actions are polluted and (...). 4. Repentance has the contrary.
So on the other (...) they (...) to God and repent, they have through faith an
(...) to God, who will hear their prayers, them (...) accepted, their actions,
and their labors (...), (...). 738. Finally, these things ought not a little
to quicken 5. Consideration of a judgment day.
us to repentance and amendment of life, that there is a day appointed wherein
all shall be judged; Acts 17. 30. 6. Repentance the joy of Angels and men.
That repentance of a sinner does glad Heaven and Earth, Angels and men; (...)
15. 10. That by means thereof, our conscience is comforted, and finds peace;
7. Good consequents of Repentance.
offenses of our brethren avoided, the Church edified by our example, our
profession beautified, Satan confounded, God glorified.


Aquila. I have willingly heard you speak of encouragements to Repentance, and
I perceive not a threefold, but seauen-fold coard, both of wrath and love, to
enforce and allure unto it: That even as we ought to esteem present or future
happiness of body or soul, of name or estate, of our selves or our posterity,
the good of others, or the glory of God; and do abhor, and will avoid the
contrary; then the exercise of Repentance ought to be dear unto us. But now
Sir I covet to hear, how you will direct one for the ouercomming of such
hindrances as discourage and draw back from Repentance, which has many lets,
even as our faith has.


Apollos. Good friend Aquila, wherefore serve these former encouragements, but
to strengthen you against discouragements, when ye meet them? But because
happily it is hard, rightly and duly to apply these encouragements when occasion
is offered; and it may be that there be some blocks and lets, that will not so
easily be overcome, without some more special help: I will endeavor what I may
to help you here Do you recite the impediments of Repentance, and you shall
hear what shall be said to them.


Aquila. I will do so, and that even as I have felt them in my self, or (...)
them in others. And I find that they arise either from the quality of sin, or
Hind erances of Repentance
from some circumstance in the sin done, or from some evil affection in the
(...), or from respect of God, ormen, or from the nature of Repentance, or from
Satan's suggestions.


Apollos. What discouragement arises from the quality of sin?


Aquila. The foulness of the offense takes away hope of recovery.


Apollos. There is but only one foul offense that cannot be repented of, all
others may. Gods children can take no such fall but it may be repented of, and
ought to be; a great fall ought not to (...) any man Acts 2. And what fouler
sin can the child of God commit, then to kill the Lord of glory? I can tell
you of such as have done foul sins, and very (...) and that of knowledge,
after grace received; which yet found place for repentance. For peradventure
you will say, that the Jews did their sin ignorantly well, but Adams foul
sin, the fountain of all other sins, and the (...) of his whole kind most
woefully (...) by him, could not be done ignorantly, nor yet David's, nor
Salomons, nor Peter's. for they knew the Commandments. What is your (...) in
respect of God?


Aquila. His exceeding (...), and (...) severity toward offenders, expressed
even in casting off many, which yet have humbled (...), and turned; as (...),
(...), (...).


Apollos. Nay, the merciful and compassionate nature of God, as it is every
where excolled, and that highly; Esaias 55. 7. Psalm, 103. 9. 11. Romans 2. 4. Joel
2. 6, 7. and otherwhere: so it is purposely mentioned by the holy Ghost very
often, to inuit and encourage sinners to repentance; as in the forenamed
places, his strict severity is extended to obstinate rebellious sinners, and to
no other: not to such as turn and submit to him, and relent toward him. To
such he is as the Father in the Gospel, to his lost relenting child; neither
did he cast out any humbled repenting sinner, save such as did it in
dissimulation: and yet their temporizing repentance has got them a temporary
blessing, as to Iehu and Achah. But what be the affections in sinners
themselves that usually hinder their Repentance?


Aquila. First, loathnesse to forgo the profit of their


Apollos. Touching such as are held back by the evil gotten, to be as a fire
to consume all that which is well and justly gained, either in their own
days, or else in the days of their children, who shall as euilly spend it, as
they euilly got it; lauishing it as wickedly, as they wickedly gathered it. The
experience of all times proving true that common saying, That of evil got
goods, sildome enioyes the third heir. Therefore, let men account a little
with righteousness, better then much with iniquity. Better to be poor and
godly, then rich and a sinner. A little which a just man has, is better then
abundance with iniquity. For, Example of the oil in the cruise. Also Danieis
pulse.
Gods blessing can make a little go far, and do much, as his curse can
quickly scatter, and bring a great deal to nothing, Hag. 1, 7, 8.

2 For such as are held from turning to God by the sweetness and pleasure of
their sin, such would be advised not to look to the beginning of their sin,
but to the end of it. That which is honey in the mouth, will prove gravel, nay
gall in the belly. That which pleases at first, at last will bite as a Serpent
or Cockatrice, and cut as a two-edged sword, Prou. 5, 3, 4, 5. and Prou. 9, 17,
18. also Prou. 20, 17: these Texts would be expressed. It will prove no wisdom
to buy a momentany pleasure, with endless pain; to exchange a short passing,
and fleeting delight, with neuer-ending sorrow, anguish, and horror. Remember
what Di^es had said to him: fear lest thou have it said to thy self, thou
carnal sensual man: In thy life time thou had thy pleasure, and now thou
art tormented in this flame. So much as men have had in pleasure, so much pain
shall be given them.

3 For such as stand upon their reputation, as if it should fall, if they did
fall to repentance; let the know that as godliness is great gain, so it is
great credit. More true honor to be got by well doing in a week, then by
sin in a man's life time. For, whereas sin Romans 6, 22, 23
draws credit only from persons of no worth or credit, and must therefore
either vanish, or end in shame; Virtue and Religion purchases estimation with
the godly: and howsoever it meet with shame in the world, yet it has an
everlasting honor in the life to Revel. 7.
come, even a crown of blessed immortality.

4 Lastly, let it be weighed, that true greatness is to be great in Gods
favor, true worship is to be a true Christian; which is more honorable, then
to be as the sons of Nobles and Princes.


Aquila. I observe other hindrances growing from corrupt minds of the
offenders partly, and partly from satan's suggestions; as a fear to be pointed
at for singularity, and to have nicknames heaped on them, if they should leave
their sinful customs, or take up any good duties, which draw contempt from
the profane world. Likewise, an unwillingness to incur the displeasure and
dislike of their profane worldly friends, to whom they are beholden. 3. Some
are also hindered by the evil life of Professors, and 4. by the contemptible
estate of such as truly repent, and fear God, 5. And not a few are let by the
custom of time, which they are unwilling to go against, and differ from,
choosing to do as most do, because they would have fewest to talk of them.


Apollos. Aquila, a little hinderance is a great matter to the unwilling, as
the well-willing will overcome great lets. These which you name are but
feathers, or (at most) scar-crowes and bugges to make Children afraid: One
blast of Gods mouth will disperse them, as the wind drives chafe before it.
For reproach and nicknames the Word teaches, that it was the lot of Prophets,
Apostles, yea of Christ, to be scorned and Mat. 5. Lu. 23
mocked; and pronounces such blessed, as after their example shall endure to
be reviled for righteousness, Math. 5. and much better it is to bear a
temporary reproach in this world of the wicked for well-dooing, then to abide
eternal contempt for sin in the next life.

2. And as touching the other let, judge how much rather one ought to suffer
the displeasure of all worldly friends, then to live out of Gods favor, as
they do which live in sin without repentance. And who will not esteem the
love and liking of one godly person, above the distaste and mislike of an
hundred worldlings? Howbeit, who knows but that by his repentance, he may
gain even his enemies to be his friends, as for impenitencie, God uses to
make friends to become enemies?

3. Neither ought the mean estate of such as repent and love God, keep any
from entering into the good way of obedience to Gods will; not only because we
are commanded to judge righteously and in truth, not according to outward
appearance; and then we should perceive, that such as are basely esteemed in
the world, are glorious before God in his sight; but also, because they are
pronounced blessed, which are not offended in Christ, that is, which stumble
not at the meannesse of Christ, or his little flock his poor followers. For
as they are affirmed to persecute Christ, which persecute his members, and to
feed and cloth Math. 25.
Christ, which do these things to his members; so the being offended with the
poverty and simplicity of his members, is to be offended with Christ. They
which now refrain to embrace sincerely the truth, because of the fewness or
small regard of such as be his true followers; if Christ himself were amongst
us, the homeliness of his person and state would offend them, and turn them
from receiving his doctrine.

4 Lastly, least of all is any to be held from the way of Repentance, through
the evil customs of the time; which being evil are therefore to be forsaken,
though they be customs. Customs howsoever old, yet severed from truth and
uprightness, are but old errors. Neither are we to live by customs, but by
the statutes and commandments of God; not to follow multitudes, but to choose
rather to think and do well with a few good, then to err and do naughtily
with many which be evil. Better it were for us to walk in the good way of
repentance though it be narrow, and they but a few which find and use it,
because at last it leads to life; then to go in the way of security and sin,
though it be broad, and many tread in it, because in fine, it brings to
destruction.

And what matters it to us, how professors do live, or our Teachers or
forefathers, save only that we are to grieve if they live not well, to pity
them, to pray for them, to help as we may to reclaim them. But in no wise to
take their life as a rule, or to take an offense from their walking. For Christ
is to be imitated, and not men; namely, in that wherein they leave and go from
Christ, 1 Cor. 11, 1. And there is a woe as well to such as take an offense, as
to them which give: for woe is to the World because of offenses. And we are
commanded not to do as Teachers do, when they teach well, and do ill. Have ye
any more hindrances of Repentance yet behind unnamed?


Aquila. The hardness and painfulness of Repentance discourageth especially
our slothful natures, who are loath to abide such travail, as we must put
our selves to, if we will turn from our sins.


Apollos. Indeed (as I touched before) the gate of Repentance is straight, it is
a narrow way, it will pain us and pinch us to walk in it; but the benefit
will quit the labor: it will take up much time and travail to leave sin.
See how much ado, and what a while it is ere we can leave but one sin
especially if it be a sin of nature, to which we are more addicted; or of our
trade, by which we suck some advantage; or of the time, wherein there be many
to bear us company. I say then, to leave so many sins, and to live well, to
do so many duties, will crave both space and sweat: but the fruit will
requite the charge. The harvest of Repentance is eternal life; 2 Cor. 7. 10,
11. as the croppe of sin is eternal death. Consider also though it be
painful to leave sin, and to exercise Repentance, yet it is surely as
painful to exercise sin. I dare boldly affirm it, to live in sin, is as
painful (if not more painful) then to live well.

Sinners do not fulfill their lusts with such ease; example in the Drunkard,
These, Epicure, Gamester, covetous, proud, ambitious, which take great pains,
put themselves to great hazard, watch whole nights, and labor whole days for
compassing and enjoying their unlawful desires; so as all ends put together,
to practice sin, is as hard as to practice righteousness: which has the
sweet peace of conscience, liberty of mind, and joy of heart, to mittigate
much the pain and labor which is endured about it. But most sure I am of this,
that to repent and live well, according to Gods will, is nothing so painful
as to live in hell fire; whatsoever the pain or peril of well doing is, it is
not matchable with hell pain. Therefore let our sluggish nature be rowsed, and
enured unto diligence in seeking after the Kingdom of Heaven: better here to
endure the burden and pain which does accompany godliness, how great soever
it be, then to endure the pain of our sins for ever in that lake which
burns with fire and brimstone. It will also help us against this temptation
of our slothfulness, to call to mind not only, that ease slays the
foolish; but what hurt it does in the mean time to the godly which do yield
to it. How did the Church lament and smart; Cantic. 5. 3. because she would
not rise in the night and put on her clothes, and wet her foot a little to
open the door to Christ? I say, how did the Church there sinart for this her
sloth? she was for a time punished with the absence of her Husband Christ,
more bitter then death to her; also with astonishment and dullness of heart for
her sin: and lastly, with the cruelty of evil Pastors which fell upon her,
and beat her, and ill entreated her.


Aquila. But such as have long served and followed any sin, are moved to
fear lest it be too late to begin; they think they have lost their tide,
and it booteth not now to think of altering their course: better to keep them
where they be, rather then for to stir and strive, and be never the better.


Apollos. Indeed the long (...) in the service of any sin, makes Repentance
more difficult, but not desperate and impossible. As one that is far gone out
of his way, or has suffered a wound or a sickness, to go on long without
looking to it, makes their return and recovery more hard, but takes not away
all hope: Right so the long abiding in any sin, it does crave great care to
repent and amend it. But as they which have foreslowed their fields or gardens,
and suffer them to be ouergrowne with weeds, or which have neglected their time
in the beginning of a day, so as they have more work on their hand when night
approaches; they use to recompense their former carelessness with increase of
pains: So Christians which have spent too much time in following their
affections, and walking after the course of this world, all they have to do,
it is to redeem the time; and then doing their best endeavor, doubling their
care and pains, because their sins are many and strong, and their time but
short which is behind: yet this is their comfort, that Jesus Christ can as
easily change an heart that has long accustomed it self to do evil, as
another heart which is not yet hardened by the custom of sin; this is a sure
truth that he will help the well willing mind. Therefore let not care of
Repentance be cast off, but be so much the greater, as the need is more; and
then our good Lord will himself do the rest. Get first the mastery of one
sin, and then of another, and so of a third; and thus setting upon them one
after another, the victory will be more easy: for as sin grows weaker, so
the sinner will grow in strength. An old man cannot become young again, but an
old sinner may prove a new man by Christ's grace, and his own labor. Lastly,
they are deceived in thinking they can keep where they are; for the sinner
that grows not better, must needs wax worse: he that goes not forward, goes
backward, no man stands at a stay.


Aquila. I heard you say, that there were some sins which being public,
require a public repentance; this I tell you many good minds stick at, and
think it too great a shame, and so are kept from doing it: hoping that upon
their private sorrow and confession, God will for Christ his Son pardon them.


Apollos. Indeed Aquila, now ye touch a boil, ye rub the sore; there be honest
minds not well informed which cannot brook this, though it concern not
themselves. They take it to be too severe a discipline; one matter is, they
live not under such a strict discipline; 1 Timothy 5.
it would seem nothing if they lived in a place where such things use to be
done. If Thieves were not accustomed to die for their theft, it would be
thought too rigorous to bring in such a penalty. Again, they do not well
consider the equity of this discipline; for as a public fault would have a
public rebuke, so it would have a public repentance: a private repentance and
submission, is too narrow a plaster for so broad a wound as an open scandal.
Where many are offended with a crime commonly known, the wound being great, it
had need of an answerable salve, that humiliation and satisfaction be given and
made to many. If Christ have commanded that for a private offense, one shall
go to his brother, and say; Forgive me, it repents me: shall we not think it
meet that where a public offense is given to a whole congregation, there the
like ought to be done? shall one brother offended be respected, and shall the
whole fellowshippe and society of brethren be despised? If one hurt but one
member, he is bound to make me amends, how much more if he hurt my whole
body? Again, it is best for the offending person thus to do; for by his
readinessc (...) undergo a public infamy, taking upon him the reproach of his
sin willingly, he shall declare his repentance to be true and sound; and so
not only be received more gladly into favor of men, upon such good proof of
his conversation, but also purchase more peace to his own conscience with God:
which assuredly can never enjoy comfortable rest, till he obey this Ordinance
of Christ, in satisfying whom he has offended. Further, by this example of his
submission, he shall do others good; both by striking into them terror, not
to deserve by their sin to come unto a public abasing themselves before
many; and to give encouragement by their example of such their repentance, unto
such as shall in like manner offend by public crime. Moreover, it will stop
the mouths of the aduerfaries of Gods truth, when they shall perceive sin not
to be borne withal in any of the Children of the Church. And finally, great
glory shall hereby redound unto God, when his truth and mercies in forgiveness
of great sins, shall be openly acknowledged, and obedience yielded unto his
own appointment. By these, and the like considerations, no doubt even the holy
man, and princely Prophet David, having given a general scandal in his sin
with Bathsheba, Psalm. 51.
yet was made to forget his own private reputation, and his royal dignity,
and to bear the public shame of his sin, setting himself by that 51.
Psalm as it were upon a stage, that God might have glory, and his Church
edified by such an example. Which also induced Solomon his son in like
manner, after his grievous fall and general scandal, to publish his
repentance to the Church, in his Book Ecclesiastes: and it is Ecclesiastes,
not to be doubted of the Church of Corinth; as their sin in bearing with the
incestuous person was open, so both his and their repentance was open, and made
known. We see the Apostle to blaze out, and proclaim their Repentance for
their offense, that all men might 2 Cor. 7. 11.
take notice of their sorrow, as their sin was too much known; which in
truth (if things be rightly weighed) is rather the sinners honor, then his
shame: it being a shame to sin, but none to repent, and to be known so to
do; which rather wipeth out their shame both before God and men, and restores
the former estimation unto them. It were a foul deserved shame indeed, to be
known to have done a sin, and not to be known to have repented of that
sin; this would argue an obstinate, careless, desperate, impenitent person.
I pray you who does the less, nay, who does not now more honorably think of
King David, in that he (such a person) would submit himself to such a
discipline voluntarily, having no authority above him in Earth to enjoin it to
him? it is his renown to this day, and will be to the Worlds end. And finally,
where you say, they may repent privately, and hope for pardon; this is all I
say, I do more then doubt it: I would be loath to loose that sinner by
pronouncing forgiveness of his sins, who being made to know thus much of his
duty unto God, and the Church, and his own soul; yet should refuse to do it,
hoping that God would be good to him, if he do in secret repent. Might not
David and Solomon have thought so, and others also, who have done as they did?
Nay, friend Aquila, then may a sinner look for Gods favor, when he readily
and dutifully walks in Gods way; and Gods way is public repentance for
public scandals, when he feels his heart so affected toward God for the doing
his will, and setting forth his honor, as that in regard thereof he does
little or nothing recount of his own credit; this is a good token that all is
pardoned him. But have you any further matters to say, friend Aquila, as
touching this purpose?


Aquila. None, but that I am much bound to you, for enduring me with such
patience, to object what I thought. Were it not that the time is so far spent
already, I would request you that we might pass forward to the fruits of
Repentance, to deliver the doctrine of good works.


Of good works, the fruits of Repentance.
Apollos. NOw friend Aquila, we thought that we had spent much time in our last
conference, and so as we needed not to look back to our work: but I have
thought of something since our parting, which will enforce us to do as
Travelers, who having lost, or let something fall, are wont to go back
again, and take it up, and carry it along with them. Thus must we be feign to
do; for we have left something behind us worthy the looking back for, and the
taking up, that we may carry it along with us. And if you would know what it
is, I mean it of one peculiar note and mark, whereby to distinguish that true
Repentance, which flows from Sanctification, and is proper to the regenerate
child of God, from that which many unregenerate persons may by a common
restraining grace attain unto.


Aquila. What may that be? I pray you certify me of it in particular. There be
very many who will be glad with me to understand it.


Apollos. This it is. That as the Elect in their Sanctification True Repentance
is a turning from every sin, to do every good work.
have, though not a perfect, yet a general change and reformation in mind and
reason, will and affection, body and actions; in all these they are somewhat,
and that truly altered by grace of new birth, though imperfectly: So in the
practice of this grace, the regenerate man repents him not for one, two, or a
few; but of his whole corruption, and of all evil fruits of his natural
corruption. Albeit he cannot utterly be without sin in this life, no more
then he can be without a soul and body; yet he does not willingly nor
wittingly foster nor harbor any sin whatsoever, but is equally an enemy to
all and every sin, though with unequal success; laboring daily and nightly
the forsaking and shaking off of all their sins, in a true loathing of them:
for the godly repentant persons have learned of Saint James, James 2. 10.
that to be guilty of one, makes a man guilty of all; it being the same God
that commanded all, who commanded one: so that his authority is (...) in one,
as in all. And from the wise man they have received, that as one dead fly
marreth a whole box of Ointment; so a Eccles. 10. 1.
little folly him who is in estimation for wisdom: Ecclesiastes 10. 1. Also
in the example of that godly man, King David, they see this duty as in a
glass: for he witnesses of himself, that he hates whatsoever, his own
wickedness; Psalm 18. 22. And surely it cannot be that any man should truly
repent of other sins, though he leave the practice of them, if he do love and
keep any one known sin; neither he that hates any sin, can be thought
other, but that he has repented of all: for he having power in his
Sanctification against all, does therefore bend himself against all; and
hating one sin, in as much as therein is the displeasure and offense of his
heavenly Father, upon this ground will hate and grieve for every sin, with
endeavor against it: but whosoever retains a liking in his heart to any
sin, with a purpose (though he know of it to be a sin; and his conscience
check him for it) to continue in it, can indeed hate no sin at all; though
he lean the outward act of many sins, as Herod, as Simon Magus, as Judas did
for worldly fame, or fear of hell punishment denounced by the Word. True it
is, that even regenerate ones, who have shaken off their sins, have happily
some sin or sins hanging about them, as burres or Simile.
lime, which yet they would not have so; and they bear them not only with
check of conscience, and mislike in judgment (for so the wicked ones may do)
but with unfeigned sorrow of heart, grieved according to God, that they should
be so yoked and entangled with the remnants of their corruption; and they
strive under hope, more and more to overcome those lingering vices; as they
have conquered their fellows and expericuce has taught, that there is not any
of Gods Children, but as they have corruption left in them, even after new
birth for such purposes (as God would) to humble them, to exercise and stir
up the gift of prayer, to make them watchful, to declare his own grace in
forgiving, and might in upholding, and for other such like ends: so in the
whole host and army of their remaining sins, there is some more rebellious
and mutinous then the rest, a predominant corruption, wherewith they are feign
to wrestle hard, mightily, and long, ere they can put it down. Every man has
one Simile.
or other outward enemy more tedious then the rest sent to vex him, and to
humble him; likewise there is some one inward sinful affection, that does
longer and more grievously trouble them then all the rest do: But a regenerate
man will be at no league, nor take any Simile.
truce with it; he stands at defiance, even as I srael did with the Amalekites,
whom they were to prosecute, to Exodus 17. 14.
the rooting of them out, and did so. Right so does every repentant person
prosecute all his vicious lusts (especially his most dangerous lusts) unto the
rooting them out: for he well knows, that it were in a manner as good to keep
all sins, as to hold one unrepented of; one being sufficient for Satan to
ensnare us by it. Yet one will not be one, and alone; but as one these Simile.
within the house, makes way for all the rest to follow after: so one sin
cherished, will open a window for others to come in. To conclude, if the heart
be false in one sin, it will be false in more, as occasion is offered, and as
temptations do provoke; and when the heart is framed to uprightness and truth
by the Spirit of Sanctification, though it do not alike prevail against every
sin, yet it does unfeignedly detest and resist one sin, as well as another.
Again, the like is to be said for the doing of good, that the regenerate,
though he cannot absolutely keep the Law, to fulfill it in the strictness
thereof, by doing all that good that is commanded there, and that unto the end,
and in all perfection of love; nay, there be sundry good duties and works,
which our regenerate man through ignorance cannot so much as attain to the
knowledge of, (so large and broad be the Commandments, and so narrow and dull
is our capacity): yet as he is sanctified throughout, having all his powers of
spirit, soul and body, well and aptly disposed by grace to do good; so he
endeavors to know better every day what his work is which is prescribed him
to do, and also to perform it in every part, so far as it is known, with
such perfection as he can; doing his work in truth and uprightness, though
with wants and weakness: so as he balkes no duties. He will not play the Pope,
to give himself dispensation for any good work which he is bound to do, do
it never so much go against his stomach, and contrary his corrupt judgment
and affection, his profit or delight: yet his heart stands with the Law; Romans
7. 16. and with that he will take part even against his own lusts, repenting
him earnestly of his failings in duty, whether it come of ignorance or
infirmity, being still more desirous to come nearer and nearer to God in true
righteousness. Hence it is, that the godly are said in Scripture, to walk in
all the ways of God, as (...), 2 Kings 22. 2. to have kept the Statutes and
Testimonies of God; as David, Psalm. 119. to have walked in all the
Commandments of God without reproof; as Zachariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 5,
6, 7. to have pleased God in all things; as the (...), (...). 1. 9. to have
walked perfectly, as Ezekiah; because howsoever they could not Es. (...). 3.
for measure and manner do all in an absolute fullness: Perfection is here set
agaiust hypocrisy.
so as there should be no fault, yet for desire, care and endeavor, they
strove to do all which they could A double perfection. 1. Of measure. 2. Of
parts.
know, and their heart was upright in one duty as well as in another, and so
performed a perfection of parts (as the Schoolmen speak.) It being quite
otherwise with the unregenerate man, who as he still will cherish some sin,
so he does omit some duty and good work known to be his duty, and as necessary
as any which he does; either because it thwarteth his carnal liking and fancy,
or pincheth him in his gain, or some other thing which is dear to him. Herod
will do many things at John's Mar. 6. 20.
preaching, and Iehu is zealous in many things for the 2 King. 10. 31.
Lord; Simon Magus will conform himself to the word Acts 8. 13.
in sundry duties, but their practice hated; it is a maimed practice. There
were some good works which they would not be brought to do, as there were
some sinful affections which they could not be made to put off: for their
heart was not right before God; Acts 8 21. they were not seasoned with his true
fear: therefore their repentance was counterfeit, in action rather then in
affection, in show, not in verity.


Aquila. Sir, this was well remembered. It is indeed a maine matter, and it is
also a certain truth, that the child of God being in the work of his
Sanctification nenewed, though not perfectly, yet throughout in every faculty
of his soul; bearing now the Image of God his Father, not in part, but in
whole carrying his resemblance, in righteousness and holiness, and his heart
framed unto sincerity: therefore he is renewed not to an half obedience, but
to all obedience; that is, in all duties which pertain to him: so as his will
and purpose of heart, is (so far as measure of grace will allow and enable
him) with readiness to do whatsoever the Lord shall say unto him, either for
leaving evil undone, or for doing that which is good. That which was David's
resolution and care, to have respect to all the Commandments of God; Psalm.
119. 6: it is (though not in such degree of grace) the care and affection of
every repentant person, to keep covenant with no sin, but to disclaim and
depart from all; to omit willingly no good work, but to honor God by an
universal subjection to the Law, so far as concerns them in every good
work; submitting themselves to the mercy of God in Christ, for forgiveness of
that wherein they slip, caking afterward better heed to their ways. But now
Sir, may it please you (this being recovered which we had in a manner lost)
that we proceed in our purpose: and tell me, is it of necessity that true
Repentance be accompanied with good works of all sorts?


Apollos. After the doctrine of Repentance, ye do in very good time move me
for the doctrine of good works, which follow Repentance, as the shadow does
Simile.
the body, and flow from it as a River from the Fountain, or as fruit
springs from the tree. Repentance lying hid in the heart as the juice or
sap in the root of the tree, utters it self by good works, as by meet
and convenient fruits. This is it which we may mark in the Scripture, how the
holy Ghost has matched repentance and good works together; showing that they
should repent, and do works worthy of Repentance; Acts 26. 20. Again,
Repent, and do the first works; Revel. 2. 5. Also, Bring therefore fruits
worthy of Repentance; Matthew 3. 8. Where it is to be noted, that a good work,
is called a fruit; not only to show how God accepts them, even as a
pleasant fruit is accepted Simile.
of him that dresseth a Vineyard, or an Orchard; but in respect as they come
from Repentance, as a fruit from a Tree. And whereas he calls it a fruit
worthy of Repentance, he means such works as be meet for Worthiness put for
meekness, and unworthily, for vnmeetely;
such persons to do, as have repented. Consider also, that it cannot be, that
a man inwardly should love that which is righteous, and hate iniquity in his
soul; but he must needs outwardly express it, as occasion and 1 Cor. 11. 27.
means be offered: so as that Repentance may be worthily Heb. 6. 7.
suspected to be false, where good works do not follow; there is no true
change in the heart, where there is none seen in the life. If we search the
Scriptures, we cannot find any who have repented in truth; but they have been
afterward careful to do good works. To omit other examples, whereof
Scripture affoords us store, take one or two in stead of all. Zacheus repented,
and his repentance was fruitful, witnessing it self by good works, both by
retribution of Luke 19. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
goods euilly gotten, and by distributing of well gotten goods; also, by a
cheerful entertainment of Christ. The converted thief, as little space as he
had after his conversion, yet how many ways did his repentance declare it
self? namely, by the reproof and admonition of his fellow, by admirable
patience, by godly prayer, by justifying and defending Christ his innocence,
when he was condemned of all the Jews, and doing it before them even to their
faces; also by confessing his glory in their hearing, and his own sin Luke
23.
and shame against himself. And as it is in the first Repentance, when a
sinner is newly converted; so also it fares with renewed repentance, which
utters it self by the fruit of good works; as is manifest in the
repentance of David after his fall with Bathsheba, which brought forth diverse
good works; as instruction of the Church, praise of God, both private and
public; confession of his sins, even to the cracking and weakening of his
private estimation and royal dignity. So in Peter's repentance, the like is to
be seen, as his tears, his confirmation of others, and infinite good deeds
more, testifying the truth of his repentance.


Aquila. This certainly is so; therefore by good works or amendment of life,
we are to judge of Repentance (as of a tree by the fruit:) the Repentance is
dead which is without amendment, even as faith is dead which is without good
works. But now I would James 2. 26.
have you tell me, which works we shall call good works, and what things are
necessarily required to a work, that it may be reckoned a good work?


Apollos. For your first question, what a good work What a good work is?
is; I say, it is every duty which concerns God or men, others or our selves;
whether it be performed in thought, word, or deed; either in our general
calling, as we are Christians, or particularly in our vocations which we have
in Family, Commonwealth, or Church. Thus the work of the Ministry in
teaching, reproving, conuincing, instructing, though it be done in words; yet
it is called a good work: 2 Timothy 3. 17. Being made perfect to all good works.
The (...) of the ointment on Christ's head; Mat. 26. is there called a good
work: She has done a good work upon me. Abraham's offering of Isaac; is of
James called, A good work; James 2. 21. And not to be long in this plain
matter, the Scripture saying; that we must be judged by our works; Romans 2. 6.
And in Eccles. 12. Solomon does affirm, that every secret thing shall come to
judgment. And Christ says, that an account shall be given of every idle word;
Mat. 12. 36. It is by this apparent, that as secret thoughts and words, if they
be evil, are to be numbered amongst bad works; so thoughts and words being
good, are to be esteemed for good works; especially the Scripture in so many
places so largely using this phrase of good works for all fruits of
Repentance, as we have seen before: therefore they do err which think
works of mercy to be the only good works required at our hands.

Now to your second question; what is required to How many things required to a
good work.
a work, that it may be held for a good work? There must go these three
things. First, the matter and substance. Secondly, the person must be good.
Thirdly, the end; all these must be good. A good work for the stuff,
substance, and matter, must be commanded in the Word of God: for besides that,
we are willed to 1. Good matter.
do that only which God commanded, and not to Deuteronomy. 12. verse last.
turn therefrom to the right hand or to the left. And we read also in the
Word, that of all things done without warrant of his Word (as thereby to please
and serve him) he will say; Who required these things at your hands? Sound
reason may tell us, that nothing is to be held for a good work, save that
which God wills to be done; because his will only is the rule of all
righteousness: so as a work is then righteous and good, when it is agreeable
to his revealed will; and when it swarueth therefrom it is evil. The will of
God being (I say) as the level, lime, or rule, to direct our actions, which
are straight or crooked, as they come nearer or go farther from that line.
Moreover, the service of God standing in this, that we do such good works, by
which he is served and worshipped of us; and he liking of no service save that
which is done according to his own will: therefore they cannot be esteemed for
good works, which he wills not to be done in his Word. In vatne do they
serve and worship me (says the Lord by his Prophet) teaching my fear by the
Precepts of men; Esaias 29. 13. Which reproves, first of all some ignorant
Christians, who hearing of good works to be done, cannot stretch their
thoughts beyond works of mercy, commonly called, Alms deeds, as if these
only were meant by good works; or not beyond external Acts, which incur
into our senses. Moreover, they offend, which imagine that all they do upon a
good intent and meaning, should straight way have allowance before God for a
good work; whereas in truth no intent is worthy to be held for a good intent,
(whatsoever seems to us) save that which is according to Gods will. Not what
we deem to be good, is therefore by and by good, for that it appears so to
us; but what God will approve for good, that indeed must stand for good: not
ours, but his will, being the metyard of goodness. How many might we call to
mind, who have thought to do some good thing, and yet have been refused of
God, because they consulted not with his word, to square their meaning
thereafter? Consider of Vzza putting his hand to stay the Arc, of Peter
counselling Christ not to go to Jerusalem to suffer; and 2 Kings 26. from
verse 16. till verse 21.
going with John his fellow Apostle into the high Priests house: all being done
of good intention, and yet we know how ill it was taken of God, and might have
proved their eternal ruin.

Finally, the (...) are also to be taxed, who have devised a number of works
wherein they busy themselves; which we may call will works, or done out of
the election of their own will, and not by prescript of Gods Word: the
greatest part of their works being such, whereby yet they think not only
highly to please God, but to merit somewhat at his hands. They fail in this
first part of a good work, they do not bring the stuff and substance whereof
a good work is made: which must be (as we have said) something commanded of
God in his Law, not devised of men in their own brain; for whatsoever man
deuiseth therewith to please God, it is abominable in deed, be it never so
goodly in show; Luke 16, 15.


Aquila. What be the second and third conditions of a good work?


Apollos. As it is required that the thing to be done, or matter of the work
be good, being approved of God; so the next thing is, that the man be good
which 2. Person good, that the manner may be good.
does the work, the goodness of the worker: and the third thing is, that the
end be good for which it is done. First (says our Savior) make the tree good,
and then the fruit will be good: for a good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit; Mat. 12. 33. It is not the good work that makes the person good, as
the fruit makes not the Simile.
that makes the person good, as the fruit makes not the tree good; nor the
River makes not the Fountain sweet: but the person being first good, that
which he does according to Gods will, becomes good. And as it is amongst men,
that we cannot like a gift, when we Simile.
brook not the giver; so it is with God: he never accepts any thing that is
done, how good soever in the nature of the thing done, except the doer be first
accepted. Now that which makes the doer good, it is his faith in Christ,
whereby he is purged from all his iniquities, and has the righteousness of
Christ accounted to him, to make him righteous in the sight of God. Hence it
is, that no work of ours can please God, unless it come from faith. Hence
also it is, that the works which we do, borrow all their commendations even
from hence; that they are the children of faith, begotten and brought forth by
it: See Hebrews 11. throughout. From hence it was, that Caine and Abel
offering each sacrifice unto God, Caines sacrifice was rejected, and Abels
received and pronounced to be better then Caines, because it was offered in
faith. Abraham offering his son (though the work were strange and exceeding
wondrous) yet it had had no grace nor respect with God, except it had come from
faith. What shall I say more? a poor Kitchen-maid, an Hostler, a
Chimney-sweeper, or any other, how base soever their trade be, being a lawful
vocation; if he do his work out of a true faith in God through Christ, and
out of obedience of Gods will, his work is more glorious and pleasing in Gods
sight, then the best and most goodly work of a King, or of a Preacher, being
not faithfully and obediently performed. Whereof it is written, that many
things which are great and glorious amongst men, are abominable before God: for
if faith (...) us not a work to do our works, let them be how bright or
glittering soever for show and appearance to men, yea, and very profitable for
fruit toward men; yet they are no better then beautiful sins. So the holy
Ghost teaches, that what is done without faith, it is sin; Romans 14. 23. And
that without faith, it is impossible to please God; Heb. 11. 6. Now we are
here to consider, that faith in every good work, does A threefold act of Faith
in every good work.
set it self a work three manner of ways. Or thus (if ye will) the act of
faith in a good work, it is threefold. The first is to enable us to know, that
the thing which we do, it is such as God allows of, being commanded of him.
The persuasion hereof, it is called Faith; Romans 14. 22, 23. He that doubts,
sins if he eat, because he eats not of faith: that is, out of a
persuasion and certainty that he does well. The second act of faith it is to
assure the mind, that this work which we are resolved of, to be in it self
lawful to be done; it is such as God will accept through Christ, pardoning the
spots and imperfections of it freely for his merit: for all out works having
their stains and defects (as we have touched in our Treatise of imperfect
Sanctification, and shall hereafter declare) it is of necessity that there be
an application of Christ's merits to our works, for the cleansing of them; that
so they may please God. This is done by faith, whereby the heart is assured,
that God, who has graciously loved us in his beloved, will 1 Pet. 2. 5.
also vouchsafe for his sake, to be pleased with that we do after his will.

Thirdly and lastly, there is another work of faith, and that is it which
Saint Paul speaks of; Galat. 5. 6. Faith works by love: for it quickens
and stirs the heart to the love of God and man, in our good works which we
do, to be led not by self-love and carnal respects, but by this charity and
loving affection of our (...). 3. 14.
good God, and of our Neighbor; which is a thing very necessary in every good
thing which we do, that all be done in love. This being the end of the
Commandment, even love out of a pure heart, and faith unfeigned; 1 Timothy 1. 5.
Now whosoever truly believes in Christ Jesus, that through him he is
reconciled unto God, and has his offenses forgiven him: this faith will move
him to love that God again sincerely, and his Neighbor for Gods sake, who
commanded it to be so, and has put his Image in him, and upon him; that all
our works coming out of this sound love to God and our brethren, we may
abandon all by (...) pleasing or profiting our selves, or of our own praise,
or of shame, or fear, or whatsoever it is that prevails with hypocrites; and
end eauour to refer all we do to Gods glory, and the welfare of our
Neighbor. This 3. Good end.
is a third maine condition in every good work, that the end and mark whereat
the doer aims, be good and right: the badnesse of the end marres the
goodness Actions are measured by their ends.
of the action. He that takes a good thing in hand, and propounds a wrong
scope, he is like to one who has Simile.
a good bow and arrows to shoot withal, but looks from the mark when he
shoots, such an one shall never shoot well. Here is the privilege of
faithful persons, that by the Spirit of God they are carried in their wills
and affections to desire and seek in all that they do, Gods glory, and the
edification of their brethren, even in truth and singleness of heart, and not
in profession only, as hypocrites who will talk much of glorifying God, when
their eye is never bent to this mark, but rather is cast-vpon their own
glory; which (as the herb Colloquintida) marreth every work that is spiced
with it: but the Child of God having learned, that all his works must come
from God, as the Author, and look unto God as their end (like as the Rivers
which come originally out of the Sea, and return thither again.) Therefore as
he desires to please his neighbor in that which is good for his edifying,
minding this still in all such things as do concern his brethren, how he may
better and help them either to Godward, or some other wise: so he desires
that by his obedience and good works which he does even in the least of them,
in his eating and drinking, and in his honest recreations, and not only in the
serious business of his calling and service of God; but in every thing which
he does, he may do them to Gods glory; that others upon sight and knowledge
of his carriage in his duties, may be occasioned, if they be converted, to
acknowledge Gods work in him, to the glory of God: if not, that then by his
example they may be won and drawn to godliness, and so to glorify God in the
day of their visitation. Finally, in the doing of a good work, besides all the
former conditions, it is needful that the means be good, when means are
needful. Men may 4. Good means.
not imagine, that if the thing be good they do, then it is lawful and free
to use what means they list good or bad, without choice. Good things must be
compassed Good things must have good means.
by good means. Good has no need of evil to help it. And the Apostles rule
is sound, that evil is not to be done, that good may come of it; Romans 3. 8:
no, not the least evil, to procure the greatest good. It was (...) Genesis 27.
She sins by impatiency.
sin, that she would draw the promised blessing upon Jacob, by a deceit.
And David's sin, that he would counterfeit himself an Idcot, or frantic
man, against 1 Samuel 21. 13.
the dignity of his person, to deliver himself from the Psalm. 34. 1.
Philistines. Also, it was Lots infirmity, to seek to deliver the men which
came unto him, by prostituting his Daughters to the Sodomites lust. A good
action is spoiled by wicked means, as well as by a bad end. Howsoever, God at
his pleasure may so order the success of such actions, as it shall prove good;
yet the party must be more humbled for the sin, doing amiss, then lifted up
with the happy issue of the deed. Moreover, it would not be forgotten, that in
doing good duties, a great care is to be had of circumstances, as time, 5.
Circumstances.
place, persons, and such like. Wherein great wisdom is required, to be able
to discern of these, how to do good things meetely and fitly according to
time, and other circumstances: for the missing or failing but in a
circumstance, through lack of discretion and good insight, or foresight
rather, has caused many good works to miscarry, and have full heavy success.
Of all this it follows, that no evil man can do a good work; If the tree be
evil, the fruit will be evil; Mal. 12. And that good men need wonderful
care and circumspection, as also fervent prayer for great aid from God, to be
enabled to do such things, as shall be good when they are done: but here
withal let it be observed, that when they have done all, and brought with them
all the conditions of a good work, yet their work will still have both wants
and blemishes. As clear water that passes through a muddy channel, or pure
liquour put into a musty caske, takes corruption from them: so our works as
they pass through our understanding, and will, which are not renewed but in
part, and are partly flesh; therefore draw filth and uncleanness from our
inbred corruption, to the defiling of them; yea, and justly deserving that they
should be refused, and we also the doers: as certainly they would be, if with
the eye of rigorous and exact justice God should behold them. Whence it is,
that no godly man can be justified by his works: for the works of the Law do
make us righteous before God, when they are fully performed without any the
least default; for then even by the compact of Gods own mouth, saying, Do
this, and live; Gal. 3. there belongs unto them (as a debt) eternal life. But
sithence none ever kept the Law thus since man's fall, save Christ; therefore
Righteousness is not to be sought by the Law: which rather reuealeth our
unrighteousness, and Gods wrath against the same. And as it is impossible the
Law should justify us, because of the infirmity which is in us, whereby we are
hindered from answering the strictness of it: so we need not fetch
Righteousness from the Law, because we have it by grace, imputing freely to
the believers the doings and sufferings of Christ for our perfect justice with
God; besides, our good works following our Justification, as fruits and
effects, they cannot go before as causes of it. Wherefore all Christians are to
be admonished, to lay aside all opinion of their own Righteousness, as not
thinking ever to obtain life from God by their good doings, be they never so
many or worthy, when as one sin alone spoils all the righteousness of our
works; even as one drop of Ink does spoil a whole goblet of Wine. And
having utterly renounced all affiance in our works, to put no manner of
confidence in them for salvation; let them strive to catch fast hold upon that
Righteousness of Christ, which alone has power to merit eternal glory, to
every one that believes in the name of Christ, that abandoning the
righteousness which is by the Law; we may be found in Christ, having (...). 3.
bis Righteousness, which is by faith; Romans 10. 2.


Aquila. But Sir, if it be so, that such (...) do stick to out best works,
as you say, that they cannot (...) us, and merit ought at Gods hand, unless
it (...) eternal death: how comes it that God is so much pleased with them,
as to liken them to a fruit, and to an odor of sweet smell, and to sacrifice
and sweet (...)? and many other such comparisons there be in holy Scripture,
which declare the works of godly Christians to be highly pleasing to God. And
withal seeing we cannot (if we had a world of good works) by them all obtain
and purchase forgiveness of one sin, or the possession of heavenly joy, no not
so long as for one hour; to what purpose then are we so to labor in the doing
of them, as we are often commanded to do, with very great charge of great care
to be showed and used in the working of them, and there to come no good of them
toward our salvation, it should seem it is labor lost?


Apollos. Though there be in the most perfect work Good works please God, and
why? Woe be to the most commendable life of any man, if it be judged without
mercy, says Augustine.
of any Child of God here upon earth, so much fault, both through the want that
is in it, and the blot that sticks to it, (self love, pride, hypocrisy, and
other corruptions being blended and mixed with it) as that God might worthily
cast the doer into hell, if mercy set apart, he should judge it extremely; and
therefore just cause of being deeply humbled, is ministered to every godly man
for his choysest actions, even for them to entreat the Lord not to enter into
judgment with him, marking narrowly that which is amiss: yet the good works
of the faithful, even the very least of them are very pleasing and acceptable
to God, as the Word every where bears good witness; both in particular of
some of his childrens works, as that of (...); (...) 4. 4. God had respect to
Abel and to his offering; and Noah's sacrifice, that God smelt a savor of rest;
Genesis 8. 21. Of Abraham's offering his son, ye see likewise what testimony
there is of it; Genesis 22. verse 12. 16. And also in general of all good works
done, by which of his Children soever, that they are sacrifices accepted of him
through Christ; 1 Pet. 2. 5. And such sacrifices as God is well pleased
withal; Heb. 13. 16. And certain it is, that God would not command the doing
of them, not make such liberal promises to them being done, were it not that
he has a pleasure in them, and liked well of them; and sundry are the
respects for which he is so delighted even with the imperfect and stained
works of his Children. First, because they are his Ye are the workmanship of
God, created to good works, etc. Ephe. 2. 10. His own Spirit framing them to
do good, inspiring them with the motions and will, and enabling them with the
power to do them. As it is written; The will Philip. 2. 13.
and the deed are both of God; Phil. 2. 13. Hence are good works called,
Fruits of the Spirit; Galat. 5. 22. Thereby to teach us, that good works
being wrought in the regenerate, by the operation of the Spirit, therefore they
are accepted and pleasing to God; even as fruit is pleasant to the taste.
Secondly, he likes them all the spots, which through our corruption do stick
unto them, wiping them away by the effectual application of the blood and
death of Christ, which has the force of intercession in Heaven, coming
between the justice of his Father and man's (...), which still abides in his
members. So as being cleansed by the imputation of Christ his sacrifice and
perfect obedience, to the working believer; hereof it comes to pass, that
God beholds in their works nothing save that which is his own, being all
forgiven and covered; the rest being his, he is maruellously delighted in it,
yea, so far as to crown it with an everlasting reward. First, Deus in nobis
coronat sua dona.
he gives the power to do good, then crowns his own gift. The places of
Scripture are well known to every one exercised therein, where the Lord
promises reward, yea, great reward, not alone to the greatest works of
Christianity, as suffering reproaches, scorns, losses, death for Christ: but
even to the meanest and lowest, as to the feasting of the poor; Luke 14. 12.
to the giving of a (...) of cold (...) to a Disciple or Prophet for Christ his
sake; Mat. 10. 42. And at the last day, the feeding of the hungry, clothing the
naked, visiting the imprisoned Christians, shall have the Crown of immortal
glory and blessing; Mat. 25. awarded to them, no less then to the feeding and
guiding the Church, which is the weightiest and worthiest work of godliness;
1 Pet. 5. 5. Whereby it is (...), (...) well God likes of the voperfect good
deed of his Children, when for a few works, done in a moment, and of no great
value, he is content to render glory, even an immortal weight of it.


Aquila. This it is that moves many to thinks, that there is in good works a
power to merit, because a reward is promised to them; but what may be the
reason, that seeing there is no merit in any man's work, yet works should be
rewarded?


Apollos. Besides the consideration of imperfections Good works merit not, and
why?
and spiritual pollutions, which be in our best works (as we have heard) which
has caused the godly, that they would not trust to their own godliness, but
have ever appealed to the mercy seat of Christ Jesus; furthermore, Debitum non
est meritum. Merita nostra, Domini misericordia, meritum meum, mors (...)
Christ. Bernard.
our works are not our own, but come from his free Spirit, and are a due debt
which we owe to God our Creator and Redeemer; so as we have done but what we
ought, when we have done all; Luke 17. There being also no equality between
the infiniteness of heavenly bliss, and our finite labors in well doing;
therefore there can be no merit in them: neither is there any cause to look
for any merit from them; there is sufficiency enough of merit in the works and
passions of our Lord, to deserve for us eternal glory. Howbeit, it pleases
God to make unto our A reward due unto good works, and Why?
works a gracious promise of reward in his Word, which speaking according to
our capacity, who give rewards to men in the end of the day, after all their
labor and work is finished; as in them who wrought in the Vineyard; Matthew
20. Thence it is, that eternal life being bestowed on the faithful, after all
their labors and travail taken in the service of their most good God, in the
end and evening of their life, is called a reward; and a reward it is, not a
merit. A reward freely given for his goodness and promise sake, to them A
reward of favor, not of debt.
that believe in his Son (there being not any temporal benefit, no not a
piece of bread, which otherwise Romans 4. 4.
comes to their hand then by free mercy) and not a reward of debt and desert;
as if either the worthiness God is not obnoxious (...) his creature.
of the work simply considered, or as it is dipped and died in the blood of
Christ, could bind God to us, and Heb. 1, 3.
make him a debtor; it being that which Christ has done in himself, and not
that which he has wrought in us that has merited our salvation in heaven, and
all things which belong thereunto. Yet such is the bounty of our heavenly
Father, that as natural Parents by Simile.
promised gifts and rewards stir up their children to do what otherwise is
their duty; so he prouokes and quickens the slow dullness of his children, and
by rewards (as spurs in their sides) eggs and excites the^ to the doing of
that, which otherwise by duty they are manifoldly and strongly bound to do.
And these rewards, they are neither mean nor few, but both worthy and many,
yea sundry and of diverse kinds; first, bodily or worldly, for godliness has
even the promises of this life; secondly spiritual, to wit, increase of
spiritual graces, as it is written, To him that has more shall be given, and
he shall have abundance: Lastly, eternal, even the Crown of life, the
Paradise of God, rest from labor, the tree of life, which are promised to such
as overcome, Revel. 2, 7. and 3, 5. and 14, 13.

Now the intention of God in offering such great and manifold recompense being
this, to quicken his own unto all manner of love and obedience toward him: it
is therefore very meet and lawful, yea necessary, that Gods children should
by such encouragements hearten themselves in their course. For howsoever it be
fit and requisite, that the will of our heavenly Father and his glory be first
looked unto; that our love to his word and to the praise of his name, do set us
on work to do our duties, as we may have this testimony, that in our service
of God, and in all the good works which we do, we seek not our selves, but
the pleasing and praise of God, by doing that which he commands: yet
afterward, and (as it were) in the second place, we may turn our eyes unto the
reward promised us, thereby to help our slacknesse and slownesse to good,
considering, that our labor in the Lord shall not be in vain, but bring
forth a great harvest of comfort and bliss in the end; we reaping eternal
joys of those things which here we did sow to the spirit. As Moses encouraged
himself to care and constancy in his good course, by the remembrance of the
great recompense to come, Heb. 11, 26. so did Christ animate his Disciples,
Mat. 5, 11, 12. by the example of the Prophets, and promise of reward. Also
Paul thus quickened the Corinthians to constancy, 2 Cor. 4. verse last: The
things (says he) which we see not, are eteruall, therefore faint not. And 2 Timothy 2, 12. If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, therefore be
resolved to stick to Christ in life and death. Do we not see by common
experience, how men of all Trades, Husbandmen, Soldiers, Merchants, are made
hardy and bold to attempt and do great and dangerous things upon hope of
receiving good things in the end, as either victory, or spoil, or commodity,
or such earthly perishing things? How much more may true Christians, by the
hope of neuer-withering treasures, provoke themselves to enter into, and endure
the travails and (...) of that way, which brings to heaven in the end? They
have many things within them, and from without them; from satan, evil men, and
themselves, to make them faint and languish; therefore it will be needful to
take all helps and means of courage and heart unto themselves, seeing God
allows them so to do, and godly men in all ages have done so. By which it
appears how the Papists in the Rhemish Testament wrong us, in saying; That
we teach not our hearers either to do good, or abstain from evil, for hope
of heaven, or fear of hell.


Aquila. This is indeed a special good that comes to our selves of good
works, which though they deserve nothing, yet he that does them, and abounds
in them, is not sentaway empty handed, but rather has entrance made
abundantly into the blessed kingdom of glory. Which being given as a free
reward, as it more sets forth the mercy of God, to reward that 2. Pet. I, II.
which he might condemn; so it moves his children Our merit is misery. It is
sufficient for our merit, to know we do not merit.
the more heartily to love him, who not only without, but against all merit on
their part, does vouchsafe so richly to requite their poor endeavors in doing
his will. But be there not other good uses whereunto good works do serve, and
for which the godly do cheerfully take them in hand?


Apollos. Yea, very many and excellent: every one Use of good works.
serving as a strong motive to procure all care of doing them. For that God
that has not made nor ordained ought in vain, no not the least of his
creatures, nor the meanest of his ordinances; much less is it to be thought,
that good works were ordained to no use, or to small use. But if any thing in
the world be rich and plentiful for happy and most gracious uses, good works
may have the first place and rank, as being fruitful on every side. For, if
we look unto God himself, then the good works and good life of his children
expresses 1. Use of good works, in respect of God.
their great thankfulness toward him, for the great benefit of their
redemption. Also it cheareth him, and rejoices his heart (as I may so speak)
even as our evil works do grieve him, and are to him as gall or sour grapes
to our teeth, Deuteronomy. 32, 32. so the righteous works of all the godly, be as an
odor or sweet savor, as precious spices, as pleasant fruits: himself so
testifying, that his soul is delighted with them. See M. John Shaw his trea
tise of Mary's blessedness. Fol. 89, and 90.
And lastly, God is both pleased, and obeyed, and honored by good works,
which are fruits of righteousness by Christ, to the praise of God, Phil. 1,
11. Therefore, we should let our good works break forth, that men seeing
them, may glorify our heavenly Father, Mat. 5, 16. For, as the evil and loose
behavior of such as profess God to be their Father, does discredit him
amongst men, as himself complains, My name is blasphemed amongst the Gentiles
through you, Romans 2, 24. so it is much to the glory and advancement of Gods
name, when the professors of godliness, line as becomes the Gospel.

Now, if we look to the Gospel of God, that is 2. In respect of the Gospel.
beautified and adorned by the good works of such as know and profess it, as
it is written, Let servants show all good faithfulness, that they may adorn
the doctrine of God in all things, Titus 2, 9. If the good life of a servant be
an ornament and renown to the Gospel, when he deals uprightly and faithfully
toward his master, what countenance do we think shall be gained to the holy
doctrine of the word, when men of greater degrees and places be full of good
works? Surely, as it turns to the reproach of the word, if any who live under
it live otherwise then well: so on the contrary part, their godly and honest
conversation, turns to the credit and honor of the Word. Which is a thing
that Gods children ought earnestly to think upon, that God is contented, that
himself and his Word should have no more respect and estimation amongst men,
then our good actions and lives shall win and purchase unto it.

Now if we turn our eyes home to our selves, besides 3. In respect of our
selves.
that which was touched before, our good works are profitable every way.
First, to purchase us a good report, which is better then silver; to have such
as fear God, to speak well of us, is more worth then all riches; Proverbs 22.
1. This fruit Abraham got by his works, James 2. 24. For he was justified,
viz. approved and commended for a just person by his works. Also, the
faithful mentioned, Hebrews 11 were well reported of, through their faith and
fruits thereof. Thus Timethy got himself a good testimony: but yet further,
our good works they be testimonies of our faith, to show it to be no dead, but
a lively faith; which being an invisible grace, is yet after a sort made
visible by well living; as it is written: Show me thy faith by thy works,
James 2. 18. Even as health is known to be good and sound, Simile.
by good disposition of all outward parts of the body; so our faith, our
calling, our election, be manifested and confirmed unto us by our study, and
practice of good works; 2 Peter, Chap. 1. verse 5, 6, 7, 8. Make your calling
and election sure, by good works. Finally, a man is not more known to live a
natural life, by speaking, seeing, moving, then a Christian is known to live
the life of faith, by his godly and righteous works. What should I say, that
it is more then likely, that as our works shall have a reward of free favor,
so the measure of our works (as they exceed in number and excellency) shall
have a proportionable measure of glory? Certainly much will be required of them
who have received much, and why may we not think, that much will be rendered to
them who have done much? For to every one shall be given, according as his
works shall be; 4. In respect of other men.
1 Cor. 3. To proceed, if we regard other men, the exercise of good works, is
fruitful to all sorts and kinds Unconverted.
of men: for they which belong unto God, and be yet 1. Elect.
unconverted, by our good works which they shall see, may be moved more
readily to hearken to that truth, that works so mightily in us. Therefore
Peter counsels faithful wives, by their good works to win their
unbelieving husbands; 1 Peter 3. 1. Also, 1 Cor. 7. 16. For how know thou O
woman, whether thou shall save thy [vnbeleeuing] Husband? But if any be
unconverted, and belong not to God; these by our good 2. Not Elect.
works shall have their mouths stopped, that they cannot speak evil of us,
or of our Religion. For so is the will of God, that with well doing, we may
stop the ignorance of foolish men; 1 Peter 2. 15. Toward such as (...).
be already converted, and become faithful, our good 1. Weak.
works have their proper use either to confirm and strengthen them, if they
be weak in the faith, as Christ says to Peter, Confirm thy brethren; Luke
22. 32. Or 2. Strong.
else to comfort and rejoice such as be strong; as John rejoices, because the
elect Lady and her children walked in the truth; 2 John 2. And Paul is greatly
comforted by the faith and godliness of the Philippians, Philip. 3. 5.
Insomuch as that which is spoken of the Vine and the fruit thereof; Judge. 9.
13. agrees better to good works, the fruits of our faith; that by them God
and men are cheered. Which should exceedingly work and prevail with all good
men to do them, and to do them yet more cheerfully and plentifully, not
only because (as we use to say of things we buy) there is the more to put into
the Inuentory; so the more good works we have, the more there is to further
our reckoning: but that our name may shine as the Sun in brightness, our faith
and salvation be sealed, our God glorified, our Religion beautified, our
Neighbor edified in his soul by godly admonition, refreshed in his body and
bowels by the fruits of our mercy and love; finally, Satan and our adversaries
confounded. And for the better furthering of our selves in the practice of
them, let us further remember these few things, that our life is short,
opportunity will be taken away from us; therefore while we have time, let us do
all the good we can, considering that we have lost much time already, and
heretofore have done many things to the displeasure and discredit of so
gracious a God. Moreover, we have received many favors from God, namely,
remission of all our sins, and adoption by Christ; sanctification by his
Spirit, with infinite other benefits for soul or body. Let these mercies
increase and constrain our love to well doing and set us on fire with zeal of
good works; seeing Christ purges us from our iniquity, to the end that we
should be a peculiar people, fervently given to do good; Titus 2. 14, 15. And
as we like to see other things fruitful, our Kine, and Sheep, our Orchards,
our Fields: so let it be our care and love to see our selves fruitful, (as it
were our shame and reproach to be barren) that we may be like unto Jesus
Christ our head, of whom it is written in the Gospel; That he went about
doing good; etc. and that he did all things well: that we treading now in the
steps of his faith, and love, obedience, and patience, we may at length reign
with him in glory. For such as follow him now in the paths of godliness,
shall hereafter sit with him at his Table in his Fathers Kingdom; whither
Christ Jesus safely and speedily bring us, for his name sake,


Amen.
The ninth part of the Dialogue; Of particular good Works: first concerning
God.
Of the Love of God.
Apollos. NOw Neighbor Aquila, your constancy in following this conference,
makes me think you are like him, of whom it is written; That where he
begins a good work, he will finish it. You have taken in hand a good work,
and you are desirous to accomplish it; and to tell you truth, so am I too: and
now that we draw toward an end, let us keep close to it, till we arrive where
we would be; there is nothing so hard, but constant labor will overcome it at
last.


Aquila. Constancy in any thing advisedly taken up, is a very commendable
thing: but Sir according to your counsel, let us fall to our worke^ We have
spoken of good works generally, we are now to handle some especial good
works, which are more excellent and necessary, and whereupon all the rest do
depend: what choice shall we make? what good works shall we single out from
the rest, therein to spend our time?


Apollos. My advice is this: Whereas good works be all duties whereby either
God or our neighbor be served and benefited, and the duties which we owe to
God are chief, as cause and ground of the rest: first, First of the works of
the first Table.
we will cull out such principal good works as concern God immediately,
namely, the love of God, 2. his fear, 3. of trust in him, 4. thanksgiving, 5.
prayer, 6. reverence toward his name, 7. sanctifying his Sabbach, and lastly
of patience in suffering: and then we will descend to such fruits of faith
and repentance as do belong to our neighbor. For the first and great
commandment is to love God with all the heart, and Mat. 22.
next, to love my neighbor as my self.


Aquila. I do well approne of this order; not only because I know no better,
but because I judge it to be the best and fittest. Let me then hear you tell
me what it is to love God? wherefore we stand bound to love him? and what it
is that begets in us the love of God? And then if ye will, declare the measure
and manner of this love, how much it ought to be, and how it may be discerned
to be in us: and withal of the effects which this love will be get in his
children.


Apollos. Love is such an affection of the heart, as Love of God: what it is to
love.
desires to be knit and nearly joined to the thing or party loved. This is
the nature of love, so to carry the 1. Commandment.
heart with desire unto that which is loved, as nothing will content till it be
enjoyed and had. The truth of this may appear in that love which is
inordinate: and also in all well governed love. The thief, the adulcerer, the
gamester, the covetous, are by their love (such as they bear to their booty,
their whores, their game, and gain) so possessed, as they are then quiet and
not before, when they have and be joined in one to that which they love: as
their parting from the thing loved and losing it is their grief, yea sometime
their death: so their being with it, and having it, is their contentment, and
joy, and life. Stories and experience afford us sufficient proof hereof. We
see the Gamester never well but when he is at dice, or cards, or other game.
The Fornicator is never at rest, unless he be with his harlot. The Covetous
man is best pleased, when he looks upon, or fingereth money. Now, in
well-gouerned love it is right so, whether it be natural, or humane, or
religious. Beasts which out of narall instinct do love their young, how do they
fare? what coffeehouse they show when their young are taken from them? How
do Parents grieve and take on for the death or absence of their children whom
they love; being well pleased and delighted when they enjoy their presence and
company? In that humane love which is amongst friends, it fares after the same
manner. Let the example of Jonathan and David teach it, 2 Samuel chapter 1. What
pleasure took they in each others presence and welfare? And how bitter was it
to Ionathans heart, that it should go amiss with David, and to David's to miss
Jonathan his friend, whom he loved as a wife her husband?

This is also the nature of religious love: Such as What it is to love God.
love God, or Christ, or his word, or people, they covet to be linked unto them
as nearly as may be, delighting themselves in the partaking with them, being
much troubled for the want of them: as is to be seen in the example of the
Church in the Canticles, Cant. 5, 6. when her beloved was for a time gone from
her: and every faithful soul finds it to be their grief, to be held a
while from the word, or from their presence, or conference with God. See Psalm.
42. also Psa. 84, 1, 2, 3. upon all which I conclude, That the love of God is
that affection which makes the christian soul take comfort and contentment in
the communion with God, desiring and delighting to be more and more straightly
knit to him, and more fully to participate in him and in his gracious blessings
and love tokens.

Sundry are the causes for which Gods people ought Why God is to be loved.
to love him thus: For, they are his creatures, he their maker; they his
servants, he their Lord; they his friends, and which is more, his children,
and he their dear Father in Christ; yea they his spouse, he their husband: so
as they are tied and bound to him by all bonds of love and duty: God being
unto them in a most special manner all these things we have said. Moreover,
he loved them first, before they loved him; yea being his enemies, he loved us
when we hated him, and gave us a sufficient pawn of his love, even his own
Son, to be a man, to be a servant, yea to be a slain sacrifice for us. And
withal, has by his holy Spirit which he has given us, shed abroad this love
in our hearts. Unto all which, if we will add the consideration of all the
good which he has already done to us in our bodies and minds, in earthly and
heavenly things, and the great things which we hope to have hereafter, and the
strait commandment which it laid upon us, to love the Lord our God; and that
if we love him, the commodity is not to him, but to our How much God is to be
loved.
selves: then will it easily appear, how diversely and greatly we are obliged
to this God, to render him this duty of love; where in that we may proceed
well, we are to know, that as our measure of loving him, must be to love him
above measure, as he has loved us infinitely, and is that most perfect goodness
and beauty worthy of perfect love: so our rule to guide our love, By what rule
our love is to be guided.
is to love him, not for his benefits and good things only or chief, but to
love all other things in God, and for God, and God for himself, even for his
most sweet and gracious mercies, and for his unmeasurable holiness and truth.

This is ingenuous and filial love, such as becomes children. The other,
being that which arises from his blessings principally or solely, is mercenary
and meet for slaves or servants. For though the blessings of God be such as
deserve at our hands not only thankfulness, but increase of love and
obedience, yet we may not love him either only or cheefely in regard of them,
but principally because he is that Sovereign goodness worthy of all our love,
though he should never do us good; as godly persons are loved of us, albeit we
neither presently have, not hope for any benefit from them.

This pure love and unfeigned, it is engendered from Whence our love to God
springs.
the sense of Gods love toward us; whence arises in our hearts a love toward
him: as it is written, We love him, because he first loved us, 1 John 4, ver.
19. Thus it is said of the woman, Luke 7, 47. that because many sins were
forginen, therefore she loved much. Thus it is when the love of God is
manifested unto us in the forgiveness of all our sins, and so in our
reconciliation with God by Christ, this love constraines us to love God
ardently. 2 Cor. 5, 14.
Because he has so loved us, as to give his Son for us, we are moved, and that
most justly to love this most loving and merciful God. And this is it which is
written, that Faith works by love; Galat. 5. 6. For after that once we
believe the promise of grace, and by faith have laid hold on Gods mercies
offered in Christ; this faith sets on work our love to Godward first, and
afterward toward such as God would have us love, even to our enemies. And
this is the proper effect of our What be the effects and signs of our love to
God.
love toward God, namely, that it brings forth another love, wherewith we
love, and be ready to do good to all men, especially his Children: it being so,
that we cannot love him which begets, but we must needs love them which are
begotten; 1 John 5. 1. For as it must needs follow of Gods love to us, that it
stir us up to love him, so it is necessary that our love wherewith we love
him, do cause us to love all that bear his Image; especially such as bear it
by regeneration: Insomuch, that if any man say; He loves God, and yet hates
his brother, surely that man is a liar, and has no truth in him; 1 John 4. And
this love of others, is such a fruit and effect of our love to God, as it is a
special token whereby to judge of the truth and sincerity of it. Whosoever
then loves other men, namely, such as are Gods Children, in this respect as
they belong unto God, and because he commands love toward them; I say
whosoever upon these grounds unfeignedly loves his Neighbor, (friend, or
enemy,) this is an evidence of a man truly loving God: for he that said, That
he cannot love God whom he sees not, who loves not his Neighbor whom he does
see; 1 John 4. 20. has also said; If we love one another, his love (...)
perfect in us: 1 John 4. 12. That is, herein we have a testimony of our love,
where with we love God, that it is not counterfeit, but sincere, because we do
by love embrace one another for his sake, even to please him.


Aquila. It is an easy and common thing to dissemble the love of God, insomuch
as they which be furthest from loving him in truth, are found most forward to
protest it in words. Therefore howsoever this which you say do much avail us
to discern it, (for the love of others, especially of our enemies, which
proceeds from the love of God, it is the true touchstone and trial of it) yet
may it please you to deliver some more and more plain notes and tokens of our
love to God, as every one who will not be deceived, may have wherewith to
prove to himself the soundness of his affection this way; and in declaring of
this, ye shall make known what works and duties are fitting for them to do,
who have, and profess to have the love of God: and so by one bush stop two
gappes, and plaster two walls with one trowell.


Apollos. It is true which you say, the proper effects are best means to judge
of the cause; and the selfsame effects which be marks of our love, be also
duties and works, which such as love God are bound to do: which if they be
not done, will testify that all profession of the love of God, is but
dissimulation. Such persons as do in truth bear a loving heart to More
proofs of the sound love of God.
God, it will lead them to an hearty love of his Word; which is to be seen in
David, a man, if any other, very full of love toward God; the zeal of whose
name, had even eaten him up: Psalm 119. 139. And this he witnesses herein,
that his Word was his delight; Oh (says he) how do I love thy Law! Psalm
119. 79. My delight is in thy Commandments, verse 47. Thy Testimonies are Such
as love God, do love his word, which they show forth by 1. hearing, 2. marking,
3 remembering, 4. laying it up in their hearts, 5. delighting in it, 6. by
meditation, 7 praise 8 and practice or keeping it.
better to me then thousands of gold or silver, verse 72. They were as sweet
to his soul, as honey is to his mouth; verse 103. Now whereas hypocrites seem
to have the love of the Word, it is but in seeming; for they love it only for
knowledge sake, the desire whereof is a thing agreeable to Nature; but Gods
Children love it, because it is the truth of God, and their appointed food and
nourishment, whereby they are to be fed to life eternal. And further, their
love to it does breed (which is not to be found in any hypocrite) an earnest
Hypocrites delight in knowledge, but not in the thing (to wit, Christ) known
and unfeigned desire, care, and endeavor to do it, and practice it; wherein
they well declare how well they love God: As it is written; If ye love me,
keep my Commandments: John 14. 15. And yet more plainly afterward, verse
21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them; (that is to say, strives
what he may to keep them) this is he which loves me; see verse 23. to the
same purpose. All which signifying thus much, that Christ Jesus takes trial
of our love toward himself, by our loving, and out of love, laboring to do
his will revealed in his Word. As on the one side, our love to him is
manifested, by hating and flying such evils as he has forbid, according to
that is said in the Psalm; Ye that love the Lord, hate the thing that is
evil: Psalm 97. 10. And Psalm 119. 128. I esteem all thy Precepts most
just, therefore I hate every evil way: So on the other side, the delight we
have in seeking to know the Word, for this end, that we may be the doers of
the good things commanded therein, it is a good and sound proof of our love to
God, the Author of the Word: who will be loved in his Word, and trusted in his
word, and feared according to his word; whereof we conclude, That love of God,
which is severed from love and obedience of his Word, to be hypocritical. It
is also an infallible mark and duty of sound Their love to Gods Children, it
is both in affect, and effect, in word and in work.
love toward God, to love him in his Children, and his children in him (as was
touched before) when not for pleasure we have in them, or profit by them, or
for alliance or acquaintance sake, or any moral persuasion; but principally
for their adoption sake, and for the likeness which they have with God by
their grace of sanctification, we have our affections more set toward them,
then toward any other which are not such; yea, though they be our natural
brethren and sisters. Moreover, all love has a A feeling, and suffering
together.
simpathy, or fellow-feeling, causing David; Psalm. 69. 9. Acts 14.
also in John 2: in Paul and Barnabas, and others, who They rent their
clothes, etc.
have been moved in Gods cause as in their own; and more taking to heart
things which happened either with, or against Gods name, then their own; a true
note of true love. This is also a property of love, willingly to praise whom
we heartily love; as hatred appears by discovering faults and fraileties, and
vpbraiding in reproachful sort, such as offend with their infirmities: so love
delights to lay open and commend the perfection of that which is loved. This is
to be seen in marriage love, and in the love of friends; so it is also in
Christian love: it stirs up to the searching out and commending of the
excellencies of God. I will love thee dearly O Lord my strength (says David)
the Lord is my rock, my fortress, and he that delivers me; Psalm. 18, 1.
David's love which he bare to God in his heart, filled his mouth and his Pen too
with the praises of his God. Whereof also there is an example in the Spouse of
Christ, in Canticles 5. 10. My beloved (says he) is white and ruddy, the
fairest of ten thousand; she loved much, and therefore she praised much. Add
unto all this, that love does not only mention with joy and gladness the
praises of God; Amor, sui diffusivus.
it is content to be at cost with God, and to bestow gifts for his sake: for
Gods Children out of their love unto God, they do first give themselves unto
God, even their souls and bodies, to do him service in practice of all duties
commanded. Even as the Israelites brought their sacrifices freely, to offer
them unto God under the Law; so the faithful willingly offer themselves a
living sacrifice under the Gospel; Romans 12. 1, 2. They give also their graces,
and set them on work toward him, and their brethren; as they receive of God
whatsoever graces they have, so they do return them unto him, to honor him,
and serve their brethren with them. The hypocrite as he loves God for his
benefits, and so long as he does bestow good things on him; but let God once
take away his blessings, the cause of his love, and then his love fails him;
his blessings and the hypocrites love live and die together: so the gifts and
graces which the hypocrite has, are referred not unto God, to glorify him
therewith; but to the pleasing, profiting, and praising of themselves, as their
own conscience will tell them, if they will hearken unto it, and believe the
testimony thereof. It is otherwise with the godly, who in the use of their
gifts seek not themselves, but God, whom they love; and upon whom they are
ready to bestow not themselves alone, and their graces, but their goods too:
which albeit God has no need of, because gold is his, and silver is his; Hag.
2. 9. Psalm. 50. Yet when we give forth his goods to the maintenance of his
worship, or the place of his worship, or the Ministers of his Word, or to the
relief of others the Saints and members of Christ, then we do honor the Lord
with our substance, and do give it unto himself: As he will openly
acknowledge at the last day; What ye did to one of these, ye did it to me:
Matthew 25. Martha loved Christ, John 11. and the woman spoken of, Luke 7. 37.
Also, the women mentioned, Luke the 8. 23. and all they declared their love to
him by their charges and cost, which they put themselves to for his sake. That
we cannot do to him in his person as they did (because he is gone to Heaven,
and has now no need) we are to do it to him in his servants and people; which
is taken as a fruit of our love to himself. And as our cost about him, so our
of all outward observations, does far surpass the pains which they take in
all other things of their own. The indefatigable and intolerable labor and
toil of body and mind which Christ did undergo, and which Paul also did
endure, about the redeeming, and instructing of the Church; the incredible
pains which in prayer, and preaching, and living well, both James is reported
to have made his knees hard (...) Camels knees, with labor in prayer.
James, and the rest of the Apostles have suffered; it clecrely demonstrateth,
that the love of God and his Church is painful and laborious. There is nothing
so hard which love will not overcome; all pains to it seem pleasure and
pastime. As they then which stick at their pains, and withdraw their hand
from labor in the things which concern Gods glory, and their own eternal
good, do sufficiently tell us how little and poor their love is: so the great
and constant pains, which neither of vainglory, nor of any corrupt respect,
but in uprightness of heart Gods Children put themselves unto, that they may
execute the will of God in their callings; is their acquittance and
testimonial of the great measure of their love to Godward. Finally, they make
it David banished by Absolon, wept bitterly, not so much 2 Samuel 15.
for loss of his Kingdom, as for Gods anger against him. Whereas such as do
but only pretend to love God, they do not chiefly joy in his favor, but in
their outward comforts; neither is their greatest grief for the displeasure of
God against them, but for outward damages and harms, wherein they bewray that
other things are more loved of them then God himself, whatsoever they say. It
is clean otherwise with the godly, for in them the holy Spirit of love does
engender more joy in the persuasion and feeling of Gods favor, then David's
mourning, Pe ters tears. Christ's agony, do manifest this truth.
worldly men have when their Corn, and Oil, and Wine does abound; and more
hearts sorrow in missing of Gods gracious presence, then a mother conceiueth
for the death of her only son: a strong evidence that God is their chief
love.


Aquila. These things shall move me I trust to prefer God, and Christ his
Son, his Word, and Children, in my love; and to strain my self by all
means to declare that I account of God, and delight in him above all things;
endeavoring how I may attain near unto that which is commanded, even to love
him with all my heart and strength: and though I cannot perfectly, yet I will
pray for grace, that I may love him yet more fervently, and less fainedly. Now
Sir, may it please you that we pass forwards unto that other work of fearing
this God, which after his love is next to be spoken of?


Apollos. Well pleased so to do. If I first advertise you of something which
almost I forgot, namely; that as our love to God is approved, by our praises of
those good things which are in himself, and be done for us; so he takes it as
a great fruit and sign of our love, in our necessity to make him our refuge
and help, by calling upon him alone in all our distresses.


Aquila. Ere ye set upon your new work, do make this point plain: for me
thinks God does rather herein witness his love to us, in that he would be
found of us when we seek, and in affording us liberty and leave to come unto
him; then we which seek and come unto him, do thereby testify our love unto
him.


Apollos. One would think that it were so, that our Prayer, a fruit and token
of our love.
suing and begging things needful of God, should more utter our need and want
of him, then our love to him; yet so it is, that our prayers are good proofs
of our love: for seeing upon the good success of our prayers, when they are
heard and granted according to Gods promise; there does follow the
demonstration of Gods great mercy and truth, in keeping touch with his Children
to the praise of his name: therefore Gods Children out of a love they bear
unto his name, do seek and sue unto God, not so much to be helped and
succored, as that in the fulfilling of his Word made to their prayers, his
goodness and truth may appear to his glory. For God himself says, that when
he hears his people that call upon him in their trouble, they are bound to
glorify him; Psalm 50. And the love of this glory moves them to pray, rather
then the desire and hope of their own good: happy is the soul with whom it is
thus. Henceforth we will speak of his fear; for of the love of God enough
has been spoken already.


Aquila. Do ye judge of the fear of God to be such Of the fear of God.
a work as is peculiar unto the Elect and regenerate persons? We read of many
wicked men, who have feared God. Foelix an Heathen, feared and trembled at the
hearing of God and his Word; Acts 24. 25. Pharaeh was afraid of God, and
therefore prayed Moses to entreat for him, to remove the plague from him;
Exodus 8. 8. Ahab as lewd as he was, being a man sold to do wickedness, yet
was not void of the fear of God, which enforced him to humble himself in
sack cloth and ashes; I Kin. 21. 27. And infinite others which belong not to
God, but were strangers to him, yet their hearts were not wholly estranged from
his fear.


Apollos. Many evil men which live in the Church The fear of God, how it
belongs to the wicked.
under a standing Ministry, do attain by the power thereof unto a shadow of
Sanctification, such as shall work a certain reformation in them, but a
slight and light one, not sound and through, such as seasoneth and changes the
heart; and unto a resemblance of repentance, so as they do many works of
repenting persons, they have a certain grief and sear of sin, they in a
sort humble themselves, confess their sins, leave many sins touching the
outward act and work: but never come to purpose in their heart to endeavor an
utter forsaking of all and every sin, with a true hatred and loathing of
sin, as it is the offense of a good and righteous God; and they do many
works, which for the matter and substance of the work done, are good, but yet
they are not done in a good manner, and to a good end, out of a heart purged by
faith, respecting Gods glory: so they have a show of love to God, and of
fearing God. Howbeit, they are but counterfets in all, and namely in their
love, which is not of God himself, but of his good things, where with their
love does arise and fall. They are likewise hypocrites in their fear, which is
servile only in regard of Gods power, and strict justice; and of that
punishment which his powerful justice has either threatened, or already
inflicted upon them. Their fear is not toward God for his mercies, and
because he is unto them a gracious God and Father; but because he is
righteous, armed with might to hurt and plague them: as the Apostle speaks of
circumcision of the Israelites, and of Abraham's seed, there is not one kind of
these; so it is of the fear of God; it is not single and of one kind, but it
is diverse. There is an Israelite, and an Israelite; one in heart, another
according to the flesh: a circumcision Romans 2, verse last.
inward and in truth, another after the letter, and outward in the flesh. So
there is a fear, and a fear; a Fear of God, twofold.
good fear, which we are exhorted unto, and an evil fear which we are
called from. Fear not (says Moses) Exodus 20. 20.
for God is come to prove you, that his fear may be in you, that ye sin not;
Exodus 20. 20. See in this one short sentence, that they are bid not to fear,
and yet charged to have Gods fear in them: for there is a fear slavish 1. A
servile fear; of this fear it is true which is commonly said;
and servile, arising out of the gultinesse of sins, and strengthened with
dread of punishment from the righteous power of God. This fear corrects not
Whom we fear, we hate, and wish they were not.
sin inwardly, it may well bridle some sin, and restrain from the
external work of sin; but it does not at all reform the sinner inwardly,
who is the more driven from God by it; and we are dehorted from such a fear.
And there is another fear which is filial and 2. Filial fear.
child-like, which proceeds from Gods mercies in Christ, and brings sinners
nearer in heart and affection to God, holding them closer to him in all lawful
respects, not to offend him, but in all things to obey and please him. This
difference of fear may be expressed by this comparison: There does at one time
Simile.
stand in the presence of a Judge his own son, and a male factor; the one
loath to misbehaue himself in his fathers presence, for the love and reverence
he has toward him, whom he has always found a benign tender father to
him; the malefactor for bears also all lewd and disordered actions, in fear
of the Judges power, which he does hate, and of the sentence of death, which he
abhors. So it is here; evil men being in Gods presence, are restrained and
kept from many evils, but it is through dread of his revenging hand; as Simile.
servants are brought to do well through dread of the whip: whereas the godly,
howsoever the infinite power and justice of God be dreadful to them, and they
often meditate of his fearful judgments against sin, to enure their hearts
the more to awe and trembling, (their flesh or old man having great need of
such terror to bridle them) yet it is the sweet mercies of God in the
forgiveness ofso many sins, and calling them to so great glory, which
works in them a reverent regard of Gods will, not to transgress it; no child
being so loath to displease his most kind father, as the godly are to displease
their loving Redeemer. To this purpose they do endeavor to set themselves (as
it were) in the presence of God, considering that his eye which is the Judge of
the World and their heavenly Father, is ever upon them; and in this
consideration they labor to carry themselves as becomes them, who are ever
before the face of such a Majesty, abandoning that which is contrary to his
Word, and may provoke him; and carefully doing such duties as are liking and
grateful to him. This is the ingenuous fear of Gods Children, which brings
forth these effects in them: first, it restraines them from sin, even as
touching the inward affection, as it did Joseph from incontinency, the
Israelites Midwiues from cruelty, (...) from exaction and oppression of the
people; yea, it hoideth back from all sins, great and little, secret, as
well as open, and that because they are sins and offenses of God: whereas the
fear of the wicked keeps him from gross and open, but not from small and
private sins, and that for the pain only, and not for conscience to God.
Secondly, it constraines them to do good things commanded, out of a care to
please God. When Abraham offered his Son, that which moved him, was this; for
that he feared God; Genesis 22. 12, Job was a righteous man, and did just things;
for he was a man fearing God; Job 1. 1. Thirdly, it seasons the worship of God,
that is to say, the service of God: Psalm. 5. 7. I will draw near to thy Temple
in fear, etc. Insomuch as often the whole worship of God is thereby signified,
as in Acts 10. In every Nation, he that fears God, etc. Fourthly, it seasons
our love to God, as in a Subject that loves his Prince for his excellent
goodness and bounty, his love toward his Sovereign is beautified by a
reverence of his Princes Majesty: so it is here. Fifthly, it drives away
security, it awakes slothfulness, and makes watchful. And lastly, it beats
down pride, and high mindedness; as it is written: Be not high minded, but
fear; Romans 11. 20. These several fruits and effects of the fear of God, are
so many persuasions to move us to embrace it, whereunto we are provoked by
other reasons also; as namely because God has so straightly and often
commanded it: Fear God; 1 Pet. 2. 17. Again, Fear him that can kill body and
soul; Luke 12. which does show it to be a thing pleasing to him. Also, it is a
gift of God, yea, one of his special and peculiar gifts, which he vouchsafes
unto his Children; into whom he has promised so to put his fear, as they
shall never depart from him; Ier. 32. Moreover, the fear of God is a man's best
wisdom: As it is written; The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom: it
has great promises even of blessedness made to it; Blessed is the man that
fears God. It is the garden Psalm. 112. 1.
of all virtues, which are preserved by an ho'y fear of Prou. 26. 27.
God; it is the enemy of all vices, which cannot reign Prou. 8. 13.
where the fear of God has place. Besides, the examples of the godly, and the
approbation of the fear of God in them by the holy Ghost in Scripture, should
greatly excite us to it. Cornelius is commended for this, that he was a man
that feared God, and all his household; Acts 10. 1. Also Job, that he was a man
fearing God; Of Ezra, it is said he feared God greatly.
Job 1. 1. Of Hezekiah it is said, that he made the fear of God his treasure;
Esaias 33. 6. Also Obediah, Joseph, Daniel, and others highly praised in this
respect. As on the other side, it is laid down as a mark of a wicked man,
not to fear God; Romans 3. And as the want of it has been the cause that
wicked men have quite fallen away from God, as in Pilate, who feared not God,
but Caesar, and he slew himself; the like is to beseene in Achitophell and
Judas: so the weakness of it in Gods children, has been occasion of sundry
falls, as of Peter's abiuring, through too much fear of man, and too little
fear of God; and in David counterfeiting himself to be an Idiot, or mad,
through fear of Achis, King of the Philistians, and sundry others, which out
of little fear of God, and too much fear of man, have done evils, or denied
the truth. Therefore (Gods Children) are to labor not only for sound fear,
but for a great portion of it, to have it, and to have it abundantly, as that
it may prevail over the fear of the flesh, to fear God as he should be
feared, according to the greatness of his Majesty and power.


Of trust or confidence in God.
Aquila. AMongst other things spoken by you touching the God must be feared
accordingly.
fear of God, your last words of fearing God accordingly, be very worthy of
all Christians to be thought on: for it is not enough if we will do our duties
and be safe, to fear God, and to do it sincerely, unless we do fear him
accordingly: that is, considering our own infirmities, how weak we are and
prone to evil, unable to do well, feeble to resist encounters, and to bear
off assaults, stumbling at every straw, and fearing every bush, or shaking of a
leaf; and the malice and force, the subtilty and guile of our visible and
invisible enemies, how many, furious, and crafty they be; also considering, how
sundry men stronger then our selves, have been surprised and overtaken by
them: moreover, the awefull Majesty of God, his terrible justice, and
almightinesse, so hating sin, so able to annoy and hurt sinners, the infinite
goodness and mercy and holiness of God, so loving the righteous, so willing
and able to bless the just; all these being duly pondered, it would be the
duty and work of all men to pray, and use all good means that they may fear
God, and fear him much and plentifully, and continually. And to speak truth,
how can he be too much feared, that has already done so much for us? of whom
also we look for so much; from whom comes all good: without whom nothing can
be had that is helpefull and healthful unto us; he governing and disposing
all things as he will, having all creatures subject to his will and pleasure:
Angels, Men, Devils, Beasts, to make them friends, or enemies. Blessed is
therefore the man whose heart is always, and much in his fear, being afraid
of sinning against God, as of the greatest evil that can befall him; and
studious of pleasing God, as the greatest good that can come to him. But now
Sir, I would hear you prove unto me, that to trust in God, is such a work as
the faithful alone can do it; and wherein it consists, and how it differs
from the confidence of wicked men, and what be the effects and marks of it in
those that have it, and how we are to be encouraged unto it.


Apollos. Of all other works which be proper to Trust in God, proper to the
faithful.
the Elect, there is least question of this, whether it be appropriated to
godly men alone; because the Scripture every where does describe the wicked
hereby, as by an essential effectual note, that they trust not in God; that
there is in them an evil heart and unbelieving; Heb. 3.
that they withdraw themselves through unbelief, Heb. 10.
that they are full of unbelief; that they are faithless, that their trust is
in their riches, or in the Psalm. 53.
arm of flesh, or in man, and not in the living God. Tim. 1. 6.
Which plainly proves, that none save the godly man can put his trust in God;
it being put down as the property and inseperable mark to a righteous man,
that his trust is in God, that he makes God his Psalm. 18.
buckler, his tower, his shield, and defense, his fortress Psalm. 112.
and bulwark; that his heart is fixed in God, and stays on him. The promises
also which be made to them that they shall never be removed; Psalm 125. 1. but
be established and stand like mount Sion that cannot be removed; that mercies
shall compass them on every Psalm. 32.
side, that they shall not perish; that God will be their God for ever, that
his salvation belongs to them, that he will never fail nor forsake them;
Heb. 13. And many such like, do confirm to us, that to trust in God, as it is
a thing marvelous acceptable unto God, so it is a duty which every one cannot
perform, but they only with whom God has stricken an everlasting covenant.

This trust in God, causes the godly man to repose What it is to trust in God.
and place his affiance and confidence in God, that through his only goodness
and power, he shall not only be safe against all enemies and evils, so as not
to be overcome by them, though he be assaulted; but to obtain whatsoever good
thing is expedient for him to have. The ground of this their confidence, it is
first Ground of trust in God.
the knowledge of Gods nature, that he is merciful, most true, and almighty.
Secondly, the consideration of his promises, whereby he has bound himself to
do his children good, and to keep evil from them. Thirdly, the great
experience of Gods great care and kindness, both to others and toward
themselves. For the first ground of our trust in God; see Psalm. 146. 5, 6.
where the infinite power of God uttered in the work of creation, and his
fidelity in performing his word, are put for foundations of our trust. For the
second, when Esau came against Jacob, he gathered trust and heart from the
remembrance and meditation of Gods promises before made to him; O Lord (says
Jacob) thou speak to thy servant, and badst me go into my Country, and thou
would be with me; Genesis 32. 9. Also David hereupon built his confidence, as we
may read Psalm. 119. In thy Word is my trust and comfort. And touching the
third, his own experience of Gods wonderful preservation toward himself;
Psalm. 25. 4. Thou art the God of my salvation, in thee do I trust all the day
long; and toward others, Our Fathers trusted in thee, and were delivered;
Psalm. 22. 4. did embolden him to rest himself in God. And this is to be
observed in the The godly use means, but have their trust in God only.
trust and confidence of a godly man, that whether he have few or many, little
or great means, any or no means; yet his heart still trusts in God, whom
he knows, and has tried to be sufficient of himself, without, nay, against
means to succor and save him. And herein is the maine difference between the
godly Wherein the trust of the godly differs from the trust of the wicked.
and the wicked, in this point; that whereas both profess to trust in God
alone, and in prosperity and peace, both seem so to do; yet the trust of the
ungodly, is not in the Lord, but in second causes, in outward means; as Asa
trusted in his Phisicians, 2 Chro. 16. 12. The rich man in the Gospel trusted
in his abundance of goods; Luke 12. 19. Doeg in the multitude of his riches,
Psalm 53. 5, 6. the Jews in the Egyptians, in whom they strengthened
themselves; Esaias 30. 2. the Assirians in their own forces, Esaias 36. and some
(says the Psalmist) trust in Chariots, some in Horses, whereas the godly do
trust in the name of the Lord; Psalm. 20. This difference is manifested in the
evil day, when means fail the wicked; then it appears their hope was not in
God: for of confident and bold, by the presence of the means, they weigh faint
and heartlesse through the absence thereof; as appears by common experience.
Whereas the godly, in desperate hopeless cases, as Daniel in the Den of Lions,
the three servants in the fiery Furnace, Jeremy in the dungeon, Joseph in
prison, Jonas in the Whales belly, David in exile and flight from Saul;
finally, Paul and Silas in the stocks, made God their strength and whole trust:
and which is yet more then all this, the godly make the Lord their stay and
trust, not only when all men, and all things be against them, but also when
God shows himself as an enemy unto them, believing in him under hope above
hope; as it is said of Abraham, Romans 4. 18. Job also professing that he would
trust in God, though he would kill him, Job 13. The reason hereof is evident,
because they are assured, that whatsoever courses God holds toward them, yet
his mercies, truth, and goodness, are firm, and unchangeable, and will never
fail them. Now herein is the trial of our trust in God, when in time of peace
Marks for trial of our trust in God.
and prosperity that we have means at hand, and in our power, we so use
them, as our minds does look beyond them unto God, looking for the good
success, and for a blessing from Heaven; being assured, that as we have all
means, so we expect the good use of the means from him alone: and when they
are lacking to us, or fight against us, yet not to be so dismaide, but that we
still cast up our eye unto God, with confidence of help from his goodness.
When we are put in the clests, and come to any great straites, we are then to
resolve and say with Iehosaphat; 2 Chro. 20. 12. There is a great multitude
come out against us, and we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward
thee: and with Abraham, My son, God will provide a sacrifiee, when he saw no
likelihood of any; Genesis 25. and with King David, Though my heart be per plexed
and troubled, yet will I wait on God, he is my help and my God; Psa. 42.
Encouragements to trust in God.
And again, He has been my God even from my mothers womb, therefore I will
trust in him, Ps. 22. and Happy is the man that has his trust in the God of
Jacob; for whosoever trusts in him shall be assured, never any yet ashamed
which put their trust in the Almighty; Psalm. 22. 4, 5. Therefore if thou dwell
in the secret of the most highest, and abide in the shadow of the Almighty,
saying to him, O Lord, thou art my hope and my rock, my God, in thee will I
trust; surely then he will deliver thee from the snare of the Hunter, and from
the noisome pestilence, he will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be
safe under his feathers; his truth shall be thy shield and buckler, thou shall
not be afraid of the fear of the night, nor of the arrow that flies by day,
nor of the plague that destroys at noone day, nor of the pestilence which
walks in the dark. Thus great is the peace, and wonderful is the security
and quiet of the man that makes God his stay: for who can take out of the
hands of God? If God will save, who can destroy? Who can hurt, whom he will
keep? which does all what he will in Heaven and Earth, whom none can resist;
whereas God being neglected and set apart, all other things are too weak to
help. Vain is the help of man; an Horse cannot save; no power, no policy,
can relieve or rescue against God. Vain is the help of Princes; Castles,
Towers, Forts, Forces, Friends, wealth, wit, and whatsoever else, is unable to
preserve him, who has not God for his friend; and he is not friend to any,
save such as make him their stay and (...). Both Scripture, and other Stories,
abundantly teach of very great and mighty men, how feurefully they have lived,
and how lamentably they have perished, because they reposed themselves upon
other things besides God: which is sufficient to admonish all persons to use
all good helps given them of God, so as their trust be fixed in God alone; for
he is the defense of his people, and their strong deliucrer. It were better to
have the presence and protection of God only, then a guard of many thousand men
about us. Thou O Lord alone (says David) make me rest in safety. I laid me
down and slept, and rose again, for thou O Lord make me dwell in safety;
Psalm. 3. 5. and 4. But such as withdraw their hearts from God, he shall cause
those very means wherein they put their trust, to be their overthrow: use
means therefore lest thou tempt God, trust not in them, lest thou deny him,
and he destroy thee.


Of Prayer and Thankfulness.
I See it plainly, that evil men (whatsoever they say) yet their trust is not
in God: but as the mistes and clouds keep us from the sight of the Sun, so
the Simile.
blessings of God stand between the eyes of the wicked and God himself, that
they cannot look upon him; whereas the godly by the eye of their soul pierce
through all means to behold God himself, the Author and disposer of all good
things, in whom they see a secrer blessing provided for them, which is hid from
others. But now Sir, seeing true and unfeigned trust in God, brings forth
prayer unto God, because we trust in him, therefore we call upon him; and
upon the happy success of prayers, follows thankfulness: I would have you
in the next place to deal in these things, and to show me how the godly and
ungodly do differ in these works; seeing one as well as another, does
perform them: for it is common to all to pray, and to give thanks. The
Pharisie both prayed and gave thanks, Luke 18. so did Judas, as well as Peter;
Cain, as well as Abel.

Apollos. It is true which you say, that therefore Of Prayer and thankfulness.
Christians do lift up their minds unto God, even because 2 Commandment.
of that trust which they put in him. Hence it is, that they are bold to come
unto God, for that they assuredly trust that he will do them good. As we never
have an heart to seek to any men for help, in whom we have no affiance that
they will regard us; but we readily get us to such for kindness, of whom we
have some good hope: so it is with Gods Children, their confidence which they
have in God, breeds in them a willingness by prayer to crave his help;
whereof when they are made partakers, they burst out into thankfulness and
praises of that goodness which respected and relieved them; it being the
property of Gods children not to be more forward to desire Gods benefits and
protections for them and theirs, over their souls and bodies, then to return
thankful acknowledgements after they have received mercies. And whereas
hypocrites and evil men do pray and give thanks, it is true generally, that
there is no work touching the outward act, which Gods Children do, but the
Children of this World do the same; but that which these do in hypocrisy,
the other do in truth: and particularly there be in these works of prayer
Difference between good and bad, in Prayer and thanksgiving.
and thankfulness, many differences between the one and the other; as that
the wicked are more ready to beg in their wants, then to be thankful when
they have sped, and they are thankful rather for prosperity, then for
adversity: whereas the godly see great cause to give God thanks and praise in
and for every estate, because all things are made to work together for the
best toward them; Romans 8. Again, the wicked do quickly Luke 18: and the man
which in the night time got his friend to arise out of his bed, to fetch him a
loaf to refresh his friends which came to him; so Gods children howsoever they
are long delayed for trial of their patience and constancy in prayer, and to
sharpen their affections, and for sundry other good regards; yet they pray, and
cease not till God do send a gracious answer: their prayers being like
messengers, which will not return without their answer, or like Ionathans
arrows, which brought David to him. Moreover, the wicked pray coldly and out
of a custom, the children Col. 3. 17.
do not the wicked. Moreeuer, the godly do continually Mark 9.
both which the wicked want. Finally, besides many Romans 7. 16.
and wills, approving the good they do, and hating the evil which they fly,
and may not do; studying and endeavoring by such their submission to Gods
Law, to set forth and extol the name and honor of their Mat. 5. 16.
heavenly Father. These are the rules they walk by, 1 cor. 10. 31.
both in prayer and praises, in reading and hearing the Word, and in receiving
the Sacraments; as also in the practice of all other duties toward God or men.


Of the Word and Sacraments.
Aquila. SIthence ye have mentioned the Word and mysteries, and our actions
about them are works which belong to Gods worship; declare wherein the godly
do differ from other men, in their work of hearing and partaking in the Word
and Sacrament: for all sorts of men do these works, even that Fox Herod will
hear John, and the Pharisees came to hear Christ, and Judas was at the
Passcouer, and (...) desired baptism: what is it that discerns one from
another in these common duties?


Apollos. Sincerity and soundness (called truth in Scripture) discerns work
from work, and duty from duty. The hypocrite and wicked even for their hearing
the Word, and being partakers of the Sacraments, because they lacked
uprightness in the doing, seeking not God, but themselves; therefore they
shall for them hear at the last day, Ye workers of iniquity, depart from me;
Mat. 7. 23. For this shall be said to such which did prophecy, cast out
devils, and do great works in Christ his name, because their outward works
were void of inward sincerity. And this is a thing worthy to be marked, that
even a good work Note this.
done of an evil man, with an evil and (...) heart, upon pretense and show
of serving and pleasing God, when in truth no such thing is meant, but the
pleasing When ones mind is unclean, it defiles his best works.
of himself, or some other carnal respect leads him, it does become a work
of iniquity. Howbeit, besides uprightness, there are to be found sundry things
in godly men doing these works, which are not to be found in the ungodly and
hypocrites. As first, that the godly when they hear or partake in the
mysteries, they use great and serious preparation before, by religious
meditations of their own wants and unworthiness Eccle. 4. verse last.
on the one side, bethinking how little they deserve Exodus 19.
such merciful helps, and yet how great need they have of them; and on the
other side, of the aweful (...) before whom they must appear, and of the
gracious promises which he has made to his own ordinances, with earnest
prayer to be enabled to do their public service in faith and godly reverence,
with singleness of heart, as in Gods presence, and before his face. Secondly,
in the time of those solemn actions, remembering themselves to be under the eye
of God, occupied in his service, and about their own salvation, they demean
themselves accordingly, being full of most holy and heavenly motions, suitable
to that work they have in hand. Lastly, after their being in the Assemblies,
they labor to reap great fruit by the use of the means for the increase of
their faith and obedience; that as they bring with them unto the Ministry of
the Word an honest and good heart, truly Luke 11. 15.
and fully resolved according to the measure of grace received to believe and
obey God, hungring and thirsting Mat. 5. 6.
after his graces offered, and loving his Word and Sacraments as his blessed
Ordinances, and their own souls nourishment: so after the participation of
the Word and mysteries, they perceive and feel by experience their strength
against sin and Satan much increased, and their souls refreshed somewhat in
all the graces of the new man, even as the strength and powers of their bodies
are cheered and revived Simile.
after a moderate wholesome bodily repast. This sense and experience engenders
in them hearty thankfulness unto God their Father, for blessing unto their
good his own holy institutions, which for their sins he might have turned
into a curse; and withal, it provoke them to attend and wait with
reverence, love, and hope of more fruits upon the sacred Ordinances of God,
making great conscience of sanctifying the Lords Sabbath, in the religious and
godly use thereof. Thus it is ordinarily with Gods Children, when they partake
in the Word and mysteries; and if they happen to fail of these duties, either
for substance or degree, they are very sorry, and fly to Gods mercy for
pardon, and become more heedfull afterward.


Of the religious use of Gods Name and Sabbath.
Aquila. NOw may it please you to speak of the Name and Sabbath of God, and
tell me how the godly must carry themselves in the use thereof, as God may be
pleased: for herein outwardly there appears great likeness between man and
man. The wicked and hypocrites in their common speech, oaths, vows, prayers,
confessions, using Gods name, and observing the rest of the seventh day as
diligently as any; the Scribes and Pharisees will be in the Synagogue on the
Sabbath, as well as Christ and his Disciples.


Apollos. Indeed the sons of Sceua are too bold The true use of Gods Name.
with the Name of Jesus; Acts 19. 13. and so were the Priests with the Name of
God: We adjure thee by the living God, tell us, etc. Mat. 26. And as with the
title of God they are too forward to meddle; so where God 3. commandment.
has stamped his Name upon his Doctrine, his Sacraments, his works, they with
their foul hands are sound to be too ready to touch it: but all they get by
using or abusing it rather, it is the increase of their guilt by profaning so
sacred a thing as his Name, which is glorious and fearful; it being written,
That God will not hold him guiltless which takes that Name in vain.
Therefore the godly they very sparingly use the Name of God, never or sildome
in their common speech, unless upon great occasion, and when necessity As men
use their holy day clothes.
constraines; and then they take it up with great fear and awe, lest they
sin in vainly usurping it; praying And for the titles, words, properties,
Sacraments, works of God, their care is to mention them with a godly reverence.
at least in their hearts, and secretly desiring the Lord to guide them in the
use of his Name: always fearing to apply it to any light and trifling, much
less to any wicked purpose, as to confirm a falsehood, or to cloak a
naughtiness. And this is it which Solomon admonishes us of, in that
antithesis or opposition between him that swears, and him that fears an
oath; Eccle. 9. 2. Hereby teaching, that whereas sinners do rashly use the
Name of God, even in an oath without reverence, or consideration of that
awefull and wonderful Name; contrariwise good men whenever they are to use
the Name of God, in an oath especially, or otherwise, they come to it with
fear, lest they offend by vain usage of it. Now concerning the Sabbath, they
4. commandment.
are thus affected toward it: (far otherwise then evil The true use of the
Sabbath.
men are) they do not supersticiously esteem it above other days, as it is a
day; but they joy in the remembrance and use of it, in regard of the worship of
God performed on that day, and because of the benefit that does redound to
their souls, for the building them up into the saving knowledge of God, and of
Jesus Christ his Son. In these respects they do long for the Sabbath till it
come, they cheer upon it when it does approach, and in the week days they
look so well to their ways, keeping in all things a good conscience, and so
religiously walking in the works of their vocation, as when the Sabbath does
come, they can with alacrity and joy sanctify it. The men of this World do
not with more gladness gather in their Corn, Wine, and Oil, then God;
Children to keep the And with what (...) they bear their absence from the
Assemblies; see Psalm. 84. 1, 2, and 41.
Lords day; Psalm 122. 1. I rejoiced, when they said to me; We will, etc.
From the observation where of, neither themselves, nor such as be under their
charge, are held by such common hindrances, as the World is let by. But as
they break through all (...), that they and theirs may resort to the House of
God; so their desire and study is to spend the whole day throughout, publicly
and privately, in such holy works as are commanded of God, and be sitting his
day: as reading, singing, conferring, praying, visiting the sick and
prisoners, exhorting, comforting, as occasion is offered, reconciling of
iarres, examination of their Family, how they profit by the public Ministry;
lastly, by meditation on the creatures. For which purposes they make a
cessation from all their own servile works (which on other days were lawful
to be done) that they may be free to attend all holy duties of the Sabbath, to
obtain fresh strength of grace from the God of Heaven, to cease (all their
life long) from their dead works, the lusts of their sinful nature; so as
(...) here into a spiritual rest, they may enjoy at last an eternal Sabbath in
Heaven.


Aquila. What lets, but that now we may pass forwards unto that rank of
good works, which do concern men, seeing we have taken a taste of those
works which godly men, and they only, can and do perform toward God?


Apollos. Yes, friend Aquila, there is a (...) for we have a principal part of
godliness, yet to (...) in which we may in no wise pass over, and it (...)
Patience in affliction.


Aquila. It was well remembered, for there is no more necessary work of
godliness, then this of patience; we have not more need of water and the air
then of Patience a virtue proper to a true Christian.
patience, and no work more proper to an elect man, then this; therefore
called, The, patience of the Saints, Revel. 13. 10. To teach us, that it is
peculiar to them alone; and it is there annexed to faith: as also in Heb. 6.
12. as a fruit thereof; Also to hope, as an inseperable companion of it; 1
These. 1. 3: Remembering the patience of your hope. And very worthily is hope
matched with patience, and that for two respects; seeing the thing we hope for,
which is eternal bliss and rest from our labors in Heaven, is not only
deferred and put off, but derided and scorned; 2 Pet. 3, 4: yea, and we
afflicted too; 1 Timothy 4. 10. Therefore hope has need of patience to sustain
it. Secondly, thus yoking hope with patience, we are admonished, that as hope
cannot consist without patience, so neither can patience exist, or be, where
there is not hope. Hope brings forth increase of patience, and patience
increased, does confirm hope; Romans 5. 3, 4. Finally, there is no work wherein
we more resemble and show our selves like unto Christ, the president and
pattern of true patience, then this; as we are plentifully taught, Heb. 12. 1,
3. Also 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21, 22. Which places of Scripture teach us thus much,
that Christ in patience abiding his Fathers will, suffering willingly the shame
and smart of the Cross, became an example to us, that we should follow his
steps. Insomuch as the Apostle Paul, Romans 8. and 2 Tom. 1. affirms, that such
as do sallow Christ in patient suffering, shall partake with him in reigning
and glory. It will therefore be very fit, that this grace of Patience be
distinctly and fully entreated of, and feuered from that shadow of patience
which is in the wicked, who seem to have it, and yet are nothing less then
patient.


Apollos. This had been spoken of before, when we entreated of Hope, whose
supporter patience is, as hope is the prop of Faith; but that I thought it sit
to place it amongst those works of godliness: and to the last place I have
referred it, because it being a large argument, it will ask us more time then
at this our meeting could well have been affoorded to such a copious theme,
and spacious matter. Therefore if it seem good to you, we will let it alone
till our next coming together.


The tenth Part of the Dialogue.
Of Patience in affliction.
Apollos. FRiend Aquila, since we first entered upon our conference of
effectual Calling, and of the fruits of it, you never tried my patience till
now. I have here expected you a good while, and if you had not come just thus
as you did, surely I had returned whence I came, somewhat discontented with you.


Aquila. Sir, I am but quit with you, for thus you served me once; but you that
have seen me so forward in keeping times for prosecuting this business, might
have imagined in your self, that it was something more then ordinary, which
kept me thus long from you.


Apollos. Nay, I tell you that very thought held me, and so ruled my mind at
that, as I did not grow impatient.


Aquila. Sir, I pray you lay aside your quarrel to me about my long tarrying,
and now we are so well met, let me hear you speak of the nature and property
of the object and office of Patience.


Apollos. There is no Christian grace, but it has his Afflictions, the object
of Patience.
special object to work upon, and whereabout it is exercised. Promises of
salvation are the object of faith, whose property is to believe and receive
them by the mind and will (...) to them, and embracing them for most true; the
thing promised, is the object of hope, whose office is to expect it till it be
given us. The office of love, is to knit our affections to God, who is the
proper object of our love. Repentance is busied about sins, and the use of
it, to grieve after any sin, with a purpose to offend so no more. Temperance
gouernes our mind about pleasures of life; meckenesse about injuries from men.
Mercy is exercised about miseries of others. Humility bridles the mind about
praises and honors. And to be short, the power of moderating the heart in
crosses and afflictions which are put upon us by Gods appointment, does belong
to Patience, which has afflictions or adversities for his proper object: for
this is the will of God, that no man should live in this World without crosses
and afflictions. Our days are few, they are also evil, and very evil. Our
years are few, but miseries are not few; they are many and manifold, and some
of them great, and do continually follow us as the shadow does the body. These
miseries when they happen, they stir and move the mind to grief; even as
presence of pleasure and delights tickle the mind with joy, to sorrow assaults
the mind in the presence of afflictiue and heavy things, wherewith it should be
ouerturned were it not for the help of patience, which does temper our grief,
and stay the mind steady and quiet in good contentment under the hand of God.
This then is the office of patience, to confirm and settle the mind against
the force of sorrow, arising from the sense of tribulations.


Aquila. I perceive well by this ye have uttered, that the office and power of
patience will better be declared, if withal and first of all, afflictions and
the kinds thereof (which be the matter whereabout patience is set on work)
shall be opened and said forth. Will it please you then to follow this course,
to speak generally of afflictions, and to acquaint us with those grounds of
patience, which be common to all afflictions; and after that, to handle the
several sorts of afflictions, and the special grounds of patience (...) to
every kind of afflictions, (...) the (...) grounds whereon worldlings build the
frame of their (...) patience?


Apollos. Aquila, you have well chalked out away wherein we may walk. Thus
then the (...) and (...); the Scripture says, That death (...) into the World
by sin; Romans 5. 12. By death, is understood not only that dissolution of
soul and body, but all troubles and afflictions, as the (...) of death men are
not (...) sin (...) able to death, then to afflictions. It was not only
said to Adam, To (...) thou shall return, but that in sweat of his brows
(...) should (...) his bread; and to Eve, That (...) bring forth children
(...): These, with (...) afflictions, (...) upon Adams (...), among whom, some
may be found happily which never knew what prosperity meant, but not one which
has not tasted of afflictions. Our entrance into the World is with danger and
cries, our passage out of the World is by fearful and painful death: the
middle between birth and death, cradle and grave, is full of vanity and
vexation, affliction being a cup which all men are to drink of, some more,
some less, God measuring unto each person a portion of trouble, as drink was
wont to be measured in cups, that each in the Family might have a portion.
Hence are those speeches in Scripture, The Lord has a Cup in his hand; Psalm.
75. 5. And Father, let this Cup pass; Mat. 26. 42. And Can ye drink of the
Cup, etc. Mat. 20. 22. But in this common condition of all men, the wisdom of
God does hold a difference, afflicting his own children both more often, and
more severely then he does the children of the World. There are sundry good
reasons of Gods counsel herein, why he administreth a deep portion of
afflictions, and keeps his Children in the School of tribulations longer
then he does the wicked; first in that God freeth the wicked here, when he does
afflict the just, it would admonish us, that there is another World after this,
in which his afflicted children shall have rest and be comforted, when the
wanton worldling fatted with delights, shall be troubled and in torment; as
Abraham said to the rich man, Luke 16. In his Life time he had received, etc.
And according to that 2 These. 1. 6, 7. There be other reasons of this
proceeding, as that he may by his patience and bounty toward the ungodly, call
them to amendment, and leave them without excuse, if they continue impenitent
after such lenity and kindness; Romans 2. 4. And also to terrify them and make
them afraid to sin, by expectation of the wrath to come: For if judgment
begins at Gods House, and the righteous searcely be saved, they may easily
collect what remains for them, if they turn (...); 1 Pet. 4. 17. Moreover,
Gods own children by such severity upon them, and lenity to the evil, may
perceive how impartial God is, that will not bear with sin, no, not in his
chosen ones; and so learn to fear him; and withal they are encouraged to
look for a better portion hereafter, even a share in that heavenly
inheritance. Knowing that as earthly Fathers, though they allow their sons
bare and course fare and lodging, and hard usage otherwise, when they who be
strangers, are liberally entertained, yet mean them the inheritance: so God
plentifully feeds and furnishes the wicked, who are strangers from God, when
such as be his own children are both beaten and have short allowance, yet the
inheritance of Heaven is appointed for them. And this is one chief ground of
patience, that God is not only the Author of the afflictions which he sends
according to his will, but disposes them to their advancement in the end. Which
proceeds from hence, that howsoever God be angry with the sins of his
children, and afflict them with grievous and smartful things; yet they come
from a love and mercy which God bears to their persons, which causes him in
that wrath against their offenses, to remember mercy to themselves.
Contrariwise, in his afflicting of evil men, he hates both sin and person
for the sins sake; which is the reason, that as they have no true patience
under the weight of their afflictions and miseries, as not perceiving them to
be sent to them out of any good will toward them; so when the burden is off
from their back, they are never the better, they having no blessing with their
affliction to cause them to profit to amendment, but are rather driven the
further from God: So turning and yielding to him while his hand keeps them
down, as Pharaoh and Ahab did; yet afterward they return to their old byas,
and be as they were, or rather more hardened in sin. When as godly men
understanding by their faith, that all crosses issue out of that love wherewith
God loved them in his Son to salvation, they are sure of a fruit by their
afflictions to greater repentance and humiliation; and have their minds well
framed to patience, out of this perlwalion, that the hand that strikes them, is
no hating and killing; but a loving and saving hand. The grounds of patience in
all other men, are, not the will of God, or the expectation of a benefit out of
the assurance of his favor: but necessity, because they have no remedy, and
they think it better to bear it, then to do worse: These two, either that it
will not boot them to resist, or that resistance will but do them harm;
these are the common grounds of their patience. But on the other side, the
godly have other ground of their patience in all afflictions; which I will now
more distinctly name unto you. As first, that their affl ctions come not by
chance, but are (...) and directed by Gods providence; Amos 3. Secondly, that
they are momentany and short, and shall have an end; 2 Cor. 4. Thirdly, that
they are always just and righteous, though the reason of them be not always
known; Daniel 9. Fourthly, patience in bearing afflictions, is a duty and
service pleasing to God; I (...). 4. 5. Fifthly, they know their afflictions
shall not exceed their strength. Sixthly, that there will be a good and happy
issue of them at the last; 1 Cor. 10. Seauenthly, that they have not only all
other men, but all good men to be companion of their afflictions; Psalm 34.
And lastly, that it would be to their great hurt to be free from afflictions.
By these considerations, their minds are stayed in good quietness, that
though they are not stocks, but do feel afflictions; yet the (...) of their
afflictions has no power greatly for to disturb their minds; because by
patience they possess their souls. This is it we see in Jobs sore
afflictions, he looked up to Gods will, and was patient; God has given, and he
has taken, Job 2. David sore afflicted by sin, he considered the good will
of God, that the Lord would do him good by it, and was quiet. Paul passed
through a world of afflictions, yet fastening his eye upon the end of them which
was eternal glory, and assured hereof, that they would further his own, and
the salvation of the Church, thereby he was made constant in patience; 2 Cor.
4. verse last. Moses in his afflictions endured, looking forward to the
recompense of reward; Heb. II. This it is which is the life and soul of
patience; namely, that this is the will of God, that his children should
glorify him, by willingly suffering adversities, and that Gods love will draw
a blessing out of their afflictions, to the glorisying of themselves in the
end; even as Sampson gathered sweet out of the bitter: so Gods children Simile.
find a sweet fruit of bitter afflictions; Hebrews 12. 11, 12.


Aquila. By this which you have said, I observe these three things. First
prosperity and adversity be no sure arguments of Gods favor or hatred, because
they do in common fall to all men in such sort, as the godly are blessed when
they are afflicted, and wicked persons are accursed, even when they prosper.
The second thing is, that afflictions falling alike to all, (though more, and
more often to the good) yet afflictions to wicked men be a part of Gods curse,
and properly punishments; afflictions to the godly are rather love tokens, and
have the nature of blessings in them. Thirdly, when good and evil men are
under afflictions, there is no small difference in their patience; some (...)
men have not so much as show of patience, being full of coffeehouse and rage
when they are under Gods hand: others which are more calm and still, yet have
no patience but perforce, because they cannot choose, or be loath to be thought
faint-hearted. Whereas good men are as well pleased with afflictions as with
benefits, ever accounting that best which God sends to them, whatsoever it be,
bearing his crosses not of necessity, but for duty sake to God.

After these things thus discoursed, it will be sitting that we pass from this
general Treatise of afflictions, and to descend unto particulars, to speak of
afflictions, as they are either the chastisements of our sins, or the trials
of our faith and love; thus I think we may distinguish the afflictions of the
godly: The Scripture so plainly tells us, that God chastises whom he
loves, nurtering and correcting every child whom he receives; Heb. 12. 6:
and also does tempt and take trial of them. Thus he is said to have tempted
Abraham; Genesis 22. 1. And afflictions are called temptations; James 1. 23. For
as Satan tempts to seduce and destroy; so God tempts to prove, and make
trial of his people, to make it Tentatio seductionis.
known what is in them; Deuteronomy. 10. 1. It may fall out that some afflictions
shall be both chastisements and trials; 2. Probationis.
yet we are to consider and speak of them distinctly and (...) things divided
in nature; some being tried by affliction, wherein it cannot be truly said,
that they are chastened; as Job, and diverse Martyrs. To conclude, afflictions,
which be properly punishments to the wicked, Punishment.
are to the righteous for correction, or for their Correction. Trial.
trial.


Apollos. I thank you Aquila for this kindness, in Of Chastisements.
cutting and laying out my work for me; I am content to be held your
apprentise, and to give you the credit and place of the master workman. But to
fall in hand with the work, it is true indeed which you say, that afflictions,
which in themselves, and toward the wicked are a part of the curse due to
sin; yet in respect of the righteous, they change their condition: the
afflictions and death of our Lord Jesus Christ having sanctified all the
afflictions of his members which believe in him, that they should put on
another nature, and be no more to them an execration; but to serve (as you well
say) either for correction or probation, or both. For in one work sometime God
has a double end, both to chasten for some sin done, and to take trial of
the graces in his children. For our orderly proceeding, I will first entreat of
Chastisements, and the patience which Gods Children show therein: Afterward of
their trials, and namely of their great trial of trials, which is by death and
martyrdom; whereunto some of Gods Children are put, and all are to expect it.
The Church of God it is a School, the faithful are as Disciples and
Scholars; in Scholars there is much forgetfulness, and slothfulness, and
much other untowardness; which will need to be remedied by the correcting
hand of Christ, the only master of his Church: his Ministers being to him but
as Vshers. The Church is as a Family, the faithful are as Gods servants and
children; 2 Simile.
amongst these there is always some unruliness, and disobedience: therefore
God their Lord and Father, cannot be without rods for chastisements. This the
Scripture abundantly witnesses, that as the godly on the one side give
plentiful matter, by their often and plentiful sinning, yea, sometimes by
grievous sinning against God, why they should be beaten even with scourges: so
on the other side, many and manifold are the corrections of God. He has rods
and scourges of all kinds, gentler and sharper, inward and soul
chastisements, outward and bodily corrections: God can smite in goods, name,
estate, credit, wife, children, friends, liberty, in every thing that is with
them, or near them, or dear to them. God knows how to chasten them, by
taking away, or lessening their comfort; also by putting upon them things
grievous to their nature, wherein Gods Children through patience do show all
good contentment at the Lords dealing with them, though it be sometimes very
rough and severe. Yet they know and consider that it is well deserved, First
ground of patience.
they have made themselves very worthy to be well beaten, by their breach of
Gods Law; and it is but good reason, if they be so bold as to transgress, and
deserve chastisement, that God should take leave to use his authority.
Therefore as they suffered with patience the Fathers of their bodies when they
corrected them, now much more they do submit themselves to him that is the
Father of Spirits; especially when they mark his manner of proceeding in his
chastisements, and the chief ends that he aymeth at in them: seeking therein
their profit, not his own praise, or pleasure, as bodily Parents often do.
For touching his proceeding, albeit man suffer eth not but for his own sin;
Lament. 3. (...) is corrected but for his faults: yet God does not draw out his
rods for every offense, then there were none able 2. God smites not for
every offense.
to abide it: for we offend so often and so much, that it would quickly consume
us, if we should feel his hand for every trespass. But as earthly Fathers
wink at sundry and many things amiss in their children; so it pleases God to
use conniuence and favor toward our daily infirmities, and smaller faults
which accompany the frailty of our nature. Therefore it is said of him, that
he is slow to anger, patient, and full of compassion and goodness, Psalm. 103.
Indeed when the godly do forget themselves, and fall into some foul and
gross sin, especially whereby they give offense by their example, provoking
others to sin; or when in lesser faults they grow too stubborn, and wax
secure, or when they lift up their hearts, and become proud and high minded;
(...) commonly he takes the rod in hand, being loath to fall to strike, till
we fall to dullness, sluggishnesse, arrogance, and contempt; as there is no
other remedy, but that he must scourge us, or lose us. Again, when God has
suffered his Children long, (for he had rather they should judge themselves,
then he should judge them) desiring their conversion by his bounty and
kindness, rather then their amendment by correction (so sweet and loving is
his Nature, so loath to strike) yet he strikes not till he have given good
warning, either by admonitions of his Prophets and servants, or motions of his
own Spirit, and often checkes of our own conscience, calling upon us to
reform our life. As it is written in Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord will do
nothing, but he will reveal it to his Prophets. After these warnings by his
Ministers, if there follow no repentance, then there being no other remedy, 2
Chro. 36. 16, 17, he proceeds to chastising, the more severely the longer that
he has borne; and the more that we have provoked him, either by greeuousnesse
of the fault, or obstinacy in resisting his holy Spirit, speaking in the
Ministry of his holy Word; Acts 7. 51. Howbeit, in these chastisements so
justly deserved, so worthily pulled upon us, he does exercise marvelous wise
love, or loving wisdom: his long suffering, 4. He corrects with wisdom
and love.
in bearing before he smite, is not so admirable; but his wisdom and love is
as gracious, when he smites. He goes to correction with a leaden foot, and
when he corrects and lays on his heauiest hand on his children yet it is in
so wise and loving a manner, with such fitnesle and moderation, to so good
purposes, as the faithful find even in their smartfull chastisements, cause
not only of patience and great contentment, but of great praise and
thankfulness; yea, of joy and cheerfulness in their in ward man: howsoever
their rebellious flesh mutter and storm. Which the Apostle Paul well
understood; therefore exhorts the believing Christians to grue thanks in all
things; 1 These. 5. 18. He that says, Allthings, excepted not chastisements.
And in another place, he wills us not to despise the chastenings of the Lord;
Heb. 12. 5. That is to say, esteem much, and make great account of them, as of
most wholesome remedies, and gracious testimonies of Gods special love; as
Psalm. 51. when it is said, God despises not a broken heart: the meaning is,
he makes great reckoning of it, as the best sacrifice that can be offered him;
and likewise would the holy Spirit by the like phrase teach Gods children, what
precious and fruitful things Gods rebukes and corrections be, deserving not
only to be patiently, but thankfully (...) somely taken, being full of Fatherly
wisdom and love.


Aquila. This is it that I pray you lay open, how this most heavenly merciful
Father, does express his love and wisdom in his corrections: sure it is,
that he does all things in great wisdom, and he that would have all our
things done in love, there can want no love in his own works toward his own
people. He which is wisdom it self, and love it self, must needs deal
wisely toward them whom he loves: but declare particularly wherein his love
and wisdom does appear; for this makes much to preserve and nourish
patience.


Apollos. The wisdom of God appears sundry ways, in the chastising of his
children. First, because he knows when it is due time to fall to correction,
not rashly smiting as foolish men do, who smite their inferiors before their
fault be ripe for correction. Secondly, he discerns by his wisdom what
chastisements be most meet and fittest for every one; where to use a gentle,
and where an harder hand: when to strike the soul, when to smite the body;
when it will be best to correct by losses. Also, he knows how to proportion
the chastisements (...) the sin, as the sinner may perceive not only that
he is beaten for a fault, but for what fault helis beaten; dealing herein like
the skillful wise Physicion, that does not minister like potions and medicines
to all his Patients, but considers their complexions and the nature of the
disease, and the degree of the sickness, and accordingly tempereth his
physic: so does God measure out to every one such a portion of corrections
(which is the sinners physic) as the strength of every one may be able to
(...) as the quality of the malady does require. As a crabbed stock does need
a crabbed wedge, and a sturdy untamed Colt a hard bir; so the obstinacy of
some, and the toughness of their spirit, needs a more severe discipline.
Herein moreover his wisdom declares it self, that as he knows how to fit
the chastisement unto the condition of the fault, and quality of offenders; so
how to keep a moderation both for measure and time, neither more correction
nor longer then shall be behoueful: as cunning Musicians, who know how to
stretch their strings till they be in tune, and no further, least they break
them. Finally, in this also his wisdom is manifested, that whereas
afflictions in their own nature be evil, as they are also called; Amos 3. 6.
Lam. 3. Parts of the curse due to sin: yet as in the creation he made light
out of darkness, so in his wise providence he draws much good toward his
out of these painful evils: wherein he makes his great love, together with
his wisdom to be known, not only in that he strikes not so often as we
deserve, and far lessethen we are worthy, his chastisements always coming
short of our desert, neither suffers his love them long to continue; but
especially in this, that of short corrections, through his loving blessings
upon them, his children reap happy and long lasting fruires.


Aquila. I do well perceive how truly you ascribe wisdom unto Gods
corrections: this that ye speak of their fruitfulness, by means of his love I
would have it further explained, because it is a maine motive to patience. No
reason have any but to take that well, which shall end in their own welfare; it
is the hoped fruit which makes the Husbandman, the Merchant, the Soldier,
patient amidst great labors and dangers. Tell us then what may this fruit be
which grows upon the rods of Gods correction.


Apollos. The maine fruit is called by the Apostle, Not perishing with the
world; 1 Cor. 11. 32. Ye are chastised, that ye should not be condemned with
the world; that is, suffered to go on in sin, with this secure unrepentant
world, to your certain destruction. This fruit has another subordinate
fruit, serving and leading thereunto, called, Heb. 12. 11. The quiet fruit of
righteousness; that is, the fruit of a just and holy life, which is greatly
furthered by chastisements, whereby the godly are awed and brought to fear
God, and to obey him in his Word. Before I was afflicted, I went astray, since
I have learned to keep thy Word; Psalm. 119. This fruit of a righteous life by
Job is branched out into two parts; Job 33. 16. Then be opens their ears by
the corrections which (...) has sealed; and verse 17. That he might cause man
to tur ne away from his enterpizes, and that he might hide the pride of man.
Which sentence teaches us thus much, that God by his holy Spirit does secretly
and mightily imprint in the hearts of his children, the use and fruit of their
afflictions and chastisements, which fruit is twofold; first, repentance to
turn man from his enterprise: the second is humility, to hide the pride of
man; to turn man from his enterprises, what is it else but to change his evil
mind and works into good? That whereas before he was corrected, he purposed,
and accordingly enterprized things evil and unlawful; being corrected
therefore, henceforth he alters his course, purposing and enterprizing good
things. This is Repentance, the first fruit of corrections. And what is it
else to hide the pride of man, but to abate and take down the pride and
haughtiness of his heart, that he may walk humbly with his God, and before
all men? This is humility, the second fruit of Chastisements.


Aquila. These be two notable and goodly fruits indeed, and I desire to hear
you now more particularly and fully declare, first, how we are helped by
corrections to repentance and amendment of life, then how they do avail us to
humbleness of mind.


Apollos. Iron would rust, if it were not occupied; Kepentance furthered by
chastisements.
the ground without dressing would bring forth briars and (...): so Gods
regenerate Children without corrections, in stead of the fruits meet for
repentant persons, would bring forth too much sin and vanity. And as our
children let go without chastising, would prove wantons and rebellious against
their governors; so would Gods children. Witness the experience of that godly
Prophet, confessing that ere he was troubled, he went astray; Psalm 119. and
of the people of Israel in the days of the Judges; They turned to the Lord
when they were afflicted; no sooner had they rest from their enemies, but they
for sooke him; Judges 3. 4, 5, 6. and c. And this is a thing whereof God much
and often complains by his Prophets, that his people in their prosperity were
like unto pampered Horses, which lift the heel to kick and spurn at their
Owner and Master. Every man's own experience can teach us this, that if we be
suffered a while without correction, and blessed with ease and abundance, we
grow forgetful of God, slack and cold in prayer, and in the whole service of
God, secure and presumptuous in all our conversation. But to speak more
distinctly of this matter, how chastisements when they are blessed of God, do
much help forwards the repentance of the godly; it is found true by testimony
and examples in the Word, that some by means of correction have been brought
to the knowledge and sight of some sin, which they did not espy and know to
be in themselves; their correction being as an eyesalue unto them, to help
them clearly to epsy that which was hid from their eyes. Thus to Joseph's
brethren, afflictions gave them understanding of their offense, which they had
long before committed against their brother; Genesis 42. 21, 22. Moreover,
corrections help a man as to the knowledge, so to work the grief and
detestation of his sin; because in his sharp and bitter corrections, he
perceives the better even by experience what bitter things our sins are, and
how much they displease God. See the truth of this in the Israelites, 1 Samuel 7.
6. Lam. 5. 15, 6: in David, Psalm 38. 17 and in many others. What should I say
further, that through the rod of correction Gods children are led unto an
hearty and earnest confession of their sins? also to ear Dan. 9.
Luke 15.
nest and constant prayer for the forgiveness of them, as (...) 7.
well as for deliverance from the smart or punishment, and to a continual
meditation and study how to leave and abandon such vices, as have stirred up
Gods anger against them. And finally, they are exceedingly provoked through
their chastisements for time to come to yield better obedience to Gods Word, to
increase in more fear of God, denial of themselves, contempt of this world,
compassion toward the miseries of others. As Christ being tempted, pitied
others, and can succor his members: so Christians by their own corrections
which they feel, learn to commiserate others when they are judged of God.
Thus the blessing of God upon their chastisements makes the godly to profit
much in the, 1. parts, 2. exercises, and 3. fruits of Repentance.


Aquila. I remember that I have heard you teach, that the very wicked (diverse
of them) howsoever they never take any sound benefit of their punishments when
they are past, as they show no true Patience in bearing them while they are
upon them; yet are by the severe hand of God brought to crouch unto God, whom
they despised in their prosperity: yea, with Pharaoh to confess their
wickedness, with Ahab to put on mourning weeds, with Abimelech to leave their
sin, as touching the outward deed; with Esau to shed tears: but they never
come thus far, as by their scourges to grow unto any detestation of their
sins past, and serious sincere care of avoiding occasions of such sin in
time to come: which is the prerogative of the faithful person to be soundly
bettered by his corrections, to be made more wary and awefull for afterward.
Which surely is a marvelous mercy of God toward them, to be by his rods
made more fearful to offend God, and careful to please him; and ministers
great and just cause of patient contentedness, under the hand of God: for who
will not quietly and thankfully put up that blow, that shall beat him into
Heaven, and keep him back from Hell?


Apollos. Ye say right; but how much does this bind Humility furthered by
chastisements.
them to all good patience and thankfulness in all their heavy chastenings,
that over and above all which we have said, it pleases their loving and good
God to give them the conquest of pride, and the blessing of a more humble heart
by their chastisements? Pride is a fault so hateful to God, as that he says
of it, what he says of no other kind of sin, That he will resist the proud,
and 1 Pet 4.
humble such as exalt themselves. This vice is not yet so mortified in the
godly, but though that it reigns not, yet it remains and dwelles in them,
being grounded upon, and nourished by the good gifts of God bestowed on them,
which are the matter and food of pride; we being so prone to pride and
Satan, being such a cunning workman, that he can make the best men proud of
their best gifts, yea, of their humility, being therefore proud because they
are not so proud as others; whereof arises sundry very evil effects in their
disdain of others, whose persons and gifts they should much reverence and
respect: in entertaining and stirring contentions, in putting some confidence
in themselves, yea, and sometimes in selfe-praises and self liking, and too
high conceit of their own worth, whereby their purest actions are defiled.
This vice of pride which is to God so odious, to our selves so dangerous, it is
greatly tamed by chastisements; in which the Spirit of God works, as by an
Instrument for the weakening and taking down our fierce and haughty stomachs:
for by our corrections we are made to see our inbred pride. Whereupon the heart
of a Christian is moved not only to confess (...), and (...) pardon for it,
and so to have it hid and covered by forgiveness; but from the love, and
inordinate (...) which they bare unto themselves, and their own endowments of
nature and grace, they are brought to have a more lowly conceit of themselves
and their own doings; and to think others better then themselves, and
themselves worst of all sinners: being driven from that vain confidence they
put in their own excellency and worth, to acknowledge freely and franckly
nothing in themselves, but mere beggary, and want of all good; and that to God
alone belongs all praise, of all our goodness whatsoever. And thus by their
punishment they are humbled in truth, not in show only.


Aquila. I have heard your self and some others speak highly to the praise of
humility, as that it is the foundation and base of other virtues; that as he
that will build high had need to lay his groundwork low: so he that will
build himself up in Christ unto glory in Heaven, must found himself in
humility. Of which I (...) read in Gods Book, that humbleness is that which
exalts a man, it is the ready way to honor, as pride is to shame, which
always follows after where pride rides before: so honor and glory attends
upon the lowly minded. Yea, God himself has promised to Esaias 57.
dwell with the humble, and make the contrite and lowly heart his temple and
habitation: even he that has his seat in the highest heavens, will come and
rest with him who is of a broken and humble heart. Finally, this is the grace
wherein we must bewray our selves to have the Spirit of Christ; who was lowly
and meek, and being equal with God, thinking it no robbery to be so; Philip.
2: yet humbled himself to the estate of a man, of a servant, of an accuised
man, being content to die on the Cross for our sins. Oh what blessed things
then are our chastisements, how patiently are they to be borne, how thankfully
is God to be blessed for them? who can and does so bless them, as to make them
means more and more to frame our hearts to that grace of humility, whereby
Gods Children are not only kept from arrogating to themselves what they have
not, or be not: but contrariwise, they make no show nor boast of that they
have, but knowing all good to be received, they glory not in the gift, but in
him who is merciful unto their sins.


Apollos. You do rightly judge of Chastisements to be blessed works of Gods
love, whereby such a fruit is purchased to Gods children, as the decrease of
their pride, and increase of humility; not only for the time they live under
the rod (for so long even Pharaoh will be humble, and Achab will be humble so
long (that is) they will counterfeit an humbleness, till they get out of Gods
hands,) but to cause them to walk more humbly with their God, and toward men
all their life after: for it is a consideration which sinkes deep into the
children of God, when they will bethink themselves that they are beaten, and
by such an one as the great and good God, and deservedly too for just causes;
yea, and so as others see their stripes, and take knowledge that God is angry
with them; this makes them hang down their heads, and abate their courage.
Even as an ingenious Scholar beaten for a fault before all his fellows, is
much abashed therewith: so it fares with Gods children, who yet are so humbled
and abased in their own eye, by their blows and strokes, as they learn great
patience and thankfulness, as well as humility, because they receive all their
chastisements as corrections of a most loving Father, who seeks in them their
best good. But it shall be sufficient to have entreated thus far of
Chastisements, let us pass on to the trials of Gods Children.

Touching which, we are to know thus much, that in Of Tiyals.
the corrections which God sends his Children, he does not only look at
this, only to admonish them of their sins past, that they may turn, and be
more obedient for time to come, and to abase the pride of their heart, that
they may carry themselves in all humbleness: but withal, he does take trial
of the faith, patience, and love of his Children, and sometimes it pleases him
to inflict some grievous judgment upon them without any such respect at all as
to correct their sins, but merely for probations sake. Thus he dealt with
Job, whole afflictions were not chastisements of his sins, but trials of his
faith and patience. Of this kind were such adversities and troubles, as
happened to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; whose pilgrimages proved very
combersome, and full of crosses. Also the crosses which (...) Gods children for
righteousness sake; these are such (...), as when they fall into them, they
are willed to (...) exceeding joy, because they serve for trial of their
faith: and therefore be called, Temptations; (...) 1. 2. It is the pleasure of
God (as men try gold in a Furnace) so to try his Children by afflictions. It
stands with very good reason, that God should at his pleasure make trial of
men, to see what is in them; seeing men do at their pleasure make trial of
such things, and persons, as be in their power; their Horses, their Dogs,
their Servants, their Children. And albeit times of prosperity, are times of
trial; for therein both evil men make proof of their pride, security, and
presumption; and also the godly declare their modesty, watchfulness, and
piety: yet times of afflictions are meerest times of trial; because as on the
one side many vices are covered in the days of prosperity and peace, which are
laid open in the evil day; as self-love, love of this World, impatiency,
vain confidence, fear, distrust, and sundry others, which afflictions bring
to light: so on the other side, there be sundry virtues of good men, as their
faith, love, obedience to God, patience, fear of God, hope, etc. which be more
better seen, and more manifested by afflictions, then out of afflictions. It
is an easy thing when men have rest and riches, to make profession and
semblance of faith and piety. Now, that it may be manifested, who do it in
truth, who otherwise, therefore God uses to send afflictions as touch-stones,
to try the current from the counterfeit; and as fire, to sever the dross from
the pure silver. There is much money looks as fair as any current money,
which yet is found to be vicious, when it is brought to the touch to be tried.
Likewise very many there be, who in the days of peace have faces, and
appearances of good and faithful men, who are made known in the hour of
tribulation to be far otherwise then they seemed to be, the Cross pluckes
the visard of hypocrisy from their face, and having unmasked them, makes them
to show what they are. God himself needs not to help his knowledge by these
trials: for he perfectly knows what is in us; searching our very heart and
reins. And indeed how should he that made us, be ignorant of us? Therefore
these trials serve to lay us open, not to his al-seeing eye, but to ourselves;
we being often very ignorant, what is in us: some supposing they have great
faith, love, and obedience, when it is but little, as Peter: Others fearing
their portion of faith to be little, when it is great, as Joseph of Arimathea:
some boasting of much faith, which have never a deal; as the Laodiceans,
Revel. 3. Now by the trial of afflictions, all these come to a sight and
discerning themselves; As it is written, I have tempted thee, to know what was
in thy heart; Deuteronomy 10. 12; that is, it was meet to make thee know what
is in thy self; whereof it will follow, that such as took themselves to be
full of grace, as they in Revel. 3. 17. We are rich, and full, and need
nothing; finding themselves poor and empty, either will be driven to Christ,
or left without excuse. Such as find they have great strength of faith, which
thought they had but a small faith; and they also that presumed of more, then
by experience they see in themselves; the one shall be provoked to more
thankfulness and joy, the other to more humbleness and fear; and both to a
greater patience, considering the good that comes to them by such trials. For
it is a great mercy of God in the trial of his children, to enable them to
know themselves better, and to behold more clearly both what they already
have, and what they want; that they may so joy for the one, as by the other
they may be stirred to an holy fear, and earnest prayer for increase. It is
the greatest wisdom to know our selves; and our trials do teach us this
wisdom: for which cause they are with all patience to be endured, especially
sithence to them which are tried, and do endure, there is promised, A Crown
of glory in the life to come; James 1. 12. And even in this life, the godly in
trials and afflictions having stuck to God, and followed his truth without
shrinking, and so conceiving better (then before their troubles) that their
faith is strong, and their love to God, it is not for his benefits, but for
himself; they are by this experience much encouraged to praise God, and to
proceed more chearefully in the rest of their course; and more and more to
despise the wicked suggestion of Satan, calling their faith and love in
question, both being proved to be sound: inasmuch, as even in great trials they
still trusted in God, and their heart was still toward him, to love and obey
him; as David says; Princes arose, and spoke against me, yet did I not forget
thy Law; Psalm. 119. Again, The proud have me in derision, yet did I not
decline from thy Word.


Of Trial by conflict of Conscience with sin.
Aquila. OF all the trials of Gods Children, which do you hold to be greatest,
and fullest of difficulty to endure, and glory to overcome?


Apollos. Amongst the trials of Gods children, some are but easy, as to keep
some earthly good things from them, which others have, and they desire; or to
deny success to their labors; or to grant but small success, or to defer
the hearing of their prayers for a time; and some less reproaches and
hindrances in their name and estate: other trials be yet harder, as the
spoiling of their goods, loss of liberty by imprisonment or banishment:
strange and long sicknesses; in all which, they have for grounds of their
patience, the will of God, who allotteth these things to them; his promise of
turning all things to the best for them, and the example of the Saints which
have been put to endure the (...), and also have been both sustained in them,
and well brought through them: but of all the trials, their patience is most
proved and approved by their enduring the conflict of conscience for sin, and
the suffering of mattyrdome for the Golpell. This double trial for their
sharpness and fierceness, may well be called, the fiery Trial; when either
the conscience within is frighted, and astonished with fear of hell fire for
the offense of God by sin; or the body without is put to abide the flames of
a temporary material fire, for the name of Jesus: and sure the former
invisible trial, is almost unsupportable. It is wondrous uncomfortable, when
the poor conscience has sin to surcharge and sting it, Satan to accuse,
the Law to threaten; God also appearing as a bitter enemy, showing himself in
great wrath as a severe Judge to condemn; the merciful promises, and all
things else that should breed comfort, with-drawne from the eye of faith, or
faith so dimmed and daunted, that it cannot look up to Christ. This is indeed
a heavy trial; while a man's spirit is firm and strong, it bears out all
afflictions; but when the spirit it self is wounded, who can bear that?
Christ says, That if the salt that seasoneth other things, have lost his
saltnosse, wherewith (says he) shall it be seasoned? and if the eye, which is
the light of the body, be dark, how great is that darkness? So may I say of
the spirit and heart of a godly man, which comfort him in all his troubles;
if that be dismayed and wounded, how great is that discomfort? Again, in other
afflictions and trials of Gods people, this is the stay of their minds, and the
chief prop of their patience, that though devils and men be against them, yet
God is with them; they see his help and aid ready to support and deliver: but
here in this soule-tryal, God himself shows himself as an enemy offended for
breach of his Law, as armed with wrath, and ready to take vengeance. Thus it
was with Job in his trial, who thought God to be his enemy, complaining that
he had written bitter things against him, and that he had set him as a butte
to level at, and to shoot his arrows against. Thus it fared with holy David,
and infinite others, the Saints, who could perceive in God for the time and fit
of their temptation, no other but fury, indignation, and hot displeasure; Psalm.
6. 72. Psalm. 22. 1, 2. The Children of God never utter their impatiency more
then in this case; so far as they have proceeded even to challenge and charge
God, breaking forth in their infirmities, into contumelies, censuring him very
hardly, as if he were too rigorous and extreme: yet for all this, that their
patience is so sore shaken, it is still vpheld, and made to endure until it
overcome at the last. Remember the patience of Job, and what end it had; James
5, 11. The grounds of their patience in this their deep trial, be these:
first, the consideration of Gods sovereignty and absolute power over all men,
whom he may sist at his pleasuee, and glorify himself in us by what way he
will. Secondly, his exceeding great mercies and truth, which will not suffer
him to tempt above our strength, nor to withold an happy issue. Lastly, the
examples of others, especially of the Son of God, who tasted and drunk of
the same Cup, feeling in his soul the sharp wrath, and wrestling with the
strict justice of his displeased Father, so as in his present sense he had
nothing but discomfort. Who being thus tried even with the sense of his Fathers
hottest ite, having his countenance severely set against him, to the working of
grief, distress, and perplexity in his holy conscience, knows how to
succor others, tried and tempted in this manner, being as willing as able to
relieve them; and they which are so tempted according to his example, have this
reason of patience and comfort, that they are conformed, and made like unto
their Head in suffering: the ungodly in their soule-trouble have no such hopes,
nor build upon any such foundations; and therefore are without any comforts.


Of the trial of Martyrdom.
Aquila. THe other heavy trial you call Mattyrdome, let me hear what it is,
by what degrees men are brought to it, how they are to prepare for it, upon what
grounds, they are to resolve for it, and be patient under it.


Apollos. A Martyr is any witness, or one that bears witness to any truth,
civil or religious; but as it is an ecclesiastical word, it signifies one
that bears witness to divine truth, not by common profession and practice,
as every Christian does; but by extraordinary suffering of death, or torment,
or both. At a word, he that is ready to give his life for the testimony of
Jesus, is by an excellency termed a Martyr; as Reuellation 2. 13. My faithful
Martyr Antipas was slain amongst you, where Satan dwells. It is not the
manner of God at the first to call his Children to this trial of Martyrdom,
but by certain degrees, after he has tried them with lesser and lighter
afflictions, when by long exercise they have got good strength, and upon sure
trial of Gods mighty grace in sustaining and comforting them, are grown to
experience and good hope, it being the wisdom of God to measure trials
according to the strength which men have: for he will not tempt, nor try any
of his above their power; 1 Cor. 10. 13. As in Abraham and Job, we may perceive
that God did observe an order in their trials, and still their last were
greatest and weightiest. Thus it was likewise in his proceeding with the
Apostles of Christ, after they had been tried with mocking and taunts; Acts 2.
with imprisonment and bands, Chapter 4. with scourging and stripes, Chapter 5.
at length they were called out to the hard and hot trial of Martyrdom; to
teach all men, that whatsoever trials they shall pass, yet still to look for
sharper and more bitter to be behind. Also it pleases God in his wise
dispensation to follow this course toward his Children, that he does not put
upon them this trial, but first warns them of it before it come by his
Ministers, calling upon them to prepare and make ready against the evil day;
to take away all excuse from inconstant back sliders, and to stir up the
godly to arm themselves. And we are here to remember a further goodness of
God in this matter, namely, that he charge all the faithful that they do
set their love upon Christ and his truth, as in respect thereof neither
friends, kinsfolk, brethren, and sisters, parents, husbands, wife, or life it
self, ought to be so dearly loved, but that when the comparison is between
these things and Christ with his Gospel, they be ready to manifest that they
were less loved by their willingness to lose and forgo them all for him. And
surely it is a most reasonable thing, that Jesus Christ being of more worth and
excellency, one that is higher then the Heavens, full of grace and truth, in
whom all treasures of wisdom are hid; the Godhead dwelling in him bodily,
Colos. 2. 9. and also having loved us best, and out of his love toward us has
done much for us; in that after many great crosses and calamities of his life,
he suffered the extreme pain of a shameful death, giving his body and soul an
offering for our sins, and calling us to the knowledge of himself by his
Word. Therefore of all things which be dear unto us, he should be most dear
and best beloved; so it is but equal, our love toward him should carry us so
far, that if need be, and God will have it so, we should be ready and
forward as always in affection, so when time requires actually to lay down
our lives for his sake. For if we must so love our even Christians, our
brethren in Christ, as that we be content to lay down our lives for them; I
Ioh. 3. 16. how much more do we owe this to our elder brother Christ Jesus,
from whom we receive the spirit of adoption? If Subjects to please their
Prince, or for the honor and safety of their Country; Soldiers at the
commandment, land for the love of their General: Finally, if men in their
private quarrels be willing to hazard their lives, and do put them in peril:
how equal is it that the like be performed by us for Christ, who is our life,
and for his blessed Word of life? Especially seeing it is a condition which
has layne upon the shoulders, not only of Prophets, Apostles, and other godly
men and women in all ages: but such as our Lord himself was not exempted from;
and let not the servant look to be in better condition then the Lord. It is
well with the Disciple to be as his Master is; neither is it only an equal
condition, but it is also a blessed condition, Christ having pronounced them
happy which shall lose bonse or land, wife or children, or life, for him and
his Gospel; Matthew 19. 29.


Aquila. It is a thing apparent, that there is great equity in this condition
of denying and leaving our lives for Christ. Had one man a thousand lives, he
owes them all to him, who being Lord of life and glory, was content by giving
his life a ransom for our sins, to redeem us from so great destruction, and
by his word to call us to so great salvation. But now let me hear what you
will say to the necessity of this condition, and what is to be done of
Christians which will prepare themselves for it, that they may be found ready,
if it fall to be their lot. For many Christians never think of it, and few do
think it will be their portion, and such as do, lack preparation.


Apollos. If you mean the necessity of affection and will to die for Christ;
then I say it is necessary for him that will live the life of a Christian, to
be willing in his affections to die for Christ; for except we hate father and
mother, and our own life also, we are not worthy of him; Matthew 10. 37. And
again, (...) a man (...) himself, and take up his cross, and follow Christ,
he cannot be his Disciple; verse 38. As no man that is a King, goes to (...)
with another King, but he will sit down, and reckon whether he be able to give
him the encounter: (...) 14. 28, (...) 30.
nor any man that is wise, will go to build, but first he will sit down and
cast his account, to see whether he have where with to finish the building. So
it stands every one upon, who takes upon him the profession of Christ, to try
his heart, whether he can be content to prefer Christ above all other things,
and to be willing, (if need require) to forgo even life it self for his
sake: for such is the malice of Satan, and of the wicked his children against
Christian Religion, and the true favorers and followers thereof, as they do
watch all oportunities of raising up not only ordinary molestations, but fiery
persecutions against them. And again, it pleases God after times of peace,
and long calmes of prosperity, to send a storm and tempest of persecution and
martyrdom, to discover hypocrites, and to show who be sound Christians; who
follow God for his blessings, and who profess him of love. Therefore it is
necessary that every one be found ready, and well furnished with faith and
patience, to be willing and able to abide the worst. For as in war when a
field is pitched and fought, all the Soldiers that fight are not slain, yet
are they all subject to the Sword, howsoever many escape alive: so in this
warfare against Satan and the World, all are liable to this great trial of
martyrdom, though it please God to spare and free many from undergoing it; yet
all by nature and condition of their profession are subject to it, and are to
make reckoning, and so to fit themselves, as if time change (for nothing is
more changeable) they may not be to seek of their weapons. This is it then
which I do determine according to the Word, that forasmuch as all Christians
are Christ's billed Soldiers, and have taken the press money to serve him to
the death; Ephe. 6. 5, 6, 7: And all ought to be as an house built upon a rock
firm and constant; Mat. 7. 24: And Paul the Apostle prays for the believing
Christians; Colos. 1. that they may be strengthened to patience: And also it is
written; That whosoever put their hand to the Plough, and look back, are
unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 9. 62. And all that will live godly in
Christ, must suffer persecution; 2 Timothy 3. 12. And finally, that by many
tribulations we shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Acts 14. 22. Therefore
howsoever it may seem good unto God, to bring men to their grave in peace, yet
to every Christian there is a necessity of resolution and preparation for
martyrdom. Touching your other demand, what duties are to be done of such as
will duly prepare and address themselves for such a trial: As this is a part
of our wisdom to forethinke that persecution may arise, and of our piety, to
be ready and willing to embrace it when it comes; so it is further required of
all godly wise Christians, to prepare themselves as Mariners against a storm,
and to exercise themselves as Soldiers against the day of battle. Now the
exercise of a Christian to fit himself for the trial of Martyrdom,
consists in these things: first, to labor for a sound judgment in matters
of faith, that first upon sound instruction he believe (...) and distinctly
the truth of Religion, and so there will follow a frank and undaunted
confession; according to that that is written: I believed, and therefore I
spoke; 2 Cor. 4. 13. Whereas the unsettled and unseasoned Christian, being
either ignorant, or but wavering, wi'l prove unstable in his way; James 1. 8.
Secondly, to this must be joined a through laboring in the mortification of
the corrupt lusts of our sinful nature, and a denial of our selves; because
Scripture teaches what experience has confirmed, that such as live in
pleasure and diverse sins, lacking the spirit of mortification, being
otherwise learned and leading a civil life, have proved back-slyders, and more
dishonored God thereby in one hour, then all their life long they gained him
glory. He had not need immoderately to love the World, or to hold any sins
dear to him, that must part from his own life in Christ's quarrel. The
mortisied man therefore is the likeliest and fittest man to make a Martyr; such
as being engrafted into Christ his death, have got power to die to sin, are
meetest persons to die for the Gospel of Christ. Unto all which, there must be
added a serious meditation of such Scriptures as foretell of persecutions for
the name of Christ, and diligent and often calling to mind the examples of
such as have valiantly endured loss of goods and life for the Lord Jesus; with
earnest prayer to God for strength and power to be armed with like constancy.
Such as most suspect their own strength, and being afraid of their infirmity,
get to them all helps of settled judgment, mortification, examples, prayers,
and Scriptures, to establish their hearts; there is best hope of such that they
will stick to it. Some have boasted of their strength in a vain confidence
thereof, and have started away when it came to the proof: whereas fearful
Christians, which mistrusting their own sufficiency and strength, did make God
their rock, have manfully acquitted themselves, choosing rather to die, then
to deny their Lord that bought them. He that is the greatest bragger at home,
is not ever the best Soldier in the field; nor he always stands to martyrdom
in the evil day, which in days of peace is most forward in show of zeal and
profession of words. Nichodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night,
being too fearful; afterward did declare his love to Christ, boldly standing
to him in a great extremity, when his own Disciples, who said; They would
die with him, shrunk from him, and forsook him. He therefore that least
presumes of his own power, and most strives against the power of sin, is
best made for such a business, as to suffer with Christ.


Aquila. Now Sir, let me entreat you to deliver to me what may be the
considerations whereby it pleases God to encourage his children to such a
resolution and patience, as when the fiery trial comes, they can with
constancy hold it out: and how the assaults of Satan, the world, and the
flesh, to shake and weaken this resolution, may be beaten back, or repelled?


Apollos. It is the holy Spirit of God which does establish them unto and in
this trial, inspiring their hearts with wisdom and courage, that they may
know how to confess his truth freely, and boldly; and with godly patience that
they may suffer for it manfully. As Christ said; It shall be given you what to
speak in that hour; Matthew (...). 19. And David prays God, to renew a firm
spirit in him, and with his free Spirit to establish him; Psalm. 51. 11, 13. And
Paul for the Colossians, prays God to strengthen them to all patience with
joy fullness; Col. 1. 11. So then the constancy of Martyrs is to be ascribed
not to any natural power, but to the mighty work of Gods Spirit, who says
unto the weak, Be thou strong, and fear not, for I am with thee in fire and
water. Howbeit Esaias 43.
there are sundry meet considerations, whereby it pleases the holy Ghost to
quicken and strengthen their minds to patient enduring. First of all, that by
Gods eternal decree which appoints them to salvation, they were also
appointed to that martyrdom; Romans 8. 29: Those whom he knew before, he
predestined to be made like the Image of his Son, that is, in suffering as
he suffered. Hence arises a second consideration, namely, that the Martyrs in
suffering death, have Jesus the Son of God, not only their Captain to go
before them, and lead them the way, but their companion and partner in their
sufferings: for they not only suffer after his example, but suffer with him,
and he suffers in them: so as their afflictions are called, The afflictions
of Christ; Colos. 1. 24. Thirdly, their pain of martyrdom is short and light,
the joys which follow have both immortality and weight; the smart and shame
which they see, is temporal, but the glory which they see not, is eternal; 2
Cor. 4. 18. These light and momentany afflictions, shall bring an immortal
weight of glory, says Paul: The things you see are temporal, but the things
you see not, are eternal. After a bitter breakfast, the Martyrs always and
certainly do look for a better dinner. They sow in tears, to reap in joy;
they pass through afflictions to a kingdom: as the Israelites through the red
Sea and Wilderness to Canaan. Fourthly, they look upon Christ, as the Author
and finisher of their faith; who for the joy set before him, endured the
Cross, and despised the shame; Heb. 12. 2. Also they consider the examples of
other Martyrs, who have gone that way of the cross cheerfully, and have not
loved their lives to death for Christ and his Word. By which cloud of witnesses
they are much moved and persuaded, to run the race that is set before them with
patience; Heb. 12. 1. Fistly, to suffer for Christ, it is a precious gift;
Philip. 1. 29. For unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. It is also a thing of such
worthiness, as to be rejoiced for; Acts 5. 41. They went away rejoicing. And
it is an honorable and glorious (...), 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye be rayled upon for
the name of Christ, blessed are ye, for the Spirit of glory, and of God rests
upon you: for that must needs be precious and glorious, which makes them
companions, and like unto the honorable Son of God; procures a blessed and
honorable memory in earth amongst men, prepares them a way for everlasting
honor in Heaven.

Sixthly, great is the profit which Martyrs do bring, both to the Church, in
the example of their constancy, and to themselves, in the exceeding great
reward which shall be given them; their miserable life being changed for a most
blessed life; Mat. 5. 9. Great is your reward in Heaven. Seauenthly, the
pleasure of Martyrdom: for they that suffer, rejoice in such tribulation, some
of them clapping their hands in the midst of the flame, singing Psalms with
cheerfulness, and some of them professing the fire to be unto them as a bed
of Down, or of Roses.

Eighthly, it is a safe thing to die for Christ: for such as here in this World
will lose their life for him, shall find and save it in another world; as on
the other side, they that will save it here, (with evil conditions) shall lose
it there.

Ninthly, in suffering Martyrdom, there is not only honor, profit, pleasure,
and safety; but it is also an honest duty: for we show our selves thankful to
Christ our benefactor. And this is an honest thing, to be grateful to such as
have done us good: also it is honesty to stick to him in persecution and
trouble, whom we have followed in peace and prosperity; and finally, to
maintain his cause to death before men, who by his death pleads our cause with
God, it is an honest part, and commendable. Now to conclude this point, the
Martyrs do consider, that it is but their bodies which they give for Aquila
that ye have heard the grounds of Patience, in the trial of Martyrdom, if you
will object what is used by Satan and the flesh to be laid in for the
battering thereof, I will show you how they are to be repulsed.


Aquila. As all good purposes have their hindrances; so this resolution of
Martyrdom is diversely and strongly opposed by friends, our selves, and our
enemies. Christ's purpose to suffer at Jerusalem, was crossed by a friend, his
disciple Peter; Mat. 16, 22. and the Disciples at Tyrus, Acts 21, 4, would have
hindered Paul in his purpose that way. Likewise at all times there be found
Christian friends ready to say, that our lives may win great glory to God,
much good to his Church, and therefore it were good to favor our selves. And
surely this counsel is not to be neglected, when we may follow it without
disobedience to Gods Word, or dishonor to his name, or offense to the Church,
or hurt to our own conscience: otherwise they are to be answered as Peter was
of Christ; Get thee behind me Satan. What think you of it?


Apollos. We must not be our own caruers, how or by what way we will glorify
God, and benefit his Church: for weeliue and die not to our selves, but to God;
Romans 14. verse 8. If it appear unto us therefore, that by our suffering death
for Christ, God will have his honor advanced, and his Gospel and Church also
further confirmed and built up; then we are to obey the calling of God, who as
he is absolute Lord of our lives, so he is the wisest disposer of them. Again,
whosoever are called to Martyrdom, and to the bearing of that cross, if they
shall shun it upon advice from friends, to spare their lives for further
welfare of the Church, and honor to God; let them take heed lest this be but a
secret pretense for self-love, and carnal desire of life: and let such fear,
that God may power upon them and their lives dishonor and contempt, whiles
they avoid the way, whereby he will be honored of them. But what is it that
worldly friends use to allege in this case?


Aquila. It is soon guessed what they will object; namely, loss of goods,
living, forsaking wife and children: Will ye (say they) undo all these, and
cast off the care of your Family? And for preserving of all these, their
counsel is with our bodies to go to Idol service, and to keep our hearts to
God.


Apollos. This wisdom is earthly, carnal, and devilish: for it persuades
to be newters, and to halt on both knees, like the Israelites, which held
neither of Baal, nor of God. Again, we are commanded, to keep our selves from
Idols; I John 5. 21. and in the second commandment, we are forbid either for
any religious purpose to make, or serve any Image; Exodus 20. 5. and 3. Also our
bodies being created, redeemed, and sanctified of God, their service is due to
him, not to Idols: which rather then godly men would honor with their presence
and service (but of their bodies,) they have chosen to die; Dan. 6. 15, 16.
Because it has in it both offense of God and his Church; and for the loss of
house, goods, or lands, there is this comfort against it, that the Saints shall
receive a house made without hands for their earthly Tabernacle; 2 Cor. 5. 1:
and an Inheritance in Heaven, immortal and undefiled; 2 Pet. 1. 5. For the
loss of friends, we shall be joined in fellowship with the Angels, and spirits
of blessed men; Heb. 12. 23. For wife and children, the care of them must be
eased with meditation of Gods providence, who is our God, and the God of our
seed: Gods providence is his childrens inheritance, and howsoever it be
grievous to part from them, yet it is more grievous for their love to hate and
for sake Christ; for whose sake and love, we are commanded to hate all: Mat.
10. 37. Besides, we part from them for a time, to be joined with them for ever;
I These. 4. 18. Comfort your selves with these things.


Aquila. But death is terrible and very fearful, says our flesh to us.


Apollos. Flesh (that is) carnal and corrupt reason, is an evil counselor,
as well as carnal friends; let men rather think how fearful eternal death
is: for natural death, we owe it to nature, to which we must pay it; let us
pay that to Christ, to whom we much more do owe it, and who can preserve it
for us in another world. And how should death be fearful to believing
Christians, to whom it is an end and period of all their sins and sorrows,
an entrance and beginning of endless joy and perfect righteousness? at a
word, a passage from death to life, from mortality and misery, to immortality
of bliss and glory, wherein he that hopes to live, cannot greatly fear to
die?


Aquila, But the pain of burning is too sharp and grievous; we could be
content to die, so it were not in the fire, that is most terrible?


Apollos, Yet whom God calls to that or any other violent and terrible death,
he can enable them to endure it; the power of his might can strengthen them:
Secondly he will enable them; for he has promised never to exceed the power of
the tempted; I Corinthians 10, 13.

Thirdly, he has enabled sundry to bear it, yea, such as feared it most when
they came to suffer, were made valiant; as Master Sanders. Lastly, consider a
while how terrible hell fire is, being incomprehensible, and everlasting.


Aquila. But we cannot abide death with torment.


Apollos. Torments of Tyrants in earth, have both measure and end; so have not
hell torments.


Aquila. May we not dissemble, or deny for a time the Doctrine of the Gospel,
without danger of denying Christ himself?


Apollos. The Scripture says; Ye cannot: Mat. 10. 33. Luke 11. 26. In the
former place it is said, He that denies me; in the latter is added, or is
ashamed of my words, I will deny him, and be ashamed of him. To deny Christ's
Word, is to deny himself, who is known to us by his Word.


Aquila, But when we feel our selves too weak to stand to it to the death,
what then is to be done?


Apollos, Such as cannot endure violent death, let them suffer exile; let them
live a while out of their country, which cannot give their lives to Christ:
let them be Martyrs in desire, that cannot be so in deed and effect; yet
hearty prayer may obtain that strength which is lacking. In the mean time
such weakness is to be confessed and bewailed.


Aquila. We know not what to say, when we come before the persecutors?


Apollos. Christ Jesus will give you a mouth and wisdom, against which they
shall not be able to resist; therefore trust in him, and rely upon him.
Remember poor men and women in Queen Martes time.


Aquila. Their threatenings are very full of terrors.


Apollos. Yet God is to be feared more then all tyrants, which can but kill the
body; God can send body and soul into hell fire. Again, of all threatenings,
fear these; Luke 12. 9.


Aquila, Their fair promises, if we will yield, do allure much: for we have
their word for life and preferment, to be given us upon our yielding?


Apollos. They promise these things, as the Devil their master promised the
World to Christ, to corrupt him; and yet he could not perform it. The issues
of life are in Gods hands, and for preferment he lifts up one, and pulles down
another; I Sam. 2. 6, 7. and it is the greatest misery, to be great without God.

Secondly, if God should spare life, what is the gain of a transitory life, to
the loss of eternal life?

Thirdly, consider that Christ makes better promises, and surer to such as
cleave to him in life and death; 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. Romans 8. 17, 18. Mar. 16. 28.
Luke 9. 24. Mark 8. 36. Luke 12. 8. Mat. 10. 32. Thus far of such good
works as contain our duty to God, which yet are to be practiced with respect
of edification to men, as all duties to men are to be done with desire and
regard of pleasing and honoring God in them.


The eleventh Part of the Dialogue.
Of such good works as concern our Neighbor.
Aquila. SIR, ye are well met here, shall I tell you what I feel in my self.
Me thinks it fares with me, as it uses to do with a traveling Horse, which
the nearer he draws to (...) eyes end, the more he takes heart to him, (...)
more courageously, in hope to come shortly (...) baiting and resting place; so
it is with me, I find myself now more eagar and sharp set upon this (...) then
when we began: for I have good hope, that we shall at this our meeting and
conference, draw it to a conclusion. We are come now to those works of grace,
which the true believers are to do toward their Neighbors; I pray you Sir,
which are these, and amongst these being many, what shall we first take up to
deal in?


Apollos. I could be well content our hands were eased of this labor, for I
begin to feel my self scarce well; but it will not be laid out of hand I
doubt so soon as you make reckoning of: for with my good will, there shall not
be one peculiar grace of Gods Elect, but some thing shall be said of it. My
desire is, as much as lies in us, that this our glass shall discover to a
Christian all his dignity by his calling; and all his duty (being called)
toward his Caller. To proceed therefore in our purpose, all our duty to man
is comprehended in this one word Righteousness; as godliness compriseth all
our duty toward God, whereof as we find sundry branches, so has
Righteousness many members; as Gal. 5. Paul there rehearses love, joy, peace,
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance: and
Colos, 3. 12. besides these, there are reckoned up, mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, forbearing, and forgiving one another. Also in 2 Peter 1.
5. we find there virtue, patience, brotherly kindness: in James 3. 13.
meekness of wisdom; in Titus 2. gravity and chastity: in Ephe. 4. speaking
truth: in Heb. 13. 5. contenteanesse; in Acts 20. 19. modesty. Unto all which,
we must add all respective graces and works which are to be done of us, in
respect of some degree which is put upon us; as we be Parents, or Children,
Masters or Servants, Husbands or Wives, Subjects or Governors, etc. Now the
Scripture names all these graces in one place, the fruits of the Spirit;
Galat. 5. 22. In another, exhorts the Elect of God, to put them on; Col. 3:
in a third, tells us that who so has them, he shall never fall; 2 Pet 1. 7,
8. By all which, it is manifest, that they be such graces as are proper to the
regenerate, and which none but Gods chosen children can have. The appearance
and shadow of them is to be found in others, who (as Apes do Men) would
imitate the godly in these virtues, and yet have them not, because they have
not faith, the root of them.


Aquila, I see there is more work behind then I was aware of, yet it does no
whit discourage me; let us prosecute our purpose, time and diligence with a
little patience will overcome great matters. And tell me now I pray you, would
not these graces be handled in that order as ye have named them? otherwise, how
think ye good we should proceed? ye have found us stuff for a new conference,
ye must also devise the frame to.


Apollos. Let me alone with that, though I be no good builder, yet I will
endeavor to have this matter put in good for me. I think it meet to speak
first of the general, then of the specials; and amongst these, first of them
that in common belong unto all men and afterward, of such duties as are to be
performed, in respect of a degree put upon us.


Aquila. Let us then take our beginning at Righteousness, touching which,
declare unto me what it may import, as it does respect mutual dealing of men
amongst themselves; and what difference there is herein between good men and
evil?


Of Righteousness.
Apollos. THe word Righteousness, is a large word in Scripture, and has many
acceptions. But to our purpose, it is either that peculiar virtue, whereby in
This Righteousness is commutatiue, and distributive.
contracts and bargains, and matters of justice, men are enabled to deal
equally and rightly, giving as good as they take, and rendering to every one
their due; and it is set against wrong by oppression or deceit, as contrary
unto it: or else more generally it is put and used to signify that same This
Righteousness is habitual or actual.
work and grace of the Spirit, in the soul of a regenerate man; whereby he
is willing and ready to respect his Neighbor in every thing that is dear and
precious to him, causing him to take thought and care, not only not to hurt
nor offend any man by thought, word, or deed, (as near as may be) either in
his excellency and dignity, or in his life, in his soul, or body, in his goods
or credit, or any thing else whatsoever belongs unto him: but in all and
every one of these, lovingly to tender him with an unfeigned desire, and labor
by all good means, and with his best might to increase and preserve all and
every one of them. As unrighteousness in the phrase of Scripture comprehends
all those vices, whereby men are hurtful to men, in any of their good things:
so under Righteousness are comprehended all virtues, whereby we become any
way, or in any sort profitable and helpefull to our Neighbor. In this sense is
the word Righteousness taken, in all those places where it is set with
holiness or godliness; as Titus 2. 12. and Ephe. 4. Romans 1. 18.
Unrighteousness set beside ungodliness, or set alone, is the spring of all
evils from one man to another; and Righteousness named apart from godliness,
is the root of all duties amongst men: it is as the Tree, and all other
virtues of the second Table, as the branches; it is as a Fountain, they be as
the Rivers; it is as the body, they as the members. This Righteousness is
distinguished into habitual or actual Righteousness; habitual
Righteousness is that gift of God, which is poured into the hearts of the
Elect, to enable them to will and to do good things, tending to the good of
our Neighbor, whereof in the fourth to the Ephesians; Actual righteousness is
the exercise of this gift, when out of love we practice such things whereby our
neighbor may be benefited. Hereof the Apostle spoke, 1 John 2. 19. He that
works Righteousness, is righteous. This gift and act of Righteousness, is
that, for the which Noah, Lot, and sundry others, are highly commended in the
holy Scripture; Gen 6. 9: Job 1. 1. Now as touching the difference about
Righteousness, between the Children of God and others; this is it: The godly
through this universal Righteousness, are disposed freely and of their own
accord to seek the good of every of their Neighbors, in one thing as well as
in another, according to the rules of the Word, unto the glory of God. Whereas
the wicked do some righteous things to some persons now and then whom they
affect, which cross not their own pleasure, nor gain or credit: not out of
any love to men, nor out of any respect to Gods will or glory; but out of
self-love, Hence it is, that such righteous persons as these, do turn away
from their righteousness; and so lose themselves and their labor: Eze. 18.
with by-respects of vain glory and worldly profit: and therefore in nothing
doing righteously, and in most things committing unrighteousness; clean
contrary to the course of just and righteous persons, who do work righteous
things, and that righteously, out of charity unto men, and unto the praise of
God; and that at all times, and toward all kind of men, both friends and
enemies, according to their means, and as occasions be offered them: truly
repenting where they fail in any things, and afterward endeavoring to become
more (...).


Of Love.
Aquila. SIR, it has been taught me, that under Righteousness, are contained
all duties toward God and men, and that in this sense, Godliness is a part of
Righteousness; howbeit, I perceive that we are to speak of it, as it is
separate and distinct from godliness. And now you have spoken thus far of
Righteousness, were it not good that we first set upon these works of
Righteousness, which we are bound to perform toward others, in respect of
some degree that God has put upon us? for thus it has pleased God himself to
proceed, in the laying out those duties of the second Table; he begins with
such duties as we owe unto others, in regard of our place and degree: Honor
thy father, etc.


Apollos. Indeed friend Aquila, you say well; and this platform had not been
amiss: for the decalogue (or ten Commandments of the Law) as they do
immediately come from God; so they are most perfect for matter, and most
exquisite for order and manner of delivery; the chiefest and greatest duties
first mentioned, and after the meaner and lesser, and that both in the first
and second Table: howbeit we are not bound so strictly and precisely to follow
that order in our teaching and instruction: but that it may be altered without
fault. A president of which alteration, is the Apostle Paul himself, both in
his fifth Chapter to the Ephesians, and the 3. and fourth Chapter to the
Colossians, wherein after doctrine, he descends to moral duties; and he
affords the first place to such as be common, and then comes unto the
peculiar and proper duties, in which steps I think it fit for us to tread
in, speaking first of general, and next of special duties.


Aquila. I mislike not your purpose; and yet ere you Sincerity or truth, is in
all graces as a common adioynt or quality.
deal with such particular graces, as enable us to do duties to other men,
and to our selves: let me call to mind, that which you said before of the
works which we are to do toward God, that truth and sincerity is an
affection common to them all, to distinguish them from the works of piety done
by Hypocrites, who have a certain fear of God, and love of God, etc: but it
is severed from truth; it being the mercy done to sanctified persons, that they
should truly love and fear God, and do all duties toward him in soundness;
right so is it in these duties which belong to men. As in our natural body,
blood is dispersed through all the body, and where blood is, there is spirit
too: so sincerity and truth runs through all duties, as blood in the body;
and where any grace is, there is truth with it: and all the good things which
the godly do, are done in truth, and godly uprightness. They love their
Neighbor in truth, and are truly merciful, and truly meek, and truly sober,
and truly chaste, and not in appearance only to the eye of men, but be such
before God as they seem to be before men, in all duties seeking to honor and
obey the name of God; wherein lies the grand difference between them and the
ungodly, who do the same things for matter and substance, which holy men do;
but not in the same manner, because they are void of sincerenesse.


Apollos. You say right. As every Star does partake in the light of the
Sun, to take brightness from it; so truth and sincerity passes through all
Christian graces, even as the soul that does animate and quicken every part of
the body: for all graces, if they lack truth and soundness, they be as rotten
members, or as shadows, and dead carkases, which carry the semblance of
graces, and are not: the true fire does not more differ from the painted, then
grace from grace; that is, the sincere graces from such as be but counterfeit. A
Man or a Lion pictured artificially, seems a man or a lion, and is not; so
virtues severed from truth and sincerity, have a goodly show, but are not the
lively things themselves. But now it were meet that we did set upon that
amiable The fixed commandment.
grace of love, which is the glue and band that linkes all other graces
together, and holds us Chistians fast tied and linked as many sticks in one
bundle. Therefore worthily it is called, the band of perfection, without which,
all humane things fall apeeces, and come to ruin. Let me hear what you have
heard and learned of this worthy grace of love, wherewith we love one another,
whose gift it is, whence it springs, what it is, what are the properties and
effects of it, the manner and measure thereof; and what are the duties of love,
whom we are to love, and by what persuasions we may be incited to the exercise
of this virtue; wherein it differs from faith, and finally, how we may overcome
the lets and hindrances of love, with such other things as shall come to your
remembrance; not forgetting to tell us along as you go, how true love differs
from the counterfeit.


Aquila, Sir, ye have enjoined me task enough, which I had rather it had
happened to your self; but sithence ye have put it on me, I will perform my
endeavor; be you ready to help defects: and by your patience I will first tell
you what it is. I take Love or Charity Love.
to be that grace, whereby we are moved to hold What brotherly love is.
our Neighbor dear unto us; also to desire and seek his good in all things
that be dear unto him, even as we would have our selves and our things dear
unto others. This grace it is the free gift of God, who is Love himself, and
author and worker of love in all others. Therefore Paul prays God for this
gift, and prayseth him for it; as in his salutation of the Churches is to be
well perceived: no man nor other creature can work love in us, and by nature
we have it not; it is God only, who out of his free mercy, does both plant,
and continually uphold it in us. And let this generally be spoken of love, and
all the other virtues following, that they grow not in the barren soil of our
hearts, but come from without, being the fruits and gifts of Gods Spirit,
Galat. 5. 22. This Love given us of God, is always linked with the love of
God, whose Daughter it is, being bred and brought forth by it: for therefore we
love our Neighbors, because we first love God. Thus the Apostle John teaches;
1 Ioh. 4. 21. Our mutual love being a beam of our love to God, as our love to
God, is a sparkle of his love to us: neither can any man love God, but because
he is first loved of him; neither can any love man, who first does not love
God; neither can any but love men, who have in them the love of God: for this
enforces us for Gods sake to love such as he will have us love, having put his
Image and likeness in them, and nearly linked them to us; the parties whom
we are to love, are our Neighbor; that is, every one that comes of Adam; of
what Country, Religion, Language soever, even every man and woman, being so
near to us, as to be of our kind and blood; and having any need of us in any
sort, every such is our Neighbor, upon whom we must bestow our love: not as
commonly men think them only to be our Neighbors, who dwelles in the same
street or burrow. The parable of the Samaritan quitteth this, who acknowledged
the wounded Jew for his Neighbor; Luke 10. 33. Christ's example also, doing
good to Samaritans, as well as Jews; John 4. 26. clears this point.


Apollos. But seeing God only is to be loved, and that with all the heart; is
it not a wrong to God, to give any portion of our love from him to any creature?


Aquila. Not at all; for the love where with we love How our Neighbor may be
loved, without injury to God.
our Neighbor, is not a several love from that with which we love God, but a
branch or stream of it, in loving of men for Gods sake, we love God in our
Neighbor. Even as it is the same Sun which gives light in the field and in
the house, upon land and in the water; so it is the same love which imbraceth
God and our neighbor, in loving whom we witness, and show how well and truly
we love God, so long as our Neighbor is loved for God, and in God; because he
belongs unto him, and bears his likeness, and that our love of him, is
referred to Gods glory; we may nevertheless love God with all our heart, I say
if we love our Neighbor after, and for God. Indeed if we love our Neighbor
before God, or more then God, or for our own sake and profit, then our heart
is divided, and our love it is not right: and this is one thing which
distinguishes false love from true, worldly charity from Christian. This
loves man after God, and for him; whereas worldly love respects not God, in
the loving of our Neighbor.


Apollos. Do you esteem your enemy as your neighbor, whom ye ought to love?


Aquila. Yea. If every one who comes of Adam An enemy is a neighbor and a
brother, if he be a christian.
be my Neighbor, then my enemy cannot be excluded from my love; especially
seeing Christ has so strictly commanded it: Luke 6. Love your enemies. Yea,
and most highly commended it, as a special mark and note of Gods Child, to
distinguish him from others, who can and do love their lovers. Every wicked
man can do that, to be friendly to their friends; but to be lovingly affected
to such as hate us, doing good readily to such as hurt us, and that for Gods
sake, because he will have it so; this declares us to have him to our Father,
who is kind to the unkind, and does good to the evil, giving his Son to die
for his enemies; Romans 5. 8. and to have him for our Head and Savior, who made
intercession for his crucifiers: and finally, to be brethren to him, who prayed
for his persecutors; Acts 7. 60. Again, we know not but that our enemy may be
the Child of God; in truth, either he is already so, or he may be so;
howsoever it be, if he be a Christian, we are sure he is our brother; and in
that regard we are bound to love him, being not only a Neighbor near unto us
in nature, coming of the same blood, having the similitude of God, but a
brother also, professing the same Lord, and so linked unto us by band of
Religion, having the same Baptism, faith, hope, and inheritance; all which
should work in me a loving mind toward such, yea, though I knew they did
abhor me.


Apollos. Ye say very right. And indeed this is the trial and touchstone of
our love to prove it by, whether it be counterfeit or sound: for he that can
love his enemy upon these grounds, does certainly approve himself to be
endued with Christian charity, and to be indeed the child of God, led by his
Spirit; for so much as none save such, can love their enemy in such sincere sort
as has been said. But you have showed me that my Neighbor is my enemy, no
less then my friend; let me hear now whether ye put any difference between a
neighbor and brother, and whether there be any degrees in our love?


Aquila. There is this difference. A Neighbor is Difference between a
neighbor and a brother.
more general: for every brother is a neighbor; but not on the contrary. A
Neighbor is every man or woman, whether they be Christians or Infidels, Jew,
Turk, Heathen, Barbarian, Papist, or whosoever: but a brother is that person
who only is a Christian, professing with me the same Christian doctrine, and
agreeing with me in the same worship of God. The company and society of these,
are called the Household of faith; the Church of God: so as a Christian is both
my brother and my neighbor, whereas one may be my neighbor, who is not my
brother. As the Samaritane was to the Jew, and as Paul was to Publius and the
Barbarians mentioned, Acts 28. Now according to this difference are the degrees
of love, as the holy Apostle Paul has taught us; Galat. 6. 10. Do good to
all, but especially to the Household of Faith: for we are tied to these by
more, and also by more straight bonds. If a Turk be in necessity, I am bound
to help him (so as I help him not against Christ) but if a Turk and a
Christian both want, and my store will relieve but the one, I am bound to show
my love rather to my Christian brother. I may pity the misery of a Turk, when
I cannot relieve him, because he is my flesh; I must relieve a Christian before
him, who is both my flesh and my brother. Likewise amongst Christian brethren,
there is a great odds, which will make a great odds in our love.


Apollos. Well, you then do think that there are degrees of love toward the
Brethren, and that of them some are to be loved, before, and more then others?


Aquila. I do think so; and I think it not without Degrees of Love.
reason: for amongst the Brethren, some be also our kinsfolks, our brethren,
sisters, parents, etc. Also some of them have received more excellent gifts,
and be enabled with power and will to do more excellent things for the common
good. Now where there be more causes of love, there ought our love more to show
it self; herein we must follow God, and it is a sure way, to set our love most
on them, toward whom God has most expressed his love. When we read of John,
that he was the Disciple whom Jesus loved, me thinks it intimates and declares
thus much unto us, that he did prefer him in his love: for it is out of doubt,
that he loved the rest which were good; yet John more then the rest, because of
some notable grace that he had above the rest: for Christ's love was not
partial, neither must ours be. But there is some difference to be put between
the affection, and fruits of our love; oftentimes these must be extended to
some brethren more plentifully, by reason of the great wants, toward whom yet
we have not such a fervent affection of love, as to others which be more
perfect. As fathers will most affect their best children, yet will take
greatest pains about the worst, because they need most; greatest care must be
used toward greatest infirmities: but greatest graces must have greatest
affection of love. Godly men do sometime fail herein, as we may see in Isaac
toward Esau; and David toward Adoniah and Absalon: howbeit good men may not
be followed in their evil, but in their good things.


Apollos. Now let me hear of the manner of our love, by what rules it must be
guided toward Neighbors and Brothers, friends and enemies.


Aquila. For the well governing of our love, as touching Rules to guide our
love.
the manner, and measure, and end, we have sundry rules given us in Scripture:
the first is, to love our Neighbor as our self. Now as the Apostle says; No
man hates himself, but wishes all good to himself; Mat. 22. Now such as
with a right ruled love do love themselves, they do not only wish, but
procure such things to themselves, as indeed be wholesome and good for them,
both for their bodies and souls; abandoning such things as be evil and
noisome to either, have they never such appearance and show of good and profit:
even thus ought every man to love his neighbor. And according to the second
rule, look what things by the judgment of sound reason we would have done,
or not done to our selves; these things we should be willing to have done, or
not done to another; be he friend or foe: Mat. 7. Also in what measure and
degree we desire that our Neighbor should love our selves, in the same we ought
to love them again. The third rule is, to love as brethren; 1 Pet. 1. 22. That
is, such love as natural brethren ought to bear, both for manner and measure,
one to another; such, even such, so hearty and vehement ought the love of
Christians to be amongst themselves, knowing that they are brethren by a
brotherhood, consecrated and ratified in the blood and death of Christ our
elder brother, who has charged us (as one who may command us) to love one
another, as he has loved us; John 13. 15. Love one another, as I have given
you example. And again, a new commandment I give you, that ye love one
another, as I have loved you; John 13. 15. That so ye love one another, this is
our fourth and best rule, to direct us in our brotherly Christian love, which
must be unfeigned, without hypocrisy or counterfeiting, earnest without coldness
and indifferency, constant without change or weariness, free without respect
of our own pleasure or profit; and very great, not small and mean: for thus
Christ loved us, for in that he would besides his doctrine, his miracles, his
example of life, his prayers; in all which, he witnessed his love, vouchsafed
also to give himself to such a death, and that for his enemies. This declares
how sincere, free, constant, and exceeding great his love was toward us;
wherein though we cannot equal him by attaining to his perfection, which is
not possible, nor required of us: yet we must be like to him in our love, and
strive to come so near as we may; which is both required, and possible. And
herein the true Christian does differ from the false, that the one in his love
looks upon Christ's love, as his pattern, and thereto frames his own; but the
other has no thought at all to imitate Christ: as he has him for no Savior,
so he makes him no example. The godly Christian, who believes him to be a
Redeemer, does labor to follow him as a guide and sampler; as in this duty of
love, so in all other Offices of Christianity.


Apollos. I have heard your rules of neighbourly and brotherly love; let me
hear some of your best reasons to move and persuade, both to begin, and to
persevere in exercising of this love: for it is as needful to have good
grounds of our love, as a good guide of our love. He is as much too blame, that
loves without reason, as he that loves without rule.


Aquila. As there be certain common reasons which Reasons why we ought to love.
may persuade our love toward all men whatsoever they are, to wit, because
they are the creatures of God; our flesh and blood, of one kind with us, our
Neighbors: also being made after Gods Image, having a commandment to love
them, and the examples of godly men, who have done good to all, out of an
affection of love, and because we would have others to love us; so there be
peculiar and special reasons to move us unto the love of our brethren, which
hold the same faith that we do: and of these I will give you but a light
touch, it shall be sufficient to name them; our labor ought to be more in
practicing them, then in speaking of them. It were enough that it is the will
of our Father which is in Heaven, that his Children should dwell in love, and
that he has by his example gone before us; first loving, and still loving us,
and that he has made us partakers of the same grace, to be all even
Christians, brethren, fellow heirs, members of Christ, his servants, his
friends, his children, his Spouse, his inheritance; also, that except we truly
love one another, we cannot love God, nor be loved of him, nor have any
assurance that we be his people, or look for any blessing, but for all wrath
from him; yet unto all this, if we add the sweet pleasure and delight which
is in brotherly love (behold how pleasant) and the great and manifold
commodities which arise and grow thereby, (behold how good it is for brethren
to dwell together in unity) our love being for comfort and delight like that
precious ointment, and for profit like that deaw of Hermon; and withal if we
do consider the bitterness of hatred, being as gall and wormwood, and the
hurt which it brings, all this would greatly prevail with us, to stir up
and increase mutual love.


Apollos. Let me stop you a little in your course; what be these profits which
love brings, and the discommodities which follow the wants of it?


Aquila. Whiles Christians are joined together, they are strong as an army,
where the Soldiers keep every one his rank; or as a wall, where the stones
be all joined together. Also we may boldly come with our selves and service
unto God, under hope of acceptance; we thereby grieve the adversaries of God,
which see our accord through love, and rejoice the godly: we spite Satan,
whose kingdom is more hindered by us, the more that love does abound: we
glorify the word of God, and glorify our profession, our prayers have more
feruency and fruit. As on the other side, through lack of love amongst
brethren, God and his Gospel be dishonored, Satan pleased, and the wicked
made glad our safety hazarded, because a house divided cannot stand; our
prayers hindered and rejected, with infinite discommodities, which lamentable
experience teaches men better to know, then any man's speech can do. The
Apostle aymeth at the great commodity and necessity, as also at the excellency
of love, when he bids us above all things, to put on love; and when he
likeneth it to a bond, calling it, the bond of perfection; Colos. 3. 14.
because it knitteth our selves, and our duties together; and unto sinews and
joints, Ephe. 4. As being of that use and force in the mystical body, as
sinews and joints in our natural body be, to join and fasten all the members
together; these things, as also to consider that love remains in heaven, when
faith and hope fail, must much provoke us both to esteem and to exercise all
duties of love toward the brethren, in all cheerfulness, up rightnesse, and
constancy, and to strive mightily against all the lets and obstacles of love,
both within us and without us; whatsoever they be, they are all by these
considerations to be vanquished.


Apollos. Your reasons be of good weight. There remains that you show us the
properties and actions of love: and withal wherein faith and love do differ
one from the other.


Aquila. The properties of love were touched before, when we heard that we
must love as Christ loved; but he that will be further instructed in the
properties Properties of Love.
and effects of love: let him think upon the first to the Corinthians 13. 5,
6, 7, 8. where the Apostle affirms of Christian charity, that it is kind, and
not envious, neither boasting nor proud, doing no uncomely thing, seeking not
her own things; not suddenly angry, nor thinking evil, rejoicing in the
truth, not in iniquity; suffering all things, believing all things, hoping all
things, enduring all things; the nearer that our love is to these qualities,
the holier it is: the further off, the worse, and none at all it is, if it be
void of them. Touching the works and actions of love, I find they be either
inward, Actions of Love.
which we conceive in our hearts, or outward, which we express in our lives,
words, and deeds, either toward the souls, or bodies of our Neighbor. The
inward works of love, be these, to think no evil but good of others; for
love thinks no evil: to wish them well, and desire their good every way, to
rejoice with them for their welfare, being so cheared with their good things,
as with our own: to mourn with them for the adversities and evils which
befall them, according to the counsel of Paul; Rejoice with them that rejoice,
and mourn with them that mourn. This fellow feeling when we pity others
infirmities and miseries, and be glad for their prosperity and well doing; it
is the maine mental duty of love. Now for outward actions of love, they
concern others in their person, substance, or name; they be all the works
commanded in the second Table of the Law, which be innumerable: but briefly to
give you a short sum of them, to the substance of our neighbor, we owe this
duty, to increase and maintain it by all good means; giving and lending to
such as need, and that freely, without any compact or bargain, to have the
principal with increase; yea, even where there is no hope to have the
principal restored: provided, that need and not riot do drive them to borrow,
and that their want of ability, and not of good will, do hinder them from
payment. Also if we have found ought which is others, or if any thing be of
trust committed to us, or that we have wrongfully got into our hands any
portion of our Neighbors substance, that we carefully restore if we be able;
Eze. 18. in all bargains and contracts dealing justly and plainly without
fraud or oppression; Ephe. 5. Finally, practicing the works of our particular
callings with faithfulness and diligence, that we may be profitable to all
with whom we live, serving others through love, and affoording our counsel and
pains, and whatsoever else we can do to further others welfare in their
estate, both of goods and body; if it be in our power, not only to feed him
when he is hungry, refresh him with drink being thirsty, harboring the
harbourlesse, visiting him in prison; but ministering to him being sick: not
only out of our purse, but also of our skill, if we know any thing that may
ease or cure his pain; Acts 24. 4, 5. As concerning his name, never speaking
of our Neighbor but in love, not for the empairing, but for the maintaining of
his name, when with reason and truth we may, always uttering an upright
sentence of all men, avoiding slanders, lies, false reports in our selves, and
beating them down in others; especially as concerning his soul, never to be
wanting to the good thereof: but above, and before all other duties, to
prefer such as we are to do to his salvation, endeavoring upon all
occasions offered, to admonish our brother with wisdom and love, exhorting
his slownesse, and quickening his dullness to good things, comforting the
feeble minded, strengthening the weak in an hearty compassion of their
infirmities; instructing the ignorant, rebuking the froward with all patience,
and long suffering, bearing, for bearing, giving, forgiving wrongs; in our
prayers remembering the wants of the Saints, continuing thus to do in all
humbleness and meekness; knowing that Christian love most of all consists in
these duties, because they concern the better part of man, which is his soul,
and tend to the chiefest good, that is, the attainement of everlasting life. To
be Difference between Faith and Love.
(...) in this point of Love, to answer your last demand, as in many other
things this Christian charity differs from faith, it being the fruit, faith
being the root; faith believing the promise, love fulfilling the commandment,
To. 13. Faith justifying us before God: Love declating us before men to be
just persons. So in other things also, as namely faith receives something to
it self; to wit, Christ, and his benefits: whereas Love gives out it self in
all the former duties we have spoken of, and many more whereof we shall speak
hereafter. Faith looks properly to Christ, and profits our selves; Love
looks to God and Angels, and men both good and bad, and endeavors to profit
many. Hence it is, that the Apostle prefers love before faith; 1 Corinthians
13. as also, for that faith cease at the end of this life; whereas love
endures after this life: 1 Cor. 13. verse last.


Apollos. I perceive by your discourse of Love, that you confound love and
brotherly kindness, as if they were but one grace; whereas the Apostle Peter
does distinguish them, and make them twain: 2 Pet. 1. 7.


Aquila. I do handle them together; for that I find the Scripture does often
comprehend brotherly kindness under love, when love is taken in the largest
sense, as it reaches to all men whatsoever: howbeit, I do not Brotherly
kindness.
deny, but the Apostle does sever them; 2 Peter 1. In which place he considers
love, as it does embrace men as men, because they are our Neighbors, and of
our kind; and brotherly kindness, as it is a more near and inward affection,
such as is expressed to men, as they be our brethren, Christians, and fellow
Citizens. This difference I may thus set it down. I may compare our hearts to
a great large house, whose hall is love, and the parlour brotherly kindness:
as then a great man admits all friends, strangers, one and other into his hall,
so our love is to lie open unto all men, without respect or difference; but our
brotherly kindness we communicate only to such as are our even Christians, as
we do allow our nearest acquaintance only to have access into our parlour:
Thus I conceive the meaning of the Apostle Peter, when he does sever these two
graces. But now Sir we have spent thus much time in this argument, it will be
fit that we here do break off, until we may meet again.


The twelfth Part of this Dialogue, concerning Peace, and other effects of Love.
Aquila. WHat may be the matter (good Sir) that you fall so far short of the
hour of our meeting; it was your wont to prevent me, and now I have the
forehand of you?


Apollos, Surely (friend Aquila) I was not in good health (as you well know)
when we began this conference; but that little strength which I had, is much
of late empaired: I do sensibly feel a great decay of my natural powers.
This is the cause of my long stay, I once doubted how I should have come; but I
have encouraged my self to keep appointment with you as I could: yet so, as
we must hasten in the remainder, to draw to some conclusion with speed; and
because you may the better bear the greatest weight, I will continue to put you
to speak of those graces which are behind, enioyning you to observe the Law of
breuity. The next virtue and work of the Spirit after Love, is Peace; which is
as the Daughter, and Love as the Mother; or as the hand-maide, and love as the
Mistrisse: for Love begets Peace, and peace does attend love; where Love goes
before, there Peace waits at the heel: it is hatred stirs up contention,
but Peace follows and accompanies Love. Touching which, let me hear you
briefly show me what difference there is between Gods Children and others, for
all will seem desirous of Peace, yet Peace has but a few true friends.


Aquila. Sir I am heartily sorry for debility of your body; it would be
grievous to me that you should fail of performance of this which we have
begun: but because you require speed in this business, I will obey your motion,
in favor of your weakness, and out of desire to accomplish this enterprise.
I have learned from your Four kinds of Peace.
self and others, that there is a peace with God; also with our selves,
called, Peace of Conscience. Thirdly, with the Creatures; and lastly, with our
Neighbor: which if it be in Commonwealth, Country, and Cities, it is civil
Peace: domestical Peace if it be in Families, and that peace which is in the
Church amongst professors, is Christian Peace; whereof we are to speak. This
is such a knitting together of our minds in God, and among our selves, as that
neither in Religion by schism or heresy, or in our daily conversation by
brawles, quarrels, and suites, there appear any strife or variance, but a good
agreement on all hands. Now in this virtue of Peace the godly do much differ
from others, because they embrace and maintain Peace and agreement, out of
love which they bear one to another, especially toward God; for that they
would not offend him by dissension, nor be rent asunder from their brethren,
whom they unfeignedly affect. Whereupon they are very careful not to minister
any occasion of difference, neither to take hold on occasions, being offered by
others either in weakness, or of purpose; choosing to forgo and remit their
own right, after the example of their Father Abraham, rather then to strive
and fall out: remembering that they are brethren by profession, and how that
peace is a thing very delightful to God, and exceeding pleasing and good for
all men; carrying with it innumerable commodities and benefits to man's life,
being a shadow and representation of that felicity which godly men shall have
in the life which is eternal; Romans 8, 6; whereof peace is a chief part. In
which regard the godly had rather suffer wrong, then to enter into contention,
which is bitter as gall and wormwood to their soul, being as hurtful to
mankind, as it is hateful and odious to God. Upon these considerations, all
good men as they endeavor peace, carefully looking to themselves neither to
afford, nor apprehend matter of strife: so on the other side, if by the malice
of Satan, and the weakness of men, an entrance be made into dissension, they
are willing and forward to pacify and quench the sparkles; very well knowing
that the beginning of strife, is as the opening of a flood-gate: and that it is
ever Proverbs 17.
doubtful what will be the end thereof. They therefore do their best to stop
contention at the first, yea, though they be like to make advantage of strife;
yet the love of peace, and of their brethren, more preuailes with them, then
the desire of contention or of luker. Now all the children of this world be
otherwise affected in this duty of peace; their minds are not peaceably
disposed, the way of peace they know not: Romans 3. If they live peaceably with
others, it is not because they truly love peace, and their neighbors; but out
of self-love, when it may serve their turn to avoid some trouble which they
would not fall into, or to hold some benefit which they have by good agreement
with others; so long, and so far they frame themselves to peace: but if it come
to this, that they must lose any thing by yielding peaceably to concord, or
that discord will draw more commodity to them, they then make themselves ready
for war; easily they give, and in these cases as easily they will snatch
occasion given of falling out, secretly and under hand nourishing and
increasing matter of strife and debate; being bent rather to offend God and
their brethren, then to remit but a little of their will and profit: neither
forecasting, nor caring what hurtful things follow to others by strife, so
themselves may go away gainers.


Apollos. You do rightly judge that the godly man alone has a truly peaceably
mind, and that all wicked men, what show soever they make, are all enemies to
peace: but I desire to understand if you have ought more in your remembrance
concerning this point.


Apollos. Sir, I do well remember it has been taught me, that the godly hold
this grace of peace with imperfections; so as they are sometimes through
frailety, and the subtle reaches of Satan, at variance not only with evil
men, but have iarres and bitter strife amongst themselves. Example whereof we
have in the Apostles striving for superiority, who should be greater then
others; Matthew 18. 1. and in Paul and Barnabas; Acts 15. Also in the Churches
of Corinth and Galathia; 1 Cor. 1. 11. God so disposing it for most good ends,
as to discover hypocrites, to try the godly, and to bring his secret counsels
to pass. Howbeit the godly afterward are ashamed, and do repent of their
folly, and become more wary and more studious of peace then before. This being
most true of all godly persons, that though they now and then forget
themselves, and so fall into dissentions, yet their life is so ordered, as that
the whole carriage of it for the most part tends to peace: for God has so
blessed them, that they are free from such vices as stir up strife; their
heart it is without love of all contention, pride, and vain glory, anger,
hatred, covetousness, desire of revenge, taking things in the evil part;
which are the very bellows of variance, and break-neckes of all peace. On the
contrary, it is filled with a quiet spirit, with humility, contentment,
gentleness, long-sufferance, meekness, forgiving offenses, interpreting
things in good part, when with reason and truth they may; which be the very
Nurses of Peace, and break-neckes of all contentions: their words also being
not grievous, but few, soft, and upright; far from false reports, or
tale-carrying, not using scornful, nor brawling speeches; Judges 8. 2, 3. And
finally, they contain their hands from striking, violent and unjust dealings;
and they do well know how to use a wise silence, when speaking may kindle, or
increase anger: by this means it comes to pass, that they easily gain
concord and agreement with their brethren, and as easily maintain it. All
being quite contrary in wicked men, who furthermore do herein differ from the
righteous, that as they will not have peace with whom they should, so they will
sometimes have it with whom they should not: as they study not to seek peace
with all, but with such as themselves list; so they are ready for sinister
respects, there to live peaceably where the godly does not find it possible,
unless he would have war with God, by having peace with his enemies.
Whereas this is the way of Gods Children, that if it lie in them and be
possible, they will have peace with all; if there be not peace, it is because
it is not in their power, or because they hold a just war better then an
ungodly peace. But on the other part, evil men as they give no diligence to
have agreement when they might and ought, so they are content to accord with
them with whom they ought to have no fellowship: for what communion can the
Christian which is Christ's friend, have with an Idolater, or with any other of
Gods enemies? Yet I am far off from condemning those leagues of concord which
Christian Princes do make with Infidels and Idolaters, upon necessity of
commerce and traffic for the better maintenance of this life, by exchanging
of commodities, or for common defense, where there is no league of amity
stricken, to agree and accord with them in their superstitions and
ungodliness. Such leagues of peace we read of between Abraham and Abimelech,
Geneses 23. between Solomon and Hyram, King of Siria; 1 King. 5. 1. between
David, and the King of the Ammonites; 2 Samuel 10. 1.


Apollos. Now that you have spoken thus much of peace, you may proceed to those
other virtues, which either be Parents to beget, or props to sustain Christian
peace.


Aquila. Yet by your good leave I mean to add this one thing; namely, that
Gods Children are of such a peaceable temper, as they will not fall out, no,
not with the worst men: till it come to this, that they must differ from them
in some wicked cause; and even then they do so refrain to have communion with
them in the cause, as that if it may be, and do lie in them, they will not
have war with their persons: but when they must break off fellowship with
their persons (they and their bad cause being so linked, that he that will like
the one, must allow, or seeeme at least to allow the other) yet then they so
break off society, and stand off from their company, as it is with pity and
grief for their folly, and with prayer to God for their repentance; this is
it whereunto they aim, being sorry if they fail. Now Sir I am well pleased
that we step forwards to confer of those graces, which a little before we
have seen to go together with this peaceable heart of the godly man; whereof
one is Humility: for as the child of God Humility.
walks humbly with his God, giving him all glory for Micah. 6. 8. col. 3. 10.
all good things, acknowledging and feeling in himself naught save sin and
misery; so he carries himself humbly toward his brethren, whose graces and
good works he does reverence, and with love make mention of them, in like love
covering wants and evils. And being privy to such a number of corruptions in
himself, he adiudgeth himself the meanest of all, and worst of all others,
and esteems others better then himself; being ready not out of the baseness
of mind, but out of a lowly spirit to do any service, how troublesome or mean
soever, to the comfort or help of any Christian; after the example of Christ,
abasing himself to wash his Apostles feet, and also humbling himself for his
enemies even to the death of the Cross; Phil. 3. 5, 6. The like mind has
every godly Christian, who forgets and denies himself, that he may stoop to
every duty whereby he may be helpefull to his even Christians, and yet so
far from looking after any praise, as if he be praised especially in his own
presence, he is ready to blush; Prou. 27, 2. being more desirous to hear of
his fallings, that he may be the more humbled, then to be commended for his
well doings, lest he wax proud. As for those stirrings of pride, which none
of Gods Children are wholly freed from, they much dislike them in their
judgment, and loath them in their hearts, striving and praying against them,
with craving of pardon for them; knowing how much God abhors the high minded
to depresse them, and that the way to glory, is paued and prepared by humility:
it being written, that God will lift up the humble; 1 Pet. 5, 5. Now this is
further to be considered, that with this singular humility, there is joined in
the godly a comely and reverent gravity, Gravity.
staying and ordering their affections within, and mode rating their gestures,
words, countenances, and actions without, according to the dignity of their
persons and callings; that as their humble carriage gains them love, so of
their grave behavior there arises much reverence toward them. It is not so
with the evil and unrighteous men, who be vain and light, having no gravity at
all, or none but affected gravity, little considering the excellency of their
estate and place. They be void also of true humility, because they forget the
worthiness of others; therefore either out of the pride of their hearts they
do (...) and disdain others, thinking themselves better then they: as the
Pharisees in the Gospel did, or out of baseness of mind, yielding to all
persons in all things without difference; not respecting what in duty they owe,
but being forwards to do any thing which may please, or procure themselves
respect and praise: whereof if they happen to fail and miss, they are thereby
more daunted and troubled, then they are comforted by the service which they
did, as appears in Achitophell.


Apollos. It is a thing that you have very well observed, that Gods Children
do so remember the worthiness of others, to be humbled and lowly toward
them; as withal they do not forget their own worthiness, to cause in them a
godly gravity, to deliver their humbleness from contempt. Now after these
things thus touched, we are next in order to speak of gentleness, Gentleness.
that grace and virtue which makes a Christian mild and tractable, apt to
please, loath to displease, easy to be entreated, ready to yield to others,
and to do them any favor with reason; a virtue wherein Christ excelled, It is
reported that Peter he wept so often as he (...) the mildness and gentleness
of his Lord. Luther.
being most gentle, and wherein every true Christian is his follower, treading
in the steps of his courteous and gentle disposition. Do you declare (good
friend) what the gentleness of a regenerate Christian does differ from that
which unregenerate persons do practice; for even amongst these is a certain
gentleness to be seen. The chief Captain at Rome being an Heathen man,
gently entreated Paul's kinsman, Acts 23. 19. and Publius the chief man in the
I Will of Melita, (...) entertained Paul himself, Acts 28. 7. And we may read of
many others, which were no Christians, who seemed gentle, mild, courteous, and
fair spoken, far from frowardness and rigor.


Aquila. Ye speak truth; but the difference is manifold and apparent: for
first Gods Children in exercising gentleness, prefer them that do fear
God, being most gentle toward them, even in that respect, without regard to
their own pleasure or profit: others are gentle indifferently to all, and
least of all to such as be good. Again, the godly will not be gentle when they
must be severe; whereof Moses is an example, being a man marvelous gentle,
yet in Gods cause exceeding severe and stout; Exodus 32. 27. It is contrariwise
in men unsanctified, who be sharp and bitter in their own, but remiss in
Gods quarrel. Thirdly, the faithful take care to do nothing, out of their
gentleness to please men, which may displease God; hereof wicked men have no
care. Moreover, the godly will not turn their gentleness to the hurt of any
man, because he loves his neighbor, therefore he looks circumspectly to it,
not to do him evil by his gentle dealing with him. Fnally, he is afraid
least either he be too rough, or too gentle; being sorry if he swerve at any
time from the mean, craving pardon even of his weakness that way; a thing
that evil men do not trouble themselves withal. And as in gentleness, so in
long-suffering the godly do approve Long sufferance and peace
themselves to be the Elect of God, guided by the Spirit, and partakers of Gods
Image: for whereas evil men are either stupid and soft, being without sense of
injuries done them, or else too hasty, and prove too eager, soon and suddenly
moved, many times upon light and mean occasions. The godly have such
apprehension of trespasses done against them, as that they forbear wrath,
bridling and biting in their anger, being hardly provoked unto displeasure,
waiting long, and with much patience for the amendment of their enemies, after
the example of their heavenly Father, who is slow to anger, and of great
patience, as themselves have felt him to be toward themselves by good
experience, as well as by his own testimony in Scripture. Therefore as God
being deeply provoked by their own sins, has mercifully borne with them in
his long-suffering nature; so they endeavor to deal with others that offend
them, expecting if God at any time will give them repentance for their sins.
But as for evil men, howsoever they are contented to suffer and forbear, yet
it proceeds not out of care to obey the commandment, which requires
forbearance; or to follow the example of God: but either because they are not
able to hurt such as trespass them, or for fear of some hurt to themselves,
if they should by impatiency break out into any extreme and hard courses; or
else they covet to be commended for quiet and patient men. But that we may go
forward, with this long-suffering and forbearing, Forgiving offenses.
there goes hand in hand forgiveness of offenses over against us; when upon
due consideration, that God has straightly commanded us to forgive one another,
and for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, has pardoned unto us our own manifold
and great sins, we are moved again for his sake, and for duty sake, to
pardon our Neighbor all wrongs done by him against our selves, that it may be
a testimonial to us of our own forgiveness before God. Therefore we hold our
selves bound not only to keep our selves from revenge, but we are ready if
our offending brother repent, and show himself desirous of reconcilement with
us, to receive him into our favor, according to the counsel of our Savior,
willing to forgive our brother, when he comes unto us, saying, It repents me;
and after his own practice, embracing sinners upon their conversion: in which
point there is one special caution to be observed of us, and it is this; that
we may sometimes unfeignedly forgive and love, where we have just reason not
to repose trust and confidence. None more charitable then Christ, forgiving his
mortal enemies; yet where he found (...) covered with guilefull and
deceitful words and countenances, he would not commit himself unto such; John
2. Herein all true Christians must endeavor to resemble and be like to their
Savior, out of their love forgiving quarrels and injuries, as out of their
wisdom they prove slow to give credit: for he that commanded us to be simple
and innocent as Doves, loath to be harmefull unto any; even he also has
enjoined us to be wise as Serpents, looking to our selves, lest we take hurt by
easily trusting such, as without cause have declared themselves to be our
enemies, whatsoever pretense of friendship or promise they make. The old and
common saying is, Trust not a reconciled enemy. Herein natural men do very
much fail, either being loath to forgive their enemies, or doing it fainedly,
or with great indiscretion, without heed taking, and being made more wary for
afterward.


Apollos. There be two other virtues, to wit, goodness and meekness; let me
know wherein they consist, and how near the wicked come to them, and yet have
them not?


Aquila. Goodness it is that virtue whereby Gods Goodness.
Children being good in themselves, by participation of Gods goodness, they
also endeavor to do good, and to be beneficial to others; after the pattern
which Christ has set them. Of whom it is written, that he went about doing
good; either by some word or deed, privately or publicly, ordinarily or
extraordinarily, to men's bodies or souls, he was profitable and good. All true
Christians be thus affected, they are sorry when any hour has passed without
doing good to themselves and others; watching for opportunities, and according
to their means endeavoring upon offered occasions gladly to help all men,
being careful to take good, when they can do none. Add hereunto, that they
are not only sorry when none are the better for them, but that the good which
they do, is so little, beseeching and begging mercy, because they are so empty
of goodness, and barren in doing good things; and as by their goodness they
are carried in a great desire of being helpeful to all to whom they can do
good, without weariness, respect of persons, or hope of recompense: so their
meekness enableth them to pass by abuses Meekness.
offered them by men, without purpose of rendering evil for evil; also to
bear with a quiet mind all crosses sent of God, referring themselves in them
to his pleasure, according as their meek Savior has given them example;
Father, as thou will; Mat. 26. And moreover, it causes them to submit
themselves for their judgments and affections unto the truth of God, even when
it is contrary to their reason, and does thwart their will and desires, then
they meekely yield themselves to be governed by it in their opinions and
actions, laying aside all superfluity of maliciousness, they do with
meekness receive the good Word of God, which is able to save their souls;
James 1. In these graces the (...) may come somewhat near unto Gods children,
putting forth themselves to speak and do many good things, and provoking
others to be good and helpefull; notwithstanding both the examples of goodness
which themselves give, and the persuasions which they use in the setting others
on work for to do good: yet the truth is, that they have not one drop of
sound goodness in them: which is euidenced and cleared by this argument, that
they are exceeding envious, and grieve much if they perceive any others to be
equally liked and loved as themselves, for their goodness and care of
well-doing. As amongst the Jews, diverse of them did sundry good things, yet
they envied Christ because he did more; Matthew 26. Also Saul King of Israel,
(before an evil spirit possessed him) 1 Samuel performed much good unto the
people; yet he fretted and repined at David, who did better things, and thereby
gained greater praise. By this it appears, that hypocrites exercise
themselves in doing good, not out of any habit of goodness, and from a love
of well-doing, but upon hope of receiving the like good, or else to please
themselves, and get them the name of good men; which is the cause (missing of
their hoped ends) that after a time they wax weary of doing good, and give
over that course, their hearts being unsound: and howsoever they bear a
likeness and appearance of meekness, yet herein they bewray that they have
not true meekness, because they refuse to bring their hearts, their thoughts,
and lusts, under the yoke of the Word; being also under Gods hand murmurers,
and unwilling to pass by abuses put upon them by men. For if so be that they
are hardly provoked unto anger; yet in their anger stirred upon just causes,
they exceed their bounds both for time and measure, yea and for manner too,
holding out their displeasure longer; being also more deeply moved then they
ought, and always bending their anger more against the person of their
neighbors, then against their sins. Whereas, if they were truly meekened,
both they would suffer the Word of God to rule over their corrupt reason and
evil desires, and also in their anger stirred up against their Neighbor, they
would so pursue his sins, as it should be with commiseration and grief for
his person: after the example of that same most meek Lamb of God, who in such
sort conceived indignation against the weakness of his Disciples, and
wickedness of the Jews: as yet his heart mourned, and his eyes shed tears, for
the hardness of heart in the one, and for the infidelity and maliciousness
of the other.


Apollos. Two ways do all unsound Christians declare themselves void of
meekness both toward God and man. Toward God, for that howsoever their wit
and judgment makes way, and stoopes unto the word of God to think and believe
as it teaches, (yet diverse of them do fancy and foster strange conceits,
contrary to the Word) but they never labor to bring their will and affections
in through subjection to Gods truth; nourishing still some rebellious lust,
wherewith they take part against the known will of the most blessed God, as
did Herod and Judas. Toward their Brethren, insomuch, as if they study not how
to requite unkindness (like to those which are never quiet, till they have
mete home the like measure, doing one shrewd turn for another) yet when they
do such things (as men soundly meek would do, either putting down some
affections which make insurrection against God, or putting up some abuses done
to them by men:) this comes not of obedience unto God, with desire to please
and honor him; neither is it joined with grief and repentance for their
slippes in this kind; whereas godly persons, finding how hard a thing it is,
to frame their thoughts and affections to be pliable to Gods will, and to
temper their anger toward men: as they strive to have their fierceness to God
and man (...), and to attain to a good measure of Christian (...); so they are
much humbled in their souls, for coming short and failing in these duties. Now
after meekness, there follows two other worthy gifts to be considered of: the
one is Mercy, taking pity on otherfolks miseries; the other, is the taking in
good part there doubtful sayings and doings, so far as with truth and reason
they may.


Aquila. Sir, in naming these two virtues, ye have but prevented me. These
indeed are so proper to a regenerate child of God, as the natural man can
lay no claim unto them. It is true, that unregenerate men, Mercy.
are not altogether without mercy: for Barbarians pitied Paul, Acts 18, 3. and
the Samaritane the wounded lew, Luke 10. and Pharaohs daughter did with
compassion behold that exposed infant Moses, Exodus 2, 6. but this is a mere
natural affection, and comes not from the Spirit, and it is exercised not of
obedience to God, or for his sake and glory; but upon carnal respect, such as
flesh and blood suggests: extending it self unto outward miseries only, not
to soul calamities. Whereof natural men have no sense: and when their mercy
is abused, it is ready to turn into cruelty and fiercenes; at the least, it
will not break through unkindness, to witness it self toward such as
deserve evil of them. But the mercy of Gods children, whether they do respect
their fellow-feeling, in that they can take the harms and losses of others as
their own, remembering them that are in bonds, as if they were bound
themselves, and them that are in prison as if they were afflicted, like members
of a body, who suffer together, and rejoice together: or the effects and works
of this affection, in ministering to the needy things they lack; as cloth to
the naked, meat to the hungry, harbor to the harborlesse, and all kind of
comforts. I say, in all this, they are led by the Spirit, which moves them
thus to pity and succor others, even for the Lords sake; because it is his
will, and it tends to his glory; and for their bretherens sake, to refresh
their bowels, and by such examples of mercy to win them to the Word.

Moreover, they are most affected and grieved with the spiritual evils of
others, taking their sins to heart Philip. 3, 18.
no less, if not more, then their corporal wants. Mourning for their
ignorance and hardness of heart, praying instantly the Father of al mercy, to
open their eyes, to draw them out of darkness. And this they do instantly,
even where they are provoked, and not only to their friends. As Christ wept
over Jerusalem which crucified hirn: so true Christians have compassion toward
their enemies. Further, when mercy is to be practiced upon offered occasions,
they stay not till they be entreated: but be heartily glad, that they may be a
mean of comfort to any distressed. Even as they would have refreshing and help
in their own afflictions and trobles: so they are willing to respect others,
out of a great desire to be like their merciful Father, and to adorn the
Gospel of his Son, with the works of mercy.

Moreover, where others take occasion of scorning their Brethren, of rejoicing
or triumphing over them, even from these occasions the godly do provoke them
selves to pittifulnesse, with sighs and groans, to (...) and bewail the
follies and falls, the damages and distresses which happen unto others. Yea,
the mercy of a Prou. 12. 10.
righteous man rcacheth unto beasts: not his own only, but unto the beasts of
his enemies, to pull them out of the pit, or to bring them home being
straglers. And whenever they fail in these, or in any other duty of mercy,
either for substance, measure, or manner, they have Neh. 13, 14, 31
sorrow in themselves, and fly for pardon to the throne of grace; so far off
they be, from putting trust in their own deeds: and all this, without desire
or care to be known or seen of men (further then needs must, or may be,
for their example and encouragement to the like merciful works) as they
think it sufficient, that God who knows the heart, Math. 6, 2, 3, 4. is
witness to the tenderness of their affections toward such, as are in any
necessity or want.

As touching the next virtue, it is taking of things in good part, when any
doubtful speeches or actions happen, which may be taken in evil part, and
breed matter of dislike and debate. These do the godly use to interpret well,
inclining always to the best constructions which can be made of men's doubtful
words or doings. For, as in evident evils they will not suffer a curtain to
be drawn over the eyes, not to see that which all men behold; so in such
things which may have a good sense, they will not be so uncharitable as to make
a bad interpretation. Neither will they for some blemishes in a man's person or
deed, condemn all that is good (as if for a wart or scarre, one should
despise great favor and beauty;) but they easily wink at that which is amiss,
seeking by private loving admonition to mend it, and (...) ready to commend
that which is as it ought to be: making the best of every thing, so far as
with good conscience they can. In the wicked it is quite contrary: for they
wrest men's words and actions quite beside, yea sometimes clean contrary to the
intention of the speaker and doer, after the example of David's brethren, 1.
Sam. 17. and Hannuns servants, 2 Samuel 10, 3. And if at any time they do take
any doubtful saying in the better part, it is done partially, because they
would take part with some whom they affect. They do not mete like measure to
all: being also apt for some few and small spots, to reject many and excellent
graces.


Apollos. But friend Aquila, amongst all the gifts that spring out of love and
accompany a peaceable spirit, and Government of the tongue. for speech and
silence.
tend to increase and preserve love and peace, ye have scarce named, or but
only named the government of the tongue for speech and silence, it being one
of the graces proper to the elect, to know when and how to speak. For the
righteous man orders his words with wisdom, his speeches are seasonable and
fit, like pictures of silver in apples of gold, being powdered with salt:
Whereas the fool bableth out foolishness, his words give no grace to the
hearer, but with his lips he speaks froward things, which witnesses the
price of his heart, and tends to engender strife. The good man out of the good
treasure of his heart draws out good things, and the evil man out of the
evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil things Matthew. 12. As there is
nothing whereby a man's wisdom is better known then by his words, so a man's
folly (...) by his talk, which in evil men is either vain or evil: whereas
the wise with their tongue spread knowledge, and feed many with Prou. 10.
the fruits of their lips; they shun all evil and idle, all contentious and
unloving talk, as a man would eschew a dangerous rock. It fares thus with
them they fear God, they choose rather to say nothing, then to speak
unprofitable and frivolous, vile, and hurtful things. They have learned, that
in much talk there is iniquity; even as a river that ouerfloweth the bank
draws with it much soil and filth, so many words have always some fault; it
being one of the hardest things in the world, to say much, and to say nothing
amiss. Also no danger is like the danger which comes by the slipperinesse and
foolishness of an hasty tongue. It sildom repents a good man that he says too
little, it often repents him that he spoke too much. His silence does ever
prove less grievous to him, then his speech. For, the godly find by
experience, that both the peace of their own conscience between them and God,
and also the mutual peace between them and their Neighbors, is more offended
and hurt by saying much, then by saying nothing. So it is not without cause,
that silence is termed a holding our peace, to show this; that peace is gotten
and preserved both to our selves, and with others, by prudent silence. Nothing
is so sweet a friend to peace as silence, as many words much offend it. He is
surely therefore an happy man, and fittest to live in the World, that strives
earnestly with himself to get this good moderation of his tongue. We might now
pass forwards to speak of the virtue of temperance, but that I would have you
to declare, how the Children of God do differ from others in this duty of
selfe-preseruation: for selfe-safety is a thing cared for of all men; but not
alike of all men.


Aquila. This was well remembered of you. I had like Selfe-preseruation.
to have done as he did, who told over the company twice, and still forgot
himself: for indeed all the forenamed graces be such, as serve to procure and
preserve the safety of our Neighbor; his person, and life of his soul and
body, is by the former gifts advanced, save that the last which you named, to
wit, the well ordering of the tongue, is a great mean (as any other) of
selfesafety. Life and death are in the hands of the tongue, many a man may by
his wise silence or good answers, keep himself from dangers; and by his rash
and inconsiderate, either speaking, or keeping silence, may fall into many a
great hazard even of estate, and life. Besides this, as unto our life, so unto
our comfortable being, good speech does much prevail: for Joy shall come to a
man by the answer of his lips (says (...).) Therefore hereunto the godly do
give great heed (as they are bound) that they do not make sad their own
hearts by hasty and sinful speech; this is a thing whereof the wicked have
neither care nor conscience. Indeed they are hereof careful, to make their
hearts merry, with jesting and witty conceits (which so they want impiety and
filthiness, are not simply to be condemned) but to gain to their hearts the
joy of a godly and discreet answer; this is a peculiar care of good men: who
knowing that natural liveliness or (...), is the best part of life (as grief
of heart is the beginning of death, 2 Cor. 7. worldly sorrow leading thereunto)
therefore as by all other means, as of diet, company, physic, recreation,
being religiously used, they do cherish and quicken their spirits; so they
especially look unto this, that to their natural they may join spiritual
liveliness, by the fruits of their holy speeches and actions: upon this
consideration, that God loves cheareful worshippers, and that the more hearty
and lively that the body and mind be, the better able shall they prove to do
unto God and men their appointed service. For the cheerfulness of the heart,
makes the countenance gladsome, and adds strength to the bones; whereas the
marrow of the bones (even the chief and best strength of a man) is consumed by
pensive sadness and heaviness of heart. To be short, the righteous because
they know it to be a duty to comfort their hearts, and that God and their
brethren are better served, the more comfortable that the mind is; therefore
that which the children of this world do (that is to say, make themselves
merry) upon corrupt regards, because they would live, and enjoy the pleasures
and benefits of life (which is a care common to men with brute beasts) the
same godly persons do upon conscience of the commandment, and also because
they would the more plentifully glorify God, and do good to many. Now to
Seventh commandment.
your motion for temperance or sobriety, this fruit of the spirit, together
with (...), do belong to the keeping of our vessels pure and in honor, being
of such use and force, as without them, our minds and bodies (which are the
Temples of the holy Ghost) cannot be preserved in holiness, to be fit mansions
or habitations for Gods Spirit. Many (...) men are chaste as touching any act
or deed, when yet their desires are either exceeding unruly, or being
restrained, only for worldly respects, to avoid trouble in the flesh, or for
their reputation. Whereas they which are regenerate, whether they live a single
life or a married, they have a power given unto them by the Spirit, to keep
not only their bodies, but their very thoughts pure; concerning the desire of
sex, so far as the measure of their grace will enable them, they carefully
shun (after the example of continent Joseph) all temptations and occasions of
uncleanness, in this respect, that they would not do wickedness against God:
but if at any time any of them do fall with David (breaking the Laws of
chastity) they do earnestly and unfeignedly repent with David; being ready to
make their sins known publicly if need require, ever after more heedfully
looking to their ways. Unto their chastity they do join temperance, which is
a virtue moderating their desires about the pleasures of this life; even as
chastity rules the heart about the desire of sex: so sobriety and temperance
gouernes their affections about other pleasures of this life, giving them power
not only to abstain from following and (...) filthy and unlawful pleasures,
such as are forbid; as whoredom, drunkenness, gluttony, etc. but to withstand
all inticements and prouocations thereunto, and that not for fear of shame or
punishment only from God or man, but of conscience toward God. Moreover, in
such pleasures as be lawful and allowed, as in the pleasures of eating,
drinking, apparel, recreation, sleep, marriage, buildings, and other such
honest pleasures (by the use whereof our life and kind is not only maintained,
but preserved in a comfortable estate) the gift of temperance is bestowed upon
the Children of God in all ages, degrees, and sexes, as a met-yard to measure,
and as a bridle to hold back their affections, in using these warrantable
delights, that they do not only not exceed their bounds, but be held in, and
restrained from going so far in the use of them, as otherwise their estate and
ability, and the custom of the times and place where they live will suffer and
give them leave: for this is certain, that our desires after these pleasures
are insatiable, as a bottomless (...); and withal Satan lays baits and
snares to catch all the children of Adam in their pleasures (even as he caught
their first parents) and experience tells us, that some very godly persons
have been surprised, and were taken in his snares, to the wounding of their
own conscience, and to the offense and dishonor of God. Therefore as
temperance is very needful to preserve us from running into excess, and to
cause us to live soberly and stayedly; so the children of God have a marvelous
great care to cherish and practice this grace, endeavoring thereby to curb
and hold in their sensual desires, and in abundance of their blessings to
keep a mediocrity, in such sort using their liberty in outward blessings of
this life, as it may be a help and furtherance, and not a hinderance to
godliness and eternal life. And this they enforce themselves to do the
rather, because they know it is the will of God, that they should live
temperately; 1 Pet. 4. 7. and that temperance is a fruit of the Spirit; Galat.
5. 23. an ornament of the Gospel; Tu. 2. 10. and has great promises made to
it; Lu. 21. 39. and finally, brings great benefit both to mind and body. If
natural men do some temperate actions, it is not out of an habit of
temperance, nor upon these considerations, but out of humane reason, and for
carnal respects.


Apollos. Now that you have spoken of such graces as tend to the preservation
of life, and such as are behouefull for the tempering and ruling of the
pleasures of life; good order does require that you come unto such virtues, as
regenerate persons are bound to exercise about their Neighbors commodity and
credit, to show how they stand affected toward the substance and name of
their Neighbor, otherwise then all other men do.


Aquila. Right so. Thus therefore it is; all godly persons make conscience of
doing the least injury to other Uprightness toward our Neighbors goods.
men in their goods and wealth, either by fraud or violence, either directly or
indirectly; neither willingly do they suffer any harm to come to them, if
they can hinder Psalm. 15. 3. 7.
it: and if by any ouer-sight, or wittingly, by any Eze. 18.
error, or negligence of themselves, or their servants, it happen that any
portion of their Neighbors goods or substance fall into their hands, they are
very willing to restore it unto the owner. Also things found, or pawned, or
gaged, they will not possess, but deliver them to the true owners, according
to the express commandment of God; Deuteronomy. 24. 10. At a word, because they
esteem a little with righteousness, better then a great deal with iniquity;
therefore they will not abide that ought should stick in their fingers, which
by right belongs to other men: abhorring bribery and usury; being ready and
prompt, not only by advice, but even by their help and labor, sometimes to
recover unto their Neighbor that which is theirs. (...), moreover to this
intent, that they may not be (...) to any, by empairing their goods; therefore
all righteous persons as they do make choice to live in an honest lawful
calling, such as none can justly speak (...) of, and is according to the good
Law of their Country, serving to some good, private or public, worldly or
(...): so they take not a little care to discharge the duties of their calling,
not only with great diligence and pains taking, bending their minds
earnestly to do their duties well; but with faithfulness and sincerity, even
from their hearts, more respecting the will of God, and their Neighbors
welfare, then their own benefit, which comes by the work of their calling.
(...), continuing therein without weariness or giving over, and which is the
chief or maine thing, they always begin, and take in hand the duties of their
calling, with invocation of the name of God, commending themselves to the
direction of his Spirit, and the success of their labors to the gracious
blessing of God. Look whatsoever does happen, and is given them more or less,
better or worse, they take it thankfully, knowing how unworthy they be of any
good, and yet are assured that every thing shall serve to their good; wherefore
in the end of their work they praise God, as they did by prayer enter upon
it. Thus they behave themselves religiously, not only in the duties of their
calling, and other (...) businesses, but in their recreations also, and in the
(...) of lawful pleasures; being well assured, that they can have no
comfortable and wnolsome use thereof, unless they begin and end with God,
referring all to his glory, and ordering all by his will. It is not thus with
unregenerate men, who as they make not scruple what manner of calling they live
in, (so it bring advantage, and be vnperillous) so in the execution of their
callings they forget not God alone, in not sanctifying their functions and
labors by the Word and Prayer, unless it be a little for fashion, that they
be thought Christians; but their Neighbors also, for that they do wholly aim
at their own benefit, which they study how to increase by hook or crook, by
right or wrong, not greatly passing to strain their conscience for lucre sake;
especially if it may be done warily with safeguard of their credit: for it is no
corrasiue or grief to their soul, to have God and their conscience witness
to the injury done to their brethren in their worldly matters, so as they may
escape the knowledge, censure, and shame of men. If Gehazi thought that Eliza
should have known, and Ananias had imagined Saint Peter would have found out
their budging and bad dealing, they had surely dealt better then they did. Thus
it fares with all worldly men, as in all other duties, so in their dealing
with their neighbors substance, they are carried with respect of men; insomuch
that if at any time they forbear to do wrong, and be content that others
should have right done them, this proceeds not from any true love of God and
their Neighbor, but from self love, because they would keep their reputation
and honor amongst men, or at utmost to keep and hold off the judgment of God,
which he threatens against wrong doers and unrighteous persons, or in hope of
enjoying such blessings as are promised to righteous livers; because they covet
to escape the evils denounced against unjust persons, and to (...) the good
things offered unto the just: therefore they do endeavor themselves to
perform some righteous things. This is the furthest that any unsanctified
person can go toward God, either in this or in any other duty; namely to do
good upon (...) of receiving good, and to avoid evil, for fear of finding
evil: whereas if there were neither punishments, nor benefits; yet would the
godly give to every man his due for Gods sake, because they desire to please
and glorify him. Upon which ground they are moved to Ninth commandment.
have a great respect to the credit and estimation of their Neighbor, not
only not to hurt it, either by receiving a false report against him, ((...),
chasing (...) the tale-bearers, back-biters and whisperers, by an angry look,
as the rain is driven away with the Eastwind) or by uttering any evil, or
untrue suggestion or witness against him, especially before a (...) in the
feate of Judgment: but also there is in (...) special and great desire, even
as they would have their own good name preserved, so to labor the
preservation of the good name of others, by concealing their (...), firmities,
hiding the worst, and speaking only of (...) best, excusing them when they may
with a good conscience; interpreting to the best such reports as (...) spread
abroad of them; aduertising there of the (...) whom it concerns, warning him
to look to himself (...) reuerencing the gifts of God in their Neighbors,
not bewraying their secrets, putting away (...) thoughts and words; finally,
being (...) from envy and evil suspicions: and this course they hold (...)
well toward one, as toward another, choosing rather to be thieves, then
injurious to any man's credit. But as for those who are unregenerate, the good
same of their Neighbor is not universally precious and dear unto them, they
are partial herein, thinking and speaking favorably of such whom they most
affect; others they spare, not especially if they be provoked by them, and when
the pulling down of another man's name may be the setting up of their own. If
there be any amongst them, any that are given to speak well of all, it is
because themselves would be well spoken of, and without conscience of the
truth; and lastly, not that they make any account of their Neighbors
reputation, according unto the Commandment of God. Neither is this to be
marvelled at, that natural men do so little esteem the good fame of others,
seeing they are careless of their own; neither doing the things that may
deserve good report, and also running into many sinful courses, which may
impeach, or annoy their honest estimation, and deserve shame. Now the men that
truly fear God, as they are generally and unfeignedly well bent toward the good
name of all others, especially of Gods Children; so they do hold themselves
bound to maintain and increase their own good report by all good means: not
that they seek a good name for it self, and out of vainglory, or that they
are discontented if that they be ill spoken of for well doing; Mat. 5. (which
is a thing written on Heaven gates) but to the intent that they may be fitter
to glorify God, and do more good unto others, to whom themselves and their
gifts would be more acceptable and profitable, the better that they be thought
and spoken of. Hence it is, that they do not only look to themselves, that
they may be just before men; but endeavor to fly even secret sins in the
sight of God, abstaining as well from small sins as from great, even from the
very appearance of evil, which might breed the (...) ill suspicion of them.
Neither are they only so careful of getting, as of keeping a good name (which
is soon lost, if it be not charily preserved:) by the same means therefore
they study to uphold, by which they purchased their credit, avoiding every
thing which is of evil report, and doing things only of good report: as
knowing by the word, A good name; ( Prou. 22. 1.) to be a thing of great value
and use, precious as gold and silver, and profitable for now and hereafter;
like sweet perfumes, presently refreshing, and preserving against afterward;
Eccles. 6. 2, 3.


Apol. In all this I do well assent unto you, that both there ought to be, and
is in all Gods children a tender and entire respect, both to their own, and to
the good name of others, not barely for a good names fake, but for Gods
commandment and glory sake. But let me hear of you how the case stands with
them, when they are put to utter their knowledge and testimony concerning
things, whereof they are occasioned to speak either in their ordinary talk,
or in publke speeches.


Aquila. Such as their care is of men's persons, not to Truth and uprightness
in speech.
witness any untruth which may wound the credit (...) of; the very like care
have they of things to be spoken, always to speak the truth, whether they do
promise ought for the time to come, or affirm ought of a thing present or
past, privately or publicly, still their (...) and endeavor is to show forth
the thing (...) it is, (...) out telling a lie of any kind, either hurtful, or
(...) and sportfull, or officious lie: for they are enstructed out of the Word,
and accordingly they make conference of it, that all lying is (...) to God, and
that such as speak truth are his delight; because he is the God of truth
himself, (...), the lover and rewarder of truth in others, and a severe
revenger of all falsehood. For which causes, the godly are always ready (...)
in keeping of promises.
to stand unto their lawful promises, which be within their power, and not
altered upon just (...); very wary and respective they are how they make
promises (which be as it were bonds and obligations to tie a man unto the will
of another, so as now he is not his own man) but being once advisedly made,
they are very faithfully kept of them, though it be to their own binderance.
As for their otherwords, which are not promises, but assertions, they are so
far from having any intention to deceive others, by (...) and (...) words, as
that they take very great heed (so near as their understanding they have of
things will direct them) never to utter and tell forth any thing which is
known unto them to be false; yea they do abhor the common reporting of
news and tales, even in this very regard, that they are at the least next
neighbor unto lies, and oftentimes they prove no better. Lastly, if it were to
save their own, or the life of another, by speaking a lie, they would strive
(...) suffer their (...) to perish, then to offend God, or to kill their own
soul by lying. But amongst all unregenerate men, howsoever they may speak
some true and upright things, and perform many promises, because herein
consists a man's honor and reputation; yet they are not led with the love of
the truth, so as to prefer it before profit, credit, yea, and life too: but are
ready to prefer a falsehood, when it makes more for their gain then the
truth; namely, if they can do it, and not be espied of men; whose presence and
knowledge they fear more then him that knows the heart, and judges
according to truth: whereas a person truly converted, if he does at any time
thorough infirmity, fail of speaking an upright sentence, either touching
persons or things, he is greatly humbled (though no man do know of his fault)
and has no peace in his conseience, till he have made his peace with God for
it, heartily craving pardon thorough Christ; and ever after setting a watch
before his mouth.


Apollos. If there be any virtue wherein unregenerate men may seem to match
the godly as equal to them, me thinks it is Contentment. For many of them do
profess, that they hold themselves well pleased with their condition of life,
and portion of goods; breaking very often into the mention of Gods goodness for
providing so liberally for them, and seeming not so much as to wish or desire
unto themselves ought that is their neighbors. Tell me friend Aquila, what you
do think hereof?


Aquila. For my part I do think, there is that likeness and neerenesse between
some unregenerate men, and the newborn children of God, both in this virtue
of contentment, and diverse others, as that it is no very easy thing to
discern the odds between them; and though I may speak unto you of some
differences in this point, yet all the difficulty is in the finding of it out,
when men come to the examination in themselves. And herein is great need of
prayer, that God would put into us the spirit of discretion, to make us able to
discover the sound from the unsound, both in this, and in all otherduties both
in our selves and others. But to come nearer unto your Question, my answer to
it shall be general and particular; my general answer is this: I do judge
graces to be in men unregenerate, as passions are in God, unto whom the
Scriptures do attribute hatred, repentance, wrath, jealousy, grief, and such
like; which are in God not as they are passions or affections, but in respect
of the work which does follow such passions, because he works and does such
things as men do, which are compassed with those affections. As men repenting
use to undo what they have done, and being wrathful they use to take revenge;
hence it is, that God his revenging and destroying of his own works, is called
his wrath and repentance. So it fares with unregenerate men, they are thought
to have meekness, temperance, chastity, contentednes, etc. not for that these
graces and the habit of these virtues be in them, but for that they do such
outward actions, as men endued with these graces do, and use to do.

My particular answer is this: That all unregenerate men do fail three
several ways, as touching this virtue of contentment, which causes it to be
in them a contentedness rather in seeming, then in truth. The first is, though
they confess themselves well apayde with their estate, yet indeed their heart
does not rest in it, as in a good and sufficient lot assigned unto them, in the
which they can surely trust to find God good and gracious unto them. For they
do not depend upon God, because they lack a lively faith.

2. And withal, because they do want the grace of true contentment, therefore
it cannot be, but that they still wish for more, and would have their estate
bettered: being of the quality of the Horse-leech, which (...), Give, give; and
like unto the grave and the fire, which having consumed much matter and
corpses, are ready to devour more.

3. Lastly; as their present estate is never so pleasing to them but a better
would be more welcome: so if any decay of their present condition, either for
wealth or estimation, liberty or health, do happen and fall forth, which
commonly does (men's estates being like to the Sea, which ebbeth and flows,
and unto the Moon which waxes and waineth) they are there with much
disquieted and discontented: as appears in the example of Saul and
Achitophel, both which in their prosperity, made show of contentation, but in
their adversity they were sore troubled: as also was Nabal. Whereas such as be
endued with true godliness, they do in every estate submit themselves quietly
and contentedly unto the good will of God, being well satisfied with Job 1.
verse last.
that which he appoints unto them whatsoever it is, more or little, better or
worse: always accounting the basest and meanest estate too good for them,
because of their sins and unworthiness; being pleased and contented even
with food and raiment, because they are assured, that that condition of life is
best for them, that the most wise God sets them in. And nothing doubting (such
is his goodness) but that he will maintain their life, giving them sufficient
to enjoy though he deny them abundance, and turning all things to the best for
them, according to his most true promises. Neither alone are they well pleased
with their own portion, without wishing or desiring in thought or words, the
goods and estates of other men (without unfeigned forrow if they do:) but
furthermore, they take good delight and pleasure in the comforts and good
things which their neighbors do enjoy, even as though it were their own:
striving to follow that precept, which commands them to rejoice with them that
rejoice, and to Love others as themselves, mourning with them in their
heaviness.


Apollos. Here I have three things to ask you. First, Three doubts,
whether ye think any godly person free from all covetousness? And then,
whether the desire of more wealth and a better estate be covetousness? Lastly,
whether a man may be covetous in his own goods?


Aquila. To the first I answer negatiuely; There is no person by grace of
regeneration wholly freed from covetousness, or any other sin in this life.
It is enough for this time of their pilgrimage, that they are delivered from
the curse and power of sin: so as neither covetousness, nor any other sin
shall reign in them, or Master Luther confesses that he was not troubled
great ly with this vice.
have force to condemn them. Howbeit, as the remainder of other sins is in
Gods children, so they are molested with the stirring and ticklings of
covetousness, more or less. The holy Prophet found an evil inclination of
his heart, to desire earthly things inordinately, which made him pray, that God
would not incline his heart to covetousness, Psalm. 119. that is, give him over
to that lust. Of this fault Christ often warned his own Apostles, amongst whom,
one was overcome by this vice, and the rest no doubt were tempted with it, else
Christ's warning had been in vain. It is well therefore, when resistance is
made against the motions of Covetousness: for none shall altogether lack the
egging of this Lust.

2. To your second demand, I answer affirmatively, That the desire of worldly
wealth is covetousness. The nature whereof is expressed by three words of the
Grecians (as I have heard you say:) One, signifies the love Philarguria,
Pleonexia.
of money, another the desire of riches, and the third signifies the lust of
having more. And seeing the blessed Apostle, Hebr. 13, 4. does set
covetousness as the flat contrary unto contentedness, Let your conversation
(says he) be without covetousness, and Be content with that ye have;
therefore, if our being satisfied, and resting pleased with our present estate
be contentedness, then the desire of more, or of a better estate in the World,
must needs be covetousness. Every man indeed, is bound to follow the duties
of his calling, upon which he may desire and pray for a blessing, with
condition and exception of Gods will, so much and so far as he thinks meet,
leaving the success thereof to his good pleasure.

3. To conclude, as a man may be a thief in his own, if he husband and employ
it otherwise then God has appointed, whose servant he is, and to whom he must
give account: so he may be covetous even in his own goods, if he love them,
set his heart upon them, and desire the bettering and increasing of them,
otherwise then by submitting himself to the will of God; being ready to
receive more if God will add and cast in more, with all thankfulness: yet
being well apaide with that which is already, when God shall think it good,
not to increase or amend it.


Apollos. This is indeed the sum of all that which ye have been taught, of
this grace of contentment, and of all the other graces of the new man, which
we have in our conference run through. What lets now, but that we may come
to the last fruit of an effectual calling, which consists in the special
duties which we are bound to do, and perform toward others, in respect of
some degree which is of God put upon us, or them, and so to finish this our
work?


Aquila. One impediment and let there is, namely, that we have I know not how
(save that in such a heap of duties, some might easily be slipped by) neglected
to speak of certain graces of regeneration. The one is Wisdom, so much
commended in Scripture, charging us (...).
that we be wise as Serpents, Matthew 10. that we be wise concerning that which
is good, Romans 16. that we serve and love our brethren in meek wisdom, James
1. This being one special part of Gods Image, and such a grace as guides us
in the use and practice of all the former graces: for so much as it is not
only a foresight, or forecast of things which may happen, gathering effects
by causes, and judging of present and future events by precedent accidents and
occurrences; but it is also a faculty directing a Christian how to carry
himself seemly, and as is meet for his profession in all parts of his duty;
teaching him to (...) general rules to particular occasions, that he may (...)
and do all things according to the (...) time, and place, and persons. He is
indeed an (...) man, whose heart is not only wise unto (...) faith in Christ,
but also in the duties of daily (...), through the wisdom of the Word; and
surely such happy men, are all godly men: for as it is said of David, in
respect of his warring against the Philistines, that he behaved himself
wisely; so it may be said of every true Christian, in regard of their
spiritual warfare, that they wisely behave themselves in it: which cannot be
said of unregenerate persons, who have many of them knowledge to see generally
what ought to be done, and not done; but they lack the wisdom which should
govern them in their particular actions, according to the due circumstances,
as they may please God in all their duties. The children of this world, excel
the children of light in worldly wisdom; but in wise walking before God, the
children of light excel the worldlings: whereof not one has this true godly
wisdom, howsoever cleare-sighted they be in matters of their own credit and
gain. Neither has any worldly man the blessed gift of honesty, albeit they
may do many things which be honest, and be reputed honest by men of the world,
because they do such civil works as honest men do; yet they are destitute
of Christian honesty, which is a fruit of the Honesty.
Spirit, a companion of godliness, a quality of a sanctified heart, disposed
so to practice all duties toward their Neighbor for Gods sake, as they be
very careful not to hurt them by doing any uncomely filthy or wicked thing in
their presence or knowledge: therefore the true Christian man, he is the only
honest man; yea, and he alone may be said to have an honest heart, an heart
firmly resolved to be that in truth, which he seems to be.

Finally, the gift of Virtue is proper to an elect man, who be blessed of God
with a special valor, courage, and strength of mind, whereby they can
overcome hard things, and attempt great works with good heart; for the spirit
of fortitude and virtue is in them, so as they are not easily daunted and
discouraged: whereas unregenerate persons be either too base, or too bold and
audacious, being void of that virtue which Peter exhorts goods Christians to
join to their faith. Neither does Zeal.
any unregenerate man partake in the gift of true zeal; for howsoever many of
them are zealous and seruent, yet they are zealous amiss: either they are
earnest in defense of their own opinions, and of men's traditions, as were the
blind Jews, and Paul being yet a Pharisie; or if their zeal be for good
things commanded of God, or against evil things forbid by him, yet either it
is not according to knowledge, as in those which were seruent for the
righteousness of the Law, to set it up, and to pull down the righteousness
of Christ; of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 10. I bear them witness they
have a zeal, but not according to knowledge: or if they do know what they do,
yet their striving for known good things, and against known evil things, is
neither in a good manner, nor to a good end; as it is written of Iehu, that he
was zealous for the Lord of hosts: but yet his heart was not aright, he sought
not Gods glory, neither was his heart touched with love and compassion toward
men. And thus it is with the zeal of all natural men, it is both blind and
bitter; but it is otherwise with the zeal of regenerate persons, which is
tempered with charity, and guided by knowledge. The zeal of the righteous
makes them earnest against known evil things, to hinder them, and against
known good things to further them, according to their means and calling; so
setting before their eye only the glory of God, as the mark they aim at in
all their zealous courses; as they have a charitable respect of their brethren,
to bear with their weakness, to pity (...) and miseries, to labor their
conversion, never pleasing themselves in their zeal, further then it may
please God, and profit man: wherein yet this is to be considered, that when
respect and favor to man is directly against the glory of God, their true and
god (...) is blind, and will not see; deaf, and will not hear; the
extreamities of men: as appears in the zeal of the Levites, putting to the
Sword their brethren and (...) at Gods commandment; (...) 33: also in the
zeal of (...) and Elius, putting them to death severely whom God would not
have to (...); I Kings. And touching Zeal, I have furthermore learned thus
much, that it ought to go with, and accompany every good duty of our general
or especial calling; as we are commanded, to repeat, and be zealous; (...). 3.
and it is told us, Galathians 4. that it is a good thing to be earnest in every
good thing. Our prayers must be with zeal, also our thanksgiving, our
hearing, our preaching, our giving of alms, our counsel, our repentance, and
all other particular works; as in the Law no sacrifice was accepted without
salt, so is no duty pleasing unto God without zeal: coldness, and
luke-warmnesse, are both odious to God, as also fiery bitterness, without
diferetion and love; but wise and charitable zeal is his delight.


Apollos. Nay friend Aquila, I thought of those four graces, but you have
bestowed them in a good place; not only because better late then never (as we
say) but because amongst common duties they are somewhat more general then the
rest; and therefore well singled out, and set apart by themselves. And now let
us consider of such graces as enable our elect and called Christian to
discharge such duties as he ought to do, by reason of his degree and
particular calling wherein God has set him; for hitherto you have dealt in
such gifts as concern the general vocation of a Christian.


Aquila. Sir, it is a thing commonly taught us, that every Christian besides
his calling of Christianity, common to him with other, has also a particular
person put upon him; yea, sometime one Christian bears many and sundry
persons, being both an inferior, as a child, or servant, subject, hearer,
soldier, wife, maid, or daughter; and being also a superior, as Father,
Prince, Magistrate, Mistrisse, or Mother, Captain, or Counselor, or Judge.
Now this charge lies upon every Christian, and such grace is given them, as
that they labor to answer, and in some good measure can both know, and answer
these duties, expressing and exercising the power of all that godliness which
they have as Christians, in that particular, or in (...) particular places
wherein they are seated and settled of God, and that with all diligence, and
sidelity; uprightness, and constancy. The wife gives reverence and submission
to her husband, in respect of his prehemmence in graces and authority;
Ephesians 5 verse last; the husband loves his wife as a daughter of Israel,
and member of Christ, and out of this holy affection of love cares for her; I
Peter 3. 7. bears with her infirmities, cherishes, instrusteth her, and
protecteth her. Fathers are not bitter to their children, but in mildness and
wisdom bring them up in the instruction and nurture of the Lord; Ephesians 6.
3. Children do love, reverence, obey their Parents for the Lord, Ephesians 6.
1. witnessing their honor toward their Parents, especially in this, that they
make no choice of their trades, and matches, without their priuity and
counsel. Servants not out of fear with eye service, but in singleness of
heart study to please their bodily Masters; Ephesians 6. 5. 6. and these again
are willing to do that which is equal and just, both touching the bodies and
souls of their servants, knowing that they also have a Master in Heaven;
Calosians 3. verse last. The Pastor feeds his flock, not for filthy luker,
nor by constraint; 1 Peter 5. 2, 3, 4. but out of a willing mind, showing
himself an example to the flock. The flock and people on the other side
acknowledge him, and have him in singular love for his work sake; I (...) 5.
The Magistrate kindly tendreth his inferiors, as his children; Job 29. and
mildly ruling with justice, gives praise to such as do well, and punishes
those that do evil; (...) 13. 2, 3, 4, 5. And finally, inferiors and
subjects obediently submit themselves unto their Rulers, as unto Fathers, doing
with readnesse their just commandments, and with patience bearing even their
unjust punishments. Thus have I given you a certain taste of these singular
and special duties; for neither time, nor your infirmity will permit us more
largely to discourse them: only this I think good to add, that it is the
property of all saving graces which we have named, and of the others which we
have forgotten (for who can remember all) to wax and increase, till they come
to perfection; as the young fruits grows till they be ripe: it pleasing God
to follow his first graces with new supplies, till he have finished the work
which he has begun; (...) 1. 4. So it is not with the wicked, whose gifts
decrease, and at last (...) and fall away, as leaves in winter fall from the
trees; they being as the chafe and dust, which having no steadfast firmness,
be therefore soon (...), Psalm 1. 5. Whereas the godly, which are as a tree
planted by the Rivers side, brings forth fruit in due season, whose leaves are
always green, and look whatsoever they do, it prospers; Psalm 1. 3, 4.
And now (good Sir) if it please you, we will shut up this our conference, with
this short Prayer.

O eternal, most wise, mighty, and merciful God, we give thee thanks for all
thine Election.
Elect, whom thou have according to thine eternal will calling.
called effectually by the Means of calling.
Ministry of the Law and Gospel to thy Son, Illuminatio^.
opening their eyes to see him to be their Savior, and their Opening the heart.
hearts to embrace him with affection, being satisfied with him, and so working
in them that most worthy Faith.
gift of faith, whereby being Union with christ.
united and incorporate into him, they partake with his Justification
justice both active and passive, for their perfect justification before thee,
and Sanctific atio^
with his Spirit for their imperfect sanctification in this life, having power
given them both to abide the Spiritual conflict.
combat with remaining corruptions, and upon wounds and foyles received in
that encounter, to arise by Repentance.
repentance, and also to be able to witness the truth of their repentance, by
the constant exercise of all good Good works.
works, furnishing them with needful graces of all General graces.
sorts, for the Uprightness
sincere service of thy Majesty, and of their brethren, according to their
Particular gifts.
several estates and degrees; good Father, we bless thy blessed name for
these works of thy grace in them all, and pray thee heartily both for their
continuance in grace (...)
unto the end, til they be perfectly glorified in heaven, and that the rest of
thine Elect, who as yet are not gathered, thou would hasten their conversion
and calling, to fulfill in them also the good work of thy pleasure with power,
Increase, or growth.
increasing them in all goodness, and protecting them against all enemies and
evils, till the great and Glorification
glorious appearing of thy Son Jesus; to whom with thee and thy holy Spirit, be
all praise, honor, and glory, now, henceforth, and for ever.


Amen.
Finis laus Christo, nescia finis.
Errata.
IN Page 6. Line 20. Read capable. p. 13. l. 6. r. service, for show it: p.
16. l. 31. let the comma be after them: p. 19. l. 3. r. desert: and l. 17: r.
for a certain time, as they, etc. p. 21. l. 26. r. Sacrament: p. 29. l. 15. r.
calling: p. 36. l. 13: after proceed, r. and go: l. 19. r. it. after upon: p.
37, l. 14. after keep, r. all: p. 51, put comma out in l. 5, and 8. after mind
and will: p. 55. l. 8: r. as for is. p. 59, l. last, r. wrought: p. 611, l. 9.
r. belong: p. 69, l. 6, r. matter: p. 91, l. 27; r. effects work: p. 111, l.
5, r. against the first Table after sin: l. 24, after Christ, r. because they
are such: p. 116, l. 8, r. inexpressible: p. 110, l. 27, r. oneness: l. 28, r.
so is Christ, p. 151, l. 13, r. premised: p. 161, l. 10, r. hard, for yours: p.
162, l. 22, r. friend: p. 179, l. 26, r. work, p. 188, l. 22, r. after then,
to be exalted: p. 190, l. 11, r. falls, p. 192, l. 32, r. comfort: p. 201, l.
26, r. is after it, p. 202, l. 6, r. of sinister death: p. 223, l. 26, r. rich
man, for Dives: p. 248, l. 16. r. halted: l. 27, r. renewed: p. 250, in the
margin, r. meetnesse: p. 263, l. 10, r. that evil which is our own before
being: p. 287, l. 27. r. awefull: p. 290, l. 7, r. guardian: p. 303. l. 13, r.
outward rest: p. 307, l. 8. r. these: p. 308, l. 2, r. as that, after mind: p.
328, l. 10, strike out the latter only.


