THE ENGLISH MARTYROLOGE CONTAINING A SVMMARY OF THE LIVES of the glorious and
renowned Saints of the three Kingdoms, ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND.

COLLECTED AND DISTRIBVTED into Months, after the form of a Calendar,
according to every Saints festiuity.

WHEREUNTO Is annexed in the end a Catalogue of those, who have suffered death
in England for defense of the Catholic Cause, since King Henry the 8. his
breach with the Sea Apostolic, unto this day.

By a Catholic Priest.



Eccles. 44. Nomen eorum viuet in generationem and generationem. Their memory
shall live from generation to generation. Permissu Superiorum. Anno 1608.

Ecce Regni Anglia dulcis patriae excidiu^ dolendu^ etc. Mar^yribus,
Confessoribus, etc. Behold the lamentable destruction of England so pleasant a
Country etc. An Island so shining with Martyrs. Confessors, and holy Virgins,
that scarcely shall you pass by any famous Village or street, where you shall
not hear the glorious Name of some new Saint or other etc. Matthew. Paris. in
Hist. Angl. Anno 1. Gul. Conquest. NVsquam gentium, vt opinor, reperies. etc.
No where, I supose, shall you find so many incorrupted bodies of Saints (as in
England) resembling that their everlasting incorruptibility. Which by divine
providence, I think, to be therefore so ordained; that a Nation situated almost
out of the world, should by consideration of their incorruption, be more
confidently animated to the hope of eternal Resurrection etc. Author
Continuat. Hist. Ven. Bedae l. 2. cap. 30. Vixit anno 1110. EVery corner of S.
Augustines Monastery at Canterbury lies full of the bodies of Saints, and
those of no small Name or merit; but even of such, as one whereof alone were
sufficient to make England famous. etc. Idem eodem lib. cap. 33. TO THE
CATHOLICS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND.
WHEN I had almost brought this little work to an end, (dear Catholic
Countrymen) I began to think with my self, to whom, among many so dearly
affected, I might make bold to dedicate the same, thereby the better to
patronize that, which over bold presumption had conceived. And though the thing
it self needed none other Patrons or Protectors then the glorious Saints
themselves, of whom we are now to treat: yet because I might not seem, in a
manner, to defraude any heerin of their right and interest, which I imagined;
at last I thought it most convenient, that YOU, whose hearts and minds are
firmly fixed in the honor and veneration of so glorious and elected wightes,
and for the embracing whereof you daily suffer so great and many persecutions,
should take upon you this Protection, for whose comfort and consolation
principally (next after the honor of the Saints themselves) the same is
published. I do not here offer unto you any new thing (which is always
commonly the custom of such to do who dedicate their works to others) but
that which so many ages since, has by a certain inheritance, as it were, of
your forfathers, descended still, by good right and title, unto you, and shall
hereafter unto your, and all posterity. Only this, that I have here gathered
together, and restored unto you again, that which the injury of times had
violently taken from you, and sought to abolish all memory thereof: humbly
presenting the same, as a duty of my love toward you, and my dearest Country.
Wishing you to take in good part, what my poor endeauours have been able to
produce heerin for your spiritual consolation, in these your so great
affictions and pressures: with desire to be made partaker of your good prayers.

This first of October. 1608. Yours wholly devoted. I. W. Priest.

THE CALENDAR.
IANVARY
1 Midwyne Conf.* 2 A Thousand holy Martyrs * 3 Meltorus Mart. * 4 Croniacke
Conf. * 5 Edward King. 6 Peter Conf. *. 7 Ced Conf. 8 Guithelme Bishop 9
Brituald Bishop 10 Sethrid Virg. * 11 Egwyne Bishop 12 Benedict Abbot. 13
Kentigerne Abbot. 14 Beno Confessor * 15 Alfred King * 16 Henry Ermite 17
Milwyde Virg. 18 Deicola Abbot. 19 Wolstan Bishop 20 Elfred Virg. * 21
Malcalline Abbot. 22 Brituald Bishop * 23 Boysill Abbot. * 24 Sophias Bishop.
25 Conversion Paul. 26 Theorithgid Virg. * 27 Palladius Bish. * 28 Arwaldi
Broth. Mart. * 29 Gildas Abbot. 30 Amnichade Conf. 31 Adaman Conf.
FEBRVARY
1. BRigit Virgin 2 Laurence Bishop 3 Wereburge Virgin 4 Gilbert Conf. 5 John.
Indractus Mart. * 6 Inas King. * 7 Richard King 8 Edelsted Virg. * 9 Merigold
Mart. 10 Transl. Wi^^rid Bishop. 11 William Bish. 12 Edilwald Bishop. * 13
Ermenild Queen 14 Conwane Conf. * 15 Sigfride Bishop. 16 Tancone Bishop. 17
Finan Bishop. 18 John Bishop. * 19 Acca Bishop. * 20 Mildred Virgin 21 Cymbert
Bishop. * 22 Transl. Gudwall Bishop. 23 Transl. Milburge Virg. 24 Ethelbert
King 25 Transl. Furseus Abbot 26 John Bishop. * 27 Alnoth Martyr*
MARCH
1 David Bishop. 2 Chad Bishop. 3 Wenlocke Abbot 4 Wilgise Confess. * 5
Frodoline Abbot 7 Deifer Ermite * 8 Felix Bishop. 9 Bosa Bishop. * 10 Himeline
Conf. 11 Transl Oswyn King. 12 Gregory Pope. 13 Vigane Conf. * 14 Ceolnulph
King. * 15 Aristobulus Bishop. 16 Alred Abbot. * 17 Patricke Bishop. 18 Edward
King 19 Alkmund Mart. * 20 Cuthbert Bish. 21 Isenger Bishop. * 22 Hamund
Bishop. * 23 Egbert King. * 24 Lansrancke Bishop. 25 William Martyr 26 Many
holy Martyrs. * 27 Archibald Abbot. 28 Transl. Fremund King. 29 Baldred Conf. *
30 Pattone Bishop 31 Transl. Adelme Bishop.
APRIL.
1 Sadocke. Mart. * 2 Ebba Abbess. * 3 Richard Bishop. 4 Guier Priest. * 5
Tigernake Bishop 6 Celsus Confessor 7 Sigene Abbot. * 8 Duuianus Conf. * 9
Frithstan Bish. * 10 Paternus Confess. 11 Guthlacke Conf. 12 Hugh Bishop* 13
Elfled Virgin. * 14 Ethelnulph King. * 15 Eleua. Oswald Bishop 16 Transl. Alban
Protom. 17 Marianus Conf. * 18 Oswyn Conf. * 19 Elphege Bishop 20 Ceadwall
King. 21 Anselme Bishop 22 Birstan Bishop. * 23 George Martyr. 24 Mellitus
Bishop. 25 Obodius Conf. * 26 Modan Confess. * 27 Walburge Virgin 28 Kortill
Bishop. * 29 Senan Conf. * 30 Erconwald Bishop.
MAY
1 Assaph Bish. 2 German Bishop. 3 Walter Abbot 4 Ethelred King. * 5 Algiue
Queen* 6 Edbert Bishop 7 John Beuerley Bish. 8 Wyre Bishop. 9 Beatus Conf. 10
Transl. Bid Priest 11 Fremund King Martyr 12 Remigius Bishop 13 Merwyne Virg.
* 14 Edith Virg. * 15 Dympna Virg. 16 Simon Confess. 17 Transl. 11000. Virgins
18 Sewall Bishop. 19 Dunstan Bishop. 20 Ethelbert King Mart. 21 Godricke Ermite
22 Henry King. 23 William Martyr 24 Edgar King * 25 Adelme Bishop. 26 Augustine
Bishop 27 Bid Priest 28 Jonas Abbot. * 29 Burien Virg. * 30 Hieu Virg. * 31
Wolstan Martyr
JUNE.
1 Rufin Mart. * 2 Malcolme King * 3 Eleutherius Conf. * 4 Patrocke Bishop. * 5
Boniface Bishop Mart. 6 Gudwall Bish 7 Robert Abbot 8 William Bish. 9 Columbe
Abbot 10 Tran. Edmund King 11 Edilwald Conf. * 12 Agatha Virg. * 13 Elerius
Abbot * 14 Transl Brandan Abbot 15 Eadburge Virg. 16 Transl Richard Bishop. 17
Botulph Abbot. 18 Dunstan Abbot * 19 John Bishop. * 20 Transl. Oswald K. 21
Engelmund Mart. 22 Alban Protomart. 23 Ediltrude Virgin. 24 Rumwald Bishop. 25
Amphibale Mart. 26 Nine hundred Mart. * 27 John Conf. 28 Columbane Monk * 29
Peter and Paul Apost. 30 Deusdedit Bishop.
IVLY
1 IVlius and Aaron 2 Swithin Bishop. 3 Transl. Lanfranke B. 4 Odo Bishop 5
Modwene Abbess 6 Sexburge Abbess 7 Tran. Thom. of Cant. Hedda Bishop. 8
Grimbald Abbot. 9 Edilburge Queen 10 Etto Bishop. 11 Dronston Conf. * 12 Luane
Abbot * 13 Transl. Mildred Virg. 14 Marchelme Conf. 15 Transl. Swithin Bishop
of Winch. 16 Transl. Osmund Bishop 17 Kenelme King Mart. 18 Edburge Virgin 19
Diman Conf. * 20 Ethelwide Queen * 21 Arbogastus Bishop 22 Wilfrede Queen. *
23 Vodine Bish. Mart. * 24 Transl. Lewine Virg. 25 Wiaman Mart.* 26 Christian
Virgin 27 Joseph of Arimathia 28 Sampson Bishop 29 Lupus Bishop 30 Lefrone
Abbess 31 Neoth Conf.
AUGUST
1 EEthelwold Bishop 2 Alricke Ermite * 3 Domitius Conf. * 4 Transl. Wallurge
Virg. 5 Oswald King. 6 Henry Bishop 7 Maude Queen * 8 Fagane Confess. * 9 Hugh
Bishop 10 Malcus Bishop. * 11 Gilbert Confessor * 12 Bertelme Conf. * 13
Wigbert Mart. * 14 Transl. Werenfrid Conf. 15 Margaret Prioresse * 16 Thomas
Monk * 17 Thomas Conf. 18 Helen Empress. 19 Clintanke King. 20 Oswyne King 21
Richard Bishop. * 22 Arnulph Conf. * 23 Justinian Mart. * 24 Alice Prioresse *
25 Ebba Martyr 26 Pandwyne Virgin * 27 Decuman Mart. * 28 Rumbald Conf.* 29
Sebbe King 30 Fiaker Conf. 31 Aidan Bishop
SEPTEMBER
1 Elphege Bishop * 2 Adaman Abbot * 3 Transl. Foillan Bish. 4 Tran. Cuthbert
Bish. 5 Although Abbot * 6 Bega Virgin * 7 Transl. Dunstan Bish. 8 Ethelburge
Queen * 9 Queran Abbot 10 Otger Deacon Conf. 11 Bather Abbot * 12 Eanswide
Abbess 13 Werenfrid Conf. 14 Bernard Conf. * 15 Chineburg Queen * 16 Ninian
Bishop Martyrs
17 Stephen
18 Transl. Winocke Abb. 19 Theodore Bishop 20 Cibthacke Confessor * 21
Edilhun Conf. * 22 Higbald Abbot * 23 Hereswide Queen * 24 Transl. Winibald
Abb. 25 Ceolfride Abbot 26 Wulsy Abbot 27 Sigebert King * 28 Lioba Abbess 29
Cogan Abbot. * 30 Honorius Bishop.
OCTOBER
1 ROger Bishop 2 Transl. Thom. of Hereford 3 Ewaldi Martyrs. 4 Edwyn King
Mart. 5 Conwalline Abbot * 6 Ywy Conf. 7 Osith Virg. 8 Transl. Eloquius 9
Robert Bishop. 10 Pauline Bishop 11 Edilburge Abbess 12 Wilfrid Bishop. 31
Transl. Edward K. 14 Transl. Burchard Bishop. 15 Transl. Oswald B. 16 Lullus
Bishop. 17 Ethelbrit Mart. 18 Mo^o Martyr 19 Fridesuyde Virgin 20 Wendelm
Abbot. 21 Vrsula Virgin 22 Mellon Bishop 23 Syra Virgin * 24 Maglore Bish. 25
Ardwine Conf. * 26 Eatta Bishop. 27 Transl. Romwald B. 28 Simon Apostle 29
Eadsine Bishop 30 Egelnoth Bishop 31 Foillan Bishop
NOVEMBER
1 Transl. Boniface B. 2 Vulganius Bishop. 3 Wenefride Virgin 4 Clare Martyr. 5
Malachy Bishop. 6 Winocke Abbot. 7 Willebrord Bishop. 8 Willehade Bishop 9
Congilia Abbess * 10 Iustus Bishop 11 Bertuine Bishop. 12 Liu(...)nus Bishop
13 Kilian Bish. Conf. 14 Tran. Erconwald 15 Macloue Bishop Margaret Qu. 17 Hugh
Bishop 18 Fulke Confess. * 19 Ermenburge Queen 20 Edmund K. Mart. 21 Columban
Abbot 22 Osmane Virgin * 23 Tathar Er(...)e * 24 Eanflede Queen * 25 Telean
Bishop * 26 Egbert Abbot * 27 Oda Virgin 28 Edwold Conf. 29 Barucke Ermite * 30
Withbuge Virgin *
DECEMBER
1 DAniel Confess. * 2 Need Virgin * 3Lucius King 4 Osmund Bishop 5 Christine
Virgin * 6 Congellus Abbot* 7 Odwald Abbot.* 8 Conception of B. Virg. 9
Ethelgine Abbess * 10 Chined Ermite * 11 Geruadius Bishop * 12 Elfred Virg. *
13 Iudocus Ermite 14 Mimborine Abbot * 15 Transl. Hilda Virg. 16 Bean Bishop 17
Tetta Abbess * 18 Winibald Abbot 19 Macharias Abbot * 20 Comogel Abbot * 21
Edburge Abbess * 22 Hidelide Virgin * 23 Imbware Virgin * 24 Ruthius Conf. *
25 Gregory Conf. * 26 Ethelfrede Virg. * 27 Gerrard Confess. * 28 Transl.
Elphege Bishop. 29 Thomas of Canterbury 30 Eustach Abbot * 31 Eternane Conf. *
AN ADVERTISMENT OF THE AVTHOR to the Catholic Reader.
WHEREAS all Books (good Reader) of what subject soever, that are published to
the view of the world, must pass the censures and judgments of many sorts of
people; I have thought it not amiss before thou enter any further into the
contents, to give thee two or three short aduertisments in this place; as well
thereby to prevent all occasions of misconstruction or cavil, that any man,
perchance, may take against this little work or Sanctiloge of mine; as also
the better to inform thy understanding, concerning diverse doubts or other
difficultyes, that in the reading thereof may happily occur unto thee.

1. First then I would have thee to understand, that what I have here set
down in this ensuing Martyrologe concerning the lives and miracles of these
glorious and renowned Saints of our Great-Britany, and of the Islands belonging
thereunto; I have done the same with all truth, sincerity and conscience, to my
knowledge: not contenting my self with bare words and relations only; but
have in the margents quoted also the books and places of the Authors, out of
whom I have gathered all that is here alleged. Neither have I used any other
Authors herin, but such as are approved by the Sea Apostolic, or at leastwise
permitted by the same rejecting all Apocryphal Legends or other fabulous
Historyes, that may be any way suspected of the least note of falsity or error
whatsoever.

2 Secondly I have not taken upon me in this Catalogue or Calendar to make an
universal Martyrologe, but have gathered together only the ancient Saints,
Martyrs, Confessors and Virgins of our three Kingdoms, England, Scotland and
Ireland: Yet for that, besides these of our own, there are some others also of
foraine Nations, by whom our said Countries have received some notable or
peculiar benefit, either public or private; as having been our Apostles or
Patrons, either by way of preaching, teaching, protection, or otherwise in the
cooperation to our Conversion, and consequently to be by us honored and
reverenced for such, as all our Cath. Ancestors and forfathers have done
before us, and as we see all other Catholic Countries round about us to do
the like in the same case: These (I say) I have thought good to account as our
own, and together with our own to place the^ on their proper festival
days, to the end we may as well with due honor observe their Memoryes and
Solemnityes: as also thereby avoid the ungrateful oblivion of so great and
inestimable benefits received by them and their merits.

3. The third Advertisement may be, that whereas it has pleased God to give
unto our little Dominions so many glorious Saints, both Martyrs, Co^fessours
and Virgins (besides these later of our days, whose Names I have also put
down in a Catalogue a part by themselves, in the later end of this book) who
may be more then sufficient, to make a whole and complete Calendar, throughout
every Month, placing on every day one; yet for that a great number of our
ancient Saints have no proper festiuityes in our English Catholic Church,
and many of them forgotten and almost out of memory, by this unfortunate fall
of our Country, from the true and ancient Catholic faith, and union of the
Sea Apostolic: I have thought it most convenient for the more full
accomplishing and perfecting of a Martyrologe, that where any day falls out
to be altogether void; there to place one or more of the forsaid ancient
Saints, whose public celebrity has not been hitherto kept; and thereof to
make a Commemoration only (which in the Roman and other Martyrologes is often
used) noting the same with the sign of an Asteriske or Star in the Margent,
to the end it may be known and observed of the Reader. And where none of these
forsaid Marks, so noted, is to be found; then upon that day is put the true
festiuity of the Saint, whom there thou shall find placed.

4. And lastly, I do not mean by this ensuing Martyrologe to introduce any
other public observation or festiuity of any of the Saints heerin by me set
down, then that which the Catholic Church of England has in formertymes,
and does also at this present celebrate: but only my intention is to lay forth
the sum of their lives and miracles as briefly as I may, for the increase of
devotion in the Catholic people, and for the duty and reverenced owe unto
them both: leaving the rest to every man's pri(...)re and particular devotion,
as he shall, by reading the same, be affected to their glorious veneration.
Wi(...)ing heartily all such Catholics of our said Countries, to whose hands
this little work may chance to come; that if they have any other notes,
concerning these our ancient Saints lying by them, they would vouchsafe,
either to impart the same unto me, or be pleased themselves, by reuiewing this
small labor of mine, to publish the same anew, and a(...)end my imperfections
heerin, if any shall be found; as well for the honor of the glorious Saints
themselves, as the public vtility of these our Kingdoms and Countries.
Farewell.

I. W.

ERRATA
Page 140 Monassery lege Monastery 294 Eaetta Eatta. 295 venetion veneration.
326 Roall. Royal

THE MONTH OF IANVARY.
A The first Day.
AT Glastenbury-Abbey in *
Somersetshire the Commemoration of the Saints Midwyne and Eluane Confessors,
Bar on. in Annal. Eccl. an. 183. ex antiquis monum. Eyseng. cent. 2. p. 6.
did. 6. 10. Capgrau. in Catal. Sanctor. Britan. Registr. Monast. Glascon.
who being two noble ancient Britans by birth, were sent by King Lucius of
Britany to Rome to Pope Elutherius, to treat of his Conversion to Christian
faith, and being there both baptized by the said Pope, and S. Eluane made a
Bishop, they were sent back again into Britany, together with Fugatius and
Damianus, who baptized the King and the greatest part of his Nation, in the
year of our Lord 183. And after they had much labored in teaching and
instructing the new flock of Christ in our Island for many years, full of
sanctity of life, and venerable old age, they both ended their happy days,
about the year of Christ, an hundred nynty and eight, and were buried at
Glastenbury, as the ancient Records of that Abbey do witness,

And in other places of many holy Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins; to whose
prayers and merits, we humbly commend our selves.

This last clause is always thus to be repeated in the end of every day.

B The second Day.
AT Lichfield in Staffordshire the Commemoration *
of A thousand holy Martyrs, of the British Nation, who newly converted Bed. l.
1. hist. An. c. 7. in fin. Mat. VVestmonast. in histor. Anglic. 10. Rouse de
nomine Ciuit. Lichfeldiae. Humfr. Lhuide infragm. descrip. B(...)an.
to the faith of Christ, and being Disciples and followers of S. Amphibale
Priest, that suffered in the persecution of Dioclesian Emperor, and present at
his Martyrdom near unto the town of S. Albanes in Hartfordshire, fled thence
for fear of like torments; but being overtaken at Lichfield, they were all in
hatred of Christian Religion, there most cruelly put to death, by commandment
of the President of Brittany, about the year of Christ three hundred and
four. The place where they suffered, was afterward called Cadauerum campus,
which is as much to say as Lich-field in English, and where the forsaid City
is now built, and thereof takes his ancient name and denomination. And in
other places of many holy Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, etc.

C The third Day.
IN Cornwall the Co^memoration of S. Meliorus Martyr, son to Melianus Duke of
that *
Province, who being his Fathers only son and heir, and secretly made a
Christian, Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. Sanctor. Britan. Anno Domini 411. ex
antiquis monum. Prouinc. Cornub.
was by a brother-in-law of his called Rinaldus a pagan, cruelly murdered,
partly in hatred of his faith and Religion, and partly to enjoy his
inheritance. He first cut of his right hand, and then his left leg, and last
of all his head, about the year of Christ four hundred and eleven. His body
was buried in an old Church in Cornwall, whereat in sign of his innocence, it
pleased God forth with to work many miracles; where also his relics were
kept with great honor and veneration, even until our days.

D The fourth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Croniacke *
Confessor, who borne of a very noble parentage in that Kingdom, took a
Religious habit, and became a Monk of Io. Le^^^us Epis. Rossen. l. 5. ^ist.
Scot. Arnold. wion in addit. ad lib. 3. Lig. vit^e lit. (...).
the venerable Order of S. Benedict, where in all kind of ^anctity of life, and
Monastical discipline, he ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ,
six hundred and fifty. His memory is yet very famous amongst the Catholics,
as well of the Scottish, as the Irish Nation; in both which Kingdoms in former
times, many Churches and altars have been dedicated in his honor. It is here,
and in many other places to be observed, that the Irish and Scottish
Historiographers do oftentimes disagree about the native Country of diverse
Saints mentioned in this Martyrologe; For that in ancient times the Island of
Hybernia being called Scotia, has caused a great confusion, especially amongst
forrayne writers, who for want of knowledge heerin, do often confound the one
nation with the other.

E The fifth Day.
AT Westminster by London, the deposition of S. Edward King and Confessor,
who being yet in his Mothers womb, was elected, A(...)ed. Ri^uall. in eius
vita. Pol. Virgil. l.
crowned, and anointed King by S. Peter the Apostle, as it was miraculously
reueyled to S. Brituald Bishop of Winchester, that lived at the same time. He
was very 8. Matt. Paris. an. 1069. Surius tomo 1. vit. Sanct. hac die. Petr. in
Catal. Romans Martyr. and alij.
famous for working of miracles, especially in curing a disease of swelling in
peoples throtes, which was afterward thereof called the Kinges-euill. His body
being taken up thirty six years after his death, was found as flexible and
vncorrupt, as when it was first buried. He was Canonized for a Saint by Pope
Alexander the third, in the year of Christ, one thousand one hundred
threescore and three. His translation was wont to be kept holy day throughout
England upon the thirteenth day of October, of whom in that place we have set
down a larger Narration.

F The sixth Day.
AT Bologne in France the Commemoration *
of S. Peter Confessor, who being Ven. Beda lib. 1. histor. Gent. Angl. cap.
33. Arnold. VVion in appe^d. ad lib. 3. lig. vi^^.
by S. Augustine our English Apostle ordained Abbot of a new Monastery near
unto Canterbury, which K. Ethelbert of Kent had founded, and going over into
France, was by tempest of sea, drowned near to the coast of Bologne, where the
Inahbitants finding his body, buried it in an obscure place: but a certain
miraculous light from heaven being seen every night to shine thereon, the
people began to inquire further what he was; and at last having intelligence
from England, that it was the forsaid Abbot, they took up his body, and
translated it with great solemnity to Bologne, and there with due veneration
placed it in a Church, whereat in sign of his sanctity and holiness of life,
miracles are said to have been forthwith wrought. This happened about the year
of Christ, six hundred and seven.

G The seventh Day.
AT London the festiuity of S. Ced Confessor and second Bishop of that Sea
brother to S. Chad of Li^^field, who by his Beda lib. 1. ^ist. Angl. cap. 21.
22 23. 24. 25. Et lib. 4. Cap. 3. Catal. Episco. Lo^dinens. apud wi^ l. 2. lig.
vit^.
continual preaching to the Mercians and Eastsaxons, converted many thousands
to the faith of Christ, and is worthily called their Apostle. The Sea of London
being void for many years after the death of S. Mellitus, he was at length
consecrated thereto, at the intercession of Sigebert K. of the Eastsaxons, who
was newly converted to the Christian faith. And afterward building a goodly
Monastery at a place called Lestinghen in the Province of the Deires, and
replenishing the same with many monks, at last in great sanctity of life, full
of venerable old age, he ended his blessed days, in the year of Christ, six
hundred fifty and four, and was buried in his forsaid new Monastery, where he
desceased. S. Bid recounteth, that when afterward his brother S. Chad died,
his soul was seen to descend from heaven, with a troop of Angels, to
accompany the same to paradise.

A The eight Day.
AT London the deposition of S. Guithelme Bishop and Confessor, who borne of a
noble blood in our I^a^d, and in the Primitive Matthew. westmonast. an Domini
435. Gauf. Mo(...)* l. 6. cap. 4. and 5.
Church of Britany ordained Archbishop of London, was very famous for preaching
the Christian faith to the Pagans of our nation: And after a most Saintly life,
full of miracles, in a good old age, he most blessedly departed this world,
about the year of Christ four hundred and threescore.

THe same day at York the Translation of S. William Confessor and Bishop of
that Sea, kinsman to K. Stephen of England, who after he had most patiently
endured many Calendar secundu^ us(...) S^^ (...) ^ac die.
iniuryes and wrongs, yea and banishment also from his bishopric and flock,
being again restored by Pope Anastasius the fourth, in great holiness of life,
he ended his blessed days, in the year of Christ, one thousand, one hundred,
fifty and four. His venerable body being, after many years, taken up on this
day, was with great solemnity translated to a more eminent place of his own
Cathedral Church of York, whereat, in sign of his innocence, through his
merits, it pleased God to work miracles.

B The ninth Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Brituald Bishop and Confessor, who being
constituted the first Abbot of the Monastery of Rheaculse in Kent, now called
Reaculer, which holy K. Ethelbert of that Province Bed. l. 5. ^ist. cap. 9.
Joan. Tritem. de vir. Illstr. Polid. Virgil. l. 4. and 6. ^istor. Angl.
had founded soon after his Conversion, was thence promoted to the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury, and succeeded S. Theodore in that Sea, which
when he had governed for almost forty years, in great sanctity and holiness of
life, full of venerable old age, he gave up his soul to rest, about the year
of Christ, seven hundred and thirty; and was buried at Canterbury.

THE same day and same place the deposition of S. Adrian Abbot, who borne in
Beda l. 4. cap. 1. and 2. and l. 5. cap. 21. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar.
Sigebert. in Chrou.
in Asricke, and sent into England with S. Theodore of Canterbury above named,
by Pope Vitalian; after he had taught the Christian faith in our Island for nine
and thirty years together, full of sanctity of life and miracles, he departed
to our Lord, in the year of Christ, seven hundred and ten, and was buried in
S. Augustines Church at Canterbury.

THE same day also at Po^toise in France the Translation of S. Iudocus
(commonly called in English S. Joyce) who descended of a noble British blood,
forsook the world, and De hac Transl. vid. Calend. se^. vsum Sarum, hac die.
became an Ermite in France, where in all kind of most godly life and
conversation, he ended his blessed days. His body being taken up, on this day,
threescore years after his death, was found as flexible and vncorrupt, as if
it had been buried the day before. And being put into a costly shrine, was
placed in a more eminent room of the same Church, about the year of Christ
seven hundred and thirteen, whereat it pleased God to work many miracles.

C The tenth Day.
AT Brige near Paris in France, the Commemoration *
of S. Sethird Virgin and Abb^sse, daughter to Annas King of the East Angles,
and sister to S. Edilburge Virgin, who in her young years went over into France
and became a Religious woman there in a monastery at the forsaid town of
Brige, under the Catal. Abbatis. Monast. Brigens.
care of her said sister that then governed the same; after whose death, she
was made Abbess of the whole Monastery; where in very great sanctimony of
life, joined with Bed. l. 3. cap. 8. ^ist. Angl.
most godly Conversation and Monastical discipline, she yielded up her blessed
soul to her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, six hundred and
threescore: And was buried in the same place.

D The eleventh Day.
AT Worcester the deposition of S. Egwine Confessor, and third Bishop of that
Sea, who being a man of very austere life, made a pair of iron-shackles,
locked them close Ranulph Cestrens. in eius vita. Matthew. West. anno. 712
Florent. VVigor. in Chron. anno 708 Molan. in addit. ad Vs^a. hac die. and alii.
about his legs, then cast the keys thereof into the River of Seuerne, an so
went to Rome with O^^a King of Mercia; desiring of God, that the said shackles
might not be loosed from his leges, until he had made satisfation for all the
sins of his youthful years: and in his return back, as he came over the
sea, upon a suddayne a fish leaped into the ship, wherein he sailed; which
being taken and killed, the forsaid keys of the shackles that he had thrown
into the river, were found in the fishes belly; the which being brought to the
Blessed Bishop, he forthwith applied them to the shackles that were about his
legs, and straight vnlocking them, to the admiration of the behoulders, he
came joyfully home to his Bishopric. He founded the famous Abbey of Euesham
near Worcester, and endowed it with great revenues and possessions,
procuring from Rome diverse privileges and franchises for the same, of Pope
Constantine, by the means of K. Coenred and K. O^^a, that then resided in that
City for devotion sake. And after many other works of piety, famous for
miracles, he ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ, seven hundred
and sixteen: and was buried at Euesham.

E The twelfth Day.
AT VVire-mouth in the Bishopric of Durham, the deposition of S. Benedict
Bed. l. 4. cap. 4. and l. 5. cap. 20. Mat. Pa^is. and Westminster. anno Domini 703*
Molan. in addit. ad Vs^a.
Abbot, surnamed Biscopus, who being descended of a noble parentage in our
Island, went to Rome, and after his return thence, built a goodly Monastery at
the Riuer-banke of VVire in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, wherein our famous
S. Bid was afterward brought up. He founded there also a goodly Church,
dedicating the same to the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. And after a
second voyage to Rome, to procure privileges for his said Monastery, full of
sanctity and holiness of life, he ended his venerable days, about the year
of Christ seven hundred and three, and was buried in the forsaid Church which
himself had built, whereat it pleased God to work many miracles.

F The thirteenth Day.
AT Glasco in Scotland the deposition of S. Kentigerne, Abbot and Confessor,
Son to King Eugenius the third of Scotland, Io. Lest. Epis. Ros. l. 4. de
gest. Sco. Chron. Britan. and VVio^ in Mart. Benedict. hac die Molan. in addit.
ad vsuar. and alij.
who being created Bishop of Glasco, soon after resigned that dignity, and
built himself a Monastery in the same Kingdom, gathering together six
hundred Monks, whom he instructed in all kind of virtue and good learning,
and was a myrrour to the Christian world. And when he had thus continued for
very many years, full of venerable old age, joined with sanctity of life and
miracles, he gave up his blessed soul to rest, about the year of Christ, six
hundred and eight, and was buried in the same place.

G The fourteenth Day.
IN North Wales the Commemoration of *
S. Beno Priest and Confessor, who leading Acta S. Wenefridae apud Surtom. 6.
3. Nouemb. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum in lect. S. Wenefridae. and R. B. in eius
vita M. S. in Collegio Angl. Audomarop.
an Eremiticall life in the West part of England, was by an angel admonished
to go into Wales to a noble man called Trebuith, S. VVenefrides Father, who
gave him a part of his lands and possessions to build a Monastery, as also his
daughter VVenefride to be instructed and brought up in a Religious manner:
whose head being soon after cut of by Cradocus son to Alane King of the same
Country, for not yielding to his unlawful lust, he miraculously set on again,
she living fifteen years after. He ended his venerable life full of sanctity
and miracles, about the year of Christ, six hundred and threescore: whose body
has always been had in very great reverence in our island, especially of the
Ancient Britanes of Wales.

A The fifteenth Day.
AT Mailros in the Kingdom of Northumberland, the Commemoration of Blessed *
Alfred Confessor, and eighteenth King of Bed. l. 5. cap. 13. wernerus
Rolwincke in fasciculo temporu^. VVion. lib. 4. ligni vitae.
that Province, who being a most virtuous Prince, in the one and twentieth year
of his reign, contemning all worldly pomp and honor, to the admiration of
all Christendom, both he and his wife the Queen, with mutual consent entered
into Monasteryes, and became Religious, she being veyled a Nun at a place
called Dormundcaster, two miles from Peterburrow; and he taking the habit of a
Monk in the forsaid Monastery Paulus Morigia ord. Jesus. de Vir. Illustr.
Monac. Plat. l. 2. de bono stat. Rel.
of Maylros, where in great sanctity of life and observance of Monastical
discipline, he spent the rest of his days, and finally reposed in our Lord,
about the year of Christ, seven hundred and twenty, and was buried in the
same place.

B The Sixteenth Day.
AT Tyn-mouth in Northumberla^d the deposition of S. Henry Confessor and
Eremite, who borne in Denmark of very honorable parents, came over into
England, and obtained leave of the Prior of Tyn-mouth to lead a solitary or
Eremiticall life in the Island of Cochet, where he lived many years with only
bread and water, and afterward he came to eat but thrice in the week, and
three days also a week he kept silence. On a time he would have gone to
Durham, but had no boat to pass over the river of Vita eius extat in veter.
Codice Antuerpiae, in custodia cuiusdam Nobilis viri, vbi festiuitas eius
ponitur hac die.
VVire; Wherefore being solicitous how to get over, a boat that was fastened on
the other side of the water, brake loose, and of it self came over unto him,
wherein he passed. Toward the end of his days, he got a swelling in one of his
knees, through over much praying, which growing to an ulcer, at last brake, and
when certain little worms crept therout, he would take and put them in
again, saying: Go into your inheritance, where you have been nourished, etc.
And so perseuering in a most godly and Saintly life for a long time, when the
hour of death drew near, he went into a little Chapel in the same island,
and taking the belrope in his hand, when he had rung it, he departed this life.
A monk of the next Monastery hearing the bell ring, made have thither, and
found him dead, sitting upon a stone with the belrope in his hand, and a candle
standing lighted by him, which did yield so clear a light that it dazeled the
eyes of the behoulders. His body was brought to Tyn-mouth, and there buried in
the Church of our B. Lady, near to the body of S. Oswyn King and Martyr, in
the year of Christ 1120. which year also he died.

C The seventeenth Day.
AT Canterbury the Commemoration of *
S. Milwyde Virgin, daughter to Merualdus King of Mercia, and sister to the
Saints Milburge and Mildred Virgins, who contemning Matthew. West. an. Dom. 676.
all pleasures and delights of this world, became a Religious woman in a
Monastery in Kent, near unto Canterbury, which holy King Ethelbert of blessed
memory had founded, where in great sa^ctimony of Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl.
Ranulph Cestrens. lib. 4 cap. 18. and alij antiquiores.
life and pious conversation, she yielded her soul up to her heavenly spouse,
about the year of Christ, six hundred threescore and sixteen. She had also a
brother called Meresine, a man of great holiness of life, living about the same
time, of whom there is made often mention in our ancient Historiographers of
Britany and England.

D The eighteenth Day.
AT Sutrium in Tuscany the Deposition of Petrus in Catalog. l. 2. cap. 88.
Vincent. in speculo. l. 23. cap. 2. 3. 4. and 5. Molan. and Mart. Romans hac die.
S. Deicola Abbot and Confessor, who borne in Scotland of a noble parentage,
and hearing of the virtues and sanctity of S. Columbane the Great, then living
in Italy, went over unto him, became his disciple, and was afterward made Abbot
there of a new Monastery, called S. Martins, erected in a town of Tuscany,
commonly named Sutrium, where in great sanctity and holiness of life, he ended
his blessed days, about the year of Christ, five hundred fourscore and
eleven. *


THE same day in Suetia the Commemoration Adam Bremens. in hist. Su(...)ca. l.
2. cap. 22.
of S. Vlsride Bishop and Martyr, who being an English man by birth, and of
great learning and knowledge in the scriptures, went over into the low
Countries Cranz. in Metrop. and Baron. in Annal. ad annu^ citat.
first, and thence into Suetia to preach the Christian faith, which when he had
done most fervently, and with great fruit of his holy labors for some years,
he was there finally put to death, by the enemies of Christ, and so obtained a
palm of martyrdom, about the year of Christ, one thousand thirty and four.

E The ninteenth Day.
AT Worcester the deposition of S. VVolstan Bishop and Confessor, who being
brought up from his youth in the Abbey of Matthew. West. an. 1095. and Mat.
Paris. eode an. Pol. Vir. l. 9. Sur. tom. 1. Malmes. and Flore^t in hist.
Calend. sec. vsu^ Sarum hac die, and alij omnes.
Peterburrow, and afterward made a monk in the Monastery of Worcester, was
finally created Bishop of the same City in the time of K. Edward the
Confessor, but being after deposed, through falfe and slanderous accusations,
by K. William the Conqueror, and Bishop Lanfranke, was by a miracle that
himself wrought at S. Edwardes body in Westminster, in the presence of many
people, again restored to his Bishopric, where in very great sanctity and
holiness of life, he perseuered to the end of his venerable days, which
happened in the year of Christ, one thousand nynty and five, and was buried in
his own Cathedral Church of Worcester. This day was afterward comanded to
be kept holy, in his memory, throughout England.

THE same day in Suetia the passion of S. Henry Martyr and Bishop of Opslo, who
going Io Mag. l. 19. in histor. Goth. c. 3. Molan. in addit. ad Vsu. Mart. Romans
and Breuiar. Sueticum hac aie.
our of England, to preach the faith of Christ in those parts, was honorably
intertayned of the King of Suetia, by whose counsel and direction he made war
against the Finlanders and subdued the^, whereby the whole country of Finland
was converted to the Christian faith and he became their Apostle. He was
afterward slain by the Paga^ people of the same Country, being stoned to
death, about the year of Christ, one thousand, one hundred fifty and one. His
body was afterward translated to Opslo, and there kept in his Cathedral Church
until the days of Martyn Luther, when as his sacred Relics were profaned,
beaten to dust, and cast into the air

F The twentieth Day.
AT Ramsey-Abbey in the I Will of Ely the Co^memoratio^ of S. Elsled Virgin and
Abbess, *
who descended of a noble family, and daughter to Ethelwold an Earl in the
Province of the Rob. Buckla^d in eius vita ex Antiquis monumentis
East Angles, after her Fathers death, conte^ned all worldly and transitory
preferme^ts, and became a Nun in the Monastery of Ramsey, which her said
Father had lately founded, under the Gouerme^t of S. Merwyne then Abbess
thereof, after whose descease, and Elwyne Monast. Rams. in vitis SS. Mulieru^
Angl. page 242.
that succeeded her, she was chosen Gouernesse of that house, and confirmed in
office by holy King Edgar of blessed memory, wherein she so excelled in all kind
of virtue, works of mercy, and Monastical discipline, that her name was
famous throughout England, both alive and dead. It happened upon a time, before
she was chosen Abbess, that being in the Church at Mattins, before day, with
the rest of her sisters, and going into the midst according to the custom,
to read a lesson, the candle wherewith she saw to read, cha^ced to be put out,
and thereupon wanting light, there came from the fingers of her right hand such
an exceeding brightness upon the sudden, that not only herself, but all the
rest of the Quire also might read by it. Another time also it fell out (her
charity being so exceeding great and bountiful toward the poor) that through
the large relief of the needy, her coffers were greatly emptied, in so much
that the Procuratour of the house, did check her somewhat sharply for excessive
lauishnes. She with many tears, was silent and made moan to her supreme Lord,
craving his assistance herin: And her prayers were not in vain. For the empty
chestes were again miraculously filled as before by Gods gracious recompense
and approbation of her charitable beneficence and liberality. She died in all
sanctimony and holiness of life: about the year of Christ nyne-hundred
fourscore and twelve, and was buried in our B. Ladies Church of the same
Monastery, which her Father had also built.

G The one and twentieth Day.
AT Virdune in France the deposition of S. Malcalline Abbot and Confessor, who
being an Irishman by birth, and descended of a noble stock, went over into
Append. ad Cron. Frodoar. Abb. Arnold. VVion l. 3. ligni vitae in Mart. Bened.
hac die.
France in his youth; and there entering into a Monastery, became first a monk
of the order of S. Benedict, and afterward was made Abbot of Michells at
Virdune, where in very great sanctity of life and other virtues, especially in
the exercise of Monastical discipline, in a good old age, he gave up his soul
to rest, about the year of Christ, nine hundred threescore and eighteen. His
body was buried in the same Monastery, where the same is yet preserved with
great honor and veneration of the inhabitants therabout.

A The two and twentieth Day. *

AT Winchester in Hampshire the Commemoration Matthew. West. an. 1045. in hist.
Angl
of S. Brituald Confessor and Bishop of that Sea, who of a monk of the
venerable order of S. Benedict, was ordained Bishop of Winchester; In which
dignity after Pol. Vir. l. 8. Arnold. VVion l. 2. ligni vitae in Catalog.
Epis^op. VVintonienfium.
he had continued for many years, full of singular virtue and holiness of life,
he ended his venerable old days, about the year of Christ, one thousand and
forty. He lived in the beginning of King Edward the Confessors reign; of
whom it is written, that he had a miraculous revelation, how that he saw the
said King Edward, being yet in his Mothers womb, elected King, crowned and
anointed by S. Peter the Apostle, and ordained to reign four and twenty
years, and finally to die without issue. Moreover in that vision he seeming to
demand of S. Peter, who should reign next after him, it was answered him
again, That the Kingdom of England was Gods Kingdom, and he then would
provide a King for it. His body was buried at Winchester, whereat many
miracles, by his merits, are recorded to have been wrought.

B The three and twentieth Day.
AT Mailros upon the Riuer-banke of *
Tyne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, the Commemoration of S. Boysill
Confessor and Abbot of that famous Monastery, Ven. Bed. in vita S. Cuthber.
cap. 6. and 8.
wherein S. Cuthbert was brought up, and under whom he first put on his
Religious habit, whose great holiness of life, and singular virtues especially
in the gift of Prophesy, have been famous in times past Et lib. 4. cap. 27. and
lib. 5. cap. 10. hist. Angl.
throughout our whole Island. And when he had for many years most exemplarly
governed that Monastery, being by an angel admonished of his death, he
joyfully departed this transitory life, about the year of Christ, six hundred
threscore and ten and was buried in the same Manastery. Cuthbert succeeding him
in his office.

C The four and twentieth Day.
AT Beneuentum in Italy the passion of S. Sophias Bishop and Martyr, who being
a noble Britan by birth and son to Guelleicus Io. Capg. in Catal. Sanctoru^
Britan. Antiq. Monume^ta Ec. Beneue^t. Triu^ph. Eccl. Col. Anglic. Romae.
King of North Wales, became first a monk, and then Abbot of a Monastery,
which himself had built in Wales with his own inheritance; and lastly having
been three times at Jerusalem to visit the holy sepulcher of Christ, and scauen
times at Rome on pilgrimage, was for his known virtues and innocence of life,
created Bishop of Beneuentum in Italy, where standing at the altar at Mass,
was by a wicked fellow in hatred of Christian belief thrust through the body
with a lauce, and so received a crown of Martyrdom about the year of Christ,
four hundred and nynty, and in the reign of King Arthur of Brittany, whose
Kinseman he is said to have been. Ex anti. Monum. Prou. Monum. and in vita S.
Keyn. Virg. apud R. Buckla^d, de vit. SS. Mulierum Angl.


THE same day in Monmouthshire, the festiuity of S. Cadocke Martyr, nephew to
Bragham King of Brecknocke, and Cosyn to S. David Bishop of Meneuia, whose
memory is famous, even until this day in our Island of Great Brittany,
especially in the forsaid Province of Mo^mouth in South Wales, where there are
yet remaining Churches and Chappells dedicated in his honor. He suffered about
the year of Christ 500.

D The five and twentieth Day.
THE Conversion of the glorious Apostle S. Paul, by whom our Island of great
Theodoret. in Epist. ad Tim. and in Psalm. 116. and lib. 9. de cura^d. Graec.
affect. Sophron. Sermon. de Natal. Apost. Arnol. Mirma^. in Theat.
Brittany has received no small favor. For that according to diverse ancient
writers, in the fourth year of Nero the Emperor his reign (the Jews being
by his Edict banished Rome) he personally came into Brittany, and there
preached the faith of Christ. Venantius Fortunatus a most holy and learned man
writing above a thousand years agone of S. Paul's perigrination, says of him:
Transijt Oceanum, vel qua facit Insula portum,
Quasque Britannus habet oras, atque vltima Thule.


After this he returned again to Rome where at last both S. Peter and
himself, on one, and the self same day, received the reward of their labors,
by Martyrdom, in the year of Christ, threescore and nine.

THE same day in Ireland the Commemoration *
of S. Eoglodius Monk and Confessor, who descended of a noble parentage
Hector Boet. de gest. Sco. Ioa^. Lest. in hist. Scot. and alij.
in that Kingdom, and disciple to S. Columbe the Great, came with him over
into Scotland, and was his coadiutor in teaching and preaching the Christian
faith to the Pictes, that then inhabited that Country, where famous for
sanctity of life, and other virtues, finally rested in our Lord, about the
year of Christ, four hundred fourscore and seven.

E The six and twentieth Day.
AT Barking in Essex the Commemoration *
of S. Theorithgid Virgin, who descended of a very noble British stock,
became a Bed. in hist. Ge^t. Angl. l. 4. cap. 9. Molan. in appe^d. ad vsuar.
Religious woman in the Monastery of the forsaid town of Barking under the
care of S. Edilburge the first Abbess thereof, and sister to S. Erconwald
Bishop of London, who had newly founded that Abbey; where in great sanctimony
of life, and fervor of spirit, she gave up her blessed soul to her heavenly
spouse, about the year of Christ, six hundred seauenty and eight: unto whom
S. Edilburge appearing, as she lay on her deathbed, told her, with most sweet
and comfortable words, that the time now drew near, that she should be
delivered out of the prison of this world, into the joys of eternal bliss.

F The seven and twentieth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. *
Palladius Bishop and Confessor, who being a Roman by birth, was sent thither
in the year, four hundred and eleven, by Prosp. in Chron. an. Dom. 431. and
434 Bed. l. 1. cap. 13. Baron. tom. 4. Annal. an 429.
Pope Celestine, to reduce that Nation from certain errors and heresies, which
Pelagius the Brittan had sowed among them; where being ordained Bishop and
Primate of Scotland, he instructed the people for many years in all good
learning and other Catholic cerimonyes, according to the Roman use; and
lastly full of venerable old age, in great sanctity and holiness of life, he
gave up his soul to rest, about the year of Christ, four hundred and forty.

G The eight and twentieth Day.
IN the i will of VVight in Hampshire, the Commemoration of the Saints called *
Arwaldi, Brothers and Martyrs, who being two noble young men, descended of the
blood Royal of the South Saxons, and brothers Ve^. Beda lib. 4. Histor. Angl.
c. 16. Matthew. West. an. 687.
to the King of that Island, were taken prisoners by Ceadwall King of the
Geuisses and VVestsaxons who being but newly baptized, were by him commanded to
be slain in the year of Christ, six hundred fourscore and seven. Their
bodies were decently, interred in a Church of that Province by S. Cymber Abbot
of Redford in Hampshire, by whom they had a little before been baptized and
instructed in the Christian faith, whereat in sign of their Innocence, it
pleased God forthwith to work miracles.

A The nine and twentieth Day.
IN Cornwall the deposition of S. Gildas Confessor Pol. Vir. l. 1. hist. Angl.
Gul. Neubrig. in hist. Mart. Romans Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. and alij hac die.
and Abbot of Bangor in North Wales, who after he had written many famous
books as well for the illustratio^ of the Universal, as our Primitive Church
of Brittany, became an Eremite, and lead a most strict, and severe kind of life
in the mountains of Cornwall, where full of venerable old years he rested in
our Lord, about the year of Christ 581. He is famous yet among the Cornishmen
of England especially for his writings, amgonst whom also there have been many
Churches and altars dedicated, in his honor.

B The thirtith Day.
AT Fulda in the higher Germany the deposition Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. ord.
D. Benedict. l. 3. cap. 244. Pet. Cratepol. de Epis. Germ. VVion in Mart. Bened.
of S. Amnichade Confessor, who descended of a noble parentage in Scotland,
forsook the world, went over the sea, and travailing into Germany, at last
became a monk in the Monastery of Fulda, which had been founded by S. Bonisace
an Englishman, for the Scottish nation; where living a most Godly and exemplar
life, when he was ready to die, a great light was seen, and Angelical voices
heard in his Cell, the which continued a long time after at his Sepulcher, and
were heard of all that came to visit it. He died about the year of Christ, one
thousand forty and three: and lies buried at Fulda in the forsaid Monastery.

C The one and thirtith Day
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Adaman Priest and Confessor, who being
Prefect of the Monastery of Nuns Bed. l. 4. histo. Angl. cap. 25.
in the town of Coludon (now called Coldingham) in the Marches of Scotland,
was of such rare and singular austerity of life, that it is written of him,
that he tasted meat but only twice in the week, to Tritem. de vir. Illustr.
l. 3. cap. 124. Ioa^. Lesl. Epi. Ros. l. 4. de gest. Scot.
wit, Sundays and Thursdayes; and often spent whole days and nights in prayer
and contemplation, until his dying day; which happened about the year of
Christ, six hundred and fourscore. This man is different from the other S.
Adaman of the same name, that instructed the Scottishmen, about the observation
of Easter, whose festiuity is put down afterward upon the second day of
September.

THE MONTH OF FEBRVARY.
D The first Day.
IN Ireland the deposition Laur. Dunel. in eius vita apud Sur. tom. 1. Catal.
Scripto. Britan. Marian. Scotus in Chronic. Girald. Cambr. in Histor. Chron.
Hyber. Romans Martyr. Mol. and alij omnes hac. die.
of S. Brigit Virgin, borne in the County of Kildare in a town called Fochart,
who in testimony of her virginity, touching the wood of an Altar, the same
presently in the sight of many people, became green again, and began to bud
forth a fresh: and after many other miracles done, in sign of her sanctimony
and innocence of life, she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse about the
year of Christ, five hundred and forty. There was a fair Church erected in
her honor in the City of London, which until this day is yet remaining,
commonly called S. Brides, as also many others both in England, Ireland and
Scotland. And in the i will of Man, where it is recorded that somtymes she lived,
there is an ancient Town and Church of her Name, still retayning the vulgar
denomination of S. Brides. Her body was interred at the Town of Dunne, in the
Province of Vlster, in the tomb, together with the venerable bodies of S.
Patricke and and S. Columbe, which was afterward miraculously reueyled to the
Bishop of that place, as he was praying one night late in the Church, about the
year of Christ 1176. over which, there shined a great light: Of whom one
writes thus. In Aliter. Hitres in Duno, etc.
Burgo Duno, tumulo tumulantur in vno,
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius
The same Monument was afterward destroyed in the reign of K. Henry the eight,
by the Lord Leonard Gray Viceroy or Deputy of that Kingdom, to the great
lamentation of all Ireland.

E The second Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Laurence Confessor and Bishop of that
Sigeb. in Chron. Bed. l. 2. hist. Angl. cap. 4. 6. and 7. Matthew. West. in
hist. Pol. Vir. l. 2. cap. 4. 6. 7. Sur. tom. 1. de vit. SS.
Sea, who coming into England with S. Augustine and his fellows to preach the
Christian faith, succeeded him in his Sea of Canterbury, which when he had
governed most worthily, for diverse years, in great sanctity and holiness of
life, he rested in our Lord, about the year of Christ, six hundred and
seauenteene, and was buried in the Porch of the Church at Canterbury, near to
the body of S. Augustine, at whose tomb, it pleased God afterward to work
many miracles.

THE same day at Hohemburge in the higher Germany, the deposition of S.
Burchard Bishop and Confessor, brother to S. Swithin of Winchester, who being
first a monk in England, went over into Germany to S. Egilwardus in eius vita
apud Sur. tom. 5. 14. October. VVion in Notis ad Mart. Bened. 14. October.
Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, and thence to Rome, where by Pope Zachary he was
consacrated Bishop of VVirtzburgh in Franconia, and sent to that Sea: where
after he had spent forty years in propagating the Christian faith, ended his
blessed days in a monastery at Hohemburge, which himself had founded, about
the year of Christ, seven hundred fourscore and eleven.

F The third Day.
AT Hamburge near Ely in Cambridgshire, the deposition of S. VVereburge
Virgin, daughter to VVulherus King of Mercia, who despising all worldly
delights, became a Religious woman in the Monastery of Nuns at Ely, under S.
Audry her aunt, and Author Co^tinua. hist. ven. Bed. Vincent. in spec. l. 5.
cap. 28. Rob. Buckl. in eius vita lib. M. S. de vitis SS. mulier. Angl. Stous
in Annal. sub Gul. Rufo. anno. 5.
Abbess thereof, where in all kind of exemplar good life and sanctimony, she
gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse in the year of Christ, six hundred
seauenty and five. Upon her deathbed she commanded her body to be buried at
Hamburge, but contrary to her will it was carried to the Monastery of
Trickingham, where the gates fast locked, the same was kept and watched very
carefully. But see a wonder. They which were appointed to watch the same, fell
into a deep sleep, so as the people of Hamburge coming in the night for the
body, the gates, both of the Monastery and Church, were opened of themselves
without men's hands; and taking it away without any resistance, they interred it
at Hamburge, as before her death she requested. The same being taken up again,
nine years after her death, was found altogether vncorrupt, her very garments
not so much as any whit perished: where God testifying her Holiness by many
miracles, was thereby greatly glorified in this his Virgin. It is recorded that
her body was afterward translated to Chester, where in the time of K. William
Rusus was erected a goodly Monastery in her honor, by Sir Hugh Lupus Earl of
Chester, and S. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year of Christ 1092

G The fourth Day.
AT Sempingham in Lincolneshire the deposition of S. Gilbert Confessor, who
Molan. in ad^ it. ad (...). ar. Gul. Neubrig. l. 1. cap. 16 Arnold. Wion in
Martyr. (...). and alij ^^es hac die.
descended of an honorable parentage, was the first founder of the Order of
Religous men in England called Gilbertines, where he built thirteen
Monasteryes of that order, to wit, eight of women, and five of men. And after a
most godly and sainctly life, full of venerable old years, he departed this
world, about the year of Christ one thousand one hundred and fifty. His body
was buried in the said Monastery of Sempingham near Deeping in Lincolnshire,
where for a long time it was kept with great veneration, for the often Miracles
that were wrought thereat:

THE same day at Huncourt in the Territory of Cambray in Hennalt, the passion
of Mola(...)n addit. ad vsuar. and in Indic. SS. Belgij Hereb. in sastis SS.
S. Liephard Bishop and Martyr, who borne in our island of Great Brittany, and
there made Bishop in her primitive Church, went on pilgrimage to Rome, and in
his return homward four miles from Cambray, was slain by certain pagan
thieves. His feast is celebrated in the Church of Cambray on this day with an
office of three lessons.

A The fifth Day.
AT Lewis in Sussex the deposition of S. John Confessor, of the Order of
Chanons-Regular, whose integrity of life and holy Conversation has been famous
in Herebertus in fastis SS. hac die.
times past, both at home and abroad. His life is extant in written hand in a
Monastery of the Low Countries, as testifies the Reverend Father Herebertus
Rosweydus of the Society of Jesus in the preface to his work entitled, Fasti
Sanctorum, whose festiuity he puts down on this day.

THe same day at Glastenbury in Somersetshire *
the Co^memoration of S. Indractus Martyr, who descended of the bloud-royall of
Ireland and coming thence on pilgrimage to Glastenbury in England, with a
further intention Gul. Malmes. in eius vita. Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Britania.
to visit Rome, was with nine other Companions, and his own sister, called
Drusa, slain at Stapwich in the same Province by certain wicked fellows of
the VVestsaxons, about the year of Christ, seven hundred and eight, whose
bodies, being brought to Glastenbury Abbey with great solemnity, were there
very honorably interred, whereat it pleased God, in token of their Innocence to
work Miracles.

B The sixth Day.
AT Rome the Commemoration of Blessed *
Inas King of the VVestsaxons and Confessor, who leaving the care of his Pol.
Vir. (...). 4. (...). cap. 5. Matthew. West. an. Dom. 727. O^l. Malmes. derebus
gestis Regu^ Ang. in Ina. Arnol. VVion l. 4. ligni vitae. Io. Sto. in Anna.
Angl de regno VVestsaxonum. ^abulae Eccl. S. Petri Romae.
Kingdom to his kinsman Ethelhard, went to Rome, where he erected a Schole for
the English nation, as also a fair Church thereto belonging in honor of our
blessed Lady, near to the hospital of Sanctus Spiritus, in the Burgo or
suburbs of S. Peter's, both which were afterward consumed by fire. He was the
first King of our nation, that ordained throughout his Dominions, that every
family should once a year give a penny to the Church of Rome, in honor of S.
Peter the Apostle, which contribution continued ever since, even until our
days, commonly called by the name of Peter Pence. He founded the Abbey of
Wells with the Cathedral Church, dedicating the same to God and S. Andrew the
Apostle. He new builded also the Abbey of Glastenbury, which was the fourth
building of that Monastery. Besides, the said Godly King did there in like
manner, erect a Chapel, plated all over with silver and guilt, with ornaments
also and vessels (says the Story) of gould and silver. To the building of
which Chapp^^^, ne gau^, in weight, two thousand six hundred forty pounds of
silver; and to the altar, two hundred thr^escore and four pounds of gold: A
Chalice with the patin, ten pound of gold: a Censar eight pound: two
candlesticke^, twelve pound and a half of silver: a cover for the Missall, or
(as then they used to call it) the Ghospell-booke, twenty pounds: vessels for
wine and water to the a^tar, thirty pounds of gold: a holy water pot, twenty
pound of silver: Images of our Savior, our Bl. Lady, and the twelve Apostles,
one hundred threescore and fifteen pound of silver, and twenty eight pound of
gold: A pall for the altar, and ornaments for the Monks of gold and pret^ous
(...)nes curiously wrought. All which he gave (says the Author) to that
Monastery; but the same was afterward in this last age, by commandment of K.
Henry the eight, defaced, spoiled, and robbed of all the forsaid, and infinite
other treasure. And after all this, the forsaid King Inas going in person to
Rome, and performing the things above mentioned, took finally upon him the
habit of a Monk, where in great sanctity and holiness of life, he ended his
blessed days, about the year of Christ 727. and was there buried in the
entrance of S. Peter's Church, as the ancient Tables and Records thereof do
declare.

C The seventh Day.
AT Luca in Italy the depos^tion of S. Richard King and Conf^ssour, son to
Lotharius King o^ Kent, who, sor the love of Sur tom. (...). vi^. SS. Democh.
l. 2. de sa(...)if. Mis s(...). Mart. Romans Wi(...) l. 4. ^igni (...) Mola^. and
^ij ^nes hac die.
Christ, taking upon him a long peregrination, went to Rome for d^notion to
that Sea, and in his way homward, died at Luca, about the year of Christ,
seven hundred and fifty, where his body is kept until this day with great
veneration, in the Oratory or Chapel of S. Frigidian, and a^orned with an
Epitaph both in verse and pros^. That in verse is this.

Hi^ Rex Richardus requiescit Sceptriser almus;
Rex suit Anglorum, regnum tenet ille Pol^rum:
Regnum dimisit, pro Christo cuncta reliquit
Ergo Richardum nobis dedit Anglia Sanctum.
Hic genitor Sanctae Walburgis Virginis almae,
Et Willebaldi Sancti, simul and Winibaldi;
Suffragijs quorum det nobis regna Polorum.
The same day at ^ondo the deposition of S. Augulus Bishop and Martyr, who in
the persecution of Dioclesian the Emperor, for peaching the Christian faith in
our Island Martyr Romans Marcel lin. l. 28. Calend. se^. us(...)m Saru^ and Molan.
hac die.
of Great Brytany, was put to death, by the enemies of truth, about the year
of Christ three hundred and five, a little after the death of S. Alban.

IN like manner the same day at Rhemes in ^rance the Translation of S Helena
Mother to Constantine the Great, who borne in Colchester of Essex, according to
the ancient traditions of the Britans, and daughter to Sigeb. (...) Chron. 849.
Almannus Monach. de eius Translat. Molan in addit. ad Vsuard. hac die M^nalog.
Grae. 21. Maij.
Coclus Prince of Britany, was famous for building of Churches in honor of
Christ, and his Saints. She died at Rome when she was fourscore years of age,
and was afterward on this day translated to Rhemes, where her sacred relics
are kept with great veneration. Her Memory has been very famous in times past
in the Greek Church, whose celebrity is there kept upon the 22. of May,
together with her Son Constamine.

D The eight Day.
AT Strenshalt in the Kingdom of the *
Northumbers, the Commemoration of of S. Edelsled Virgin and Abbess, daughter
to Oswyn King of the same Province, who, by her Father being dedicated unto God
for a famous victory, which he obtained against the cruel Penda King of the
Mercians, was committed Bed. l. 4. cap. 26. VVion. l. 4. ligni vitae. Ingulph.
de Croyland. Hereb. Rosweyd in fast. SS.
for her education to S. Hilda Abbess of a Monastery amongst the Northumbers,
called Hartesey; and when she came to riper years, she founded for her self
another Nunry in the same Kingdom, called Strenshalt, and was made Abbess
thereof, where in all kind of profound humility and sanctity of life, joined
with other virtues, she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse, about the
year of Christ six hundred and seauenty. Her body was buried in the same
Monastery, whereat for many ages following it pleased God to work wondrous
miracles.

E The ninth Day.
IN the territory of Liege in the lower Germany, the passion of S. Menigold
Martyr, Mola^. in Indi^ulo SS. Belgij and in addit. ad Vsuard. hac die.
who borne in England, and descended of a very noble parentage, became first a
Captain in the French and German wars, and afterward an Eremite; unto whom
Arnulph the Emperor gave a little territory near to the bank of the river of
Mosa, where he built himself a cottage or Oratory for his devotion. And as he
was going one day to the Church, was slain in hatred of Christian says, by
certain notorious malefactors and enemies thereof, about the year of Christ,
nine hundred. His body was afterward translated to Huis, near Cull^n, upon the
fifteenth day of lune, where together with the body of S. Domitian Bishop, the
same is kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants of that place.

F The tenth Day.
AT Wiccij
Worcester the Translation of S. Wilfrid the second of that name, Confessor
and Bishop of York, whose great sanctity and holiness of life it pleased God to
manifest by the incorruption of h^s body, which being reueyled to S. Oswald
Bishop of Worcester to remain interred in the Monastery of Rippon in
Yorkshire, then decayed and destroyed by the Danes, was by him sought for and
found whole and incorrupt, together with the venerable bodies of sieve Reverend
Abbots, Tilbert, Borwyn, Ven. Bed. l. 5. cap. 24. and in Epitome. Sur. to. 5.
in Vita S. Oswaldi 1^. October. and alij.
Albert, Sygred and Walden; all which S. Oswald translated to his Cathedral
Church of Worcester, and there with great veneration and honor interred them,
whereat it pleased God also in sign of their sanctity to work miracles. He
died about the year of Christ seven hundred and thirty. This S. Wilfrid is
different from the other of the same name, whose festiuity is kept upon the 12.
of October.

G The eleventh Day.
AT Tire in Syria the Commemoration *
of Blessed William Bishop and Confessor, who being an Englishman by birth,
became first a monk of the venerable Order Gul. Tyrius lib. 13 cap. 23. and l.
4. cap. 11. wion^ l. 2. ligni vitae, in Catal. Epis. Tyriensium.
of S. Benedict, and was afterward sent into Palestine, and made Prior of the
Monastery of the holy Sep(...)er in Jerusalem: And in the year of Christ one
thousand, one hundred and thirty, he was consecrated the first Archbishop of
Tire in Syria: which function when he had inioyed six years, in all sanctity
of life and virtuous conversation, he ended there his happy days, in the year
of our Lord, one thousand one hundred thirty and seven.

THE same day in Breckneckshire of Wales *
the Commemoration of S. Canoch Confessor, Rob. Buckl. l. M. S. de vitis SS.
Mulieru^ Anglie. in vita S. Keynae virg. fol. 90.
who being son to Braghan King of Brecknocke, and great Uncle to S. David
Bishop of Men^^ia, was very famous for holiness of life in those parts, about
the year of Christ four hundred fourscore and twelve, and whose memory is yet
famous amongst the ancient Britans of our Island, especially in South wales. He
had a brother called S. Cadocke, that was a Martyr, and a sister named S.
Keyn^, who lived about the same time, in great opinion of sanctity, as the
Records of their lives yet extant, do demonstrate.

A The twelfth Day.
AT Durham in the Bishopric, the Commemoration o^ S. ^dilwald Bishop and *
Confessor, who being first a m^n^e then T^item. l. 4. d^vir. Illustr. ord. D.
Benedict. cap. 179. Matthew. West. an. 738. VVion. 2. ligni vitae.
Abbot of the Monastery of Mailros in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, was
lastly promoted to the Bishopicke of Lindisserne (now translated to Durham) and
succeeded S. Edbert in that Sea; which when he had governed, like a worthy
pastor of his flock, for almost forty years, in great sanctity of life and
virtues thereto agreeable, full of venerable old years, he finally reposed in
our Lord, in the year of Christ, seven hundred thirty and eight: and was
buried at Lindisserne.

B The thirteenth Day.
AT ^ly in Cambridgshire the deposition of S. Ermenild Queen, wise to
VVulherus King of Mercia, who after the death of her Matthew. west. an. Do. 676.
Vincent. in specul.
husband, became a Religious woman in the Monastery of Ely, under her own
Mother S. Sexburge, who at that time was Abbess thereof and after her said
Mothers descease, Litaniae sec. vsum Sarun. Mola^. in ad^it ad Vsuard. hhc ^ie.
she was elected in her place, where famous for sanctimony and holiness of life,
she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, six
hundredthreescore and eighteen.

ALso the same day at Herbipolis.
VVirtzburgh in Germany, the Translation of S. K^lian Bishop and Martyr, who
descended of the blood royal of Ireland, for the love he bare to his
Neighbor-countries, came thence Petrus Gaseli(...). in suo Martyrologio hac
die. Democh. l. de sacrif Missae cap. 35. tomo 2. wion in Martyr. Bened.
with three other Companio^s into Flaunders, and so went into Germany, where he
was ordained Bishop of VVirtzburgh: which Sea when he had held for few years,
diligently attending to his flock, he was slain, together with his three
forsaid Companions, by the enemies of Christian says in the year of Christ,
six hundred fourscore and seauenteene. His body being buried at VVirtzburgh,
was afterward on this day taken up, and translated to a more eminent place of
the same Church, where before it lay; but his principal festiuity is
celebrated upon the eight day of July.

C The fourteenth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Con^^ane Confessor, who borne in the *
(...)e Kingdom, and des^^nded of a noble parentage, d^spised all pleasures of
this world, and retyring himself to a Monastery, became a Religious man of the
Order of S. Io. Lest. Epis. R^ssens^. 4. de gest. Scot. Arnol. wion in addit.
ad l. 3. lig^i vit^.
Benedict in one of the Islands of Or^ades near Scotland, where in all kind of
exemplar good life, learning and virtuous conversation, in a good old age,
ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ, six hundred and forty. His
memory has by^ famous, even until th^se our days, throughout the whole Island
of Great Britany, but especially amongst the Scottish nation: amongst whom
also, diverse Churches and altars have in times past, been erected and dedicated
in his honor.

D The fifteenth Day.
AT Vexouia in Goth-land the deposition of S. Sigfride Bishop and Confessor,
who being Archdeacon of the Church of York, was sent by King Alfred of England
into Gothia, to preach to the pagan people of that Country, whom he converted
to the Christian faith, together with their King Joan. and Olaus Magnus in
hist. Goth. l. 7 cap. 16. 19 and 20. Molan in addit. ad Vsuard. hac die
Olaus, and so became their Apostle. He was afterward made Bishop of Vexo^ia
and Metropolitan of Goth^a, which Sea when he had governed most worthily for
many years in great sanctity and holiness of life, full of venerable old age,
he went to rest in our Lord, about the year of Christ, one thousand and two,
and was buried in his own Cathedral Church of Vexouia, where his body was
kept with great honor and veneration of that nation, for the miracles that
were wrought thereat, until these later years of schisms and heresies in
those Provinces.

E The sixteenth Day.
AT VVerdt in Cleeu-land the deposition of S. Tancone Bishop and Martyr, who
Joan. L(...)s Episcop. Ros. l. 5. de gest. Scot. Cranz. in Metrop. cap. 22. l.
1. VVion hac die in Martyr. Bened.
borne of a noble blood in Scotland, was first a monk, and then Abbot of a
Monastery in the same Kingdom, called Amarbaricke, and being very desirous to
help his neighbour-Countreys for their souls health, went over into Flaunders,
and thence into Cleeu-land, and there was made Bishop of VVerdt, where
preaching continually and propagating the Christian faith, he was at last
slain by the barbarous and incredulous people of that Province in hatred
thereof, about the year of Christ, eight hundred. His body was buried at VVerdt.

F The seventeenth Day.
AT Lindisferne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, the depos^tion of S. Finan
Beda l. 3. hist. Angl cap. 21. 22 and 25. Gul. Malmes. in histor. Martyr. Romans
Molan. and alij omnes. hac ^ie.
Bishop and Confessor, who being first a monk of S. Columbes M^nast^ry in the
Island of Hoy by Scotland, was ordained Bishop of Lindisferne, and succeeded S.
Aidan that Sea, where in all kind of godly conversation and sanctity of life,
he ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ, six hundred and
threescore. He is called the Apostle of the Mercians (or middle Englishmen) by
whose endeauours in preaching, a great part of that Kingdom was first
converted to Christian faith, together with their Prince Peda, son to the
notable persecutor Penda, who with many great Larles and Lords of Mercia, was
at the in^^ance of holy King Oswyn of Northumberland, by him baptized, at Ad
Murum.
Barwicke, as S. Bid and other English Historiographers do recount. There are
many Churches both in England and Scotland dedicated in his honor.

G The eighteenth Day.
AT Saltzburge in Bauaria the Commemoration *
of S. John Confessor and Bishop of that Sea, who being a monk of an old
Monastery near VVinchelsea in Sussex, went Joan. Tri tem. lib. 4 cap. 105.
wion l. 2. ligni vitae in Catal. Epis. Saltzburg.
over into Germany to S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, with whom he remained
for a time, and after going to Rome, was by Pope Gregory the third created the
first Bishop of Saltzburge, and sent thither: which sea when he had most
worthily governed and preached the Christian faith for fourteen years
together, and brought many thousands to the true worship of God, in great
sanctity of life and venerable old age, he ended his blessed days, about the
year of Christ seven hundred fifty and seven, and was buried in his own
Cathedral Church of Saltzburge.

A The ninteenth Day.
AT Hagustalde in the Kingdom of the *
Northumbers, the Commemoration of S. Acca Confessor and Bishop of that Sea,
who being one of S. VVillebrord his coadiutors, Bed. l. 5. cap. 21. 22 23. and
24.
and going over with him into Saxony and Frizeland for the conversion of those
nations; was sent back again into England Matthew. West. an. 734. and 792.
Mola^. ^n Indi^u^o SS. Belgij
to the Consecration of S. Switbert, and there detayned and ordained Bishop of
Hagustalde, by S. Wilfrid the second of York: which pastoral function when
he had most worthily performed for many years, in great sanctity of life and
godly conversation, full of venerable old age, he reposed in our Lord, about
the year of Christ, seven hundred thirty and six.

B The twentieth Day.
IN the i will of Thanet in Kent the deposition of S. Mildred Virgin, daughter to
Merualdus King of Mercia, who contemning the vain Pol. Vir. l. 4. histo. Angl.
M^l^n. in (...). ^d Vsuard. Rob. B(...)l. in ^ius vita l. M. S. page 150.
pleasures of this world, went over, in her tender years, into France, and
there dedicated her self to God in a Monastery of Virgins, at Kale; but
afterward returning into England, and gathering together seauenty other
Virgins, was consecrated Abbess of a new Monastery erected in the i will of
Thanet, by S. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, where famous for sa^ctimony of
life, and miracles, she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse, about the
year of Christ, six hundred threscore and four. The forsaid Monastery was
afterward burned by the Danes, with many others in our Island. There is yet to
be seen a fair Church dedicated in her honor in London in the Poultry,
commonly called S. Mildreds; as also an old Chapel yet standing, erected
likewise in her honor in a village or Flaunders called Milan, three miles
distant from the City of S. Omers.

THE same day at Haselburrow in Wilsthire the deposition of S. aliter wilfrick.
Vlfricke Confessor and Eremite, whose wonderful life in prayer and
abstinence, together with working of Miracles, was very famous throughout
England about the year of Christ, one Math. west. and Paris. in historijs ad
^mu^ Do. 1154.
thousand one hundred fifty and four, about which time also he died; and was
buried in a little Oratory at the forsaid village of Haselburrow, which
himself had built, at whose body many miracles are recorded to have been
wrought.

C The one and twentieth Day.
IN the I Will of Wight in Hampshire the commemoration *
of S. Cymbert Bishop and Confessor, who being a monk of the venerable Order
of S. Benedict, and Abbot of the Monastery of Redford in the same Province, was
in the reign of Ethelhard King of the Ve^. Beda l. 4. cap. 16. Trit. l. 4. c.
178*
VVestsaxons ordained Bishop, and placed in the ^le of VVight, where he
confirmed the people in the Christian faith, which S. Arnol. wion l. 2. ligni
Vitae.
Wilfrid of York, had there planted some twenty years before, in the time
of his banishment from that Sea, where in all kind of most godly conversation
and sanctity of li^e, he gave up his blessed soul to rest, about the year of
Christ, seven hundred and thirty.

D The two and twentieth Day.
AT Gaunt in Flaunders the Translation of S. Gudwall Bishop and Confessor, who
Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. 6. It^^ij. Sigeb. in Chron. an. 958. Sur. to. 3. in
vit. SS.
being a noble Britan by birth, and ordained Bishop in that Primitive Church,
preached incessantly the faith of Christ with great profit in our Island. He
built many Monasteryes and became himself a Father of an hundred and fourscore
monks. And after all this, thirsting the good of his Neighbor-countries, he
went over into the lower Germany, and there taught the Christian faith in like
manner, with no less profit then in Britany. And last of all, full of
venerable old age, in great sanctity and holiness of life, he rested in our
Lord, about the year of Christ, three hundred and forty, and was one of the
first of our Island that preached the Christian faith in Flaunders. His body
having been brought into England, was afterward on this day, in the second
persecution of the Danes, translated to Gaunt by Arnulph Earl of Flaunders,
and S. Gerard Abbot, in the year of Christ, nine hundred and threescore. Where
the same is still preserved with great veneration of the Inhabitants.

E The three and twentieth Day.
AT Monasterium ^^nelockense.
VVenlocke in Shropshire the Translation of S. Milburge Virgin, daughter to
Merualdus Prince of Mercia, whose great sanctimony and innocence of life, it
pleased God Gotzel. Monac. in ^ius vi^a. Ma. west. an. Do. 676. Pol. Vir. l. 4.
histo. Vincent. in specul. l. 25. Petr. in Catal. Gul. Malmes. in hist. Angl.
and alij omnes ^ac die.
to manifest unto the world, after her departure, by the manifold miracles
wrought at her body, which being miraculously revealed to a certain godly man,
in the reign of K. William the Co^querour, was taken up, and found sound and
vncorrupt to the admiration of the behoulders; and being put into a costly
shrine, was kept in the Monastery of VVenlocke, which she had built with her
own inheritance, until the time of King Henry the eight, when the same was
destroyed. She departed to our Lord about the year of Christ, six hundred
threescore and four, upon the six and twentieth day of May, but her feast is
commonly celebrated on this day, both in England and other Countries. Her life
is written at large by Gotzelinus a monk of the Monastery of S. Bertin, in the
City of S. Omers in Artoys.

F The four and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury the deposion of S. Ethelbert King of Kent and Confessor, who
Bed. in Epit. and in hist. cap. 25. and deinceps. Item in hist. lib. 1. West.
Martyr. Romans Mola^. and alij o^nes hac die.
first of all other Princes in our Island, after the Britans, received the
Christian faith, by the preaching of S. Augustine and his fellows, sent from
Rome by Pope Gregory the Great. He built many goodly Churches and Monasteryes
in his dominions, and among the rest S. Augustines at Canterbury, S. Andrews
at Rochester, and S. Paul's at London. He departed this life in the year of
Christ, six hundred and sixteen, and was buried at Canterbury.

THE same day in Scotland the depositio^ of Gas^l. in catal. SS. et in M. S.
Calendar. Wion. in Martyr. Bened.
S. Berectus Confessor, who leading a Monastical life in that Kingdom, was
famous for sanctity of life and working of miracles, about the year of Christ,
seven hundred and fourteen, about which time also he ended his blessed days,
and was buried in Scotland.

G The five and twentieth Day.
AT Perone in Picardy the Translation of S. Furseus Abbot and Confessor, son
Sur. to. 1. Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 19. Ay(...)ode g^st. Fra. l. 1. c. 18. Trit. de
vir. Ill(...)st. Petr. in Catal. l. 11 cap. 130. and alij.
to K. Philtan of Ireland, who coming into England to Sigebert King of the
Eastangles, built there a Monastery, and gathered many monks together,
instructing them in all kind of virtue and good learning. And then leaving the
care thereof to his brother, called Foillan, he went over into France, and there
built another Monastery at Perone, where in his venerable old days, full of
great sanctity and holiness of life, he departed to our Lord, about the year of
Christ, six hundred and thirty. His body was buried in the same Monastery, of
whom the Monks of that place, have many particular hymns in their Office:
the which being taken up afterward, was on this day translated to a more
eminent place of the forsaid Church of Perone, where the same is kept with
great veneration, for the miracles, that are recorto have been wrought thereat.

A The six and twentieth Day.
AT Constance in the higher Germany the Commemoration of S. John Bishop and *
Confessor, who borne in Scotland, and descended there of a noble parentage,
became Bellef. in Cosmogr. Democh. de Sacr. Missae cap. 35. tomo 2. wion l. 2.
lignivitae in Catal. Epis. Constant.
in that Kingdom first a monk of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and
thence went over into France to S. Gallus Abbot, that then was famous in those
parts, of whom being thoroughly instructed in all kind of Monastical
discipline, was at last ordained Bishop of Constance, where after many years
of most approved virtue and sanctity of life, he happily reposed in our Lord,
in the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and four, and was buried in his own
Cathedral Church of Constance.

B The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Lichfield in Staffordshire the Commemoration of Blessed Sexulfe Bishop and *
Confessor, who being the first Abbot of the Monastery of Medshamsted (now
called Beda l. 3. hist. Angl Tritem. l. 4. devir.
Peterburrow) by whose persuasion VVulferus K. of Mercia had newly founded the
same, was ordained Bishop of Lindisserne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers,
and afterward Illustr. ord. D. Benedict. cap. 158. Matthew. West. an. 700.
translated to Lichfield in the place of VVinsrid that was deposed by S.
Theodore of Canterbury. In both which Seas, he most worthily behaved himself
in teaching and instructing his flock for many years: And at last full of
venerable old age, joined with sanctity of life, he departed to our Lord, about
the year of Christ, seven hundred.

THE same day in the Province of the Eastangles in the Diocese of Ely, the
Co^memoration *
of S. Alnoth Martyr, who being heardsman to S. VVereburge Abbess of the Rob.
Buckl. in vita S. Wereb. in libr. de vitis SS. Mulieru^ Anglic.
Nunry of Ely, became an Anchoret, leading a most strict and severe recluse
life for the love of God: whom when he had so served for some years, he was
slain by certain wicked thieves in hatred thereof, and so received his crown
of Martyrdom, about the year of Christ 670.

C The eight and twentieth Day.
AT York the deposition of S. Oswald Senate. Brauon. in eius vita. wion in
Mart. Bened. hac die.
Bishop and Confessor, nephew to S. Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, who being
first made Chanon of Winchester, and then Bishop of Worcester, was lastly
promoted to the Archbishopricke of York, whose godly virtues and innocence of
life, was afterward declared by the manifold miracles wrought at his body.
Amongst other works Sur. to. 5. 15. October. Calend. sec. vsum Sarum.
of Charity, he was wont every day to give dinner to twelve poor men or
pilgrims, serving them at table with his own hands, wash their feet, give them
money in alms, and always at Easter to give them new apparel. He died on
this day in the year of Christ, nine hundred fourscore and twelve, and was
afterward translated to Worcester upon the fifteenth of October, on which day
his principal festiuity is celebrated in our Catholic Church of England, of
whom also, in that place, we have made a large Relation.

THE MONTH OF MARCH.
D The first Day.
AT Meneuia in Penbrookshire Gaufr. Monum. in hist. Britonu^ Pol. virg. l. 3.
Mat. West. an. 872. Gir. Cambr. in eius vit. Breuiar. sec. vsu^ Sar. alijque
omnes hac die.
the deposition of S. David Bishop and Confessor, son to Xantus Prince of
Wales, and Uncle to the valiant, King Arthur, who was so famous for working of
miracles in his life time, that he became a great pillar, and vphoulder of the
British Primitive Church, especially in extinguishing the Relics of the
Pelagian heresy. He translated his Bishopric (which was at Carleon upon V.
ske) unto Meneuia (now called in the British tongue of his name, Twy Dewy, and
in English S. David's) where finally after he had built twelve Monasteryes, and
replenished the same with monks, being of the age of an hundred forty and six
years, he ended his blessed days, and was buried in his own Church, about
the year of Christ, five hundred fourscore and twelve. It is recorded by the
British antiquityes, that by his prayers, he obtained the heat and virtue that
the waters of Bath in Somersetshire have in curing and asswaging many deseases,
though others do assign it to have been found out long before. He was afterward
canonized for a Saint by Pope Ca(...)us the second.

THE same day at VVerdt in Cleeu-land the Marty. Romans Bed. l. 5. cap. 21. Sur.
tom. 2. vit. SS. Mola^. in Indiculo SS. Belgij Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Cranz.
Metrop. l. 1. and alij
deposition of S. Suitbert Confessor, and first Bishop of that Sea, Son to
Sigebert Earl of Nottingham, who going over into the lower Germany and thence
into Saxony and Frizland with S. VVillebrord and his company to preach the
Christian faith, was there elected Bishop of VVerdt, and sent back into
England to be consecrated; and then returning to his Sea, after much fruit
wrought in that harvest, in great sanctity and holiness of life, he reposed in
our Lord, in the year of Christ, seven hundred and seauenteene. His body is
kept at VVerdt, where he died, with great veneration of the inhabitants. He was
canonized by Pope Leo the third.

E The second Day.
AT Lichfield in Staffordshire the deposition Beda in Epit. and in hist. l. 3.
ap. 28 and deinceps. Matthew. West. an. 657. Marty. Romans and alij hac die.
of S. Chad Confenour and Bishop of that Sea, whose most exemplar life,
together with working of manifold miracles is yet famous throughout England.
The Cathedral Church (or Minster) of that City, is dedicated to our Blessed
Lady and S. Chad. There is also a Well near to the same Church, commonly
called S. Chads Well; In the bottom whereof, lies, until this day, a clear
great marble stone, whereon S. Chad was wont to kneel and pray in his Oratory;
the water of which Well, is very wholesome and sovereign for many diseases. He
died in the year of Christ, six hundred threscore and four, and lies burved
in his own Cathedral Church of Lichfield.

THE same day at VVerdt in Cleeu-land the deposition of S. Willeicke Abbot and
Marcel. in vita S. Simiberti cap. 16. Molan. in addi^. ad Vsuar. et in Indic.
SS. Belgij
Confessor, who going out of England with S Switbert and his company to preach
the Christian faith to the Pagans of the lower Germany and Saxony, was
constituted Abbot of a monastery at VVerdt, which S. Switbert had newly
founded, where after the reaping of a fertile harvest in the conversion of
infinite souls to God, full of sanctity and miracles, reposed in our Lord,
about the year of Christ 727.

F The third Day.
AT Tauracum in little Britany the deposition o^ S. VVenlocke Abbot and
Confessor, who descended of the royal blood of o^ Great Britany, and nephew
to Francanus Sur. to. 2. Molan. in addit. ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS. Belgij
wion hac die, and alij
Viceroy of that Kingdom, went over into little Britany, and was ordained Abbot
there of an ancient Monastery called Tauracum, whose li^e replenished with
sanctity and miracles, was famous, as well in our Kingdom, as in France and
Flanders, about the year of Christ, four hundred and fourscore, about which
time also he reposed in our Lord. His body was afterward translated to Gaunt in
Flanders in the Norma^ persecution, and there is kept until this day with
great veneration of the Inhabitants, for the often miracles that have been
wrought thereat.

G The fourth Day.
AT Perone in Picardy the deposition of S. Eurseu^ Abbot and Confessor, son
to Philtan King of Ireland, who coming into England to Sigebert King of the
Eastangles, built there a goodly Monastery, and filled the same with monks,
whereof himself was ordained Abbot. And then after a Sur. in eius vita. Bed. l.
3. cap. 91. histor. Aymo de gest. Fra^corum l. 1. cap. 18. wion hac die, and
alij
while leaving the care thereof to his brother Foillan, he went over into France
and built another Monastery at Perone, where in most godly and saintly exercise
of life, he died on this day, about the year of Christ, six hundred thirty and
six. His body is preserved yet in the same Monastery with great veneration for
the frequent miracles that have been wrought thereat.

A The fifth Day.
IN Northumberland the Commemoration of *
S. VVilgise Confessor, a noble man of that Province, and Father to the famous
S. VVillebrord, who casting from him the cares Alcuinus in vita S. wil^ebror.
apud Sur. tom. 6. die 7. Noue^^ris and in eius vita.
of this world, became an Eremite, leading a solitary and severe life in the
Kingdom of Northumberland, where he built him a little Cottage or Oratory in
honor of S. Andrew the Apostle, in which when he had l^ued many years, in
continual fasting, watching and prayer, full of sanctity of life, and
venerable old age, he finally went unto our Lord, about the year of Christ,
seven hundred thirty and six. S. Alcuine Master to Charles the Great, wrote
his life in Elegiacall verse, as himsel^e witnesses in the li^e of S.
Willebrord, where also in the end thereof, he recounteth a miracle wrought by S.
VVilgise, about the mu^tiplication of wine.

B The sixth Day.
AT Secking on the Rhene in the lower Joan. Lesla us Episcop. Ros. l. 4. de
rebus Scoticis. Petr. Cratepol. de Epis. ^ern. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsuara.
Gasel. hac ^ie. etc.
Germany, the deposition of S. Frodoline (otherwise called Winsred) Abbotand
Confessor, son to Conranus King of Scotland, who going over into Flaunders
and Germany for the conversion of those people to Christ, was ordained Abbot of
a Monastery, called Secking, situated upon the riuer-banke of Rhene, where
after he had converted many thousands to the faith of Christ, in all kind of
virtue and sanctity of life, he ended his venerable aged days, about the year
of our Lord, five hundred threescore and four.

THE same day at Dormundcaster two miles from Peterburrow in Northamptonshir^,
the deposition of the Saints Kinisdred and Kiniswide, Virgins and sisters,
daughters to Penda K. of Mercia, who being dedicated Math. West. an 7. 5. Pol.
virg. l. 4. hist.
to God, even from their infancy, despised all worldly preferments, and entering
into a Nunry at the forsaid town of Dormundcaster, there only studied how to
serve Ranulph. Cestrens. l. 5. hist. c. 18. Rob. Buck. de vitis earu^ hac die.
their Lord, in all kind of virtuous conversation and Sanctimony of life until
their dying day, which happened about the year of Christ, six hundred thirty
and four. Their bodies were afterward translated to Peterburrow, where S.
Ethelwold Bishop of of Winchester built a goodly Monastery in their honor,
about the year of our Redemption, nine hundred and fourscore.

C The seventh Day.
IN North Wales the Co^memoratio^ of S. Deifer *
Confessor, who borne of a noble Acta S. wenefr. 3. Nouem. apud Sur. and
Breui. sec. vsum Sarum in lectio. S. wenefr. and antiq. Monum. Cambriae.
British stock, contemned the vanities of this world, and became an Eremite,
leading for many years, a solitary and severe kind of life, in all virtue and
humility in the North of Wales; where among other miracles which he wrought,
one is recorded, that by his prayers, he raised out of the ground a fountain
of clear water very sovereign for many diseases. He died in great sanctity
and holiness, about the year of Christ, six hundred threescore and four, about
which time also S. Wenefride was famous in those parts for the miracles
wrought at her body; and with whom this holy man Deifer had been very
conversant, whilst she lived.

D The eight Day.
AT Dunwich in Suffolk the deposition of S. Felix bishop and Confessor, who
coming out of Burgundy where he was borne, was by S. Honorius Archbishop of
Canterbury sent to preach the Christian faith to the Eastangles, where he
converted the whole Province, together with their King Sigebert, and Ve^. Beda
l. 2. cap. 15. and l. 3. cap. 20. West. an. 632. Marty. Romans Molan. and alij.
so became their Apostle: and last of all was ordained Bishop of an old City
called Dunmocke (otherwise Dunwich) which at this day is more then half
consumed by the sea. This holy man founded in that Province, Monasteryes,
Schools, and Churches. And after a most Saintly life full of miracles, he
finally reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, six hundred and fifty,
and was buried in the Abbey of Soam in Cambridgshire, four miles from Ely,
from whence in the Danish persecution, he was translated to the Monastery of
Ramsey.

E The ninth Day.
AT York the Commemoration of S. Bosa Confessor and Bishop of that *
Sea, who being a monk of the Monastery of Strenshalt in the Kingdom, of the
Ve^. Beda l. 4. histo. Cap. 12. Math. West. in stor. histo. Tritem. l. 4. cap.
4. wion. l. 2. ligni vitae in Catal. Episcop. Eborace^s.
Northumbers, was at the instance of Egfride King of that Province, ordained
Bishop of York, and placed in that Sea, in the room of S. Wilsride, who then
lived in exile in the I Will of Wight, being expulsed the Dominions of
Northumberland by the forsaid King: which when he had governed most worthily
for nine years in all kind of good learning and virtue, and S. Wilsride
restored again, he willingly returned to his Monastery, and there in great
sanctity of life, and heavenly conte^plation he spent the rest of his days,
and finally reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ seven hundred.

F The tenth Day.
AT Vissenaken in the lower Germany the deposition of S. Himeline Confessor,
who borne in Ireland and there descended of Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. and in
Indic. SS. Belgij Antiqua Monum. Hyber.
a noble blood, and allied to the famous Bishop S. Romwald of that Nation,
despising this transitory world, went over into the lower Germany and there led
an Eremiticall life in the Montaynes near unto Thene in the Duchy of Brabant,
where he was very famous for sanctity of life and other virtues; the same being
manifested afterward, by the manifold signs and miracles at his death, which
fell out about the year of Christ seven hundred and threscore. His memory is
until this day very famous in the forsaid town of Vissenaken, where his body
remains, and is greatly honored by the frequent concourse of such as daily
come to visit the same.

G The eleventh Day.
AT Tyn-mouth in the Kingdom of the Northumbers the Translation of the
venerable body of S. Osuyne Martyr, and King of the Deires in the same
Province, who being impiously slain in hatred of Christian faith Ve^. Beda in
Epit. and l. 3. hist. cap. 14. west. an. 641. 745. and Paris. ibi. and alij.
by Osway King of the Bernicia^s, it pleased God to manifest his innocence, by
the wonderful miracles wrought afterward at his body, which being on this day
found out, was taken up, and with great solemnity and veneration translated to
a Church of our Blessed Lady in an old town of the same Kingdom, now called
Tyn-mouth, where afterward was a godly Monastery erected in his honor, and
where his principal festiuity was wont in Catholic time to be celebrated on
the twe^tith of August, on which day he was Martyred in the year of Christ,
six hundred fifty and one.

A The tweluth Day.
AT Rome the deposition of S. Gregory Pope and Doctor, who for his admirable
works and labors in Gods Church, was surnamed the Great. He sent S. Augustine
Bed. l. 2. cap. 13. Paul. (...)c. de gest. ^ongobard. l^. cap. 11. and 12.
Mart. Romans Breuiar. sec. vsi^m Sarum. et alij o^nes hac die.
with other Monks into England, for our Conversion, who landing in the I Will of
Thanet, and intertayned by King Ethelbert of Kent of blessed memory, within a
while converted that Province to the says of Christ, together with the said
King Ethelbert, and by little and little the whole Realm of England. The
memory of which our Apostle S. Gregory, has been very famous in former times in
our Country, whose feast was wont to be kept holyday, in diverse parts of the
Land, where also are many goodly Churches and monuments yet remaining, erected
and dedicated in his honor. He died in the year of Christ, six hundred and
four; and lies buried in S. Peter's Church at Rome.

THE same day in Scotland the Commemoration *
of S. Fethno monk and Confessor, who being a disciple of S. Columbe Hect.
Boeri(...)s in ^ist. Scot. Ioa^. ^est. l. 4. Ilid.
the Great of Ireland, came with him over into Scotland, together with eleue^
other Companions, all Irishmen, to preach the Christian faith to the Pictes
that then inhabited that Kingdom, where after their conversion from Idolatry
to the true knowledge of Christ, famous for sanctity of life and other virtues,
he there ended his blessed days about the year of Christ 580.

B The thirteenth Day.
IN Scotland the Co^memoration of S. Vigane *
Confel^our, who de^^^nded of a very honorable parentage in that Kingdom,
became there a monk of the Venerable Order Arnol. Wion. l. 2. ligni vitae. de
script. Ord. D. Benedict.
of S. Benedict, of the Congregation of Cluniacke, whose great learning and
virtue, has not only i(...)rated very much the Order of his Religion, but the
whole island also where he was borne* There is yet exta^t in diverse libraryes of
Europe, a famous work of his, entitled, Sermones ad populum, which he wrote
about the year of Christ, one thousand and two, about which time also in great
sanctity of life and venerable old age he departed to our Lord, and was buried
in Scotland.

C The fourteenth Day.
A^ Lindisserne in the Kingdom of the *
Northumbers, the Commernoration of S. Ceolnulph King of that Province and
Confessor, who leaving the care of his Kingdom Matt. West. an. Do. 733.
Continuator hist. V^n. Bedae l. 1. cap. 9. and in. Epit. an. 737.
to Eadbert his kinsman, and rejecting all worldly pleasures and titles, became
a monk in the Abbey of Lindisserne, where in all kind of (...) and exemplar
good life he spent the rest of his days, and finally in a good old age there
gave up his soul to rest, about the year of Christ, seven hundred thirty and
seven. He was afterward buried in the same place, near to the Venerable body
of S. Cuthbert Bishop of that Sea, at whose tomb many miracles are recorded to
have been wrought in witness of his sanctity.

D The fifteenth Day.
AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the festiuity Arnold. Mirman. in theat.
Conuers. Gentium Doroth. insynopsi.
of S. Aristobulus Bishop and Martyr, who being a noble Roman by birth, and one
of the first Christians of that City, as appears by S. Paul his salutation
of him, in his Epistle to the Romans, was created Bishop by S. Peter the
Apostle, and sent by him into Britany to preach the Christian Baron. i ad no^.
(...) Martyr. Romans hac die.
^aith; whereafter he had brought very many erring sheep to Christ's fould,
most gloriously ended his blessed days by Ma^tyrdome, about the year of
Christ threscore and ten. His memory has been famous in our Ila^d until these
later times of schisms and heresies, as being one of our first Apo^tles and
Patrons.

E The sixteenth Day.
AT Ridall-Monastery the Commemoration of Blessed Alred Abbot and Confessor, *
whose great learning and virtue has much illustrated the Catholic Church of
Arnold. W(...)n l. 2. (...)ligno ^it^ (...) Catal. scrip. Ord. D. Benedict. and
ali.
Christ, but especially our Island of Great Bri^any, where he was borne, lived,
and died. He was first a monk of the venerable Order of S Benedict, and
afterward became Abbot of an ancient Monastery called Rhieuallis, (now vulgarly
Ridall) where in great sanctity of life, he ending his blessed days, reposed
in our Lord, about the year of Christ, one thousand one hundred threescore and
four. He wrote the life of King Edward the Confessor, besides very many other
lear^ed and p^ous books to the number of one and twenty: all which are yet
extant to be seen in diverse Libraries, as well in England, as other Countries
of Europe.

F The seventeenth Day.
IN Ireland the deposition of S. Patricke Prosp. Aquit. insua hist. Mar. Scot.
an. 432. Sige. in Chron. an. 491. Guliel. Neubrig. l. 3. cap. 19. Joan. Capgr.
in Catal. SS. Brita^niae
Bishop and Confessor, Apostle of that I^and, who borne in the Territory of
Bristow in Somersetshire, and brought up at Glastenbury, went over, in his
youth, into France to S. Martyn his Uncle then Bishop of Towers, who was
brother to S. Patrickes Mother, of whom he was instructed in learning and
other virtues: and afterward going to Rome, was there consecrated Bishop by
Pope Celestinus, and sent back to preach the Christian faith in Scotland,
which he did for a time with great fruit of his labor; and thence he went into
Ireland because at that time the greatest part of the Scotts inhabited that
Kingdom) where he converted the whole Island, and so became their Apostle,
working wondrous miracles among them. He lived an hundred and two and twenty
years, obtaining by his prayers, that no venomous creature should live or
breed in Ireland, and died in the year of Christ, four hundred fourscore and
one. His body was first interred in the town of D^n, in the Province of
Vlster, and afterward translated to the Archbishops Sea of Armachan in the same
Kingdom, about the year of Christ, one thousand, one hundred, threescore and
seauenteene, as the ancient Records of Ireland do declare.

G The eighteenth Day.
AT Corse-castle in the I Will of Purbecke in Sur. in eius vita. tom. 2. Pol.
virg. l. 6. histo. Angl. Westan. 978. Martyr. Romans and alij o^nes hac die.
Dorcetshire the passion of S. Edward K. of the VVestsaxons and Martyr, who
through the treachery of his stepmother Queen Alfred (desirous that her own
son Ethelbert should be King was slain by certain soldiers hired by the
forsaid Queen to that purpose, whilst he was on hunting, in the year of
Christ, nine hundred threescore and eighteen. His body was first interred at
Warham, and after at Shastesbury, whereat it pleased God in witness of his
Innocence to work many miracles. And last of all the same was translated to
Glastenbury-Abbey in the year of Christ, one thousand and one.

THE same day in Ireland the deposition Vincent. in speculo l. 29. c. 11. and
12. Wion. l. 2. ligni vitae.
of S. Christian Bishop and Confessor, who borne in the same Island, became
there first a monk of the Order of Cisterce, and scholar to the famous S.
Malachy Archbishop and Primate of that Kingdom, and afterward Abbot of
Mellisonte, and last of all Bishop, where in great sanctity of life he ended
his Bernard. in vita S. Malach.
blessed days, about the year of Christ one thousand one hundred forty and
eight, whose memory is yet famous throughout Ireland.

A The ninteenth Day.
AT Derby the Commemoration of S. *
Alkmund Martyr, son to Alred King of Northumberland, who being slain in a
battle against the Duke of VVil^on in the behalf Ranulph. Cestrens. l. 5. c.
28. and alij nostrat.
of the Viceroy of Worcester, named Ethelmund, that pretended to recover
certain lands, that VVolstan Duke of Wilton detayned from him wrongfully, his
body presently began to do miracles; which being seen, and witnessed, the same
was translated to Derby, and there with great veneration interred most solemnly
in a Church erected in his honor, and called afterward of his name, S.
Alkmunds, which in former Catholic times, has been a famous pilgrimage,
especially for the Northern people of England. He suffered in the year of
Christ, eight hundred.

B The twentieth Day.
AT Lindisserne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers the deposition of S.
Cuthbert Ve^. Beda l. 4. cap. 26. 27. 28. 29. and 30. Abbo Floriac. inprolog.
ad vit. S. Edmu^di Regis. Vincent. in speculo Sur. to. 2. hac die cu^ Mart.
R^m. and ali some. i bus.
Bishop and Confessor, who descended of the Kings blood of Ireland, became a
monk first of the famous Monastery of Mailros, in the Marches of Scotland, and
afterward was ordained Bishop of Lindisserne: which Bishopric, after he had
governed some two years, he resigned, and became an Eremite, leading a most
strict and severe kind of life, in the Island of Farne, and so continued until
his dying day: which happened about the year of Christ, six hundred fourscore
and eight. He was very famous for sanctity and working of miracles both alive
and dead.

THE same day, and same place the deposition of Blessed Herebert Priest and
Confessor, a man of great holiness of life, who often repayring to S.
Cuthbert aforsaid, always used his counsel and direction, Bed. l. 4. cap. 29.
hist. Angl.
for the affairs both of his body and soul. And one day S. Cuthbert telling
him, that himself was shortly to leave this world and pass to the other;
Herebert fell down at his feet, and importunely besought him that he might
also pass to the next life with him, that had so long inioyed his company
here on earth. At whose earnest intercession, S. Cuthbert falling to his
prayers, finally obtained the same. And so with in a while after, they both
falling sick, went both to our Lord upon the one and self same day and hour,
in the year of Christ, 688. and were both buried at Lindisserne.

C The one and twentieth Day.
AT VVerdt in Cleeu-land the Commemoation *
of S. Isenger Bishop and Martyr, who descended o(...) a noble Scottish family,
Cranz. Metrop. l. 1. cap. 29. wion. l. 2. ligni vitae in Catal. E^is.
Werdensium.
contemned the vanities of the world, and became first a monk in that
Kingdom, of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, and afterward Abbot there of
the Monastery called Amarbaricke, which when he had governed for diverse years,
moved with zeal of converting his Neighbor-countries, went over into
Flanders and Germany, and being there ordained Bishop o(...) VVerdt, was a
little after slain in defense of the Christian faith, by the infidels of that
Country, about the year of Christ, eight hundred twenty and four. His body
being brought to VVerdt, and there interred in his own Cathedral Church, was
kept for a long time with great honor and veneratio^ of the Inhabita^tes.

D The two and twentieth Day.
AT Sherborne in Dorcet^hire the Commemoration of S. Hamund Bishop of that *
Sea and Martyr, who in the Danish persecution Matthew. west. ad a^num D. 871. in
hist. maiori Ang.
under the Captains Hingar and Hubba, was for the Confession of Christ most
barbarously slain at Merdune, by those Tyrannical Pagans, who in the
vastation of England, spared neither Ecclesiastical nor Religious person
whatsoever. His Martyrdom happened about the year of Christ, eight hundred
threescore and eleven, and in the reign of Alfred King of the West saxons.

E The three and twentieth Day.
AT Lindisserne the Commemoration of *
Blessed Fgbert King of the Northumbers Contin. Epitom. Ve^. Bedae an. 758.
Pol. virg. l. 4. hist. west. an. 757. wio^. l. 4. ligni vitae. and alij.
and Confessor, who after he had governed that Province most laudably for
twenty years, conte^ned his Crown and dignity of a King, leaving the same to
his son Oswulph, and entering into the Abbey of Lindissern aforsaid, became
there a monk of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, where in very great
sanctity of life, humility, observance of Monastical discipline and other
virtues, he finally ended his peaceable days in our Lord, about the year of
Christ, seven hundred threescore and eight. He endowed the Archbishopricke ^f
York, whilst he was King, with gr(...) (...)news, where also he founded a
worthy Library, and furnished the same with all good Authors that could then be
gotten.

F The four and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury the depositio^ of S. Lanfra^ke Confessor, and Archbishop of
that Math. west. an. 1089. Pol. Vir. Petr. in Catal. l. 6. c. 4. et 7. Vinc. in
speculo Tritem. de Vir. Illustr. l. 2. and 3.
Sea, who borne at Pauia in Lombardy, became first a monk of the Abbey of
Beck, and then Abbot of Cane in Normandy, and afterward ordained Archbishop of
Canterbury, at the request of King William the Conqueror; whose most pious
life, and good learning, joined with extraordinary charity to the poor, and
assistance of the Church of England, is yet memorable throughout the Christian
world. Of this man there is a story recorded, how that in his yo^ger days he
trauayling by the way, and cha^cing to be robbed by thieves, took the same so
impatiently, that by no means he could be pacified for a time: but at length
coming to himself again, he brake forth into these words: What? have I so
much learning and knowledge both in Philosophy, Divinity and Scriptures, and
yet have not learned to be patient in adversity? Surely, (...)uall not cease
until Hier. Platus l. 2. de bono status Religiosi.
I find out that learning. And upon this, he presently went into France, and
thence into Normandy, where coming to the Abbey of Beck, he lay secretly for
many years in that Monastery, being reputed for an Idiot and simple man,
until at length his learning and wisdom being discovered, he was made Prior
of Beck, and presently afterward Abbot of S. Stephens in Cane aforsaid, and
finally Archbishop of Canterbury. He died in the year of Christ, one thousand
fourscore and nine, and was buried in his own Church at Canterbury.

G The five and twentieth Day.
AT Norwich in the County of Norsolke the passion of S. William Mareyr, who
being a boy of the same City of some ten 10. Capgr. in Catal. SS. Brita^. Gul.
Nubrig. l. 3. cap. 7 8. 9 Geor. Lilius in hist. anno 1235. Vincent. in specul.
years old, was by his Father set an apprentice to a glouer of the same town,
whom the Jews of Norwich secretly stealing away, crucified on a Cross in
despite of Christ and his blessed Mother, upon the feast of her Annu^ciation.
His body they cast into a wood or thicket, near to the said City, which being
found and brought unto the town with a sollemne procession of the Clergy, was
placed in the great Church, or Minster of that Sea, and there was wont, to be
kept with great veneration. His Martyrdom happened in the year of Christ, one
thousand one hundred forty and six, in the eleventh year of the reign of K.
Stephen.

A The six and twentieth Day.
AT Bardney in Lincolnshire the Commemoration *
of Many holy Monks Martyrs, who in the first Danish persecution in our Island,
were slain by those Pagan people in Ingulph. de Croyland in histor. 10. Stous
Annal. Angl de Reg. west sax. page 100.
their own Monasteryes in hatred of Christian Religion. At what time also the
said Danes ranging abroad the Countries, slew (says the Story) the Abbot and
the Monks of the Monastery of Croyland, and fiered their Church, and houses
belonging thereunto. At Peterburrow also they made the like slaughter of
Religious persons; and coming to the Nunry of Ely, they put the Religious
Virgins all to the sword without compassion, and so receiving their Crowns of
Martyrdom, they went unto our Lord. All which happened in our Country, about
the year of Christ, eight hundred threescore and ten.

B The seven and twentieth Day.
IN Scotland the depositio^ of S. Archibald Abbot and Confessor, descended of
a very noble Arnold. Wion in Mart. Benedict. and Oasel. ex antiq. S(...) Monum.
hac ai^.
parentage in that Kingdom, whose rare (...)e and conversation together with
the singular gifts of clemency toward the poor and orphans, has in former
times been famous both in England and Scotland. His feast is recounted to have
been celebrated on this day, by the ancient Records of Scotland and Ireland:
among both which Nations, many altars, and some Churches also, have heertofore
been dedicated in his honor. He flourished about the year of Christ seven
hundred and eight, about which time also he desceased.

C The eight and twentieth Day.
IN the Marches of Wales the Translation of Io. Capgr. in Catal. SS. Brita^.
Molan. in addit. Vsuard.
the glorious ^ody of S. Fremund King and Martyr, son to Ossa King of Mercia,
who setting aside his crown and kingdom for the love of Christ, in the second
year of his reign, became an Eremite in a little Ila^d of the Marches of
Wales, called in the British tongue Illesage, where at last he was slain by
Osway the Apostata, in hatred of Christian Religion, Wion haec die in Mart.
Benedict.
in the year of Christ, seaue^ hundred fourscore and sixteen. He being
afterward canonized for a Saint in the year of our Lord 1157. and raygne of
King Henry the third, his body was taken up on this day, and translated to a
more eminent place of the same Church where it lay before, whereat it pleased
God to work miracles. His principal festiuity is celebrated upon the eleventh
day of May, of whom in that place, we have made mention again.

D The nine and twentieth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Baldred Confessor, whose memory in
ancient *
times has been very famous in that Io. Mayor de gestis Scot. l. 2. cap. 7. ex
antiq. Scot. Monum.
Kingdom. For that he having sometimes preached to the people of three
villages near adjoining one to the other in Scotland, called Aldham, Tiningham
and Preston, was so holy a man of life, that when he was dead, the people of
each village, contended one with another which of the^ should have his body, in
so much, that at last, they not agreeing therabout, took arms, and each of
them sought by force to enjoy the same. And when the matter came to issue, the
said sacred body was found all whole in three distinct places of the house
where he died; so as the people of each village coming thither, and carrying
the same away, placed it in their Churches, and kept it with great honor and
veneration for the miracles, that at each place it pleased God to work. He
lived in the time of S. Kentigerne and S. Columbe the Great, about the year of
Christ, six hundred and ten, about which time also he gave up his soul to rest
in our Lord.

E The thirtith Day.
AT VVerdt in Cleeu-land the depositio^ of S. Io. Lest. l. 5. histo. Scot.
Albert. Cranz. Metrop. l. 1. c. 20. Wion in Mart. Bened. hac die.
Pattone Bishop of that City and Confessor, who descended of a worthy blood
in Scotland, was first made Abbot of the Monastery called Amarbaricke in the
same Kingdom, and thence going over into the lower Germany and Saxony, was at
last consecrated Bishop of VVerdt, where in great sanctity of life and other
virtues, diligently attending to his flock and preaching the Christian faith
among them, he ended his venerable old days, about the year of Christ, seven
hundred threscore and two, and was buried in his own Cathedral Church at
VVerdt, where his body was wont to be kept with great veneration of the
Inhabitants.

F The one and thirtith Day
AT Malmesbury in Wilsthire the Translation of S. Adelmus Bishop and
Confessor nephew to Inas King of the VVestsaxons, who trauayling in his youth
into France and Italy, through his diligence in studdies, Gul. Malmes. de
pontif. Angl. Bed. l. 4. cap. 19. Calendar. sed. vsum Sarum hac die. Catal.
Episcop. Sireburgensium.
attained to great learning, both in the Greek and Hebrew tongues, but
especially in Divinity. In the knowledge whereof, he was in his days accounted
excellent. After his return into England, he first became a monk of the Order
of S. Benedict at Malmesbury, and then Abbot of the whole Monastery: and
afterward going to Rome with King Ceadwall, he was there created Bishop of
Sherborne by Pope Sergius, and sent back to that Sea: where after great
labors taken in the Government thereof, and many notable books written for the
instruction of men in Christian life, he finally reposed in our Lord, in the
year of Christ, seven hundred and nine: whose body was afterward solemnly on
this day translated to Malmesbury, and there kept in Catholic times with
great honor and veneratio^, for the manifold miracles, that are recorded to
have been wrought thereat.

THE MONTH OF APRIL.
G The first Day.
AT Pontoyse in France the Commemoratio of the Saints Sadoch and Adrian,
Priests and Confessors, *
who being Irishmen by In vita. S. Ri(...)ij. Abbatis apud Sur. to. 2. die 26.
Apr. de vitis SS.
birth, came over into France to preach the Christian faith to the people and
inhabitants of Picardy, where they were honorably received and intertayned by
S. Richarius a noble man of that Country, and afterward Abbot of Pontoyse. And
when they had labored in that new harvest for many years, and reaped therein
most abundant fruit, in the conversion of infinite souls from their
Idolatrous superstition to the true worship of one God, they finally ended
their happy days in a venerable old age, about the year of Christ, six
hundred and forty. Their sacred Relics are kept until this day by the
Religious men in the forsaid Monastery of Pontoyse, with great veneration of
the Inhabitants.

A The second Day.
AT Coldingham in the Marches of Scotland *
the Commemoration of S. Ebba Virgin and Abbess, daugher to Ethelfride King of
Northumberland, and sister to S. Oswald and Rob. Buckland in eius vita l. man.
Serful. 156. de vitis SS. mulieru^ Angl.
Osway Kings of the same Province, who co^te^ning the vanities of the world,
became a Religious woman, and received the holy veyle of chastity at the hands
of Blessed Finan Bishop of Lindisserne: but afterward building two goodly
Monasteryes of her own, one upon the river of Derwent, called of her name
Ebbecester, and the other at the forsaid Coldingham, she became Abbess of the
later, and ruled the same in all perfection and holiness of life, having very
many noble and virtuous virgins under her; among whom, S. Audry Queen and
flower of the I Will of Ely was one. And after she had heaped up store of heavenly
treasure, in a good old age, she went to her spouse, about the year of Christ,
six hundred fourscore and four, whose memory has in times past been very
famous both in England and Scotland, where many goodly Churches and Chapels
have been erected and dedicated in her honor; and one yet standing to be seen
in Oxford, commonly called S. Tabbes; as also in the forsaid Marches of
Scotland near to Coldingha^, there is a little port or haven in the promo^tory
of that Province, still retayning the name of S. Tabbes-head.

B The third Day.
AT Chichester in Sussex the deposition of S. Richard Confessor and Bishop of
Matthew. West. and Paris. an. Dom. 1253. Sur. to. 2. Breu. sec. vsion Saru^.
Mart. Romans and alij.
that Sea, whose wonderful life and doctrine, joined with the greatness of his
miracles, has been sufficiently manifested to the Christian world. He was borne
at Which in Worcestershire, and died at Dover in Kent, the ninth year of his
Presulshippe, and year of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and three.
Whose body being brought to Chichester, so shined with miracles, that among
others, it is recorded, that three dead men, were at the same, by his meritts,
again raised to life. He was canonized for a Saint, by Pope Urban the fourth
seven years after his death, and of Christ 1260.

THE same day at Eureux in France the deposition of S. Burgundosora Virgin and
Abbess, who descended of a noble British blood and disciple to S. Columbane
the Great Bed. to. 3. Operu^. Sur. to. 3. Vit. SS. in vita S. Columb. Mart.
Romans and Molan.
of Ireland, was by him sent over into France and there made Abbess of a
Monastery, which he had built at Eureux, where in great sanctimony of life she
ended her blessed days, about the year of Christ, six hundred and ten. S.
Bid has written her life at large, wherein he recounteth many worthy and
memorable acts of hers, especially for the observation of Monastical
discipline, wherein she excelled.

C The fourth Day.
IN Cornwall the Commemoration of S. *
Guier Priest and Confessor, who leading an Eremiticall, and severe kind of
life in Matthew. Paris. in hist. Maiori ad An. 871. ex antiq. monum. Britanniae.
that Province, and being companion to S. Neoth (by whose counsel the
University of Oxford was founded) that lived in those parts with him in the
time of King Alfred, was very famous for sanctity of life, and working of
Miracles both alive and dead. His name is yet very memorable, and frequent
among the Cornishmen, where in times past, have been many altars erected, and
dedicacated in his honor. He died about the year of Christ, eight hundred
threescore and eleven.

D The fifth Day.
IN Scotland the deposition of S. Tigernake Bishop and Confessor, whose godly
life, Molan. in addit. ad Vsuard. ^ac die. Antiq. Monum. Regni Scotiae.
and doctrine, has not only illustrated that Country, where he was borne, but
his neighbour-Kingdomes also round about: And therefore his memory not unworthy
to be recorded among the other Saints of our Island, that has been made worthy
of so glorious a Patron. He died in all sanctity and holiness of life, about the
year of Christ, seven hundred and thirty, and was buried in Scotland.

THE same day in Suetia the Commemoration *
of S. Gotebald Bishop and Confessor, Adam. Bremens. i^ hist. Gothoru^ l. 2.
cap. 2^. Baronius to. 10. Annal.
who being an Englishman by birth, went over into Norway and Sueueland and
there propagated the Christian faith with abundant fruit of his holy labors,
for many years; and finally in great holiness of life, there rested in our
Lord, about the year of Christ, one thousand and four.

E The sixth Day.
IN Ireland the deposition of S. Celsus Confessor Mart. Romans hac die. Bernard.
in vita S. Malach.
and Bishop of Connerthen in the same Kingdom, whose godly life, full of
sanctity and miracles, has been very famous in former ages, both at home, and
abroad. He was predecessor to S. Malachy in his Bishoppricke, and died in the
year of Christ, one thousand one hundred twenty and eight. *


THE same day at Hexam in Northumberland Gul. Malmes. l. 1. de reg. Angl. Simon
Dunelm. in chron. 788. Asser meneue^s. an. 789.
the Commemoration of S. Ethelwold, King of the same Province and Martyr: who
being wickedly slain in the Civil wars among his own subjects, and his
body brought to the Church of Hexam, it pleased God in sign of his innocence
in that cause, to work many miracles thereat; which being seen, and diligently
examined, the same was with great solemnity and veneration honorably reconded
in the said Church as beseemed so precious a treasure. He suffered about the
year of Christ, nine hundred.

F The seventh Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Sigene Abbot and Confessor, who descended
*
of a very noble parentage in that Kingdom, became a monk of the venerable
Io. Les^. Episco. Rossens. l. 4. de gestis Scot. Wion in addit. ad l. 3. ligni
vit. (...).
Order of S. Benedict, in a monastery of one of the Islands of Orcades,
belonging to that Province, whereof afterward himself was made Abbot. In which
office he so behaved himself in sanctity of life, good learning and
reformation of Monastical discipline, that his name was famous as well
throughout Scotland at home, as in England, Ireland and other Countries
abroad. He lived about the year of Christ, six hundred and threescore, about
which time also he reposed in our Lord.

G The eight Day.
AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the Commemoration of S. Duuianus Confessor, *
and scholar to S. Joseph of Arimathia, who being a noble man of Britany
joined himself to S. Joseph, and lead a solitary life with him and his
companions, in the Island of Auallonia (now called Glastenbury) which King
Aruiragus of Bri^any had granted unto them; where being very famous for
sanctity of Joan. de Kirkst. at in Monasticis Eyseng. cent. 2. part. 3. did. 4.
life and miracles in that first Primitive Church of our Country, he finally
reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, one hundred and eleven. His
body was buried at Glastenbury, and there conserved with due veneration until
the days of K. Henry the eight, in whose reign that Monastery deca(...)ed. He
was very nobly borne, and one of the first Christians of our Island, that
exercised a solitary or Eremiticall life, after the coming of S. Joseph of
Arimathia into Britany.

A The ninth Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire, the Commemoration *
of S. Frithstan Confessor and Bishop of the same Sea, who forsaking the
Matthew. west. an. D. 932. and 935. Pol. Virgil. l. 6. Ranulph. Cestrensis l. 6.
c. 6. de offie. and Missa defunctoru^
burden of that dignity, betook himself to a solitary kind of life, in a
village near to the said City of Winchester: In which he constantly
perseuered in all sanctity and holiness of life to his dying day, which
happened in the year of Christ, nine hundred thirty and three, and was buried
at Winchester, where his body was wont to be kept in Catholic times, with
great honor and veneration. There is a story recorded, how that S. Frithstane
was wont every day to say mass, and office for the dead; and one evening as he
walked in the Churchyard reciting his said office, when he came to Requiescant
in Pace; the voices in the graves round about, made answer aloud, and said

Amen.
B The tenth Day.
AT Paderborne in the higher Germany the deposition of S. Paternus Confessor,
Joan. Tritem. de vir. Illust. l. 3. cap. 324. Lest. l. 5. hist. in fine. wion
in Mart. Benedict. hac die.
who borne in Scotland of a worthy blood and despising all wordly things, gate
him over into Germany, and there became a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict in
a Monastery of the forsaid town of Paderborne, where, by divine prophesy, he
fortold the burning thereof by causall fire, wherein himself, being in his Cell,
was also consumed to (...)shes, about the year of Christ, one thousand fifty
and eight. His memory is very famous, until this day, both in Germany, where
he lived, and in Scotland also where he was borne.

THE same day in Suetia the passion of S. Eschillus Bishop and Martyr, who
going Joan. magnus in hist. Goth. l. 18. c. 11.
out of England with S. Sigfrid and his Nephews, to preach the Christian faith
to the Sueuians, after he had labored for many years incessantly in that
kind, and brought many thousands to the true worship of God, was A nnales
Sueuici and Breua. Suev.
by the (...)redulous Paga^ people of that country, stoned to death, as he was
preaching the word of (...)e, upon Good Friday; And thereby deserved to be
crowned with Martyrdom upon the same day, that our Blessed Savior suffered
for the Redemption of mankind. This happened about the year of Christ, one
thousand and sixteen, and in the reign of King Edmund of England, surnamed
Iron-side.

C The eleventh Day.
IN the I Will of Crowland in Lincolnshire the deposition of S. Guthlacke
Confessor and Faelix Croland. Gul. Ramefius and Petr. Blesens. in eius vit.
west. an. 714. Sur. to. 2. Pol. Vir. l. 4. Mar. Romans and Molan.
Eremite, who being in his youth a soldier, and of good parentage, became
weary of the world, and retired himself to the Monastery of Ripendowne (now
called Rippon) in Yorkshire, where be took first the habit of a monk, and
shortly after became an Eremite in the forsaid I Will of Crowland. In which kind
of life he continued in so great austerity of fasting, praying, and pennace,
that he deserved twice a day for fifteen years together to enjoy the
glorious sight of his good Angel, working wonderful miracles both alive and
dead. He departed this world in a venerable old age, about the year of Christ,
seven hundred and fourteen, and was buried in Cro(...)and Abbey.

D The tweluth Day.
AT Roane in France the Commemoration of Blessed Hugh Co(...)ssour and Bishop
of that Sea, who being an Englishma^ by birth, *
and Abbot of Reading in Barkshire, was thence Mattl(...). West. in hist.
(...)aiori and an. Christ. 11.30 Chron. Cluniacense etc. (...).
in the time of K. Henry the (...), promoted to the Bishopric of Roane; in
which dignity he so worthily behaved himself; for (...)x and thirty years
together, that his name was famous in those days throughout all France. He
died in great sanctity of life and miracles about the year of Christ, one
thousand one hundred threescore and six. This man is different from the other
S. Hugh, Bishop of the same place, whose fes(...)all day is celebrated upon the
nynth of this month.

THE same day at Alaxion, also in France, the Commemoration of S. Mechtild *
Virgin, who descended of the blood To all of Scotland, fled thence secretly,
with her yo^gest Rob. Buchland in eius vital. M. S. de. vit. SS. Mulierum
brother Alexander in base attire, into France, where placing him as a Brother
in the Monastery of Cistercian Monks at Fone, she went herself to a village
nine miles of, called Alaxion and there made her a little Cottage of sticks
and rushes, living in great severity and penance, manteyning herself with the
labor Angl. ex. antiq. momon. Galliae.
of her own hands till her dying day, which happened about the year of
Christ, one thousand and two hundred. The townsmen of Alaxion buried her body
with great solemnity and veneration, God glorifying the same by many Miracles.

E The thirteenth Day.
AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the Commemoration *
of S. Elsled Virgin, and Niece to King Ethelstane of England, whose Osbert.
Monac. in vita S. Dunstani apudSur. to. 3. 19. Maij. west. an. Do. 929.
wonderful virtues, and holiness of life, together with working of miracles,
have in times past, been famous in our Island. She built herself a little
Oratory, by the counsel of S. Dunstan, near to the Church of our Blessed Lady
at Glastenbury, in which she lived in continual prayer, watching and fasting,
until her dying day. And when upon a time her uncle K. Ethelstane, that was
there on hunting, came to visit her, and with a great company, stayed and dined
with her, she having but one little vessel of drink (called mead) set the
same before him and his train; of which when every one had drunk his fill,
the said vessel was notwithstanding as full as before. She ended her blessed
days about the year of Christ, nine hundred thirty and six, and was buried at
Glastenbury.

F The fourteenth Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire, the Commemoration of Blessed Ethelnulph King *
of the VVestsaxons and Confessor, whose godly acts in propagating and
increasing the Christian faith in our Island, is not only famous to all
posterity, but may be an example also and myrrour to all other Christian Card.
Baron. in Annal. tom. 10. Matthew. West. an. 854 and 857. Paris. an. 1257. Pol.
Vigil. l. 5. hist. Gulielm. Mal mes. de re gib. Angl.
Princes of Europe. He made the tenth part of his Kingdom free from all
tributes and and exactions, and gave it to the Church in honor of our Blessed
Lady, and other Saints of God; as also he sent every year three hundred Marks
to Rome, one hundred to S. Peter's Church, another hundred to S. Paul's, and the
third to be bestowed in alms at the Popes discretion. And at last went thither
himself in pilgrimage, together with his youngest son Alfred, whom he
committed to Pope Leo for his education; And there among other deeds of
Charity, he reedified the English-schoole that had been a little before consumed
by fire. And soon after his return back into England in most godly wise, he
reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, eight hundred fifty and seven.
Matthew Paris a monk of S. Albans, and a very grave Author, numbreth him among
the canonized Saints of our Nation. His body was with all solemnity and
veneration honorably reconded in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, where
it yet remains among the Monuments of our Saxon and English Kings.

G The fifteenth Day.
AT York the Elevation of the glorious and venerable body of S. Oswald, Bishop
Matthew. West. an. Do. 1002. Arnold. wion in Mart. Benedict. Calend. sec. vsum
Sarum hac die.
of that Sea and Confessor, who trauayling in his younger days into France,
became there first a monk in the Monastery of Floriacke, and returning into
England, was afterward ordained Bishop of Worcester, and lastly, at the
intercession of K. Edgar, preferred to York where in great sanctity of life
and miracles he ended his blessed days, in the year of Christ, nine hundred
fourscore and twelve. His body in the year 1002. was on this day with all
solemnity and reverence taken up by Aldulph his successor in that Sea, and set
in a more eminent place of the Cathedral Church of York, but afterward
translated to Worcester. He built the famous Abbey of Ramsey in the i will of
Ely, as also a goodly Church at Worcester, which he dedicated to our blessed
Lady.

A The sixteenth Day.
AT Cullen in the higher Germany the Translation of part of the venerable body
of S. Alban Protomartyr of Great-Britany, which together with other Relics
Hist, Convent. S. Panta. impressa Coloniae. 10. Lidg. Monac. Buriens. in eius
Vita. Molan. in addit. ad Vsua. ^ac die. Gerard. Leigh in rudimentis Insigniu^
de Albano.
being first carried thence to Rome by S. Germa^ Bishop of Auxier in France,
when with S. Lupus he came into Britany to expel the Pelagia^ heresy, was
afterward brought back to Cullen by Thcophania wife to the Emperor Otho the
second, and there very honorably placed in the Monastery of S. Pantaleon,
where the same is yet kept with great veneration of the whole City. This S.
Alban in his youth before his conversion to Christian faith, being Lord of
Verolame (now called S. Albans) went to Rome, and there made a Royal Challenge
of Iustes for the honor of his Realm, where before all others he had the
price, and thereupon was made knight of the Bath by the Emperor Dioclesian,
and high Steward of the Britans; who were then under the subjection of the
Romans. And after his return home, being made a Christian by S. Amphibale
Priest, was for that cause shortly after apprehended, and put to death at the
forsaid town of S. Albans in Hartfordshire, about the year of Christ, three
hundred and three. Fortunatus in his excellent Book of Virginity speaking of
Martyrs, among others, commends S. Alban thus:

Albanum egregium foecunda Britannia profert. There was a goodly Church and
Monastery afterward erected at S. Albans in his honor by Ossa K. of the
Mercia^s, wherein the said body of S. Alban was placed; the which was in our
last age, destroyed by K. Henry the 8. his commandment, with hundreds more in
our Island.

B The seventeenth Day.
AT Fulda in the Diocese of Mentz in the *
higher Germany, the Commemoration of S. Marianus Confessor, who borne in
Scotland, Arnol. wion. l. 2. ligni vit. de script. Ord. D. Benedict. Sixtus
Senens. in biblioth. lib. 4.
and descended of a good parentage in that Kingdom, went over into Germany and
took first the habit of a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict, in the Monastery
of S. Martins at Cullen, and afterward at the forsaid town of Fulda, in an
Abbey, which S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz had sometimes founded for the
Scottish nation, where in great holiness and sanctity of life, he reposed in our
Lord, about the year of Christ, one thousand and threescore, and reign of K.
Edward the Confessor of England. He wrote many learned books which he left
behind him to posterity, and are extant to be read in diverse libraryes of
Europe: The Catalogue whereof you may see set down by diverse Catholic writers
in print.

C The eighteenth Day.
IN the Marches or borders of Scotland the Commemoration of S. Oswyn
Confessor, who descended of a noble British parentage, *
conte^ned the vanities of this world, and 10. Trit. l. 3. c. 118. Arnol. Wion
in Append. ad l. (...). ligni vitae
became a monk in an ancient Monastery called Lesting (which S. Chad of
Lichsield had sometimes founded) in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, where
giving himself to continual fasting, prayer and other bodyly penna^ce, famous
for sanctity of life and miracles, he departed this transitory world, and
reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, six hundred threscore and ten,
whose name and holiness have been very memorable in former times in our island
of Great Britany, especially among the Northern people, and borderers of
Scotland.

D The ninteenth Day.
AT Green-wich in Kent the passion of S. Elphege Bishop and Martyr, who being
Sur. to. 3. bac die. Pol. Vir. l. 7. Mar. Romans and Mola^. in addit. ad Vsuard.
Joan. Capgr. in Catal. SS. Augl. Breu. Saru^ and alij o^nes hac die.
first Abbot of an ancient Monastery near Bath in Somersetshire, was thence
promoted to the Bishopric of Winchester, and after to Canterbury. And when
the Danes came to invade his Church of Canterbury, and demanding of him three
thousand marks of money, he like a good Pastor of his flock, manfully
resisted, refusing to give the said sum from his Church. Wherefore after
seven months imprisonment, and diverse kinds of torments, he was finally
stoned to death at the forsaid town of Green-wich by the enemies of truth, in
the year of Christ, one thousand and twelve; whose body was first brought to
London, and afterward translated to Canterbury. About this time also (as it is
recorded) were slain by the said Danes, for the Christian faith, six and
thirty monks of S. Augustines Monastery in Canterbury, and eight thousand of
the lay people in other places of England.

E The twentieth Day.
AT Rome the deposition of Blessed Ceadwall King of the VVestsaxons and
Confessor, who before he was yet a Christian himself, so much reverenced the
Christian Bishops, and Clergy of the Church of Ve^. Beda l. 4. histo. c. 12.
15. et 16. and Epit. ad an. Dom. 688. west. an. 686. 687. 688. and 689.
England, that when he had subdued the I Will of VVight, being Pagan, he gave the
fourth part thereof to S. Wilfrid (at that time expulsed from york) wherein he
caused him to preach and plant the Christian faith; and afterward went
himself to Rome, and was there baptized by Pope Sergius, where within a few
days, being yet in his Albes, he departed to our Lord on this day, in the
year of Christ, six hundred fourscore and nine. His body lies buried in the
entrance of S. Peter's old Church at Rome, as the ancient Tables and Records
thereof do declare, whereof you may read S. Bid more at large in his history of
England, where he sets down two Epitaphes engraue^ over the forsaid Kings
tomb, the one in verse, the other in prose in memory of so famous an act to
all posterity. That in verse is this.

Culmen, opes, sobolem, pollentia regna, triumphos, Bed. l. 5. bist. c. 7.
Exuuias, proceres, mania, castra, lares;
Quaeque Patrum virtus, and quae congesserat ipse Ceadual Armipotens, liquit
amore Dei.
Vt Petrum, Sedemque Pe^ri Rex cerneret hospes, Cuius font meras sumeret Almus
aquas,
Splendificumque iubar radianti carperet haustu, Et quo viuisicus sulgor vbique
sluit.
Percipiensque alacer rediui^ae pramia vitae. Barbaricam rabiem, nomen and inde
suum.
Conuersus conuertit ouans, Petrumque vocari Sergius Antistes iussit, vt ipse
Pater.
Font renascentis, quem Christi gratia purgans, Protinus ablutum vexit in arce
Poli.
Mira fides Regis, Clementia maxima Christi, Cuius consilium nullus adire
potest.
Sospes enim veniens supremo ex Orb Britanni, Per varias Gentes, per freta,
perque vias,
Vrbem Romuleam vidit, Templumque verendum Aspexit Petri, mystica dona gerens.
Candidus inter o^es Christi socialibus ibit, Corpore nam tumulum, mente
superna tenet.
Commutasse magis Sceptrorum insignia credas, Quam Regnum Christi promeruisse
vides.
THE same day at Ersord in the higher Germany, the Translation of S. Adlar
Bishop and Martyr, who being an Englishman by birth, and a monk in the
Kingdom of the Northumbers, went over into Germany Petr. Crat^pol. de Epise.
Germa^iae.
with S. Boniface to preach the Christian faith to that Pagan Nation, where
being consecrated Bishop of Erford, he was, together with S. Boniface, and
fifty others, slain by the barbarous people, at a town called Trit. l. 3. c.
173. and l. 4. c. 183. de vir. Illustr. Wion. hac die.
Dockum in Frizland, for the defense of Christian faith, in the year of
Christ, seven hundred fifty and four. His body was afterward on this day
translated to Ersord, and there is kept with great Veneration of the
Inhabitants.

F The one and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Anselme Bishop and Confessor, who borne
Io. Trit. de vir. Illust. and seript. Eccles. Syxt. Senens. in biblioth. l. 4.
Pol. Virg. l. 11 histor. Mart. Romans and Molan. hac die.
at Augusta in Burgundy, came thence into Normandy to the Abbey of Beck, and
there became first a monk, then Prior, and lastly Abbot of the said Monastery.
And being afterward promoted to the Sea of Canterbury, governed the same most
laudably, until the time of King William Rufus, by whom he was banished the
Realm, but again restored by King Henry the first. He celebrated two famous
Counsels at London. And after a most holy life joined with great piety and
learning, full of venerable old age, he ended his blessed days, in the year
of Christ, one thousand one hundred and nine, and sixteenth year of his
Government: and was buried in his own Cathedral Church of Canterbury, at the
head of his predecessor Lanfranke, at whose body it has pleased God to work
many miracles.

G The two and twentieth Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the Commemoration *
of S. Birstan Confessor and Bishop of that Sea, whose godly life and
miracles, have much illustrated our Island of Matthew. West. in hist. maiori ad
an. Do. 944. and 965.
Great Britany. There is a story recorded, how on a time after his death he
appeared to S. Ethelwold his successor in the Sea of Winchester, together
with S. Birine and S. Swithin, all in great glory, and told him: That he who
was made worthy of so great glory in heaven, had no reason to be de^rauded of
his honor on earth. After which time S. Ethelwold caused his body to be kept
with more veneration and reverence then before. He died in great sanctity and
holiness of life, about the year of Christ, nine hundred forty and four, and
was buried at Winchester.

A The three and twentieth Day.
THE Celebrity of S. George Martyr, whose feast, for that he is Patron of
England, Mart. Romans and o^nes alij ^ac die.
has always been kept holy, and served with a double office throughout our
whole Realm in former Catholic times, according to the use of Sarum.

THE same day at VVimborne in Dorsetshire the Passion of S. Etheldred King of
the Sea. Chro^. an. Do. 872. Ingulph. de Croland in histor. Marian. Scot. and
Io. Stous in Anna(...)bus.
VVestsaxons and Martyr, who in the Danish persecution, was slain by the
Tyrannical Pagans, in hatred of Christian Religion, at an old Town in the
west part of England called VVhittingham, in the year of Christ, eight hundred
threescore and twelve. His body was brought to the Monastery of VVimborne, and
there entombed with great veneration, as is yet to be seen by his Epitaph,
recorded by our English Historiographers, thus: In hoc loco requies^it corpus
S. Etheldredi Regis VVestsaxonum Martyris, qui anno Domini octingentesimo
septuagesimo secundo, vigesimo tertio die Aprilis per manus Dacorum Paganorum
occubuit.

B The four and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury the depositio^ of S. Mellitus Bishop and Confessor, who being
sent Bed. l. 1. c. 20. and 30. and l. 2. c. 2. (...). 7. Sigeb. in Chron. Mart.
Romans and alij omnes hac die.
into England by S. Gregory the Great, with three other Copanions to assist S.
Augustine in the harvest of souls, was shortly after his coming first created
Bishop of London, and afterward governed the Sea of Canterbury, where in all
venerable sanctity of life and miracles, he ended his blessed days, about the
year of Christ, six hundred twenty and four: and was buried near to his
predecessors S. Augustine and S. Laurence, in the North porch of his
Cathedral Church of Canterbury.

THE same day in the Monastery of S. Bed. l. 3. c. 27. and l. 5. cap. 3.
Marcell. in vita S. Simibert. Molan. and alij.
Columbe in Scotland, the deposition of S. Egbert Abbot and Confessor, who
descended of a noble British linnage, sent S. VVillebrord and his fellows into
Flanders and Germany, to preach the Christian faith; as also gave instructions
to the monks of Scotland, about the observation of the feast of Easter. And
finally in great sanctity of life and miracles reposed happily in our Lord,
about the year of Christ, seven hundred twenty and nine.

ALso the same day at S. I^es in Hu^tingtonshire the inue^tio^ of the venerable
body Matthew. West. an. Dom. 1001. Andr. Leuca^der and Gotzelin. in eius vita.
of S. Iuo Bishop and Confessor, who coming out of Persia into England, there
preached the Christian faith; and dying about the year of Christ, six hundred,
was afterward on this day found out, and taken up by Alwyn Earl of the
Eastangles, and most honorably, and with great veneration entombed and placed
in the Abbey of Ramsey, in the year of Christ, one thousand and one, and
reign of King Ethelred of England.

MOreour the same day at Canterbury the Tra^slatio^ of S. Wilfrid Bishop of
York and Confessor, whose body in the second Danish persecution, was on this
day translated Calend. sec. vsum Sarum.
to Canterbury, from Rippon in Yorkshire, where he was first buried, by S. Odo
Archbishop of that Sea, and there with great solomnity and veneration, placed
in the Cathedral Church of that City, about the year of Christ, nine hundred
fifty and seven, whereat it pleased God to work miracles. His principal
festiuity is celebrated in our English Catholic Church upon the tweluth day
of October.

C The five and twentieth Day.
AT VVancourt in the Territory of Arras in * Chron. Lamberti de Loos Monach.
Camerac. ex antiq. monum. Eccles. Wa^cor^ens. and Attrebatensis.
the lower Germany, the Commemoration of S. Obodius Confessor and Eremite, who
descended of a very noble parentage in Ireland, and contemning the vanities of
the world, in his youth, went over into the Low-Countreyes, and there lead a
solitary and Eremiticall kind of life in the aforsaid Territory of Arras, to
the great edification of the Inhabitants of that place; where finally in great
sanctity and holiness of life, he ended his blessed days, about the year of
Christ, seven hundred; whose body is yet co^serued in the said town of
VVancourt, with great honor and veneration of the people dwelling therabout,
as Patron of that Village.

D The six and twentieth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of the Saints Modane and Midane Brothers and *
Confessors, who borne in the same Kingdom, and there descended of a worthy
family, contemned the vanities of the world, Io. Les^. Epis. Rossensis l. 5. de
gest. Scot. ex antiq. monum. Wion. in addit. ad l. 3 ligni vitae.
and became Religious monks of the venerable Order of S. Benedict in their
own Country, where in all kind of good learning, virtue, and sanctity of
life, they finally, in a good old age, reposed in our Lord, about the year of
Christ, eight hundred and four. Their memory has in former Catholic times
been famous throughout Scotland and Ireland, where many aultars and Oratories
have been dedicated in their honor, as the ancient Records of those Kingdoms
do declare.

E The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Heydentine-Monastery in the higher *
Germany the deposition of S. Walburge Virgin and Abbess, daughter to S.
Richard King of England, who after the death of her Father, being sent for by
S. Boniface Archbishop Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. Ord. D. Bened. l. 3. c. 250.
Anton. Demochar. l. 2. Sacrific. Missae. Arnold. Wion in Mart. hac die. Mart.
Romanu^ die 1. Maij.
of Mentz and her uncle, was by him made Abbess of the forsaid Monastery of
Heydentine, where in very great sactity and working of miracles she gave up her
soul to her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, seaue^ hundred
threscore and sixteen Her body was afterward translated to Eyst, and there
placed in the Cathedral Church of that City (near to the venerable body of
S. VVillebald her own brother;) out of which there distilleth until this day,
a most sweet and precious oil, very sovereign for many diseases. Over whose
tomb is engraven in marble this short Epitaph. Filia Regis erat, sed egenam se
faciebat,
Dives vt Christo, regnaret semper in ipso.
The feast of this her Translation is celebrated in Germany upon the first of
May with great solemnity and devotion of the people of Eyst. She was canonized
for a Saint by Pope Adrian the second.

F The eight and twentieth Day.
AT VVerdt in Cleeueland the Commemoration *
of S. Kortill Bishop and Martyr, who borne of a noble parentage in Scotland,
became first a monk in that Kingdom Albert. Cranz. Metrop. l. 1. ca. 26. Wion
l. 2. ligni vitae in Catalog. Episcop. Werde^s.
of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, in an ancient Monastery there called
Amarbaricke, whereof he being soon after made Abbot, went over into the Lower
Germany and Saxony to propagate the Christian faith newly planted in those
parts; and being there ordained Bishop of VVerdt, was a little after in hatred
of the same Christian faith, slain by the incredulous and barbarous Saxons,
about the year of Christ, eight hundred and twenty. His body was buried at
VVerdt aforsaid, and there kept in former times with great veneration.

G The nine and twentieth Day.
IN Northwales the Commemoration of S. Senan Confessor, who descended of an *
ancient and noble British blood, contemned the vanities of the world, and
became Acta. S. Wenefr. Virginis in diu(...) Codic. and in. lectio^. eiusdem
Sanctae, in Breuiar. Sar.
an Eremite, leading a solitary and severe kind of life in the North of Wales
near to the Teritorry of S. Wenefrides Father, by whom S. Wenefride her self
was often visited, and after her death lay many years buried near to his
body, until her translation to Shrewsbury. He lived in great sanctity and fame
of miracles in the year of Christ, six hundred and threescore, about which
time also he happily reposed in our Lord. His memory has in former Catholic
times been very famous in our Island of Great-Britany, but especially among the
Welch-men. And in Cornwall, there is yet a Village and Haven of his name,
commonly called S. Senans.

A The thirtith Day.
AT London the deposition of S. Erconwald Confessor and Bishop of that Sea,
Io. Trit. l. 4. de vir. Illust. Bed. l. 4. hist. c. 6. Mart. Romans Molan. and
omnes hac die.
son to Offa King of the Eastsaxons, who being first Abbot of Chertsey in
Surrey, which himself had built, was thence promoted to the Bishopric of
London, wherein he so excelled in all sanctity and holiness of life, that it
pleased God to manifest the same to posterity, by the wonderful miracles
wrought by him both alive and dead. He deseased in the year of Christ, six
hundred threescore and five, and was buried at London. He founded another
goodly Monastery of Nuns at Barking in Essex, whereof he ordained his own
sister Edilburge Abbess. The feast of his Translation was wont to be kept in
our Country in Catholic times, with great solemnity, upon the fourteenth of
November (in which place we have again made mention of him) especia^ly in the
Diocese of London, where it was appointed holy day, as the ancient Records of
S. Paul's Church do declare.

THE MONTH OF MAY.
B The first Day.
AT S. Assaphs in Flint-shire of Wales the deposition Arnol. Wion in Mart.
Benedict. ex Chro^. Britan. Molan. in addit. ad Vsua.
of S. Assaph Confessor and first Bishop of that Sea, who of a monk and
disciple of S. Kentigerne Abbot of Glasco in Scotland, was ordained Bishop of
an old town in Northwales named Elgoa, but afterward called S. Assaphes of
his own name, where he excelled in all kind of virtue and singular holiness of
life until his dying day, which happened in a venerable old age, about the
year of Christ, five hundred fourscore and sixteen.

THe same day at Fossis in the Territory of Namures in the lower Germany, the
deposition of S. Vltan Abbot and Confessor, son to Philtan King of Ireland,
and brother to Bed. l. 3. c. 19. Sigebert. in Chron. Vincent. in specul. and
Wion. hac die.
S. Furseus and S. Foillan, who going over into France and Flanders, built a
Monastery or hospital for the intertaynment of poor pilgrims at a place
called Fossis in the forsaid Territory of Namures, which he obtained of S.
Gertrude Abbess of Niuelle. And after infinite works of piety and devotion in
that kind, he there finally went to our Lord, about the year of Christ, six
hundred and threescore, and was buried at Fossis.

C The second Day.
IN the lower Germany the festiuity of S. German Bishop and Martyr, who being
He^iber. Rosweyd. Soc. Jesus in Tab. fast. SS. hac die.
an Englishman by birth, went over into the low Countries to preach the faith
of Christ, where finally for his reward, he received a Crown of Martyrdom.
His life is to be read at large in written hand, extant in a Monastery of the
Low-Countreyes, as testifies a Reverend Priest of the Society of Jesus, whose
festiuity he appoints on this day, in his book entitled, Fasti Sanctorum
etc.

THE same day at Padstow in Corn-wall the Commemoration of S. Piran Confessor,
*
who borne in Ireland of a Kings blood, for the love of God contemned the
world, and became an ^^^mite in that Kingdom, leading (for many years) a very
str^ct and severe kind of life, in so much that it pleased Chron. Hyber^. and
^ntiqn^om^m. Lee^^s. T^^sco.
God to work by him many miracles. Among which, one is recorded, that with the
flesh of three kyne, he sus^ayned ten armies of ne^ for eight day, as also
raised diverse dead men to life. And after all this he came over into England,
and lived at Padslow in Corn-wall, where in great sanctity of life, he finally
reposed in our Lord, and where in like manner his body has been kept with great
solemnity and veneration, in a Chapel of the forsaid town o Padslow, which
Chapel is there to be seen until this day.

D The third Day.
AT Mailros in the Kingdom of Northumberland, the deposition of S. Wal^er Io.
Mel^. in ad li^. ad vst (...). (...). ^est. (...). 6. de^^st. Scot. (...)
Da^idem. Regem.
Abbot and Confessor, son to David King of Scotland, who forsaking the
dignities and honors of the world, and refusing the Archbishopricke and
Metropolitan Sea of S Andrews in the same Kingdom, became a monk and
afterward Abbot of the goodly Monastery of Mail^os, situated in the Marches of
Sco^land, in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, where in very great sanctity of
life and working of miracles, he ended his blessed da^es, about the year of
Christ, one thousand and one hundred. His memory is yet famous throughout the
whole Realm of Sco^land, where many Chappells and altars have in Catholic
times been dedicated in his honor, but now quite destroyed and defaced by the
enemies of Gods truth, to the great lamentation of the Christian world.

E The fourth Day.
AT Bardney in Lincolnshire the Commemoratio^ *
of Blessed Ethelred Con^essour, Bed. l (...). ^ist. ^a^. 20. and in Epito ad
An. Do. 704. Pol. Vi^. l. 4. Mat. W^st. an. 692. et 705.
and King of the Mercians (or middle Englishmen) who after he had ruled that
Kingdom most laudably for thirty whole years together, left the same to
Cocured his Nephew, contemned the world, and took the habit of a monk in the
Monastery of Bardney of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, and afterward
became Abbot of the same p^ace, where he so greatly excelied in all kind of
virtue and sanctity of life, that his name was very famous in those days
throughout England. He died about the year of Christ, seven hundred and ten,
and was buried in in the same Monastery.

F The fifth Day.
AT Shepton in Warwickshire the Commemoration *
of S. Algi^e Queen, mother to King Edgar of blessed memory and Monarch of
England, who so greatly excelled in Matthew. West. (...). Do. 943. and 955. and
974.
piety, devotion, and other eminent virtues whilst she lived, that her body in
the year of Christ, nine hundred threescore and fourteen (which was some
thirty years after her death) being miraculously reueyled at Shepton, it
pleased God to work many miracles thereat, in testimony of her holiness, and
increase of devotion in our Island of Great Britany.

THE same day in Ireland the Commemoration *
of S. Scandalaus monk and Confessor, disciple to S. Columbe the Great of
that He^t. Boet. de gest. Sco. and Les^. ibid. (...). 4. histor. and alij.
Nation, who coming over into Scotland with a dozen other Companions in
company of the forsaid S. Columbe, for the Conversion of the Pic^es, who then
inhabited that Kingdom, was famous for sanctity and holiness of life, about the
year of Christ, five hundred and four score, about which time also he reposed
in our Lord.

G The sixth Day.
AT Lindis^erne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, the deposition of S. Edbert
Confessor and Bishop of that Sea, who Ve^. Beda. l. 2. (...). 29. et in vita
S. Cuthb. Mart. Romans Molan. and alij omnes hac die.
taking up the venerable body of S. Cuthbert eleven years after his death, and
finding it altogether vncorrupt, put the same into a new coffin, and said:
Happy were that man, who might lie in the old; and within a few days after,
full of sanctity and holiness of life, he being called out of this world, was
himself laid therein, according to his wish. At whose body it pleased God to
work many miracles in token of the innocence of his life. This happened in the
year of Christ, six hundred fourscore and eighteen.

THE same day at Landaffa in Clamorganshire, Matthew. west. an. 507. Gauf^.
Monum. l. 9. c. 4. et 13. ^ist. vet. Brit. Humfr L(...)i would i(...)ag. des^ript.
Britan.
the Translation of S. Dubritius Bishop and Confessor, who being sometime
Archbishop of Carleon upon Vske and Metropolitan of the Britans, resigned the
said Sea to S. David, and became an Eremite, leading a very strict and severe
kind of life in the mountains of Wales, until his dying day; which happened
about the year of Christ, five hundred and twenty. His body was first buried
in the Island of Bardsey, and afterward on this day translated to Landa^^a,
about the year of Christ, one thousand one hundred and twenty.

A The seventh Day.
AT Beuerl^^ in Yorkshire the festiuity of S. ^oh^ Bishop and Confessor,
commonly called (...) John of Beuerley, who after he had governed the Sea of
York in great sanctity Be(...). 5. c. 2* 3. 4. and 6. (...). de vi^. I(...)r.
(...). s^c. vs^ S^r. M(...)t. R(...). M^^a^. and alij.
and holiness of life, for the space of three and thirty years, famous for
miracles, he ended his venerable old days, in the year of Christ, seven
hundred twenty and one. His body was first buried at York, but afterward with
great honor and solemnity translated to Beuerl^y, by Bishop Alred his
successor, and there interred in the Monastery which himself had built, where
with great veneration the same was preserved even until our days, and visited
of many, especially for the great miracles that it has pleased God to work
thereat by his merits. The forsaid Monastery of Beuerley, was afterward, by
license of the Pope, made a Sanctuary, in the reign of King Registr. E(...)e
(...).
Ethelstane, who placed a certain Chair of stone in the Church, near unto S.
Io(...)s body, upon which, this ins^ription was engraven: Hae^ seeds lapidea
di(...)ur Freed-stoole, id est, Pacis Cathedra; ad quam reus sugiendo
perue^iens, o(...)odam ^^be^ securitate. This festival day of his was
afterward in a Council of Bishops held at London in the year 1416. appointed
to be kept holy day in his memory throughout England.

B The eight Day.
AT Mus^^i^ht in the Territory of Liege, the ^^^tiu^ty of S. Wyre Confessor,
d^sc^ded of a noble blood in Scotland, who being ordained Mar^. in vita S.
Simiberti apud S^ri^m. Mart. Romans Mola^. in addit. ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS.
Belgij
Bishop of the Deiri, in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, went over into the
lower Germany, where he became Co^fessor to Duke Pepin of Brabant, laboring
incessantly in teaching and preaching the Christian faith. And finally in great
sanctity and venerable old years, he departed this life, at the Monastery of
S. Odilia near Ruremond, upon the River of Mosa, about the year of Christ
seven hundred thirty and one. His body was translated afterward to Maestricht,
and there with great veneration of the Inhabitants is kept in the Cathedral
Church of that City.

C The ninth Day.
AT Vindecine among the Zwitzers in the higher Germany the deposition of S.
Beatus Confessor and Apostle of Zuizerland, who being son to a nobleman of
Britany, B. Rhena. in ^ist. German. l. 3. Eys^^. Ce(...). (...). part. 5. Mart.
Romans Vsuard. Annals Heluet.
went to Rome in the primitive Church, partly on pilgrimage, and partly to be
better instructed in the Christian faith. And as he returned back, he began to
preach to the Zwitzzers in Heluetia, and converted many of them to the says of
Christ, whereby he became their first Apostle. He died there in an Oratory which
himself had built, where also his body was buried, and many miracles wrought
thereat, about the year of Christ, one hundred and eleven, and was the first
Saint of our Nation we read of, that died out of Britany.

D The tenth Day.
AT Durham in the Bishopric the Translation of the venerable Body of S. Bid
^ri^ and Confessor, by whose wrytings the Christian world has been much
illustrated. When he was but seven years old, he was committed for his
education to S. Benedict, Abbot of the Monastery of Matthew. West. an. 737.
Author Co^tin. eius hist. l. 1. cap. 7. Trit. de vir. Illust. Molan. hac die.
Arnol. Wion l. 5. ligni vit. cap. 101. ex antiq. monum. Eccles. Dunelmens.
VVyremund, and afterward became a monk in the same place, serving God therein
all the days of his life, as himself testifies in the end of his fifth book
of the history of England. And being at last admonished of his death, by an
Angel, when the time drew near, which was on the feast of our Saviors
Ascension, kneeling down upon the pauement of his Cell, and singing, Gloria
patri, and silio, and spiritui sancto etc. have up the ghost, about the year
of Christ, seven hundred threscore and six. His body was afterward on this day
translated to Durham, and there with great veneration placed in the Tomb
together with S. Cuthbert, with this old inscription or Epitaph:

Beda Dei famulus, Monachorum nobile sydus,
Finibus e terrae profuit Ecclesiae.
Soles iste Patrum scrutando per omnia sensum,
Eloquio viguit, plurima composuit.
Annos in hac vita ter duxit vitae triginta,
Presbyter officio, vtilis ingenio.
Iunij septenis viduatus carne Kalendis
Angligena, Angelicam commeruit patriam.
His principal festiuity is kept in our English Catholic Church upon the 27.
of this month according to the use of Sarum, on which day he died.

E The eleventh Day.
IN the Marches of Wales the passion of S. Fremund King and Martyr, son to
Ossa King o^ the Mercians (of Middle (...)glishmen) Joan. Cap^^r. in Catal. S^.
Britan. Mola^. in addit. a^ Vsuar. Matthew. Pa^is. dei^^ Canonizat. an. Do. 1257.
who after a y^are and a half, that he had ruled his Kingdom, left the same,
and for the love of Christ became an I remite in the Marches of Wales, in a
l^ttle Island there, called in the Brit^sh tongue (...) sage, where together
with two virtuous priests he lived a very holy and exemplar kind of life,
until King Os^^ay, that was fallen from the Christian says, in hatred thereof,
secretly killed him, in the year of Christ, seven hundred threescore and
nine. He was afterward canonized for a Saint in the year, one thousand two
hundred fifty and seven, and reign of King Henry the third of England; whose
memory in Catholic times, has been very famous in our Island, especially among
the ancient Britans of North-VVales.

F The tweluth Day.
AT Lincoln the deposition of S. Remigius Confessor and Bishop of that Sea,
fa^ou^ for sanctity of life and learning. He (...) world in the year of
Christ, (...) thousand fourscore and eleven: whose (...) being on this day
interred with great (...), and veneration, in his Cathe(...) Church of
Lincoine, it pleased God in Matthew. West. an. Do. 1091. Pol. Vir. l. 10. histor.
Mat P r. an. 1253. and 1255. Sto. in Annal. in vita Guliel. primi an. 1086.
(...)any of his holiness to work wondrous signs ^nerat, especially in the
reign of King Henry the third, when as all England went on pilgrimage thither,
for the great miracles that were the^ daily wrought. He built two famous
Monasteryes by the help of King William the Co^querour, the one at Battle in
Sussex, the other at Cane in Normandy, which later he consecrated to S. Stephen
the Protomartyr. And was the first that translated the Bishopric of
Dorchester to Lincoln, where he built a goodly Cathedral Church, and adorned
the same (says Stow) with Clerks that were approved both in learning and
manners.

G The thirteenth Day.
AT the Monastery of Ramsey in the I Will *
of Ely, in the Province of the Eastangies, the Commemoration of S. Merwyne
Virgin, who being a woman of great sanctimony and holiness of life, was by
King Edgar of blessed memory, constituted Abbess of a new Monastery, which by
the help of Alwyn Earl of the Eastangles, S. Oswald Bishop of York Matthew.
West. in hist. maiori ad An. Do. 967. and de eius Electione ibid.
had newly ^ounded at Ramsey, where in all virtuous conversation and exemplar
good li^e, especially in the observation of Monastical discipline, full of
miracles, she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse, about the year of
Christ, nine hundred and fourscore, where her body was also interred, and kept
for a long time with great veneration. This forsaid Abbey of Ramsey is
different from another of the same name, which in times past has been also very
famous in our Island, being situated in Wiltshire, where until this day the
ruins thereof are remaining to be seen.

A The fourteenth Day.
AT Pollesworth in Warwickshire the Commemoration of S. Edith Virgin, and *
sister to holy King Edgar of blessed memory, Acta. S. Edithae junior is apud
Sur. to. 5. die 16. Sept. Matthew. West. in hist. etc.
who being a woman of rare virtue, was ordained Abbess of a Monastery at the
forsaid place of Pollesworth, which S. Modwene of Ireland had built with the
goods of her own inheritance; where in all kind of sanctimony of life, and
godly conversation, full of miracles, she ended her blessed days, about the
year of Christ, nine hundred and fourscore. This woman is different from
another S. Edith of the same name, whose festival days are celebrated upon
the sixteenth of September, and third of November, and was daughter to the
forsaid Edgar, and Abbess of Wilton, commonly called by the name of Edith the
younger, and Niece to this, of whom here we have made mention.

B The fifteenth Day.
AT Ghele in Brabant the festiuity of S. Dympna Virgin and Martyr, daughter
Sur. to. 3. de vit. SS. ^a^ ^ie. Mola^. in adait. ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS.
Belgij Rob. B^ckl. in eius vita. Mart. Romans and alij o(...)es.
to a pagan King of Ireland, who being secretly instructed in the Christian
faith by S. Gereberne a Priest of her own Nation, after the death of her
mother the Queen, her Father would have married her, and made her his wife:
which thing the holy Virgin abhorring, stole privily away into the lower
Germany, whither her Father following her, and finding her out, cut of her
head, with his own hands, together with the head of S. Gereberne in hatred of
Christian Religion, about the year of Christ, 600. Her body is honorably
reconded at Ghele, and there is kept with great veneration, whereat it has
pleased God to show infinite miracles, in sign of her innocence, especially in
casting out Devils, as well to his own glory, as increase of devotion in the
Christian world, and especially in the low Countries. S. Gereberns body was
interred at the town of Santen upon the river of Rhene, and there has Relics
were kept, whiles that place was Catholic, with great veneration of the
dwellers therabout.

C The sixteenth Day.
AT Bordeaux in Gascoyne of France the deposition of S. Simon Confessor, an
Englishman by birth, and General of the Spec(...)n ^ratr. Carmelit. Io. Mola^.
in addit. ad vsuar. hac die.
Religious men called Carmelites, who as he prayed to the blessed Virgin, she
appeared with a troop of Angels, holding up the Scapulare or Cool of his
Order in her hands, and said: That whosoever died in that habit should be
saved. He desceased at Bordeaux in the visitation of his Generallship, about
the year of Christ, one thousand, fifty and two, where his body is yet kept
with great veneration, God having, through his merits, adorned the same with
many miracles.

THE same day at the town of S. Albans in Hartsordshire, the Translation of S.
Alban Lord of V^r^l^me, knight of the Bath, high Steward of the Britans, and
the first Martyr that suffered for Christ in our Hand. Whose body was on this
day by Offa King of the Mercians, in the year of Christ 794. Matthew. West. an.
794. and 796. Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Joan. Lidgate Monac. Burie^sis in eius
vita. vid. Respons. ad D. Cook an. 1606. edi* (...). 6. (...). 70.
taken up and translated to a Church, that he had newly built in his honor,
without the town of S. Albans. In which place also he founded a goodly
Monastery, and endowed it with great lands and possessions. This King Offa went
after in person to Rome, and procured S. Albans Canonization, and privileges
for the said Monastery, of Pope Adrian the first: As also gave to the Sea of
Rome a certain tribute of his Kingdom, gathering yearly, of every family of
his dominions, certain money for the same, commonly called Peter Pence, which
tribute continued in our Island until King Henry the 8. when first the breach
began with the sea Apostolic.

THE same day in like manner in Scotland Romans Mart. Molan. and alij omnes hac
die.
the deposition of S. Brandan Abbot and Confessor, whose life and miracles
have been famous in times past in our Island of Great-Britany. He flourished in
the year of Christ 570. about which time also he died.

D The seventeenth Day.
AT Elnona in the higher Germany the Translation of the venerable bodies of
Three of the eleven thousand Virgins, martyred with S. Vrsula, who be(...)g of
the British Nation, suffered death for defense of their v(...)ginity and
Christian Religion, at Cullen in Io. Mola^. in ad^i^. ^d vsuar. Regist.
Ecclesi^ Elnone^s.
Germany, with the forsaid S. V^sula, and her companions, about the year of
Christ, three hundred fourscore and three. From whence on this day, three of
their said glorious bodies were translated to Elnona, and there very honorably
and with great veneration reconded; whereat it has pleased God to work
miracles, as well for the increase of devotion in the people, as also for
confirmation of Catholic Religion in those parts.

E The eighteenth Day.
AT York the deposition of S. Sewall Confessor and Archbishop of the Matthew.
Pa^is. in ^ist. Ang. an. 1255. 1256. 1257 and 1258. Catal. Episco. Eborace^s.
same Sea, sometime scholar in Oxford to S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury,
whose integrity and innoc^cy of life, together with his admirable patience in
adversity, was so acceptable to God, that it pleased his divine Majesty in
sign thereof, to work miracles by him both alive and dead: and among other, it
is recorded, that lying on his deathbed, he turned water into wine, by only
blessing it. He ended his venerable old days; after much sorrow and
tribulation, in great sanctity and holiness of life, in the year of Christ,
one thousand two hundred fifty and eight, upon the day of our Blessed Saviors
Ascension, deserving to receive the Crown of his labors, on the same day,
that Christ our Savior, after his bitter passion here on earth for the
Redemption of mankind, entered into the glory of his eternal Father. His body
was buried in hisowne Cathedral Church of York, and there kept and visited
with great veneration of the Northern people, even until the time of King
Henry the 8. for the Miracles that had been wrought thereat.

F The ninteenth Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Dunstan S(...)r. to. 2. hac die. Gul.
Ma(...)s. in hist. Angl. Petr. in Catal. l. 8 Pol. Vir. l. 7. Mar^. Romans Mola^.
and alii.
Bishop and Confessor, who being first Abbot of the ancient and goodly
Monastery of Glastenbury in Somersetshire, was thence promoted to the
Bishopric of Worcester, and after to London, and ^ast of all to Canterbury:
whose godly works of piety, together with the multitude of his miracles, are
manifest to the Christian world. He d^ed in the year of Christ, nine hundred
fourscore and eight, and was buried at Canterbury, where his body was wont, in
Catholic times, to be kept with great veneration of all England, until these
later days of schisms and heresies in our Kingdom.

THE same day at Towers in France the deposition of S. Al^uine, Abbot and
Confessor, who borne in Yorkshire, and sometime School-maister of York, went
over into France, and became Mai^^er to the Emperor Trit. de Script. E^^l. l.
2. Vincent. in specul. lib. 23. Gazelin. M^la^. and Wion hac die. in s^is
Martyrologijs.
Charles the Great, by whose help he founded the University of Paris, about the
year of Christ, eight hundred and four, having himself been scholar to our
famous S. Bid in his youth. His notable labors and works in Gods Church are
yet memorable throughout the Christian world. He died at Towers in France about
the year of Christ 813. and was the first that composed the Mass and Office
of the blessed Trinity, and of S. Stephen the Protomartyr, which being
afterward approved by our Mother the holy Catholic Church, is the same that
now is usually said in the Roman Missal and Breuiary.

G The twentieth Day.
AT Here^ord the festiuity of S. Ethelbert King of the Eastangles and Martyr,
who coming into Mercia to visit King Ossa, and to treat of a Marriage with
his daughter, was through the malice of wicked Quendred wife to Ossa, miserably
slain at a town now called Sutton-wallis, four miles distant from West. an.
793. Pol. Vir. lib. 4. Co^tin. Ve^. Bed. l. 2. (...). ^1, Mola^. (...). Capgr.
in Catal. SS. Britan. Girald. Cambr. and alij.
Here^ord, partly for ambition, thereby to enjoy his Kingdom, and partly also
for that he was a Christian. His body being presently brought to Heresord, and
there interred, it pleased God forth with to show the innocency of his cause,
by the wonderful miracles wrought thereat; Over which, King Kenulphus afterward
erected a goodly Church in his honor, placing there a Bishops Sea, and which
is now the Cathedral Church of that City. He suffered in the year of Christ
793.

A The one and twentieth Day.
AT Fin^hall among the Northumbers the Matthew. West and Paris. an. 1170. Guliel.
Ne^brig. l. 2. cap. 20. Item in vita S. Roberti Abbat. Mart. Romans and alij.
deposition of S. Godricke Eremite, who after he had lead a solitary life, for
threescore years together, and twice on pilgrimage for devotion visited our
Saviors Sepulcher at Jerusalem, and the blessed Apostles bodies at Rome, full
of great sanctity of life and veneble old age, together with innumerable
miracles, he finally reposed in our Lord, in the year of Christ, one thousand
one hundred and seauenty. His body was buried at Fin^hall in an Oratory which
himself had built, whereat, even until the days of Queen Elizabeth, many
miracles were wrought.

THE same day at Constantinople the deposition of Blessed Constantine the
Great, who borne in our ^^and og Great Britany, according to ancient
Traditions; was the first Christian Emperor, that restored peace M(...)nal.
(...). (...) die. (...). in ad li^. ad Vsuard.
to the Church of God. He is by the Greeks canonized for a Saint, and his
festiuity appointed on this day: among whom also many goodly Churches and
altars, have in former ages, been dedicated in his honor. And in North wales of
our Island, there is yet remaining to be seen a fair Church, ^r^ted and
dedicated in his name.

B The two and twentieth Day.
AT VVindesore the deposition of holy K. Henry, the sixth of that name, of
England, Pol. Viz. l. 24. hist. A^gl. Io. Sto in A(...)l. A^gl. in Ed(...). 4.
Reg(...). E(...). W^^des.
who being a most virtuous and innocent Prince, was wrongfully deposed by King
Edward the 4. and cast into the tower of London, where a little after he was
most barbarously slain by Richard Duke of Gloucester, in the year of Christ,
one thousand four hundred threescore and eleven. His body was first buried in
the Monastery of Cher^sey, where presently it began to do miracles, which
being s^ene, it was with great solemnity and veneration translated to
VVindesore, and there honorably interred in the Chapel of S. Gregory, whereat
also it pleased God, in witness of his innocent life, to work many miracles.
Moreover it is recorded, that his Velvet ^at which he used to wear, being put
on men's heads, that were troubled with the head-ake, were presently cured. He
builded the famous school of Eaton, and was the founder of the Kings College
in Cambridge. King Henry the seventh dealt which Pope Julius the second about
his Canonization, but by reason of both their deaths, the same was broken of.

C The three and twentieth Day.
AT Rochester in Kent the deposition of S. William Martyr, who borne in the
Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Ang. Thom. Mo(...)m. in (...) vita. Molan. in ad^it. ad
vsuar.
town of Perth in Scotland, and taking his pilgrimage toward Hierusale on
foot through England, was by his own servant slain in the high way, a little
from the aforsaid City of Rochester; whose body being brought to the town, it
pleased God forthwith to work many miracles thereat in sign of his innocence,
where the same was after interred, and kept with great veneration in the
Cathedral Church of S. Andrew, in the same City, until these our days. The
story of his martyrdo^e and miracles, is written at large by Thomas Monmouth,
who lived about the year of Christ, one thousand, one hundred and threescore.

D The four and twentieth Day.
AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the Commemoration of holy King Edgar
Confessor, *
and first Monarch of England, whose glorious acts in Gods Church are famous
to all posterity. He builded and reedified seven and forty Monasteryes, that
had been destroyed by the incursions of other barbarous Nations, and endowed
them with great maintenance; as also caused, by Pol. Vir. l. 6 histo. Angl.
Matthew. West. an. 975. et 1052. Vincent. in specul. l. 25. c. 81. Petr. in
Catal. l. 11. c. 65. et alij. wion l. 4. ligni vitae.
his intercession to the Sea Apostolic, all the Clergy of his Realm to be
reformed. In the hour of his Nativity, it is recorded, that S. Dunstan heard a
voice of Angels singing, Pax Anglorum Eccles^ae, etc. Peace to the Church of
England. He died in all sanctity and holiness of life, in the year of Christ,
nine hundred threescore and fifteen: whose body was with all solemnity and
veneration, honorably interred at Glastenbury; which being taken up in the
year, one thousand fifty and two (almost fourscore years after his death by
Aldar Abbot of that place, was found whole and vncorrupt, and being cut, fresh
blood issued therout, as if he had been newly dead; whereupon he was put into a
costly shrine of silver, which himself had sometime given to that Church, and
placed upon the high altar, together with the head of S. Apollinaris, and the
relics of S. Vincent Martyrs, whereat miracles are recorded to have been
wrought: And so continued there until the time of King Henry the eight, and
decay of that Monastery.

E The five and twentieth Day.
AT Sherborne in Dorcetshire the deposition Bed. l. 4. hist. c. 19. west. an.
794. Sur. in eius vita to. 3. Guliel. Mabnes. de Pont. Angl. in Adelmo. Mart.
Romans and alij.
of S. Adelme Bishop and Confessor, nephew to Inas King of the Westsaxons, who
trauayling into France in his youth, after his return, became first a monk of
the Venerable Order of S. Benedict at Malmesbury, and afterward being made
Abbot of that Monastery, went to Rome in company of King Ceadwall, and was
there created Bishop of Sherborne in Dorcetshire by Pope Sergius, and sent
back to his bishopric, where after great labors and many notable books
written for the instruction of men in Christian Religion, but especially one of
Virginity, which he dedicated to the Nuns of Barkensteed, and whereby many
were moved to that holy kind of Religious life, he finally reposed in our Lord,
in the year of Christ, seven hundred and nine. His body was buried at
Sherborne first, but afterward removed to Maimesbury, where the same was wont
to be kept in Catholic times with great veneration.

F The six and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Augustine Confessor and first Bishop of
that Sea, who being sent from Rome by S. Gregory Greg. l. 5. Registr. Epist.
53. Red. l. 1. ^^p. 23. and deinceps Breuiar. six. vsum Sarum.
the Great to preach the Christian says to the English nation, first converted
King Ethelbert of Kent, and afterward by himself and others, the whole Nation,
and so became our Apostle. He died in the year of Christ, six hundred, and was
buried at Canterbury, where his feast was wont to be kept ho^yday with great
solemnity, and so likewise throughout the whole Diocese.

THE same day at Gl^stenbury in Somersetshire the festiuity of the Saints
Fugatius Pont. Vi^un. Gauf Monum. in hist. Britan. Pol. Vir. Matthew. West.
Cestrens. and alij.
and Damianus Confessors, who being sent into Britany by S. Eleutherius Pope
(whose ^east is also this day celebrated) did baptize K. Lucius with the
greatest part of his Kingdom, as also did institute three Archbishoprickes (to
wit London, York, and Carleon in Wales) and twenty eight Bishoprics in
place of so many Flaminies, teaching and instructing the people in all
Christian virtues and cerimonyes necessary for that new planted Catholic
Church. And when they had thus labored for many years, sull of most venerable
old age, and sanctity of life, they both ended their blessed days, about the
year of Christ, one hundred fourscore and eleven, and are said to have been
buried at Gl^stenbury.

G The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Geruaux in Yorkshire the deposition of S. Bid Priest, who being a monk of
Matthew. West. an. 714. Con^in. eius bist. l. 1. cap. 7. and 8. Bar. in annot. ad
Mart. Romans bac die. Trit. devir. Illustr. l. 3. c. 155. et l. 4. c. 21.
the Order of S. Benedict in the Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul, upon the
river bank of VVyre, in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, so illustrated Gods
Church by his wrytings, that not only in his life time, but ever since he has
for the same been called by the name of Venerable. He departed this world in
great sanctity and holiness of life about the year of Christ, seven hundred
threescore and six, and was buried at Geruaux in the Monastery there, with this
Epitaph.

Presbyter hic Beda requieseit carne sepultus;
Dona Christ animam in caelis gaudere per aeuum.
Daque i i sophia debriari font, cui iam
Suspirauit orans intento semper amore.
But his body being afterward translated to Durham, and placed in the tomb
together with S. Cuthbert, was there kept with great reverence, even until
the days of the late Queen Elizabeth. There is a very ancient Table hanging
in the new Church of S. Peter at Rome, which my self have seen and read,
wherein are registered these words: In medio Ecclesiae ante porta^, quae dicitur
Argentea, sub lapide circulari, sepultum est corpus Venerabilis Bedae
Presbyteri etc. But it is not (I suppose) to be understood of this our S. Bid
of England, (as many do) but rather of another of the same name, though not so
ancient as he, who was a Monk also of S. Benedictes Order, and very famous for
learning, in the time of Charles Tabul^e Canobij S. Benig. prope Genuam.
the Great, with whom he lived; and after his death (which was in the year of
Christ, eight hundred and ninteene) his body shining with miracles, was for a
time translated to the Monassery of S. Benignus, near Genua in Italy, and
perhaps afterward to Rome. But whosoever this was, it is not any way manifest,
that our S. Bid was ever at Rome, either alive or dead.

A The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Luxouiu^ in France the Commemoration *
of S. Jonas Abbot and Confessor, who borne in Scotland of a noble parentage,
and contemning the world in the flower of his youth, went over into France and
thence into Lombardy to S. Columbane the Great, where he became a monk of the
venerable Order of S. Benedict, and S. Columbanes Arnol. Wion l. 2. ligni vitae
de Script. ord. Diui Benedict. Molan. passim in addit. ad vsuar.
disciple, and was afterward made Abbot of Luxouium, where in all kind of good
learning, sanctity of life, and other virtues, he ended his blessed days,
about the year of Christ, six hundred and thirty. He wrote the lives of S.
Columbane aforsaid, S. Eustachius and S. Bertulph Abbots, which are to be seen
at large in Surius, though being annexed to the third Tome of S. Bedes works,
are, by error, attributed unto him.

B The nine and twentieth Day.
ATS. Buriens in Corn-wall, the Commemoration *
of S. Burien Virgin, who being an Irish-woman of great nobility by Ex antiq.
Monum. Cornu. et Registr. eiusdem Eccl. ibid.
birth, came over into England and lived a most virtuous and godly life for
many years in Corn wall, where in very great sanctimony and working of
Miracles, she finally gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse. Her memory is
very famous, even until this day in our Ila^d of Great Britany, especially
among the Cornish-men, where there is a town and port of her name in the Cape
or Promont of Cornwall, commonly called S. Buriens: where also in times past
has been a famous Church erected in her honor.

C The thirtith Day.
AT Colchester in Essex the Commemoration of S. Hieu Virgin, who borne of o^ a
noble blood in the Kingdom of the *
Northumbers, and building there a goodly Monastery called Heorth^u (of which
the holy Virgin Hilda was first Abbess) is said to De ea vid. ven. Be^. l. 4.
c. 23. degest. Angl. Hulus meminit Arnol^. Wion in Append. ad l. 3. lig. vita.
have been the first woman in that Kingdom, that took upon her the vow and
habit of a Nun, being veyled and consecrated thereunto by S. Aidan Bishop of
Lindisferne. And a^terward coming into the Province of the Fastangles, to the
City called Calcaria (and now Colchester) in all sanctimony and holiness of
life, she finally there ended her blessed days, about the year of Christ, six
hundred fifty and seven.

D The one and thirtith Day.
AT Eucsham in VVorcester-shire the festiuity of S. VVolstan, Nephew to two
Kings of Mercia, who being slain in hatred of Christian Religion by one of
his own Kinsmen, a great light from heaven was seen for thirty days
together Matthew. West. an. 849. I^. Capg. in Catal. SS. Brita^. Author Contin.
hist. Ven. Bed. l. 2. cap. 31.
to descend and remain over the place, where he lay killed. By this miraculous
token, his body being found out, was first buried in the Monastery of
Rependowne (now called Ripon) in Yorkshire: and after when many miracles were
wrought thereat, it was translated to the Abbey of Euesham (which holy S. Egwyn
Bishop of Worcester had founded not many years before) and there with great
solemnity and veneratio^ placed in the Church of that Monastery whereat it
pleased God, in testimony of his innocence, to show wondrous things. He was
martyred upon the vigill of Pentecost, about the year of Christ, eight hundred
forty and nine.

THE MONTH OF JUNE.
E The first Day.
AT Stone in Staffordshire the Commemoration of the *
Saints Rufin and Vlfade brothers and martyrs, so^ns to VVulserus a Paga^ King
of the Mercians; who for Ex monumentis Monast. Petri de burgo, and Registr.
Lichfield.
that they were made Christians, and had received baptism at the hands of S.
Chad Bishop of Lichfield, were both by their own Father slain in hatred
thereof, as they were at prayer in S. Chads Oratory, about the year or Christ,
six hundred threescore and eight. Their bodies were by their mother Queen
Ermenild (afterward also a Saint) conveyed to Stone, and there kept with great
veneration, where also in time, was erected a goodly Church, together with a
Priory, and dedicated in their honor. But the K. their Father soon after
repe^ting him of the fact, with great sorrow and cont^ition came to S. Chad,
and asking him forgiveness, received the Christian faith: whereupon destroying
all the Temples of the Idolatrous Gods in his Dominions, did in their places
build Churches and Monasteryes; and among the rest, he founded the goodly Abbey
of Medeshamsteed (now called Peterburrow) dedicating the same unto God and S.
Peter the Apostle, and enriching it with many and large poss^ssions.

F The second Day.
AT Dunfermelling in Scotland, the Commemoration *
of B^essed Malcoline, the third King of that name, and husband to the famous
S. Margaret Queen of Scotland, whose godly works of piety and devotion are
famous all to posterity, especially to his successors, as well in that
Kingdom, as to other Princes of blood in Europe. He was so zealous in the love
of God, that he became more holy then any of his predecessors had been before
him, being wholly addicted to the repayring and erecting of Churches,
Monasteryes, and Bishoprics. Moreover he was accustomed, with his Religious
Qu. S. Margaret, every day to serve with his Turgot. Episc. S. Andreae in eius
vita. Hector Deidonatus l. 12. hist. Scot. Molan. in append. ad vsuar Rob. Buc.
in vita S. Margar. Reg. Sco.
own hands 300. poor people, with meat and drink, he on the one side, and
she on the other: and was the first King of that Nation that created Earls in
Scotland. Which Kingdom after he had governed in all virtuous and pious
manner, for six and thirty years, coming into England, was violently
oppressed and slain at Anwicke in the borders of Scotland, by Robert Mowbray
Earl of Northumber land, together with his eldest son Edward, to the great
lamentation of his Country, and was buried at Dunfermelling, in the year of
Christ, one thousand fourscore and twelve.

G The third Day.
AT Arc in Apulia in the Kingdom of Naples, the Commemoration of S. *
Eleutherius Confessor, who borne of a very Ex Archiuio Eccl. Arcens. and
inscriptione ipsius Sepulchri.
good parentage in England, and taking his journey to Jerusalem for devotion,
returned thence back by Italy, where for the love of God he became an Eremite
or pilgrim, leading a strict and severe kind of life, so far from his native
Country; at what time the plague infecting sorely those parts, full of great
sanctity, and holiness of life, he finally rested in our Lord. His body is kept
at the forsaid town of Arc until this day, with due honor and veneration of
the inhabitants, for the Miracles, that by his merits, it has pleased God to
work thereat, and there is visited as chief Patron of the Village.

A The fourth Day.
AT Bodmin in Corn-wall the deposition of S. Patrocke Bishop and Confessor,
whose Matthew. West. in hist. maiori ad (...). 905. Calend* sec. rs(...) Sarum
hae die, Sto. in vita S. Edou. Conf.
most godly life and virtues, have been very famous in former ages, throughout
our whole Island, but especially in Corn-wall, where his memory is fresh until
this day, and where many altars and Oratories in Catholic times, have been
erected and dedicated in his honor. He lived about the year of Christ, eight
hundred and fifty; and is said to have been the first bishop of Corn-well,
placing his Episcopal Sea at the fornamed town of Bodmin, which Bishopric
was afterward translated to S. Germans at Cridington (now called Kirton) in
the same Province, and lastly to Excester in Devonshire by King Edward the
Confessor, in the year of Christ, one thousand and fifty.

B The fifth Day.
AT Dockum in VVest-frizland the passion of S. Bonisace Archbishop of Mentz and
Apoltic of Germany, who being an Englishman Ve^. Bed. in Epit. Sigebert in
Chron. Marian. Scot. l. 2. hist. an. 717. T^i. d^vi^. Illustr. Mart. Romans A^^,
Vsuard. and alij.
by birth, went over into Germany, and th^ce to Rome, where he was created the
first Bishop of the forsaid City of Mentz, and sent thither to preach the
Christian faith, which he did incessantly for sixteen years together,
reducing many thousands from their Idolatry, to the true worship of Christ,
building Churches and Monasteryes for the co^tinuation and propagation thereof.
And at last going into Frizland to preach to that people was there ^^ayne by
the enemies of Christ, at the forenamed town of Dockum, in the year of our
Lord, seven hundred fifty and four. His body was afterward translated to
Mentz, and there honorably placed in the Monastery of Fulda, which himself
had founded.

THE same day also, and same place, the passion of S. Eboam, and S. Adlar
Bishops; Io. Moia^. i^ addi^. advsuar. and in I^di^. SS. Belgij
S. Vintruge, S. Walter, and S. Adelhere Priests; S. Hamunt, and S. Boso
Deacons; S. VVaccare, S. Gunderbere, S. VVilbere, S. Hildebrand, and S. Adolph
Monks, and others to the number of fifty, most of them Englishmen, who were
with the forsaid S. Bonisace martyred Sur. to. 3. in Vita S. Bonifacij
in Frizland for preaching the Christian faith. And as they were his fellows
in travail and labors of propagating the name of Christ: so were they worthy
to be made partakers of his Martyrdom. Their bodies are most of them kept at
Maestricht upon the River of Mosa, with great veneration of the Inhabitants.

C The sixth Day.
IN the Monastery of Blandine near Gaunt in ^landers the depositio^ of S.
Gudwall Bishop Io. Mola^. in ad^i^. ad vs^ar. (...) die. Sigebert. in Chro^.
an. Do. 958. Sur. 10. 3. Vit. SS. and alij.
and Confessor, who borne of a noble and ancient British blood, and despising
all worldly honors and preferments, built many Monasteryes in our Island, and
became Father to an hundred and fourscore monks, which he instructed in all
kind of virtue and good learning: and at last being made Bishop, he went over
into France and Flanders to preach the Christian faith in those parts, where
famous for sanctity of life and miracles, he finally reposed in our Lord, about
the year of Christ, four hundred and three. His body was first buried in the
forsaid Monastery of Blandine, but being afterward brought into England, was
thence again in the second persecution of the Danes, translated to Gaunt, by
Arnulph Earl of Flanders, and S. Gerrard Abbot, about the year of our Lord,
nine hundred and fifty.

D The seventh Day.
AT Knaresburge in Yorkshire the deposition of S. Robert Abbot and Confessor,
who borne in the same Province, became Sur. to. 3. Romans Mart. and Mola^. hac
die. Matthew. Paris. an. 1238. 1243. and 1271. de eius miraculis.
first a monk at VVhitby, and then at Fountains, and last of all was ordained
Abbot of Knaresburge of the Order of Cisterce; whose most holy life and
co^uersatio^, has been wittnessed by the manifold miracles wrought at his body
after his death; out of which (in the time of King Henry the third) there
distilled a precious sweet oil, very sovereign for many diseases. He was wont
in his life time to recite every day an hundred and fifty psalms, in honor of
Christ and the blessed Virgin Mary. He died in the year of our Lord, one
thousand one hundred and fifty, and was buried in his own Monastery.

THE same day at Worcester the Translation of S. VVolstan Confessor and
Bishop of the same Sea, whose wonderful life and miracles have been famous
throughout England. His body being taken up on this day Matthew. Paris. an. 1201.
and 1218.
was found sound and uncorrupted, together with his Pontifical vestments,
wherein he was buried, which was more the^ an hundred Wion hac die. in suo
Martyr. Malmes. and Flor. in hist. Angl.
years after his death; and was very solemnly, and with great veneration set
in a more eminent place of his own Cathedral Church of Worcester, in the
year of Christ 1218. It is recorded, that the said Church being afterward
burned by casual fire, the tomb wherein his body lay, was not so much as
touched with the flame.

E The eight Day.
AT York the deposition of S. William Confessor and Bishop of that Sea, Pol.
Vir. lib. 12. Guliel. Neubrig. l. 1. cap. 17. and 27. Mola^. in addit. ad
Vsuard. Catal. Epis. Eborace^s.
kinsman to Stephen King of England, who by false slanders being accused to
Pope Eugenius the third, was deposed from his Bishopric, and one Murdacke set
up in his place, but after again restored by Pope Anastasius the fourth:
wherein with great signs of sanctity and innocence of life, together with many
miracles, he finally ended his blessed days, in the year of Christ, one
thousand one hundred fifty and four, and was buried at York. It is recorded
by Polidor Virgil, that when he was restored again to his Bishopric, and
coming toward York, the people flocked in so great number to congratulate
and welcome his return, that passing over the River beyond Pont-fract, the
throng and press was so great, that the bridge (being but of wood) brake, even
^ust, as the Bishop was over, and threw all the rest into the water: which when
the holy man saw, he fell down upon his knees, and besought our Lord to save
them. Whose prayers were soon heard. For though the stream was very strong
and violent, yet were they every one preserved from drowning.

THE same day in the Diocese of Metz in the hig^er Germany, the deposition of
S. Io. T^it. l. 3. (...). 283. le. (...). Ill^st. ord. D. Be^e li(...). Wion in
Mart. hac di^. and l. 3. lig. vitae.
Distoode Bishop and Confessor, who borne in Ireland, and a monk of the Order
of S. Benedict, was ordained Bishop of Dullyn in the same Kingdom; but going
over into Germany to preach the Christian faith, he resigned that dignity, and
became Abbot of a Monastery there, which until this day is called of his name
S. Disibodes, in the forsaid Diocese of Mentz, where in great sanctity of life
and Miracles, he ended his blessed da^es, about the year of Christ, seven
hundred.

F The ninth Day.
IN Scotland the deposition of S. Colme.
Columbe Abbot and Confessor, who borne in Ireland, and descended of a noble
parentage, Bed. l. 3. c. 4. and 25. et in Epic. an. 565. He^m. Contr. in Chron.
an. 596. Mart. Romans Baron. t^m. 3. Annal. et o^nes alij. hac die.
forsook the world, and all other eart^^y preferments, and became a monk in
one of the islands of Orcades, called (...)oy, in a Monastery there of the Order
of S. Benedict, whereof at last he being made abbot, was so famous for sanctity
and holiness of life, that even until this day his memory is fresh to the
Christian world, especially in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland,
where there be many Churchs yet remaining, dedicated in his honor. He
desceased about the year of Christ, five hundred fourscore and sixteen: whose
body was afterward transl^ted into Ireland to the town of Dune in the Province
of Vlster, and there with great solemnity and veneration interred, together
with the sacred relics of S. Patricke and S. Brigit. He by his preaching
converted to the faith of Christ, the Pictes that inhabited Scotland, and is
called their Apostle, working very many miracles among them to his dying day.

G The tenth Day.
AT S. Edmu^dsbury in Suss^lke the Translation of S. Edmu^d King of the
Easta^gles and martyr, who in the Danish incursions, under the Captains Hinguar
and Hubba, being first whipped, and then, bound to tree, and shot full of
shaftes, was finally beheaded. All which torments he most constantly endured,
ever calling upon the name of Jesus, until he had finished his Martyrdom,
which was in the year of Christ, eight hundred threescore and ten. His
principal festiuity is celebrated in our Catholic Church of England, upon
the twentieth of November: but his body being taken up afterward on this day,
was with great solemnity translated from Hexam in Northumberland (where Sur.
to. 6. in eius vita 20. Nou. Registr. Monast. S. Edmu^d. Buriens.
he was martyred) and placed in a goodly shrine, richly adorned with jewels
and precious stones in a Church erected in his honor in Suffolk, which of his
name was ever since called S. Edmu^dsbury, whereat it is recorded many miracles
have been wrought. And after this again, in the year, one thousand and ten,
the Danes inuading the Province of the Easta^gles, Alwyn the Bishop of that
Diocese brought the body of S. Edmu^d from Bury aforsaid to London: at the
coming whereof in at Criplegate many miracles were wrought, where for the space
of three years it remained in the Parish Church of S. Gregory near unto S.
Paul's, and then was translated the second time to Bury, in the year of
Christ, one thousand and thirteen.

THE same day in Scotland, the festiuity Abbo Floriace^s. in eius vita. Pet. in
Catal. Osbert. de stoke in eius vita. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum. Mart. Romans
Molan. and alij hac die.
of S. Margaret Queen, wife to holy Malcome, King of that nation, and daughter
to Prince Edward, surnamed the Outlaw, Son of Edmund Ironside King of
England, whose godly life and virtues, especially in devotion and liberal
alms to the poor, are yet famous both at home and abroad. She died in great
sanctimony of life and miracles about the year of Christ, one thousand
fourscore and twelve, upon the sixteenth of November: though her principal
festiuity be celebrated upon this day both in England and Scotland.

THE same day also at Rochester in Kent, the deposition of S. Ithimar Bishop
and Bed. l. 3. c. 14. and 20. Herebert. Rosweyd. in fast. SS. hac. die. wion l.
3. ligni vita.
Confessor, who being a man of excellent learning and wisdom, succeeded S.
Paulinus in that Sea, being consecrated thereto, by Honorius Archbishop of
Canterbury: which when he had governed most worthily for 17. years together,
in great sanctity, and holiness of life, he reposed in our Lord, about the year
of Christ, six hundred threscore and eleven, and was buried in S. Andrews
Church at Rochester.

A The eleventh Day.
AT Lindisserne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, the Commemoration of *
S. Edilwald Priest and Confessor, who borne in our Island of a noble
parentage, succeeded S. Cuthlert for twelve years together, in leading an
Eremiticall life in the Island of Farne, commonly called Holy Island. He was
endued with so rare and singular virtues, that Ve^. Bed. in vita S. Cuthber.
and l. 5. c. 1 Hist. Angl.
his very name was famous in those days, throughout England and Scotland. S.
Bid recounteth that a certain skin wherewith S. Edil(...)ald had stopped a
hole in his Oratory did miracles after his death: as also how by his prayers,
he ceased a storm or te^pes, that arose on the sea, when certain of his
friends, that came to visit him in the Island, returned homeward, which happened
about the year of Christ, six hundred, fourscore and nynteene; about which
time also he died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church at Lindisserne in the
raygne of King Elfride of Northumberland

B The tweluth Day.
AT B^schopssen in the higher Germany the *
Commemoration of S. Agatha Virgin, who being an English woman by birth, and
Arnol. Wion in addit. ad Mart. Bened. l 3. and in vita S. Liobae.
leading a religious life in the Monastery of VVimborne in Dorcetshire, went
over into Germany with S. Lioba, S. Te(...) and others, whom S. Bonisace (an
Englishman in like manner, and (...)bishop of Mentz) had sent for into those
parts, to be Directrices in Monastical discipline, of certain Nunryes, which
he there had newly founded; where under the forsaid Lioba, that was constituted
Abbess of the fornamed Monastery of Bischopssen, she lived and died in great
sanctimony and holiness of life, about the year of Christ, seven hundred
fifty and seven, and was buried in the same place.

C The thirteenth Day.
IN North Wales the Commemoration of S. Elerius Abbot and Confessor, who *
borne of a noble British parentage, and setting aside the vain pleasures of
the world, built with the goods of his own inheritance a Monastery in the
North-west part of our Island, now called North Wales, where he gathering
together many devout persons, lead a Monastical life, directing Io. Capg. in
Catal. SS. Brita. Item in Act. S. Wenef. 3. Noue^br. wion. in addit. ad l. 3.
ligni vit.
them in all kind of virtue and discipline, until his dying day. He lived in
the time of S. VVenefrid, about the year of Christ, six hundred threscore and
four; of whom she received the holy veyle of Chastity, and was ordained
Abbess of a Monastery which S. Beno her master and tutour had erected in her
Fathers territory: as also wrote the whole story of her life, which is yet
extant in wrytte^-hand to be read in diverse libraryes of England. The bone of
one of his arms, is yet in the custody of a Catholic Gentleman of our
Country, who preserves the same with great devotion and veneration, as
beseems so precious a Relic.

D The fourteenth Day.
IN Scotland the Translation of S. Brandan Abbot and Confessor, borne in the
same Kingdom, whose godly life and doctrine, Maurol. in Mart. hac die Pet. in
Catal. l. 5. c. 117.
together with his manifold miracles, are yet famous throughout the Christian
world, especially in our Island of Great-Britany. His principal festiuity, in
our Catholic Church of England, is celebrated upon the sixteenth day of May,
where also we have wio^ in suo Mart. hac etiam die.
made mention of him. There was a goodly Church, as also a town builded in his
honor, in one of the Islands of Orcades, which until this day, is commonly
called by the name of S. Brandans. He died about the year of Christ, five
hundred and seauenty.

E The fifteenth Day.
AT Wilton in Wilsthire the deposition of S. Eadburge Virgin, daughter to
King Edward the elder, who refusing all worldly Petr. in Catal. Vincent. in
specul. Pol. Vir. West. an. 901. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar.
honors and preferments, took a Religious habit in the Monastery of Wilton,
and became a mirror and rare example to the Nobility of England, where she so
excelled in all manner of virtue, but especially humility, that she ever
thought herself the most contemptiblest of all the Monastery: Which thing how
acceptable it was to God, it pleased him to manifest to the world, by the
manifold miracles he wrought by her, both alive and dead. She desceased about
the year of Christ, nine hundred and fourteen, and was buried at Wilton.

THE same day at Huis in the Diocese of L(...)ge, the Translation of S.
Menigold Martyr, who borne in England of a great parentage, became first a
Captain in the French and German wars, and after an Erem^te; unto whom
(...) the Emperor gave a ^^ttle Territory (...) to the river-(...) Molan. in
addit. ad Vsua. and in I^ d(...). SS. ^e^gij hac die.
o^ Mosa, where ^e (...) an Oratory for ^^s private deuotio(...) as he was one
day going to Church, was ^^a^^e by ce^tain^ (...) (...)diers in hatred of his
sanc^^ty, about (...)* ear of Christ, ^^ne (...). (...) body was afterward on
this day, with great solemnity, tran^^ated to Huis, where the same is yet kept
with due honor and veneration o^ the Inhabitants.

THE same day also in little Britany the deposition of S. Maine Abbot and
Confeuour, who borne in our Island of Great Britany, and kinsma to S. Samp^on,
went over Pe^r. de V^^^. (...). (...). ^oc. in ei^s vi^a. Renat. ^ened. in vit.
SS. Ga(...). Belforest. in descri. Armori^.
with him into little Britany, to preach the Christian says, where he fist
lead a Monastical life at Dole, under the forsaid S. Sa^pson, and afterward
being made Abbot of a Monastery dedicated to S. John Baptist in the same
Country, after many year of labor and toil taken in the service of Christ,
and conversion of many souls to him, famous for miracles, he finally rested in
our Lord, about the year of Christ, five hundred and nynty. His body was
buried in the same Monastery, which at this day of his name is commonly called
S. Maines, and there is kept with great honor and veneration.

F The sixteenth Day.
AT Chichester in Sussex, the Translation of S. Richard Confessor and Bishop
of that Sea, who having studied seaue years in the University of Bologna in
Italy, and returning home, was first made Chancelour of Oxford and the^ Bishop
of Chichester: which Sea when he had governed for nine years, Matthew. West. and
Paris. an. 1253. and 1276. Sur. to. 2. die 3. Apr. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum.
hac die.
in great sanctity and holiness of life, he died at Dover in Kent, in the
year of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and three. His body being
brought to Chichester, was afterward on this day taken up, and put into a
goodly silver shrine, and translated to a more eminent place of that Cathedral
Church, whereat so many miracles were daily wrought, that infinite people made
concourse thither from all parts of England. This Translation was made in the
year, one thousand two hundred threescore and sixteen.

THE same day at Hereford the passion of S. Leofgar Bishop and Martyr, who
being Chaplyn to Duke Harold, su^ceeded Ethelstane in that Sea; where in all
kind of Matthew. West. ad an. Do. 1056.
virtue, and good works, exercising his Pastoral function, he was by K.
Griffin of Wales, that violently and unjustly assaulted that City, slain,
together with seven of his Chanons that denied him entrance into the Catal.
Episco. Herefor.
Church, which when the said Griffin had spoiled and robbed of all the
relics, jewels, and other ornaments that were portable, he lastly fired both
it, and the whole City, in the year of Christ, one thousand fifty and six.

G The seventeenth Day.
AT Hecknam in Normandy the deposition of S. Botulph Abbot and Confessor, who
borne in Scotland of a noble parentage, Petr. in Catal. l. 11. c. vlt. West. in
hist. Tho. walfingh. in ^pod. Neustr. Molan. in addit. ad Vsuard. Io. Sto. in
Annal. sub Edou. primo.
and going over into France, became there a monk, and afterward was made the
first Abbot of a new Monastery called Hecknam in Normandy, which himself had
caused to be built at his own charges, where in great sanctity of life, he
ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and
four. There is yet remaining a fair parish Church dedicated in his honor
without Aldgate, in the City of London; besides many other ancient momuments
of him in the Realm of England. And among the rest, there was a goodly ancient
Church and Monastery of Blackefriers erected in his honor in Lincolnshire,
near to the sea side, which in process of time growing to a fair
Market-towne, was called thereof Botulphs-towne, and now by the corruption of
our language, is vulgarly known by the name of Boston; which said Church and
Monastery were both in the reign of King Edward the first consumed by fire, in
the year, one thousand two hundred fourscore and seven.

A The eighteenth Day.
IN Scotland the Co^memoratio^ of S. Dunstan *
Abbot and Confessor, borne in that Kingdom and descended there of a great
parentage, who contemning the vanities of the world in the flower of his youth,
took a Io. Less. l. 4. de reb. gest. Scot. Wion in append. ad. l. 3. ligni
vit. and alij.
Religious habit, and became first a monk of the Venerable Order of S.
Benedict in Scotland, and afterward was ordained Abbot of the whole Monastery;
where in great sanctity of life, famous for his learning and works of piety,
in a good old age, finally rested in our Lord, about the year of Christ, six
hundred and seauenty, and was buried in Scotland. This man is different from
the other S. Dunstan of England, whose festival days are celebrated upon the
nineteenth of May, and seventh of September.

B The ninteenth Day.
AT Ely in Cambridgshire, the Commemoration *
of S. John Confessor and Bishop of the same Sea, who being first a monk,
Matthew. West. an. 1220. and 1125. Arnol. Wion l. 2. lig. vit. in Catal. Episco.
Eliens.
and then Abbot of Fountains in Yorkshire, was for his great virtue and
holiness of life ordained Bishop of Ely; In which dignity he so governed
himself, especially in humility and charity to the poor, that his memory was
very famous, as well throughout England and Scotland at home, as in other
Countries abroad. And when he had sat in that Sea for five years or
therabout, famous for holiness of life, full of venerable old age, he departed
to our Lord, in the year of Christ, one thousand two hundred, twenty and five,
in the reign of King Henry the third, and was buried in his Cathedral Church
of Ely, before the Altar of S. Andrew.

C The twentieth Day.
AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the Translation Sur. to. 2. 18. Mart. Pol.
Vi^. lib. 6.
of S. Edward King and Martyr, who through the deceit of his stepmother
Queen Alfred, was slain at Corse-Castle in Dorsetshire, as he was on hunting.
His body was first buried at Warham, and then at Breuiar. sec. vsi^m Sarum et
Epist. Innocent. PP. 4.
Shaftesbury, and lastly on this day with great solenity translated to
Glastenbury the tweluth year after his Martyrdom, and year of Christ, one
thousand and one. He was canonized for a Saint by Pope Innocentius the fourth.

THE same day at VVinockes-berge in Flanders the Translation of S. Oswald King
of Northumberland and Martyr, who after many glorious battayles and combatts
sought in defense principally of the Christian faith, Matthew. West. ad an. 789.
Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die.
was at length slain in hatred thereof by Pe^da a Paga^ King of the Mercians or
middle Englishmen) at a place in Shropshire, called afterward of his name,
Oswaldes-tree; where now is built a fair Market-towne, still retayning that
ancient name, though somewhat corrupted in pronunciation, and commonly called
Oswistry. His body was first buried at Peterburrow in Northamptonshire, and
after in the Danish persecution on this day translated to Berghen in Flanders,
where it is kept with great veneration of the inhabitants. His principal fell
iuity was wont to be celebrated in our Catholic Church of England upon the
fifth day of August, and in diverse places kept holy day.

D The one and twentieth Day.
AT Beuerwicke in the Diocese of Harle^ in Albin. Flaccus in vita S. willebr.
Mola^. in Indic. SS. Belgij hac die.
South-Holland, the passion of S. Englemund Martyr, borne of a noble parentage
in England, who going over into Holland and Frizeland, for the propagation of
Christian faith, was by Radbodus King of Frisia, a Pagan and enemy to Christ,
most cruelly put to death, about the year of our Lord, seaue^ hundred twenty
and seven. His body was kept in an Oratory at the forsaid town of Beuerwicke
with great veneration, even until the Hollanders in this last age, falling
from the Obedience of the Catholic Church and Sea of Rome, embraced heresy.

E The two and twentieth Day.
IN Derswolds wood, near to the town of Gild. Epist. de excid. Britan. Bed.
l. r. c. 7. Gaufr. Monum. lib. 5. Sur. tom. 3. Mart. Romans
S. Alba^s in Hartfordshire, the passion of S. Alba^, high Steward of the
Britans, and the first Martyr in our Island of the British nation, who in the
persecution of Dioclesian the Emperor, was beheaded for being made a
Christian, and receiving and succouring a Christian Priest, named Amphibale, by
whom he had been baptized. He suffered about the year of Christ, three hundred
and three; and was afterward canonized for a Saint by Pope Adrian the first.

THE same day, and same place, the passion of one of the soldiers, that led S.
Alban Bed. Gild. Gaufr. Paris. and alij citati supra.
to execution, who seeing his constaney and patience in suffering for Christ,
being therewith greatly moved, confessed forthwith his error, and asked the
blessed Martyr forgiveness: which when the persecutors beheld, they grievously
tormented him for the same. He notwithstanding, following S. Alban to his
death, when his head was cut of, took and embraced it in his arms, and thereby
was immediately cured of all his wounds inflicted by the persecutors. And
thereupon confessing Christ, was by the enemies of trut^ finally beheaded, and
so baptized in his own blood.

THE same day in like manner at S. Omers in Artoys in the Monastery of S.
Bertin, Io. Mola^. addit. ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS. Belgij hac die.
the Translation of S. Ortrude Virgin, borne in England of a noble blood: whose
body in the Danish persecution was translated from an ancient Monastery in our
Island, called Andria, to the forsaid Abbey of S. Bertin, and is there yet
preserved in a silver shrine, with great veneration among other Relics in the
Sacristia or Vestrey of that Church. She died about the year of Christ, six
hundred seauenty and nine.

F The three and twentieth Day.
AT Ely in Cambridgshire, the deposition of S. S. Audry.
Edil^rude Virgin and Abbess, daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, and
wise to King Egfrid of Northumberland, who living with her husband twelve
years in perpetual viginity, as S. Bid records, at last, with his consent,
renounced the pleasure of this world and dignity of a Queen, and became a
nun, first in the Ven. Bed. l. 4. c. 19. and 20. Item in Chron. de sex aetat.
Trit. de vir. Illust. Vincent. in specul. Sigebert. in Chron Mart. Romans Molan.
and alij. omnes hac die.
Monastery of Coldingham in the same Kingdom, under S. Ebba her aunt, and
thence being ordained Abbess of the Monastery of Ely, where before she had
founded a goodly Church in honor of S. Peter the Apostle, full of great
sanctimony and holiness of life, she finally went to her heavenly spouse, about
the year of Christ, six hundred and fourscore. Her body was buried in the same
Monastery, over which there was erected a goodly Church, and dedicated to her
name. And being taken up sixteen years after her death, by her sister S.
Sexburge then Abbess of that place, was found wholly vncorrupt, and as fresh,
as if the had been buried but the day before. S. Bid himself made a sonnet in
moeter, in praise of this Virgin, which you may read in the fourth book of his
History of England and twentieth Chapter. She is called by sundry writers
Etheldride; but in our own language, most commonly known by the name of S.
Audry.

G The four and twentieth Day.
AT Mechlyn in Brabant, the passion of Io. Mola^. in Indic. SS. Belgij and in
addit. ad Vsua. hac die.
S. Rumwald Bishop and Martyr, son to a King of Ireland, who, after he was
consecrated Bishop of Dublyn in that Country, went to Rome, and thence
returning into Flanders, began to preach the Christian faith in the Territory
of Mechlyn, and there first planted the same, under Count Ado of that Province,
of whom he was very honorably intertayned. And when he had thus labored, in
reducing the strayed sheep, to the fold of his Master Christ, for many years,
he was at length, there slain in hatred of the Christian faith by two wicked
soldiers, one whereof, the blessed Bishop had some times reprehended for
adultery, about the year of Christ, seven hundred, threescore and fifteen.
His body remains still at Mechlyn, and there is kept with great veneration in
the Cathedral Church, in a very sumptuous silver shrine, though his principal
feast be celebrated throughout the Diocese, upon the first of July, with a
double office as chief Patron of that City. He was canonized by Pope
Alexander the 4.

A The five and twentieth Day.
AT Verolamium, now called S. Albans, in Hartfordshire, the Passion of S.
Amphibale Priest and Martyr, who being a noble young man of Britany, and going
to Rome with Bassianus Son to Seuerus Viceroy of the Britans, Gild. de excid.
Brit. Matthew. Paris. and West. passim. Io. lidgat. Monac. Burie^s. in eius vita.
Gerard. Liegh. in rudim. Infigniu^.
was there by Pope Zepherinus instructed secretly in the Christan faith,
baptized, made Priest, and sent back into Britany, there to preach unto
others, where he converted and baptized S. Alban then high Steward of the
Britans for the Roman Emperor. And being at last accused for teaching the
doctrine of Christ, had, by the persecutours, a hole made in his side; and one
of his guts being taken out of his belly, and fastened to a stake, was driven
about the same, until all the rest were pulled out, and woone about the said
stake. And when he was ready to give up the ghost, two angels were seen to
descend, and carry his soul up to heaven. There was a fair Church dedicated
in his honor in Winchester, where many miracles have been wrought at his
Relics. And among others it is recorded, that one that had been dead four
days, was raised again to life. He suffered about the year of Christ 304.
being above an hundred years of age.

THE same day at Egmond in Holland the deposition Io. Mola^. in Indic. SS.
Belgij Sur. to. 3. Mart. Romans and alij. omnes hac die.
of S. Adalbert Priest and Confessor, nephew to Oswald King of Northumberland,
and son to K. Edilbald of the South saxons, who going over into the lower
Germany with S. VVillebrord and his fellows to preach the Christian faith,
converted infinite souls in Holland, and is therefore worthily called their
Apostle. Count Theodore of that Province, built a goodly Monastery near unto
Harlem in honor of him, whose son was afterward cured of a dangerous fever
by the meritts of S. Adalbert. He died about the year of Christ 705.

THE same day in like manner at Dauentry in Gelderland the Translation of S.
Lebuine Priest and Confessor, borne of a noble family Marcel. in vita S.
Simibert. Io. Mola^. in Indic. SS. Belgij
in England: who going over also into the Low-Countreyes, to preach and
instruct the new-made Christians of those Provinces, after many labors and
much fruit wrought in that kind, he ended there his venerable old days, about
the year of Christ, seven hundred, and threescore. His body was afterward on
this day translated to Dauentry, and there kept with great veneration, as
chief Patron of that City and Diocese.

B The six and twentieth Day.
AT Benchor in Ireland the Commemoration *
of Nine hundred holy Monks Martyrs, who being oppressed by certain Paga^ Io.
Trit. l. 3. de vir. Illustr. cap. 339. Arnol. Wion in append. ad. l. 3. lig.
vitae.
Pirates, that landed in that Island, were in hatred of Christian Religion
slain, and their Monastery robbed and defaced, to the great lamentation of all
Ireland; for that it was, in those days, a common storehouse (as it were) of
all good learning and virtue, out of which came the Apostles of diverse
Provinces of France, Flanders and Germany, who reduced them to the Christian
faith, and true worship of one God. Many Authors (of forrayne Nations
especially) do often times confound this Monastery of Benchor in Ireland, with
that of Bangor in Caerneruanshire of North Wales, thinking them to have been all
one, whereas they were different, and situated in two several Kingdoms.

C The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Cayon in the Diocese of Towers in France, the deposition of S. John Priest
and Confessor, who being a noble Brytan by birth, and refusing all worldly and
temporal honors in his Country, went over into France, and there built
himself a little Oratory for his own private devotion in a solitary place
near unto Towers, where he was very famous for sanctity of life, working many
miracles both alive and dead. Romans Mart. hac die. Greg. Turon. l. de gloria
Conf. c. 23 and in hist. 562.
His body was buried in the same Oratory after his descease, about the year of
Christ, five hundred thirty and seven. There is a story recorded of a certain
Bay tres, that this S. John had there somtymes planted; which when after many
years, it withered with age; and was cut down, being laid two years under a
wall, and served for a seat ^o sit on, was again put into the ground, and
through his merits, sprung and budded forth a fresh, to the admiration of all
France.

THE same day at Gaunt in Flanders the Translation of S. Leuine Bishop and
Martyr, an Scottishman.
Irishman by birth, and disciple to S. Augustine our English Apostle; who
leaving his Bishopric (which was in Scotland) went over into Flanders with S.
(...) Breuia. Ga^daue^ss and Joan. Molan. in addit. ad Vsuard. hac die. and in
Iudic. SS. Belgij
and his fellows, where preaching the Christian faith to the infidels of those
parts, was by them apprehended, and had his tongue cut out of his mouth, which
being by a miracle immediately restored him again, he was finally beheaded,
about the year of Christ, seven hundred and twelve. His body being first
interred in a Village of the same Province, was afterward on this day with
great sole^nity translated to Gaunt, where being placed in the Cathedral
Church of that City, is there yet preserved with great Veneration of the
inhabitants.

D The eight and twentieth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Columbane Monk and Confessor, who *
borne in the same Kingdom of an honorable family, contemned the world,
a(...) Io. Lest. l. 4. degest. Scot. Arnold. wion. in append. ad l. 3. lig.
vita.
became a monk of the Venerable Order o^ S. Benedict in Scotland, where in
great sanctit^ of life, and other virtues thereto agreeable he ended his blessed
days, in the year o^ Christ, six hundred and forty; where also his memory
has been famous in times past having had many Chappells and altars dedicated in
his honor. This man is differen^ from the other S. Columbane of Ireland,
surnamed the Great, somtymes Abbot and founde^ of the Monastery of Bobia in
Lombardy, whos^ feast is celebrated upon the one and twenti^ day of November.

E The nine and twentieth Day. Maen^l. Graec. ex Sym. Metaph. 29. Iunij.
Innocent. PP. Epis. ad Dece^t. Eysengr. Ce^. 1. p. 7. Theodor. Epist. ad Tin.
and in Psalm. 116. and l. 9. de curand. Grac. affect. Sophron. sermon. de natal.
Apost. (...)lred. Rieual. in vita Edo. Conf. Mart. Romans

AT Rome the Passion of the glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, who in the
persecution of Nero the Emperor, were on one, and the selfsame day put to
death; S. Peter being fastened to a Cross with his head down ward, and S. Paul
beheaded. Of these two Apostles it is recorded by diverse very ancient writers,
that about the year of Christ, threscore and seven, they came both personally
into our island of great Britany, and there preached the Christian faith,
founded Churches, ordained Priests and Deacons, and therefore may worthily be
called our Apostles, of whom we have received so great benefitts. There are
very many Churches in our Country dedicated in their honor, as special
Patrons of our Island. And in the time of King Edward the Confessor, S. Peter
appearing to a very holy man, showed him, that himself had sometimes preached
in Britany, and consequently the special care he had of that Church and
Country.

THE same day at Lindisferne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, the
Commemoration *
of S. Ethelwyne Bishop and Confessor, who of a Monk of S. Benedicts Order in
S. Columbes Monastery in the Island of Hoy in Scotland, was ordained Bishop of
Lindisferne, Io. Trit. l. 4. c. 156. Wio^ l. 2. lig. vitae. in Catal. Epis.
Lindis.
where for many years having instructed his flock, in all virtue, and good
learning, finally in great sanctity of life, he reposed in our Lord, about the
year of Christ, seven hundred and nynty, and in the reign of Osred King of
Northumberland.

F The thirtith Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Deusdedit Bishop and Confessor, surnamed
Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 28. and l. 4. c. 1 west. an. 645. and (...). Joan. Molan.
in addit. ad Vsuar. 14. Iulij.
Frithona, who being an English Saxon by birth, succeeded S. Honorius in the
Sea of Canterbury, being consecrated thereto by Ithimar Bishop of Rochester:
wherein when he had spent nine years, in continual preaching and instructing
his flock, famous for learning and sanctity of life, he gave up his blessed
soul to rest, in the year of Christ, six hundred threescore and four, and
was buried in the Church of S. Augustines in Canterbury, with his predecessors;
at whose body in confirmation of the innocence of his life, it pleased God to
work many miracles.

THE MONTH OF IVLY.
G The first Day.
AT Cairlegion.
Carleon upon Vske in South Wales, the passion of the Saints Julius and Aaron
Martyrs, who Gild. de excid. Britan. Ven. Bed. l. 1. hist. cap. 7. Mart. Romans
hac die. cu^ Mola^. Hu(...)f. ^huide in fragm descript. Britan.
being two noble ancient Britans of the same City, were in the persecution of
the Roman Emperor Dioclesian with many others in our British primitive Church,
most cruelly put to death for the Confession of Christ, about the year of our
Lord, three hundred and four. There was an ancient goodly Church erected and
dedicated in their honor in the forsaid City of Carleon, where also their
bodies have in times past been kept with great veneration of the old Britans of
South Wales.

THE same day in little Britany the deposition of S. Goluin Bishop and
Con^essour, Rob. Caenalis de reb. Gall. l. 2. Perio^h. G. Renat. Benedict. in
vit. SS. Gall. hac. die. wion. in addit. ad l. 3. lig. vit.
borne in our Island of great Britany of very honorable parents, who going over
into little Britany, and there leading an Eremiticall life, for many years,
was at last, against his will, elected, and upon obedience consecrated Bishop,
about the year of Christ, six hundred. In which function and dignity he
excelled in all kind of sanctity and holiness of life, working many miracles
among the Frenchmen, both alive and dead.

A The second Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the deposition of S. Su^ithin Confessor and
Bishop Matthew. West. an. 862. Sur. to. 4 de vit. SS. Mola^ in addit. ad vsua. 2.
et ^5. Iulij.
of that Sea, whose rare life, together with his working of miracles, is very
famous to all posterity through the Christian world. Whenever he was to
consecrate any new Church, though it were never so far of; yet would he go
thither on foot. It chanced on a Market day at Winchester that a woman
passing over the bridge, with a basket of eggs, where the holy man was sitting
to see the workmen labor, about mending of the bridge; and one of the said
laborers offering to jest with the woman, and she resisting, brake all her
eggs: which thing the good Bishop seeing, and lamenting the woman's loss, made
the sign of the Cross over the said broken eggs, and immediately they all
became whose again. He died about the year of Christ, eight hundred
threescore and two, and was buried at Winchester.

THE same day at Landaffa in Clamorganshire of Wales the deposition of S.
Oudocke Confessor and Bishop of that Sea, who Catal. Episco. Landafens. hac
die.
being descended of a noble blood in Britany, was famous for holiness of life
and working of miracles, both alive and dead. He was the third Bishop of
Landaffa, and succeeded S. Telean in the same Sea, about the year of Christ,
six hundred and thirty.

B The third Day.
AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Lanfranke Confessor, and Bishop of the
same Sea, who being Abbot of Cane in Normandy, was thence, at the suite of K.
William the Conqueror, promoted to the Maurol. in Mart. hac die vna cum wion
and alijs.
Sea of Canterbury, where in great holiness of life, he governed the same most
laudably for nineteen years together, and at last desceased the third year
of the reign of K. William Rusus, and year of Christ, one thousand fourscore
and nine. Upon this day his West. an. Do. 1089. Vincent. in specul. and alij.
body being taken up afterward, was with great solemnity tran^lated to a more
emine^t place of the Church of Canterbury, whereat, it is recorded, many
miracles have been wrought.

THE same day at Oostkerke in Flanders the deposition of S. Guthagon
Confessor, Son to a king of alias Ireland
Scotland, who taking upon him a voluntary poverty for the love of Christ, went
over into Flanders, and there became a pilgrim^ or Eremite in the territory of
Tornay, where in great sanctity Io. Mola^. in Indie. SS. Belgij and in addit.
ad Vsua. hac die.
and holiness of life, he reposed in our Lord. His body was afterward taken up
by Gerrard Bishop of Tornay, and set in a more eminent place of the Church of
Oostk^rke, in the year of Christ, one thousand ^^ty and nine, where the same
is kept with great honor and veneration of the inhabitants, and is yet to be
seen there through iron grates, placed in a wall of the same Church.

C The fourth Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Odo Con^essour and Archbishop of the same
Sea: Who being a man of excellent learning and wisdom, was first made Bishop
of Welles, and after of Canterbury. In which dignity, in great sanctity of
life and spirit of prophesy, he ended his venerable old days, in the year o^
Christ, nine hundred f^fty and eight, and was buried at Canterbury. Matthew a
Monk of Westminster recounteth a dreadful example of revenge, taken upon his
successor in that Bishopric, Ealysine, who so soon as S. Odo was dead, and
procuring himsel^e to be elected Matthew. West. an. 934. and 958. Hereb. Rosweyd.
in ast. SS. hac die. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar.
in his room by Symony, the very first day o^ his induction to that Sea, he
most co^temptuously trod him under his feet in his grave. With which fact God
being highly offended, soon after revenged the same in the behalf of S. Odo.
For Ealssine going to Rome for his Pall, perished most miserabl^, through
hungar and cold, in the Alps (which thing was ^ortould also by S. Odo) being
forced before his death, to put those his feet in the warm dung of horses,
with which he had so insolently trodden upon the others body in his grave.

D The fifth Day.
AT Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire the festiuity of S. Modu^ene Virgin and
Abbesle, daughter to Nang^^ee King of Ireland, who after infinite miracles
wrought in that Kingdom, came into England, and there by the help of K.
Ethelnulse, whose son she by her prayers, had cured of a dangerous sickness,
builded two famous Monasteryes, near to the forest of Arden in VVaruickshire,
the one at Polesbury, the other by the forest side; of which later she her
self was Abbess first, and then of another Monastery at the forsaid H^^ebert.
Ros. in f(...)s SS. hac die. Pol. Vir. l. 5. hist. M^tth. West. an. 857. Sur.
to. 5. in vita S. Osithae Virg.
Burton in Staffordshire. And after this she went into Scotland to King Conwall
her kinsman, and thence back again into Ireland, where in all kind of rare
sanctimony of life and miracles, she finally ended her blessed days, about the
year of Christ, eight hundred and seauenty, bequeathing her body to the
forsaid Monastery of Burton, whither it was brought, and kept with great
reverence and veneration, even until our days. Among her many miracles, one
is recorded, that by her prayers, she raised to life S. Osith, being the^ but a
girl, that had been drowned in a river three days, as may be read in the Acts
of S. Osithes life.

THE same day at Canterbury the Translation of S. Anselme Confessor and Bishop
Petr. Gaselin. Maurol. and wion in suis Mart. hac die. Petr. in Catald. 6. c.
56.
of the same Sea, whose rare learning, virtues, and labors in Gods Church,
together with his miracles and sanctity of life, are yet famous to the
Christian world. He died in the year of Christ, 1109. and in the nynth year
of K. Henry the first his reign. His body was afterward on this day taken up
and translated to a more eminent place of his Church at Canterbury, with great
solemnity and veneration, whereat, through his meritts, it has pleased God to
work many miracles.

E The sixth Day.
AT Ely in Cambridgshire the deposition of S. Sexburge Queen and Abbess, wife
Ven. Bed. l. 4. c. 19. west. an. 640. Vincent. in specul. l. 15. c. 32. Rob.
Buckl. in eius vita fol. 128.
to Ercombert K. of Kent, and daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, who
after the death of her husband, governed his Kingdom for a while, and built a
goodly Monastery of Nuns in the i will of Sheppey in Kent, and then became
herself a Religious woman in the Monastery of Ely, whereof also (after the
death of her sister S. Audry, who had that dignity whilst she lived) she was
made Abbess: and there in most godly wise, finally gave up her soul to her
heavenly spouse Christ, about the year of our Lord, six hundred fourscore and
nynteene; and was buried in the same place, near to her said sister S. Audry.
Whose body being taken up seven years after her death, was found whole and
vncorrupt, which well declared the sanctimony, and holiness of her life, whilst
she lived.

F The seventh Day.
AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Thomas Archbishop of the same Sea and
Martyr, who being violently oppressed by Sur. to. 6. Staplet. de trib. Thomis.
Sander. de schis. Angl. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sar(...). hac die.
King Henry the second his servants, was, after many slanders, calumniations
and banishment suffered in defense of Ecclesiastical libertyes, slain in the
time of Euensonge, in his Pontifical vestments, before the high altar in his
own Church of Canbury, in the year of Christ, one thousand one hundred
threescore and seauenteene. His body being afterward on this day taken up, and
put into a costly silver shrine, guilt, and set with precious stones, was
translated to a more eminent place of the same Church, whereat it pleased God to
work infinite miracles. King Henry the eight at his breach with the Sea
Apostolic destroyed this goodly monument, and taking all the treasure thereof
to his own use, caused his body to be burned to ashes and dispersed in the
air, in the year of Christ 1538.

THE same day at Winchester in Hampshire the deposition of S. Hedda Confessor
Bed. l. 4. c. 12. and 5. cap. 19.
and Bishop of that Sea, whose godly and innocent life was afterward confirmed
by the miracles wrought at his body in Winchester, Tritem. de vir. Illustr.
where he died, and was buried in the year of Christ, seven hundred and five.

THE same day also at Eyst in Germany, the deposition of S. VVillebald
Confessor Democh. l. 2. de Sacrif. Missae. and in Catal. Episco. Eystens.
Mart. Romans and alij.
and first Bishop of that Sea, Son to S. Richard King of the English: who
going over to his uncle S. Boniface into Germany, was by him ordained Bishop of
Eyst, where full of great holiness of life, he reposed in our Lord, in the year
of Christ, seven hundred fourscore and one. His body is buried in the
Cathedral Church of that City, and there preserved with great veneration.
Bed. l. 3. c. 8. Trit. de Vir. Illustr. Contin. Ven. Bed. Vincent. in specul.
and alij.


THE same day in like manner at Brige near Paris in France, the depositio^ of
the Saints, Edilburge daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, and Ercongote
daughter to King Ercombert of Kent, who being both Abbesses of the said
Monastery of Brige, the one succeding the other, and dying both on one day, in
diverse years, deserved to have their memoryes celebrated together, on one and
the self same day, by our Mother the holy Cath. Church. The former, S.
Edilburge, died about the year of Christ, six hundred and threescore: and the
other some four years after, and were both buried at Brige aforsaid.

G The eight Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the depositio^ Matthew. West. an. 872. Molan. in
Indic. SS. Belgij Gotzel. Monach. in eius vita.
of S. Grimbald Abbot and Confessor, whom King Alfred calling out of Tra^^e
into England, used in all his consultations for the government of his Kingdom.
He refused the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, and chose rather to be Abbot of a
new Monastery, erected by the said K. Alfred in the City of Winchester, where
in most godly wise he ended his blessed days, in the year of Christ, seven
hundred and four.

THE same day at VVirtzburge in Franconia the passion of S. Kilian Bishop,
together with the Saints Colma^, Totna^ and Erwald monks and Martyrs, who
being borne in Ireland Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. Romans Mart. Molan. Gaselin.
and wion hac die.
all of very honorable families, and S. Kilian son to the King of that
Island, went over into Germany, where S. Kilian was ordained Bishop of
VVirtzburge, and preaching the Christian faith in those parts, were all at
last by the enemies of truth, slain for the defense thereof, under Gosbert King
of Franconia, about the year of Christ, six hundred nynty and seven. Their
Relics are kept until this day at VVirtzburge, with great veneration of the
inhabitants.

A The ninth Day.
AT Barking in Essex the deposition of S. Edilburge Queen, who being wife to
Inas King of the VVestsaxons, both she and her husband consented to enter into
two Monasteryes, and become religious: whereupon Io. Trit. de Vir. Illustr. Pol.
Vir. hist. l. 4. Stephan. Lusinga^. Co(...)na 4. c. 21. and Chron. Britan. fol.
155. Wion hac die. in Mart. Benedict.
the King himself going to Rome, and there taking upon him the habit of a
monk of S. Benedicts Order, the Queen likewise entered into the Monastery of
Barking aforsaid, and received the holy veyle of Chastity, where in all kind of
sanctimony of life, she finally ended her blessed days, about the year of
Christ, seven hundred and forty. Of this name of Edilburge, there are three
Saints of our Nation, to wit, S. Edilburge daughter to Annas King of the
Eastangles, and Abbess of Brige in France: S. Edilburge, sister to S.
Erconwald Bishop of London, and the first Abbess of this aforsaid Monastery of
Barking: and this S. Edilburge whereof we now speak, Queen of the VVestsaxons.
All which three being English women by birth, lived together within the space
of less then an hundred years.

B The tenth Day.
AT Fisciacum in Hannonia.
Hennalt the deposition of S. Etto Bishop and Confessor, who being an Irishman
by birth, and coming out of that Kingdom with S. Furseus and his fellows,
went over into France and Germany, to preach the Christian faith, which Io.
Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die, et in Indic. SS. Belgij
he did with as great fruit and profit, as holiness of life, until his dying
day: which happened about the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and six. His
body was afterward translated to Letias in the same Province, and there is kept
until this day with great honor and veneration of the inhabitants, for the
manifold miracles, that it has pleased God in sign of his sanctity to work
thereat.

C The eleventh Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. *
Dronston Confessor, who borne in the same Kingdom of the blood Royal, and
uncle to Aidan King of Scotland, contemned Io. Lesl. Ros. E^is. l. 4. hist.
Scot.
the vanities of the world in his youth, and entering into a Monastery there,
took the Religious habit of S. Benedict. In which kind of life he so excelled
in all humility and perfection, Wion l. 4. ligni vit. Joan. Mayor in hist. l.
2. cap. 7.
that his name was very famous throughout Scotland and Ireland, even until his
dying day, which happened full or sanctity of life and miracles, about the
year of Christ, six hundred: where also in ancient Catholic times, many
Chappells and altars have been dedicated in his honor.

D The tweluth Day.
IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Luane Abbot and Confessor, who being *
borne in the same Island of a noble pare^tage, Arnold. Wion in append. ad. l.
3. lig. vitae. Item in Actis S. Malac. Malac. Epis. 5. Nouemb.
became there first a monk of the Order of S. Benedict, and afterward Abbot of
the Monastery of Benchor in the same Kingdom, where he was very famous for
sanctity of life, in the time of S. Malachy Bishop of Connerthen and Primate of
all Ireland, with whom he lived many years, ending his venerable days in a
good old age, about the year of Christ, one thousand one hundred and forty,
and in the reign of King Stephen of England.

E The thirteenth Day.
AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Mildred Virgin and Abbess, daughter to
Merualdus King of the Mercians (or middle Englishmen) who contemning the
vanities Matthew. west. an. 676. and 1011. Pol. Vir. l. 4. Io. Molan. in addit.
ad Vsua. and in Indi^. SS. Belgij
of this life, became a religious woman in the I Will of Thanet in Kent, and
afterward Abbess of that Monastery: in which kind of life she so excelled,
especially in humility, that it pleased God to work many miracles at her body
after her death: which being on this day translated to Canterbury by S.
La^franke Archbishop of that Sea, was, together with the venerable body of S.
Edburge, most honorably placed there in the Church of S. Gregory, in the year
of Christ, one thousand fou^score and five. There was also a famous Monastery
built in her honor in the Province of Kent, besides many goodly Churches
e^ected and dedicated in her name in diverse places of England. Part of her
Relics were translated to Dauentry in Gelderland, and there kept until these
our days, with great veneration of the people of Geldria. She died about the
year of Christ, six hundred threescore and four.

F The fourteenth Day.
AT Dauentry in Gelderland the festiuity of S. Marchebne Priest and Confessor,
Hu^ba^. Monac. in vita. S. Leb. Mart. Romans Molan. in Indi^. SS. Belgij ba^die.
who being an Englishman by birth, and going over into the low-Countreyes as
companion to S. Willebrord, preached there the faith of Christ incessantly, for
more then threescore years together, whereby he converted the greatest part of
Frizeland, and is called their Apostle. And a ter infinite labors and toils
taken in that holy enterprise, full of great sanctity and holmes of life, and
in a good old age, he finally reposed in our Lord, at a place in Transysleania
(to wit beyond the River of Ysle) called Oldseele, about the year of Christ,
seven hundred threescore and two. His body was after translated to Dauentry,
where the same was honored, and preserved even until our days, with great
veneration of the Inhabitants.

G The fifteenth Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the Translation of S. Swithin Bishop of the same
Sea and Confessor, whose life was so innocent, and virtues so rare, that it
pleased God by him to work many miracles both alive and dead. When he was
ready to depart out of this world, he commanded (for humilityes sake) his body
to be buried in the Churchyard, whereon every one might Matthew. West. an. Do.
862. Sur. to. 4 Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. Matthew. Paris. an. 970. and 854.
tread with their feet. But afterward when many and daily miracles, were, by
his merits, wrought at his grave, and the concourse of people thereto began to
be great, he was on this day taken up, and translated to a Church of his own
name, erected in Winchester, commonly called S. Swithins, which now of late in
hatred of his memory is by the Protestants named the Trinity. This his
translation happened about the year of Christ, nine hundred; which day was
afterward by commandment kept holy, throughout the Diocese of Winchester.

THE same day at Oldseele beyond the River of Ysle in Gelderland, the
deposition of S. Plechelme Bishop and Confessor, who borne in our Island of
Great Britany, and Ven. Bed. l. 5. c. 24. in fine. Io. Mola^. in addit. ad
Vsua. and in Indie. SS. Belgij
going to Rome with S. VVero, was ordained Bishop of an old town in Scotland
named Candida-Casa, now called VVhitherne, and in his return homward preached
the Christian faith to the Frisians, where full of sanctity of life and
miracles, he reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, seven hundred
thirty and two. His body is yet preserved at the forsaid town of Oldseele with
great veneration of the people therabout.

THE same day also at Pollesbury in VVarwickeshire the deposition of S. Eadgith
Matthew. West. 901. and 926. Wion in Mart. Benedict. ha^ di^.
Queen of Northumberland, and sister to King Ethelstane, who was given in
Matrimony to Sithricke Prince or the Northumbers, a Pagan, upon condition he
would become a Curistian. Which he accepted of: but soon after renouncing both
his Queen and faith, ended his life in a most miserable sort. And she setting
aside the cares and troubles of this world, became a Religious woman, and
received the holy veyle of chastity in the Monastery of Polesbury aforsaid:
where in great sanctimony of life, she ended her blessed days, about the year
of Christ 926.

THE same day in like manner at VVerdt in Cleeucland, the passion of S.
Harrucke Bishop Albert. Cranz in Metrop. (...). (...). 29. ^o. Lest. l. (...).
degest. Sect.
and Martyr, who being a Scottishman by birth, and a monk of the Monastery of
Amarbaricke in Scotland, went over into the low Countries and Germany to
propagate the Christian faith, where being ordained Bishop of VVerdt, was at
last put to death by the enemies of Christ, and so ended a glorious Martyrdom,
about the year of Christ, eight hundred thirty and one.

Moreover in Suetia the deposition of S. David Confessor, who being an
Englishma^ by birth and an Abbot of the Venerable Order of Cluniacke, went into
Suetia to preach the faith of Christ to the infide^s of Bre^iar. S(...)i (...)
h^c die. Item. in Chron. Suet. and Nor^eg. de Gent. Apostoiis
that Country, which he did for many years; and after abundant fruit reaped
in that harvest by his holy labors and endeavors, famous for sanctity of
life, he finally re^ed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, one thousand and
two.

A The sixteenth Day.
AT Salisbury in VVil^shire the Translation of S. Osmund Confessor and Bishop
of the same Sea, whose li^e and doctrine has Ranul^h. Cest(...)n (...). M. S.
l. 7. cap. 3. Matthew. W^st. pas^im in ^istor. and alij, Calendar. sec. vsum
Sarum. hac die.
much illustrated, as well the universal, as our Catholic Church of England.
He was the first that compiled the Saru^ Breutary, and other Ceremonies of that
Church, which were afterward received and used throughout the whole Realm. For
which cause in ancient times, the Catholic Bishops of Salisbury obtained the
Title of the Popes Master o^ Cerimonyes, and had their places always assigned
them in the Popes Chapel and other sole^nit^es at Rome, according to that
dignity. His body was on this day solemnly translated to new Salisbury from a
village a mile distant from the some, now called old Salisbury, where he died
in the year of Christ, one thousand fourscore and ninteene, and there placed
in the great Minster or Cathedral Church of that Citt^, in the middle of the
Chapel of our Blessed Lady, under a fair marble Monument, whereat it pleased
God to work miracles through his merits. He wrote many learned books, and
among others, the life of S. Adelmus the first Bishop of Sherborne, yet extant
in diverse libraryes to be read. He was canonized for a Saint by Pope Calixtus
the second, and his feast in many places of England has on this day been kept
holy.

B The seventeenth Day.
AT VVinchcombe in Glocestershire the Passion Matthew. West. an. (...). Con(...).
Ven. Bed. l. 2. (...). 31. ^incent. in spec^^l. l. 25. c. 3. Matthew. Paris. an.
1257. Mart. Romans Mola^. and Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum.
of S. Kenelme King of Mercia and Martyr, who being but seven years of age,
and committed unto his sister Quendrede ^or his education, was, through her
ambition of desire to reign, caused secretly to be slain by one of his guard,
who cast his body into an obscure place among bushes and thorns: which thing
being first miraculously reueyled at Rome by an Angel, that let fall a paper
upon S. Peter's altar, wherein was written in golden letters the whole process
and manner of his death, the Pope sent presently into England to other
Christian Kings to inquire and search out his body: and the same being at last
found, and with a sollemne procession brought unto the Church of VVinchcombe
aforsaid, it pleased God forthwith to work many miracles in witness of his
innocence. His sister the Author of the soul fact was stricken blind, both her
eyes falling out upon a Primer, whereon she was reading: which being stained
with the blood of her said eyes, is yet kept in memory of the miracle of Gods
justice. His Martyrdom happened about the year of Christ 821.

THE same day at S. Albans in Hartfordshire, the deposition of S. John
Confessor, who being Abbot of the Monastery of the Matthew. West. an. 1214. in
hist. Flor. Britan.
Benediclines in that town; was very famous for sanctity of life and miracles
throughout England, about the year of Christ, one thousand two hundred and
fourteen.

ALso the same day in the territory of Namures the festiuity of S. Fridegand
Priest and Confessor, who being an Irishma^ by birth, went over into the
Low-Cou^treyes with S. Foillan and his fellows to Io. Mola^. in (...). ad
Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij
preach the Christian faith, which he did most fervently with great fruit of
his holy labor, till his dying day, which happened about the year of Christ,
six hundred and forty. His body was lost in the troubles of the late wars
made by the French in the Low-Countreyes, to the great lamentation of the
Inhabitants of that place, who for their sins were deprived of so glorious a
Patron.

C The eighteenth Day.
AT Alisbury in Buckinghamshire the deposition of S. Edburge Virgin, daughter
to Red^ald King of the Eastangles, who together with her sister S. Edith
became a Religious Maurol. in suo Mart. h^c aie. vna cum ^ion and Chron.
Britan. fol. 302.
woman in a Monastery at the forsaid town o^ Alisbury: where in great
sanctimony o^ ^^^e, she ended her blessed days, about the year o^ Christ, six
hundred and twenty. Her body was a terward translated to a town of her own
name, called Edburgetowne, which now more corruptly we commonly call Edburton,
where the same has been preserved even until our days, with great honor and
veneration, for the Mirac^^s that have been wrought thereat.

THE same day at Huis in the Confines of the higher Germany, the Translation of
S. Odilia one of the eleven thousand British Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. et
in Ind. SS. Belgij
Virgins, martyred with S. Vrsula, whose name and body being reueyled by her
self to a holy religious man in Paris, called Ioannes de Eppa, was found out,
and upon this day by Siffred Archbishop of Cullen with great solemnity
translated to the forsaid town of Huis, where the same was very honorably
placed in the Church of the Religious men there of the Order of the
Holy-Cr^sse, and is preserved yet in the same place with great veneration of
the Inhabitants.

D The ninteenth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Diman Confessor, who descended of an *
honorable linnage in the same Kingdom, (...). L^s^. R^s. E(...) (...)gest.
(...). l. 4. (...) i^ (...). (...). 3. (...). vitae.
contemned the world, and entering into a Monastery, became a Religious man of
the Venerable Order of S. Benedict in Scotland, under the care and government
of S. Sigenius Abbot, whose scholar and disciple he was: where in all kind of
singular humility, and other sanctity of life, in a venerable old age, he
finally reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, six hundred and
seauenty.

E The twentieth Day.
AT Wilton in Wiltshire, the Commemoatio^ of S. Eth(...)i would Queen, wife to K.
*
Al red of the West saxons, who after the death of her husband, built a goodly
Monastery in the forsaid town of Wilton for religious (...). W^st. an. 904.
women, endowing it with great rentes and revenues: among whom also herself
entering, took their habit and holy Chron. Britan. f^l. 196. Wio^ l. 4 lig.
vita.
veyle of Chastity, and became one of the number; where in all kind of singular
humility, virtue, and other sanctimony of life, she ended her blessed days,
about the year of Christ, nine hundred and four, and was buried in the same
place.

F The one and twentieth Day.
AT Strasburgh in the higher Germany, the deposition of S. Arbogastus
Con^^ssour and Bishop of that Sea, who being an Cratepol. de Epis. German. Ant.
Democh. de Sacrif. Missa. to. 2. (...). 35. wi^n l. 2. lig. vit. in Catal.
Epis^o. Argent.
Irishman by birth, and a monk of the Order of S. Benedict, went over into
France and Germany, where he became an Ermite for diverse years in the forest
of Alsatia, and afterward was ordained Bishop of Strasburgh: which Sea, when he
had governed for twelve years, in great sanctity of life, and other virtues,
he departed this world, and reposed in our Lord, in the year of Christ, six
hundred fifty and eight. Among many of his miracles, one is recorded, that by
his prayers he reca^led to life Sigebert Son to King Dagobert of France, that
by misfortune had been slain by a wild boar.

G The two and twentieth Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the Commemoration of Bl. VVilfr^de Queen and *
Abbess, wife to holy King Edgar, and Mother to S. Edith Virgin, who being
from a Pol. Vir. lib. 6. Ranulph. Cest^. in hist. Angl. Ite^ in Actas S. Edi
(...) Virg.
child brought up among the Religious woman in the Monastery o^ Winchester,
and afterward married to King ^dgar, rejecting the vanities of the world after
her husbands death, entered again into the said Monastery, and became Abbess
of the same; where in all kind o^ sanctimony and exemplar good life, she gave
up her soul to her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, nine hundred
fourscore and seven: In which place also her body was interred, and there kept
with great veneration, even until our days.

A The three and twentieth Day.
AT London the Commemoration of S. Vodine Martyr and Archbishop of the *
same Sea in our British Primitive Church, who being a man of singular sanctity
of life, reproved King Vortiger of Britany, for putting away his lawful wise,
and taking another woman, whose Father was a great enemy to the Christian
faith: wherefore King Gul. Mal nes. histor. ex antiq. Monum. Britan. and Sto.
Ibidem.
Hingist of Kent, the said womans Father, ince^sed with rage against the holy
Bishop, caused him forthwith to be slain (like another S. John Baptist,)
together with many other British Priests and religious men, and so he received
a crown of Martyrdom, about the year of Christ, four hundred and fifty.

B The four and twentieth Day.
AT VVinocks-berghen in Flanders, the translation of S. Lew^ne Virgin and
Martyr Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die, et in Indic. SS. Belgij Antiq.
Britan. Monum.
who descending of a very honorable parentage in our Island of Great-Britany,
was in the time of S. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, slain for the
confession of Christ, in the year of our Lord, six hundred fourscore and
seven. Her body was kept with great veneration in an old Monastery of S.
Andrew, near Seaford-hauen in Sussex, until the time of the second Danish and
Norman incursions, and then on this day was translated to Berghen aforsaid, and
there placed in the Cloister of S. Winocke, in the year of Christ, one
thousand fifty and eight, whereat many miracles have been wrought. In the last
vastation of Flanders by the French, the said glorious body was lost, to the
great lamentation of all Flanders, but especially of the Inhabitants of
Berghen, who by that means where deprived o^ so great a treasure.

C The five and twentieth Day
IN Gothland the Commemoration of the *
Sainte^ VViaman, Vnaman, and Sunaman, brethren and martyrs, nephews to S.
Sigfride o^ York and Apostle of Gothia, who going out of England into that
Country with their said uncle S. Sigfrid for the Conversion thereof, were, by
the enemies of Io. Mag. (...) hist. Gothoru^ l. 17. c. 20. Olaus Magnus etiam
in addit. ad Joan.
Christ, slain in hatred of Christian Religion. Their bodies were thrown into
a river, and their heads being put into a vessel, and a great stone hanged
thereat, were cast into a poole near unto the place of their Martyrdom, where
on a time S. Sigfride walking and deploring their deaths, on a sudden there
appeared three miraculous lights upon the water, that compassed the vessel
wherein their said heads were, which he seeing, presently leaped into the poole,
and embracing the^ wept and said: Vindicet Deus. Whereto one answered,
Vindicatum erit, Another replied, In quem? The third added, In filios filiorum
etc. This happened about the year of Christ, one thousand.

D The six and twentieth Day.
AT Derremond in Flanders the festiuity of S. Christian Virgin, who descended
of the blood Royal of our Kings of England, Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. hac
die, et in Indic. SS. Belgij
had an angel sent from heaven (as writes Molanus) to instruct her in the
Christian faith: by whose admonition, to eschew the dangerous allurements of
the world, she first stole secretly into Scotland, and thence into Flanders,
and there after a private and most saintly life, full of miracles, she gave up
her blessed soul to rest with her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ,
one thousand fourscore and twelve, and in the reign of K. William Rusus of
England. Her principal celebrity is kept at the forsaid town of Derremond,
upon the seventh day of September, when her body was taken up and translated
to a more eminent place of the same Church, where it is yet preserved with
great veneration of the Inhabitants, as Patroness of that Village.

E The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Glastenbury in Sommersetshire the festiuity of S. Joseph of Arimath^a, who
going out of Jury (after he had buried Christ) with S. Mary Magdalen and her
company, to Marselles in France, came thence into Great-Britany, with his own
son Io. Capg. i^ Catal. SS. Brit. Pol. Vir. (...). Ca^^d. in d^s^rip. Britan.
page 162 ^icol. Harpesf. in hist. Eccl^s. fol. 3.
Joseph, and ten other disciples, where he obtained of King Aruiragus, a little
Island in Somersetshire, called in the British tongue Ins wi^^in (now
Glastenbury;) and there leading a solitary life with his said fellows, at last
he converted to the Christian faith Marius and Coillus, son and nephew to
King Aruiragus, and then full of most venerable old years, he died, about the
year of Christ, fourscore and two. There was afterward a goodly Monastery
erected in that place of the Order of S. Benedict, which was the greatest in
all England, and so remained until the time of King Henry the 8. when by his
commandment the same was destroyed by Sir William Goald Justice of Peace, to
the lamentation of all Christendom. His feast was wont to be celebrated on
this day in many places of our Realm, even until the reign of the late
Queen Elizabeth.

THE same day at Lincoln the passion of S. Hugh Martyr, who being a Child of
t^n years old, was by the Jews of that City in contempt of Christ and
Christian Religion, nailed on a cross, and so deserved to be crowned with the
same death, that our blessed Savior suffered for the Rede^ptio^ of mankind.
The perfidious Jews, when he was dead, buried his body in an obscure place,
which the earth miraculously cast Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Aug. Matthew. West. and
Paris(...). 1255.
up: and then they threw him into a well, who being there also by a miracle
found out by his own Mother, the Chanons of the same City, with great
veneration carried the same in processio^ to the Cathedral Church or Minster,
and there interred his holy Relics, in the year of Christ, one thousand two
hundred fifty and five, and in the reign of King Henry the third of England.

F The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Dole in little Britany the deposition of Sigeb. in Chron. an. 565. Petr. in
Catal. l. 6. Vincent. in specul. lib. 20. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Mart. Romans
Molan. and alij hac die*
S. Sampson Bishop and Confessor, who borne in our Ila^d of a Royal British
blood, was first created Archbishop of Carleon upon the river of Vske, and
Metropolitan among the old Britans of Wales, now commonly called Carline; and
being inflamed with desire of helping his Neighbor-countries for their
Conversion, went over into France, and there was constituted Bishop of Dole in
little Britany by King Childebert of France: where after he had converted many
thousands to the faith of Christ, famous for miracles, he finally ended his
venerable days, and reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, six
hundred and ^oure. His body was buried at Dole, and there in ancient times wont
to be kept with great veneration and reverence of the Inhabitants.

G The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Troys in France the deposition of S. Lupus Bishop and Confessor, who about
the year of Christ, four hundred and forty, together with S. German Bishop
Mart. Romans Molan. and alij omn^s hac die. Bed. l. 1. Eist. Eccl c. 17. 18. 19.
20. and 21. Gild. Sapien. in eius vita. Greg. T(...) de glo^. Conf.
of Auxier, came over into our Island of Great-Britany, to expel the Pelagian
heresy, and to reestablish the Catholic and Roman faith, which was among them
before, and then began to be extinguished by the doctrine of Pelagius the
Britan. At what time also is recorded a famous and miraculous victory achieued
by the prayers of these two Saints, against those heretics, by only crying
and sounding out the word Alleluia, wherewith the said Pelagians were driven
away and discomfited. And for this singular benefit, that our Country has
received by this servant of Christ, it seems not amiss, that his memory
should be recorded among the ancient Saints of our Nation (though he were a
Frenchman by birth) and his festiuity celebrated by us, for the increase of
devotion in our Island, that was once made worthy of so glorious a Patron and
Protector.

THE same day at Lichfield in Stassordshire, the Commemoration of Blessed Owen *
Confessor, who being a man of great esteem and birth, and high Steward to
Queen Edildride of the East ^^gles, renounced the world, and became a monk,
first in the Monastery of Lesting in the Kingdom Ven. Bed. l. 4. hist. Angl.
cap. 3.
of the Northumbers, under S. Chad, that then was Abbot thereof, and after at
Lichfield: where being made worthy by God, to hear the voice of Angels one
day descending upon S. Chads Oratory to call him to heaven, in great sanctity
and holiness of life, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ,
six hundred and fourscore.

A The thirtith Day.
IN Northumberland the deposition of S. Le^rone Virgin and Martyr, who being
Abbess Matthew. West. an. 1011. Arnol. Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die
of a Monastery in the same Kingdom, was in the second Danish persecution
together with many holy men and women, slain in contempt of the Christian
faith. For the furious Danes surprising all the Monasteries that stood in their
ways, put most of the Religious persons, either to sword or fire. And among
others, coming to this Monastery, whero^ S. Lefrone was Abb^sse, after that
they had most barbarously and by violence abused the sacred Virgins, they
tithed the whole Monastery, putting nine to death, and leaving the tenth to
sh(...) for herself, which vnheard-of-cruelty, the perfidious Danes showed
toward many religious persons in our Country, at their arri^all, and
incursions, about the year of Christ, one thousand and eleven.

THE same day at Canterbury the deposition of S. Ta(...)yne Confessor, and
Archbishop of the same Sea, who being a Bed. l. 5. c. 24. Joan. Tritem. l. 4.
(...). 69. Pol. Vir. lib. 6. wion l. 2. lig. vitae.
man of excellent learning and wisdom, was, of a monk of the Monastery of
Brewton, promoted to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, and succeeded S.
Brituald in that office: where in all kind of holy conversation, and sanctity
of life, he ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ, seven hundred
and forty, and in the reign of King Edbert of Kent. His body was buried in
the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, where it yet remains in the old Cloister.

F The one and thirtith Day.
AT Hunstocke in Corn-wall the deposition of S. Neoth Priest and Confessor,
who leading a solitary life in the VVest-part of England, was famous for
sanctity of life and Matthew. West. an. 87^. et 878. Molam. in addit. ad Vsua.
and alij omnes hac die.
miracles, both alive and dead. He was very familiar with king Alfred of the
VVestsaxons, by whose counsel and exhortation, the said King founded the
famous University of Oxford. With this man also there lived at the same time,
another venerable holy man (and as it were his companion) called S. Guier, unto
both which there have been many Chappells and altars, in Catholic times past,
dedicated with in the Realm of England. And in Humingtonshire in particular,
there is yet remaining a fair town and Church, sometime erected in memory of
S. Neoth, which until this day retayneth that ancient name, and is commonly
called S. Neots. He died about the year of Christ, eight hundred threescore
and eleven.

THE MONTH OF AUGUST.
C The first Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the deposition of S. Ethelwold Sur. to. 4 in eius
vita. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Pol. Vir. lib. 6. histor. Mart. Romans Molan. and
alij omnes hac die.
Bishop and Confessor, who being first a Monk of Glastenbury Monastery, under
S. Dunstan, was afterward made Abbot of Abington, and thence promoted to the
Bishopric of Winchester: which when he had governed for one and twenty
years together, in great sanctity of life and working of Miracles, he rested
in our Lord, in the year of Christ 984. and was buried in his own Cathedral
Church of Winchester: at whose body it has pleased God to work many
miracles. It is recorded of this holy Bishop, that in time of a great dearth,
he brake all the plate belonging to his Church, and gave it to the poor,
saying: That the Church in good time might be again provided of Ornaments
necessary, but the poor that perished for want of food, could not be recovered.

THE same day at Gaunt in Flanders the Translation of S. VVenlocke Abbot and
Confessor, who descended of the ancient Royal blood of Britany, became Father
to Sur. in vita. S. Ethbini 19. Octo. Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die.
many Monks in an old Monastery in the lesser Britany, called Tauracum, where
in all kind of most holy life, he ended his blessed days. His body was
afterward on this day with great solemnity translated to Gaunt, about the year
of Christ, one thousand and fifty, and is there until this day preserved with
great honor and veneration.

D The second Day.
AT Durham in the Bishopric, the Commemoration of S. Alrike Eremite *
and Confessor who leading a solitary life in the forest of Carliele for many
years together, Matthew. Paris. in Chron. ad an. 1107. and 1170.
was of such admirable sanctity and holiness of life, that his memory, even
until our days, has been famous throughout the whole Island of Britany. S.
Godricke an Eremite also living in those parts at the same time, and being
present at his death, saw his soul ascend into heaven, as it were in a
Sphericall form of a burning wynd. His body was with great veneration interred
at Durham by the Clergy of that Church, about the year of Christ, one thousand
one hundred and seven, in which year he died.

E The third Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Domitius Confessor, who descended of a *
worthy lynage in the Kingdom of Ireland, became there a Monk of the holy
Order of Io. Lest. Episco. Rossens. l. 4. de gest. Scot. Wion in append. (...)d
l. 3. (...)g. vitae.
S. Benedict, under the famous Abbot S. Columbe, whose scholar and disciple he
was, where in all kind of good learning, virtue, and other sanctity of life, he
ended his venerable old days, about the year of Christ, six hundred
threescore and eleven. His memory has, in times past, been very famous
throughout the Island of Great-Britany, especially in Scotland, where he lived
and died.

F The fourth Day.
AT Furne in Flanders in the Diocese of Ipres, the Translation of part of the
glorious body of S. VValburge Virgin and Abbess, daughter to S. Richard King
of the English, who being sent for into Germany by S. Bonijace her uncle,
Archbishop of Mentz, was by him ordained Abbess of a monastery Marcel. in vit.
S. Simib. c. 14. Mol. in addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Wion. hac die in
Mart. Benedict.
there, which he had newly founded, called Heyden^rae, where in all kind of
sanctimony of life, she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse, in the year
of Christ, seven hundred threescore and sixteen. The rest of her body
remains at Eyst, whither it was before translated; wherout, until this day,
distilleth a precious oil, very sovereign formany diseases. Her principal
festiuity was wont to be celebrated in our Catholic Church of England, upon
the one and twentieth day of June, according to the use of Sarum; and in Germany
upon the first of May.

G The fifth Day.
AT Oswistree in Shropshire the Passion of S. Oswald King of the Northumbers
and Martyr, who after he had brought the Angles, Scots, and Pictes unto his
subjection, was so zealous in the new planted faith of Christ, that for defense
thereof principally he was slain by Penda the Pagan King of Mercia, at the
forsaid town of Osistree, in the Bed. in Epit. and l. (...). c. 6. 9. 10. and
11. Io. Mayor Histor. Scot. l. 2. cap. 11 Mart. Romans and alij omnes. hac die.
year of Christ, six hundred thirty and five. S. Bid recounteth, that on a
day as he sat at dinner with S. Aidan Bishop of Lindisferne, there was a
silver dish brought before him full of daynties, which when he saw, he caused
presently to be broken in little pieces, and given to the poor attending at
his gate for alms, together with the meat that was therein, saying, They had
more need thereof then himself. The Bishop sitting by, and delighted with such
rare piety in a King, took him by the right hand, and said: This hand, I pray
God, may never consume. And so says S. Bid, it fell out: for that his arm
and hand being cut of at his death, remained till his days whole and
incorrupt, being kept in a silver case, in S. Peter's Church at Bambrough. He
finished the Cathedral Church of S. Peter at Torke, which was before begun by
his predecessor King Edwyn. His body was first buried at Peterburrow, and part
thereof translated afterward to VVinockes-Berghen in Flanders, where the same
was preserved with great Veneration.

A The sixth Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the depositio^ Pol. Vir. lib. 11. and 12. Matthew.
West. and Paris. ad ann. citat. Wio^ l. 2. in Catal. Episco. winton.
of Blessed Henry Confessor and Bishop of the same Sea, who being a Frenchman
by birth, and brother to King Stephen of England, became first a monk of the
Order of S. Benedict, and after Abbot of Glastenbury, and last of all Bishop of
Winchester, and Legate Apostolical of England. In which dignity he behaved
himself with so great humility and love of the common people, for more then
forty years together, that his name was famous throughout all England and
France. He died in great sanctity of life, and spirit of Prophesy, in the year
of Christ, one thousand one hundred seauenty and one, about four months
before the Martyrdom of S. Thomas of Canterbury.

THE same day at ^one in France the Commemoration of S. Alexander Confessor, *
who descended of the bloud-Royall of Scotland, Rob-Buckl. in vita S. Mechtil.
Virg. L. M. de vit. SS. Mulie u^. Angl.
stole secretly thence for the love of Christ in base attire, and went into
France, where he became a Lay-brother in a Monastery of Cistercian monks at
Fone, laboring in the basest offices of the house, unknown till his dying
day: Which being then reueyled to the Prior of the Monastery upon obedience, it
pleased God to testify his worthiness by a Miracle after his death, which was
thus. A Monk of the same Monastery, that had a sore ulcer in his breast, and
now grown to a fistula, came to the said Alexanders tomb, and there prayed.
Unto whom Alexander appearing brighter then the sun with two Crowns, one on
his head, and another in his hand; the Monk demanded what that double Crown
meant? He answered and said: The Crown in his hand is for the temporal
Crown, which I forsook for Christ's love (for he should have been King of
Scotland, being next heir thereunto by succession, as the Story relates:) The
other on my head, is that which I have received common with other Saints. And
that you may be assured of the verity of this vision, you shall now be cured of
your infirmity. And having thus spoken, and the other immediately healed, he
vanished away. He died about the year of Christ, one thousand and two hundred.

B The seventh Day.
AT Westminster by London the Commemoration of S. Maude Queen, daughter *
to S. Margaret and holy King Malcolme of Scotland, and wife to K. Henry the
first of England, whose admirable and rare virtues, together with her singular
and exemplar life, has been a pattern ever since to all Princesses in Europe;
especially her exceeding Charity Matthew. West. et Paris. an. 1118. and 1105.
Item in Actis S. Marg. Matris apud Sur. to. 3. 10. Iunij.
toward the poor, whom she disdayned not, though never so foul leapers, but
rather embraced them with all delight, yea washed their soars and ulcers,
never so loathsome and filthy: For whom she built also a goodly hospital in
the suburbs of London called S. G^les; as also founded the Priory of
Christes-Church within Ald-gate of the same City. Her body was with all
veneration buried at Westminster in the year of Christ, one thousand one
hundred and eighteen, which year she desceased. In whose praise these
distiches following were composed.

Prosper a non laetam secere, non aspera tristem,
Aspera risus ei, prospera terror erant.
Non decor essecit frag^lem, non Sceptra superbam,
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
She was in her tender years brought up in the Monasteries of Religious women
at Winchester and Rumsey, in all exercise of virtue and learning. She built a
fair stone bridge over the river of Lue at Stratford-vpon-Bow, as also gave
diverse goodly mannours and lands to the Abbey of Barking in Essex, for
mayntayning of the same.

C The eight Day.
AT Glastenbury-Abbey in Somersetshire the Commemoration of S. Fagane
Confessor, *
and Scholar to S. Joseph of Arimathia, with whom when he had led a solitary
Eysengr. C^nt 2. part. 3 did. 4. Io. de Kirkstat in Monast. Tabulae. Glas^on.
life for many years in the Island of Auallonia, now called Glastenbury, and
being by S. Joseph thoroughly instructed in the Christian ^aith and other
virtues, became himself a preacher thereof and S. Joseph's successor in his
Oratory, where the ^amous Monastery of Glastenbury was afterward built: Where
also in great sanctity and holiness of life he finally reposed in our Lord,
about the year of Christ, one hundred and twelve; and was one of the first
Confessors of our British Nation.

D The ninth Day.
AT Ely in Cambridgshire the deposition of Matthew. West. an. 1254. and Paris.
eodem an. Pol. Vir. l. 16. in fine.
S. Hugh Bishop and Confessor, who being first a Monk and then Abbot of the
Monastery of S. Edmundsbury in Suffolk, was thence promoted to the Bishopric
of Ely, where in all kind of most commendable virtues, especially in humility
and abstinence, having governed that Sea five and Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac
die.
twenty years, he happily ended his venerable days, about the year of Christ,
one thousand two hundred fifty and four. His body was very honorably interred
in the Cathedral Church of Fly, within the Chancell, which himself had newly
built from the ground, consecrating the same in presence of King Henry the
third, and his son Prince Edward, in the year 1235. and was there kept
until our days with great honor and veneration of the people. He also built
the Bishops Palace at Ely, besides many other public works of Charity, which
he performed whilst he lived.

E The tenth Day.
AT Lesmor in Ireland the Commemoration of S. Malcus Bishop and Confessor, *
who borne in England, and a Monk of the Monastery of Winchester in
Hampshire, and of a most virtuous conversation, was elected Io. Mola^. in
appe^d. ad Mart. Vsua. and Ber. in vita S. Malach. Epis.
and consecrated Bishop of Lesmor in Ireland. In which Pastoral office, in
great sanctity of life and working of Miracles, he finally ended his blessed
days, about the year of Christ, one thousand one hundred twenty and five. He
is also much praised by S. Bernard, that lived at the same time; who writing
the life of S. Malachy, Bishop and Primate of Ireland, among other things, he
says of S. Malcus: That the wisdom of God was in him. etc.

F The eleventh Day.
AT Chichester in Sussex the Commemoration of Bl. Gilbert Confessor and Bishop
*
of the same Sea, whose integrity of life and virtuous conversation, has made
him famous to posterity. He was a Father of the fatherless (says the Story of
his life) a comforter of mourners, a defender of widows, a relieuer of the
poor, a helper of the distressed, and a diligent visitour of the sick. And
thus heaping up heavenly treasure by the exercise of these and other like
virtues, and by his continual teaching and instructing Matthew. West. in hist.
An^ l. ad an. Citat. Registr. Cicestren. Catal. Epis. Cicestre^s.
the people, like a true Pastor of Christ's flock, full of venerable old age,
he finally reposed in our Lord, in the year of Christ, one thousand three
hundred and ^iue, and was buried in his own Cathedral Church. At whose body
Matthew of Westminster records diverse Miracles to have been wrought. He
raised the foundations of our Blessed Ladies Chapel at Chichester, but death
preventing his pious endeavor, the same was finished by another.

G The tweluth Day.
AT Stafford in the ^ame Shire, the Commemoration *
of S. Bertelme Confessor, who descended of a noble British lynage in our
Island, contemned the puddle and vanities Regist. Eccle. Stafford. and monument.
antiq. eiusdem Prouin.
of the world in the flower of his youth, and became an E^mite for the love of
God, leading a most strict and severe kind of life, in the woods near Stafford
aforsaid: where in very great sanctity and holiness of life, he ended his
blessed days, and finally reposed in our Lord. His body was afterward brought
to Stafford, and being there interred, was wont, in ancient times, to be kept
with great veneration of the people of that Province.

A The thirteenth Day.
IN Frizeland the Commemoration of S. *
VVigbert Priest and Martyr, who being an Englishman by birth, descended of an
honorable stock, lead first a solitary life in Ireland, and thence returning
into England; went over into Frizeland to preach the Christian says to the
Pagans of that Country, which when he had done for two years, without any
great profit, returned again, and gave himself to his former Eremiticall kind
of life. But being sent thither the second Ven. Bed. l. 5. c. 10. and 11.
Marcel. in vita S. Simibert. Molan. in In^ic. SS. Belgij
time with S. VVillebrord and his fellows, was by Radbodus King of the
Frizians put to a mos^ cruel death, for persuading the people to break down
a certain Image of Jupiter, which the said King had set up to worship and
offer sacrifice unto, about the year of Christ, six hundred fourscore and
fourteen. This man is different from the other S. VVigbert, whose feast is
also celebrated upon this day by the Roman Martyrologe, under the name and
title of a Confessor.

B The fourteenth Day.
AT Elst in Gelderland the Translation of S. VVerenfrid Priest and Confessor,
who Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Io. Trit. de vir.
Illustr. l. 3. c. 147. wion in Mart. Benedict.
being a Monk of the monastery of Rippon in Yorkshire, went out of England
into Fla^ders and Germany to preach the Christian faith, where he converted the
whole Country of Geldria, and became their Apostle, laboring incessantly, by
teaching and instructing them in the true way of life, until his dying day.
His body was afterward with great solemnity and veneration, on this day
translated to the forsaid town of Elst, whereat infinite miracles have been
wrought, especially in curing the disease of the Gout. He died about the year
of Christ, seven hundred and sieve; and is honored of the Inhabitants of
Elst, as principal Apostle and Patron of that Province.

C The fifteenth Day.
IN the Monastery of Cateby, the Commemoration *
of S. Margaret Prioresse, who borne at Abington in Barkeshire, and sister to
S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, was by him ordained Prioresse of the
forsaid Monastery of Cateby: whose most virtuous life Matthew. West. in hist. ad
an. 1257.
and conversation, full of sanctimony and miracles, deserved to be famous even
until our days throughout England. She died about the year of Christ, one
thousand two hundred fifty and seven, and was buried in the same place. At
whose body it has pleased God, in testimony of her holiness, and increase of
devotion in our Island of Great-Britany, to work miracles,

D The sixteenth Day.
AT Dover in Kent the Commemoration of S. Thomas Monk and Martyr, who by *
certain French Pirates, that la^ded there in the night, was most barbarously
slain in defense of the goods of the Church and Monastery Matthew. West. an.
1295. Pol. Vir. lib. 17. Histor. Sto. in vita. Edou. 1.
committed to his charge, about the year of Christ, one thousand two hundred
fourscore and fifteen, and reign of King Edward the first of England. His
body was with great solemnity and veneration interred in the Church of Dover,
whereat it is recorded that miracles have been wrought, in sign of his innocence.

E The seventeenth Day.
AT Hartford in the same Shire, the festiuity of S. Thomas Archdeacon of
Northumberland and Confessor, who having Matthew. West. and Paris, an. 1253.
been a disciple of S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, was of so great sanctity
and holiness o^ life, that it pleased God to manifest the same after his
death, by the manifold miracles wrought at his body. He died in the year of
Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and three, and was buried in a little
Chapel of the Carmelites at Hartford. And for that there are three other
Saints of this name, of the English nation, this man is commonly called, for
distinctions sake, by the name of S. Thomas of Northumberland.

THE same day at Egmond in North-Holland ^n the D^ocesteo Harlem the deposition
o^ S. Ieron Priest and Martyr, who borne in Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. e in
Ind. SS. Belgij Petr. Cratep. de Episco. German. Wion and a^ij.
Scotland of a Noble blood, went over into Holland to preach the Christian
faith to the people o^ that Country: which when he had done most painfully for
many years together with great sruite and profit of his holy labors, was at
last slain in hatred thereof by the Danes and Normans, that made incursions
into those parts, about the year of Christ, eight hundred and fifty. His body
was with great veneration brought to the Monastery of Egmond, and there placed
near to the venerable Relics of S. Adalbert their Apostle, both which are
now destroyed and cast out o^ the Church, in these our unhappy days, together
with all other sacred Relics and images, in those parts, to the lamentation
of the Christian world.

F The eighteenth Day.
AT Rome the deposition of S. Helen Empress mother to Constantine the Great,
who borne at Colchester in Essex (as ancient Niceph. l. 8. Eusebius. in vit.
Constant. Socrat. l. 2. cap. 12.
Records testify) and daughter to Prince Coelus of Britany, was for her great
zeal in Christian Religion, made worthy both of an earthly and heavenly
crown. She desceased at Rome, about the year of Christ, three hundred twenty
and six, being of the age Zozom. l. 1. c. 1. Manal. Graec. 21. Maij. Mart. Romans
hac die. Simon Dunel. in histor. Angl.
of fourscore years. Her body was afterward translated to Rhemes in France,
and there is kept with great veneration. The Greek Church does celebrate her
feast upon the one and twentieth day of May, together with her son
Constantine. She going to Jerusalem found out the Cross, whereon our Savior
was nailed, and suffered his passion for the Redemption of mankind, and
repaired that City sore ruined through the wars of the Roman Emperors,
adorning the same with many goodly Churches and monume^tes. She also builded
the walls of the City of London and Colchester in England, together with a
goodly Church in the Town of Bedsord, which being turned into a Monastery, was
called of her name Helenslow, but afterward quite destroyed and overthrown by
the Incursions of the Danes, about the year of Christ, eight hundred
threescore and eight.

G The ninteenth Day.
IN South Wales the Commemoration of S. Clintanke K. of Brecknocke and Martyr,
who *
being a very zealous and godly Prince, as he was one day on hunting, was
slain by a Pagan soldier, partly in hatred of Christian Religion, and partly
also for that a noble Virgin should say, she would never 10. Capg. in Catal.
SS. Brit.
marry any man except the said King, who was so zealons a Christian. There was
afterward a goodly Church erected in his honor, near to a River in
South Wales, where he was slain, and where with great veneration his holy body
was interred, at which it pleased God in sign of his innocence to work many
miracles.

A The twentieth Day.
IN Northumberland the passion of S. Oswine King of the now Yorkshire
Deires and Martyr, who for that he was a most zealous Christian, was impiously
slain by Osway the Pagan King of the Bernicians, about the year of Christ,
six hundred fifty and one. His body being Bed. in Epit. and Histor. l. 3. c.
14. West. an. 645. and 941. Molan. in addit. ad Vsua.
thrown into an obscure place, and after miraculously found out, was with
great veneration brought unto Tinmouth, and there placed in an ancient Church
erected in honor of our blessed Lady. S. Aidan living at the same time, and
Bishop of Lindisserne, had a revelation of his death, even at the instant of
his passion, who when he preached to the people, was wont oftentimes to say of
him: This Nation of ours is not worthy to have so good a Ruler or Governor.
etc.

B The one and twentieth Day.
IN Calabria in Italy the Commemoration of S. Richard Bishop and Confessor,
who *
descended of a worthy parentage in England, and going to the Court of Rome,
was there made Priest, and at length, for his Regist. Eccles. S. Andr. in
Calab* and Officiu^cius impress. Romae.
virtue and learning, ordained Bishop of a place in Calabria called S. Andrews:
where in great sanctity and holiness, of life together with exceeding vigilance
over his flock committed to his charge, he finally reposed in our Lord. His
body was interred in his said Cathedral Church of S. Andrew, and there is yet
preserved with great devotion and veneration of the Inhabitants, for the
frequent Miracles that have been wrought thereat. He is Patron of that Diocese,
and his feast is there celebrated with a double Office, wherein he has three
proper lessons, containing the whole Story of his life.

C The two and twentieth Day.
IN Bedfordshire the Commemoration of S. Arnulph Confessor, who descended of *
a noble British lynage in our Island, for the love of God, contemned the world,
and became an Eremite, leading a most strict and Ex antiq. monum. Prouin^.
Bedford.
severe kind of life in the County or Province of Bedford: where in great
sanctity and holiness he also ended his blessed days. His body was buried in
the same shire at a place called afterward of his name S. Arnulphs-bury, where
for a long time it was honored, for the miracles it pleased God to work
thereat.

D The three and twentieth Day.
AT Meneuia, now cal'ed S. David's in Penbrookeshire *
of Wales the Commemoration o^ S. Justinian Monk and Martyr, who being a
noble Britan, and building a Monastery 10. Capg. in Catal. SS. Brit.
with his own inheritance, in the Island of Ramsey in Penbrookeshire aforsaid,
and having there gathered many monks together under Monastical discipline,
was in the said island, by the devils instigation, in hatred of his sanctity,
slain by three of the brethren of his said Monastery, who were all presently
stricken with a filthy leprosy by divine Justice, in revenge of so odious a
fact, about the year of Christ, four hundred fourscore and six. His body was
withal veneratio^ and honor brought to the Church of Meneuia, where the same
was by S. David himself then Bishop thereof, solemnly interred, and whereat it
pleased God to work many miracles.

E The four and twentieth Day.
IN Cateby-Monastery the Commemoration of S. Alice Prioresse, and sister to S.
Edmund *
Archbishop of Canterbury, who borne at Matthew. Paris. in hist. Maiori. ad an.
D. 1257. and deinceps.
Abington in Barkeshire and a woman of admirable spirit and virtue, was after
the death of her sister S. Margaret, made Prioresse of the Monastery of Cateby,
where in very great humility and holiness of life, she ended her blessed
days, about the year of Christ, one thousand two hundred and seauenty. Her
body was buried in the same Monastery near to the body of her forsaid sister
S. Margaret, whereat in token of her sanctimony of life, whilst she lived, it
pleased God to work miracles after her death.

F The five and twentieth Day
AT Coldingham in Norhamshire, in the Marches of Scotland, the passion of S.
Ebba Abbess and Martyr, descended of the blood royal of the Kings of
Northu^berla^d, together with all her Sisters in the Monastery who in the
first Danish Incursions, under the Captayns Hinguar and Hubba, cut of their
noses Chron. Britan. fol. 609. Westan. 870. Pol. Vir. lib. 4. Arnold. Wion.
lib. 4. lig. vitae. Baron. tom. 10. Annal. in defens. earumde^.
and upper lips, to deforme themselves, thereby to anoyd the barbarous lust of
the Pagan persecutours; who seeing them so mangled and defaced, commanded
their Monastery to be fiered, and so they all ended their course of Martyrdom.
She was afterward canonized for a Saint, about the year of Christ, eight
hundred and fourscore. This woman is different from the other of the same Name,
who was the foundresse and first Abbess of this Monastery of Coldingham, and
no Martyr, for that the Danes were not in her time yet come into England, nor
almost two hundred years after. Her Commemoration we have put down before,
upon the second day of April.

THE same day at Monte-Flascone in Tuscany Catal. Epis. Herefor. Regist.
eiusdem Eccle. Pol. Vir. l. 17. Hist. Ang l.
the deposition of S. Thomas Confessor and Bishop of Hereford, who going to
Rome to Pope Martyn the second, about the affairs of his Church, died in his
way homward at the forsaid Town of Monte-Flascone, where his flesh being
separated from his bones, was there honorably interred in the Church of S.
Seuerine; but his sacred Relics were brought to Hereford, and there placed in
a fair marble Tomb in his own Cathedral Church, with great solemnity and
veneration, the second day of October, in the year of Christ, one thousand two
hundred fourscore and seven. He was afterward Canonized for a Saint by Pope
John the two and twentieth.

G The six and twentieth Day.
AT Isselbey in Lincolnshire the Commemotion *
of S. Pandwyne Virgin, who descended of a noble parentage in our Island of
Great-Britany, was of such admirable virtue, Rich. Parochus Isselb. in eius
vita apud Io. Capg. in Cat. SS. Angl. Mola^. in append. ad Vsua.
and austerity of life, that in sign thereof it pleased God to work many
miracles at her body after her death, which was kept for a long time with great
veneration of the Countrey-pleople, at the forsaid town of Isselbey. She died
about the year of Christ, nine hundred and four. The story of her life is
written at large, by Richard Pastor of the Church of Isselbey, whereof there is
mention made in the Catalogue of English Saints, gathered by John Capgraue a
learned man of our Nation, who lived in the time of King Richard the second,
and lead an Eremiticall life in the Province of Kent.

A The seven and twentieth Day.
IN Glocestershire the Commemoration of *
S. Decuman Eremite and Martyr, who borne of a very noble British parentage in
South Wales, and brought up in the Christian faith from his youth, stole
secretly away from his friends, and with a faggot of wood, instead of a boat,
miraculously passed over the river of Seuerne, and came into Glocestershire,
Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Ang.
where leading an Eremiticall austere life, was at length slain by a Pagan
soldier, in hatred of Christian Religion: whose head being cut of from his
body, himself took up from the ground, and carried to a fountain, whereat he
was wont to wash it. At which place there was afterward a Goodly Church erected
in his honor, about the year of Christ, seven hundred and six, where his
body was wont to be kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants: as also
another dedicated unto him in the Town of Wells in Somersetshire, which at
this day is there standing to be seen.

B The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Brackley in Northamptonshire, the Commemoration of S. Rumbald Confessor, *
Son to a British King of our Island, who as soon as he was borne into the
world Ex Registr. Eccle. Brackl. et antiqua monum. Prouin^. North.
and baptized, did miraculously speak and fortell diverse wonderful things;
and professing himself a Christian, presently yielded up the ghost. His body
was with great veneration buried at the forsaid town of Brackley, whereat, it
is recorded, diverse miracles have been wrought.

THE same day at Cullen in the higher Germany, the Commemoration of S. *
Agnes Virgin and Martyr, who being a noble Britan by birth, and one of the
number of the Eleven thousand Virgins martyred with S. Vrsula, was for defense
of her chastity there Tabulae. Colonie^s.
put to death with the rest of her fellows, about the year of Christ, three
hundred fourscore and three, herself afterward miraculously revealing her
name: for which cause her body is peculiarly honored of the Inhabitants of
Cullen.

C The nine and twentieth Day.
AT London the deposition of S. Sebbe Ven. Bed. l. 4. c. 11. Mart. Romans hac
die. Sto. in. Ann^l. Angl. de Regib. Eastsax.
King of the East saxons and Confessor, who after he had governed that
Kingdom thirty years in great peace and tranquillity, became a Monk in the
Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul at London, distributing the greatest part of
his goods to the poor before his entrance, where within a few years after, in
great sanctity of life, he peaceably rested in our Lord, about the year of
Christ, six hundred threescore and fifteen. His body was buried in the Church
of S. Paul in London, in a costly marble Coffin, where it was kept until our
days with great veneration of the Citizens, for the miracles that are
recorded to have been wrought thereat.

THE same day at Dorchester in Oxfordshire, Gul. Malmesb. lib. de Pontif. and
Reg. Angl. an. 871.
the Translation of S. Edwold Confessor and Eremite, brother to S. Edmund King
and Martyr, who refusing the Kingdom of the Eastangles, gave himself, for
love of Christ, to a solitary life; In which when he had lived many years in
all sanctity and holiness, at last ended his blessed days at Dorchester, where
his body being interred about the year of Christ, eight hundred threescore and
eleven, was afterward, on this day, taken up and translated to a more eminent
place of the same Church, where before it was land.

D The thirtith Day.
IN ^rance in the Diocese of Meldune the deposition of S. Fiaker Confeslour,
Son Io. Lest. Epis. Ross. de reb. Sco. lib. 4. Hect. Boet. l. 9. Bellefor. in
Ann. Francoru^ l. 9. c. 36. Mola^. and omnes hac die.
to Eugenius the fourth of that name, King of Scotland, who forsaking all
worldly dignities and delights, went over into France with his sister S. Syra,
and became a Religious man, by the help and directions of S. Pharao Bishop of
Meldune: where in very great sanctity and holiness of life he ended his
blessed daye^, about the year of Christ, six hundred and thirty. In the City
of S. Omers in Artors, there is a Chapel or Oratory dedicated unto S. Fiaker
within the Par^sh Church of S. Margaret in the same Town, where his feast is
kept on this day with great solemnity, and veneration, by the Sodality or
Confraternity that is there instituted in his honor. Where also is granted
Plenary Indulgence to all that rightly v^sit his Chapel on this day, and
fullf^ll the other circumstances contained in the Bull of Grant, by Pope
Clement the eight, dated in the year of Christ one thousand ^iue hundred nynty
and seven.

E The one and thirtith Day.
AT Lindisserne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers the deposition of S. Aidan
Bed. l. 3. (...). 3. 5. and 14 Et in vita S. Cuthber.
Confessor, and Bishop of the same Sea, whose soul S. Cuthbert, being then
but a Shepherd, saw carried up to heaven by two angels, and was thereby
converted to a Religious life, about the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and
one.

THE same day at VVimborne in Dorcetshire Matthew. West. an. 719. 727. and 901.
Breuiar, Sarum and Molan. hac die.
the deposition of S. Cuthberge Abbess sister to King Inas of the VVestsaxons,
who building a Monastery of her own charges at VVimborne, entered her self
therein, took a Religious habit, and became Abbess of the same. Where in all
kind of virtuous exercise, and Monastical discipline, together with working
of many miracles, she finally gave up her soul to her heavenly spous^, about
the veare of Christ, seven hundred twenty and seven,

ALso the same day at Fulkstone in Kent the Translation of S. Eanswide Abbess
daughter to Eadbald King of Kent. who despising all worldly and temporal
honors studied how to attain to Celestial. And entering into a monastery at
Fulksto^e aforsaid, Io. Mola^. hac die Chron. Brit. fol. 264. Rob. Buckl. in
eius vita page 119.
was afterward made Abbess thereof; where in great sanctimony and holiness of
life she died, about the year of Christ, six hundred and forty. Her body was
afterward on this day taken up, and translated to a more eminent place of the
same Church, whereat it pleased God to work miracles

THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER.
F The first Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the Commemoration of S. Elphege the first of that *
name, Confessor and Bishop of the same Sea, whose godly life and doctrine,
Matthew. West. an. Do. 934. and 947. in histor. Angl. majors.
together with the spirit of prophesy, has been very famous in ancient times
throughout England. He was the first that persuaded S. Dunstan to lead a
Monastical life, as also ordained him and S. Ethelwold Priests. And when the
said Dunstan was expelled the Court by King Ethelred, he came to this holy man
Elphege, of whom he was very gratefully received and comforted. And finally
full of venerable old age, replenished with sanctity of life and miracles, ^e
peaceably rested in our Lord, about the year of Christ, nine hundred forty
and six, and was buried at Winchester. This man is different from the other S.
Elphege of the same name, who was Bishop of Canterbury, and martyred by the
Danes in the year 1012.

G The second Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Adaman Abbot and Confessor, a man of *
wonder^ull virtue and austerity of life, who being made Abbot of S. Columbes
Monastery in the Island of Hoy by Scotland, governed the Tritem. d(...).
Ill(...). Bed. l. (...). (...). 16. and 22. Sixth. Se^ens. in ^ibliot^. lib. 4.
Molan. in App^^d. ad Vsua.
same in great sanctity and holiness, together with obse^uance of Monastical
discipline until his dying day. He was one of the first, that by his doctrine
and exhortations brought the Scottishmen, as also a great part of the Britans,
to the Catholic observation of the feast of Easter, who before followed the
error of the Quartade^imans in keeping thereof. He wrote in like manner a
learned Treatise of the same subject; as also another work yet extant,
entitled, De Lo^is Sanctis, and flourished about the year of Christ, six
hundred and seauenty.

A The third Day.
AT Fossis in the Territory of Namures, the Translation of S. Foillan Bishop
and Martyr, Son to King Philtan of Ireland, who going to Rome, was there
created Bishop Molan. in addit. ad vs^ar. et in Ind* SS. Belgij Wion in Mart.
Benedict. hac ^ie.
by Pope Martin the first, and sent thence to preach the Christian faith in
France and Flanders; which when he had done for many years with very great
labor and profit in that kind, he was at length slain, together with three
of his fellows at a place in Namures, called Silua Carbonaria, or
Colliers-wood: which thing being reueyled to his brother S. Vltan, and S.
Gertrude Abbess of Niuell in Brabant, his body was ^ought for, and being found
out, was on this day afterward solemnly translated to the Monastery of Fossis,
and there is yet preserved with great veneration. He suffered about the year
of Christ, six hundred and threescore.

B The fourth Day.
AT Durham in the Bishopric, the Translation of S. Cuthbert Bishop and
Confessor, who first leading a solitary life in the Island of Farne (now called
Cochet) became afterward a Monk, and then Abbot Bed. l. 4. c. 27. 28. 29. and
30. West. an. 696. 875. 878. 995. Alan* Copus in dialog. dial. 3. cap. 19. Abbo
Flori^^. in Prolo. ad vit. S. Edmundi Ereuiar. sec. vsum Sarum.
of the Monastery of Mailros in Northumberland, and last of all was promoted to
the Bishopric of Lindisferne; the which he resigned after some years again,
and became an Eremite. Whose great holiness of life has been manifested by the
wonderful miracles wrought by him, both alive and dead. He desecased in the
year of Christ 687. His body being afterward on this day taken up, and found
altogether whole and vncorrupt, was with great sole^nity translated to the
Cathedral Church of Durh^m and there kept with great veneration: whither also
many thousands went on pilgrimage, even until the days of King Henry the
eight.

THE same day at Treuers in the higher Germany, the Passion of S. Marcellus
Bishop and Martyr, who being a noble Britan by birth, and gathering together
the dispersed Democh. l. 2. de Missa. contr. Caluinu^ c. 37. Eysengr* cent. 2.
p. 4. d 7. Molan. Mart. Romans
Christians in our Country, that were converted to Christ by S. Joseph of
Arimathia and his fellows, in our Primitive British Church, did by his
preaching and doctrine so move King Lucius, that he sent forth with to Rome to
Pope Eleutherius to treat about his Conversion to Christian faith. He
afterward went over into Germany to preach, in like manner, the faith of Christ
to that people, where, as he was executing the office of a good Pastor, he was
finally martyred at Treuers, about the year of our Lord, one hundred and
fourscore; and was the first of our British Nation, that suffered death for
Christ, out of the Island of Great Britany.

C The fifth Day.
AT Alt-Munster in Germany, the Commemoration of S. Although Abbot and Confessor,
*
who borne in Scotland, and descended of a noble parentage in that Kingdom,
Metrop. Salisbur. and wion in appe^d. lib. 3. lig. vitae.
went over into Germany, in that Primitive Church, and there became Abbot of a
new Monastery, erected by S. Boni^ace (an Englishman) Archbishop of Mentz, and
Apostle of that Country. Which Monastery was afterward of this man's name,
commonly called Altho-Monastery, and now by continuance of time, more abruptly
is termed Alt-Munster. He died in great sanctity and holiness of life, about
the year of Christ, seven hundred and threescore, and was buried in the same
place.

D The sixth Day.
IN Cumberland the Commemoration of S. *
Bega Virgin, who descended of a very noble parentage in Ireland, and being
instructed in the Christian faith, came over into our Island of Great-Britany,
and there led a most virtuous life in the forsaid Province of Cumberland: where
in very great sanctimony of life, and working of miracles, she finally Chron.
Brit. fol. 650. Wion. in appe^d. ad l. 3. lig. vitae.
gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse. There has been in ancient Catholic
times a goodly Church and Monastery erected in her honor in Cumberland, where
her body was wont to be kept with great reverence and veneration of the
Inhabitants of that Shire; which place, in those days, was a famous
pilgrimage, especially for the people of the Northern parts of England.

E The seventh Day.
AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Dunstan Bishop and Confessor, who Sur.
^o. 3. Malmes. in hist. Angl. Petr. in Catal. lib. 8. Pol. Vir. lib. 7.
being first Abbot of Glastenbury, then Bishop of Worcester, and after of
London, was last of all created Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of
England: whose most holy life and miracles, are yet famous throughout the
Christian world. The Devil appearing to him on a time in the liknesse of a
young and beautiful woman, tempting him to uncleanness, he took up a pair of
pinchers, that then lay by him, and caught the foul beast by the upper lip,
and so holding him fast, and leading him up and down his chamber, after diverse
interrogatories, drove him away. He died in great sanctity of life, in the
year of Christ, nine hundred fourscore and eight. His body was on this day
taken up, and with great solemnity, set in a more eminent place of the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, whereat it has pleased God to work many
miracles.

F The eight Day.
AT Lyming in Kent the Commemoration *
of Blessed Ethelburge Queen, wife to De ea habetur mentio in vit. Edwin. Reg.
North. and in vit. Ethelb. and Eadb. Regum Cant. R. Buckl. in vit. S. Ethelb.
Abbatis. Bark. fol. 122.
holy Edwyn the first Christian King of Northumberland, and daughter to K.
Ethel^ert of Kent, who after the martyrdom of her Lord and husband, fled out
of Northumberland, and came back to her Country of Kent, where forsaking the
pomp and vanities of the world, she built herself a little Monastery at the
forsaid town of Lyming, and there receiving the holy veyle of Chastity, was
consecrated to God by the hands of S. Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury: where
in very great holiness of life serving her heavenly spouse, she became mother to
many holy Virgins and widows, that did imitate her religious purpose and
profession. And so continuing in that godly vocation, for many years, full of
all virtue and sanctimony of life, she finally went to her heavenly spouse,
about the year of Christ, six hundred forty and seven.

G The ninth Day.
IN Scotland the deposition of S. Queran Abbot and Confessor, who descended of
a Mart. Romans Vsuard. Gasel. Wion and alij. omnes hac die.
noble family in that Kingdom, contemned the vanities of the world, and
entering into a Monastery, became a Monk of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict,
and afterward Abbot of the same; whose singular life and miracles have been
manifested abundantly to the world, both at home and abroad.

THE same day at Barking in Essex the depositio^ of S. VVulshild Virgin and
Abbess, daughter to VVulshelme an Earl among the Hereb. Rosweyd. in Fast. SS.
Rob. Buckl. in eius vital. M. S. de vit. SS. Mul. Angl.
VVestsaxons, who being borne after eighteen years barrenesse of her mother,
was in her very infancy consecrated to God, and committed for her education to
the Religious Virgins in the Nunry of Winchester; but coming to riper years,
she built herself a Monastery at Horton, and was by holy K. Edgar confirmed
Abbess thereof, as also of the Monastery of Barking, which the said King had
newly reedined and repaired, being sorely ruined through the incursions of the
Danes; from whence being soon after expulled, with all her company, by the
ambition of Queen Alstrude, was after 20. years banishment restored again by
the forsaid Queen, she being admonished thereto by S. Ethelburge sometime
Abbess thereof, who had appeared unto her in a vision, when she lay sick,
complaining of the injustice of the fact; and there in very great fanctimony of
life, she ended her blessed days, about the year of Christ, nine hundred
fourscore and five, and was buried at Barking: whose body being taken up thirty
years after her death, was found, together with all her clothes, as whole
and sound, as if she had been buried but a few days before.

A The tenth Day.
IN the Territory of Ruremond in Gelderland the Deposition of S. Otger Deacon
and Confessor, who being a Monk in the North of England where he was borne,
and going to Rome in company of S. VViro and Plechelme, returned thence into
the low Countries, and was most honorably received of Duke Pepin of Brabant,
who gave him a certain Territory and place of hab^tation in his dominions,
where he might Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. e^ in Ind. SS. Belgij Wion in
Mart. Benedict. hac die.
preach and plant the Christian faith: which when he had done for many years,
with great fervor of spirit, to the gayning of many thousand souls in those
parts; in great sanctity and holiness of life, he received the reward of his
labors by reposing in our Lord, about the year of Christ, seven hundred
thirty and one. A great part of his body remains yet in the Cathedral Church
of Ruremond, and is there kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants of that
Diocese.

B The eleventh Day.
IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Bather *
Abbot and Confessor, scholar to S. Columbe the Great of that Kingdom, who
coming into Scotland with him to preach Io. Lesl. Epis. Ross. l. 4. de gest.
Scot. wion in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vit.
the Christian ^aith to the Pictes, who then inhabited that Country: and being
a most virtuous and innocent man of life, was by him made Abbot of a Monastery
in the same Country, which he had newly erected. In which office and dignity
he so behaved himself, especially in the reformation of monastical
discipline, that his name has since been famous throughout the Kingdoms of
Ireland and Scotland. He desceased in great sanctity and ho^^nes of life, about
the year of Christ, five hundred fourscore and eleven.

C The tweluth Day.
AT Fulkestone in Kent the deposition of S. Eansu i would Virgin and Abbess
daughter Rob. Buckl. in eius vit l. M. S. Angl. page 119. ex antiq. Monum.
Cantiae.
to Eadbald King of Kent, who forsaking all worldly conversation and delights,
obtained of her Father a solitary place in his kingdom to serve her spouse
Christ, which being granted her at Fulkestone aforsaid, she there built her
self a little Oratory for a time, and then gathering together many other
noble Virgins, embraced a monastical life, and became Abbess of the rest, her
Oratory being converted into a Nu^ry; where in all kind of sanctimony of life
and pious conversation, glorious for miracles, she finally reposed in our Lord,
about the year of Christ, six hundred and forty.

THE same day at VVimborne in Dorcetshire *
the Commemoration of S. Quemburge Matthew. West. in hist. Maio^i. ad an. 727.
Virgin, sister to Inas King of the VVestsaxons, who under the Government of S.
Cuthberge her sister and Abbess, received the holy veyle of chastity in the
Monastery aforsaid: where in very great virtue, humility, and other pious
excercises, she ended her happy days, about the year of Christ, seven
hundred twenty and seven.

D The thirteenth Day.
AT VVester-woort in Gelderland, the Deposition of S. VVerensrid Priest and
Confessor, who being an Englishma^ by birth, Falix in Martyr. hac die. Eius
vita habetur tom. 7. Sto ij. ex M. S. Codic.
and descended of an honorable family, became first a Monk in the Monastery
of Rippon in Yorkshire, and thence went over into the Low-Countreyes and
Germany to preach the Christian faith, where he converted the whole Province of
Geldria, and so became their Apostle. He died on this day at the forsaid Town
of VVester-woort, about the year of Christ, seven hundred and five: and was
afterward solemnly translated to Elst, where his body has been kept with great
veneration of the Inhabitants, for the manifold miracles that have been wrought
thereat, especially in curing the gout.

E The fourteenth Day.
AT Arpine in the Kingdom of Naples *
the Commemoration of S. Bernard Confessor, who being an Englishman by birth,
and going to Jerusalem on pilgrimage (together with S. Gerard his companio) to
visit our Saviors sepulcher, in his return back fell sick in Italy, where
after a short space, in all signs of sanctity and helines Ex Reg. Eccles.
Arpine^s. and Arch. Inscript. ipsius Sepulch.
of life, he reposed in our Lord. His body being obscurely buried, was many
years after miraculously revealed to the Archpriest of that place, who with a
sollemne procession, brought the same unto Arpine, and placed it very decently
in the Church, where it is at this day kept with great veneration and honor of
the Inhabitants, as their chief Patron, for the manifold miracles, that eue^
in these our times are wrought thereat, especially in curing of Ruptures: whereby
the same place is now beco^e a famous pilgrimage, for such as are grieved with
that infirmity. His life and miracles are recounted more at large in the
Records of the Church of Arpine; of whom also there is a proper prayer with a
Hymn, or Sequentia, wherein briefly is declared the whole story of his life:
both which are commonly read in the Mass and Office of his festival day.

F The fifteenth Day.
IN the Monastery of Dormundcaster in Northamptonshire two miles from
Peterburrow, the Commemoration of Blessed Chinneburge Queen, daughter to Penda
King of the Mercians, *
and wife to Alfred King of Northumberland, who with the consent of her husband
(he also having left the world, and retired Chron. Brit. fol. 398. wion l. 4.
lig. vit. Rob. Buckl. in eius vita l. M. S. fol. 171.
himself to a Monastical life in the Abbey of Mailros) became a Religious
woman in the forsaid Monastery of Dormu^dcaster, where in all kind of
sanctimony of life, and pious conversation, she ended her blessed days, about
the year of Christ, six hundred threescore and ten. This forsaid Monastery
being afterward called of her name Chinneburgcaster was in the year 1010.
quite overthrown by the Danes; so as there is little or no memory thereof left
at this day, in our Island of Great-Britany.

G The sixteenth Day.
IN Scotland the deposition of S. Ninian Bishop and Confessor, who descended
of a noble British blood, was ordained Bishop of a place called S. Martins,
among the South-Pictes in the Marches of Scotland, whom he converted to the
Christian faith, and became Ve. Bed. l. 3. c. 4. Io. Mola^. in addi^. ad Vsua.
and alij omnes hac die.
their Apostle. He after died in Scotland, about the year of Christ, five
hundred and twelve; whose body being buried in the forsaid Church of S. Martin,
was there kept with great honor and veneration even until the days of K.
Henry the eight. In whose honor also many goodly Churches and altars, have in
former Catholic times been erected and dedicated, in the Kingdom of Scotland.

THE same day at Wilton, in the Church of S. Dionyse, the deposition of S.
Edith Sur. to. 5. Cont. Ve^. Bed. l. 2. Pol. Vir. l. 6. Vincent. in specul.
Matthew. West. an. 961.
Virgin and Abbess, daughter to holy Edgar King of England, who despising all
worldly and temporal perfermentes became a Religious woman in the Monastery of
Wilton, under the care and government of her own mother VVilsrede, after
whose descease, she was made Abbess of the same place: where in all sanctimony
of life, she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse, in the year of Christ,
nine hundred fourscore and four. There are many goodly Churches and monumentes
of her name yet to be seen in diverse places of England: and one particularly
at a Town called Church-Eaton in Staffordshire, where there is a little
wellspring of water, very sovereign for many diseases, commonly called by the
name of S. Ediths well.

A The seventeenth Day.
IN South Wales, the passion of the Saints Stephen and Socrates Martyrs, who
being two noble ancient Britans by birth, and converted to the faith of Christ
in our Primitive Mart. Romans Bed. Ado. Vsuar. and alij omnes hac die.
Church, by the preaching of S. Amphibale Priest and Martyr, were in hatred
thereof, put to death in our Island, in the persecution of Dioclesian the
Emperor, by most exquisite torments, together with many others for the same
cause, about the year of Christ, three hundred and four. There are diverse
Churches yet remaining in Wales that in ancient times have been dedicated in
their honor: among whom also, their memory is yet famous until this day,
especially in Monmouthshire, and the Southern parts adjoining.

B The eighteenth Day.
AT Berghen in Flanders, the Translation of S. VVinocke Abbot and Confessor,
who descended of a noble British blood, and going over into the Low Countries
to S. Bertin Abbot of the Monastery of Sitheu (now called S. Bertins) in the
City of S. Omers, was by him ordained Abbot of an ancient Monastery named
VVoromholt, called afterward Mola^. in addit. ad Vsuard. et in Ind. SS.
Bell(...)ij Meyerus in Anna. Flandr. and alij.
of his name S. VVinockes; where in all kind of sanctity of life and Regular
discipline, famous for miracles, he reposed in our Lord. His body was afterward
on this day translated to the forsaid town of Berghen, by Baldwyn Earl of
Flanders, about the year of Christ, nine hundred; and there is yet conserved
with great veneration of the Inhabitants, for the manifold miracles which it
has pleased God to work thereat.

C The ninteenth Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Theodore Archbishop of that Sea and
Confessor, Bed. l. 5. cap. 8. and in Epit. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Mart. Romans
and alij omnes hac die.
who borne at Tharsis in Cilicia of a noble parentage, became first a Monk of
the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and afterward was ordained Archbishop of
Canterbury, and sent thither from Rome by Pope Vitalianus. He celebrated two
Provincial Synods in our Island, the one at Hartford, the other at Hedtfeld,
concerning the Reformation of the Clergy of England. And when he had in all
virtuous and Saintlike behavior governed the forsaid Sea of Canterbury for two
and twenty years, in most godly wise, he finally reposed in our Lord, about
the year of Christ, six hundred and nynty, and was buried at Canterbury, with
a famous Epitaph in heroical verse: some part whereof you may read in S. Bid,
setdowne in the fi^th Book and eight Chapter of his History of England.

D The twentieth Day.
IN Scotland the Co^memoratio^ of S. Cybthacke Priest and Confessor, who being
an Irishman *
by birth, and Nephew to S. Columbe the Great of that Nation, despised all
worldly preferments, and came over into Scotland with his said Uncle, to preach
the Christian faith to the Pictes who then inhabited part Io. Lest. Episco.
Ross. l. 4. hist. Scot.
of that Kingdom. And at last entering into a Monastery, became a Monk of S.
Benedictes Venerable Order in the Island of Hoy under the care of the forsaid S.
Columbe, who had newly founded the same, and was then Abbot thereof: where
famous for sanctity of life and miracles throughout the whole Kingdom, there
ended his blessed days in rest, about year of Christ, six hundred and four.

E The one and twentieth Day.
IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Edilhun *
Confessor, who being an Englishman by birth, of great learning and virtue,
and brother to another Edilhun of the same Ve^. Bed. l. 3. l. 27. Hist^r.
Eccles. ^ent. Angl.
name, then Bishop of Lindisferne, in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, went
over into Ireland, to lead a more quiet kind of life, remote from the world;
where after he had passed a few years, in very great holiness and sanctity, he
gave up his soul to rest, about the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and
five. He had for companion in this his peregrination into Ireland, a noble young
man named Egbert, with whom living in a Monastery there, called in the Irish
tongue Rathmelsig, whilst the plague infected sorely that Country, he had a
vision of his own departure out of this life, and of the escape of his fellow
Egbert; to whom, when he had related the whole, in an quietness of spirit he
gave up the ghost.

F The two and twentieth Day.
AT ^indissa in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, the Commemoration of S. *
Higbald Abbot and Confessor, whose integrity of life and conversation has
been ^amous, in times past, throughout the whole Ve^. Bed. l. 4. c. 3. Io.
Mola^. in appe^d. ad Vsua* lit. H.
Island of Great-Britany. He was Abbot of an ancient Monastery in the forsaid
Kingdom of Northumberland, in the time of VVulhere King of the Mercians; and
ended his happy days about the year of Christ, six hundred fourscore and
five. He went into ^^eland a little before his death to visit the holy Abbot
Egbert, who at that time was there very famous for the great opinion of his
sanctity and holiness of life: with whom he had very many spiritual
conferences, and among other things, discoursing of the death of S. Chad
Bishop of Lichfield (being a little before desceased) holy Egbert related to
have seen his foul carried up to heaven, by the hands of Angels, that
descended thence to accompany the same.

G The three and twentieth Day.
AT Kale in France the Commemoration of Blessed Hereswide Queen, ne^ce to *
S. Edwyn King of Northumberland and Martyr, Bed. l. 4. Histor. cap. 23. Wion
lib. 4. lig. vit^.
sister to S. Hlida, and wife to King Ethelwold of the Eastangles, who after
the death of her Lord and husband, forsaking all worldly pleasures, friends,
and other prefermentes whatsoever, went over into France, and there taking a
Religious habit, received therewith the holy veyle of Chastity in the forsaid
Monastery of Kale, where in very great humility and sanctimony of life, she
spent the rest of her days in prayer and contemplation of heavenly things, and
finally gave up her blessed soul to her heavenly spouse, about the year of
Christ, six hundred fourscore and ten.

A The four and twentieth Day.
AT Eyst in the higher Germany, the Translation of S. VVinibald Abbot and
Confessor, Son to S. Richard King of Author ^ius vit^ (...)d Sur. (...). 7.
Wion hac die in Mart. Benedict.
the English; who going over into Flanders and Germany with S. VVillebrord and
his fellows to preach the Christian faith to those people, founded a Monastery
in the Province of Franconia, called Heydelmaine, and became himself Abbot
thereof; which when he had governed for ten years, in great sanctity and
holiness of life, ^he happily reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ,
seven hundred and threescore. His body was afterward on this day, solemnly
translated to the forsaid City of Eyst, and there placed in the Cathedral
Church, together with the Venerable body of his brother S. Willebald, where
the same is preserved with great veneration of the Inhabitants.

B The five and twentieth Day
AT Langres in France the Deposition of (...). C^ol^^id Con^es^our, and Abbot
of the ancient Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul, Ve^. Bed (...). (...). 2^.
and l. ^e se^ A^tat. (...). (...). (...). M(...). in ad li^. ad V(...)d.
Revi^^^. F(...)es. Lig^^.
upon the River bank of VVyre, in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, now cailed
VVyre(...), and Ma^^^er to our famous S. Bid, who going to Rome to obtain
Privileges for his sa^d Monastery, died in his journey homward at Langres, in
the year of Christ, seven hundred and seauenteene: and there being most
honorably interred in the Cathedral Church of that City, his body is kept
until this day with great veneration. There is a Letter of this holy man's yet
extant in S. Bedes History, which he wrote to N^ionus King of the Pi^^es or
Redshankes, about the ^^ue observation of the feast of Easter; as also for the
Reformation of his Clergy. To whom in like manner says the Story) he sent
cunning Carpenters and workmen, to bu^d him a Church, after the fashion of
those in Nor^humberland.

C The six and twentieth Day.
AT Westminster by London the depositio^ of S. VVu^^y Abbot and Con(...)our,
who (...). W(...). (...). (...). (...). 8. W(...) in (...). ad (...). 3. lig.
(...).
being a man of great virtue and innocence of life, was by S. Dunstan created
the first Abbot of Westminster, where in all kind of exemplar good life, full
of sanctity and miracles, he ended his blessed days, about the year of
Christ, nine hundred and threescore. His body was buried in the same Monastery,
and there was wont to be kept with great veneration of the Citizens of Lond^n.

THE same day in Sco^land the Commemoration of S. (...)us Mon^e and *
Conf^ssour, who borne in Ireland, and descended of a worthy parentage in that
Kingdom, came thence into Scotland in company H^ct. Boet. de rebus gest. Scot.
and Io. ^^st. (...). (...) l. 4. (...).
of S. Co(...)e the great of that Nation, whose d(...)ple he was, and afterward
his coadiutour impreaching the Christian ^aith to the Pictes. After whose
Co^^ersion, full of sanctity and miracle^, he gave up his soul to rest, about
the year of Christ, ^^ue hundred and fourscore.

D The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Knobhersburge in the Province of the *
Eastangles, the Commemoration of S. Sige^ert King of the same Province and
Martyr, Bed, l. 3. cap. 18. Pol. Vir. lib. 4. histor. Matthew. W^st. an. 5^6. et
6^2. and W(...). li^. 4. lig. vit. Registr. Cantab.
who inflamed with the love of God, left the administration of his Kingdom to
his Cosyn Egricke, and took a Religious habit in a monastery which himself
had newly erected called Knobhersburge; but a little after Penda the Pagan King
of Mercia, inuading his dominions, he was by his Subjects drawn, by force,
out of his Monastery, into the field, where unarmed, having only a little rod
in his hand, was slain, together with his Cosyn Egri^ke, by the forsaid
Penda, in the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and two, and the seventeenth
of his reign; and was afterward declared a Martyr. It is recorded by diverse
Historiograp^ers that he first founded the University of Cambridge in his own
Province, for the education and instruction of youth in all kind of good
learning and liberal sciences.

E The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Fulda in tho higher Germany the deposition of S. Lioba Virgin and Abbess,
Rudolph. B. Rena. discip. in eius vita. Mart. Romans Molan. and alij.
who being first a Religious woman in the Monastery of Wimborne in Dorcetshire,
was called thence, together with S. Te^la, S. Agatha and diverse others, into
Germany, by S. Boniface an Englishman, and Archbishop of Mentz, and there made
Abbess of a new Monastery, which he had erected at a place called Biscopssen;
where after she had led a most Saintly life, full of miracles, she went at last
to her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, seven hundred fifty and
seven, and was buried at Fulda, where her body is yet kept, together with the
venerable body of S. Boniface, with great veneration of that Country round
about.

F The nine and twentieth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Cogan *
Abbot and Confessor, who borne in the same Kingdom of a very honorable
parentage, became there a Monk of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and
after Abbot of the whole Monastery; whose name being famous throughout our
whole Island of Great-Bri^any ^or sanctity of life and lear^ning, Io. (...).
(...). (...). l. 4* hist. Scot. (...). W(...) i^ (...). li^. 3. lig. vit^.
he gave up his soul to rest in our Lord, about the year of Christ 700. and
thr^^score. At whose body it pleased God, in co^firmatio^ of his holiness to
work many miracles. In which Kingdom also, there have been in times past many
Chappells and altars dedicated in his honor, but now all utterly ruined by the
v^fortunate change of Relig^on in that Country, to the lamentation of the
Christian world.

G The thirtith Day.
AT Canterbury the Deposition S. Honorius Archbishop of the same Sea and
Confessor, who coming from Be^. l. 2. (...). 1^. (...). and l. 3. cap. 20.
(...). to. 5. Mart. R^^. Mol ^n. and alij omnes hac die.
Rome into England with S. Augustine our Apostle, succeeded him afterward in
his Office, and was the fi^th Archbishop o^ Canterbury. Which Sea, when he had
governed in all kind of sanctity and holy example of virtuous life, full of
Venerable old age, he reposed happily in our Lord, in the year of Christ, six
hundred fi^ty and three, and was buried in the Cathedral Church of that City
with his predecessors: where his body was kept, even until our days with
great honor and veneration, due to so glorious a Confessor.

THE MONTH OF OCTOBER.
A The first Day.
AT London the deposition of S. Roger Confessor and Bishop of the same S^a,
whose admirable Matthew. Paris. an. 1247. and an. 1248. and 1271. Descrip.
Ciuitat. Parme^s. in Italia. Registr. Eccles. D. Pauli Londine^.
virtues, and sanctity of life, witness the Miracles that have been wrought at
his body. He died at Stepney a mile from London, in a house belonging to that
Bishops Sea, in the year of Christ, one thousand two hundred and forty: whose
body being brought to London, was with all honor and veneration, interred in
the Cathedral Church of S. Paul the Apostle, in a fair tomb by the
North-wall, a little above the Quire, with this Epithaph, which is there yet
remaining to be read.

Ecclesiae quondam Praesul praesentis, in anno
M. bis C. quater X. iacet his Rogerus humatus.
Huius erat manibus Domino locus iste dicatus.
Christ suis precibu^ veniam des, toll reatus.
The people of Parma in Italy have chosen him for one of the chief Patrons of
their City, by reason of a meruaylous victory they obtained against Frederick
the Empeperour, by the prayers of S. Roger, whose body at that time shined with
miracles in England.

THE same day at Oostkerke in Flanders the Translation of S. Guthagon
Confessor, Son to the King of Scotland, who taking upon him a voluntary
poverty, for Mola^. in addit. ad Vsuard. et in Ind. SS. Belgij
the love of God, went over into Flanders, and there became a pilgrim or
Eremite; where in great sanctity of life he finally reposed in our Lord.
Nicolas Bishop of Tornay, on this day, caused his body to be reverently
elevated, and placed more decently in the forsaid Church of Oostkerke, in the
year of Christ, one thousand four hundred forty and four, where the same is
yet preserved with great veneration: whose feast in like manner in there on
this day celebrated with great solemnity by the Inhabitants round about.

Moreover the same day at Condy in He(...)lt, the deposition of S. Was(...)lph
Confessor, who des^ended o^ a nob^e blood in the Kingdom of Ireland, and
brother Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. e^ in Ind. SS. Belgij
to S. Etto of that Na^^on, did, for the love of Christ, fo^sa^e his Country
and friend^, and went over into France, to lead a solitary and strict kind of
life, where in great sanctity and holiness, famous for miracles, ^e ended his
bl^ssed da^es, in the Province o^ Hen(...), whose body being yet preserved at
the (...) town of Cordy, is there honored with great veneration of the
Inhabitants.

B The second Day.
AT Hereford the Translation of S. T^omas Bishop and Con^essour, who being Pol.
V^r. lib. 17. Mart. Romans Molan. Bret^a^. sec vsum Sarum. Sur. to. 5. hac di^.
and alij.
first Chancelour of the Vniuer^^ty of Ox^ord, and the^ of the whole Realm of
^ngla^d, was finally ord^^ned Bishop o^ Hereford; which Sea, when he had
governed mo^^l^^dably for many years, he took his ^orney to Rome, to Pope
Mar* in the second, and died in his way homward at M^te-^^s^o^e in the Dukedom
of Florence, in the year of Christ, one thousand two hundred fourscore and
seaue^: whose sacred Relics being brought into England, were with great
veneration, on this day placed in the Cathedral Church of Hereford. His
miracles are Registered in the same Church to the number of four hundred twenty
and five: Among which, it is recorded, that by his prayers were raised from
death to life threscore several persons, one and twenty leapers healed, and
three and twenty blind and dumme men to have received their sight and speech.

C The third Day.
IN Westphalia the Passion of the Saints Bed. l. 5. cap. 11. Sigeb. in Chron.
an. 693. Mart. Rom-Molan. and a^j omnes hac die.
^waldi, brethren and Martyrs, commonly called Al^us and Niger, who being
Priests and Monks of the Monastery of Rippon in Yorkshire, went over into
Ireland, where living for diverse years in great austerity of life, at last
returned, and went into Friz^land to preach the Christian faith to that Nation,
which they did for a long time, with great labor and profit, till coming into
Westphalia, they were slain by the old Pagan Saxone, for the Confession of
Christ, about the year of our Lord, six hundred fourscore and si^teene. Their
bod^es were afterward miraculously found in the river of Rhene, and most
honorably laid in the Church of S. Cunibert at Cullen, by Duke Pepin of
France, about the year of Christ 1074. and there are kept with great
veneration of the Citizens of that place.

D The fourth Day.
IN Northumberland the Passion of S. Eduyn King and Martyr, who being the first
Christian Prince of that Province, and converted to the faith of Christ by the
Ve^. Bed. in Epit. and hist. l. 2. c. 16. 17. and 20. and l. 3. c. 9 West. an.
617. 625. 626. 634. and alij.
preaching of S. Paulinus Bishop of York, was afterward slain in hatred
thereof, by the impious Cadwalline King of the Britans, and Penda King of the
Mercians, in the year of Christ, six hundred thirty and four, and in the
seventeenth of his reign. There was an ancient fair Church sometime crected
and dedicated in his honor in the City of London, by Newgate Market, which
there remained until it was dissolved in this last age by King Henry the
eight, together with many other like goodly Monuments of Catholic piety in
our Kingdom.

E The fifth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Conwalline Abbot and Confessor, whose
rare *
virtues and learning have in times past been famous, not only throughout his
own country, but in others also. He was first Io. Lest. Episco. Ross. l. 4.
hist. Scot. Wion in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vitae.
a Monk of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and then made Abbot of an
ancient Monastery in the Island of Iona belonging to Scotland, where in great
sanctity of life and other virtues, especially in the Reformation of
Monastical discipline, he ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ,
five hundred and threefcore.

F The sixth Day.
IN Northumberland the festiuity of S. Ywy Deacon and Confessor, scholar and
disciple Hereb. Rosw. in Tab. de fast. SS. hac die.
to S. Cuthbert of Durham, whose great holiness of life, has in ancient
Catholic times been famous in our Island, especially among the Northumbers. He
died, as may be gathered out of antiquity, about the year of Christ, seven
hundred and four.

THE same day in Scotland the Commemoration *
of S. Comine Abbot and Confessor, who descended of a noble blood Io. Lest.
Episco. Ross. l. 4. hist. Scot. wion in Append. ad lib. 3. lig. vtta.
in the same Kingdom, and disciple to S. Columbe the Great, in a Monastery in
the Island of Hoy, was for his great learning and virtue, made Abbot, by him, of
another Monastery in the same Province; whose godly life and miracles, have in
former times been famous, both at home and abroad. He died about the year of
Christ 600.

G The seventh Day.
AT Chich in Essex the Passion of S. alias O(...)sy.
Osith Queen and Martyr, daughter to the King of the Eastangles, and wife to
Suthred the last King of the Eastsaxons, who with the consent to her husband,
fo^^ooke the world, and received the holy veyle of Chastity in the Monastery of
Alisbury; but afterward building another of her own, in a Village Io. Capg. in
Catal. SS. Angl. Pol. Vir. l. 5. hist. Sur. to. 5. hac die. Hereb. in fast SS.
Wion. lib. 4. lig. vitae.
called Chich, in the Province or the Eastsaxons, and gathering together many
noble Virgins, became herself Abbess thereof, until the Danes inuading that
Kingdom; and coming unto her said Monastery, cut of her head in hatred of
Christian Religion. The which she taking up from the ground, carried three
surlo^ges, ^o a Church of S. Peter and S. Paul, where coming to the Church door
imbrewed in her own innocent blood, she fell down, and so ended the course of
her martyrdom, about the year of Christ, eight hundred and seauenty. In the
place also where she was beheaded there presently sprung up a miraculous
fountain of water, very sovereign for many diseases, which even until this
day is greatly esteemed by the Inhabitants near about. Her body was first
buried at Alisbury in Buckinghamshire; but afterward, by a voice from heaven it
was commanded to be translated to the forsaid Monastery of Chich, now commonly
called S. Osiths of her name, situated not far from the sea side, whereat it
pleased God to work many miracles,

THe same day at Lincoln the Translation of S. Hugh Confessor and Bishop of
the Sur. to. 6. West. an. 1297. Petr. Suitor in vit. Cart. Registr. Eccles.
Lincoln.
same Sea; whose body after fourscore years that it had been buried, was on
this day taken up, and being found altogether vncorrupt, with a great quantity
of clear and sweet oil in the Tomb where it lay, was put into a costly
shrine of silver, guilt and richly adorned with precious stones, and set in a
more eminent place of the same Church or Minster at Lincoln, in the reign of
King Edward the first, and year of Christ 1282. where it has ever since been
kept until these our later days, with great reverence and veneration, for the
miracles that have been wrought thereat.

A The eight Day.
AT VValciodore in the Territory of Liege the Translation of S. Eloquius Priest
and Confessor, who borne in Ireland of a noble pare^tage, and coming into
England, went thence into the Low Countries with S. Etto, and his fellows to
preach the Christian faith; where after much fruit reapt in gayning Io. Mola^.
in addit. ad Vsua et in Ind. SS. Belgij
of souls to God, in great sanctity of life and working of miracles, finally
reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and one. His
body was afterward on this day translated to the Monastery of VValciodore
aforsaid, where the same is kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants.

THE same day in Brecknockshire of Wales the deposition or S. Keyna Virgin,
daughter to Braghan King of Brecknocke, and great Aunt to S. David Bish. of
Meneuia, who Rob. Buckl. l. man. scrip. de vit. SS. Mulier. Angl. Page 91.
being in her infancy consecrated to God, left her Country and came over the
River of Seuerne into England, and there lived a most austere life in a
solitary wood full of serpents, into which no man durst enter for fear of
death: But by her prayers they were all turned into stones, still retayning the
shape of serpe^ts. And after that she had lived many years therein, without
humane assisiance, she returned again to her friends and Country, and built
herself a little Cottage upon a hill, where in continual prayer and
abstinence, clad in hayrcloth she served her Lord and Savior until her dying
day. And being ready to depart out of this world, an Angel came down from
heaven, and put upon her a white garment wrought with gould, bidding her to be
in readiness to enter into the Kingdom of her Celestial spouse. She departed
to our Lord upon this day, about the year of Christ, four hundred and nynty,
and was buried in the same Province, where her memory has been famous even
until our days. She is called in the British tongue Keyn-vayre, that is to
say, Keyne the Virgin.

B The ninth Day.
AT Lincoln the deposition of Bl. Robert surnamed Grossa-testa, Confessor and
Bishop of the same Sea, whose great sanctity of life and virtues, joined with
learning, Matthew. West. and Paris. an. 1253. and 1251. Sixth. Senens. in
Biblioth. lib. 4. Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. Registr. Eccles. Lincoln.
especially in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues, has been very famous in
the Church of Christ. Among other works, he translated the Testamentes of the
twelve Patriarchs out of Greek into Latin, as also wrote very learned
Co^mentaryes upon the Psalter, yet extant to be seen in written hand in diverse
Libraryes of Europe. He was borne in Suffolk, and in his youth trauayled into
France, where applying his studyes, he attained to great knowledge in
Philosophy and Divinity, and at his return back was promoted first to the
Arch deaconry of Licester, and afterward to the Bishopric of Lincoln, which
when he had governed most laudably for eighteen years, he reposed happily in
our Lord, in the year of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and three. His
body was most solemnly interred in a goodly marble Tomb in the south I Will of
his own Cathedral Church of Lincoln, and there was wont to be kept with
great reverence and veneration, even until the days of King Henry the eight.

THE same day in the County of Hennalt in the Diocese of Cambray, the
festiuity Joan. Mayor l. 2. hist. Scot. c. 7. Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. et
in Ind. SS. Belgij
of S. Gislen Confessor, who being an Irishman by birth, went to Athens in
Greece, where he became first a Monk of the Order of S. S. Basil, and thence
returning by Rome, came back into the Lower-Germany, and there built himself
an Oratory in a Village three miles distant from Montz in Hennalt, teaching and
instructing the people of those parts in the Christian faith with great fruit
and fervor of spirit until his dying day, which happened about the year of
Christ, six hundred and forty. His body is kept in a Monastery of his own
name in the forsaid Territory of Hennalt, commonly called S. Gislens, where it
is honored until this day with great veneration of the Inhabitants round
about.

C The tenth Day.
AT Rochester in Kent the Deposition of S. Pauline Bishop and Confessor, who
Ve^. Bed. in Epit. and lib. 1. Histor. cap. 29. et l. 2. c. 9. 10. 11. and 12.
Sur. to. 5. and alij.
coming into England with S. Augustine and his fellows, converted the
Kingdom of the Northumbers, together with Edwyn King of that Province, and so
became their Apostle. He was ordained the first Archbishop of York; but being
thence expulsed after King Edwyns death, he came back again into Kent, and
there governed the Sea of Rochester, being then void: where in great sanctity
of life, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the year Christ, six hundred
forty and five. His body was with all solemnity buried in the Cathedral
Church of S. Andrew in Rochester, and there kept with great veneration.

THE same day at Birlington in Yorkshire the deposition of S. John Confessor,
Prior of the Monastery of Chanons-Regular, Io. Mola^. in addit. ad vsuar.
whose godly life, full of sanctity, has been manifested sufficiently by the
miracles he wrought both alive and dead. He desceased in the year of Christ,
one thousand three hundred threescore and nynteene, and was buried at
Birlington.

D The eleventh Day.
AT Barking in Fssex, the deposition of S. Edilburge Abbess, sister to S.
Erconwald Bed. l. 4. cap. 7. 8 9. and 10. Tritem de vir. Illustr. Molan. and
alij.
Bishop of Lodon, who by him was co^stituted Gouernesse of a new Monastery that
himself had built, by the forsaid town of Barking upon the River of Thames,
where in all kind of sanctimony of life and Monastical discipline, she gave up
her soul to her heavenly spouse, in the year of Christ, six hundred threefore
and sixteen

THE same day in Scotland the deposition of S. Canicke Abbot and Confessor,
whose godly life and miracles, have been famous Mart. To(...). Mol in. Petr. in
Catal. l 11. cap. vlt.
throughout the Christian world, but especially in Scotland, where he was
borne, lived, and died about the year of Christ, eight hundred.

E The tweluth Day.
AT Rippon in Yorkshire the deposition of S. VVil(...)ride Confessor and
Archbishop of York, who being twice expulsed his Bishopric by Egfrid King of
the Northumbers, went and preached to the Southsaxons, where he converted the
I Will of VVight, and first planted the Christian faith in that Ve^. Bed. l. 3. c.
28 and l. 4. c. 12. and 13. and l. 5. cap. 20. Mart. Romans Molan. Sur. to. 5.
and omnes hac die.
place. And when he had thus labored for many years in his banishment to the
gayning of infinite souls to God, being at last restored to his Bishopric,
in all sanctity or life and miracles, he finally rested in our Lord, upon the
year of Christ, seven hundred and eleven; and was buried in S Peter's Church
at Rippon aforsaid, which himself had built, on the south side of the high
Altar, Over whose tomb was engraven this ancient Epitaph following.

VVilfridus hic magnus requiescit corpore Praesul,
Hanc Domino qut Aulam, du(...)us pieta^i amore
Fecit, and exi(...)o sacrauit nomine PETRI,
C(...) laues cali Christus dedit arbiter Orbis,
Atque auro ac Tyrio deuotus vestijt ostro.
Quin etiam sublime Crucis radiante metallo,
Hic posuit tropheum, nec non and quattuor auro
Scribi Euangel(...) praerepit in ordine libros,
Ac thecam e ru^ilo his con(...)ignam condidit auro.
Paschalis qui etiam solemn(...)a tempora cursus,
Catholci adiustum correxit dogma Canonis,
Quem statuere Paires, dubioque errore remoto,
Certa suae Ge(...)i ostendit moderam(...)na ritus.
Inque loc(...)stis Monachorum examina crebra
Colligit, ac monitis cauit quae regula Patrum
Sedulus in(...)it, (...)sque do(...)que forisque
Iactatus (...)mium per tempor a longa periclis.
Qu(...)decies ternos postquam egit Episcopus annos,
Transijt, and gaudens caelestia regna petiuit:
Dona IESV, vt grex Pastoris call sequatur.
F The thirteenth Day.
AT Westminster by London the Translation of S. Edward King and Confessor,
whose body in the nynth year of King Henry the second, was by S. Thomas of
Canterbury Pol. Vir. lib. 8. Matthew. Paris. an. 1066. and 1163. Sur. and Mart.
Romans 5. Ian. Regist. Vati^. Romae.
taken up, and put into a costly shryne of silver, guilt with gold, made by K.
William the Conqueror, and placed in the great Church of Westminster. In
which also, even until our days, was wont to be kept a Ring of gold, with
great veneration, which S. Edward himself had sometime given to S. John
Evangelist, asking him an aims in the habit of a poor man, and was afterward
brought unto the said King from Jerusalem, by a certain Pilgrim, as sent
unto him for a token by S. John. This day was afterward commanded to be kept
holyday throughout England, as is yet to be seen, as well by a Council
celebrated at Oxford in the year of Christ 1222. as also by the letters of
Pope Innocentius the 4. registered in the Roman Vaticane.

THE same day at Vienna in Austria the deposition of S. Colman, Martyr and
sometime Bishop of Lindisserne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, who being
borne in Ireland Mart. Romans Breuiar. Saltz. Hect. Boet. Lest. de gest. Sco. in
Ferquardo Rege.
of a noble Scottish blood, after he had preached incessantly to the English
Saxons, and among others converted Penda the Pagan King of Mercia to the faith
of Christ, went over unto the higher Germanr to instruct that Nation also,
where coming at (...)all into Austria, was for defense thereof, slain by the
barbarous people of that Province, about the year of Christ 675. His body was
brought to Vienna, and is there yet preserved with great veneration of that
City.

G The fourteenth Day.
AT VVirtzburgh in Franconia, the Translation of S. Burchard Confessor and
Bishop Egilwar. in eius vita. Sur. tom. 5. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Molan.
Mart. Romans and alij.
of the same Sea, who being an Englishman by birth, and brother to S. Swithin
Bishop of Winchester, went over into France and thence into Germany to S.
Boniface, with whom he went to Rome, and was there ordained Bishop of
VVirtzburgh by Pope Zacharias, and sent back to his Sea. And after that he had
labored incessantly for forty years together in Christ's vineyard, teaching
and preaching the Christian faith, full of sanctity and miracles, he gave up
his soul to rest, in the year of Christ, seven hundred fourscore and eleven.
His body was afterward on this day translated to the Monas^ery of S. Andrew in
that City, by Hugh Bishop of VVirtzburgh, and there* is kept with great
Veneration.

A The fifteenth Day.
AT Worcester the Translation of S. Oswald Bishop and Confessor, nephew to S.
Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, who being first a Chanon of Winchester, was
thence promoted to the Bishopric of Worcester Sur. to. 5. Pol. Vir. lib. 7.
West. an. 959. et 960. Molan. and alij.
and lastly to York: Whose godly l^^e and miracles are yet famous through the
Christian world. He died in the year of Christ, nine hundred fourscore and
twelve; and was afterward on this day translated to Worcester, whose feast was
wont to be kept with great celebrity in Catholic time, as well in that
Church, as throughout the rest of England besides.

THE same day also at Ochnofort in the higher Germany, the depositio^ of S.
Tecla Virgin and abbess, who being an Englishwom^n Sur. in vita. S. Bonifac.
Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Mart. Romans and alij.
by birth, and sent for out of VVimborne* Monastery in Dorcetshire into Germany
by S. Bonijace Bishop of Mentz, together with S. ^ioba and S. Agatha, was
there made Abbess of a Nunry called Ochnofort, which the said S. Boniface had
newly erected, where in great sanctimony and holiness of life she ended her
blessed days, about the year of Christ, seven hundred and fifty.

B The six^eenth Day.
AT Mentz in the higher Germany the depo(...)tion of S. Lullus Con^essour, and
Breuiar. Mogunt and Sur. tom. 5. Tri^em. de vir* Illustr. Vincent. inspec.
Molan. Mart. Romans
Archbishop of that Sea, who descended of a noble parentage in England, and
hearing of the fame of S. Boni^ace his Countreyman, went over unto him into
Germany, of whom he was first made Priest, and then Suffragan under him in the
same Sea whilst he lived, and his successor after his death. Which when he had
governed for two and thirty years, full of sanctity of life, he happily
reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, seven hundred fourscore and
eight.

THE same day at Arb^n also in Germany the Mart. Romans Vsuard. hac die. Sur. to.
5. Lesl. de gest. Sco. l. 4. in Chenetto Rege.
deposition of S. Gallus Abbotond Confessor, whose life and doctrine have in
times past been very famous in many places throughout Europe. He was borne in
Ireland of a noble parentage, and disciple to S. Columbane the Great of that
Nation; and died in Germany about the year of Christ, six hundred and forty,
and was buried at Arbon aforsaid.

C The seventeenth Day.
AT Wye in Kent the Passion of the Saints Ethelbrit and Ethelred Brothers and
Martyrs, who being nephews to Eadbald King of Kent, were slain in hatred of
Matthew. West. an. 654. Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Cont. Bed. l. 2. cap. 3^. Herebert.
in Tab. fast. SS. hac die.
Christian Religion, about the year of Christ 664. Whose bodies being cast
into an obscure place, a miraculous light from heaven was seen to shine over
them, and to detect the indecency of their burial. Wherefore being thereby found
out, they were brought to the Monastery of Wye with great solemnity, whereat
many miracles were forth with wrought. And in the reign of King Edgar of
England, S. Oswald* Bishop of Worcester caused them to be removed to Ramsey,
where also in sign of their innocence, it pleased God in like manner to work
many miracles. There was a goodly Church erected in Kent, and dedicated in
their honor, by S. Ermenburge Queen of the Mercians, about the year of
Christ, six hundred threescore and nyneteene.

THE same day at Ely in Cambridgshire the Translation of the Venerable body of
S. Audry.
Ediltrude Virgin and Abbess, daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, and
wife to Egfrid King of the Northumbers, who living with her husband twelve
years in perpetual Virginity, with his consent became a Religious woman, and
received the Bed. l. 4. cap. 19. Item de sex aetat. Tritem. de vir. Illust^.
Vincent. in spec. Sigeb. in Chron.
holy veyle of Chastity in the Monastery of Coldingham, under S. Ebba her Aunt,
and afterward was made Abbess of the Nunry of Ely; where in all sanctimony of
life she went to her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, six hundred
and fourscore, and was buried in the same Monastery. But her fame increasing by
the Miracles wrought at her body, the same was taken up sixteen years after
her death by her own sister S. Sexburge then Abbess of that place, and being
found fresh and wholly vncorrupt, was translated to a goodly Church newly
erected there in her honor, where it was wont to be kept, even until our
days, with great veneration.

D The eighteenth Day.
AT Nassoin in the Territory of Liege in the lower Germany, the Passion of S.
Mono Eremite and Martyr, who descended Mosand. apud Sur. to. 7 Molan. in addit.
ad vsit. et in Indic. SS. Belgij
of a noble parentage in Scotland, forsook the world, and went over into
Flanders and Germany, and there became an Eremite in the Forest of Arden,
leading a most strict and severe kind of life for many years together, where
being finally slain by certain P^gan thieves in hatred of his Religion, he
happily attained to the palm o^ Martyrdom, His body is buried in the forsaid
Village of Nassoin belonging to the Abbey of S. Huvert, in a Church which
himself had there sometime bu^lt, and is kept with great veneration o^ the
Inhabitants of that place.

E The ninteenth Day.
AT Oxford the Depositio^ of S. Frideswide Virgin and Abbess, daughter to
Didan Duke of Oxford, who being so^licited by one Pol. Vir. l. 5. hist.
Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum. Mart. Romans hac die. Nicol. Sand. l. 2. desch s. Angl.
Vitaeius M. S. Rob. Buckl.
Algarus a noble young man to yield unto his ^ust, escaped miraculously his
violence, he being on the sudden stricken blind by Gods Justice for offering
the same. She was afterward made Abbess of a Monastery erected by her Father
in the same City: which Monastery in the time of King Henry the first was
converted to a Priory of Chanous Regular, and so continued until King Henry
the 8. when as Cardinal Wolsey obtained the same of the Pope, toward the
founding of Christs-Colledge, which is now built in the same place. She died in
all sanctimony and holiness of life, about the year of Christ, seven hundred
thirty and nine. There is an ancient Chapel yet to be scene dedicated in her
honor, in a Village of Artoys called Bomy, some four leagues di^tant from the
City or S. Omers, where her festiuity is kept with due veneration of the
Inhabitants.

THE same day at Maestricht in Brabant the Translation of S. VVillebrord, the
first Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die. Molan. in Indic. SS. Belgij
Bishop of that Sea and Con^essour, who being borne in Yorkshire, went over
into the low Countries with a dozen other Companions, all holy men, and
converted the greatest part of those Provinces to the Christian faith, and so
became their chief Apostle. He died in all sanctity and holiness of life, about
the year of Christ 736. and was afterward on this day translated to Maestrcht,
and there is kept with great honor and veneration, as principal Patron o^
that Diocese, where also his feast is celebrated with an Office of nine
lessons.

ALso the same day in Ireland the Deposition Mart. Romans Molan. Petr. in Catal.
of S. Ethbyn Abbot and Confessor, whose godly life and miracles have in times
past been famous through the Countries round about. He died about the year of
Christ, six hundred and ten.

F The twentieth Day.
AT Toleys in aliter Germany
France the deposition of S. VVendelyn Abbot and Con^e^sour, Son to the King
of Scotland, who forsaking all temporal preferments, and his own inheritance
to that Crown and Kingdom, went over into France, and there became a Peter
Cratep. de Epis. German. Exeges. l. 11. Trit. de vir. Illustr. l. 3. c. 79.
Molan. wion, and alij omnes hac die.
Religious man and afterward Abbot of the Monastery of Toleys, where famous for
sanctity of life and Miracles, he reposed in our Lord, about the year of
Christ, seven hundred and twenty, and there lies solemnly intombed. Over
whose body is also built a goodly Chapel, which for the co^course of people,
that come thither on devotion to visit the same, and the miracles that are
daily wrought thereat, the Town is now commonly called by the name of S.
VVendelyns.

G The one and twentieth Day.
AT Cullen in the higher Germany the Passion of S. Vrsula Virgin and Martyr,
daughter to Dionocus King of Cornwall, who together with an eleven thousand
other British Virgins (as ancient Authors do recount) being shipped at London,
to pass over into France, to be married there to two Legions of British
soldiers, unto whom Maximus, that was by them chosen Emperor, had given the
Country of Armorica; were by a contrary wynd driven down Ga^f. Monum. l.
(...). c. 15. hist. vec. Britan* Baron. in Annal. an. 338. Ri^h* Vi^us I. V.
Doct: iahist. Britan. Mart. Rom* and omnes hac (...).
to the mouth of the River o^ Rhene, and there, near unto Cullen, were all
slain by the barbarous Hunnes and Pictes, in defense of their Virginity, about
the year of Christ, three hundred fourscore and three. Most of their bodies
were brought to Cullen, and there interred with great honor and veneration,
and their memoryes celebrated upon this day, throughout the Christian world.
There was afterward a goodly Church built in Cullen in their honor, called the
Church Of the holy Virgins; which always has been had in such reverence among
the Inhabitants, that they never buried any other body there. Neither will the
ground or earth of that Church receive any other body, no, not the corpse of
young Infants newly baptized, but, as if were, vomiting them up again in the
night, they will be cast above ground, as has oftentimes been tried.

A The two and twentieth Day.
AT Roane in France, the Deposition of S. Mellon Bishop and Con ^^^ou^, who
Pet. de. Natal. de vit. SS. Vinc. in spec. l. 11. cap. 74. Mart. Romans Molan.
and alij.
being a noble Britan by birth, and sent to Rome in the time of Valerian the
Emperor to pay Tribute for the Kingdom of Britany, was by Pope Stephen,
instructed in the Christian faith and baptized, and after created the first
Bishop of Roane, and sent into France to his Bishopric: where in all kind of
sanctity o^ life and miracles, he ended his blessed days, about the year of
Christ, two hundred and fourscore. His body is kept until this day at Roane in
the Cathedral Church of that City, near to the body of S. Nicasius with
great honor and veneration of the Inhabitants.

THE same day at Cullen the passion of S. Cordula Virgin and Martyr, one of the
eleven thousand that suffered with S. Vrsula, Mart. Romans Molan. in addit. ad
vsuar. R^dulph. in vita Albert. Magni p. 2. cap. 9.
who being terrified the first day with the slaughter of her companions hid
herself: but on the morrow repenting her thereof, and discovering herself to
the Hunnes; was finally also crowned with Martyrdom, about the year of Christ
383. Aller^us Magnus caused her body to be brought to Cullen, where the same is
kept with great honor.

ALso the same day at Fesuli in Tuscane, the Franc. Cat(...) Ep. Eesulan. in
eius vit. Mart. Romans ha^ die.
Deposition of S. Donatus Bishop and Confessor, who borne in Scotland and
descended of an honorable family, was created Bishop of F^s^li; where famous
for sanctity o^ ^^fe and miracles in a good old age, he happily rep^sed in our
Lord. His feast is kept at Fes^li a orsaid on this day, with great solemnity
and devotion of the Inhabitants.

B The three and twentieth Day.
AT the Monastery of Brige near Paris in France the Commemoration of S. Syra *
Virgin, daughter to K. Eugenius the fourth of Sco^land, who rejecting all
worldly po^pe and preferments, in her tender years, went over Io. Lest.
Episto. Ross. l. 4. de gest. Scot. Wion lib. 4. lig. vitae.
into France, with her brother S. ^i^ker, where the receiving the holy veyle of
Cnastity, became a Religious woman in the forsaid Monastery of Brige, under S.
Phara Abbess thereof: where excelling in all kind of sanctimony of life, and
godly conversation, especially in the virtue of humility, she gave up her pure
soul to her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, six hundred and
thirty, and was buried in the same place.

C The four and twentieth Day.
AT Paris in France the festiuity of S. Maglore Bishop and Confessor, who
being a noble Britan by birth, and kinsman Sur. to. 5. hac die. Tritem. de vir.
Illustr. l. 3. c. 50. and l. 4. c. 47. Mart. Romans and Mola^.
to S. Sampson, succeeded him afterward in his Bishopric of Dole in little
Britany, and last of all became an Ermite in France, where leading a strict and
austere kind of life, famous for miracles, he finally reposed in our Lord,
about the year of Christ, 586. His body is kept with great veneration at Paris
in a Monastery there of his own Name, commonly called S. Maglors, whereat it
has pleased God in sign of his sanctity to work many miracles.

THE same day in France also, the Commemoration of S. Maxentia Virgin and *
Martyr, who being daughter to one Marcolane a noble man of Scotland, and
promised in matrimony to one of like dignity that was Rob. Buckl. in eius vita.
lib. M. S. de vit. SS. Mulier. Angl. fol. 237.
a Pagan, she conte^ning the same, fled secretly into France with two of her
trustiest servants, and there lay disguised for a time in a Village called
Beauuaise, living in continual prayer and contemplation, until being pursued
by her pretended husband, was at last found out and descried. And when by no
means she could be induced to yield unto his marriage, he turning love into
fury, presently stroke of her head with his own hands, as also the heads of
her two servants Barbantius and Rosebea. The Innocence of whose cause was
presently manifested by a miracle, which was, that she taking up her own head
from the ground, carried it to the place where it now remains, where
afterward was a goodly Church ^rected in her honor, and God glorified therein
by many miracles. Whose sacred body Charles then King (...) France is said to
have greatly reverenced, and adorned with sundry Royal gifts.

D The five and twentieth Day
AT the Town of Ceprano in the Kingdom *
of Naples, the Commemoration Registr. Eccles. Ceprane^s. and inscript. eius
Sepulturae ibidem sculpt.
of S. Ardwyne Priest and Confessor, who borne in England of very worshipful
parents, and going to Jerusalem to visit the holy Sepulcher of our Savior,
in his return back from thence, came into Italy, where at that time the
Plague sorely infecting the Kingdom of Naples, in great sanctity of life, he
there gave up his blessed soul to rest. His body was with all sole^nity
interred in the forsaid Town of Ceprano, where until this day it is kept with
great honor and veneration of the Inhabitants, for the daily miracles it
pleases God to work thereat, in testimony of his holiness, and increase of
the peoples devotion to that place.

E The six and twentieth Day.
AT Lindisserne in the Kingdom of the Nor humbers, the Deposition of S. Eatta
Co^^ssour and Bishop of that Sea, who Ve^. Bed. lib. 4. c. 27. and 28. Tritem.
lib. 4. c. 16^. W^st. W(...) (...) C^tal. Episco. Lin(...)f. Her eber. in fast.
SS hac die.
being first a Monk and then Abbot of the Monastery of Mailros in the same
Province, wa^ afterward ordained Bishop of Lindisfarne (now translated to
Durham) and predecessor to S. Cuthbert; which when he had governed in all kind
of virtue and sanctity of life for five years or therabout, he was removed to
the Church of Hagustald, resigning the Sea of Lindisserne to S. Cuthbert, and
within a while after in great holiness, famous for Miracles, he departed to our
Lord, about the year of Christ, six hundred fourscore and six.

THE same day in Lorayne, the Deposition of S. Albuine Bishop and Confessor,
Io. Tri^. l. (...). (...). 267 and l. 4. (...). 190. Wi(...) l. 2. lig. vit.
who being an Irishman by birth, and Monk of a Monastery in the Island of Hoy,
ne^re Sco^land, went over into Germany to preach the Christian faith, where he
converted the whole Dukedom of Lorayne, and became in Catal. Epis^o. Frislar.
et in Mart. Benedict.
the Apostle of that Province. He was afterward made Bishop there of a place
called Frislarium in the Town of ^urbach; where teaching and preaching
continually to his flock, in great sanctity of life and miracles, he finally
ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ, seven hundred and fifty.

F The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Mechlyn in Brabant the Translation of S. Romwald Bishop and Martyr, Son
to the King of aliter Scotland.
Ireland, who being ordained Archbishop of Dublyn in the same Kingdom, went to
Rome for devotion, and thence back into the lower Germany, where in the
Territory of Mechlyn, under Io. Mola^. i. addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij
Count Ade of Flanders, he first planted the Christian faith, and became the
Apostle of that Province. He was afterward slain in hatred of Christ, by two
soldiers, in the same Territory, in the year, seven hundred threescore and
fifteen. Whose venera(...) body was afterward on this day translated to
Mechlyn with great solemnity and ven^tion, and put into a goodly Shrine of
silver very richly set with precious stones, and other ornaments, whereat it
has pleased God to work many miracles. He was canonized for a Saint by Pope
Alexander the fourth.

G The eight and twentieth Day.
IN Persia the Passion of the glorious Apostle S. Simon, surnamed Zelotes, who
according to diverse ancient writers, among other his peregrinations, came into
our Island of Britany, about the year of Christ, forty Ni (...). l. (...).
(...). 4. P(...). ^ir. li(...). (...). (...). W(...). a(...). ^6. and (...), 2.
Dorot^. in Synop.
and six, and there preached the Christian faith, baptized, ordained Priests
and Deacons, er^cted C^urches and the like, whereby we may worthily call him our
Apostle, and with greater so emnity celebrate his fea^^, by whom we received
so singular grace^ and benefitts. He afterward went into Persia with S. I^de to
preach the Christian faith to the Inf^dels of that Country, where at last he
received the reward of his labor by Martyrdom, being nailed to a Cross:
though Dorotheus writes, that he (...)ed, and was buried in Britany.

THE same day at Winchester in Ha^pshire the Deposition of B^^ssed Alfred King
of the VVestsixons and Confessor, who after A^^o (...). (...). (...). Scot in
hist.
many glor^ous and victorious battayles achieued against the ^aga^ Danes that
infested his realm; in great sanctity and holiness of life he ended his blessed
days, in the year of Christ, eight hundred fourscore and Regist. de Hide Wion
and alij.
nynteene, and lies buried at Winchester. He founded diverse goodly
Monasteryes, as t^^t of Shaftesbury, of Winchester, of Ethelingsey, besides
the famous University of Oxford.

A The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Eadsine Bishop and Confessor, who being
Henr. Hu^tington. in sua hist. an. 1050. Regist Eccles. Cant. and Catal.
Episco. Cantuar.
Chaplyn to King Harold, was first preferred to the Bishopric o^ Winchester,
and thence to Canterbury, whose innocence of life and other virtues have been
famous in our Island until these our days. He spent the greatest part of his
time in continual prayer and meditation of heavenly things. And when he had
governed the flock committed unto his charge for twelve years, in a venerable
old age he gave up his soul to rest, in the year of Christ, one thousand and
fifty: and was honorably interred in his own Cathedral Church of Canterbury,
where his body was wont to be kept with great veneration, for the miracles that
have been wrought thereat.

THE same day in Scotland the Commemoration *
of S. Motifer Monk and Confessor, who borne in Ireland and disciple to S.
Columbe the Great, came with him over into Scotland, and was his coadiutor
Hect. Boet. de gest. Sco. Io. Lest. l. 4. hist. Scot.
there in preaching the Christian says to the Pictes, who in those days
inhabited that Kingdom, where famous for sanctity of life, he made a holy end,
about the year of Christ, five hundred and fourscore.

B The thirtith Day.
AT Canterbury the depositio^ of S. Egelnoth, surnamed the Good, Confessor and
Matthew. West. an. 1038. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Pol. Vir. l. 7. in fine. wion
in Mart. Benedict.
Anchbishop of the same Sea, son to Earl Agehmare, and sometimes Deane of
Christ's Church in Canterbury, whose great holiness of life together with his
learning and virtues have been famous throughout Christendom, but especially in
our Island of Great Britany. He died on this day, about the year of Christ, one
thousand and forty, having been Bishop seauenteene years, and was solemnly
interred in his own Church at Canterbury, in the reign of King Hareld of
England. It is recorded that he going to Rome to fetch his Archiepiscopall
Pall, brought thence with him an Arm of S. Augustine the Doctor, and bestowed
it upon the Abbey of Couo^try in Warwickshire, where the same was kept with
great reverence, until the time of King Henry the eight, and decay of that
Monastery.

C The one and thirtith Day.
IN Hennalt the Passion of S. Foillan Bishop and Martyr, Son to Philtan King
of Ve^. Bed. l. 3. hist. Angl. Petr. in Catal. Tritem. de vir. Illustr.
Vincent. in spec. lib. 22. Io. Mola^. in addit ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij
Ireland, who-being first a Monk, and then Abbot of a Monastery called
Knobhersburge; in the Kingdom of the Eastangles, went to Rome, and being there
ordained Bishop by Pope Martyn the first, was sent back into Frace and
Flanders to preach the Christian faith, whereat last as he was exercising of
his Pastoral function, he was slain, together with three other Companions,
in the Territory of Hennalt, in the Diocese of Namures: whose death being
reueyled to his brother S. Vltan and S. Gertrude Abbess of Niuelle, his body
was presently sought out, and being found, was with all solemnity brought to
the Monastery of Fossis, and there is yet conserved with great veneration of
the Inhabitants. He suffered about the year of Christ, six hundred and forty.

THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER.
A The first Day.
AT Fulda in the higher Germany the Translation Ve^. Bed. in Epit. Sigeb. in
Chron. Mar. Scot. l. 2. hist. an. 717. Wion hac die in Mart. Benedict.
of S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz and Martyr, who borne in the City of
London, and going into Germany to preach the Christian faith, went thence to
Rome, and was there by Pope Gregory the second ordained the first Bishop of
Mentz, and sent back to his Bishopric; where teaching and preaching the
faith of Christ to the Germans, he converted the greatest part of that
Country, and became their Apostle. He was finally martyred in Frizeland, at a
town called Dockum, with fifty other companions, about the year of Christ,
seven hundred firty and four. His body was afterward of this day translated
to the Monastery of Fulda, which himself had founded, where the same is kept
with great honor and veneration, for the miracles that have been wrought thereat.

THE same day in the Monastery of Hampole near Doncaster in Yorkshire, the
Co^memoration *
of Blessed Richard Confessor Sixtus Senens. in Biblioth. Script. Illustr.
lit. R. Codex M. S. in Coll. Angl. Duacens.
and Ermite, whose singular spirit of piety and devotion, is left written, and
manifest to the world by his own works yet extant. He was first a Doctor, and
then leaving the world became an Eremite, and led a solitary life near to the
forsaid Monastery of Hampole: to which place he was wont often to repair, to
sing psalms and hymns in honor of God, as himself testifies in his works.
And after many spiritual books and treatises by him written, full of great
sanctity of life and venerable old age, he finally rested in our Lord, about
the year of Christ, one thousand three hundred forty and nine: and was buried
at Hampole.

E The second Day.
AT Lens in the Province of Artoys, the (...)iuity of S. Vulganius Bishop and
Confessor, who borne in Ireland, and going thence with the Saints Foillan,
Obodius, and Chron. Camerac. La^b. de Loos Mo(...). 8. A^tbert. and Molan. in
Indi^. SS. Belgij
others of that Nation, into the lower German^, began there to preach the
Christian says, and was at last consecrated Bishop. Where after infinite
labors and trauayles taken for the love of Christ, in propagating his name and
faith among the Infidells of those parts in all (...)ctity and holiness of
life, he ended his blessed days about the year of Christ, seven hundred and
four. His body is yet kept with great honor and veneration at the forsaid
town of Lens, in the Monastery there of the Chanons-regular, where his feast
is yearly celebrated on this day with great solemnity and devotion of the
Inhabitants of that place.

F The third Day.
IN North Wales the Deposition of S. VVenefride Virgin and Martyr, daughter to
a noble Britan of those parts, called Trebuith, whose head being cut of by
Cradocus Son to Alane King of North Wales, for not consenting to his
unlawful Just, was by her Sur. ^o* 6* de vit. SS. Robert. Salop. in eius vita.
Bre* (...). Sarum. Mart. Romans and alij. omnes hac die.
Master S. Beno set on again, she living fifteen years a ter, to the
admiration of the whole world for so famous a miracle. In the place where she
was beheaded, presently sprang up a miraculous fountain, very sovereign for
the curing of many diseases: which until this day is a great pilgrimage and
place of devotion for all Catholics of England, commonly called S.
VVenefrides well. Her body was afterward translated to Shrewsbury, about the
year of Christ, one thousand one hundred thirty and eight. This festiuity of
hers was wont to be celebrated in our Catholic Church of England with an
Office of nine lessons, according to the use of Sarum, and in many places kept
holiday.

THE same day at Wilton in Wi^^shire the Translation of S. Edith Virgin,
daughter to holy Edgar King and Monarch of Sur. to. 5. 17. Septe^. wion in
Mart. Bened. hac die.
England, who after the death of her Mother VVilfred, was ordained Abbess of
the Monastery of Wilton aforsaid: where in all sanctimony and holiness of life,
she gave up her soul to rest, and was buried there in the Church of S.
Dionyse, which herself had sometime built, about the year of Christ 984. whose
body was afterward on this day taken up, and translated to a more eminent place
of the same Church, whereat it is recorded many miracles to have been wrought
This woman is commonly called by the name of S. Edith the younger.

G The fourth Day.
IN France the Passion of S. Cl^re Priest and Martyr, who descended o^ a worthy
British stock, and borne in the City of Rochester in Kent, his worldly
friends would have Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Brit. Mart. Romans and Vsua. hac die.
had him to marry a wife against his will, for which he forsaking both Country
and friends, went over into Normandy, where he taking holy Orders, was made
Priest: and afterward going thence into France, for that he refused to yield to
the lust of a noble woman of that Country, was slain by her procurement in
defense of his charity, about the year of Christ, six hundred threescore and
six. His body was buried there in a Village called Volcassine, whereat it
pleased God in sign of his innocence to work many miracles.

A The fifth Day.
AT Clar^uallis in the Territory of La^gres in France, the festiuity of S.
Malachy Bishop and Co^(...)our, who being first a Monk Sur. to. 6. hac (...).
vna (...) Molan. i^ ad^it. ad us(...)r. B(...). in not ad Ma^^. Romans 3. nonas
(...). ^e ^a. d. in (...) vita ^t i(...) Epist. Mombr. ^om. 1. vit. SS.
o^ (...)hor (...) (...), and then Abbot, was after or(...)ned Bishop or
(...)rthen ^n the same (...), (...) and Pr(...)ate o^ Ireland* (...)e (...) and
di^d in the time of S. Bernard, about the care of Ch(...), on^ thousand one
hu^d(...) (...) and eight; who wrote unto him diverse learned (...)s, as also
his whole life, yet extant among S. Bernards works. He desceas^d the second
day o^ this month in the forsaid Monastery of Clareuallis, though his
(...)iuity be commonly celebrated on this day, because on the other is kept the
Commemoration of All-Soules, especially among the Monks of the Venerable Order
of Cisterce.

B The sixth Day.
IN the Monastery of VVoromholt by Berg^en (...) Flanders the depositio o^ S.
VVinocke Abbot and Confessor, who d^sc^nded or a Sur. to. 6. Marcell. in vita.
S. Switber. Molan. in (...)it. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Be(...)ij
most noble and Royal blood in Britany, went over into the lovver Germany to
S. Ber(...), who then lived there in great fame for his holiness, and was by him
ordained Abbot of a Monastery erected in Flanders, called Woromhol: where full
of wonderful holiness and sanctity of life, together with working of many
miracles, he reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, seven hundred and
sixteen. His body was afterward Jacob. Meyrus in Ann. Flandr. lib. 1.
translated to Berghen a orsaid, where the same is preserved, even until these
our days with great veneration of the Country round about: In whose honor
the said Town is now also commonly called of him by the Name of
VVinockes-Berghen.

C The seventh Day.
AT Epternake in the higher Germany the depositio^ of S. VVillebrord Bishop and
Confessor, Sur. to. 6. Marcell. in vita S. Simib. Molan. in addit. and Vsua.
et in Ind. SS. Belgij.
who being a Monk of Rippon in Yorkshire, was sent out of England by the holy
Abbot Egbert, with a dozen other Companions to preach the Christian faith in
the Low Countries and Germany; and going thence to Rome, was by Pope Sergius
consecrated Archbishop of Maestricht in Brabant, and sent back to that Sea.
Where after the conversion of many thousand souls to the true worship of one
God, he there ended his blessed days, in a Monastery at the forsaid place of
Epternake, in the Diocese of Treuers, which himself had built, in the year
of Christ, scauen hundred thirty and six.

THE same day at Strasburge in the higher Germany also, the deposition of S.
Florentius Bishop and Confessor, who being borne in Scotland of an honorable
parentage, Mart. Romans hac die. Lesl. l. 4. de gest. Scot. Democ. tom. 2. de
sacrif. Missae cap. 35.
went over into Germany, in the time of King Dagobert of France, whose daughter
being dumb and blind from her nativity, he by his prayers restored both to
speech and sight. And after going into the Province of Alsatia, was ordained
Bishop of Strasburge: where in all holiness of life, attending diligently to his
charge, he gave up his soul to rest, about the year of Christ, six hundred
threescore and fifteen, and was buried there in a Monastery near to the River
of Brusch, which himself had founded a little before, for the Scottish nation.

D The eight Day.
AT Bremen in East-frizland the deposition Albert, Cranz. lib. 2. c. 14. and
15. Io. Mola^. in addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Mart. Romans Sur. to. 6.
Tritem. de vir. Illustr.
of S. VVillehade Confessor and first Bishop of the same Sea, who going out of
England, where he was borne, for the Go^uersion of his Neighbour-countreys,
after he had preached to the Saxons and Frizians for more then fifty years
together, and converted many thousands to the Christian faith, was at the
request of Charles the great, ordained Bishop of Bremen in Frizland. Where
after he had passed a venerable old age, joined with sanctity of life, he
finally rested in our Lord, about the year of Christ, seven hundred fourscore
and eleven. His body was buried in the Cathedral Church of that City
dedicated to S. Peter, which himself had built, and was there wont to be kept
with great honor and veneration of the Inhabitants, as chief Patron and
Apostle of that Province, even until these our later days of schisms and
heresies in those parts.

E The ninth Day.
AT VVhitby in Yorkshire the Commemoration of S. Congilla Virgin and Abbess *
whose godly and virtuous life, together with the observation of Monastical
discipline, Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. Wio^ l. 4 lig. vitae.
has deserved to be famous, in Catholic time, throughout England. She was
co^stituted Abbess of an ancient Monastery now called VVhitby, which Oswy King
of the Northu^bers had newly founded; wherein he caused his own daughter
Ethelfred to be brought up, under the care and government of the forsaid
Congilla; who famous for sanctimony of life and miracles, gave up her soul to
her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, six hundred threescore and
eleven.

F The tenth Day.
AT Canterbury the Deposition of S. Iustus Archbishop of the same Sea and
Confessor, who coming into England with Bed. l. 1. c. 29. et l. 2. c. 3. 5.
8. Mart. Romans Molan.
S. Augustine and his fellows, was first ordained Bishop of Rochester, and
after of Canterbury, where in all holiness of life, he desceased, about the
year of Christ, six hundred thirty and two, and was buried at Canterbury.

THE same day at Michelmburgh in VVandalia the passion of S. John Bishop and
Albert. Stadens. in Chron. hac die. Helmod. in Chron. Scla^. l. 1. c. 23.
Cranz. Me(...)op. l. 4. c. 43. Tri em. de vir. Illustr.
Martyr, who being an Irishman by birth, and a Monk, went over into the lower
Germany, and thence into VVandalia to preach the Christian faith; where being
consecrated Bishop of Michelmburgh, was at length taken by the Infidels of that
Country, and sorely beaten with cudgells. And when they could not auert him
from calling upon the name of JESUS, they first cut of his hands, and then his
feet, and last of all his head, about the year of Christ, one thousand
threescore and six.

G The eleventh Day.
IN the Monastery of Malon in the Territory of Namures, the Deposition of S.
Bertuine Bishop and Confessor, who borne in Ireland of a noble parentage, and
going over into the Lower Germany, to preach the Christian faith, built
himself a little Oratory in honor of our Blessed Lady, in a Io. Mola^. in
oddit ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij
Village called Malon in the forsaid Territory of Namures, where in very great
austerity and holiness of life, he gave himself wholly to conte^plation and
meditation of heavenly things, until his dying-day, which happened full of
miracles, about the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and one. In the same
place where he had built his said Oratory, was afterward erected a goodly
Monastery of the Institute of S. Augustine, where his body is yet kept with
great veneration of the Inhabitants therabout.

A The tweluth Day.
AT Asche in Flanders the Passion of S. Liuinus Bishop and Martyr, who being
borne in Scotland, and scholar to S. Augustine our English Apostle, went over
into Flanders with three other Companions to preach Io. Mola^. in addit. ad
vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Marcell. in vita. S. Benifac. Suitbert. and eius.
the faith or Christ, where he was slain in hatred thereof by the Pagans of
that Country, about the year of Christ, seven hundred and three. They first
cut out his tongue, which being miraculously restored unto him again, he was
finally beheaded. His body was first buried at Hauten, but afterward translated
to Gaunt in the year 1007.

THE same day in Ouerysle o^ Gelderland the f(...)uity of S. Lebuine Priest and
Confessor, who being a Monk of Rippon in Yorkshire, and disciple to S.
VVillebrord, went Sur. to. 6. Tritem. lib. 3. de vir. Illustr. cap. 146. Molan.
in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij
over to S Gregory Bishop of Maestricht in Brabant, of whom he was sent to
p^each to the Saxons beyond the River of Ysle; where after he had converted
many thousands to the faith of Christ, full of sanctity and miracles he ended
his blessed days, about the year o^ Christ, seven hundred and threescore.
His body was afterward translated to Dauentry, and there is kept in the
Cathedral Church of that City with great veneration, as one of the chief
Patrons of the Diocese.

B The thirteenth Day.
IN the Territory of Arras in Artoys the Deposition of S. Kilian Bishop and
Confessor, who descended of the bloud-roall of Scotland and Kinsman to King
Fugenius the fourth of that Name, despised, ^or the love of God, a^l wor^dly
preferments, and went over into the lower Germany, to preach the Christian
faith; where when he had reduced Io. Mola^. in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS.
Belgij Regist. Priorat. S. Kilia^. Albin.
many thousands to Christ's flock, replenished with sanctity o^ life, he ended
his blessed days, in a venerable old age, about the year of Christ, six
hundred and forty. His body is kept until this day in a Village called
Alb^niacke, in the Diocese of Arras, where there is a goodly Prior^ of
Chanous-Regular erectd in his name, common^ called the Priory of S. Kilian.
Th^s man is different from the other S. Kilian of the same Name mentioned upon
the eight of July, who was of the Irish Nation, and a Martyr.

C The fourteenth Day.
AT London the Translation of S. Erconwald Confessor and Bishop of the same
Sea, Son to Offa King of the Eastsaxons, M^tth. West. an. Do. 1148. ^alend.
sec. vsum Sarum. hac die.
whose fame of sanc^ity and holiness of life, together with working of
miracl^s, has been notorious throughout Christendom, but especially in
England. He died in the year of Christ, six hundred threescore and fifteen,
and was buried at London in S. Paul's Church, but afterward taken up on this
day, and trans^ated to a more eminent place o^ the same Church in the year of
Christ 1148. At whose body it is recorded many m^racles to have been wrought.

THE same day at Ewe in Normandy the Mart. Romans eu^ Baron. Mo^an. in addit. a^
vsuar. Sur. ^o. 6. W^^^ i^ Catal. Epis^o. Dubune^.
deposition of S. Laurence Bishop and Confessor, who being first a Monk and
then Abbot of Glindalacke in Ireland, was la(...)y ordained Bishop o^ Dublyn in
the same Kingdom: And thence going over into Normandy, in great holiness of
life and miracles, ended his blessed days. He was a^terward canonized for a
Saint by Pope Honorius the third, in the year of Christ, one thousand three
hundred and six. His body still remains at Ewe a^orsaid, where it is kept
with due veneration of the Inhabitants of that place.

ALso the same day in Bardsey-Iland in North Wales the deposition o^ S.
D^^ritius Matthew. W^st. an. 507. Gaufr monum. l 9. c. 4. and. 3. hist. (...)n.
Confessor, Archbishop o^ Carleon upon Vske, and Primate of the old Britans of
Wales, who resigning his Sea to S. David, King Arthurs uncle, became an Ermite
in the wild Mountains of North Wales; where in very great austerity of life,
full of miracles, in a venerable old age, he finally reposed in our Lord, about
the year of Christ, five hundred twenty and two; and was buried in the
a^orsaid Island of Bardsey.

D The fifteenth Day.
AT Saints in France the Deposition of S. Macloue Bishop and Confessor, who
Io. Mola^. in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Petr. in Catal. Vita eius
habetur Romae M. S. in Biblioth. Baron. Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die.
being descended of a noble British blood, and Monk of the Monastery ot Bangor
in Caerneruanshire of Wales, was thence promoted to the Bishopric of Althene
in little Britany (now called of his name in that vulgar language San-Macloue)
and consecrated thereto by Leontius Bishop or Saints: which Sea when he had
governed most worthily for many years, in all sanctity of life and laudable
virtues, coming to Saints aforsaid, in a good old age gave up his soul to
rest, about the year of Christ, (...)e hundred threescore and four. His
Relics were afterward translated to the Monastery of Gemblacum, where the
same are yet preserved with great honor and Veneration, for the manifold
miracles, that in times past have been wrought thereat.

E The sixteenth Day.
AT Pontoyse in France the Deposition of S. Edmund Bishop and Confessor, who
being sometime Treasurer of the Church of Salisbury, was ordained Archbishop of
Canterbery: which Sea when he had governed for six years in all godly manner,
being many ways (...)red by King Henry the Pol. Vir. lib. 16. Sur. to. 6. de
vit. SS Matthew. West. an. 1246. Mart. Romans Molan. and alij.
third and (...) Otho, he resigned the same, went (...) into France, and lived
in voluntary banishment, spending the rest of his days in continual prayer
and meditation, in a Monastery of Chanons-Regular at Sorson: where in very
great sanctity of life he departed this world, in the year of Christ, one
thousand two hundred and forty. His body was brought with all solemnity to
P(...)yse, where the same is kept with great honor and Veneration until this
day. He was canonized for a Saint by Pope Innocentius the fourth, six years
after his death. This day was afterward commanded to be kept holy in his
memory throughout England. King Jews of France caused his body to be
translated to a more honorable place of the Church in Pontoyse, and bestowed
thereon a sumptuous shryne of silver, guilt and richly adorned with many
precious stones. Sur. to. 3. and Mart. Romans 10. Iunij. Io. Mola^. in addit. ad
Vsua. hac die.


THE same day in Scotland the deposition of S. Margaret Queen, wife to holy
King Malcolme the third of that Name, and daughter to Prince Edward of England,
surnamed the Outlaw, whose wonderful life and virtues, especially in devotion
and liberal alms to the poor, are famous to posterity. Her principal
festiuity is celebrated upon the tenth of June, though she died on this day, in
the year of Christ, one thousand fourscore and twelve, and in the reign of K.
William Rusus of England.

F The seventeenth Day.
AT Lincoln the deposition of S. Hugh Confessor and Bishop of the same Pol.
Vir. l. 13. 14. and 15. Petr. Suitor de vita Carthufiana l. 2. c. 5. Silu.
Girald. in eius vita West. an. 1297. Mart. Romans Molan. and alij omnes hac die.
Sea, who borne in Burgundy, was sent for into England by King Henry the
second, and first made Prior of the Charterhouse-Monks at VVittam in
Somersetshire, and thence elected and ordained Bishop of Lincoln. In which
function he so excelled in all kind of virtue and holiness of life, that his
merits deserved to have the same manifested to the world, by the wonderful
miracles wrought at his body. He newly built the Cathedral Church of Lincoln
from the foundations. And when he had most laudably governed his flock for
fourteen years, full of venerable old age, he gave up his soul to rest at
London, in the year of Christ, one thousand and two hundred. His body was
presently brought to Lincoln, at what time there happened to be present King
John of England, and William King of Scots, with very many of the Nobility of
both Realms. The two Kings for the great reverence they, had unto his
holiness, bare-headed carried his body from the gates of the City unto the
Church, where the same being most solemnly received by the Prelates and Clergy,
was buried behind the high Altar, near unto the Chapel of S. John Baptist.
He was afterward canonized for a Saint by Pope Honorius the third, in the year
of Christ 1220.

THE same day at Strenshalt in the Kingdom Ve^. Bed. l. 3. c. 24. and lib. 4.
cap. 23. Lippomannus tom. 2. West. an. 680. Tri em. de vir. Illustr.
of the Northumbers the Deposition of S. Hilda Virgin and Abbess, descended of
the blood royal of the Kings of that Province, who forsaking the vanities of
the world became a Religious woman first in a little Nunry near to the river
of VVire, and then Abbess of the Monastery of Hartsey (now called VVhitby in
Yorkshire) and afterward of Strenshalt, where in very great sanctity of life,
she ended her blessed days, about the year of Christ, six hundred and
fourscore. Her feast is in many places observed upon the fifteenth of December,
where also we have again made mention of her.

G The eighteenth Day.
AT Santo-Padre a Village in the Kingdom of Naples, the Commemoration *
of S. Fulke Co^sessour, who being an Englishman by birth, and descended of a
noble Regist. Eccles. Santo-Padrien. and monument. ipsius Sepulch.
family in our Island, took upon him for the love of Christ, a long
peregrination, to visit the holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem. And as he returned
homeward by Italy, the plague at that time sorely raging in those parts, in
very great sanctity and holiness of life, he received the reward of his labor,
and ended his blessed days in rest, His body is until this day kept with
great honor and veneration in the forsaid Village, called by the Italia^s
Santo-Padre, for the manifold miracles that are daily wrought thereat: whereby
the same place is now become a pilgrimage of devotion to visit his body,
especially among the Neapolitans, and people of Calabria.

A The ninteenth Day.
IN Kent the festiuity of S. Ermenburge Queen and Abbess, daughter to
Ercombert King of Kent, and wife to Merualdus King of the Mercians (or middle
Englishmen) Matthew. West. an. 654. and 676. Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. and alij.
and mother to the three famous Virgin-Saintes Milburge, Mildred, and Milwyde:
who having built a goodly Church and Monastery in Kent, in honor of her two
kinsmen Ethelbrit and Ethelred Martyrs, gathered together seauenty other
Virgins and holy women, and with consent of her husband, entered into the same,
as Abbess and Gouernesse of the rest: where in all sanctimony of life and
virtuous conversation, she ended her blessed days, about the year of Christ,
six hundred fifty and four, and was buried in the same place.

B The twentieth Day.
AT Hexam in Northumberland the Passion of S. Edmund King and Martyr, who being
a Saxon by blood, borne in the City Abbo Floriac. in eius vita. Petr. in
Catal. Osbert. de Stokes in eius vita Mart. Romans and omnes hac die.
of Noremberge in that Province, and nephew to Ossa King of the Eastangles, was
by him adopted successor and heir of that Kingdom. And when had most
Christianlike governed the same for fifteen years, was in the first Danish
persecution, under the Captains Hinguar and Hubba, for the Confession of
Christ, first whipped sorely, and then tied to a tree, and his body shot full
of arrows, was finally beheaded. Whose head the Danes carrying into a wood
near by, cast among briars and bushes. And when the Tyrants forsook those
parts, and the Christians seeking for the same, lost themselves in the forsaid
wood, and one calling upon another, asking with a loud voice, Where art?
where art? where art? the blessed Martyrs head answered, Here, Here, Here.
By which miraculous voice they found out the same. He suffered in the year of
Christ, eight hundred and seauenty.

THE same day, and same place also, the passion of S. Humbert Bishop and
Mart^^, who being Counselor and companion to the ^orsaid King Edmund in the
administration of his Kingdom, deserved to West. a^. 870. and 855.
be made partaker with him of his martyrdom, and so obtained a crown of glory
in the year o^ our Lord above mentioned.

C The one and twentieth Day.
AT Bobia in Lombardy the deposition of S. Columb^ Abbot and Confessor, Ve^
Bed. in cius vita. Ma^t. Romans and Mola^. hac die.
who being an Irishman by birth, and first a monk, then Abbot of the Monastery
of Benchor in the fame Kingdom, went over into France, and there founded a
Monastery at Luxouium, and thence passing into Italy, he there also founded
another at Bobia, by the help of Agilulph King of the Lombards, of Io. Lest.
de gest. Scot. Hect. Boet ibid. in Eugenio 4. Carol. Sigon. de regno Italiae.
l. 2
which himself became Abbot. And after all these, and diverse other labors and
toils taken for the advancement of Christian Religion in Gods Church, full of
wonderful sanctity of life and miracles, he ended his venerable days, about
the year of Christ, six hundred and fourteen, and was buried in the forsaid
Monastery of Bobia.

D The two and twentieth Day.
IN France the Co^memoration of S. Osmane *
Virgin, descended of the Blood - Royal Vide fusius eius vita^ l. Manuscript.
Rob. Buckl. de vita SS. Mulier. Angl. page 239. ex antiq. monum. Hi^erniae et
Fra^ciae
of Ireland, whose parents being Pagans, she notwithstanding in her tender
years was privately instructed in the Christian faith. But afterward being to
be espoused to a Noble man of the same Kingdom but an Ethnicke, forsook both
Country and friends and fled secretly over into France, accompanied only with
a mayd-seruant, that waited on her called Aclitenis, where in a wood near to
the River of Loyre, she lived a very austere life, being clad with a coat made
of bulrushes, and feeding her hungry body only with herbs. It chanced one
day, that a wild boar being chased in that wood by the hunters, came running
to her, as it were, for succor. The huntesmen eagerly pursuyng the beast,
stroke him with their spears with all their force, but could not once pearce
his skin. Heerupon the Virgin being discovered, was suspected to be a witch;
and being brought to the Bishop, and found to believe in Christ, was by him
baptized, and had a little territory assigned her, and a Gardener appointed to
cultiuate the same, for her bodily relief and sustenance: who being on a time
deluded by the devil to attempt some thing against her, was by divine justice
suddenly stricken blind: whereof he repenting himself, was by her prayers
again restored to his sight. And so she perseuering a long time in that holy
conversation, full of sanctimony of life, was finally called thence unto Christ
her spouse, whom she had so entyrely loved and served.

E The three and twentieth Day.
AT Chepslow (...) Mo^mouthshire of Wales, the Co^memoratio^ of S. Tathar
Confessor *
and Eremite^, who being descended of a Re^istr. (...). Chepst. et antiq.
(...). Pro^in^. Mo(...)
noble British lynage, contemned the world, and became an Ermite in the
Mountains of Monmouthshire, in the reign of Cradocke King of South Wales,
about which time also in great sanctity of life and miracles, he ended his
blessed days. He built of his own inheritance a goodly Church in the forsaid
Town of Chepstow, together with a fair School for the education of youth in
learning and virtue: for which his memory is yet famous in our Island,
especially among the ancient Britans of South Wales.

F The four and twentieth Day.
AT Strenshalt in the Kingdom of the Northumbers the Commemoration of *
Blessed Eanslede Queen, daughter to Edwyn, Bed. l. 4. Eistor. Angl. cap. 26.
Arnol. Wion lib. 4. lig. (...).
and wife to Oswy Kings of Northumberland; who after the death of her Lord,
and husband, setting aside all worldly pomp and pleasure, took a Religious
habit, and became a Nun in the Monastery of S. Peter at the forsaid place of
Strenshalt, under the care and Government of her own daughter Ethelfred that
then was Abbess of the same. Where in all kind of profound humility,
sanctimony of life, and other virtues, she ended her blessed days, about the
year of Christ, six hundred and fourscore.

G The five and twentieth Day
AT Landaffa in Clamorganshire of Wales the *
Commemoration of S. Telean Martyr, and second Bishop of the same Sea, whose
Regist. Eccles. Land^f. and Catal. Episco. eiusdem Eccl. ex antiq. monum.
Cambriae
rare life, learning, and other eminent virtues have in times past been famous
throughout England, especially among the ancient Britans of our Nation, where
his memory is fresh even until this day. He was very nobly borne, and brought
up under S. Dubritius Archbishop and Metropolitan of Wales, together with S.
David. And a little after his coming to his Bishopric, he was constrained,
through a vehement plague infecting those parts, to go over into France. The
which being ceased and he returned, was soon after slain by a certain noble
Man of that Country, called in the British tongue Gueddan, about the year of
Christ, six hundred twenty and six. His body was buried in his own Cathedral
Church of Landaffa (to whom the said Church is now dedicated) where the same
was preserved with all honor and veneration, even until the days of King
Henry the eight of England.

A The six and twentieth Day.
AT Fulda in the higher Germany, the Commemoration of S. Egbert Abbot *
and Confessor, who being a Scottishman by birth, and descended of a noble
family Io. Lest. Episco. Rossens. l. 5. de gest. Scot. Wion in append. ad lib
3. lig. vitae.
in that Kingdom, forsook his Country, and went over into Germany in that
Primitive Church, and there became first a Monk, and after Abbot of a
Monastery which S. Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz and Apostle of the Germans had
newly erected at Fulda aforsaid. Where in very great sanctity of life and
doctrine, especially in the obserua^ce of Monastical discipline he finally
reposed in our Lord. Where also his body is yet kept with great honor and
veneration of the Inhabitants of that place. This man is different from the
other S. Egbert of the same Name, that was Abbot of S. Columbs in Scotland,
whose feast is observed upon the four and twentieth day of April.

B The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Rhode in Brabant the deposition of S. Oda Virgin, who borne in Scotland of
the Roall blood of that Kingdom, and being stroke^ blind, went over into the
lower Germany to the body of S. Lambert at Liege, where by his merits and her
own prayers she received again her sight, vowing perpetual Chast^^y to God,
that had so miraculouily Io. M^la^. in a(...). ad vs^ ^r. ^t in (...). SS*
(...) hac die.
delivered her of that insirmity. Her Father, notwithstanding, would have had
her to marry; but she detesting the same, never returned back into her
Country, but lead a solitary and most holy life in the Territory of Liege:
where in all sanctimony spending the rest of her days in continual prayer and
contemplation of heavenly things, she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse,
about the year of Christ seven hundred and thirteen. Her body remains in
the forsaid Village of Rhode, and there, as Patroness of that Town, is kept
with great veneration, for the often miracles that have been wrought thereat.

C The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Dorchester in Oxfordshire the deposition of S. Edwold Confessor and
Ermite, Gul. Mal^nes. l. de P^t. Angl. hac die. (...). i^s^st. S.
brother to King Edmund the Martyr, who refusing the Kingdom of the
Easta^gles, after his Brothers passion, gave himself wholly, for the love of
Christ, to a kind of solitary life and heavenly contemplation. In which after
he had lived many years with great signs of sanctity and holiness, ended his
blessed days in an old Monastery, at Dorchester aforsaid, sometime called
Corn-house, and was there with great veneration interred, about the year of
Christ, eight hundred threescore and eleven.

D The nine and twentieth Day.
IN Clamorganshire of Wales the Co^memoration of S. Barucke Confessor and
Ermite, *
who being descended of a noble British race in our Ila^d, did for the love of
God conte^ne Ex antiq. Mo(...)m. Cambr. de Prou. Clamorg.
the world, and become an Ermite, leading a most strict and severe kind of life
in a little Island of the sea, in Clamorganshire, called afterward of his Name,
Barucks-eye (but now more corruptly Bardsey: where in very great holiness and
sanctity of life, he gave up his blessed soul to rest in our Lord. His memory
is yet very famous in the forsaid Province of Clamorgan, as also among the
ancient Britans of our Island.

E The thirtith Day.
AT Derham in Nor^olke the Co^memoration of S. VVithburge Virgin, daughter *
to Annas King of the Eastangles, and sister to S. Audry and S. Sexburge
Queens who building with her own patrimony a Nunry at Eius vit. extat M. S.
(...)a Rob. Buckl inter vit. SS. Mul. Angl.
Derham, entered therein and received a Monastical habit. Where after she had
spent her days in great holiness and sanctimony of life, finally rested in
our Lord, about the year of Christ, six hundred and threescore. S. Ethelwold
Bishop of Winchester in the year of Christ 974. having repaired the Abbey of
Ely defaced by the Danes, and adjoining unto it this forsaid Nunry of Derham,
caused her body to be taken up (which was found whole and vncorrupt, after
above 300. years from her death) and translated to the Abbey of Ely, by Abbot
Britlmote, and there placed near to the holy body of S. Audry her sister. The
said Monastery which she built, being afterward converted into a parish Church,
remains until this day in Norsolke, still retayning the forsaid name of
Derham.

THE MONTH OF DECEMBER.
F The first Day.
AT Bangor in Caerneruanshire *
of Wales the Commemoration of S. Daniel Confessor, and Bishop Io. Capg. in
Catal. SS. Brit. ex Regist. Eccles. Bangore^.
of the same Sea, whose great sanctity of life and miracles, have been famous in
former ancient times throughout our whole Island, both alive and dead,
especially among the ancient Britans of Wales. His body was buried at Bangor
aforsaid, where the Cathedral Church of that Bishopric, that now is, was
erected and dedicated in his honor. He was the first Bishop of that Sea, and
lived about the year of Christ, five hundred and sixteen, and in the Reign
of King Arthur of Britany.

G The second Day.
AT Dormundcaster two miles from Peterburrow in Northamptonshne the
Commemoration *
^alias Eve
S. VVe^de Virgin and Abbess, daughter to Penda a Pagan King of the Mercians,
and sister to the holy Virgins Kinneburge, Kinisdred, Kinisuide and Edburge,
who conte^ning all worldly pomp and delights, for the love of Christ, entered
into the Monastery of Dormundcaster asorsaid, and Wio l. 4 lig. vita Chron.
Britan. fol. 276. Regist. Eccles. Petribur.
there took the holy veyle of chaltity and monastical habit, under the
government of her own sister Kinneburge that then was Abbess of the same;
where after the death of her sister Idlurge, that succeeded Kinneburge, she was
elected also to that Office. Which three sisters one succeding another in the
same dignity of Abbess, did, as it were, by an hereditar) right, leave one the
other their sanctimony and holiness of life, which e^h one conserved and
augmented until her dying day. This was the youngest of five sisters, all
Saints, and died about the year of Christ, six hundred fourscore and twelu^.
Her body was translated to Peterburrow, and there intombed very richly with the
rest of her sisters

A The third Day. Eyseugr. cent. 2. p. 5. did. 2. p. 2. d. 7. p. 3. d. 2. p.
4. d. 2. 10. Nauc. vol. 8. ge^. 6. Petr. de Natal. l. 1. c. 24. Annal. Curiens.
Ratisbo^. Bauar. et Monast. S. Lucij ibidem. Bernard. Guido in Catal. Po^t. sub
Eleuth.

AT Chure in Heluetia the Passion of S. Lucius the first Christian King of
Britany and Martyr, who being converted to the faith of Christ by the Saints
Fugatius and Damianus, sent from Rome by Pope Eleutherius, afterward became
himself a preacher of the same Doctrine, and went over into France and thence
into Germany, where after many persecutions sustained for the confession of
Christ, being at last (according to ancient traditions) ordained the first
Bishop of Chure, was there finally put to death by the incredulous people of
that Nation, about the year of Christ, one hu^ndred fourscore and twelve. His
feast is very sole^nely celebrated with Octaues at Chure aforsaid, as is to be
seen in the Breuiary of that Diocese, wherein the whole story of his li^e is
recounted at large.

THE same day at Dorcester in Dorcetshire the deposition of S. Birine
Confessor, Ve^. Bed. l. 3. c. 7. West. an. 637. and 644. Mart. Romans
and first Bishop of that Province, who converted the VVestsaxons to the faith
of Christ, together with their King Kinegilsus, and so became their Apostle.
He died in the year of Christ, six hundred and fifty, and was buried at the
forsaid town of Dorcester, Gul. Ramesius in eius vita. Wio^ l. 2. lig. vitae.
in Catal. Episco. Dorcestrens.
but afterward translated to Winchester by S. Hedde Bishop of that City, and
there with great solemnity and veneration being placed in the Cathedral Church
of S. Peter and S. Paul, deserved to be honored with this Epigram of an
ancient Poet, that wrote his life in verse.

Dignior attolli quam sit Tyrinthius heroes,
Quam sit Alexander Macedo. Tyrin hius hosts
Vicit, Alexander mundum, Birinus verumque.
Nec tantum vicit mundum Birinus and hostem;
Sed sese bello vincens, and victus eodem.
IN like manner the same day in the Territory of Liege in the Lower Germany the
deposition of S. Eloquius Priest and Confessor, who borne in Ireland, went
over the sea, with diverse other Companions to preach the Christian faith to the
Netherlanders; where 10. Mola^. in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij.
after much fruit reapt in great sanctity of life he ended his blessed days,
about the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and one: whose body was afterward
translated to the Town of VValciodore, and there is kept with great
veneration, as Patron of that place.

B The fourth Day.
AT Salisbury in Wilsthire the deposition of S. Osmund Confessor and Bishop
of the same Sea, who being a Norman of noble birth, came into England with King
William the Co^querour, by whom he was first made Chancellor of the Realm,
and Earl of Dorset, and afterward, for that he Ranulp. Cestrens. in eius vita.
l. 7. c. 3. Mart. Romans and alij onmes hac die.
was a most virtuous and learned man, he was elected Bishop of Salisbury: which
Church being begone by his Predecessor he finished, adding thereto a goodly
Library, which he furnished also with many excellent books. And when he had
most laudably governed his flock for sixteen years, in great sanctity and
holiness of life, he happily reposed in our Lord, in the year of Christ, one
thousand fourscore and nynteene, and was buried in his own Cathedral Church
of Salisbury, at whose body it pleased God to work miracles. He was canonized
for a Saint by Pope Calixtus the third, two hundred and fifty years after his
death.

THE same day at Triuis in the Territory of Chure in the Province of Heluetia
in Germany, the festiuity of S. Emerita Virgin and Martyr, sister to King
Lucius of Britany, who going into Germany with her said brother, was by the
paga^ people of that Country, for Eysengr. p. 3. Cent. 2. d. 1. Breuiar.
Curiens. in Offic. 9. lection. hac die.
the confession of Christian says, put to death, ending her glorious
martyrdom by fire, about the year of Christ, one hundred fourscore and
thirteen. The whole story of her life is set forth at large in the Breuiary of
the Diocese of Chure aforsaid, in her Office on this day.

C The fifth Day.
AT Winchester in Hampshire the Commemoration of S. Christine Virgin and *
Abbess, daughter to Prince Edward surnamed Matthew. West. an. 10^7. Paris.
eodem an. and 1209. Pol. Vir. lib. 9. hist. Angl.
the Outlaw, and sister to the famous S. Margaret of Scotland, who together
with her mother Agatha, entered into the Monastery of Winchester, and there
became a Religious woman first, and afterward Abbess of the whole house. In
which dignity she perseuering in all kind of exemplar sanctimony of life, and
Monastical discipline, gave up her soul at last to her heavenly spouse, about
the year of Christ, one thousand and fourscore, and in the reign of King
William the Conqueror.

D The sixth Day.
IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Congellus *
Abbot and Confessor, who being Bernard. in vita. S. Malac. Episcop. Wion in
append. ad lib. 3. lig. vitae.
a most venerable Monk of the Order of S. Benedict, and living with S.
Malachias, at that time Bishop of Connerthen in Ireland, was by him ordained
Abbot of an ancient Monastery near to the forsaid Bishops Sea in the same
Kingdom; where in very great sanctity of life and miracles he ended his
blessed days, about the year of Christ, one thousand, one hundred and forty.

THE same day at Cullen in Germany the *
Commemoration of S. Florentina Virgin and Martyr, who being one of the number
of the eleven thousand holy British Virgins martyred with S. Vrsula, was for
defense of her Chastity there put to death Tabulae Colenie^s.
with the rest of her fellows, about the year of Christ, three hundred
fourscore and three, herself afterward miraculously reueyling her name.

E The seventh Day.
AT Durham in the Bishopric, the Co^memoration of S. Odwald Abbot and
Confessor, *
who of a Monk of wonderful Innocence, and godly conversation, was elected
10. Trit. de vir. Ill^str. l. 3. c. 128. Wion in appe^d. l. 3 lig. vita.
Abbot of the monastery of Lindisserne in the Kingdom of the Northumbers,
where in ad kind of holiness of life and Monastical discipline, full of
miracles, he reposed in our Lord, about the year of Christ, eight hundred and
six, and was afterward buried at Durham aforsaid.

THE same day in Scotland the Commemoration *
of S. Gallanus Monk and Confessor, who borne in Ireland, and descended Hect.
Boet de gest. Sco. Io. Lest. Episco. Ross. l. 4. Ibidem.
of a noble blood in that Kingdom, came over into Scotland with S. Columbe the
Great, whose senoller and disciple he was, where teaching and preaching the
Christian faith to the Pictes that in those days inhabited Scotland, famous
for sanctity of life and miracles, he departed this world, about the year of
Christ, five hundred and fourscore.

F The eight Day.
THE CONCEPTION of the most glorious and immacusate Virgin MARY mother of God,
by the grace and power of her Son, that preserved her from all inquination of
sin: which feast being first of all begun to be celebrated in our Island of
Great Britany in the time of S. Anselme Archbishop Petr. in Catal. l. 1. c. 41.
Sixth PP. 4. Extrau. commun. tit. de Relig. and Vener. SS. Conc. Trid. Baron. in
Not. ad Mart. Romans hac die. *
of Canterbury, and King William the Conqueror, about the year of Christ,
one thousand threescore and ten, by the Monks of the Venerable Order of S.
Benedict, to the honor and glory of the blessed Virgin; was afterward
confirmed by our Mother the holy Roman Church, and commanded to be kept
holiday throughout Christendom, to the increase of devotion toward so mighty
a Patroness.

THE same day at Winchester in Hampshire the Commemoration of Blessed Agatha
Queen, daughter to Solomon King of Hungary, and wife to Prince Edward of
England surnamed the Outlaw, and Mother to the Histor. Scot. ex(...)sa Francof.
an. 1584. lib. 7. Matthew. Wesi. and Paris. an. 1067. Wio^ l. 4 lig. vitae
two famous Saints Margaret and Christine, who when, after the death of her
husband, she saw her Son Edgar, to whom the succession of the Crown of
England by right belonged, to be iniustly depressed and molested by the
invasions of King Harold first, and after of the Conqueror, and thereby
frustrated of the recovery of the Kingdom, she with her two daughters,
resolved to take their journey back toward Hungary by sca; but being driven
by tempest into Scotland, they were very honorably received by King Malcolme,
who took the forsaid Margaret to wife. And after a while that they had stayed
there, Agatha the Mother, and Christine the other daughter, returned into
England, entered both into the Monastery of Religious women at Winchester,
where in very great sanctimony of life, they finally ended their blessed days;
the Mother desceasing about the year of Christ, one thousand threescore and
twelve: whose body being interred in the same Monastery, has been kept with
great veneration, even until our days.

G The ninth Day.
AT Shaftesbury in Dorcetshire the Commemoration *
of S. Ethelgine Abbess, daughther to Alfred King of the VVestsaxons, who
despising all temporal and worldly preferments, Matthew. West, an. 871. and 888.
Gene(...)l. Alf^^d^ R^gis an. 870. Pol. Vir. lib. 5. and alij.
took a Religious habit, and became a Nun in the Monastery of the forsaid
Town of Shaftesbury, which her Father had there newly erected: whereof at last
she being ordained Abbess, governed the same in all sanctimony of life, and
exact Monastical discipline, until her dying day, which happened about the
year of Christ, eight hundred fourscore and sixteen.

A The tenth Day.
AT Glower in Clamorganshire of Wales the Commemoration of S. Chi^^d
Confessor *
and Eremite, who borne in Wales, and there descended of an ancient and noble
Io. Capg. in Ca^^l. SS (...) it. ex antiq. Mo(...). Camb^ i. e
British lynage, contemned the vanities of the world, and for the love of
Christ, became an Eremite, leading a most strict and severe kind of life in the
Mountains of the forsaid Province of Clamorgan, where in very great sanctity
and holiness of life, he finally ended his happy days. His body was buried at
the forsaid Town of Glower; whose memory has in times past, been very famous
throughout England, but especially among the ancient Britans of Wales.

B The eleventh Day.
IN Morauia the Commemoration of S. *
Geruadius Bishop and Confessor, who borne in Scotland and descended of a
noble Io. Lest. Episcop. Ross. l. 5. hist. Scot. Wion in append. ad lib. 3.
lig. vitae.
parentage in that Kingdom, took a Religions habit, and became a Monk there
of the Venerable order of S. Benedict, and thence went over into Germany, and
lastly into Morauia, where being created Bishop, he preached the Christian
faith incessantly to that Nation, and became their Apostle. And a ter that he
had brought many thousands from their Idolatry to the true worship of one God,
full of venerable old age, in great sanctity and holiness of life, he finally
rested in our Lord, about the year of Christ, eight hundred and sour.

C The tweluth Day.
IN the I Will of Crowland in Lincolnshire the Commemoration o^ S. El^rede Virgin,
*
daughter to Offa the Pagan King of Mercia, Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. Steph.
Lvsinga^. cor. 4. c. 9. Wion lib. 4* lig. vitae.
who being converted to the Christian faith principally by the murder committed
by her Mother upon King Ethelbert of the Eastangles that came to demand her in
Marriage for his wife, forsook her said parents, friends and all other worldly
preferme^ts, and took a Religious habit, in the Monastery of S. Guthlacke in
the forsaid I Will of Crowland, where in great sanctimony of life, and observance
of Monastical discipline, she gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse, about
the year of Christ, seven hundred fourscore and thirteen,

D The thirteenth Day.
AT Pontoyse in France the Deposition of S. Joyce.
Iudo(...) Confessor and Ermite, who being desce^^ed of a most noble British
Sur. to 6. Pet^* in Catal. l. 1. cap. 25. Vince^t. in sp(...). Wio^ l. 4 lig.
vitae. Rodu^^. Ag^icol. in distich.
blood, forsaking all worldly prefermentes, went over into France, and there
for the love of Christ, became an Ermite. In which kind of life he so excelled
in sanctity and holiness, that it pleased God to manifest the same by the
incorruptibility of his body, which is kept whole until this day with great
veneration at the forsaid Town of Po(...)oyse. He gave alms four times to
Christ visibly in the habit of a poor man, that demanded the same; and died
in the year of Christ, six hundred fifty and three. Whose worthy praise this
distich declares.

Regia Progenies veterum styrps clara Britannum,
Ecce nitet ru^la Iudocus luce per Orbem.
THE same day in the ^le of Thanet in Registr. E^cles. Cantuar. and Rob.
B(...). in eius vital. M. S. de SS. Mulier. Angl. page 115.
Kent, the deposition of S. Edburge Virgin and Abbess, daughter to blessed
Ethelbert the first Christian King of that Province, who being baptized and
instructed in the Christian ^aith by S. Augustine our Apostle, forsook the
world, and entered into the Mona(...)ery of holy Virgins erected in the I Will of
Thanet aforsaid, under the government of her niece S. M^ldred, after whose death
she became Abbess of the same place: where in all sanctimony of life, she
ended her blessed days. S. Lansranke Archbishop of Canterbury in the year of
Christ, one thousand fourscore and sieve, translated her body, as also S.
Mildreds, unto Canterbury, and placed them there in the Church of S. Gregory,
which he had newly repaired, and enriched, whereat miracles are recorded to have
been wrought.

E The fourteenth Day.
AT Cullen in Germany the Co^memoratio^ *
of S. Munborine Abbot and Confessor, who borne in Scotland, and descended of
a Io. L^st. E(...). R(...). 4. Hi^tor. Sent. A(...)l. Wi^. in a(...)d ad lib.
3. lig. vit(...). R(...)t. M(...). S. Mar(...). Colon.
noble blood in that Kingdom, despised the world, and became first a Monk of
the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and afterward went over into Germany, and
there was made Abbot of a Monastery dedicated to S. Martin in Calls: which
when he had most laudably governed for twelve years or therabout, in great
sanctity of life and miracles he ende^ his blessed days, in the year of
Christ, nine hundred four score and thirteen, and was buried in the same place.

F The fifteenth Day.
AT Strenshalt in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, the Translation of S. Hilda
Virgin and Abbess, daughter to Prince Herericke nephew to Edwyn King of the
same Province, who from her infancy giving Ve^. Ded. l. 3. c. 24. and l. 4. c.
23. West an. 665. and 680. Trit. de Vir. Illu. l. 3. c. 123.
herself wholly to devotion and piety became a Religious woman first in a
little Nunry by the River of Wyre, and then was ordained Abbess of a Monastery
erected in the forsaid Kingdom, near to the sea side called Hartsey (at this
day commonly known by the name of VVhitby in Yorkshire) and afterward of
another Monastery also in the same Province called Stre^shalt, which herself
had built; where in all kind of holiness of life and exercise of Monastical
discipline, glorious for miracles she finally went unto her spouse, in the
year of Christ, six hundred and fourscore. Her body was after many years
taken up, and set in a more eminent place of the forsaid Church of Strenshalt,
where before she lay buried, whereat it pleased God to work many miracles.

G The sixteenth Day.
AT Aberdine in Scotland the depositio^ of S. Bean Confessor and Bishop of the
Mart. Romans 10. ^lola^. i(...) (...) it. ad vsuar. ex vet. manuscr.
same Sea, whose wonderful holiness of life, together with the Miracles he
wrought both alive and dead, have in times past been famous throughout the
Christian world, but especially in Scotland and Ireland, where also many goodly
Churches and Altars have been erected and dedicated in his honor.

THE same day at Dormundcaster-Monastery two miles from Peterburrow in
Northa^ptonshire, *
the Commemoration of S. Tibbe Virgin and Anchoresse, who descended of De hac
vid. l. manuscript. de vit. SS. Mulier. Angl. page 177. Regist. Eccles.
Petribur.
a noble blood in our Island, and Kinswoma^ to the Saints Kinisdred and
Kiniswide, forsook the pleasures of the world, and became an Anchoresse for
the love of Christ, living a most strict and severe kind of reclused life in
great holiness and sanctimony until her dying day, which happened about the
year of Christ, six hundred threescore and nine, and was buried with her
forsaid Kinswomen at Dormundcaster.

A The seventeenth Day.
AT VVimborne in Dorcetshire the Commemoration *
of S. Tetta Abbess, sister to Cuthredus King of the VVestsaxons, who
forsaking Rodulph. Monac. in vita S. Liobae apud Sur. to. 5. 28. Sept. Wion
lib. 4. lig. vitae. Vita S. Bonifac. Episcop. Mogunt. et Germ. Apost.
the vanities of the world, and receiving the holy veyle of Chastity in the
Monastery of VVimborne aforsaid, was after the death of S. Cuthberge foundreste
thereof, made Abbess of the same place, where in very great sanctimony of life,
and observance of monastical discipline, she gave up her blessed soul to rest,
about the year of Christ, seven hundred and six. There is a letter yet extant
written by S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz to this S. Tetta, for the sending of
the Virgins Tecla, Lioba, Agatha, and others out of her Monastery into Germany,
in the beginning of that Primitive Church, to be made Abbesses and directresses
of diverse new Monasteryes, which S. Boniface aforsaid had erected in that
Country.

B The eighteenth Day.
AT Heydelmayne in Franconia the Depositio^ of S. VVinibald Abbot and
Confessor, Sonue to S. Richard King of the English, who going over into the
Low Countries and Germany with S. Boniface his V(...)cle, Democh. l. 2. de
sacrif. Miss. Petr-Cratep. de Epis. Germ. Mola^. in Ind. SS. Belgij. Wion et
alij hac die.
Archbishop of Mentz and Apostle of the Germans, was by him ordained Abbot of a
Monastery which himself had there founded in the same Province, called
Heydelmayne; which when he had governed for ten years in great sanctity of
life, glorious for miracles and other renowned virtues, he ended his blessed
days in rest, in the year of Christ, seven hundred and threescore, and was
buried in the same Monastery, with this Epitaph engraven on his tomb.

Hic VVinibaldus Richardi. silius almus,
Qui Regnu^ Angloru^ (...)ox linquens, hoc Monachoru^
Claustrum fundauit, Benedictique dicauit
Nomine, septingento quinquagesimoque anno.
His body was afterward translated to Eyst in Germany, and there interred with
his brother S. VVillebald, where it is kept with great Veneration.

C The ninteenth Day.
AT VVirtzburgh in the higher Germany the Commemoration of S. Marcharius Abbot *
and Confessor, who borne in Scotland Io. Trit. Chron. Hirsaug. Arnol.
of a worthy family, and taking upon him a Monastical habit in the same
Kingdom, went over into France, and thence into Germany, and was ordained
Abbot there of Wio^ in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vitae.
an ancient Monastery in the forsaid City of VVirtzburgh, where in very great
sanctity of life, renowned for miracles, he ended his blessed days in peace,
about the year of Christ, one thousand one hundred and forty. Among other his
Miracles one is recounted, that sitting at a banquet, he turued wine into
water, to the astonishment of all the behoulders there present.

D The twentieth Day.
IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Comogel Abbot and Confessor, whose holy *
life and doctrine have been famous in times Vita S. Columb. apud Bedam tom. 3.
Wio^ l. 3. lig. (...)ae in not ad Mart. Bened.
past in the Kingdom of Ireland, especially for the reformation and observance
of Monastical discipline. He was Abbot of the great and ancient Monastery of
Benchor in Ireland, and master to the famous S. Columbane of that Nation,
whom he instructed in all kind of good learning and other virtues, before his
sending into France and Italy. And when he had governed the same Monastery for
many years, full of sanctity and venerable old age, he finally gave up his
soul to rest in our Lord, about the year of Christ, six hundred and four.

E The one and twentieth Day.
AT Dormundcaster two miles from Peterburrow in Northamptonshire, the
Commemoration *
of S. Edburge Virgin and Abbess daughter to Penda the Pagan King of the
Chronog. Britan. fol. 276. Arnol. Wio^. l. 4 lig. vita.
Mercians, who contemning all worldly and temporal pleasures, became a
Religious woman in the Monastery of Dormundcaster aforsaid, under the care of
S. Kinneburge her sister; after whose death, she being chosen Abbess, governed
the same in all sanctimony of life and other virtues, until her dying day,
which happened about the year of Christ, six hundred and fourscore, and was
buried in the same place near to her said sister. This holy woman is different
from the other three of the same Name, whose festival days are celebrated
upon In vita S. Edburgae Abbatiss. Thanat. insulae 13. Dece^b.
the fifteenth of June, eighteenth of July, and thirteenth of December. And
besides these, there was another Edburge also, Virgin and Abbess, daughter to
Ethelnulph King of the West saxons, who governed the Monastery of holy Virgins
at Winchester in Hampshire, full of renowned holiness and same about the year
of Christ, eight hundred and threescore.

F The two and twentieth Day.
AT Barking in Essex the Commemoratio^ *
of S. Hildelide Virgin and Abbess, who for her great virtue and sanctimony of
life Ve^. Bed. l. 4. c. 20. Io. Trit. l. 3. c. 121. Wion in append. ad lib. 3.
lig. vita. Rob. Bu(...). in eius vita l. M. S. page 183.
was made Abbess of the Monastery of holy Virgins at the forsaid town of
Barking, and succeeded in that office S. Edilburge, inter to to S. Erconwald
Bishop of London, by whom the said Monastery was crected: where in the
exercise of all kind of virtue and obserua^ce of Monastical discipline,
renowned for miracles, she ended her blessed days, about the year of Christ,
scaue^ hundred. There is a story recorded, how that three blind women on a time
came to this said Monastery of Barking to beseech the help and patronage of
three holy Virgins there desceased, and all famous for holiness, to wit, the
forsaid Edilburge VVulfhild, and this our Hildelide, and there praying a long
time, they were at last restored to their sight; but each one by the
intercession of that particular Saint, to whom she prayed. This Monastery was
afterward in the Danish persecution burned to the ground, defaced and spoiled,
to the great lamentation or all England.

C The three and twentieth Day.
IN Wales the Commemoration of S. Inthware Virgin and martyr, who being
descended of the ancient British blood in *
our Island, lived a most godly and virtuous life in her Fathers house, being
wholly occupied Eius vita habetur fi sius in l. M. S. de vit. SS. Mulier. Angl.
a Rob. Buckl. collect. ex antiq. Monum. Cambriae
in intertayning and serving of pilgrims and strangers that resorted thither.
After her Fathers death, she being envied for her holiness of life by her
stepmother, was by a malicious devise of hers, accused to her own brother,
called Bana, to be an harlot: whereupon in this rage, he slew her with his own
hands, as she came one day from the Church. Whose innocence was presently
testified by this wonderful miracle; that having her head cut of, she
instantly with her own hands took it up from the ground, and carried it to
the Church from whence she came: as also in the same place where she was
beheaded, there sprang up a fountain of clear water, very sovereign for many
diseases. She suffered about the year of Christ, seven hundred. About which
time also there lived three sisters of hers, all very holy women, called
Edware, VVilgith, and Sidewell; who as they were conjoined to her by neernes of
blood and birth; so where they also united in singular sanctimony of life.

F The four and twentieth Day.
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Ruthius Monk and Confessor, who *
being an Irishman by birth, descended of a Hect. Boet. de gest. Sco. Io. Lest.
Episco. Ross. l. 4. hist. Sco. page 150.
noble blood in the same Kingdom, became a disciple first to S. Columbe the
Great of that Nation, and afterward coming over with him into Scotland, was
his coadiutor in the Conversion of the Pictes to the Christian faith, that in
those days inhabited that Kingdom: where after the reducing of many souls
from their errors, to the knowledge and worship of Christ, famous for sanctity
of life and grace of Miracles he finally reposed in our Lord, about the year
of Christ 588.

B The five and twentieth Day
IN the Monastery of S. Meginhard in the higher Germany the Commemoration *
of S. Gregory Priest and Confessor, Son to King Edward of the VVestsaxons,
surnamed Io. Trit. de vir. Illu. ord. D. Bened. l. 3. c. 225.
the Elder, and brother to the holy Virgin S. Edburge of Wilton, who being
admonished by an Angel, forsook both Country and friends, in the troublesome
time of his Fathers reign and incursions of the Danes, and went over into
Germany to S. Eberhard Arnol. Wio^. l. 4 lig. vitae. page 510.
a monk then famous in those parts both for sanctity of life and gift of
prophesy; unto whom he associating himself in the forsaid Monastery of S.
Meginhard, became a Monk in the same place: where in very great holiness of
life, he ended his blessed days, about the year of Christ, nine hundred
forty and five.

C The six and twentieth Day.
AT VVhitby in Yorkshire the Commemoration of Blessed Ethelfrede Virgin, *
daughter to Oswy King of the Northumbers, Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. Wio^ l.
4 lig. vitae.
who contemning all worldly pomp and tra^sitory glory, took a Religious
habit, together with the holy veyle of Chastity, in a Monastery of the same
Province, called afterward VVhitby, which her said Father had there newly
founded; where under the Government of S. Congilla, that was then ordained
Abbess thereof, in all humility and sanctimony of life, she made a holy end,
and gave up her soul to her heavenly spouse, about the year of Christ, six
hundred and seauenty.

D The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Gallinaro a Village in the Kingdom *
of Naples, the Commemoration of S. Gerard Confessor, who being an Englishman
by birth, and descended of a Registr. Eccl. Gallinar. and Inscript. ipsius
sepulchri ibidem sculpt.
a worthly parentage in our Island, took upon him for the love of God a long
peregrination to visit the holy Sepulcher of Christ in Jerusalem; which when
he had performed and returning back by Italy, where at that time the plague
sorely raged, in very great sanctity of life, gave up his soul to rest in our
Lord. His body is until this day kept with great honor and veneration, in the
forsaid Village of Gallinaro, whereat in testimony of his holy life, miracles
are yet daily wrought: So as the place is thereby become a great pilgrimage,
especially for the Neapolitans and people of Calabria.

E The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Elphege Bishop and Martyr, who being Sur.
to. 5. 19. Agr. Pol. Vir. l. 7. hist.
first Abbot of a Monastery near unto Bath in Somersetshire, was thence
promoted to the bishopric of Winchester and lastly to Canterbury. He was
slain at Greenwich in Kent in the second Danish persecution by those barbarous
10. Capg. and Breu. sec. vsu^ Sarum Pet. in Cat. Osb. in cius vita. Mart. Romans
19. Apr. Maurol. and Wio^ hae die.
people in defense of his Church of Canterbury, and for not delivering them
three thousand Marks of money belonging to the said Church, in the year of
Christ, one thousand and twelve. His body was first brought to London, and
afterward on this day solemnly translated to Canterbury, and there placed in
his own Cathedral Church of that City, where it was wont in Catholic time
to be kept with great honor and Veneration.

F The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury the Passion of S. Thomas Archbishop of the same Sea, Legate
Apostolical and Primate of England, who Sur. to. 5. hac die Breuiar. sec. vsum
Sarum Mart. Romans Eius vit. habetur in hist. quadrip, impress. Parisijs an. Dom.
1495.
for defense of the liberties of the Church, being many ways injured by King
Henry the second, was forced to appeal to Pope Alexander the third; of whom
being acquitted of all the calumniations and slanders laid to his charge, was
again restored to his Bishopric, but within a while after being violently
oppressed by some of the forsaid Kings servants, to wit, Sir William Tracy,
Sir Reynold Fitzvrson, Sir Hugh Moruill, Richard Breton, and others, was slain
in his own Church of Canterbury, in the time of Euensonge, before the high
Altar, in the year Staplet. de trib. Thomis and omnes auj hac di^.
of Christ, one thousand one hundred threescore and eleven. Whose martyrdom is
here described in these old verses:

Richardus Breton, nec non Moruillius Hugo,
Guillelmus Tracy, Reginaldus Filius-vrsi,
Thomam Martyrium secere subire beatum.
Fortis and inuictus his quattuor ensibus ictus
Primas Anglorum Thomas petit alta polorum.
His body was shortly afterward put into a goodly shrine, beset with costly
jewels and precious stones, and placed in his own Nicol. Sand. l. 1. de
schis. Angl.
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, whereat infinite miracles were wrought; and so
continued until the time of King Henry the eight, by whose commandment the
said monument was utterly destroyed, and his sacred Relics burned to ashes,
in the year of Christ 1538.

G The thirtith Day.
IN the Abbey of Flay the Commemoration of S. Eustach Abbot and Confessor, *
who for his singular virtue and innocence Matthew. West. in Hist. maiori ad an.
1200.
of life, being first a Monk, was ordained Abbot of the forsaid Monastery of
Flay. In which dignity he so excelled, in all kind of profund humility, charity
to poor Orphans, and other eminent virtues, especially in the exercise and
observance of Monastical Wio^ in append. ad lig. 3. lig. vitae.
discipline, that his name deserved to be famous throughout our whole Island, in
former Catholic times. He died about the year of Christ, one thousand and
two hundred. At whose body it pleased God afterward, in testimony of his holy
life, to work miracles.

A The one and thirtith Day
IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. *
Eternane Monk and Confessor, Nephew to S. Columbe the Great of Ireland, who
contemning all worldly honors and prefermentes, 10. Lest. lib. 4. de gest.
Sco. Wion in append ad lib. 3. lig. vitae.
took a Religious habit, and became a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict in a
Monastery in the Island of Hoy by Scotland, under the government of his forsaid
uncle S. Columbe; where in all kind of sanctity of life, he ended his blessed
days, about the year of Christ, five hundred fourscore and eighteen. Whose
memory has continued famous both in Scotland where he lived, and in Ireland
where he was borne, even until this last age.

Laus Deo and Beatiss. Virg. Mariae.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE SAINTS NAMES CONTAINED in the former Martyrologe.
A
AAron Martyr 1. July. Acca B. 19. Feb. Adaman Ab. 2. Sept. Adaman Confess. 31.
Ianuar. Adelme B. 31. Mar. 15. May. Adalbert conf. 25. June. Adelhere Mart. 5.
June. Adlar Mart. 20. Apr. 5. June. Adrian Abbot. 9. Ianuar. Adrian Priest 1.
April. Adolph Mart. 5. June. Agatha Virgin 12. June. Agatha Queen 8. December.
Agnes Virg. Mart. 28. August. Aidan Bishop 31. August. Alban Protomart. 16.
Apr. 16. May and 22. June. Albuine Bishop 26. October. Albuine Abbot 19. May.
Alkmund Mart. 19. March. Alexander Conf. 6. August. Alfred K. of Northu^b. 15.
Ian. Alfred K. of Westsa. 28. Oct. Algiue Queen 5. May. Alice Prioresse 24.
August. Alnoth Mart. 27. Febr. Alred Abbot 16. March. Alricke Ermite 2. August.
Although Abbot 5. September. Amnichade Conf. 30. Ian. Amphibale Mart. 25. June.
Anselme B. 21. Apr. 5. July. Arbogastus Bishop 21. July. Archibald Abbot 27.
March. Ardwyne Conf. 25. Oct. Aristobulus Bish. 15. Mar. Arnulph Conf. 22.
August. Arwaldi martyrs 28. Ian. Assaph Bishop 1. May. Audry vide Ediltrude.
Augulus mart. 7. Febr. Augustine Bishop 26. May.
B
BAldred Conf. 29. March. Barucke Conf. 29. Nou. Bather Conf. 11. September. Bean
Bishop 16. December. Beatus Conf. 9. May. Bid Priest 10. and 27. May. Bega Virgin
6. Sept. Benedict Abbot 12. Ian. Beno Conf. 14. Ian. Berectus Conf. 24. Febr.
Bernard Conf. 14. Sept. Bertelme Ermite 12. Aug. Bertuine Bishop 11. Nouemb.
Birine Bishop 3. December. Birstan Bishop 22. April. Boniface B. 5. June. 1.
Nouem. Bosa Bishop 9. March. Boso Mart. 5. June. Botulph Abbot 17. June. Boysil
Abbot 23. Ian. Bra^dan Abb. 16. May 14. Iun. Brigit Virg. 1. Febr. Brituald of
Canterb. 9. Ian. Brituald of VVinch. 22. Ian. Burchard B. 2. Feb. 14. Oct.
Burgundosora Abbess 3. Apr. Burien Virg. 29. May.
C
CAdocke mart. 24. Ian. Canicke Abbot 11. October Canoch Conf. 11. Feb. Ceadwall
King 20. Apr. Ced Bishop 7. Ian. Celsus Bishop 6. Apr. Ceolfride Abbot 25.
Sept. Ceolnulph King 14. Mar. Chad Bishop 2. Mar. Chinede Ermite 10. Dec.
Chineburge Queen 15. Sept. Christian Bish. 18. Mar. Christian Virg. 26. July.
Christine Virg. 5. December. Clare Mart. 4. Nouemb. Clintanke K. mart. 19. Aug.
Cogan Abbot 29. Sept. Colman Bishop 13. October. Colman mart. 8. July. Columbe
Abbot 9. June. Columbane Abbot 21. Nou. Columbane Monk 28. June. Conine Abbot
6. October. Comogel Abbot 20. December. Co^ception of our B. Lady 8. De. Congellus
Abbot 6. December. Congilla Abbess 9. Nou. Constantine Emp. 21. May. Conwalline
Abbot 5. October. Conwan Conf. 14. Feb. Cordula Virg. 22. Oct. Chroniacke Conf.
4. Ian. Cuthbert B. 20. Mar. 4. Sept. Cuthberge Abbess 31. Aug. Cymbert Bish.
21. Febr. Cyhthacke Conf. 20. Sept.
D
DAmianus Conf. 26. May Daniel. B. 1. December. David Bish. 1. March. David Conf.
15. July. Decuman Mart. 27. Aug. Deicola Abbot 18. Ian. Deifer Conf. 7. March.
Deusdedit Bishop 30. June. Diman Conf. 19. July. Disibode Bish. 8. June.
Domitius Conf. 3. Aug. Donatus Bish. 22. October. Dronston Conf. 11. July. Drusa
Mart. 5. Febr. Dubritius B. 6. May. 14. Sept. Dunstan B. 19. May. 7. Sept.
Dunstan Abbot 18. June. Duuianus Conf. 8. April. Dympna Virg. Mart. 15. May.
E
EAdgith Queen 15. July Eadsine Bish. 29. October. Eadware Virg. 23. December.
Eanslede Queen 24. Nou. Eanswide Abbess 31. Aug. 12. Sept. Eatta Bishop 26.
October. Ebba Mart. 25. August. Ebba Virg. 2. April. Eboam Martyr 5. June. Edbert
Bish. 6. May. Edburge of Wilson 15. June. Edburge of Edburton 18. July Edburge
of Kent 13. Dec. Edburge of Peterb. 21. Dec. Edelfled Abbess 8. Febr. Edgar
King 25. May. Edilburge Queen 9. July. Edilburge of Brige 7. July. Edilburge
of Barking 11. Oct. Edilhun Conf. 21. Sept. Ediltrude Q 23. Iun. 17. Oct.
Edilwald Bish. 12 Febr. Edilwald Ermite 11. June. Edith of Polleswor. 14. May.
Edith of Wilton 16. Sept. 3. Nouemb. Edmund King Mart. 10. June. 20. Nouemb.
Edmund Bishop 16. Nouemb. Edward K. mart. 18. March. 20. June. Edward K. Conf.
15. Ian. 10. October. Edwold Conf. 29. Aug. 28. Nouemb. Edwyn King mart. 4.
October. Egbert King 23. March. Egbert Abbot of Scot. 24. Apr. Egbert Abb. of
Eulda 26. Nou. Egelnoth Bish. 30. October. Egwine Bish. 11. Ian. Elerius Abbot 3.
June. Eleutherius Conf. 3. June Elsled Virg. 13. April. Elsled Abbess 20. Ian.
Elfred Virg. 12. December. Eloquius Conf. 8. Oct. 3. Dec. Elphage B. of Winchest.
1. Sept. Elphege B. of Cant. 19. Apr. 28. December. Eluane Bishop 1. Ianuar.
Emerita Virg. Mart. 4. Dec. Engelmund Mart. 21. June. Eoglodius Conf. 25. Ian.
Erconwald B. 30. Ap. 14. No. Ercongote Abbess 7. July. Ermenburge Queen 19.
No. Ermenild Queen 13. Febr. Erwald Mart. 8. July. Eschillus Mart. 10. Apr.
Ethbyn Abbot 19. October. Ethelburge Queen 8. Sept. Ethelbert King Conf. 24.
Feb. Ethelbert King Mart. 23. May. Ethelbrit Mart. 17. October.
Ethelred
Ethelsrede Virg. 26. December. Ethelgiue Abbess 9. December. Ethelnulph King. 14.
Apr. Ethelred K. Mart. 23. Apr. Ethelred K. Abbot 4. May. Ethelwide Queen 20.
July. Ethelwold K. Mart. 6. Apr. Ethelwold Bish. 1. Aug. Ethelwyne Bish. 29.
June. Eter^ane Conf. 31. Dec. Etto Bishop 10. July. Eustach Conf. 30. December.
Ewaldi Mart. 3. October.
F
FAgan Conf. 8. August. Felix Bishop 8. March. Fethno Conf. 12. March. Fiaker
Conf. 30. August. Finan Bish. 17. Febr. Florentius Bish. 7. Nouemb. Florentina
Virg. Mart. 6. Dec. Foillan B. 3. Sept. 31. O^^ob. Fremund K. Mart. 24. March.
11. May Fridegand Conf. 17. July. Frideswide Virg. 19. October. Frithstan Bishop
9. April. Frodoline Abbot 6. March. Fugatius Conf. 26. May. Fulke Conf. 18.
Nouem. Furseus Abbot 25. Febr. 4. March.
G
GAllanus Conf. 7. Dec. Gallus Abbot 16. October. Gerard Conf. 27. December.
Gereberne Mart. 15. May. German Bish. 2. May. George Mart. 23. Apr. Geruadius
Bish. 11. December. Gilbert Bish. 11. Aug. Gilbert Conf. 4. Febr. Gildas Abbot
29. Ianuar. Gislen Conf. 9. October. Godricke Ermite 21. May. Goluin Bishop. 1.
July. Gotebald Bish 5. Apr. Gregory Pope 12. March. Gregory Conf. 25. December.
Grimbald Abbot 8. July Gudwall Bishop. 22. Feb. 6. June. Guier Conf. 4. Apr.
Gunderhere Mart. 5. June. Guthagon Conf. 3. July. 1. Oct. Guithelme Bish. 8.
Ianuar. Guthlacke Conf. 11. Apr.
H
HAmund Bishop 22. March. Hamunt Deacon. 5. June. Harrucke Bishop. 15. July
Hedde Bish. 7. July. Heiu. Virg. 30. May. Helena Empress. 7. Febr. 18. Aug.
Henry ^rmite 16. Ian. Henry of Opslo 19. Ian. Henry of VVinchest. 6. Aug. Henry
King 22. May. Herebert Conf. 20. March. Hereswide Queen 23. Sept. Higbald
Abbot 22. Sept. Hilda Ab. 17. Nou. 15. Dec. Heldelide Abbess 22. December.
Hildebrand Mart. 5. June. Himeline Conf. 10. March. Honorius Bish. 30. Sept.
Hugh Mart. 27. July* Hugh B. of Ely 9. August. Hugh B. of Lincoln 17. Nou. 7.
October. Hugh B. of Roane 12. Apr. Humbert Bish. 20. Nouemb.
I
IEron Mart. 17. August. Inas King 6. Febr. Indractus Mart. 5. Febr. Inthware
Virg. 23. December. John of Beuerley 7. May. John Conf. 27. June. John Abbot 17.
July. John of Le^is 5. Febr. John of Birlington 10. October. John of Constance
26. Febr. John of Saltzburge 18. Febr. John of Michelmburge 10. No. John of Ely
19. June. Jonas Abbot 28. May. Joseph of Arimathia 27. July. Iotaneus Conf. 26.
Sept. Isenger Mart. 21. March. Ithimar Bish. 10. June. Iudocus Ermite 9.
^anuar. 13. December. Julius Mart. 1. July. Iuo Bish. 24. April. Iustus Bishop.
10. Nouemb. Justinian Mart. 23. Aug.
K
KEnelme King 17. July. Kentigerne Abb. 13. Ian. Keyna Virgin 8. October. Kilian
Mart. 13. Febr. 8. July. Kilian Con^. 13. Nouemb. Kinisdred Virgins 6. Mar.
Kinis^ide
Kinneburge Queen 15. Sept. Kortil Bish. 28. April.
L
LAnfranke Bishop. 24. March. 3. July. Laurence Bish. of Canterb. 2. Febr.
Laurence B. of Dublyn 14. Nouemb. Lebuine Bish. 25. June. 12. Nouemb. Lefrone
Abbess 3. July. Leofgar Mart. 16. June. Leuine Bish. 27. June. 12. Nouemb.
Lewyne Virg. Mart. 24. July. Liephard Mart. 4. Febr. Lioba Abbess 28. Sept.
Luane Abbot 12. July. Lucius King 3. December. Lullus Bish. 26. October. Lupus
Bishop. 29. July.
M
MAcharius Abbot 19. December. Macloue B. 15. Nouemb. Maglore Con^. 24. October.
Maine Abbot 15. June. Malachy Bish. 5. Nou. Malcaline Abbot 21. Ian. Malcus
Bish. 10. Aug. Malcolme King 2. June. Marcellus Bish. 4. Sept. Marchelme Conf.
14. July. Margaret Prioresse 15. Aug. Margaret Queen 10. June. 16. Nouemb.
Marianus Conf. 17. April. Martyrs at Lichfield 2. Ian. Martyrs at Benchor 16.
June. Martyrs at Bardney 26. Mar. Maude Queen 7. August. Maxentia Virg. 24.
October. Mechtild Virg. 12. Apr. Meliorus Mart. 3. ^an. Mellitus Bishop 24. Apr.
Mellon Bish. 22. October. Menigold Mart. 9. Feb. 15. June. Meresine Conf. 17.
Ian. Merwyne Virg. 13. May. Midane Conf. 26. April. Midwyne Conf. 1. Ianuar.
Milburge Virg. 23. Febr. Mildred Virg. 20. Feb. 13. Iul. Milwide Virg. 17. Ian.
Mimborine Abbot 14. December. Modane Conf. 26. Apr. Modwene Abbess 5. July. Mono
Mart. 18. October. Motiser Conf. 29. October.
N
NEoth Conf. 31. July. Ninian B. 16. Sept.
O
OBodius Ermite 25. Apr. Oda Virg. 27. Nou. Odilia Virg. 18. July. Odo Bish. 4.
July. Odwald Abbot 7. December. Ortrude Virg. 22. June. Osith Virg. 7. October.
Osmane Virg. 22. Nouem. Osmund B. 16. July 4. Dec. Oswald King 20. June 5. Aug.
Oswald Bish. 28. Febr. 15. April 15. October. Oswyn King Mart. 11. March 20.
August. Oswyn Conf. 18. April. Otger Deacon 10. Sept. Oudocke Bishop 2. July
Owen Conf. 29. July
P
Palladius Bish. 27. Ian. Pa^dwine Virg. 26. Aug. Paternus Conf. 10. Apr.
Pattone Bish. 30. Mar^h. Patricke Bishop 17. March. Patroke Bishop. 4. June.
Paul Apost. 25. Ian. 29. June* Pauline Bish. 10. October. Peter Apost. 29. June.
Peter abbot 6. Ian. Piran Conf. 2. May. Plechelme Bish. 15. July.
Q
QVemburg Virg. 12. Sept. Queran Abbot 9. Sept.
R
REmigius Bish. 12. May. Richard King 7. Febr. Richard of Chichester 3. Apr.
16. June. Richard of Calabria 21. Aug. Richard Ermite (...). Nouemb. Robert
Bish. 9. October. Robert Abbot 7. June. Roger Bish. 1. October. Romwald Bish. 24.
June 27. October. Ru^in Martyr 1. June Rumbald Conf. 28. June. Ruthius Conf. 24.
December.
SAdoch Conf. 1. Apr. Sampson Bish. 28. July. Scandalaus Conf. 5. May. Sebbe
King 29. August. Senan Conf. 29. April. Sethrid Virg. 10. Ian. Sewall Bishop
^8. May. Sexburge Virg. 6. July Sexulse Bish. 27. ^ebr. Sidwell Virg. 23.
April. Sigene Abbot 7. April. Sigebert King 27. Sept. Sig^ride Bish. 15. Feb.
Sop^ias Bish. 24. Ian. Soldier Mart. 22. June. Socrates Mart. 17. Sept.
Stephen
Switbert Bish. 1. March. Swithin Bishop 2. and 15. July Sunaman Mart. 25.
July. Simon Apost. 28. October. Simon Conf. 16. May. Syra Virg. 23. October.
T
Ta^win Bish. 30. July. Tancone Bish. 16. Febr. Tathar Conf. 23. Nouemb. Tecla
Abbess 15. October. Telean Bish. 25. Nou. Tetta Abbess 17. December. Theodore
Bish 19. Sept. Theorithgid Virg. 26. Ian. Thomas of Canterb. 7. July. 29.
December. Thomas of Hereford 25. Aug. 2. October. Thomas of Northum. 17. Aug.
Thomas Monk 16. Aug. Tigernake Bish. 5. April. Totnan Mart. 8. July. Tibbe
Virg. 16. December. Trans^. of 11000. Vir. 17. May
V
VIgane Conf. 13. March. Vintruge Mart. 5. June. Vl^ade Mart. 1. June. Vlsricke
Ermite 20. Feb. Vl^ride Bishop 18. Ian. Vltan Abbot 1. May. Vnaman Mart. 25.
July. Vodine Bishop. 23. July. Vrsula Virgin 21. Oct. Vulganius B. 2. Nouemb.
W
VVAccare 5. June. Walburge Virg. 27. Apr. 4. August. Walter Abbot 3. May.
Walter Mart. 5. June. Wasnulph Conf. 1. October. Weed Abbess 2. December.
Wendelin Abbot 20. October. Wenlocke Abbot 3. March. Wenefride Virg. 3. Nou.
Wereburge Virg. 3. Febr. Weren^ride 14. Aug. 13. Sep. Wiaman Mart. 25. July.
Wigbert Conf. 13. Aug. Wilfride of York 24. April. 12. October. Wilfride of
Worcester 10. Febr. Wilfred Queen 22. July. Wilgise Conf. 5. March. Wilgith
Virg. 23. December. Willeicke Conf. 2. March. Willebrord Bish. 19. October. 7.
Nouemb. Willebald Bish. 7. July. Willehade Bish. 8. Nouem. Wilhere Mart. 5.
June. William of York 8. Ianuar. 8. June. William of Rochester 23. May William
of Norwich 25. March. William of Tire 11. Feb. Winfride Abbot 6. March.
Winibald Abbot 24. Sept. 10. December. Winocke Abbot 8. Sept. 6. Nouemb. Wolstan
Bishop. 19. Ianuar. 7. June. Wolstan Mart. 31. May. Wulf hild Abbess 9. Sept.
Wulsy Abbot 26. Sept. Wyre Bishop 8. May.
Y
YVVy Deacon 6. October.
THE AVTHORS Alleged in this Book, out of whom the former Saints Lives are
gathered.
Abbo Floriacensis Adam Bremensis Ado. Alanus Copus Albertus Crantzius Albertus
Stadensis Albinus Flaccus Almannus Monachus Aloysius Lippomannus Alredus
Rhieuallensis Andreas Leucander. Annals Baroniani Annals Heluetiorum Antonius
Demochares Arnoldus Mirmannus Arnoldus Wion Asser Meneuensis Aymo Baronius
Card. Beda. Bernardus Bernardus Guido Breuiarium Cameracense Breuiarium
Curiense Breuiarium Gandauense Breuiarium Moguntiuum Breuiarium Saltzburgense
Breuiarium Sarum Breuiarium Sueticum Carolus Sigonius Chronicon Cameracense
Chronicon Cluniacense Chronograph. Britanniae Chronicon Hyberniae Concilium
Tridentinum Continuator Bedae Cornelius Tacitus Egilwardus Monachus Extrauagans
Xysti PP. 4. Felix Crolandiensis Folcardus Doroborniensis Franciscus Cattanius
Franciscus Belleforestius Franciscus Maurolycus Gaufredus Monumetensis Georgius
Lilius Gerardus Liegh Gildas Sapiens Gotzelinus Morinensis Gregorius Magnus
Gregorius Turonensis Gulielmus Eysengrenius Gulielmus Malmesburie^sis Gulielmus
Neubrigensis Gulielmus Tyrius Gulielmus Ramesius Hector Boethius Hector
Deidonatus Helmodius Presbyter Hermannus Contractus Herebertus Rosweyde
Hieronymus Platus Historia Quadripartita Historia antiqua Scotorum Hucbaldus
Monachus Humfridus Lhuide Iacobus Meyrus Ioannes Capgrauius Ioannes Frosyard
Ioannes de Kirkstat Ioannes Lesleius Ioannes Mayor Ioannes Magnus Ioannes
Molanus Ioannes Nauclerus Ioannes Tritemius Ioannes Rouse Lambertus de Loos
Laurentius Dunelmensis Laurentius Surius Marcellinus Monachus Matthaeus
Parisiensis Mathaeus Westmonaster. Mombritius. Mosander Nicolaus Harpesfield
Nicolaus Sanderus Olaus Magnus Osbertus de Stokes Paulus Diaconus Paulus
Morigia Petrus Blesensis Petrus Cratepolius Petrus Gaselinus Petrus de
Natalibus Petrus Suitor Petrus de Viel Polidorus Virgilius Prosper Aquitanius
Ranulphus Cestrensis Registrum Cantuariense Registrum de Hide Registrum
Lichfeldiense Registrum Lincolniense Registru^ D. Pauli Londine^s. Registrum
Petriburgense Renatus Benedictus Rhenanus Richardus Vitus Rodulphus Agricola
Rodulphus Monachus Rogerus Houeden Romanum Martyrologium Robertus Buckland
Robertus Caenalis Robertus Salopiensis Senatus Brauonius Siluester Giraldus
Sigebertus. Sophronius Speculum Fr. Carmelitaru^ Stephanus Lusinganius Simon
Dunelmensis Theodoretus Thomas Walsingam Turgotus Episcopus Vincentius.
Vsuardus Wernerus Rollewincke
FINIS.
A CATALOGVE OF THOSE WHO HAVE SVFFERED DEATH IN ENGLAND, for defense of the
Catholic Cause, since the year of Christ 1535. and 27. of King HENRY the
VIII. his reign, unto this year 1608.
THE PREFACE
IN the year of our Lord 1530. King Henry the viij. after that he had reigned
22. years in great peace and Io. Sto. in Annal. hoc anno and seque^tibus
prosperity, famous throughout the Christian world, both for Religion,
learning, and prowess, upon displeasure taken against the Popes Holiness, about
his divorce with Queen Catherine his lawful wife; began unfortunately his
breach with the Sea Apostolic, forbidding by Proclamation upon the 19. of
September, all suites to be made to the Court of Rome. etc. And so by little
and little going forward in this course now begun, and being (through evil
Counsel) incited first against the Clergy of England, condemning them in a
Praemunire (for relaxation whereof they Sand. l. 1. de Schism. Ang.
were forced to give him an hundred thousand pounds) and then against the Pope;
at last entitled himself Head of the Church of England, taking upon wholly the
government of all the Ecclesiastical state in his Dominions dissoluing and
suppressing Monasteryes and other Religious places at his pleasure. And
moreover exacting an Oath, under pain of death, of all sorts of subjects,
against their consciences, of this his pretended Supremacy. This forsaid breach
with the Sea of Rome, thus begun, and continued afterward under the raygne of
King Henryes two Children Edward and Elizabeth, holds also until this day in
our Country in their Successor K. James, to the great grief of all the
Christian Catholic world. The names of those, who for refusing the said Oath,
or otherwise resisting this their pretenced Supremacy, have suffered under
these forsaid Princes, are set down as follows, according to the years,
months and days of their deaths.

Under King Henry the VIII.
Anno Christi 1535. Henrici 8. anno 27.
John Houghton Prior of the Carthusians at London. Augustine Webster Prior of
the Carthusians at Exham. Robert Laurence Prior of the Carthusians at Beuall.
These were put to death Nic. Sa^d. lib. 1. de Schism. Ang. pa. 128. 129, 130.
at Tyburne the 29. of April, for denying the Kings Supremacy.
Richard Reynolds Monk of S. Brigits Order of Syon. John Hayle Priest, Vicar
of Thistleworth.
Humsrey Midlemore William Exmew Charterhouse Monks of London, suffered at
Tyburne 18. June.
Sebastian Newdigate
John Rochester James Warnet Carthusians, at York 11. May

Richard Bear Thomas Green John Dauis Thomas Johnson William Greenwood
Charterhouse - Monks died in prison in June and July.
Thomas Scriuan Robert Salt Walter Persons Thomas Reading William Horn
Charterhouse Monk 4. Aug.
John Fisher Card. of S. Vitalis, and Bishop of Ric. Hal. in eius vita.
Staplet. de tribus Thom.
Rochester, at the Tower Hill 22. June. Sir Thomas More Knight, at the
Tower Hill 6. July.
Anno Christi 1536. Henr. 8. 28.
John Pasley Abbot of Whaley Sand. ib. l. 1. page 176. 177.
John Castegate Monk at Lancaster 10. March.

William Haddocke Monk, at Whaley 13. Mar. N. N. Abbot of Sauley N. Astbebe
Monk o^ Geruaux at Lancaster in March.

Robert Hobbes Abbot of VVoborne, together with the Prior of the same
Monastery and a Priest, suffered at VVoborne in Bedfordshire, in March. Doctor
Maccarell with 4. other Priests, at Tyburne 29. March. William Thrust Abbot of
Fountaynes Adam Sodbury Abbot of Geruaux at Tyburne in Iun.
William Would Prior of Birlington N. N. Abbot of Rivers

Anno 1537. Henr. 29.
Antony Brorby of the Order of S. Francis, strangled with his own gildle, at
Sand. ib. page 183. Boucher. de pass. Frat. Fransc. page 8. 13. and 17.
London 19. July. Thomas Cort Franciscan, famished to death in prison 27. July.
Thomas Belcham of the same Order, died in Newgate 3. August.
Anno 1538. Henr. 30.
John Forest Friar obseruant, Confessor to Queen Katherine, in Smithfield 23.
May. Bouch. ibid. and page 26. Sand. ibi.
John Stone an Augustine friar, at Canterbury this year. Two and thirty
Religious Men of the Order of S. Francis being cast into prison for denying the
K. Supremacy, died there through cold, stench, and famine, in Aug. Sept. and
October. N. Crossed Priest Sand l. 1. page 973.
N. Collins Priest at Tyburne.
N. Holland Layman

Anno 1539. Henr. 31.
Adrian Fortescue Thomas Dingley Knights of S. John's of Jerusalem, Sand. pa.
181. 194, 197.
at Tower hill 8. Iul.

Griffith Clarke Priest N. Mayre Monk at S. Thomas Wateringes 8. July.

John Tauers Doctor of divinity John Harris Priest 30. July.

John Rugge William Onion Priests, at Reading, 14. Nouemb.


Hugh Faringdon Abbot of Reading, at Reading 22. Nouemb. Richard Whiting Abbot
of Glaste^bury John Thorn Roger James Monks of Glaste^bury at Glastenb. 22
Nouem.


John Beck Abbot of Colchester, at Colchester 1. December.
Anno 1540. Henr. 32.
William Peterson Sand. ib. page 216. 217.
William Richardson Priests, at Calais 10. April.
Thomas Abell Edward Powell Priests, in Smithfield 30. July.
Rich. Fetherstone
Laure^ce Cock Prior of Dancaster William Horn Monk Edmund Bromley Priest
Giles Horn Gentleman. at Tyburne 4. August.
Clement Philpot Gentleman. Darby Genninges Layman Robert Bird Layman

Anno 1541. Henr. 33.
David Genson Knight of the Rhodes. 1. Sa^d. page 180
July.
Anno 1543. Henr. 35.
GErman Gardener Priest John Lark Priest Sand. page 227.
John Ireland P(...)est at Tyburne 7. March.
Thomas Asbey Layman

Under Queen Elizabeth.
Anno 1570. Elizabethae 12. Nicol. Sander l. 7. de visib. Monarc. page 734. and
736.

John Felton Gentleman, in S. Paul's Churhyard 8. August.
Anno 1571. Elizabeth. 13.
John Story Doctor of the Canon Law, at Tyburne 1. June.
Anno 1573. Elizabeth. 15. Concert. Eccles. Ang.

THomas Woodhouse Priest, at Tyburne 19. June.
Anno 1577. Elizab. 19.
CVthbert Main the first Priest of the Seminaryes, Concert. Eccles. Angl.
at Launston in Cornwall 29. Nouemb.
Anno 1578. Elizab. 20. Concert. ibid.

John Nelson Priest, at Tyburne 3. February. Thomas Sherwood Gentleman 7. Febr.
Anno 1581. Elizab. 23.
Everard Hanse Priest, at Tyburne 31. July. Concert. Eccles. Ang. Sand. l. 3.
de schism. Angl.
Edmund Campian Priest of the Society of Jesus. Alexander Briant Priest of the
same Society of Jesus. at Tyburne 1. Dec.
Raph Sherwyn Priest

Anno 1582. Elizab. 24.
John Pa(...)e Priest, at Chelemsford in Essex 2. April. Thomas Ford Priest.
John Shert Priest. Concert. Eccles. Angl. et Sand. vbi supra.
at Tyburne 28. May.
Robert Johnson Priest.
Thomas Cottam Priest of the Society of Jesus. William Filby Priest. at Tiburne
30. May
Luke Kirby Priest. Laurence Johnson Priest
William Lacy Priest Richard Kirkman Priest at York 22. August.
James Tompson Priest, at York in Nouemb.
Anno 1583. Elizab. 25.
Richard Thirkill Priest, at York 29. May. John Slade Layma^, at Winchest. 30.
Oct. Concert. Eccles. Angl. et Sand. pa. 465. 466
John Body Layman, at Andouer 2. Nouemb. William Heart Priest, at York. James
Laburne Gentleman, at Lancaster.
Anno 1584. Elizab. 26.
William Carter Layman, at Tyburne 11. Ian. Concert. Eccles. Ang. pa. 127.
134. 140. 143. 156. cum Sand. vbi supra.
George Haddocke Priest John Mundine Priest James Fen Priest at Tyburne 12. Feb.
Thomas Emersord Priest John Nutter Priest
James Bele Priest John Finch Layman at Lancaster. 20. April.

Richard White Layman, at VVrixam in Wales 18. October.
Anno 1585. Elizab. 27.
THomas Aufield Priest. Thomas VVebley Layman. at Tyburne Concert. Eccles. Ang.
pa. 203. Sa^d. page 485 499.
6. July.

Hugh Taylour Priest Marmaduke Bows Layman at York.

Margaret Clitherow Citizen of York, at York in March.
Anno 1586. Elizab. 28.
EDward Transam Priest Nicol. VVoodfine Priest at Tyburne 21. Concert. Eccles.
Ang. pa. 204. 410 Sand. pa. 499.
January.

Richard Sergeant Priest William Tompson Priest at Tyburne 20. April.

John Addams Priest John Low Priest at Tyburne 8. October.
Robert Debdale Priest
Robert Anderton Priest William Marsden Priest at Tyburne.

Francis Ingleby Priest, at York. Stephen Rousam Priest, at Gloucester. John
Finglow Priest.
Anno 1587. Elizab. 29.
MAry Queen of Scotland, at Foderinghay-Castle 8. Febr. Concert. Eccles. Ang.
pa. 207.
Thomas Pilchard Priest at Dorcester in March. John Sands Priest, at
Gloucester. John Hamley Priest, at Chard. Alexander Crow Priest, at York.
Robert Sutton Priest, at Stafford. Edmund Sikes Priest. Galriel Thimbleby
Priest. George Douglas Priest.
Anno 1588. Elizab. 30.
VVlliam Deane Pr. Didacus de Yepes Episcop. Taracon. de persec. Angl. Hispani^e
Henry VVebly P. at Mile^dgreene by London. 28. Au.

William Gunter Priest, at the Theater by London. 28. August. Robert Morton
Priest Hugh More Gentleman in Lincolnes Inn fields by London 28. Au.

Thomas Acton alias Ho(...)ord Priest at Clarkenwell in London 28. August.
Richard Clarkeson Priest Thomas Felton lay brother of the order of the Minimes
at Hounslow 28. Aug.

Richard Liegh Priest Hugh Morgan Priest Edward Shelly Esquire Richard Flower
Layma^ at Tyburne 30. Aug.
Robert Martyn Layman John Rock Layman Margaret Ward Gent.
Edward James Priest Raph Crochet Priest. at Chichester 1. Oct.

Robert Wilcockes Priest Edward Campian Priest Christopher Buxton Priest at
Canterbury 1. October.
Robert VVidmerpoole Layman
William Wigges Priest, at Kingston 1. October. John Robinson Priest, at Ipswich
1. October. John VVeldon Priest, at Milendgreene by London 5. October. William
Har^ley Priest Richard VVillia^s Priest at Halliwell by London 5. October.

Robert Sutton Layman at Clarkenwell 5. Oct. William Spenser Priest. Edward
Burden Priest. John Hewit Priest. Robert Ludlam Priest. Richard Sympson Priest
at Darby.
Ni(...)las Garlic Priest
William Lampley Layman at Gloucester.
Anno 1589. Elizab. 31.
George Nicols Priest Richard Yaxley Priest Thomas Belson Gentleman at Oxford
5. Iul. Didac. de Yepes Epis. Taracon. de persec. Angl. Hispan.

Humsrey Vp-richard layma^
John Annas Priest. Robert Da^by Priest.
Anno 1590. Elizab. 32.
Christopher Bales Priest, in Fleetstreet in London 4. March. Alexander Blake
Layman in Grayes Inn lane in London 4. March. Nicolas Horner Layman in
Smithfield in London 4. March. Miles Gerard Priest Francis Dickinson Priest at
Rochester 30. April.

Antony Middleton Priest at Clarkenwell in London 6. May. Edward Iohnes Priest
in Fleetstreet in London 6. May.
Anno 1591. Elizab. 33.
Edmund Geninges Priest Swithin Welles Gent. in Grayes Inn fields 10. Dec.

Eustach White Priest Andr. Philop. cont. Edict. Reginae. Ang. pa. 482.
Polidor Plasden Priest Brian Lacy Gentleman. at Tyburne 10. Dec.
John Mason Layman. Sydney Hodgson Layma^
Momfort Scot Priest George Bisley Priest in Fleestreet 2. July.

William Dickinson Priest at Winchester 7. July.
Raph Milner Layman
Edmund Duke Priest Richard Holiday Priest. at Durham.
John Hog Priest Richard Hill Priest.
William Pikes Layman at Dorcester.
Anno 1592. Elizab. 34.
VVillia^ Patteson Pr. at Tyburne 22. Ia. Thomas Portmore Priest in S. Paul's
Churchyard in London 21. Febr. Roger Ashton Priest, at Tyburne 23. June.
Anno 1593. Elizab. 35.
James Burden Layma^, at Winchest. 25. Mar. Did. yepes ibi. page 651.
Antony Page Priest, at York 30. April. Joseph Lampton Priest at Newcastle 23.
June. William Dauis Priest, at Beumaris in Wales, in September. Edward Waterson
Priest.
Anno 1594. Elizab. 36.
William Harington Priest, at Tyburne 18. Febr. Yepes vbi supra page 633. 640.
641
John Cornelius Mohun Priest of the Society of Jesus. Thomas Bosgraue Gentleman
at Dorcester 4. July.
Patricke Samon Layman John Carey Layman
John Ingram Priest. Thomas Boast Priest at Newcastle.

James Oldbaston Priest.
Anno 1595. Elizab. 37.
RObert Southwell Priest of the Society of Jesus, at Tyburne 3. March. Did.
Yepes in hist. persecut. Angl. page 642.
Henry Walpole Priest of the Society of Jesus at York 17. Apr.
Alexander Raulins Priest
George Errington Gent. William Knight Gentleman William Gibson Gentleman at
York.
Henry Abbots Layman
William Freeman Priest.
Anno 1596. Elizab. 38.
N. Auleby Priest. N. Thorpe Priest.
Anno 1597. Elizab. 39.
John Buckley alias Jones Priest of the Order Yepes vbi supra. page 710. l. 5.
of S. Francis, at S. Thomas waterings 12. July.
Anno 1598. Elizab. 40.
THomas Snow Priest Christopher Robinson Priest Richard Horner Priest at York.
N. Grimston Layman N. Britton Layman.

Anno 1600. Elizab. 42
CHristopher Wharton Priest, with a venerable Matrone Relatio 16 Mart. a Th.
W. edit.
at York 18. May.

John Rigby, Gentleman, at S. Thomas Waterings 21. July. Robert Nutter Priest
Edward Thuinge Priest at Lancaster in June.

Thomas Sprot Priest Thomas Hunt Priest at Lincoln in July.

Thomas Palaser Priest John Norton Gentleman at Durham in July.
N. Talbot Gentleman.

Anno 1601. Elizab. 43.
John Pibush Priest, at Tyburne 11. February. Roger Filcocke Priest of the
Society Relat 16. Mart. page 93. and 94.
of Jesus. Mark Barkworth Priest of the Order of S. Benedict. at Tyburne 27.
Feb.
Anne Line Gentlewoman widow
Robert Middleton Priest. Thrustan Hunt Priest. at Lancaster.


Anno 1602. Elizab. 44.
FRancis Page Priest of the Society of Jesus. Thomas Tichborne Priest at
Tyburne 29. April.
Robert Watkinson Priest James Ducket Layman
N. Harrison Priest N. Bates Gentleman at York in April.


Anno 1603. Elizab. 45. and vltimo.
LAurence Richardson alias Anderton Priest at Tyburne 27. February.
Under King James.
Anno 1604. Jacob. Reg. 2.
LAurence Bailey Layman, at Lancaster in March. John Suker Priest Robert
Grissold Layma^ at Warwick in August.


Anno 1605. Iacobi 3.
Thomas VVilborne Layman, at York.
Anno 1606. Iacobi 4.
Richard Oldcorne Priest of the Society of Jesus. at Worcester. 7. Apr. Raph
Ashley Layman at Worcester. 7. Apr. Henry Garnet Priest, Superior of the
Society of Jesus in England, in S. Paul's Churchyard 3. May.
Anno 1607. Jacob. 5.
RObert Drury Priest, at Tyburne 26. February.
Anno 1608. Jacob. 6.
MAtthew Flathers Priest at York 21. Mar. George Geruis Priest of the Order of
S. Benedict, at Tyburne 11. April. Thomas Garnet Priest of the Society of Jesus
at Tyburne 23. June.
FINIS.
CERTAIN CORRECTIONS and Additions in the late English Martyrs, which came to
the Authors knowledge after the printing of the former Catalogue.
Anno 1543.
Add, John Risby, and Thomas Rike.
Anno 1585.
Add N. Hamelton Priest. at York Add Rob. Bicardicke layman at York
Anno 1586.
Add, Richard Langley Esquire at York 1. December. Eode^ anno put John Sands,
and Stephen Rousam in Anno 1587.
Anno 1588.
Hugh Morgan Priest, corrige, Gentleman. Ibidem, Edw. Shelley Esquire, corrige,
Gentleman.
Anno 1592.
Roger Ashton Priest, corrige, Gentleman.
Anno 1595.
Add, John Watkinson (alias VVarcoppe) layman, at York. Add, Anno 1599.
Matthew Hayes Priest, at York.
Anno 1600.
Dele illa verba, with a venerable Matron.
Anno 1601.
John Pibush Priest, at Tyburne, corrige, at S. Thomas VVaterings.
Anno 1603.
Laurence Richardson, alias Anderton Priest, corrigesie, William Richardson
Priest etc.
Anno 1605.
Add, William Brown layman, at Rippon.
Anno 1606.
Richard Oldcorne, corrige, Edward Oldcorne etc.
If, besides these, any other errors have heerin escaped, either in Names or
Syrnames, or in the years, or places of their sufferings; I humbly desire the
Catholic Reader to pardon the same, and of himself in charity to amend them:
To whose prudent Judgment, and Censure of HOLY CHVRCH, I submit the whole.

I. W.


