CHARITY MISTAKEN, WITH THE WANT WHEREOF, Catholics are unjustly charged: for
affirming, as they do with grief, that Protestancy unrepented destroies
SALVATION.

Printed with License, Anno 1630.

PREFACE.
HAVING observed the liberty, which men are grown to take, in not holding it
nenecessary to believe that any one Religion is precisely true; and that for
the excusing of themselves from blame, they think fit to lay the fault on
others as being too strict in approving and upholding only one; I have thought
fit to imply some of my hours upon examining, how much or little reason they
have, in a case of this high importance, either to brag of their own
charity, or to impeach the opinion of ours. And therefore I shall humbly pray
all my Protestant Readers, to bring attention without passion to the perusal
of this ensuing discourse; wherein I will hope they shall meet with cause, to
be as good to themselves as I wish, or at least to give over mistaking us,
though perhaps* they shall not care to mend themselves. But certainly if there
be any such thing, as Heaven, and God, and Christ, and Faith, and Church, and
that indeed there be but one: not only shall they be miserable men in the next
life, who apply not themselves entirely to the belief of that, and that
alone; but they shall even in this world be vvorthily held ignorant and
imprudent, who tax men as uncharitable for nothing but because they approve
not many. For let that, which follovveth, be well weighed; and they will
see that not only Catholics affirm this truth; but that the belief there of
is also auowed both by the practice and principles of the chief Protestants
themselves in their vvritings; howsoever the contrary discourse reigns too
much in the minds and mouths of particular men of that profession, who have
many times so much of the good fellovv, that they have too little of the good
Christian. But I remit my self to that, which follows: which again I
recommend to the Reader.

THAT CATHOLICS ARE both improbably and unjustly charged with lack of
Charity, for affirming that Protestancy unrepented destroys salvation. CHAPTER
I.
IF it be a part of honor and justice, for a Cauallier of this world, to
defend the rights of the oppressed; and to contribute, if there be cause, with
particular care, toward the protection and defense of some excellent, but
afflicted Lady, whose fame were blasted by the ill tongues of men: how much
more just and honorable will it be for a Catholic (who in this time and
place, may well go for a Cauallier of Christ) to defend the honor and fame of
his Lady and Mother, which is the holy Catholic Church: She being so
innocent, as the immaculate Spouse of Christ our Lord ought to be, and yet with
all, so much wronged, as to be taxed for wanting the very wedding ringe, and
the nuptial to be it self of Charity, whereby she is best distinguished from
all pretenders to that Marriage bed, and most evidently marked out to be that
very Spouse, which indeed she is? For, that the abounding in Charity should be
the distinctiue sign of the Church of Christ our Lord, from every other
congregation upon earth, he did by the Oracle of his own blessed mouth declare
expressly upon record; when speaking to the same Spouse of his, in the person
of his disciples he said thus; By this shall all men know, Euan. Io. c. 13.
whether you be my disciples or no, if you love one another.

And least by occasion of these words, a man might chance to think, that the
Church were only bound to love her own children, and consequently that
Catholics were but obliged to maintain Charity toward their fellow
Catholics; our Lord did elsewhere teach us, that we were not only to love our
friends, but our enemies also, by his own example of bestowing his sun,
Matt. c. 5.
and rain, not only upon the just, but upon the unjust also; and that it was
to be a sign of a true Pastor, if he were ready even to lay down his life
for his slocke, Ioh. 10.
whereby in this case the spiritual good, of no less the^ the whole world, is
to be understood. So that to charge the Catholic Church, that she proceeds
uncharitably toward Protestants; and that so far, as through the want thereof,
to censure and condemn them to the pains of hell; is as good (as has been
said) as to tell her to her teeth, that she is but a harlot and strumpet, and
not indeed the Spouse of Christ, as she pretends. And now therefore I, as a
child, though an unworthy one, of this Church, feeling the affront which his
mother undergoes upon this occasion, will procure to remove it the best I can;
and in the first place to show, how improbable the slander is; and in the
second place, how untrue.

First then at the very first fight, it is wholly improbable, even supposing
that the Catholic Church should unjustly and untruly hold (as she is charged
by her adversaries to do) that Protestancy unrepented destroys salvation,
that yet this should be affirmed by her, through want of Charity, and not
rather upon some other motive, namely error in judgment indiscreet zeal of
souls, immoderate fear of the justice of God, or the like. For to see the
holy Catholic Church dissolve, and even as it were defeat her self of her
very self, for the acquiring of all imaginable both temporal and eternal
blessing to mankind; and then yet to say, that because she wants Charity,
she will not allow men of different Religions a place in heaven, where yet
there is room enough for all the world; does stamp the mark of absurdity
upon the very front of the proposition, even whilst it is delivered. Now to
see that this Catholic Church is, after a most eminent manner, so expressiue,
and diffusiue of her self toward the good of others, as has been said, a man
needs no more but to have eyes in his head; for the truth thereof is not only
to be euicted by reason, but it lies subject even to common sense, and to the
observation of every ordinary looker on. For what kind of creature is there,
of what condition, what sex, what age, whom the Catholic Church does not
strive to wrap up in the bowels of her pity? and how restles is that
solicitude wherewith she does it?

As soon as any child is borne, she considering the precise necessity of
Baptism, will be sure to initiate him with that Sacrament; wherein other
Religions are far more remiss. When he grows up to years of discretion,
she strengthe^s him with the Sacrament of Conformation. When she finds him
once to have drunk of the poisoned cup of actual sin, she strives to make him
cast it up again, by the Sacrament of Confession and Penance. To the end that
he may not only enjoy some proportion of health, but be able to stand out, and
grow, and pass on with strength and comfort, she feeds him from time to
time, with the precious Body of our blessed Lord in the Sacrament, of the
Altar. If he will bestow himself upon the service of Almighty God in a more
particular manner, by taking Priesthood, she not only gives him holy Orders,
but she does it by a Sacrament co^ferring grace. If he have not spirit for so
much as that, but resolves to walk on in the broad way of a married life;
that state is honorable, though it be inferior to the former; and she ioynes
him to a wife, by a Sacrament, also co^ferring grace. If in his last sickness he
be assalted by those sharpest arrows of his invisible enemy, she annoynts him
toward the combat, and enables him by that Extreme Unction, and by the
benedictions and prayers which accompany it, to resist and conquer those
adverse powers. When he is giving up the ghost she recomends the soul with
most tender, and affectuall words, into the hands of God. And it is no sooner
discharged from that body, but instantly she makes it her business, to pray
for it; and still she prays, and prays, and never gives it over till the
worlds end.

But now in the mean time, whilst Christians are leading this mortal life,
for such as have a desire to consecrate themselves wholly to God in any
Religious Order, by the vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, whether they
be men, or women, the holy Catholic Church with excessive Charity, prouides
means for them, in Monasteries, and other Religious houses, (either by the
foundations of Princes and great persons, or else by the ordinary and daily
Charities of her devout children in general) that they may be enabled to live,
and wholly attend to that sacred fu^ction, for the assistance of mankind in
the way of spirit (though some after a more contemplative, and some others
after a more active or mixed manner) without scattering, or dispersing their
thoughts and cares, upon providing for the necessaries of this life.

She does also otherwise find means, that secular men and women be
succored, according to all their miseries, whether they be spiritual or
temporal. If men be to suffer as malefactors, she has children, who by
special devotion oblige themselves to watch some nights with those poor
creatures, of what Religion soever they may be, to prepare them, before they
dye, for that great passage, If men be taken prisoners by Moors, or Turks, or
other Infidels, she nourishes whole Orders of Religious people in her bosom,
whose office it is to keep correspondence in those other unbelieving parts; by
means whereof the miserable creatures are redeemed, and restored to their
former liberty, through the Charity of her children. Orphans, and poor
virgins are brought up by thousands; and endowed with marriage money. And
persons sick of all diseases, are cherished and relieved, and regaled by whole
Armies (as man may say) of Christians, in her Hospitalls: yea and they are
served and attended (after the example of Christ our Lord) by the own hands of
great Princes and Prelates, and of choice and delicate Ladies, and Queens, in
the Communion of the holy Catholic Church.

But then, as much as souls are more worth then bodies, so far does the
Charity of Catholics, for the instructing, and gayning souls, exceed those
former Charities, which they impart for the relief of men's bodies. For where
there is question of bringing up youth in virtue; of drawing ignorant and dull
people to some reasonable proportion of knowledge in things belonging to their
salvation; of reducing men, who are perverted by heresy; of converting men, who
are buried quick in the blindenes of infidelity; what pains, what care, what
vast iourneys both by sea and land, what incommodity, what danger, what
torment, what death is not most gladly undergone and even desired by worlds of
Religious men, who are children of the holy Catholic Church; and who suck
the sweet strong spirit of the love of martyrdom, from the breasts of their
mother; she being inspired and enriched therewith, by her celestial spouse? In
the strength whereof, they bless such as curse them; they pray for such as
persecute them; and are ready upon all occasions, in the hope of freeing their
enemies from damnation, to run hazard of their own temporal death. Now she
who is so profuse in affoarding favors, will be sure precise in not doing
wrongs. And so it is notorious to the whole world (as appears both by our
innumerable books of Cases of conscience, and by those Formularies also, which
are daily set out to instruct and teach men how to examine themselves, and to
confess their sins) that she is most strict in keeping us, from judging or
speaking uncharitably of any one, and from doing men the least wrong, either
in thought, word or deed. And now without recrimmating upon our adversaries,
for the want of such great charities, and diligences as these, me thinks I
may appeal eue^ to themselves, whether it be even probable (as I said before)
that the belief of the Catholic Church, concerning the ill estate of such as
die impenitent in the Protestant Religion, can be thought to proceed from want
of Charity, and deserve not rather to be imputed, and ascribed, to some other
cause.

Of the intention of Catholics when they say that Protestancy unrepented
destroys salvation, and how the speech is to be understood. CHAPTER II.
THe intention therefore, wherewith Catholics declare that Protestancy
unrepented destroys salvation, cannot with any color of reason, be thought to
proceed from want of Charity in them, but indeed from the religious and just
care they have to awake men toward the saving of their souls, in the right
way; by procuring that they see, that they are to perish, if they continue in
the wrong. And the good God of heaven does best know, that when we speak to
Protestants in this kind, our very hearts are sad, as considering how true it
is, and how much it imports them to weigh it well; and that yet, the while, in
steed of their proffiting by our advice, they malign us for presenting it to
them in the best sort we can.

Nay they calumniate not only our intention, as has been said, by affirming
that it proceeds in us from want of Charity; but they charge us withal, with
taking the office of Almighty God out of his hands, by pronouncing judgment
upon our fellow servants before their time; and in fine, that we make their
Protestancy to be as the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is not capable of
any remission at the hands of God.

But the Case being well considered, will appear to be ill put against us, who
are far from being liable to such aspersions as these. We judge not them or
any other: for we know that we all must stand, or fall to our own Master. We
love their persons, and we pity them for their errors; and we proceed no
otherwise toward them, then as toward creatures who are made after the image
of Almighty God, and who were redeemed by the death and Passion of our only
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and we pray and hope, that before they part out
of this life, the merits of the said death and passion of our Blessed Lord may
be applied to their souls, by faith and charity and penance, and by those
Sacraments, and other conduits and means of conueying, and applying his grace,
and spiritual life to their souls, which are only to be found in the bosom
of the holy Catholic Church. Without which Sacraments and other means, the
merits and blood of Christ our Lord, though most apt and able in themselves, to
save a thousand millions of worlds, will never save any one soul. For in fine,
the merits of our Lord, and the sinful souls of men, be two extremes of
great distance from one another; and can never be brought to meet, but by such
ways and means, as the unspeakable power and wisdom and goodness of
Almighty God, has found out for that purpose; and those means are they, which
I have already touched. For if the merit of our Blessed Saviors death, were of
it self to save any one soul, without the application thereof by the
aforesaid means; no reason at all could be assigned, why any one soul should
be lost; as yet the far greatet part of souls is sure to be.

So that we speak not so much of Protestants in thy kind as of the profession
of heresy which they follow, and we judge no more of them upon this reason, but
that whilst they live in that Religion, they estrange themselves from the
right means of applying the merits of Christ our Lord to their souls, whereby
they might be saved. But yet we hope nevertheless, that God will have so much
mercy on many of them, before they die, as to incorporate them into his
mystical body, which is his true Church, whereby they may partake the
influence of that mercy and grace, which is derived from the head thereof Jesus
Christ our Lord. And therefore it is plain, that we make not Protesta^cy to be
at a sin against the Holy Ghost, which cannot be forgiven, because it will
not be repented; whereas Protestancy both may, and often is repented of, and
consequently forgiven: and to the end that it may be so, we declare the
grieuousnes of the sin, and we procure by all the means, we can, to remove
the same.

Nay, we are so far from accounting it a sin against the Holy Ghost, as
that by our saying that Protestancy unrepented excludes salvation, we employ no
more, then merely, that it is a mortal sin. For whosoever dies impenitent of
any one mortal sin can never be saved, S. Paul ad Galat.
and whosoever shall with true penance be sorry and depart from his Protestancy,
though it be but in the last minute of his life, will be capable of salvation.
So that we judge not men in particular, concerning their salvation of
damnation; but yet on the other side, we must not be afraid to affirm (though
we are cordially sorry for having cause to do it) that they who dye impenitent
either of Protestancy, or any other sin which depriues the soul of the grace
of God, cannot be saved. For such men as these, are judged already in general,
by the mouth of God; but which of them in his particular, shall be taken before
he die out of that unhappy heard of goats, and placed in that blessed flock
of sheep, by the hand of the good shepherd, we leave to his own
unsearchable determination. And therefore as we take not the office of Judge
out of his hand; because we cannot come to know whether this or that particular
sinner may not repent before he dye: so yet we may safely say, that a man, who
lives in Protestancy, or any other mortal sin; and who is so far from
repenting it (though he be sufficiently informed thereof) as that he will not
so much as acknowledge it to be a sin; and who, (for ought we know, or can
learn) did no way retract or reuerse it, so much, as at the hour of his
death; departs this life in a state which is greatly to be lamented: and
withal that if he repented himself as little of it indeed, and in the sight
of God, as in our sight he seemed to do, there can be no doubt with us (so
long as we believe our Religion to be true) but that such a person dyed
without salvation, as departing in the obstinate profession of a different
Religion, which we esteem to be false. And the same must they also believe of
us, mutatis mutandis, if indeed they believe their own Religion to be true
Christian religion, of which Christ himself pronounced. Qui non crediderit
condemnabitur.

That our saying that Protestancy unrepented destroys salvation, proceeds
from want of Charity in us, is no less untrue (because there is but one true
Church,) then already I have showed it to be improbable, and first this is
proved by holy scripture. CHAPTER III.
HItherto I have been showing how utterly improbable it is, even prima facie,
that we should censure Protestancy or Protestants, through want of Charity;
and withal what that motive is, which induces us to let them know the
extremity of danger, wherein they are; or that when we hold any such
discourse, it is so far from being an effect of want of Charity in us
toward them, as that it only proceeds from our deep compassion of their
case, which is the most sweet and precious fruit of that sovereign virtue.
My endeavor now shall be, to show that this charge of uncharitableness, against
us is not only improbable, but unjust also and untrue. And that in carrying our
selves herein as we do, we not only not swerve from our duty to them; but if
we should do otherwise, we should fail of that obedience which we own to
Almighty God himself, who exacts the performance of this office, at the hands
of his holy Catholic Church. And now for the clearing of this point in such
sort as that it may satisfy doubtful minds, it will first be fit to premise
some few grounds, upon which I may the better build up that truth, which I am
about to declare.

I will not offer here to prove, that there is a God; because now I have not
to do which professed Atheistes: nor yet that Christ our Lord is the true
son of God, who suffered death for the redemption of the world; because we
live not amongst Jews. But for as much as there are such differences of
opinion, concerning that Religion and Church, which was founded and framed by
Christ our Lord: I will briefly show in the first place, that Almighty God did
found one Church, and but one; and that he ordained one Religion, wherein he
would be served, and but one; and that out of that Communion there is no
salvation. In the second place I will make it appear, that the unity which is
to be maintained amongst the members of this one true Church, and the
professors of this one Religion, is directly broken between Catholics and
Protestants. And then I make account, that in the third place, it will follow
even of it self, that both Catholics and Protestants are not saueable in both
their several Religions, without repentance thereof. And consequently, that no
one of us is to be blamed, if conceauing his own to be the only true Religion,
he declare the dangerous estate, wherein he takes any other man to be, who
communicates and agrees not with him; but rather that he is obliged to let him
know it. And now I will briefly put my self to prove the first assertion
concerning the unity of the Church, by some texts and testimonies of holy
Scripture: and first of the old Testament.

In the time of Moses, when it pleased Almighty God to draws a visible people
to himself, and to give them an express law; and to ordain variety of
visible sacrifices, by the oblation whereof they were to do him homage, and
appease his wrath; and to institute visible ceremonies for the more devout and
exact performance of the same, it was also pleasing to his divine Majesty to
appoint, that howsoever the Jews were to exercise their Religion in some
kinds, in their several Synagogues, yet that sacrifice was not to be offered to
him by them, but in the only Temple of Jerusalem. He also commanded; that in
such cases of difficulty, as might occure; his whole people should be subject
to the determination and decision of the high Priest for the time being; and
this, Deuteronomy. cap. 17.
upon no less then the pain of death; from which sentence there was to be no
appeal. Let the place at large be well considered, and it will easily appear
by the great authority, and power, which was cast upon the indiuidual person of
one Judge; that there could neither be any other Church, nor any other Religion
which might pretend to be true, if it would presume to disagree, and dissent
from this.

The same truth is also made evident, by the fearful judgment, which fell upon
Core, Dathan, and Abiron, Nu^. 16.
for their act of disobedience against Moses and Aaron; in so much as that
the ground opened it self, and swallowed them up alive, with all their goods,
into the profound pit of hell, in the sight of the whole paople; for but
offering to make a schism from that one Church, wherein he had ordained
himself to be served.

According to this practice under the written law, Almighty God speaking to
the Prophet Ezechiel, of the times which were to succeed under the Messiah,
made a promise that he would give true Christians a heart which should be most
truly one. Ezech. 11.
Et dabo eis cor vnum. And the kingly Prophet David describes the excellency,
and Majesty of Almighty God, by declaring how he reigns in his holy place;
and makes them who inhabit that house, to be all after one manner, and to be
endued with the same affections and dictame^s concerning his services. Psalm, 67.
Deus in loco sancto suo, qui inhabitare facit vnius moris in domo. Those words
also of the Canticles; Vna est columba mea, Cant. 6.
perfecta mea, etc. were spoken by the holy Ghost, in the person of God the
Father, with intention to design and delineate, the unity of the Church: for
so it is interpreted by S. Cyprian, De unit. Ecles.
and he expresses himself further thus, upon that occasion; will any man
think that he holds fast his faith if he hold not fast this unity of the
Church?

Now the same also is delivered; at least as certainly, in the new Testament;
and so much more evidently, and abundantly, as the Church of God under the
law of grace, was to be far more diffused over the whole world, and both for
the honor of Christ our Lord, and the safety of his servants, who were so
dearly bought by himself to be preserved in no less perfect unity the^ ever
it had enjoyed in former times. We see therefore that Christ our Lord made it
one of his last suits to his eternal father (when he stood, as it were, even
upon the very brim of death) that he would preserve the disciples whom he had
given him, he would make the^ al, Io. 37.
as truly one in affection and will touching things with might concern his
service, as even the Father and Son were one. And it may be noted here with
all, that in this case, he speaks to his eternal Father for our increase of
comfort, with a compellation of extraordinary tenderness, saying, Io. 17.
Pater sancte, serua eos. etc. Keep them, holy Father etc. to show, how much
his heart was set upon this suite. When also he was upon the point of his
Ascension up to heaven, he commanded his disciples to teach all nations to
observe all those things whatsoever, which he hadu^ commaded them; Matt. 18 v.
9. 20.
and he pronounced indefinitely, that whosoever would not believe, shouldbe
condemned: which does clearly relate, not only to this or that particular
Article, but to the whole su^me of Christian doctrine in general: and thus it
may be seen, that he intended to ordain an exact unity in his Church; Marc.
16 v. 26.
and that whosoever should fail of believing any one point of Christian
doctrine; should be as sure of condemnation, as if he had believed but any one,
or none.

The Apostles planted this one faith, and watered it with all so well, that our
Lord gave great increase to it, and the holy Ghost declared, in the acts of the
Apostles, Act. 4,
That the whole multitude of belieuers had but one heart and one soul. And
that vessel of the holy Ghost, S. Paul, considering how very much this point
of unity did import, sendes his advise to the Ephesians, Cap. 4.
that they should be careful to preserve the unity of the spirit, in the bond
of peace; and the word whereby he expresses himself, implies no ordinary kind
of care, but a most particular solicitude of mind.

I should never make an end, if I would press all those places of the new
Testament, which declare the intention of our Lord to have his Church one, and
only one. The very names, whereby it is described, as for example that of the
Arcke of Noe; of one Kingdom; one City; one Spouse; one vineyard; one
field; one barn; one ship; one net; one body; and many others of like nature,
which I omit; show expressly that the Church of Christ our Lord, was to be but
One. And especially this point was settled by our Lord, when he made his own
Church, to be the only supreme Judge even in all spiritual offenses and
scandalls, and much more in Controversies of Religion amongst Christians;
requiring, that whosoever would not hearken to, and obey that Church should be
held a very Pagan, and Publican; Matt. 18.17.
without allowing him so much as any appeal at all, even to the holy
Scripture it self. By which only words of our blessed Lord; it is most clearly
and naturally proved, that this Church is enriched, with those very qualities,
and marks which are auowed by us her children, and contested by the
adversaries thereof; as namely with a perpetual visibility; or else he had
given us a command which it were not possible for us to obey. For how should
we at all times find out, and consulte our difficulties, and manifest our
complaints to that Church, which at all times could not be seen by the eyes of
men, with a most certain infallibility? For otherwise, a man might perish for
believing and professing false doctrines, through his obedience to the
co^maundant of Christ our Lord, in submitting to an erring Church. But
especially (which makes most to our purpose) the entire unity of the Church is
proved here, by the exact obedience, which we are obliged to exhibit to the
same Church. For else, if there might be two several true Churches dissenting
from one another, they might hold me for a Publican and Pagan, if I did not
obey them both: which were impossible for me to do, they commanding contrary
things. And if one of the^ dissented from the other I must be tossed betwixt
two damnations. For if I should obey that true Church erring, I should incur
damnation by obeying her, and by embracing and persisting in her errors; and
yet if I should not obey her I should incur damnation by the express
se^te^ce of Christ our Lord himself, who appoints me to be held a Pagan, if I
obey her not. And this shall suffice for this Chapter, wherein we may have
seen, what holy Scripture says to this question: and in the next we shall
find, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church, who follow it as their guide,
will not fail to utter the same voice.

The express unity of the Church is proved by the authority of the Fathers of
the most primitive times. CHAPTER IIII.
THe holy Fathers in the most primitive times, who are justly called Fathers,
and reverenced as such by us, were yet withal most obedient and humble
children, to the holy Catholic Church of their time; and so treading in those
very steps, which had been traced out for them by the holy Ghost in holy
Scripture, they have showed many ways, how they believed and knew, that there
was but one true Church, and that the perfect unity thereof, was to be so very
carefully maintained, as that whosoever broke it, must everlastingly perish.

I say they have showed many ways, what their dictamen was herein: for some of
the^ have written whole books, expressly and to no other end at all, but to
prove the necessity of unity in the Church of Christ our Lord; as namely S.
Cyprian and S. Augustine. Others have written, and framed express Catalogues
of all the heresies which had risen in the Church of Christ our Lord from his
Ascensio^ to heaven til their own time; expressly showing hereby, that both the
unity of the Church was directly broken by the obstinate belief of any one
doctrine, which was held in disobedience to the same Church; and withal, that
whosoever did so break it, must forfet the salvation of his soul thereby. And
this was done by S. Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, by Philastrius Bishop of
Brescia, both who are cited to this purpose by the incomparable S. Augustine in
his treatise de heresibus ad Quod vult Deu^. Where himself also maks an exact
Catalogue of all the heresies which had sprung until his time: and where, by
the way, I must needs observe in a word, that he recou^ts diverse heresies,
which are held by the Protestant Church at this day, and particularly that of
denying prayers and sacrifices for the dead; and then he concludes in the end,
that whosoever should hold any one of them, were not Christian Catholic.

Besides this way of proof, concerning the unity of the Church; I will also
cite the Fathers who are full of express and positive texts, whereby upon
occasion, they prove the unity of the Church, and I will begin with S. Ireneus,
who discourses thus. Lib. 1. cap. 3. Hac praedicatione etc.
The Church having received this word preached, and this faith, as was showed
before, and having spread the same over the whole world, does diligently
preserve it, as inhabiting one house; and does likewise believe those things
which are taught thereby, as having one soul and one heart, and in the same
conformity, she preaches and teaches, and delivers it, as indeed possessing but
one mouth. For though there be in the world different expressions, and tongues,
yet the virtue and power of Tradition is but one, and the same. And neither
those Churches which are found in Germany, nor those others in Spain, nor
those in France, nor they which are in the Eastern parts, nor they which are
in Egypt, nor they which are in Libya, nor they which are settled in the middle
parts of the world, do believe or make tradition of doctrine, any otherwise in
one place the^ in another. But as that creature of God, the Sun, is one and
the same in the whole world, so is the preaching of the truth, a light which
shows every wheare, and illuminates all men who will come to the knowledge of
the truth. And those Prelates of Churches, who have most power and grace of
speech, will deliver no other things but these. For noe man is above his
master, neither will such an one as has meaner talents in speech, make this
doctrine and Tradition less; but since Faith is but one, and the same; neither
does he enlarge it, who is able to speak much of it; nor that other diminish
it, who speaks less.

De praescrip. aduer. Haeret. Valentinus etc.
Tertullian shows plainly, that whosoever denies any one doctrine of the
Church rejects all, for thus he says upon occasion. Valentinus approves
some things of the law and the Prophets; some things be disavowes; that is, be
disallowes all, whilst he approues some. And the same Tertullian, De
praescrip. c. 8. Caeteru^ multos etc.
does also elsewhere, in the same book infer, the truth of Catholic
doctrine, by the exact unity thereof, whilst he says after this manner. Quod
apud multos etc. That which is found to be one, amongst so many, is not to be
thought to have crept in by error, but to have been recommended by Tradition.

S. Cirill Patriarche of Jerusalem, Catech. 18.
assigning reasons why the Church of Christ our Lord is called Catholic, does
excellently give this one, amongst the rest; Quia docet Catholice id est
vniuersaliter, etc Because she teaches Catholickely, that is to say,
universally and without any defect or difference, all those doctrines, which
ought to be known, concerning things either visible or invisible, celestial
or terrestrial.

S. Cyprian in his book de vnitate Ecclesiae, says thus, Ecclesia Domini
luce perfusa etc.
of the unity of the Church. The Church being stricken through by the light of
our Lord does send her beams throughout the whole world; but yet that light,
which is cast so far abroad, is but one, and the same; she spreads her
brannches, over the whole earth after a plentiful manner; she extendes her
flowing streams with great abundance, and to a great distance; but yet is she
one head and one root, and one mother, who is fruitful by such store of
issue. Lib. 1. Epist. 6.
The same Saint also, speaking of the sin of Core, Dathan, and Abiron implies
that the one Church must not only be entirely believed, but followed also, in
all her doctrines, and directions. For he says that though Core, Dathan and
Abiron, did believe and worship one God, and lived in the same law, and
religion with Moses and Aaron, yet because they divided themselves from the
rest by Schism, resisting their governors and Priests, they were swallowed up
quick into hell.

S. Basile puts such a value upon the absolute integrity of all the whole
Christian Doctrine, (which declares what he believed concerning the necessity
of unity in the Church) as to express himself after this manner. S. Basil.
apud Theodoret. l. 4. hist. c. 17. Qui in sacris litteris etc.
They who are well instructed in holy writ, permit not one syllable of divine
doctrine to be betrayed, or yielded up; but are willing to embrace any kind of
death, for the defense thereof, if need require. That man of God, had been
solicited by some to relent for a time, and to yield though it were but to a
little; he refused in such sort as you have seen and he did it much disdain to
be atte^ted in that kind.

S. Gregory Nanzianzene speaking of Heretics, who do all break the unity of
the Church; seems yet to apprehend them to be worste of all, who whilst
indeed they break it, Greg. Nazian. Tract de fide. Nihil periculosius etc,
Lib. Apo. cont. Ruff. Propter vnu^ etc.
do yet seem to do it least; because so they will hardliest be perceived.
And he delivers himself in these words. Nothing can be more dangerous, then
those Heretics, who when they run straight through all the rest, do yet
with one word, as with some drop of poison, infect the true and sincere faith
of our Lord.

S. Hierome shows, that the unity of the Church, and faith thereof, must be so
perfect; as that for some one word or two, contrary to the same, many heresies
have been cast out of the Church. And S. Leo says, that out of the Catholic
Church there is nothing pure, according to that of the Apostle; whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin: and else where he says also. If it be not one, it is no
faith at all. Concerning this one Church, S. Augustine is also most express
and clear; For when the Donatists (says he) calumniated the Catholics, In
Breui collat. collat dici tertiae.
as affirming that there were two Churches; one upon earth, which contained
both the good and bad; and the other in heaven, which contained none but good:
the Catholics made them this answer. That they did not make two Churches, but
did only distinguish the two times of the Church, saying that the same One only
Church was in one state now, and was hereafter, to be in an other: that now, it
had a mixture of evil men, but that hereafter, it should have none: just so,
as there are not therefore two Christ's, because once he could dye; and now he
can dye no more. And thus the Catholics refuted that slander, which the
Donatists had laid upon the^; expressly showing, what they had formerly said;
namely, that there was but One, and the same holy Catholic Church. And to
show more over by the judgment of S. Augustine, In explicatione Psalm. 54.
that the Church, in her doctrine, was to be truly One; he spoke thus of the
Donatists, who called upon the same God, preached the same gospel, sunge the
same Psalms, had the same Baptism, observed the same Easter, and the like; In
those things they were with me, yet not wholly with me; in Schism not with me;
in Heresy not with me; in many things with me; in a few not with me: but in
regard they were not with me in a few, their being not with me in many could
not help them. Nay S. Ireneus (whom I named before) implies, Lib. 2. cap. 3.
not only, That it is necessary for a true Christian Catholic to differ in no
one point of the doctrine or faith from other Christans; but he must withal
not believe any thing after a different manner; that is to say, upon a
different motive, from that, for which it is believed by other Christians. But
this point I shall touch hereafter. And for the present it may suffice to have
proved the necessity of most perfect unity in the Church, and that indeed no
reason can be given, why if there be allowed any more true Churches then One,
there should not be admitted, as well two thousand as two. So that now it
remaynes for me, to show also by the judgment of holy Scriptures, and Fathers,
that out of this One Church, there is no salvation.

It is proved, both by holy scriptures, and Fathers, that out of One true
Church of Christ our Lord no salvation is to be found. CHAPTER V.
SInce the Church of Christ our Lord, is so truly One, and but only One; it
follows easily enough, that no salvation can be had out of this Church; and
that every heresy, or schism, is sufficient to deprive any soul thereof. But
yet nevertheless, to the end that men may be wholly left without excuse, or
rather that they may be the better warned to take heed in time, of those
miseries, which otherwise they are to feel for all eternity; I will strengthen
also this truth by the authority of some few Scriptures and Fathers of the
primitive Church. For so, by degrees, it will easily and of it felfe appear,
that we Catholics are not faulty in that, wherewith we are so much charged.

The Prophet Esaias thus foretelles the quality and condition of the then future
Church of Christ our Lord and what shall become of them, who serve it not. Cap.
60.
Gens enim, and regnum, quod non seruierit tibi, peribit. That nation, and
kingdom, which will not serve thee, shall perish. And now if a whole nation
and kingdom shall perish for not serving, what shall become of those private
miserable people, who blaspheme and rent it? The same Prophet says else where,
to the same purpose, Cap. 54.
Omne vas etc. Every vessel or pot, which is framed against the, shall not
succeed or prove well; and thou shall judge every tongue resisting thee in
judgment.

We have seen already in the new Testament (upon another occasion to prove
the unity of the Church) that whosoever obeyes not this One Church, is by the
order of our blessed Lord himself, to be held for no other then a Pagan or
Publican; that is to say for no better then a mere Idolater in his Religion,
and for a most infamous and base person in his conversation. And we may see now
further that S. Paul, that vessel of election, that man who had been rapt to
the third heaven, add who had in his heart such a flaming furnace of Charity,
as to desire to be made Anathema for the salvation of his brethren, does most
abundantly declare the woeful state or all heretics and schismatickes. He
requires men to avoid an heretic if he reform not himself, after one or two
reproves; and he names Haereticum hominem indefinitely, without specifying in
particular, what his heresy may be, more or less. He says also, that an
Heretic is condemned even by his own judgment. ad Tit. 3
That their speech is like a Cancer which creepes and kills; That they attend
to the spirit of error, and the Doctrine of devils; That they are
hyppocrites, and liars, covetous, arrogant, and blasphemous; That they take the
appearance of piety upon them but yet renounce the virtue and substance hereof;
That they are ever learning, but without attayning to the knowledge of truth;
That as Iannes and Mambres resisted Moses so do these also resist the truth;
being corrupt in mind, and reprobates concerning the faith; but that they
shall not prevail, but their folly shall be made manifest to al, as that of
Iannes and Mambres was; That they have itching ears, which they turn away
from hearing the truth; S. Jude.
And S. Jude says they are du^be Beasts, unfruitful trees, twice dead, and
rooted up; clouds without water and waves of a tempestuous sea, which beat
themselves into the some of their own confusion; for whom, the storm of of
eternal darkness is reserved; and that they are men who walk the way of Cain,
and Baalam; and who perish in the contradiction of Core.

By all which kind of language a man may easily perceive, how far both the
Apostle S. Paul, and S. Jude also, accounted them to be from salvation, who
have divided themselves from the Catholic Church by heresy or schism. And
S. Paul says in clear terms, That the works of the flesh are manifest;
Galat. cap. 5.
which whosoever co^mits, shall not possess the kingdom of God, Amongst which
he reckons expressly, contentions, emnities, dissentions, and Sects etc. which
word Sects in Latin, is Heresy in Greek. Now if any one heresy be damnable;
what shall they be, when they come in clusters? And if their souls be to be
lost, who fall into emnity and contentions, without repenting themselves
hereof; what shall become of those miserble creatures, who violate, malign,
and wound the whole mystical body of Christ our Lord, which is his Church?

As for the Fathers, De praes. aduersus haeret
they are as bright as day, in this point. Tertullian says, that if they be
heretics, they cannot be accounted Christians.

S. Cyprian is express, and large in this argument, and says thus. Lib. 4.
Epist. 2. and de unit. Eccles.
Adulterari non potest Sponsa Christi etc. The Spouse of Christ cannot be
adulterated, she is incorrup and chaste; she knows one house, and purely
consernes the Chastity of one bedchamber. It is she who keeps us for God; she
sets them forth for his kingdom, whom she has begotten. Whosoever is
separated from the Church, and is joined to an adultres; is separated also from
those promises, which belong to the Church; nor shall he arrive to the rewards
of Christ, who forsake the Church of Christ. He is an alien, he is a profane
person, and he is an enemy. He can no longer have God for his Father, who has
not the Church for his Mother. If a man might have escapte drowning, without
being in the Arck of Noe; he shall also be able to escape, who is out of the
Church. Ibid.
He also says thus afterward. They cannot remain with God, because they
would not continue of one mind, in the Church of God. Though their bodies
should be delivered to be burnt in the fire, or that they should be devoured by
wild beasts, such a death would not be a Crown of faith but a punishment of
perfidiousnes in them; nor would it be a glorious end of their virtue, but a
destruction following upon despair. Such a man may be killed, but cannot be
crowned. Just so does he profess himself to be a Christian, as the devil
does often falsely affirm himself to be Christ; according to what our Lord
him self did forewarme, and tell us thus, Many will come in my name, saying I
am the Christ, and they shall deceive many. But as he is not Christ, though he
shall deceive many, under the color of that name; so neither can that man be
accounted a Christian, who remains not in his doctrine and faith. And in
another place, he also says, Quisquis (...) est lib. 4. Epist. 2.
whosoever he be, and what kind of man soever he be; he is no Christian, who
is not in the Church of Christ.

The like or rather the very same words are used by S. Augustine Sermon. 181. de
te^p. and else where also he says thus to certain heretics. How can you
brag, Symb. ad Catecum. c. 10. Quomodo vos came etc. Lib. 2. contra Gaudon. cap.
12.
that you hold fast the Faith, which our Lord left to his Apostles? would you
have men so blind and deaf, as not to hear, or read the gospel, where they
may know what faith our Lord left to his Apostles concerning his Church? from
which since you are divided, and separated, you do no other thing, then rebel
against the words, both of the body, and of the head; and yet, the while, you
brag, that you endure persecution for the Son of man, and for the faith,
which he reco^mended to his Apostles. And the^ does the Saint put himself to
show our of Scripture, That this is that Church of Christ, which is spread over
the whole world, De unit Eccl. Ad ipsam etc.
The same holy Father says also, No man comes to salvation or life
everlasting who has not Christ for his head; and no man can have Christ for
his head, who is not in his body, which is the Church, And else where he
discourses thus, Epi. 152. quisquis ab hac etc.
whosoever is separated from the Catholic Church, how laudably soever he may
conceive himself to live, yet he shall not have life; but the wrath of God
remainesh upon him, for this only crime of being severed from the Society of
Christ. And to conclude (for as much as concerns S. Augustines authority
touching this point) let this following speech of his be well pondered, whereby
it will appear that Cardinal Petron said well, when he taught that the name
Catholic was, not only a name of belief and faith, but of Charity also and
Communion, which whosoever should want, would also want salvation, though he
were not wanting in points of faith; let us hearken to S. Augustine who
delivers himself thus; Et haeretici etc. De fide and Symb cap. 10.
both Heretics and Schismatickes are wont to call their congregations by the
name of Churches: Heretics violate Faith by believing false things of God,
and Schismatickes though they believe the same things with us, do yet fly from
fraternall. Charity by their wicked divisions; And therefore neither does the
Heretic belong to the Catholic Church, because he loves not God; nor the
Schismaticke, because he loves not his neighbor. For how (says these Saint
elwhere) shall the Schismaticke be esteemed to be in Charity with his
neighbor, who is out of Charity or Communion with the whole body of Christ,
which is his Church. Epist ad Dam.


Saint Hierome writing to Pope Damasus, says (not only of the Catholic
Church indifinitely, but denoting that to be the Roman) that that Church is
the Arc, out of which whosoever lives, shall be drowned in the deluge, and that
that Church is the house, out of which whosoever should eat the lamb, were a
profane person.

Lactantius also says thus; Lib. 4. cap. 30.
Sola Ecclesia Catholica est, etc. It is the Catholic Church alone, which
preserues the true worship of God, this is the fountain of truth, this the
house of faith, this the Temple of God; if any man either enter not into it, or
depart out of it, Ibid.
he shall be deprived of the hope of salvation, and eternal life. No man must
flatter himself with an obstinate kind of contention for the questions here,
about salvation and life, which if it be not watchfully and diligently provided
for, it will be extinct and lost.

Saint Fulgentius has this dreadful saying, wherewith I will conclude this
point. Firmissime tene etc. be most firmly persuaded and have not doubt at all
but that every Heretic or Schismaticke, baptized in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, if withal he be not a member of the
Catholic Church can by no means be saved, how great Alms soever he shall
give, yea and though he should shed his blood, for the name of Christ; For so
long as the sin either of Heresy or Schism (which draws men down to
death) shall remain in any man; neither Baptism, nor Alms, nor death endured
for the name of Christ, can be of any benefit toward his salvation, who houlds
not fast the unity of the Catholic Church. And now by this we see what the
holy Scriptures, and what the Fathers of the most primitive time affirm
concerning the vnsaueablenesse of any man, who is not a member of that Church,
which formerly has been so clearly proved to be but One; Nor will I so much
distrust either the attentio^ or discretion of my reader as to think that I
need press this point any further. So that now in the next place it will
only remain to be considered and resolved; whether or no, both the Catholics
and the Protestants ca^ be truly said to be parts and members of this One and
the self same Church? for if they can not, the case in question is already
judged, and there will be no color of reason, why either of us should
hereafter be charged with want of Charity for affirming, that the other is not
saueable without repentance of his Religion.

CHAPTER VI. That both Catholics and Protestants can not possibly be
accounted to be of one and the same Religion, Faith and Church.
HItherto I have insisted upon the former part of this maine discourse: wherein
I undertook to show (and do conceive my self to have co^plyed with my word)
that there is but one true Religion and one true Church; out of which there is
no salvation.

It will now remain that I prove the second part of my undertaking, which is
that both the Catholics and Protestants, can by noe means account themselves
to be professors of that one true Religion, and obedient Children to that one
true Church; whichsoeuer be that true Church, by the address and conduct
whereof men may hope to save their souls. For clear demonstration whereof it
will be fit, in the first place to show, what that is, which makes a diversity
in Religion; and without which men may still be of the same Religlon, though
there be difference of opinion between them.

The very name of a Christian Religion, whereby Almighty God is to be
worshipped, implies a doctrine which must be believed, Sacraments which must be
received, discipline which must be embraced, and Prelates or Governors which
must be obeyed: and therefore that which make a Religion to be entire, is the
belief of the same doctrine, and the participating of the same Sacraments, and
obedience to the same discipline and Prelates or Governors, so far as men
do not obstinately reject any part thereof, or refuse to submit thereunto.
Whosoever does this, and co^formes his interior, by way of belief, to the
same doctrine and Sacraments, and his exterior, by way of obedience, to the
said Prelates and discipline, may justly be held to be one of the same
Religion: and whosoever refuses to do this, fayles of that.

But so also, on the other side, whenever the Church has not decided, and
propounded, and commanded a doctrine to be believed by her children, and has
not enjoined such a part of discipline to be embraced, a man (so that he commit
no scandal in the manner of it) may vary both in the one and in the other,
from other men, and may think and do, as he sees cause; without offending the
unity of Church, or incurring thereby the crime either of heresy or schism,
as I shall show more at large afterward upon an other occasion. It must
therefore be considered whether Catholics and Protestants be of one Church or
not; or rather it is to be seen: for indeed in this case men have not so much
need of their wits, as of their eyes, for the resolving of the question. But
yet still to the end, that even the weakest stomachs may be made strong enough
to digest that morsel which is coming toward it, I will show by several
arguments that we are far from all possibility of passing for professors of
the same Religion, and for members of the same Church, so long as we continue
as we are.

For who perceaues not at the first sight, that we resolutely differ from one
another, in the prime and maine points of Christian Religion? We embrace not
all the same Scriptures; we differ about no fewer then five Sacraments of
seven, which Catholics believe with all reverence, and they reject withal
contempt. Yea and even concerning those two, in the receiving whereof we both
agree, namely the Sacrament Baptism and of the Communion, there are so many
differences and debates amongst us about the necessity of of the one, and the
real presence of our Lord in the other; that upon the matter we can be thought
but to agree in words.

We differ about the authority of all traditions vnwritte^, which is the very
foundation of our belief of the holy Scripture it self; and consequently, of
all the other greatest points. We differ about the Primacie of S. Peter, and
his successors; yea and about the infallibility of general Counsels; and so
therefore about the supreme judge on earth of all our controversies in
Religion. We differ, about the justification of souls, and the value which the
death and grace of Christ our Lord has imparted to the works of the children
of God. We differ in a world of particulars, about the article of holy
Catholic Church, and namely whether it must always be visible or not even,
to the eyes of men; and whether it must always be free from error and
fallibility. We differ about the Communion of Saints, and whether we may
either pray for the^ who are in Purgatory, or to the^ who are in heaven. And we
differ not only about these, and many other most importa^t points, as me^ who
ar ready to relinquish their opinions, if they be comanded: but we are on both
sides resolved to persist; though both the Catholic Church in her counsels,
and the Protestants in their several Confessions, have declared that their
own opinions are true, and the contrary false: and though we on the one side
have cast excommunication upon the new deniers of those doctrines of ours,
which we have received from Christ our Lord, and his Apostles; and they on the
other, have filled their parts of the world, which scurrill and blasphemous
inuectiues against those said Doctrines of ours; and have taken upon themselves
to be the reformers of the Church, though without either ordinary mission, or
miracles; and to be true publishers of the gospel, and even the very
illuminatours of the world.

And now therefore let that be considered once for all, which has formerly ben
showed, about the style of holy Scripture and Fathers, which speak those said
things of Heresies and Heretics, without specifying in particular, what they
are. And let it also be called to mind, what Catalogues the Fathers of the
Primitive Church, have made of heresies, whereof many (abstracting from the
pride and disobedience, which thereby is committed against the Church) are
neither of so great importance in themselves, or at least not great at all, in
respect of those many most important Articles, which are mutually affirmed or
denied between the Protestants and us. For what imported it all, that some were
so foolish, as to hold al men bound by Scripture to put of their shoes when
they prayed: and yet S. Augustine cited them for heretics in his Catalogue.
But the pride wherewith they presumed to abuse Scripture, and to impose such a
fond law upon men's consciences and a resolution not to leave it, when they were
commanded by the Church, was that which made it heresy in them. Or what
Article of the Creed? or what book of Scripture? or what sacrament of the
Church, did the Quartodecimani deny; or what error did they introduce, but
only the celebrating of Easter at another time, then was ordained by the
Church? and yet for this does S. Austin inroll them in the rank of
heretics. and the same I might exemplify in many other particulars.

Presumption and pride, which is expressed by choosing, and obstinatly
maintaining of any doctrine or discipline, contrary to the judgment and
commandment of the Catholic Church; and by refusing to submit therein to
the same Church; is that wherein the very life and spirit, of Schism and
Heresy does consist.

And the question is not here, whether the point, upon which the Schism or
heresy is grounded, be in it self of so great importance yea or no? but
whether there be in the heart of any private man or men, such a diabolical
degree of obstinacy and pride, as to prefer their own sense and Judgment, in
things belonging to the faith and worship of our Lord God, before the
resolution and direction of his holy Catholic Church, which is his spouse,
his kingdom, his house, his Sanctuary and his city, which was made the
treasure house of grace, the foundation and pillar of truth, the depositary of
the holy Ghost, and the heir of most faithful and firm promises, that even
the gates and power of Hell it self should never be able to prevail against
it. And now I say, if there be found such a sin as this in the soul of man,
as to prefer his own poor dictamens before the decrees of this Church, it
is so very enormous, so barbarous, so wholly out of the way of al Religion, of
reason, of nature, and even of common sense; and it savors of such a
spiritual and infernal presumption (so much the more cordially to be first
lamented, and then detested, because it is cloaked under the color of the
gospel, and Christian liberty, and I know not what of that kind) that really
it can deserve no other place or degree of punishment, then Hell it self.

And now that all this is true; namely that heresy co^sistes not in the
material belief of a false doctrine (for the contrary thereof perhaps, was not
sufficiently propounded to be believed) but in the disobedience to the Church,
after it is propounded, that famous example of S. Cyprian and the Donatistes
may serve for prooffe. For S. Cypria^ was of the first who fell upon the
doctrine of rebaptization of such as had been baptized by Heretics; and the
Donatists afterward succeeded in the same. But in S. Cyprian it was but error,
because the Church of his time, had not absolutely condemned it; but growing
after to condemned, in the Donatists time; it was Heresy in them not to
forsake it. Which drew Vincentius Lirinensis to make this exclamation, O
admirable change of things! the authors of an opinion are held Catholics; and
the followers of the self same, are judged heretics. And S. Cyprian himself
declares the same in substance, upon a like occasion concerning others. For
when one inquired of him, what that erroneous doctrine was, which Nouatianus
the schismatic had taught; his answer to his friend was directly this. Thou
must know that we should not be curious what that doctrine is which he teaches,
since he is out of the Church; teachinge clearly thereby, that not the quality
of the doctrine, but the pride of the man, is that which makes the heretic.

And in deed if this were not the rule, whereby heresies and schisms must be
known, it were impossible to conclude what were an heresy or a schism; and
so also there should fall out to be no heresy in effect at all, which might
not be compatible with salvation. Now this opinion, is not only contrary to the
current of holy Scriptures and Fathers, and to the belief and practice of the
Catholic Church of all ages; but even of the Protestants themselves, who
condemn not only us, but one an another also as is abundantly showed the
Author of the Protestants Apology, etc. for the Roman Church and especially
in the place cited in the Margin; fol. 408.
where he cites Luther expressly saying thus. We seriously censure the
Zuinglians, and all the Sacramentaries, for heretics, and as alienated from
the Church of God. And I protest before God and the world, that I agree not
with them, nor ever will: but will have my hand clear from the blood of those
sheep, which these heretics drive from Christ, deceive and kill. And again,
in the same place, Cursed be the Charity, and concord of Sacramentaries for
ever, and ever, to all eternity. And a little before his death, he protests
saying: I having now one of my feet in the grave, will carry this testimony
and glory, to the tribunal of God; That I will with all my heart condemn and
eschew Carolostadius, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and their disciples; nor will
have familiarity with any of them neither by letter, writing, words, nor
deeds, accordingly as the Lord has commanded: Thus he says with very much
more to the same effect. And to make this yet more evident by the like
testimonies of the Zuinglians, and Caluinists: the Tigurine Divines say thus;
Nos, condemnatam and execrabilem vocat sectam etc. Luther calls us a damnable
and execrable sect; but let him look, that he declare not himself an
Archheretick; since he will not nor cannot have any society with those that
confess Christ. But how marueilously does Luther here bewray himself with his
devils; what filthy words does he uses? and such as are replenished with all
the devils in hell For he says that the devil dwells both now and ever,
in the Zuinglians; and that they have a blasphemous breast insathanized,
persathanized, and supersathanized; and that they have besides, a most vain
mouth, over which Satan bears rule, being infused, perfused and transfused
into the same. Did ever man hear such speeches pass from a furious devil
himself? In so much as Zuinglius says of him, Behold how Satan does
endeavor wholly to possess this man. And Oecolampadius also forewarnes
Luther, least being puffed up by arroga^cy and pride he be seduced by Satan.
Whereunto might be added sundry other like testimonies. This contention between
Luther and his followers on the one party, and the Zuinglians or Caluinists on
the other, is yet further testified, not only by the almost infinite writings
of on against an other yet daily increasing; but also by the known mutual
proscription or banishment of each other, from their several territories or
dominions. So far were they from reputing one another for members of one and
the same Church. Thus far go the words of the said Apoligie, where you shall
find the places both of Luther and Zuinglius and Oecolampadius, and the
Tigurine divines, exactly cited.

Hear also further, what Nicolaus Gallus says (who was an eminent Minister at
Ratisbone) of the difference amongst the Protestants themselves. Non sunt leaves
etc, In The sib. and Hypothes.
The dissentions which are amongst us, be not light, nor concerning light
matters; but about the greatest Articles of of Christian Doctrine; of the law,
and the gospel; of justification and good works; of the Sacraments, and use
of ceremonies. Hear also what Conradus Schlussenburgus another famous Lutheran
Protestant says, in the very Title of his book against the Caluinists,
Theologiae Caluinisticae libri tres etc. Three books concerning Caluinia^
divinity, wherein it is showed as in a Table to the eye, out of two hundred and
three and twenty public writers of the Sacramentaries (with particular setting
down the pages, the words, and the names of the authors) that the said
Sacramentaries have no true belief of almost any Article of Christian Faith.
This book was printed at Franckford in the year 1594. Read also but the very
Title of two of Grauerus his books (who was a famous professor of
Lutheranisme; the one is this; Absurda absurdoru^ absurdissima, Caluinistica
absurda. The absourd and most absourd doctrines and Calvin etc. and the other,
Bellum Ioannis Caluini and Jesus Christi, printed 1598. The war of John Calvin
against Jesus Christ. And lastly, do but read this Title of book written by
Aegidius Hunnius, who was a most famous Lutheran, and succeeded next to Luther
himself in possessing his Chair at Wittenberge. The Title is this Aegidij
Hunnij Caluinus Iudai. ^ans id est, etc. Calvin playing the Jew; that is to
say, A discovery made by Aegidius Hunnius, of the Jewish Interpretations and
corruptions, whereby John Calvin, ^ath not been afraid, to corrupt (after a
detestable manner) most illustrious places, and testimonies of holy Scripture
concerning the glorious Trinity, the Deity of Christ, and of the holy Ghost;
and especially of predictio^s of the Prophets touching the coming of the
Messiah, his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting at the
right hand of God. Printed at Wittenberge in the year 1592.

I forbear both to press this evidence, and I will no further seek to prove
by way of Authority, that both Catholics and Protestants are not sauable, as
not being to be accounted, to be of one and the same Church and Religion, no
not yet even the Lutherans and Caluinists. For in a word, that reason strikes
even at the root, which is drawn from the nature and propriety of faith it
self. And even that alone, if it be well considered, will unanswerably
convince, not only that they are of different faith and Church, who differ in
so many Articles of so great moment, as these wherein we profess one selves to
disagree: but that they also, who differ in any one single point, which is
propounded and commanded by the Catholic Church: yea and more over, that they
who differ not in any points at all, if yet they assent not, upon the only true
infallible ground, which is (as has been said) the revelation of Almighty God,
and the Proposition and Direction of the said Catholic Churh; not only have
the self same faith, with that Church; but that they have no supernatural and
true faith at all, even of those other doctrines, which they most earnestly
think themselves to embrace; and consequently that it is wholly impossible for
them to be saved, if they dye impenitent.

The reason whereof is excellently delivered by S. Thomas, and many other
divines who vnaunswerably prove, that whosoever belieues not the whole corpse
of Christian Doctrine, has no true supernatural faith at all, and does not
righly believe any one Article thereof. He may have a kind of material faith,
concerning those articles, to which he gives assent, but not a certain and
true and supernatural faith, unless he believe them upon the right ground
thereof; which is, The speech, or revelation of Almighty God, propounded and
commanded to believed by the Catholic Church. For example, if I should
believe, that Christ our Lord dyed for the sins of the world, either because I
had only read it in some learned book; or in regard that I had been told so by
some friend, whom I much esteemed and loved; or else because I thought it
likely, in respect of some co^gruity thereof to other things; or finally upon
any other humane and fallible motive whatsoever; it is clear that I could have
no supernatural faith at all, even concerning that one single article of
Catholic doctrine. And the same is to be said of the rest, whether they be
many or few, great or small. And the undoubted reason hereof is, because I
give not my firm assent to it upon the only true infallible motive, which is
the revelation of God, and the proposition of his Church. For whatsoever is
less then this, cannot erect and qualify an act of supernatural faith, with
must be absolutely undoubted and certain; and otherwise it is noe true faith
at all, but opinion and persuasion, or humane belief. He therefore with
belieues not every particular Article of Catholic Doctrine, which is revealed
and propounded by Almighty God and his Church, does no assent eue^ to any one
of them, which he belieues, upon the said only true and infallible motive. For
if he did, he would as certainly, or rather indeed could not choose, but as
willingly believe all the rest, since they all come recomended to him by the
same Authority. And now if there be truth in this, which indeed cannot be
called into any question, the Catholics and Protestants are far enough from
being of one faith and Church; since it is demonstrated that besides the maine
differences, which run between us, either they or we have not really any
true and supernatural faith at all of any one doctrine of the Church, wherein
yet we seem to consent together. For as Turks and Mores who believe in God
the Father, have yet no true supernatural faith even of that one single
Article, nor the Jews of any thing contained even in the old Testament; so
neither has any heticke, of any thing contained either, in the old or new;
since they all resemble one another in this, that whatsoever they believe, it
is not done upon that motive, which only can make an act of true and
supernatural faith.

And thus it shall suffice me to have proved (according to the maine project of
this discourse) that there is but one true faith, which is the foundation of
the only one true Religion, which is exercised in one only true Church,
wherewith Christians are bound to communicate; and that out of this Church,
there is no salvation to be found; and lastly that both Catholics and
Protestants can by no means be accounted for members of one and the same true
Church of Christ our Lord.

But Protestants (Qui nolunt intelligere vt been agant) though their reason
tell them that all this is true, do yet find their Religion to be so unsoundly
built, that they can hardly be drawn to an acknowledgment thereof. And
therefore they are wont to say, that such unity of faith, as this whereof we
have spoken, is a kind of impracticable thing in this life; that the holy
Scripture speaking thereof is not to be understood in such a rigid sense; that
the Fathers of the primitive Church, were too precise that way; that their
discourse of this kind was metaphysicall; and that salvation is no so hard to
be obtained; but that there is room enough in heaven for both Religions. And
finally they object, that there is no such exact unity as I have her described,
even amongst us Catholics; and that themselves maintain a sufficiency of
unity in faith, both with the Fathers of the primitive Church, and with their
own fellow brethren the Lutheranes; yea and some moreover will be so
courteous, as to profess that they agree, even with us modern Papists, in all
Fundamental points of faith. But I will consider in the next chapter, both how
little reason they have in what they object herein against us; and in what also
they allege for themselves.

The avoiding of three objections, which they make against us, to disprove our
unity in faith amongst our selves; and of a fourth allegation, whereby they
would show that they hold as much unity both with the Lutherans, and even with
us Catholics at this day, as they are bound to maintain. CHAPTER VII.
THey first strive to impeach our unity in faith, by obiecting that variety of
opinions in some points which they find by our books, to be amongst us; whereby
they would infer, that there is also amongst us a diversity of belief and
faith; and there is nothing more usual with them then this discourse. But the
answer is shortly and clearly this. That wheresoever they find our Doctors to
be of a contrary opinion, they shall also find those points in question, not be
have been defined by the Church; but left at liberty to be debated and
disputed, as men see cause. Such are a world of difficultyes between the
Thomists and Scotists; de auxilijs, between the Dominicans and the Jesuits;
wherein either side defendes that which they take to be the truth, opposing the
contrary opinion, by all the arguments that occure. And both sides, the while,
are resolved, and ready to submit, to the judgment and definition of the Church
whenever it shall be declared; so captiuating their understanding to the
obedience of faith, as the Apostle exhorts. And in the mean time, they
preserve the spirit of charity, in the bond of peace. If our adversaries could
show that they erected Altar contra altar, or that they were resolved not to
obey to the definition of the Church, when it were declared, they should have
reason on their side: but otherwise they are either very ignorant, or else full
of malice, who make this objection. And let them either show, what Jesuit and
Dominican breaks communion with on another, or else betake themselves to some
better prooffes.

The next objection is yet more stupide then the former; and I wonder how
Caluins rage against the Church could put him so far out of his wits, as that
he would ever take it into his mouth. For it is he, who (being pricked by our
noting their want of unity toward their fellow brethren) thinks to re^ort it
back upon us, by saying that we are not in case, to object any such thing
against them; forasmuch as that forsooth, we have as many sects amongst us, as
we have several Orders of Religious men; and then he rekons up Benedictans,
Carmelites, Dominicans, Franciscans, and whom else he will. Wicked man, who well
knew, that no one of those holy Orders, does differ in any one point of
doctrine from any of the rest, and are so far from breaking communion with
them, as that still they prevent one another in all honor and good respects,
according to the advice of the Blessed Apostle; and much more do they exhibit
all possible reverence and obedience to the same Church, and the Prelates
thereof. The difference which indeed reigns amongst them, is who shall strip
themselves soonest of all earthly incombrance, and so fly the faster to heaven.
They have several Rules indeed which were framed by their several Founders,
those men of God; whereby they might the better direct their course to this
iourneyes end, according to those several spirits which our Lord imparts to
several persons. For though any man may be good in any lawful state of life,
but especially in some holy Order of Religion; yet because men are not only of
several constitutions in body, but of as several dispositions also in mind;
and that some are apter for contemplation, others for a more active life; some
for corporal austerities, others for mental reflections and mortifications;
some for catechizing, preaching and confessing, others for silence and
recollectio^; Vt omnis spiritus laudent Dominum, it was most agreeable to the
sweet providence of Almighty God, to inspire his emine^t servants with
several spirits, who might erect several Orders at several times, which
several natures might affect, and so apply themselves to God, both more
cheerfully and more fruitfully therein; especially if they conserve that
spirit, with which the Order was first endued. And as well and wisely might
Calvin have co^fest a difference of Religion amongst themselves because some
men wear gowns and others cloakes; as to have argued a disunio^ amongst our
Religious men, because of their difference in habit or diet, either from other
Orders, or else from secular people.

I hear them also make a third objection, against our unity in points of
faith; in regard of the difference between our learned and unlearned men; for
in consequence thereof they say, that some one of us belieues incomparably
more, then an other. For the clearing of this point I will open a certain
distinction, the subject whereof they are wont to lay to our chardge as a
crime: but if they lend me a little patience, the same will serve them for a
light, to let them see that themselves are out of the way.

This distinction, is of Explicit and Implicit faith. A man is said to have
Explicit faith of any Article or doctrine, when he has heard it particularly
propounded to him, and has some particular knowledge thereof, and gives
particular assent thereunto. But as for Implicit faith of any Article or
doctrine, a man is then said to have it, when he belieues that concerning it,
which the Church teaches them explicitly, who are capable thereof; although for
his own part, he have not perhaps so much as heard of it in particular; or if
he did, he has forgot it; or if he remember it, he has not capacity enough to
apprehend, or understand it. But howsoever (as I said) he is resolved to
believe both of that and all things else, as the Church teaches; and will give
an Explicit consent to it, when he shall be informed hereof, and be made ab^e
to understand it; and has this firm resolution, that he will never hold he
contrary either of that, or of any other thing, which they Church shall require
him to believe.

This I say is our doctrine concerning Explicit and Implicit faith, and I
dare confidently affirm, that whosoever considers the same indifferently, and
with a resolution to receive satisfaction if there be cause, and not to be
still cauilling, whether there because or not; will confess, that not only the
doctrine of Explicit and Implicit faith, does not only not impeach our unity
in belief, in regard that some me^ believe some things more Explicitly, ^hen
others do; but that, if it were possible to abo^ish this doctrine (which indeed
it is impossible to do, because it is rather delivered us by the voice of
nature it self, which has ordained a different capacity in the minds of men)
it would be wholly impossible to maintain any Church in any unity of faith at
all. For example; will any man amongst them be so absurd, as to conceive that
any plough man, or Trades man, or silly Woman, does believe the same things
Explicitly, concerning Original sin, or the relation which runs between
free will and grace, and a hundred other questions of this nature, which may be
Explicitly believed by some principal Doctor of divinity amongst them, who
have particular studied these questions? And if they confess they cannot, will
they be content that we shall infer thereby, that there is no unity of faith
maintained amongst them? Infallibly they will not: and therefore it is but
reason, that they measure, as they would be measured to; and that they
acknowledge that if dissension in point of faith, could depend upon the
Explicitenesse, or Implicitenesse of a man's believing several doctrines, there
would be, in effect, as many several faithes, amongst unlearned Christians, as
there are several capacities. For as much as we can hardly find, two such
men, whereof the one belieues just as much Explicitly and no more, then the
other does; because the notice, and the attention, and the capacity, and the
memory, and the profession, is ever in effect more or less in one, then in
another, and according to the more or less of these circumstance, will the
Articles Explicitly believed be either more or less. The truth concerning
this particular holds not only in the Catholic Church, but in all
congregations which profess any Religion whatsoever, consisting of several
Articles and parts. They who are learned and have eminent endowments of nature,
and apply themselves with particular industry, must ever believe Explicitly
more points of their Religion, whatsoever it be; and those others who are of
contraries qualities, must believe Explicitly fewer points. And this is also
clear, that the more points of any Religion, which a man belieues Explicitly,
the fewer does the leave himself to believe Implicitly; and so on the
contrary side, the more he belieues Implicitly, he reaches so much the fewer
with an Explicit faith. He may and must believe all the Articles, and
Doctrines of his Religion, with a true, entire, most certain and supernatural
faith; but that he should believe them all with an Explicit faith, is neither
necessary, nor possible. But by believing as much as he can with an Explicit
faith, and what he can not, with an Implicit; a Cardinal Bellarmine, and a
Collier; nay the simplest Catholic woman in the whole world, and the most
glorious Mother of God, if she lived still on earth, should be absolutely and
fully of the self same Religion and faith wi^h one another. So that the sw^rd
of our adversaries proves a buckler to us; and that objection which they make
to disprove our unity in faith, (under which they would both shelter their
weakness, when we justly object their departure from the Church against the^;
and also authorize their malice, when they have a mind to cast the scandal of
affected ignorance upon us) proves a foundation to us of that truth, which
shows how our unity is made perfect.

These are the three objections, which Protestants are wont to make against our
unity in point of faith. And now there remains an allegation or argumt, whereby
they procure to defend themselves against our objection, that they want unity
amongst themselves. For in virtue hereof they affirm, that they ought not to
be held in disunion, either with the Fathers of the primitive Church, or which
the Lutherans or such other fellow ghospellers of theirs at this day, or indeed
even with us Catholics; if things, as they say, may be considered with
moderation: and all this they take to be secured, by distinguishing points of
faith, into Fundamental and not Fundamental; and then by saying that they
agree both with the Fathers, and Lutheranes, and sometimes (of their courtesy)
even with us, in all fundamental points of faith, and that they differ but in
points not fu^damentall. It is a matter of great moment, that this particular
conceit be carefully sifted and discovered; and therefore I will ask leave that
the next Chapter may be spent about it.

That Protestants have no reason in alleging the distinction of fundamental,
and not fundame^tall points or faith; as intending to prove thereby, that they
are in unity with the Fathers of the Primitive Church, of their fellow Brethren
the Lutherans, yea and some times with Catholics at this day. CHAPTER VIII.
BOth Luther and Calvin, and their next disciples, yea and many Protestants
also of these days, have familiarly in their sermons, and no less freque^tly
in their books, taken liberty, with every pennefull of incke to dash as it
were damnation into our eyes; and directly to affirm, that they departed from
the Communion of the Church of Rome, because forsooth they found it to be the
seat of Antichrist, the Synagogue of Satan, the very Center of superstition
and Idolatry; and finally, that bloody tyrant, which exercised all immaginable
cruelty against the Saints of God for many ages, and which poisoned the world
with false and prophanes doctrines, of extreme dishonor unto Almighty God. And
indeed with what color could certain single, base, and filthy men have
presumed to depart from the visible Catholic Church of Christ our Lord, and
to erect their conuenticles as they did, if they had not ar least professed,
that they could not find salvation there? For if they had said that they might
have found it there, they could not so much as have pretended to justify their
departure from thence. But yet nevertheless now that many modern Protestants
have been taught by time, that the straits, into which they fall, are great by
protesting against our salvation in that kind, they have been content now and
then, to desire better quarter at our hands; and to affirm that the
differences between them and us, concern not the fundamental points of
faith, but only such as are not fundamental; that therefore for their parts,
they hold we may be saved, if we lead good lives in our Religion: and that
they desire the like attestation of us for them; and thas it is but tyranny and
cruelty in the Catholic Roman Church, which keeps from allowing it; since
upon the matter, the Religions of us both are the same, and the Churches in
effect the same. And this is that, which lightens, as they think, our chardge
of them; and still keeps theirs heavy upon us, as being uncharitable in not
allowing them salvation.

This discourse of theirs, and their standing so much upon fundamental points
of faith, in the sense which they use, is a mere Chimera: but it is frequented
by them, through a high kind of craft. For though it be most true, that some
doctrines are in themselves of far more importance, then some others; because
the knowledge thereof, may be necessary for the performance of some duty which
is required at our hands; or else because they may contain the very heads and
first grounds of Christianity, more then others do; and therefore do exact a
more explicit belief at the hands of Christians, and consequently may be
accounted in some respects more fundamental: yet so, on the other side, there
is no doctrine at all concerning Religion, the belief whereof is not
fundamental to my salvation, if the Catholic Church, which is the spouse of
Christ our Lord, propound and command me to believe it. For there is no error
in faith, which may not be made damnable by the manner of holding it, when it
is done so obstinately, as that in defense thereof, a man denies the authority
of the Catholic Church.

This is vnanswereably proved by the mere Catalogues of heresies, which have
been made by several Fathers of the primitive Church, and especially by S.
Austin, in his treatise ad Quod vult Deu^; which I have touched before, and
which I earnestly exhort my reader to peruse at large. For therein he notes
diverse, which consist but of single erroneous doctrines, and they of little
importance in themselves, as was declared in a former chapter. But yet for as
much as they were obstinately embraced, they were there declared to be so
fundamental, as that he was noe Christian Catholic, who believed any one of
them; yea or who should afterward believe any other, which might chance to be
condemned by the Catholic Church.

Look back upon the example of S. Cyprian in the 6. chapter: for there you
will find, that the self same doctrine of Rebaptization, which was not
fundame^tall to him, in regard that the Church had not then defined it; the
same, I say, was fundamental afterward to the Donatistes and made them
Heretics, because then it was defined, and yet still maintained by them.
Look back to see in the same place, what the nature of true faith is: which
is not only, that it be absolutely entire in itself; but that the means of
propounding the Articles thereof be also both certain, and absolutely
infallible: or else there will be no faith at all. See also in the same
Chapter, where the form and spirit of heresy is found to consist in the pride
and disobedience, wherewith any doctrine or discipline of the Church is
disobeyed; and then withal cast an eye upon that, which you may find in the
fifte Chapter of this discourse, about the judgment, which is pronounced there,
both by Scriptures and Fathers about the vnsaueablenes of any soul, which is
guilty of the least heresy, or schism and separation from the one and only
true Church of Christ our Lord. For by this means it will appear most
evidently, that the distinction of Faith, into Fundamental and not
Fundamental points (to the purpose of permitting it in a man's liberty to leave
any one of them vnbelieued, wirhout prejudice to salvation) is both frivolous,
dangerous, and utterly false: and so I shall be excused from growing into
length by making unnecessary repetitions, which I am most careful to avoid.

But in the mean time, I should be glad to know, of the authors of this
distinction, what points of their faith, which are controuerted eitheir
between them or us, or between the Lutherans and them, are fundamental, and
which are not fundamental? The very nature of the words seem to show; that a
fundamental point of faith, is such an one as is most necessarily to be
believed; and that whosoever belieues it not, cannot be saved. And that so also
on the other side, a man may take his liberty, either to believe as he sees
cause, or not to believe any doctrine, which is not fundamental, without
incuring the sentence of damnation. Upon this it follows, that there is
nothing in all Christian Religion, which according to their grounds it imports
a man more exactly to learn, then what is fundamental and what not; nor which
it more imports the Doctors and guides of the Protestant Church to make known
to all that people, which they pretend to guide in the way of salvation. And
yet nevertheless, there is absolutely no one thing, which has been so
frequently and importunately desired, as that they would give in, some exact
list or Catalogue of all, and the only fundamental points of faith: and yet is
there no one thing, wherein we are so little satisfied, and which upon the
matter, they do so absolutely refuse. And yet (as has been here expressed)
if according to their grounds a man should fail of belieueing any one
fundamental point of faith, by his not knowing (through their fault) that the
point, which he believed not was fundamental, he must be sure to perish and
that for ever.

But the Protestants are wise enough in their own way, and well they know
what they do, in order to their own ends, both when they frame the distinction
of fundamental and not fundame^tall points of faith; and when also they refuse
to give in a Catalogue of which is which. For by making first the distinction,
and then by concealing the particulars contained under the branches thereof,
they save themselves harmeles amongst ignorant people, from being co^uinced to
be of a different Communion and Religion, both from the Fathers of the
primitive Church, on the one side; and from their fellow sectaries of this age,
on the other. Whereby they gain a kind of reputation with their vulgar
auditors and readers, as if they maintained a sufficiency of unity with both.

Whereas if either they framed not the distinction of fundamental at all, or
else would clearly let men know which points alone were fundamental; then this
would follow. That whenever we should convince them of any particular
doctrine, which is denied by them, and which yet was believed by the ancient
Fathers, they would be obliged to profess, that either that point was not
fundamental, which would disable them from railing at us for believing the
same; or else that the Fathers were of a different Religion in fundamental
points from them; and that in their opinion, those very Fathers could not be
saved; which would put them to much prejudice another way. And so upon the same
reason, they would also either be forced to renounce the communion of the
Luthera^s, if they were found to differ from the^ in fundamental points of
faith; or else to avowe expressly, that those points, which they believed
differently from them, were not fundamental, which would be of no less danger
and disreputatio^ to the^.

But now, when we urge them (for example sake) with the doctrine of praying to
Saints, of prayer for the dead, or the like, out of the ancient Fathers; and
that once we bring them from denying via facti, that the Fathers taught that
doctrine, which yet they will be sure to confess as cautelously as they can;
they then tell us straight, that those Fathers were but men, and had their
errors. We ask them then, if those errors deprive them of salvation? They
say noe; because those points forsooth, were not fundamental: and thus, as
has been said, they will seem to keep a kind of quarter with the Fathers.
In the self same manner when we urge them in the name of Lutherans, with the
Real Presence of of the body of our Lord in the Blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, or with their casting the Epistle of S. James and diverse others out of
the Canon of holy Scripture; by their forbearing to avowe and declare that
these points of Religion are fundamental, they go invisible to the eyes of
simple people; and still make a shift to seem to be in unity with the
Lutherans; when yet the world knows and we have seen, that Luther himself
declared them directly to be heretics.

Not only does this distinction of their doctrines into fundamental and not
fundamental save their credits amongst weak me^, by making them believe that
they join in unity of faith, both with the Fathers of the primitive Church,
and Lutherans; but they enable themselves also thereby, to affirm (with some
very little show of color, though it have no truth at all) that they have had
a continual visible Church in all the ages since Christ our Lord; without
being so easily detected to the contrary. And their way is this. When they are
pressed by us to show a continual visible Church of their Religion, (which they
know well enough that they are not able to produce) those adversaries of ours,
who are of any ingenuity at all, are wont clearly to confess, that indeed
they have had no continual visible Church. But so also they declare, that
there is no necessity at all that the Church must have been continually
visible to the eyes of men. The rest, who see how absurd this doctrine is, say
that indeed there must always have been a visible Church; but then again
they subdiuide themselves in that opinion. For some few of them affirm (when
they are urged by us to show that visible Church of theirs) that theirs, and
ours, do make but one true Church; and so in showing the visibity of ours, they
do withal (as they say) show their own to have been visible. And these men
tread in this way, because they well know, that no other Church but ours can
indeed be showed to have been visible through all ages since Christ our Lord.

But a third sort of men there is, who pretend to show a Church distinct from
ours, which has continually been visible, in the profession and practice of
the Protestant Religion. Wherein Fox has showed the way to the gees, who
follow him. For in fine, when they are put to name their particular professors
of former ages; they do but muster up those several single false doctrines,
which have been held by other heretics by retayle, during ten or twelve
ages since Christ our Lord; many of which Doctrines together, themselves do
now profess in gross. For what other men of former times did they ever, or
can they ever name, as men of their Religion, but such as believed some one or
two of those heretical doctrines, which now themselves embrace; and wherein
they are contrary to us? But by that reason, our adversaries might say as well,
that both they and we, yea and all those others also, are of one and the same
Religion, because we all agree together in many points, though we differ in
many more; and though we be excommu^i^ated by one an other. And if their belief
may be examined, whom our adversaries cite out of former times, as men to whose
communion in Religion they now lay claim, it will be found, (as has
abundantly been proved) that both those former were express heretics
(even in the Protestants own opinion as well as ours) for their misbeliefe of
other things; and that those doctrines, wherein those former heretics agreed
with us, and dissented from the Protestants, are now most unjustly condemned by
them in our persons; howsoever (for the hideing of their own misery) they are
content to wink at the self same opinions in them, who were their
predecessors in heresy.

But all this while, it must still be noted, that they make themselves able to
dance also in this Net by the distinction which they have framed of
fundamental and not fundamental. For if this had not been devised, but that
it might have been declared, that the obstinate belief of any one single
heresy depriues a man of salvation; and therefore that there is no means to
make any one man to be of the same Religion with any other, but by being wholly
of the same Religion; so far forth at the least, as that he must not
obstinately deny any one doctrine thereof, whether it be important more or
less, when once, as has been said, it is lawfully and sufficiently
propounded, and commanded to be believed by the true Church: it would insta^tly
have been made as patent and clear, as it is true and certain, that neither
when Luther rebelled from the Church of Christ our Lord, nor in any age before
his time, there was in the whole world, any one kingdom, or country, or city,
or town or family of men, or pastor, or flock, yea or any one single person,
so much as of Luthers own, and much less of the now Protestant Religion,
which is now forsoothe so far refined beyond his.

To conclude, the making of this distinction between fundame^tal, and not
fundamental points of faith, and the resolving not to declare which is which,
does save them, with a great part of the ignorant world, from the imputation of
Rigor, in their proceeding with us. For how could they persecute, as they do,
without extreme note of cruelty? yea or even how could they dissent without
apparent impiety, from our belief and practice of those doctrines, wherein we
have had, and still have prescription of so many ages; if the contrary thereof
should be confessed by themselves not to be fundamental? We must not therefore
wonder, if that they stick so fast, as they do, to this distinction: for
hereby it appeers, that they have wit enough to keep themselves warm, which
they could not do so well without this cloak upon their backs.

It is also more them probable, that one reason, why they are so unwilling to
give in any Catalogue of the fundamental points, is because they know so well
how ridiculous they would make themselves by the infinite variety of their
Catalogues. For if it be so familiar with them to be of different minds
concerning particular doctrines, how much more would they be so, in this which
is a root of many branches, or rather a monster of many heads. And so there
can be no doubt, but that some of them would not be more resolute in
restraining the fundamental points into a narrow compass, then others would
be in enlarging them to a broader. I will consider what is said by most of the^
to this purpose: and because this chapter is grown into length, you shall
expect that which follows in the next.

That Protestants neither do, nor dare declare what are their fundamental
points of faith; whereby yet they would pretend that they live in the Communion
of the one true Church of Christ our Lord. CHAPTER IX.
IT is usual with many to affirm that the Apostles Creed contains all the
Fundamental points of Faith: but these men when they are pressed, grow soon
ashamed of that opinion; when they are told that in the Creed, there is no
mention made at al, either of the Cano^ in holy Scripture, or of the number, or
nature, yea or so much as of the name of Sacraments. Besides that there are so
great differences between them and us about the understanding of the Article
of the desce^t of Christ our Lord into Hell, and that other of the holy
Catholic Church; and that also, of the communion of Saints, which we believe
and they deny to inuolue both prayers for the dead, and prayers to Saints, as
that we should not be much the better, either for our knowing or confessing
that the Creed contains all the Fundamental points of Faith, unless with all
there were some certain way, how to understand them right, and especially
unless under the Article, which concerns the holy Catholic Church, they would
understand it to be endued with so perfect infallibility, and great authority,
as that it might teach us all the rest. For indeed according to that sense, not
only the whole Creed, but even that single Article of the holy Catholic
Church might be said to contain the reason of all our Faith so Fundamentally,
as that we should need noe other guide then that.

But if we understand it otherwise, the Scripture it self speaks of
particular errors, which are damnable in them, by whom they are embraced; and
yet they are not at all against any express doctrine of the Creed. As namely
where S. Paul calls it a doctrine of devils, to forbid marriage, and meats:
which, by the way, is not to be understood of the chastity, and fasts of the
Catholic Church (as Protestants do most peruersely affirm) which knows that
those things are lawful, but that yet it is most grateful to God, when his
servants, for his love, deprive themselves of those delights; but of the
heresy of the M^ni^hees, as S. Austen does expressly declare, who forbad both
marriage and meats, as being abominable and impure through the institution
thereof, which they said was derived from a certain second ill co^dicioned
God, of their own making. In like manner S. Peter says, that S. Paul in his
Epistles had written certain things, which were hard to be understood, and
which the unlearned and unstable did pervert to their own destruction. S.
Austen declares upon this place, that the places misunderstood concerned the
doctrine of Justification, which some misconceaued to be by faith alone, by
occasion of what S. Paul had written to the Romans. And of purpose to
countermine that error, he says that S. James wrote his Epistle, and proved
therein that good works were absolutely necessary to the act of Justification.
Here upon we may observe two things; the one that an error in this point
alone, is by the judgment of S. Peter to work their destruction, who embrace
it: and the other, that the Apostles Creed which speaks no one word thereof,
is no good rule to let us know all the fundamental point of faith.

Others say, that the book of the 39. Articles declares all the fundamental
points of Faith, according to the Doctrine of the Church of England; but that
also is most absurdly affirmed. For as it is true, that they declare in some
co^fused manner (which yet indeed is extremely confused) what the Church of
England in most things belieues; so is it as true, that they are very careful,
that they be not too clearly understood. And therefore in many controversies,
whereof that book speaks, it comes not at all to the maine difficulty of the
question between them and us; and especially in those of the Church, and Free
will. For whereas there are two maine Controversies concerning the Church;
namely whether the Catholic Church of our Lord must not ever be visible to
the eyes of men, though at some times more gloriously then at others; and
whether the said Church be infallible in the definitio^s of Faith (in both
which points we hold the affirmative and they the negative;) they dare not
declare in this public manner what they hold therein. And so also in that of
Free Will, Art. 10.
they only affirm thereof in haec verba. The condition of man after the fall
of Adam is such, that he cannot turn, and prepare himself by his own
natural strength, and good works, to faith, and calling upon God; wherefore we
have no power to do good works pleasant, and acceptable to God, without the
grace of God preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us,
when we have that goodwil. Now this is true Catholic Doctrine, which we
believe better them they. But they declare not the while, whether or no a man
have freedom of will to do a good work or not to do it, when first he is
inspired, and moved to it by God Almighties grace; which we affirm, and they
deny, and which is the only knott of our question, and the point upon which so
many other Catholic Doctrines depend.

So also do they play at fast and ^oose, when in the sixth Article, of holy
Scripture, they enumerate al those books of the old Testament, which they allow
to be Canonical; wherein by the way, they are rather Jews then Christians,
for not admitting the books of Judith the Machabees, and diverse others into
the Canon. And they trifle, also when they tell us, that they understand those
only books both of the old and new Testament to be Canonical, of whose
authority there was never any doubt in the Church. For they know as well as we,
that the Apocalips, the Epistle of S. James, S. Jude, and one of S. Peter's,
were not acknowledged till prooffes were made, during the space of three or
four hundred years after Christ our Lord. And yet these me^ have been
pleased out of their great grace, to admit them, though the Machabees must be
rejected, because they speak of prayer for the dead. But observe in the mean
time, what this book of Articles says concerning the Canonical books of
the new Testament. It says only this. All the books of new Testament, as they
are commonly received, we do receive, and account them for Canonical. But why
do they not particularly enumerate all the books which they acknowledge to be
of the new Testament, as they had done them of the old? but only because they
must so have named those books of S. James and others for Canonical, which
the Lutherans have cast out of their Canon. A mad piece of unity, God wot, when
these reformers of the Church, according forsooth to Scripture (if you will
take their word) cannot so much as agree about the very Canon it self of the
Scripture.

But abstracting from all these insincerities, wherewith that book of Articles
is full fraught, they do not so much as say, that the Articles of Doctrine,
which they deliver are fundamental, either all, or half, or any one thereof;
or that they are necessarily to be believed by them, or the contrary damnable
if it be believed by us; but they are glad to walk in a cloud, for the
reasons which have been already touched.

Master Rogers indeed, in the Analysis which he makes of those nine and
thirty Articles, speaks loud enough by way of taxing the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, as being contrary to that of the Church of England; and he
gives it as many ill names, as his impure spirit can devise; and affirms
amongst other things, that many Papists, and namely the Franciscans blush not
to affirm that S. Francis is the holy Ghost: Fol. 23.
And that Christ is the Savior of men, but one Mother Jane is the Savior of
women, a most execrable of Postellus the Jesuit; Fol. 14.
with a great deal of such base trash as this. And yet his book is declared
to have been perused, and by the lawful authority of the Church of England
permitted to be public. But yet, even Master Rogers himself, is not so
valiant as to tell us in particular which point of their Doctrine is
fundamental to salvation, and which is not.

Much less is there any appearance that ever the Church of England should do
it; since even now we have seen, that it dares not, in diverse points, so
much as declare in public manner, that it professes the express contrary of
what we held. Nay we are not likely to see the fu^damental points of Faith,
whereof they talk so loud, to be auowed by so much as either of the
Universities, yea or yet by any one College, or society of learned men amongst
them. And the reason of their reservation in this kind is plain* For if, when
they write jointly, and in a body, they should be convinced of any absurdity or
error, by the testimony either of the ancient Fathers on the one side, or the
Lutherans on the other, their maine cause would receive a mortal wound;
because so their Church, o^ Universities or Colleges would plainly appear to
be controlled, and confuted, eitheir by the Fathers, or their fellow
ghospellers: whereas now when they speak or write, but in the name or persons
of particular men, one of them will not think, that himself, or his cause is
much prejudiced, if any other of them be found guylty of error; and in such
cases, it is usual for them to say, what care I if Doctor Morton say this, or
Doctor White say that? and the like. For this reason it is, that I have heard
some Catholics affirm, (and that, to my thinking, with great reason) that
they would hold it to be no ill work for them, if the pretended College of
Chelsy, or any other, were founded by Protestants expressly for writing books
of controversy, by common consent. But I believe I shall not see them halt
upon that leg, for fear least they should be found to be lame of both.

On the otherside, at times, they make eager inuectiues against us, for
declaring so many, yea and all the Doctrines of our Church to be Fundamental;
so far forth as that whosoever refuses obstinatly to believe any one of them,
does forfette the salvation of his soul. And in the strength of this zeal of
theirs, Doctor Dunne in a sermon made before his Majesty at his first happy
coming to this Crown, does bitterly exclame against the Catholic Roman
Church as making every toy to be Fu^damentall. Where, by the way, he takes his
pleasure upon us, and says that we Papists will not let Protestants be saved,
though they believe the same Creed, and the same faith with us; unless withal
they will believe, the same Mathematics, and govern themselves by the same
Kale^ders, which to omit other poornesses of his, was so weak and mean a
jest, so misbecoming of that Audience and of the place he held, as being
fitter indeed for some Ordinary, the^ for a Chapel or Church; and withal so
very untrue, if he were in earnest, that unless the pride of his own conceit
had raised up a dust to put out his eyes, he could not but have seen the
senselesnes of what he said, even whilst he was speaking: since we the Roman
Catholics in this kingdom do rather govern our selves at this day, by the
less perfect Calendar, which now is used in this place, then by the other,
which is both the better (even by the judgment of learned Protestants) and is
authorized by the Catholic Church abroad. Letting he world see thereby, how
willingly we can accommodate to them in all things, which belong not merely to
Religion. But Master Doctor forgot himself worse shortly after. For having
gravely admonished me^ before, not to account things arbitrary to be necessary,
nor to call superstructions foundations, nor to esteem that every little thing
in Religion should be able to deprive a man of salvation, he takes the pains
to wipe out with a wet finger the whole substance, and drifte of all his own
discourse, by saying to his effect: That difference in belief, in points,
which are not very important, is not to prejudice a man's salvation, unless by
not believing them he commit a disobedience with all, for (says he) Obedience
indeed is of the Essence of Religion. Which upon the whole matter, is the very
thing we say; and the very thing whereby he crosses the whole scope of his own
sermon. For if a man's disobedience to the proposition and direction of the
Church, concerning an inferior point of Doctrine, do impugn the very essense
of Religion, it will follow that their distinction of points Fundamental or
not Fundamental (whereby they would infer that a man can not loose his
salvation but for misbelief in some few main points of Religion, and not in
the rest) is absurd and vain, and detractiue both of Doctor Dunnes Doctrine
last mentioned, and of their own objection of uncharitableness against us, for
saying that men dying in different Religions cannot be saved. And withal that
this distinction will not secure them from committing the crime of separation
from the Church of Christ our Lord, and in swaruing from the directions
thereof; in which case, all the Doctrines of the Church are found to be
Fundamental toward salvation.

And this shall serve for a dischardge, both of what they object against our
unity in faith, and of what they allege in the behalf of theirs. And in the
mean time, I conceive that I have also sufficiently secured and settled those
two main grounds upon which this whole, discourse is turned. Namely first
that there is but one true faith, and one true Religion and Church, out of
which there is no salvation: and secondly that both Catholics and Protestants
can not possible be accounted to be of that one Religion, Church and Faith. And
now for the final proof of this last point according even to their practice
as well as ours; let my Reader but look upon the body of their laws made
against us, and especially upon the Preambles thereof, wherein they plentifully
show how hateful an opinion they have of our Church; Let him look upon the
several Acts of State, which have issued from my Lords of the Counsel; Let
him look upon the proclamatio^s, which have been made and published from time
to time; Let him look upon the large co^missions, which have been granted to
Pursiuants, whereby that scume of the world, has been and is enabled, both to
ransom and ransacke us at their pleasure; Let him look upon those speeches,
which have been uttered in both houses of Parliament, not only against the
professors, but even the profession it self of our Religion; and how his most
excellent Majesty, has been importuned by their Petitions, to add more weight
to our miseries: for thus it will easily be seen, how false how rotten, how
superstitions, how Idolatrous, how detestable, how damnable, and even
destructive of all truth and goodness they profess themselves to esteem our
Religion, and in fine that we carry such a mark of the Beast in our foreheads
as must needs, in their opinion, shut up the gates of Heaven against us, and
set open the jaws of Hell to devour and swallowe us up. So that certainly we
are no more of one Church with them in their opinion, then they are of one with
us in ours. And now there will remain noe more but a short Recapitulation of
what has been delivered more at large, for the finishing of this discourse, to
which I will now betake my self.

A recapitulatio^ of the whole discourse, wherein it follows upon the
confession of both parties, that the Catholics, and the Protestants, are not
both of them saueable in their several Religions, without repentance thereof
before they die; and that Catholics must therefore be no longer held
uncharitable for saying so: but those Protestants are showed to be Libertines,
who say the contrary. CHAPTER X.
SInce the Faith, Religion, and Church, has been proved both by Scriptures
and Fathers, as also by vnanswearable reasons, which have been drawn both
from the very grounds of true Faith, and from the nature and spirit of Heresy
and Schism, and finally by the Confession of both parties, to be but only one;
and that out of that one, there is noe salvation to be obtained: Since the
difference concerning the Doctrine of faith between Catholics and
Protestants, are so many, so important, and so resolutely maintained,
concerning both the Canon of Scriptures, the number and nature of Sacraments,
the authority of traditions, the supreme Judge of Controversies, the visible
head of the Church, the justification of over souls, the valewe of our good
works, the liberty of our will, the possibility of keeping the Commandments,
the relations which run between the men of this life on the one side, and
both the souls in Purgatory, and the Saints in Heaven on the other: Since,
besides our differences in points of Doctrine, we swerve also from one an other
in points of discipline, and have separated our selves and have mutually
excommunicated one another: Since we hold them to live in heresy and schism,
and they us in affected ignorance, gross superstition and Idolatry, and are
daily making Sermons and books and edicts and laws against one another: it is
certain that either both they, and we must not be saved, if we die vnrepe^tant
of our several Religions; or else that the whole world has been in a dream
of three thousand years old, ever since Moses time, which furnished us, with
the first proof that there must be unity in Religion, and obedience in the
professors thereof, and that such as should obstinately trangresse, were
ordained to be put to a first death, which might serve them for a Preface to
their second destruction.

Which truth being once granted, I trust they will not take it ill, at our
hands, if we hope well of our selves in our own way; and consequently if we
conceive that we have no cause to hope well of them, if they die impeditent in
theirs, they have no reason to be offended with us: and the less since the
Lutherans declare so expressly and resolutely that the Resolution of the
Sacramentaries, that is to say, of our English Protestants, is also damnable,
as has been seen. And this not only for the heresy which they hold in point
of the Sacrament, but for many others also, as appears by those authors of
theirs, whom I cited before. So that still I see less and less color, why
they should except against us, as if we wanted charity, for saying that of
them, which when they list, they not only take liberty to say of us, but even
of one another also; and yet do not think that they offend Charity therein.

As for us, we neither do, nor can with any reason conceive, that they break
the law of charity toward us (supposing their own Religion to be true) in
that they allow not salvation to us, if we dye in ours; which consequently must
be false. And if ours be a false Religion, (as it must needs be, if their
Church be true, and that we obstinately refuse to obey it) we cannot be saved
by the profession thereof. And so therefore, on the other side, if ours be true
(as even they must give us leave to think it, and as infallibly we believe it
to be) theirs must then be no less false, then ours is true. Now supposing
this on both sides, it will not be want of Charity in either of us, both to
hold, and declare, the others Religion to be inco^patible with salvation: nay
it will be want of Charity if we do it not.

For men are not so made for them selves, as that they must not also procure to
do their neighbors good, and especially in that, which most imports. And
besides the general tie of one part of mankind to another (whereof we are put
in mind so many ways) the holy Scripture it self is often pointing us out to
our duty in this kind; and most especially it does in one passage of
Ecclesiasticus lay a direct obligation upon us, in these most binding words;
Cap. 17.
Mandauit vnicuique Deus de proximo suo. God has laid a charge upon every
man, that he look to his neighbor. Which as it warrants not the busy or
meddling humor of any private man, to intrude himself into the secret affairs
of another, nor obliges him so much as even to the reprooffe of his known
sins, (when he has neither charge over that person, nor has hope of
amendment by it, and when it is not agreeable otherwise to the circumstances
and rules of charity, which ought to be conducted and carried on by Christian
prudence;) so yet on the otherside, it lays not only a Counselle, but a strict
commandment, not only upon some one, but upon every one; not to omit
opportunity, whereby a man may prudently be in hope, either to do his
neighbor any important good, or else to divert him from any thing, which may
do him any considerable hurt.

Now if a private man must not only be excused, if according to the rules of
Christian piety and prudence, he assist his neighbor in doing well, and
declaring the danger wherein he is, if he do otherwise, but he shall not be
excusable in the sight of God, if he dischardge not this duty; how much more
highly shall the Church of Christ our Lord be both authorized, and obliged to
instruct Christians in the right way, and to reduce such others as are in the
wrong, by making them understand their danger of everlasting damnation?

Nay we see by that which past between Almighty God and the Prophet Ezechiel,
that he was appointed to stand Centinell over the house of Israel, and to hear
Gods word out of his own mouth, and so to announce it to his people in his
name; and that God said thus to him, Si dicente me ad impium etc. Ezechiel cap.
3.
If when I shall say to the wicked man, thou shall dye the death, thou declare
it not to him, nor advise him to return from his wicked way, that he may live;
that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but I will require his blood at thy
hands. But if thou anounce it to him, and that yet he will not return from
his sin and from his wicked way, that man indeed shall dye in his own sin,
but as for thee, thou shall have freed thy soul from death.

Now therefore if a single Prophet, being called to that office by Almighty
God, be obliged, under the pain of his own damnation, to advise men to depart
from their wickedness; how much more precisely will this obligation lie upon the
Church of God, which has the chardge over all Christian souls, to teach them
that Doctrine which is true, and to let them see the danger wherein they are of
hell fire, if they continue to profess that which is false? For the word of
God, whether it be written in holy Scripture, or unwritten and so delivered
from hand to hand by Tradition, is his revealed will; and the Church is his
Embasadour Leidger in this world, to declare and announce that word and will of
his to mankind; and to bring them into league with God, as S. Paul affirmed of
him self, and of the other Pastors and Doctors of the Church; 2. Cor. 5
Legatione pro Christo fungimur etc. We are Ambassadors on the part of Christ,
with instructions for the reconciling of man to God. And accordingly S. Paul
was careful to let men see their case, and to declare the danger wherein
sinners were. For we have seen how he warned men to take heed of the speech
of heretics as of a Cancer; and else where, to avoid them if they did not
first reform them selves, after they had been reproved once or twice; as
also that such as departed from the unity of faith were people who attended to
the spirit of Error, and to the Doctrine of devils; and a great deal more of
that kind, which you shall find related before in the ninth chapter: which
clearly and fully shows what opinion the holy Scripture has of heretics.

Besides all this if a man shall eternally be damned for committing of one
theft, or one act of simple fornication, unless he repent himself thereof
before he die, Gal. 5. Co^sulta. decapes. relig.
which is clear by S. Paul's express text: much more, as Father Lessius
shows, shall he incur those eternal torments for heresy, which is a most
grievous kind of infidelity, and which includes in it self so many other most
horrible sins, as namely blasphemies, contempt of Sacraments, scoffs and
scorns, a profanation of holy things, a hatred and persecution of true
Religion, disobedience to the Church and her Prelates; sacrilege, pride,
obstinacy, schism and rebellion against the supreme Ecclesiastical
Magistrates. How great torment therefore, I say, shall any man eternally endure,
for the sin of Heresy, which is more grievous then thousands of fornications
and thefts?

It will not therefore serve a man's turn toward eternal life, if being out
of the Communion of Gods Church, he carry himself otherwise as sweetly, as
ciuilly as can be devised; and that men praise him for a worthy person, an
honest man, the best neighbor in a whole kingdom, one who owes no man a
penny, one who is courteous to all the world, who never swears an oath, nor
gives offense to any, in any kind. These are all goods things, but these are
not all those good things, which are required of him who will be saved. For
whilst such an one is so kind and civil to man, he is both unkind and cruel
toward Almighty God, if he be rebellious to that Church which was purchassed
by the death of his only son. But it seems we are still made of that mould,
whereof S. Hierom speaks after this manner, Nos in Dei iniurijs benigni sumus;
In c. 16. Matt.
in propri^s contumelijs odia exercemus. We are easy and remiss toward such
as ar iniuriours to God; but we are reuinge full, when there is question of
righting those wrongs which are done to our selves. But withal, he alleages
the example of Hely in the book of kings, against this ill custom, saying, Si
peccauerit vir in virum, 1 Reg. 2.
placari ei potest Deus: si autem in Deum quis peccauerit, quis orabit pro eo?
If one man offend an other, God may yet be appeased toward him: but if any man
sin against God, who shall pray for that man? A very different dictamen from
that which reigns now in the world; where a man, who gives men no offense,
shall be celebrated by men for a kind of Saint, though withal his whole life
be consumed in sinning against God, by infidelity, by secret blasphemy, by
heresy, and by all that pride and malignity which it involues against God and
his Church, together with contempt and scorn, as has been said, of all those
devout Ceremonies, and almost all those holy Sacraments, which his divine
Majesty has ordained for our eternal good, with so much cost to him self.

But Saints and men of God, who see with clearer eyes then others, make a
contrary judgment of these things: and so also are they very remiss, when
wrong is done but to themselves; but rigorous, when perverse men will needs be
putting affronts upon Almighty God. The Ecclesiastical story is full of
examples in this kind. See but how S. John carried himself toward Cerinthus,
and Polycarpe to Marcion, and S. Antony to the Arrians; and a thousand others.
And least it should be thought that Saints fall not foul, but only upon such
Heretics as deny the very prime Articles of Christian Religion, which concern
either God the Father, or the immediate person of Christ our Lord himself: cast
but an eye upon S. Bernard, that mild and merciful man of God, and see how he
treates the heretics of his time, who had too much affinity with those of
ours, as you will perceive by his censure of them; but yet it was for certain
points which seemed not to trench so deep into the Christian Faith. But
howsoever, he speaks of them in no gentler a still then this, Sermon. in Cantic.
66.
Videte detractores, videte canes; irrident nos, quia baptizamus infantes; quod
oramus pro mortuis; quod Sanctorum suffragia postulamus. Behold these
detractours, beh^ld these dogs. they scoff as us, because we baptize infants;
because we pray for the dead; and because we beg the prayers of the Saints. So
that still we see into this truth, more and more. That how smooth soever the
face, and how sweet soever the words, and how civil soever the carriage be;
yet if heresy be in the heart, it is of all others the most odious and
offensive thing, both to Almighty God, and to all good men, who have his honor
in high account. Yea and even how kind, and civil soever they seem to their
neighbors and friends in moral things, such especially as they see often, and
salute, and converse with; yet you may observe by that saying of S. Bernard,
that they are cruel enough to such as they see not. And with all their
ciuillity and curtesy and suauity in ordinary conversation, they can find in
their heretical hearts, at a clap to rob all dead men, of the help and
comfort of the prayers of the living; and al living me^, of the prayers of the
Saints who are in heaven, and the same Saints, of all the honor which
Catholics pay to the^ here on earth; to omit in this place, their infinite
and innumerable detractio^s, and slanders, and reproaches of the whole Church
of God. Al which I have not said, either by way of aggravating their sins, or
of alienating men from their persons; which I esteem, and love, and desire to
serve with my whole heart; but only, to the end that they may know their own
case, and consider well, what kind of thing heresy is, and how hateful in it
self to God, and man; that so, by the divine goodness, they may grow to change,
both their names and natures; and pass from being enemies, to become children
of that one true Church, out of which there is no salvation.

In the mean time it is more them clear, that the chardge, which Protestants
lay upon us, as wanting Charity, for saying that their Religion unrepented
destroys salvation; must needs be now transferred from us, and imputed with as
much reason to him, who has laid (as has been seen) an obligation even upon
all Christians, and much more upon the Church, and the Pastors thereof, to
declare the dangers which they incur, who are departed from the Communion of
the holy Catholic Church. And as truly, yea and much more probablely, may
they affirm, that the holy Fathers of the Primitive Church wanted Charity, for
the strictnes, which they used in conde^ning men to Hell, as heretics, for
their obstinancy in holding some one single Doctrine of it self, which yet was
not sometimes so very importa^t. Gal. 5.
That S. Paul wanted charity, when he excluded men from heaven for those sins
of frailty, to which we are daily solicited, even by the very nature and
condition of our own flesh and blood; and in particular also for dissentions
and sects, which signify heresy in that place. That the holy Ghost wanted
charity, being the hand which guided the Apostles finger, to write so severely
as he did. That Christ our Lord wa^ted Charity, in commanding that me^ should
be held for no better then Pagans, Matt. 16.
and Publicans, if in any thing of scandal, and much more of doctrine
concerning faith they disobeyed the Church: for his precept of obedience was
indefinite, and therefore our obedience must not be limited, only to this, or
that. That God the Father himself wanted Charity, who sent Chore, Dathan, and
Abiron alive, Numb. 16.
and headlong into hell, for a mere act of schism, and commanded that
whosoever would not obey the sentence of the Priest for the time being, should,
without any other remedy, be put to death. And lastly that Luther himself, and
his most learned Disciples wanted Charity, not only for defaming the Church of
Rome, as the seat of Antichrist, the whore of Babylon, and the Beast of the
Apocalips, which printes the mark of damnation upon the foreheads of her
Children; but for condemning also all Caluinists, for their heresy, concerning
the blessed Sacrament, besides many others, which are both imputed and proved
upon them, by the Lutherans.

As for Luther and his Disciples, it costs me little to lay them a side, as not
importing much what they say, save that their authority is argumentum ad
homine^, against al such Protestant Libertins, of this nation, as so unjustly
chardge us with want of Charity toward them, for saying that if they dye in
Protestancy, they cannot be saved. But that which I have showed a part rei;
namely that the Fathers of the Primitive Church, that the blessed Apostle S.
Paul, nay that God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost have both
practiced, and imposed upon all Christians, and especially upon the Church and
Churchmen to declare the danger wherein sinners are to loose their souls, by
continuing in sin; must needs suffice to exempt us in the judgment of any
indifferent moral man, from offending against Charity for doing the like.

It is not therefore want of Charity in us, to affirm the danger of their
state, who are in error, out of a most Christian desire to see them delivered
from the same: but it is too evident, that their mislike of us, upon this
occasion, proceeds in them out of Libertinisme and their too great good
fellowship in matters of the soul, and out of the mean conceit, which they
have framed in their minds, of the unity of Faith, and of Communion both in
Doctrine and discipline with the Catholic Church, and of the entirenes of the
infallible truth, and the unspotted service of Almighty God.

And what indeed do they, but show by their whole course, that they desire and
resolve, to believe, and profess according to the occasion; and to comply with
the superior powers of this world; and to obey the motions of appetite and
sense, without being ever so much as told, if they can choose, that they must
loose heaven for their labor? Whereby it may be seen, that the children, are
in this, as like their Mother as they can look. For who perceaues not, that
the Protestant Church, does rather carry a respect to outward Conformity, then
to real unity in matter of Religion; and that indeed, they are but as in jest,
when there is speech of saving souls in any one Church, rather then in another.

It is true that they make both laws and Canons, whereby they oblidge me,
under a world of penalties, to frequent their Churches, and to receive their
Sacraments; but without caring greatly, whether men believe their Doctrine to
be true or no. For I put this case. If a man who were known to be wholly
affected in his heart to the Catholic Faith, should yet, for the saving of
his lands or goods, resolve to comply with their laws by going to their
Churches, and by receiving their Communion; yea and withal should declare in
company the day before, that he was resolved to do so the day after, for the
only saving of his estate, and for the showing of his obedience to the Kings
laws; though yet withal, he were persuaded that their Sacraments were
unlawful, and their Church impure: would that Minister, refuse to let him go
to his Service, and or to communicate with the rest? Infallibly he would not;
and we see daily that they do not in like occasions. For that Church, as I
said, aspires not to Unity, but Uniformity.

But the proceeding of the Catholic Church is very different, and has that
divine truth, which was committed by our Lord to her care, in so high account,
that if she have but just cause to suspect, that any man belieues not in his
heart, as she teaches; she is so far from obliging him under pecuniary mulcts,
to repaier to her service and Sacraments, that she will by no means, admit him
thereunto, till he have first clear himself of that suspicion, and
sufficienly showed himself free, from any such want of belief. Thus does the
Catholic Church of this age proceed, and thus also did the same Church
proceed in the most Primitive times: In so much as that then there were, and
now there are, certain me^ deputed, belonging to particular Churches, who were
called Ostiarij. Whose duty was and is, to attend within at the Church doors,
of purpose to hinder their being present at the celebrating of divine
Mysteries, whom they may know to be obstinately auerst, either from believing
any part of the Doctrine, or from living under the discipline, of the
Catholic Church.

This Church, which is enriched and endowed with the holy Ghost, and
consequently with spiritual Fortitude, which is one of the seven prime gifts
thereof, proceeds like a body, which knows it self to belong to an omnipotent
head; and fears not to avowe, both what it says, and what it does. And as, on
the one side, she expresses all the suauity which can be conceived, and is most
ready to wrap up the most enormous sinners of the world, and the most mortal
enemies which she has, in the very bowels of her compassion, if they will
come to God in the way of penance; so yet withal, on the other side, if men
will presume to be so vastly proud, as to prefer their own fancies before
her wisdom, which was sent down from Heaven for, the direction of the world;
and if, notwithstanding her most charitable endeauours to reduce them, they
will yet add contempt and obstinacy to their other sins, she threatens them
with the danger wherein they are; and she goes on so far, if she find cause,
as to separate them, in the quality of heretics, from her Communion; and
proceeds not against them as against Traitors to Princes, or states, according
to that poor shifte of Protestants (whose guylty Consciences make them not
dare, though their hearts be well bent that way) to punish our Priests
capitally, as for a corrupt Religion; but they set upon them impudent and false
pretext of Treason. For as the Catholic Church is most perfectly charitable,
so withal she thinks she cannot express that virtue better, then by clearly
distinguishing between truth and false hood, and by exhorting men to embrace
the one, and to avoid the other; so far off is she from demeriting, by
letting Protestants know that if they dye impenitent in that Religion, they
loose their souls.

THE CONCLUSION.
IN the mean time it is a most woeful case, chat whilst they will be blaming
us for the want of Charity in condemning them, there should be so few of them,
who have so much compassion and Charity toward themselves, as to fly from
their extreme danger of eternal death. And that such a world of worthy people
being drawn up by pride in the understanding part of the mind, and dragged
down by the disorderly affections of the will, should be so very glad to cast
themselves away, and that for ever.

Our Lord give all men grace, to feel in their very hearts, what a huge misery
it is, to be in state of any mortal sin, but especially of this present
Heresy, which both is grievous in it self, and is besides, a continual
noursery of other sins, by means of those corrupt principles, even concerning
life, which under the false colors of purity, and piety, and Christian
liberty, and the light of the gospel, it is wo^t to infuse into the heart of
man.

For when they teach men, that there is no merit belonging to good work,
(though they be confessed by us to flow, but from the grace and goodness of
Christ our Lord) what courage do they give men to be frequent, and cheerful
in doing of good works? And what cause can they assign, why men should
abstain from sin, when they teach them that the best works which are
performed by the greatest Saints in the world, are no better then sins, and
they in their own nature mortal? Nay when they teach men that the
commandments of God are not possibly to be kept by any man, (even with the
help of that divine grace, which has been purchased and merited for us, by
Christ our Lord, and is communicated to the souls of his servants by faith and
love) what reason can they have, either to exhort men to keep Gods
Commandments, or to reprove them for infringing the same? Yea and yet
further, when they profess that men have not so much as Free will to do any
one good work at all, even when they are first moved, and assisted toward it
by the good grace of God, (for without that grace, all Catholics profess that
no man is able so much as to think one good thought in order to salvation)
with what sense can they encourage men to do any thing which is good, or with
what justice can they punish them for omitting the same: since it has no
dependa^ce at all, in the least degree upon their own Free will?

If therefore now at last, they would give me leave, I would beseech them to
look with steadfast eyes, upon the dangerous state wherein they are; and
besides to consider, that our Lord is so highly good in himself, and has been
so gracious to us, that he deserve to be adored, and served, though all the
world say nay. And they are happy miseries which are endured in honor of such
a Majesty as his; whose infinite power, and wisdom, are as if they were but
mere instruments of his infinite goodness, for the conueighing of graces down
to us, and the drawing of us thereby up to him.

The sins of this world, and especially of Heresy and Schism, which are the
very roots and sources of millions of sins, give matter of sad meditation to
the mind of those men, who behold these things with a clear sight, yea and
even although (by way of supposition) there were no voluntary and malicious
sins committed in the world, yet were it misery enough for a man to live out
of the communion of the holy Catholic Church with loss of time, in doing
good, wherein such inestimable Treasures might be acquired. For supposing that
a man be a true member of that Church, (for as much as concerns his belief;)
and that (for as much concerns his life) he be in state of grace, there is no
moment of time, wherein by the mercy of God (which is ever both preventing, and
cooperating with the will of man) the same man may not procure increase of
grace, either by the doing of some one good deed, or by the saying of some one
good word, or by the producing of some one good thought, to the honor and
glory of our Lord God. Nor is there any weakness of body, or want of learning,
or of other habilityes of the mind, or any distress in fortune, which can
clipp the wings (that is to say the holy affections) of the soul, from
soaring, and struggling thus toward heaven. Now for every degree of new grace,
there is, in correspondence, a distinct degree of glory, laid up to be
possessed in heaven. This glory is a thing of such incomparable, and sovereign
quality and excellency, as that the Blessed Apostle says thereof, That neither
the eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2
nor the ear has heard, nor the heart has comprehended any such thing as
that.

A poor man's eye in this world might at ease discover a million of times more
greatness and glory, then ever the greatest, and most glorious Monarch did
enjoy. And yet a man's eye may be said scarce able to see any thing, if it be
compared with the infinitenes of those other things, whereof we may have news
by our ears. For who can see so many things, as the tongue of others can tell
him of? But yet, neither can all that, which we may even hear, hold any manner
of proportion with those worlds of other things, which by the faculties of our
mind, we may conceive. For when all is seen which can be showed, and when all
is heard which can be told, it remains for us to imagine other manner of
things then all those; and to multiply and frame by fancy, upon a minutes
warning, both innumerable more species, and incomparably more excellent, then
those former were. So that it is no mean expression, for the Blessed Apostle
to use, when he says that the glory and joy of heaven, does excel all that
which can be seen or heard by the sense, or which can even be conceived by the
heart of man, And yet means of high even by this expression, the Apostle
himself dares not venture or presume to tell us how great those joys are; but
only, that other things are not so great as they. And thereby he may rather be
accounted to deliver what they are not, then what they are.

This joy and glory, is so high, and great, and deep as that one instant
thereof would incomparably exceed and out strip, in true account, all the
sensual joy and glory, which has been found and felt, by all the mortal
creatures of flesh and blood put together, from the beginning of the world till
the end thereof; though all that glory and joy, could be cast and summed up
into one single act of glorying, and enjoying. For the honor and pleasure of
this world, carries noe proportion at all, with that of the next, any more then
idle dreams do with strong truths, or vain shadows with substance, which
is substance indeed. For in this life, whatsoever delight is felt, the mind
of man is still too hard for the body, and over works it; and does secretly,
either give or take a kind of lie and insatisfaction, even in the topp of all
the greatest pleasure which it feels, though dull people understand not, or
observe not this. But if, for any one instant, a soul could have any one
glimpse of celestial bliss, and be ingulfed with all the facultyes thereof,
upon an object of such infinite perfection, as God is, and that this were done,
without the interposition, or interpretation of any creature, but that the
whole soul might touch and mingle and unite it self for that instant with
that sovereign obiecte; O how fully would the soul be satisfied! O how base,
and how beastiall would all the delight and glory of this world, both appear
and be, in respect of that!

We may see some traces of this truth, by a consideration of those supernatural
visitations, and spiritual illustrations, and eleuations, whereby our Lord
has been pleased to descend into the souls of innumerable servants and
Spouses of his, even in this life; that so they might be enabled to take in, as
it were some little sent and air of that eternal bliss, which is prepared
for them in the next. Yea and how many have there been, who formerly, being
all immersed in the pursuit of terrene honor, and delight, have by the means
of some one celestial visitation, been instantly, and for ever estranged (and
that with extreme contempt) from the care of all the carnal joy and greatness,
which this world was able to afford them, ane have been fixed with a perpetual
eye, upon the most ardent love, and most loyal faithful service of our Lord
God.

The stories of our Saints lives, and our own experience in conversation with
spiritual persons, which through the goodness of God are never wanting in his
holy Catholic Church, has made us not only see this truth, but even as it
were, to touch it with our fingers ends. And yet there can be no doubt, but
that all the spiritual visitations, and consolations, and ecstasies, and rapts,
which ever shall be, or have been felt and suffered in this life, by all the
servants of God, (and yet in some one of them, we know that S. Paul was taken
up into the third heaven, and that he was possessed with the understanding and
feeling of so high mysteries, as it was neither lawful, not possible for man
to express) are most poor and mean things in comparison of any one moment
of joy in Heaven. And the reason hereof is clear. For whatsoever spiritual
gift is imparted in this life, is but by image and representation; but in the
next, it is in substance, and face to face, with God himself, where he is
seen, as he is indeed.

If then one instant of celestial glory be not only so far exceeding all
carnal joy and pleasure, which is but dust and trash, being compared with that
other; but that also even the highest spiritual gust and joy, which is
experime^ted in this life, be not able once to subsist, in sight of one moment
of that glorious joy, which is felt in heaven (though it be but for one
instant) how infinitely must we find our selves obliged to this immortal God of
ours, who has vouchsafed, not to ty us to instants of time, in the fruition of
that glory; but to enlarge and extend it, I say not to years, or ages, or
worlds of time, but as far as perfect eternity it self? In comparison
whereof the time of all this world, from Adam to this day, and a million of
millions as much time as that, and as many more millions as all the hearts of
all men can comprehend and count, are not so much in durance, as one minute is,
being compared with all those millio^s of time. And yet all this eternity of
such glory, as I have described, is vouchsafed to us by the inexhausted goodness
of our Lord God for having produced any one single act of Faith and Love,
which yet we see may be innumerably multiplied with so much case. For any one
single thought, which is directed to the glory of our Lord God, does increase
the same grace in our souls, and consequently lays up a distinct degree of
that eternal glory, whereof we have spoken. So that, it is a clear and
constant truth, that for every other good thought (which may be conceived in
any one moment of time) we shall have an increase of eternal glory, in a
distinct degree, beyond that which otherwise we should have had; and we shall
for ever see more perfectly the immortal Essence of Almighty God, and love it
more, and enjoy it more, then we should have done, if we had not produced that
one single act of mind, which yet (as I said) may be done by any ignorant or
silly creature in the world, in any one moment of his time. And yet withal, we
are so miserable, as not to lament, that this time should be lost, not only
upon toys, and consequently upon not increasing this stock of immortal
treasure; but even upon committing of sins, which do no thing but horde up
an eternity of immense torments for us, insteede thereof.

We Catholics must be thankful, and beg grace withal, that we may continue
where we are; and we must beg it also for such others, as are not, and will not
be so happy yet; to the end that contemning all the vain delights and honors
of this world, which may entice them, and all the disaduantages and troubles
which may threaten them, they may give themselves up now at last, to be
received into the bosom, of the holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church; and
so, to be embraced by those strong arms of that divine protection and comfort,
which Christ our Lord, her Spouse, has endewed her with, for the saving of
those souls, for which he died. Our Lord God make them so happy, as to receive
this blessing: and let all his Saints and Angels ever glofiry his holy name,
for having imparted it to us.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAPTER 1. THAT Catholics are both improbably, and unjustly charged, with
lack of Charity, for affirming that Protestancy unrepented destroys
salvation. Chapter 2. Of the intention of Catholics, when they say that
Protestancy unrepented destroies salvation, and how that speech is to be
understood. Chapter 3. That our saying; that Protestancy unrepented destroies
salvation, proceeds from want of Charity in us, is no less untrue (because
there is but one true Church) then already I have showed it to be improbable;
and first this is proved by holy Scripture. Chapter 4. The express unity of
the Church is also proved by the authority of the Fathers of the most primitive
times. Chapter 5. It is proved both by holy Scriptures, and Fathers, that out
of this one true Church of Christ our Lord, no salvation is to be found.
Chapter 6. That both Catholics and Protestants cannot possibly be accounted
to be of one and the same Religion, Faith, and Church. Chapter 7. Three
objections ar avoided, which they make against us, to disprove our unity in
faith amongst our selves; and so also is an allegation about Fundame^tal,
points of faith whereby they would show, that they hold as much unity both with
the Fathers, and with the Lutherans, yea and even with us Catholics at this
day, as they are bound to maintain. Chapter 8. That Protestants have no
reason, in alleging the distinction of fundamental and not fundamental
points of faith, as intending to prove thereby, that they are in unity, with
the Fathers of the Primitive Church, or of their fellow brethren the Lutherans,
yea and some times with Catholics at this day. Chapter 9. That Protestants
neither do, nor dare declare what are their fundamental points of faith;
whereby yet they would pretend that they live in the communion of the only one
true Church of our Lord. Chapter 10. A recapitulation of the whole discourse,
wherein follows, upon the confession of both parties, that the Catholics and
Protestants be not both of them sauable in their several Religions without
repentance thereof before they dye; and Catholics must therefore be no longer
held uncharitable, for saying so: but those Protestants are showed to be
Libertines, who say the contrary. The Conclusion.
FAVLTES ESCAPED in the printing.
Faults Corrected Page 8 l. 1 as man as a man 17 l. 2 we own we owe 21 l. 29
hadu^ commaded had commanded 24 l. 26 persisting persisting 30 l. 24 did it
much did it with much 32 l. 28 doctrine or doctrine of 36 l. 16 of of eternal
of eternal 38 l. 1. who forsake who forsakes 41 l. 2 these Saint elwhere the
Saint else where 51 l. 10 to condemned to be condemned 55 l. 28 title of book
title of a book 68 l. 9 particular studied particularly studied 70 l. 22 or
argumt or argument 93 l. 9 execrable of execrable assertion of 101 l. 4. of
ou^^ souls of our souls 110 l 6 and Polycarpe and S. Polycarpe l. 28 scoff
as us scoff at us 117 l. 17 first clear first cleared 119 l. 28 case, chat
case, that 124 l. 29 And yet means of high even by this And yet even by this
means of high.


