Self Denial: OR, A CHRISTIANS HARDEST TASK. WRITTEN By CHRISTOPHER WILSON;
Preacher of the Word of God, etc.

printer's device of Nicholas Oaks, featuring a fleur-de-lis seeding (McKerrow
251)

LONDON: Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for Richard Whitakers, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Kings Head. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sr. John Osbourne Knight; Remembrancer to the Chief
Treasurer in His Majesty's Court of Exchequer: As also to the Right Worshipful
Lady, Dorothy Osbourne his Wife: Christopher Wilson wishes all increase of
grace in this life, and Eternal Happiness in the life to come.
Right Worshipful:
IT has been an ancient and laudable Custom among Humane and Divine Writers,
to entitle their labors intended for the public good, to some particular
person, fit for eminency of place, quality of gifts, and affection of piety; to
Patronize and Commend to the common use, their said labors: It being then so
with me, that being entreated to make public this small Treatise, discoursing
of one of the maine Duties of Christianity: I thought it was meet to go the
Common Road, that none through praejudice might either reject the Work, as
altogether worthless, or despise the Author, as altogether friendlesse; but
that, that authority, which the Word of God has and ought to have among
Christians, might by an external, and secondary testimony of men of worth, be
confirmed and countenanced.

I have therefore presumed (though without your privity) to take up your
Worships Name to be as an ornament to the work; that those who know not the
Author (as being an obscure man) might not yet despise it, while it is allowed
of such a one, of whom the Church of God has long agon taken notice of as
Foster-Father; and the Commonwealth rejoiced in as an vncorrupt and grave
Officer and Majestrate. Yet in this business I had some strife in my self,
while on the one side I considered your natural Disposition which desires not,
as indeed you need not, the applause of pen and paper; having many real and
solid praeconies and testimonies of your laudable, and virtuous actions, I was
deterred: But when on the other side I considered my duty and that special
obligation I stand bound in, to your Worships, for your many favors, I could
not but express some evidence and testimony of a thankful mind; and knowing
that none of the common kind wherewith the world does gratify her
benefactors, would not be acceptable to you, especially from a Scholar and
Minister: I am bold to present such as best befits me, and pleases your self;
accept therefore a testimony of a thankful mind, and such as if in no other
regard might be acceptable; yet as it reioyces the husbandman or Gardener to
taste of his planted and grafted fruits: so seeing this is a handful of that
fruit which has sprung from that Tree, which was first planted in the Garden
of God, by your hand, and is still watered and warmed by the dew and beams of
your beneficence: I hope it will not be unpleasing to you, and the Church of
God will thankfully acknowledge, that what euerfruite has, or may grow hence,
that, under God, it is to be ascribed to your most Christian piety and care of
the same: Who finding one of the Daughters of Syon harbourlesse and ragged,
has honestly housed her, and clothed her. I had not thought (believe me
Worshipful Sir) to have gone thus far, when I put Pen to paper, to speak of
your praise to your self or other, for I know it pleases you not; yet let God
be glorified, and his servants honored.

To return then, seeking a Patron for my Work; who may be thought fitter then
the Patron of the worker? Lords in old time did challenge, and the Law of God
allowed it, that the service of servants was their Masters wholly and sure;
how ever the work for the outward lincaments may not seem worthy your
judicious eye, and great learning, yet for the matter being taken out of Gods
Book, which by your daily practice I can witness, is most precious unto you;
I know nothing borrowed thence, can seem contemptible.

I pray you therefore accept in good worth this my tendered service; and as the
Lord accepts of his servants works not by the work it self, but according to
the heart and mind of the worker; so judge not of it, I pray you, by the out
side, but by the affection of the giver. And thus ceasing longer to distract
you from your many serious affairs, I commend the reading of this Treatise to
your best leasures; praying God for a Blessing on it, and commending your
self, and all your Worshipful family to Gods gracious prospering and
protection, still to be over you and yours in goodness. I humbly take my leave
from my Study at Haunes the 24. of June, this present Year 1624.

Your Worships to be Commanded in all Christian Offices: CHRISTO: WILSON.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, in this little Treatise I offer to thy view one point of thy
profession, such as is thy Alpha and Omega, the beginning and perfiting of a
Christian: the first to be learned ere thou can set thy foot over the
Threshold of Christ's School, and yet not perfectly learned till thou be in
Christ's glorious Kingdom. The consideration of this one point will help,
direct, and settle thy musing thoughts about many things that befall the course
and condition of Religion in the World; for here is discovered the stepmother
of all true Religion, whither we consider the rule and doctrine of it, or the
practice of it: Here also thou may see the arising and increasing of all
false Religion coming out of the earth and sea of man's carnal earthly heart,
and troublesome affections. Here thou shall see as it were under one Roof, a
Prison and a shop or forge; a Prison wherein thou may behold Divine truth,
and sacred Religion chayned and bound with many Fetters in the Common Iayle of
Selfe-conceite, and Self-love. Here again thou may behold the Shop and
Forge wherein are wrought, and hammered out the frame and fabric of all false
religions and opinions, both within and without the Church. Here thou may
behold the Seminary of all Heresies, and factions that trouble the Church, the
ground of the grand false and deceitful religions that reign in the World, as
Pagan Idolatry, Profane Mahumetisme, Popish Heresy and Superstition, all
turbulent Schisms, as the late Arminianisme, they arise all out of one bitter
root or fountain before named; and to give thee a little taste and touch of
them both.

For the first, here thou may see truths Prison, wherein it is detayned in
unrighteousness, and that with three chief bonds: The first is Self-conceit,
arising from the want of Denial of our own minds, wit, opinion, reason,
fancies, and wisdoms: for such being the natural blindness of the mind
that it cannot conceive many truths, such is also the Natural dotage to
conceit and invent of it self, or to receive from other any strange fictions,
vanities, curiosities, or what pleases the carnal fancies of men, that truth
is neglected either as not known, or rejected as not pleasing: so that, with
this one chain Selfe-conceite, does bind up many precious truths, or seal
them up under the privy seal of Ignorances. This St. Paul notes in the Roman
Gentiles, and others, that while they professed themselves wise, they became
fools, so that when in some sort they knew God, they did not glorify him as
God, but became vain in their imaginations, or discourses raised thence; and
their foolish hearts were full of darkness, so that in the end they turned the
Truth of God into a lie.

Add unto this as a part of it a defect or viciousness that is in the
practuall understanding, called conscience; which when it should give a perfect
direction before, and a right verdict after our actions or conceits, it is
erroneous, dull, idle: not willing to examine things, apt to be deceived, and
so to excuse or witness with, as good, when it should accuse and witness
against, as bad. So that as many a man of a naughty conscience as we speak,
who knows some particular truth or fact, yet smoothers them, not caring to
reveal them: so is it naturally with man through this defiled conscience,
which is as a grave to bury many holy truths in. Alas lamentable experience
sufficiently witnesses this same, both in the general, and in many
particulars; as is seen in many Papists either ignorant, and mis-in-formed, or
dreaming and ill minded ones, who see and know the truth, but they love it not,
and therefore will not give witness of it: but as they have labored to get
in, and burn many Books of Holy Truth, so do they suppress the same in their
minds. But if the beams of Divine truth break and pierce into the darkness
of the mind, it would give forth some luster thence to the whole man; then a
second bond is at hand to bind this Truth, and that is, Self-will, the will
taking upon her as a Judge to examine all evidence, all places, tenants,
propositions; and if they please not the will, they are then rejected and pass
no further, either secretly checking the understanding, as too busy in her
informations, or only examining the reasons projected, or cunningly turning
them another way, resolved they shall not have her assent and confirmation, and
so be dead and nipped in the head: so that the will Procrustes-like stretches
out each opinion to the length of her measure, or cutting off what is longer,
so that partly man's inability in his elective faculty, and partly its wilfulnes
refusing truths showed by the understanding, restraynes many parts of Divine
truth; as was also seen in many Pharisees in the days of Christ, who saw and
were often convinced, but wilfully went from and against the same: such also is
the condition of many wilful Papists in these our days.

But if truth pass the upper part of the soul, as reason, conscience, and
will, and that now there might be hope, there would be no stoppage; to a
third, and that a strong and violent band to offer violence, and to make a new
faction and Head; and this is Selfeloue: who leads a multitude of violent and
clamorous passions, drowning and crying down the voice and judgment of
reason, as we see often in many elections, the greater and baser part to be
carried against the smaller and wiser. For when holy truth falls into the hands
of these, she is carried from her own Bar where she should be tried, the
Laws by which she should be judged are refused, the lawful Judge deposed,
and sometime envy, malice, self-love, pride, vainglory, sometime other
unruly affections and passions are made the lawful Jury to be empenelled
against truth, and if in any thing she may be found an enemy to thy popular,
sensual and carnal state, it is sufficient to commit her to Prison: Here
things are examined how they stand with Honor, Pleasure, profit, ease, or any
worldly respects, and as they make with or against these, so have they
approbation or disallowance: this of old was alleged against the truth, we
will offer Cakes to the Queen of Heaven, for then we had plenty of all things.

Thus Demetrius and his Fellows pleaded hard against Paul, and his religion:
this carried the Scribes and Pharisees wholly against Christ, as Christ told
them, How can ye believe, seeing ye seek honor one of another, and not the
Honor that comes of God? and in another place, if we let him alone, all will
follow him, and the Romans will come and take our Kingdom; and then as
Michaiah must be restrained because he speaks not good for Ahab; and as the
Philistimes though convinced of the truth and Majesty of the God of Israel, yet
they encouraged one another, saying, Let us quit our selves as men, that we be
not slaves to the Hebrews. Thus does Natural men, transported with carnal
passions. This is clearly seen by that answer, that learned Erasmus made to
the Duke of Saxony, who requiring his judgment touching Luthers cause,
answered it was true and just: The Duke replying why then do they rage against
him, he answered because he stracke at the Popes Triple Crown, and sought to
pull the Luncions or full Diet from the Monks belly; so that by this, that
has been said, the first point is sufficiently cleared, so that we need not
go far to enquire after discountenancing of Truth: ill thriving and many
stoppages it finds, for sometimes it meets with one of these, sometimes with
another; so that, till the Lord break these hands, Truth fayles, and Religion
cannot enter, as the Prophet complains in the behalf of Justice.

For the latter, I must be brief, neither needs it any further proof: for
that which is proved an enemy to Truth, is always a friend to the contrary,
so that these three, Selfe-conceite, Self-will, Self-love, they are the
inventors, the establishers, maintayners, and every way magnifiers of all false
Religions, as being the brat of it own brain; and therefore as the
Philosophers answered witily and truly, the earth was sparing and churlish to
the good herbs, but liberal in nourishing the weeds, because to the one
she was a Stepmother, to the other a Natural mother, so every man is as a
Natural soil for all errors, heresies, idolatries and the like, but very
unkind for Holy Truth, further then we be fitted by grace; so that false
religious both arising from man, and attempered to man's Natural reason, and
humane wisdom, earnall affections and the like, it cannot be but they must be
approved of all such who have not learned in some measure this Lesson of
Christ, of Self-denial: so that it is to too apparent hence, whence Truth
finds small entertainment, but false Religion draws multitudes, the one draws
up the the Hill, the other down; the one with the stream, the other against
it: Yea hence it appears that consents and multitudes are so far from being
evidences of Truth, as that they are just suspicions of the contrary, and a
good rule in matters of Religion to try particulars by, is to examine what is
plausible to humane wisdom and affections, and to question that, but what
crosses these and carries us against them, is likely to be of God.

These things, Gentle Reader, I commend unto thy serious consideration as
worthy of it, if thou respect the matter it self, as for the form and Phrase
thereof, I must crave thy favorable censure: the Nouelty of the subject as it
was the ground of some friends importunity to publish it, so if I have failed
in any thing in the same, it deserves pardon, it is easy erring, where the way
is not made before.

For thee learned Reader, if any such shall vouchsafe to peruse it, I submit my
self to his judgment and correction: glad if I may minister but any occasion
to any such of further enlarging this so necessary a subject. For other
Readers, and the common Christian, for whose good I have penned this, if it
shall any ways inform thy judgment, settle thy thought, and help thee
forward in the School of Christ, I have my desire, my joy shall be full; and
if this my first fruits shall find kind entertaynment in the World, it may
add encouragement to other assayes. In mean while, I commending the fruit of
this Labor to the Lords Blessing, craving thy Prayers, I cease remaining thy
Brother in the common Faith and Salvation, and a Wel-willer of thy good:

CHRISTOPHER WILSON.

SELF DENIAL: OR, A Christians hardest Task.
LVKE 9.23. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross daily, and follow Me.


THESE Words are Recorded by the Evangelistes to have been often used by our
Savior, and that on diverse occasions partly special, Mat. 16.23, 24.
as Mat. 16.23.24. Where Peter taking on him to Counsel Christ, but much
amiss, Christ having reproved him, and showed him the ground of his error,
he lays down this as the Cure of that and all others of the same nature,
that none cannot only not counsel him, but not follow him counselling them
unless they learn this point to Deny themselves: Luke 9.
St. Luke he shows the occasion to have been this, that having spoken of his
own future sufferings and death, to the end that none should be offended at
them, or expect other condition in as many as would constantly follow him, he
shows that this is to be received as the first lesson in his School, That
all his followers must deny themselves and resolve for the worst: Briefly,
whereas in the end of this Chapter some offer themselves to be followers of
Christ, but are refused; and one being called of him did make excuse: Our
Savior lays down this as a general qualification of all those that are
meet and fit to follow him, that they must resolve in way of preparation and
due disposition, To deny themselves, etc. For whereas there is nothing more
necessary to servants then to know their Masters will, and their own duty: So
Christians being all the servants of God, nothing more beseemes them then the
enquiry of their Masters will, and more specially the maine duties required at
their hand. 1 The Law.


Now because none might plead excuse of Ignorance through infirmity, 2 The
Gospel.
that they are so many as can hardly be remembered; as God dealt in this
behalf with the Jews, The sum of every Christian man's duty consisting of
three Branches.
reducing all their duties to ten herds or words: And Christ has reduced them
to two, Love of God, and Neighbor: So our Savior Christ has most briefly
laid down the whole sum of every Christian man's duty, consisting of three
branches. 1 A denial of out selves. 2 Bearing the Cross. 3 Following Christ.


The first, a denial of our selves,

Secondly, the bearing the Cross.

Thirdly, the following Christ.

And in truth, the last contains the whole duty of a Christian.

Yet because our Savior, as he saw what were the Lets of the practicing of
the duty, which while they were not removed, it were in vain prescribed;
therefore Christ has set them down in the words going before: There are two
maine Lets which hinder us from following Christ. 1 Inward within us, and that
is our selves.
For there are two maine Lets whereby every man is hindered from following
Christ: the one is inward within a man, and that is himself: The other is
outward, arising from the malice of Satan and the World, raising up continual
troubles and afflictions, against the professors of Christ.

Now these two unless they be removed, 2 Outward, which are the afflictions
we have in this World.
the first, by a resolute renouncing and abandoning what ever is in our selves,
an enemy to Christ's Doctrine, or any part of it. The other, by arming our
selves with courage and sprituall armor to an undaunted suffering and bearing
of the Cross: I say without this preparation before hand, it is bootlesse and
to no purpose to offer our selves to Christ: so that hence arises unto us this
necessary Instruction.



This point our Savior teaches by two notable similitudes, Luke 14.26. to 34.
Luke 14. the 26. verse. to the 34. That as it is folly to begin to build,
before a man have considered what the charge will be; and whether he be able
and willing to disburse so much, or else to give over at the first: For as it
is folly to attempt war before we have well weighed our own and our enemies
forces, Simile.
that if we find our selves too weak, we may make as good conditions of
peace as we can: So when we enter Christianity to raise up such a building as
being well grounded, will stand against all storms, and before we enter this
spiritual war against our three grand enemies, the flesh, the World, and
Satan, it behooues us that we bestirre us to get all things requisite to the
one and the other. He are that of Solomon has place, Proverbs.
Establish thy thoughts by counsel, and by counsel make War: And that
speech of the Heathen has place above all, here. That every Action must want
two things, 1. Rashness. 2. Negligence.


The one to be avoided ere we enter; the other when we have set upon it: much
more this work so holy, so weighty. It is a dangerous thing in war, or
building to commit an error in the onset. So in Christianity to set out
il-appointed. We know a journey of any length is not undertaken but with
preparation of all things necessary, and with resolution to abide all ways and
weathers. To undertake a Sea-voyage without a Ship well appointed in every
regard, were to expose the Ship and all in it to a thousand dangers. Now all
these inconveniences in worldly things are not comparable to the spiritual
evils and miseries we shall bring on our selves, if we enter not our
Christian profession with all things necessary; both a right fitness of our
own minds, and an vndauntednesse of spiritual courage.

Hence it was that at the first setting up of the Church of Christ, when those
that were of ripe age were called, none were admitted, but such as gave good
testimony of a sound faith and steadfast resolution. That question which Christ
put forth to the two Disciples, Mat. 20.22.
Matthew. 20.22. Are ye able to drink of my Cup, and be Baptized with my
Baptism: That is, are you willing and able to undergo the same things in some
measure that I must.

This question I say is proposed to all, and this same thing is no less
requisite to us borne Christians, for seeing it pleases the great General,
Christ, to put us into his muster-role when we are children, and to keep us
in the Camp or Garrison, and give us pay many years ere we be able to
strike a stroke in his Battles, it behooues us the more, when we come, to
understand what Christ has done for us, and what we have undertaken by a
solemn oath to do for him, that we set our selves in good earnest unto it,
and now to quite our selves like men, unless we would renounce our Generals
colors, and flying out of his Camp go to serve his enemy with that body, wit
and strength, our own General had given us.



Secondly, it reprooues those who when they are called upon to do such things
as they promised, when they entered Christianity by Baptism, they are
displeased, as if some new or strange thing were urged upon them, it being no
other thing then their own Vow.

Thirdly, they are reproved, that when they meet with any harsh point, as of
mortification, or meet with oppositions, reproaches, or losses in the World,
they are offended and begin to repent them, and to think of embracing some
such religion as will well suite with their carnal and earthly minds.

Matthew.
that he that puts his hand to the Plough, and looks back, is not worthy of
the Kingdom of God: We may come to this resolution, that neither our own
carnal wisdom, nor worldly discouragements may make us take offense at
Christ or his truth, ever remembering that of Christ, Mat. 11.6.
Blessed is he that is not offended at me.

Thus much then may suffice to have spoken of this Doctrine. Now let us
proceed to the handling of the first Let laid down, which is necessarily to
be removed. That is set forth in these Words.

Let a man deny himself: The Text.
Matthew says, Let a man forsake himself: The Word here signifies, not a
simple or weak denial, but a stout and constant denial, a denial again and
again: It is a kind of phrase much used in Scripture, borrowed from great
men, or Masters of Requests, who if they be importuned in any thing unlawful
or unfitting, they do constantly deny the petitions. So must a Christian, if
in matter of Religion, his own corrupt nature, reason, or wisdom shall make
any motion or request either to like or dislike, do or not do, any thing that
agrees not with Religion, but is opposite, he is at no hand to yield unto the
same, but to advise with the mouth of the Lord, to consider what God and his
Word says, and not to swerve from that, Numb. 24.13.
though (as Balaam said) We could gain a housefull of gold or silver. More
fully for the meaning of these words, (Let a man deny himself;) we may not
imagine that Christ who took our whole nature on him, with the affections and
infirmities, does require of his followers that they should deny their reason,
and nature, to put off all humane affections, and natural desires, so as to be
brute Beasts, to become a stock without life or sense: For reason and
affection have their place, and use in man; but in one word hereby is
commanded the renouncing of all that is in us, which we have brought on our
selves as our handy-workes, besides and contrary to that we were created at
the first: So that to deny our selves is, that in matters of Religion, in
judging of Gods truth and worship, in affecting or disliking any part thereof,
we should not advise with our own carnal reason, humane wisdom, worldly
affections, or receive, or reject any thing in it as it was pleasing and
plausible to our own private judgments: Yea, that what ever thing was good in
us of it self, yet if it became any bindrance to the ready and entire
embracing of Christ, that we should renounce the proper motions and placites
of our own minds, to neglect our own affections, to repress all the
counsels and persuasions of the flesh, to live not to our selves but to God,
and all for Christ.

This denial is to be practiced according to all the parts and powers of the
soul; as mind, will, desire, affection, appetite, etc. Briefly that we
offering our selves to be worshippers and servants of God and Christ, we do
no way seek our own ease, pleasure, profit, glory; but set our selves wholly
to glorify God, and do good to our Christian brother: So then the meaning
being cleared; the Doctrine arising hence is this.



This duty thus generally propounded, has diverse Branches, for some of the
things in man are such as for matter of religion are altogether corrupted and
so wholly to be denied: Others there are that are not evil in themselves, but
accidently corrupted are not to be stayed on: Other things there are that are
good, and the gifts of God by grace; which yet are in some sort to be denied,
but not as the former: For the better conceiving of which duty, and the more
full and distinct handling of it, I will divide it into several Branches
thereof, which are seven which are to be Denied.

Secondly, the necessity of this duty shall be laid forth in sundry
particulars, illustrated with examples.

Thirdly and lastly, the excellency of it shall be displayed by the worthy
works thereof; and then we stirred up for the laboring in this duty with
means of direction in the same.

Touching the Branches of this Duty, 1 Branch to be denied, is our wisdom.
the first is the denial of our own wisdom, understanding, reason, mind,
thoughts, imaginations, with all the conceits, conceptions, and inventions
thereof: being sinful, some of them being idle, and wandering, some curious and
vain, some ungodly, some unclean, unjust, uncharitable: All these in matter
of Religion are to be denied: Deuter. 12.8. Deuteronomy. 12.8.
Ye shall not do what seems you good in your own eyes. This very thing is
the drift of the second Commandment, forbidding all devised worship, and the
Lord often challenging the people for this, that they chused their own
inventions, and that the fear of him was taught by the precepts of men: Thus
Christ tells us, Luke 16. Luke 16.
That which is highly pleasing to man is abominable to God; and on the
contrary, that which is displeasing to man, is pleasing to God: Gods thoughts
being not as man's thoughts: Esaias.
briefly all the discourages that arise from our natural conceits, as being
vain, unprofitable, and perverted, as does plainly appear in the wisest
discourses of the heathen men: whereof the Apostle does speak: Romans 1.21, Rom
1.21.22.
22. Yea, so true it is that these are to be denied, that the greater color
and shadow that they have of wisdom, the more pernicious they are unto man,
Romans 8.7, 8.
and prejudicial unto God. This the Apostle does teach: Romans 8.7, 8. The
wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. Hence it is, that those that are
soonest brought to the true obedience of God and his Word are such for the most
part as are foolish, simple and of weak conceits, whereas those which have
been most famous for wisdom and understanding, have been hardly brought to
the subjection of Gods Wisdom and Truth.

Paul: 1 Cor. 1.21. 1 Cor. 2.14.
1 Cor. 1.21. and 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man discernes not the things of
God, for they are foolishnes unto him: Simile.
Neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned. So that as a
Beast cannot perceive or comprehend things reasonable because above his Nature:
So natural reason cannot conceive the things of God, the eye of the mind
being blinded. Examples.
Examples to make this good, John 3.3, 4. 1 Nichodemus.
are many: as first of all in Nicodemus, John 3.3, 4. Not conceiving the
mystery of Regeneration; and generally in all the Pharisees who as they were
more wise in their own conceits, and swelled with the opinion of their own
wisdom, so were they the furthest from embracing Christ. This also is plainly
to be seen in the History of Naaman who whilst he was enjoined by the
Prophet such things as in his carnal sense and reason were foolish and weak,
2 Naaman.
he grew into choler with the Prophet, 2 Kings 5.14.
and had he not after renounced his own reason, he had returned home as
Leaprous as he came. And by nothing more does the truth of this appear, then
hence: Romans 1.21, 22.
That the wiser men have been and are in their own imaginations, the more
they have erred. They became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
hearts were blinded; yea, while they professed themselves wise, and thereuppon
to oak on them to appoint a manner of Gods worship, they became fools.

From this root also arises the common unacceptable service of blind and
superstitious people, obtruding unto God their good intentions as they call
them, which is nothing else but their own thoughts and inventions as
acceptable service unto God, thinking whatsoever pleases man, must also please
God, forgetting that of Christ, Luke 16.15.
That which is pleasing unto men is abominable unto God. Hence also it is,
that the most wise are most auerse to religion: the Publicans entering before
the Scribes and Pharisees, and in all ages the Apostles assertion is verified.
1 Cor. 1.27.
1 Cor. 1.27. Not many wise, not many mighty are called, etc. because their
wisdom is not, nor cannot subject it self to the Wisdom of God, it being
drunken with a spiritual pride whereby they think foul scorn to be checked
and taught wisdom of an Inferior: such a wisdom as the great ones of this
World have not known, insomuch as the Apostle is forced in plain terms to
deliver it: 1 Cor. 3.18.
If any be wise, let him be a fool, that he may be Wise.

The Use of this point is most profitable: For first it does discover unto us
the true grounds of many things in matter of Religion, which while we consider
not, we are either troubled at, or offended, or wonder: As first hence we may
see whence comes the many differing and devised Religions in the World: As that
of Paganism, Mahumetisme, Papisme, Arminianisme, Familisme, Brownistme,
Anabaptisme, Arianisme and others, and that they are so generally embraced.
They come hence, that men not denying carnal reason, humane wisdom,
plausible opinions to the flesh, have forged a Religion out of these, that is
so suitable to man's corrupt nature, that he delights in it.

brought into the true Church and Religion of God, even from humane wisdom,
carnal reason, cunning pollice, the diverse humors and affections of men,
which so please men as what ever arises hence is exceeding delightful, as man
naturally loves the brat begotten of himself; for from what other ground have
come those infinite Ceremonies of making and adoring of Images, Solitary life,
Abotts, Monks, Friars, Pilgrimage, Purgatory, Fastings, Difference of meats,
and Days, Distinction of Clergy, and Laitye, Sngle life, power of Indulgences,
constrained and approved Ignorance, and unknown devotion, diverse places after
death according to the diverse degrees of goodness, worshipping of Saints,
meditation of them, their multiplied Sacraments, their divided and half
Communion, Auricular confession, buying of pardons, Popes supremacy,
dispensions with the Laws of God, and sins of men, deposition of Princes,
absoluing of men dying, excommunicate after they be Dead, and what other.

All these have come out of the shop of reason, humane wisdom, carnal
policy, and pretended devises of man's brain.

And hence it is that they are so easily embraced, so hardly forsaken, which
thing while the World considers not, they are ready to judge with them against
the Truth: All these are discovered and reproved in that they have a show of
carnal wisdom; and are measured, grounded and gilded over with witty
reason, Luke 26.15.
plausible and cunning devises, but at no hand agreeing with the simplicity of
truth and wisdom of God, who judges not according to outward appearance, nor
looks not, nor likes as man likes.

deny reason, and humane wisdom, in matters of Gods Worship, and so suspect
what ever is most plausible to it; we must not bring our thoughts or conceits
with us, but resolve to abandon the same; Captiuating (as St. Paul speaks)
our thoughts, and bringing every imagination into the subjection of Jesus
Christ, if we once know the mind of God, we may not reason against it; for
as where the Philosopher ends, the Physician begins: So where reason ends,
Grace and Faith begins: Yea, this shows how needful it is for every
Christian to labor for regeneration, whereby he may be renewed in the spirit
of his mind, and endewed with the spirit of Revelation, and with judgment to
discern things excellent, that he call not good evil, and evil good, but
that he may be able to prove and approve what the good, perfect and
acceptable will of God is; and this is that wisdom to be wise to sobriety.
Rom 12.3.
And thus much for the first branch of Denial.

The second thing that we must deny in our selves, is the denial of our own
Wills, 2 Branch, our Will, which must be Denied.
Judgments, Elections, Choyces, and Determinations in matters of Religion: This
is a harder task then the former, for the will is wil-full, peremtory,
headstrong, causing to walk after the stubbornness of our own hearts, is
violent in her elections, Jeremy 18.
approbations, refusalls, as the Prophet Jeremy brings in the Jews in the 18.
Chapter saying desperately we will do this or that: Jeremy 44.25.
And Jeremy 44.25. We will do what seems good to us, we will offer Cakes to
the Queen of Heaven; that is the Sun: So that this is most necessato be
denied, for our will is most contrary to Gods Will: his is holy, heavenly,
pure, peaceable; but ours are froward, carnal, malicious, and this is the true
rule and ground of obedience; the denial of our own will, and the subiecting
of it to another.

own will, but their Masters directions, how much more ought we, who always
may justly suspect our selves, and never can suspect the will of Christ, and of
God, it being the square of right, for therefore is a thing good, just, and
equal, because God wills.

This our will therefore, as contrary to the will of God, (as fire and water)
must be subdued, we cannot serve God and Mammon, nor our own will and Gods
will: It is meet that Hagar should stoop to Sarah.

Thus Christ pleased not himself, and came not to do his own will, but his
Fathers: As he has notably taught us by his own example, Heb. 10.7.
Heb. 10.7. In the Volume of thy Book it is written, I should do thy Will,
lo I come to do it: Often Christ witnesses this: I came not to do my own
will, Matthew.
but my Fathers that sent me; And how necessary this is, may appear by that
one example of Christ, who with a holy striving did subdue his will though most
holy to the righteous will of his Father: Math. 26.39. Father if it be
possible, let this Cup pass, yet not my will, Mat. 26.39.
but thine be done. Sundry particulars of this, will be set down when we
come to the general necessity of all, and therefore we come to the Use.

denial of our own will, Col. 2.20, 21.
hence Collos. 2.20, 21. to the end all false Religions are called
will worship, they have a show of wisdom in will worship, and therefore are
condemned. For all the former points of Popery they have come partly from
reason, and wisdom; partly from self-will, abusing their authority and
pretending a spirit of infallability and not erring, and therefore to do what
they lift.

deny his own reason and choice, and wholly to subject himself to Gods; to
renounce his own will, and to choose and do the will of God.

This is harder then to offer all outward sacrifice, then to undergo the
seuerest penance of whip and sackcloth: So that the Papist was not aware of
this, as in truth, they know it not, nor teach it, and therefore as if
Christianity had been a sport and had not in it to take men up withal, these
holy and hard taske-maisters would impose burdens of their own.

of all service and obedience is the will of the commander, not the commanded;
especially as God being most wise, so his will is most just, yea it is our
life: whereas to follow our own wills proved our destruction in Adam, and
still would do if we give way to the swinge of our wills: neither let us
thiuke much of it, the Angels in Heaven do it, Christ Jesus on earth did it.
And thus much for the second branch, the third follows.

The third part of Self-denial is of out affecctions, 3 Branch, is our
Affections, which are to be Denied.
desires, lusts, appetites, and petitions of the flesh, and espetially that
evil root of Concupiscence with the vicious and depraved affections of self
love, couetuousnesse, wrath, pride, envy, uncleanness: these as they are more
corrupt, sensual, and violent, then either reason or will, so need they more
to be denied, these distemper the whole man, and often carry him so headlong
that the voice of reason cannot be heard: this is that the Apostle Paul does
speak of, Gal. 5.24.
Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the affections and lusts of
the flesh. And further declares the same to be contrary to good motions,
desires, and affections of the spirit, Col. 3.5. we are called to mortify the
affections which are called our very members, Col. 3.5.
this mortifying and crucifying is this denial Christ speaks of; and this is
requisite in a threefold regard.

For first, they are by nature set on their false objects, we loving,
delighting, trusting in those things we should not love, delight and trust in,
and we fearing, greiuing, and abhorring the things that ought to be loved and
not feared: rejoiced in and not greiued at, sought unto and not fled from, so
that till these be set to look the right way, they carry all awry with them.



Gal. 5.22.
these chefely maintain the combat twixt the flesh and the spirit, for these
are contrary one to another: that we cannot do the good we would, but are
carried to do the evil we would not. As to instance, Romans 7.17.


1. Nature refuses to dye, to be mortified, to be in subjection, and desires
to live, to be above, and at liberty: But,

Grace and our profession teaches to be mortified, to be Gal. 6.14.
crucified to the World, and the World to us.

2. Nature seeks after Math. 19.21
profit to it self: But,

Grace teaches to seek the benifit of others. 1 Cor 9.12.

3. Nature is glad when she is Acts 12.23.
honored: But John 12.42, 43 John 4.44.

Grace ascribes all Genesis 3.12.
honor to God, and rejoices when God is honored.

Nature desires to make the best of it self, and chooses rather to hide and
conceal, then plainly to confess, and lay open it own blemishes and sins.
But,

Grace teaches us to take the Anotomizing knife of Gods word, and ripp up our
own hearts, and makes us willing and ready to acknowledge and confess our
sins unto the Lord: and communicate our infirmities unto others, by whose
advice and prayers we may be comforted. James 5.16.

4. Nature fears g reproach. But, Grace teaches to rejoice at Acts 5.41.
rebukes.

5. Nature loves Col. 5.8.
case: But, Grace requires 1 Cor. 15.38
diligence and pains.

6. Nature calls to Jude 1.16.
greatness, to pride, to roughness, cruelty, revenge: But, Gal. 5.20, 21.

Grace thirsts after Gal. 5 22.23
goodness, Gal. 5. 22.23
gentleness, meekness, humility, love, pardoning of Injuries.

7. Nature savors only of earthly, worldly, and n temporal things: But,

Grace has a sweet favor in things heavenly o and spiritual, as the gifts
and graces of Gods spirit: the benifits of Christ, and the joys of Heaven for
evermore.

So that in infinite of this kind, the natural desires being contrary to the
Spirit, no marvel though we are to deny our Desires: But if these loins of
our mind be not girded up, we are no fitter then he that has long coats
hanging down, is fit to run a Race; And no sooner are we like to arrive at
the haven of Heaven, then that Pilot at his desired harbor, whose ship is
carried away with wind and waves: So that here is the shipwreck of many good
Christians, while they give place, some to one carnal affection, some to
another. As one is carried away with Pride: another with Profit, a third with
Pleasure, a fourth with Malice and Revenge: Thus Demas fell away, here is the
stony ground and the thornies failing that they bring not fruit: Christ was
excellent in this as in all other things, in a sweet temper of all his
affections, so were the ancient Patriarchs, not greatly moved at any thing. And
this is of singular and daily use to a christian, for hereby we refrain first
from all unlawful Pleasures, and Profits, And then secondly in things lawful,
as Meat, Drink, Pleasures, Recreations, Gain, we look to the due measure
and circumstances of Time, Place, and Persons, not giving scope to what
natural affection would carry us, but limiting our desires by grace and Gods
word.

enter Christianity with unmortified affections, and without denial of
themselves any thing that Nature desires, and so either they come to Religion
for carnal ends, and not for conscience and to the right end, or being
entered they are ready to fall from the truth, if it does not satisfy their
carnal desires, as among the Jews Jeremy 44 They would be of that Religion,
Ver 44.
wherein they had thriuen best. Othersome again being Christians are so
carried after carnal desires, as that they seek nothing but the satisfying
the same, and wholly neglect those taskes of denotion which a Christian should
keep, because these are harsh to carnal affections: Hence also it is, that
others some by one unbridled affection or other, as Pride, Anger, teastinesse,
are a scandal to Religion.

Paul's rule, to use the world as if we used it not, buying as though we
possessed not, rejoicing as though we rejoiced not etc. If this be done there
is nothing in Christainity hard, and without this, nothing is easy; for how
should we cleave unto God by Fear, Love, Confidence, and the like, while these
are glued to the things of this world. And thus much for the third branch.

The fourth branch of this Denial is, The 4. branch of Selfe-Denyall is our
Righteousness
that we must Deny our own worth, Excellency, civil Righteousness,
Goodness of nature, Fairness of carriage, Courtesy, plain and just dealing,
and what other of the like nature, for these albeit they are good in
themselves, and are not in the same manner to be denied as the former, yet in
diverse respects they being hurtful to Religion,



Titus 1.16. Titus. 1.16.








For we must annihilate our selves, Romans 10.3.
that we may extol the grace and goodness of God. This the Prophet Esaias
taught. Esaias. 64.6. Job. 25.5.
All our righteousness is as a defiled cloth. Yea with Job let us say, That
the stars are not clear in Gods sight: how much less man that is a worm.
Genesis 18.27.
This was in Abraham, let me that am but dust and ashes speak: Let God be true,
and every man a liar. Thus Daniel, Dan. 9.8. Phil. 3.8. 2 Samuel 7.18.19.22. 1
Chro. 29.11, 12, 13, 14. 2 Samuel 9.8.
To us belongs shame and confusion. Thus Paul, Phil. 3.8. I count all things
loss and dung. See it in the example of David, 2 Samuel 7, 18, 19, 22. 1 Chronicles.
29.11, 12, 13, 14. And sure since man to man will do it ( Mephebosheth says to
David) 2 Samuel 9.8. What is thy servant, that thou should look on such a
dead Dog as I. How then in the lowest of humility should we abject our selves
when we think, or speak, or hear of the great and fearful Majesty of
Almighty God.

Had this lesson been learned of them that profess themselves the deuoutest
in humility, A note of humility and self Denial.
they would never have dared to enter plea with God, to justify themselves in
his presence, before whom the mountains tremble and the Rocks melt as wax,
there should no word have been heard of the worthiness of Man, of free will,
of merrits, works of Supererogation; all these with other spring from this
bitter root of (Philautia) self love: The Elders teach this duty by casting
their Crowns at the Lambs feet.

Besides, that if to these there be adjoined an outward profession of
Religion, they think themselves so perfect as that they want nothing. This was
the destruction of the Pharisees; as appears both by Nicodemus who knew not
what Regeneration meant, as also of that Pharisee Luke 18.11. Luke 18.11.
Who so rested in his fair carriage, that he neither asked pardon for any
sin, nor begged any grace: And this was Paul's case before his Conversion,
Phil 3.4, 5, 6, 7.
but when he had learned better, see how he renounces all these, Phil. 3.4, 5,
6, 7. Yet he counts them all loss and dung: So that seeing they are so many
dangerous bars to grace and salvation, they are in this regard so far to be
denied, as not to be rested in, nor counted of as acceptable in Gods sight:
This was the right Christ challenged as defective, and to be excluded of all
that would enter Heaven. Mat. 5.28. Except, etc.

The consideration of this point is necessary to show how falsely and weakly
many lay the ground of their salvation, thinking that they are in state good
enough and in high favor of God, if they lead a fair harmless life, if they
give men their due, though not God, and though they suffer many secret and
spiritual corruptions to lurk in their hearts. At least they are in such a
dangerous case as that they are not sensible of the want of Christ, but as some
ill humor filling the mouth of the Stomach causes a craving of unwholesome
things, and takes away desire from healthful meat: Even so many are hereby
so dulled in their desire after the true food, as that they feed one swades
and husks that starve the foul.

of all these things as unable to commend us to God, as that we may be
stirred up to look after that, that is effectual and sound indeed. And to to
this end we must remember that if these had been sufficient, then many
Heathen were saved, and that man's natures so corrupt by the fall, that every
action coming from an evil cause and instrument, cannot but be evil as
Christ auouches. Mat. 12. Either make the Tree good, Mat. 12.
and his fruit good, etc. Showing that the heart must be renewed ere it can
bring forth any good work, yea we must be transplanted out of the old Adam
and set in the new, and that every Branch that bears not fruit in me says
Christ, shall be cut off, so that these are but as Adams Figge-leaues so cover
our nakedness, and thus much of the fourth Branch, being external,
defective, hollow, and hypocrite, vainglorious, stinking through inward
corruption.

The fifth Branch is higher then all these, The fifth branch of Denial of our
Religion and good-workes.
and such as at first may seem strange, It is the Denial of our own
Religion, Goodness, of good-Workes, the best Graces, and the best services
that we have done: These are not so to be denied as not to be labored for, or
as if opposite to Religion of themselves: For they are the works of Gods
spirit in the heart of his Children, rich evidences of Salvation, and of the
life of grace. Yet these are in such sort to be denied as they hinder us from
cleaving to Christ, or obscure any way the glory of Gods free grace: Excellent
is the practice of the Apostle, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. Phil. 3.8, 9, 10.
Who having in the former Verses renounced civil righteousness, does after
that renounce his graces, giving a double reason.



Secondly, that he might be found in Christ, not having his own
righteousness, showing that while he rested in any thing that was in
himself, he could not so earnestly lay hold on Christ and his Righteousness
his own though in great measure appeared beggarly.

Hence it is that the faithful have acknowledged their very righteousness to
be as a defiled Cloth, Esaias 64.6.
their best works to be full of imperfections, and so partly have entreated
the Lord to be remembered in goodness, when they have done best, and partly
have rejected and put from them all praise and admiration of themselves when
they have been most fruitful and zealous in God: As Paul, I labored more
then they all; yet not I but the grace of God which is with me; and many other
the like: So that our very spiritual goodness is to be denied.

First, in regard of the excellent perfection of Christ.

Secondly, in regard of challenging any part of the praise, as if by our own
strength we had done them.





Denial, and so in truth keep themselves from being found in Christ, being
enemies to the grace of God and righteousness of Christ: so that while they
challenge either part of the praise as co-workers, or any portion of merit and
desert, they do advance themselves by a spiritual pride, and give not glory
unto God; so that this very end they propound to themselves of their own glory
is sufficient to defile it,and make it to God abominable.

But in the second place let us learn this point, ever to renounce al
confidence and conceit of any thing that the Lord has wrought in us, or by us;
and say not to us but to thy name be the praise: the Angels in Heaven have
learnt in humility to cast their crowns down at the feet of the Lamb, and
to give al glory to him that was slain and had redeemed him, and excellert is
the example of David; 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12, 13, 14.
1 Chronicles. 29.13.14. Who am I, and what is my people? that we should be able
to offer so willingly? for all things come off thee, and of thine own have we
given thee. Now therefore we thank thee and praise thy glorious Name. And thus
much of the fifth Branch, the sixth follows. The 6. Branch of denial it is our
own lives


Lives, for this Christ teaches both in the verse following, as also Mat.
10.39. for what ever might hinder us from the constant cleaving to Christ, is
to be denied: and all things to be vnder-valued for Christ, Mat. 10.39.
or else we are not worthy of him, brave was the spirit of Paul: Acts 20.24.
Act. 20.24.
I am not ready only to be bound for the Lord Jesus, but to dye for him,
neither counted he his life dear. Thus did those worthy Hebrews in the 11
Chapter: so did the Martires of God in our Land in the former ages; Heb. 11.
All whose stepps we must follow, as Christ vrges by many reasons: as that he
that will save his life should loose it, but he that is willing for Christ's
sake to loose it, shall find it.

Which if it be so, it reprooues all fearful ones, against which Christ
gives a charge, Mat. Mat. 10.28.
10.28. Fear not those that can destroy the body, but are not able to kill the
soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell. Secondly, it reprooues those who are so far from Denying their lives,
that they will not deny their unlawful and sinful lusts, pleasures, or
proffits; they that have not learnt yet to part with these things for Christ's
sake, and honor of the truth, how can it be expected that they should part
with life it self for his sake.

It must admonish us by serious meditation to arm our selves against the
worst, to be ready to give our life for him, who has given his for us, that
we should not dye eternally: these things must often be thought on, for as a
holy man says, The price of Truth varies as the Market and price of Grain.
Some time grain is cheap, some time dear: so Truth is offered good cheepe to
us, and has bin a long time, with ease and wealth, now if the Lord should set
a greater price on it we must not then grudge. And thus much for the sixth
Branch.

The seventh and last Branch of this Denial, The 7 branch of Denial is, or
wife, children, country, friends, etc.
is the Denial of all things without us, or about us, that is near and dear
unto us: as Wife, Children, Country, Friends, etc. Mat. 10.37. Luke 14.26. Thus
Christ himself did, some times denied his Parents, some times forsook his
Friends, Country, but especially he left his eternal glory, Mat. 10.37.
the society of his blessed Father and Angels, Luke 14.26.
and lived as an exile one earth, for our redemption, so that much more are we
to do this, for this is but that equity of the Law, that God himself, his
truth and worship be loved and embraced above all.

Math. 19.29. Math. 19.29.
Whosoever shall forsake any thing as friends, howses, brethren, sisters,
father, mother, wife, children, country or lands for my names sake he shall
receive a hundredth fold more with persecutions, Mark. 10.30.
and in the end everlasting life: And thus much may suffice to have spoken of
the duty it self, and the several branches. Now it remains that we speak
of the Necessity thereof. The secoud general head contains the necessity of
Denying our Selves.


Albeit the necessity of this Duty may appear by that which has already
been spoken, yet it comes further to be declared.

There are 2. parts of christian profession, to which we are called.

The 1. concerns things to be believed. Faith: and Obedience.

The 2. duties to be performed. Faith: and Obedience.

Now either of these does require the practice of this duty.

For the first, seeing many mysteries of christian faith, 1. Faith.
and the dispensation thereof is such as agrees not with flesh and blood, is
not subject to the capacity of fleshly reason, nay may seem absurd and
foolishnes unto it, therefore no marvel if Christ said Deny your selves. And
Samuel said, If ye turn to the Lord put away those things. But let us see a
more particular declaration of this point, which is most profitable that so we
may be directed to know in what particular cases, or at what times this
Selfe-Denyall is to be practiced, and is of special use.



1. 1 Trinity.
That great hid and sacred Mystery of the blessed Trinity of persons in an
unity of Nature and Essence.

How impossible a thing to the conceit of flesh and blood.

2. The Creation of the world, and all things therein of Nothing. 2. Creation.


It cannot be says the Philosopher.

3. The Doctrine of particular Providence: 3. Providence.
That all things should be disposed of God to the falling of a hair.

Pompy demands and denies to learned Cratippus.

4. 4. Christ to be God and Man. borne of a Virgin.
So likewise that thrice blessed and most admirable Conception and Mystical
Union, of two so diverse Natures in one Person (Christ our Savior) to be God
and Man, Creator and Creature. And his Mother to be a Mother and a Virgin.

It was scorned at by the Heathen, and the Christians called Asse-heads and
Doltish for believing it.

So that who sees not here, how we must deny our own wisdom and judgment.

5. Besides Predestination; how did it seem unjust, and cruel? 5.
Predestination.


6. Redemption
6. Again to believe our Redemption in Christ or another death: Strength, in
Weakness: Glory, in Baseness.

It is a thing most ridiculous in the judgment of flesh and blood.

As also, 7. The just to be punished for the vn^^^^.
That the only Dearely-beloued of God, should be accused, betrayed, condemned,
crucified, scorned and derided, and be thus evil entreated by Man, God
looking on, and suffering the Just to be punished for the Unjust, and the
unjust to be acquitted by the Just, the Unholy to be hallowed by the Holiness
of an other.

These things require the Denial of our selves, as improoueable, unlikely and
absurd.

8. 8 To stand at the merit of another.
To pronounce our selves guilty and worthy of Death, and to stand at the Mercy
and Merit of another.

Is thought in Nature a strange thing.

9. 9 The Church always liueing and yet not seen.
Touching the Church always exsisting, and yet often not seen, may seem in
reason to be a Parradox.

10. 10 Many caled few chosen.
That the greatest part in the World shall perish, and a few in the midst of
them shall be preserved and saved.

Man naturally derides and scoffs at.

11. 11 Christ and his member united.
That there should be a communion and fellowship betwixt Christ and his
members, the one in the Earth, and the other in Heaven.

The natural man cannot perceive it.

12. 12 Regeneration.
So the work of Regeneration.

How foolish and impossible did it seem to Nichodemus.

13. 13 Resurrection.
The believing the Resurrection, of the same body we now have.

What flesh and blood thought thereof, the whole famous University of Athens
testified, who mocked at Paul for teaching of it.

14. 14 Preaching
The Preaching of the Gospel it self, in that poor and weak manner, by poor
simple men nether countenanced of wise men, nor scepters, nor riches, nor
wealth.

Is the wonderment of the world: and therefore of them is counted foolishnes.
1. Cor. 1.27.28.

Lastly, 15. To be heirs of all things and possess nothing.
to believe our selves heirs of all things: Sons of God: and beloved of
him: and yet to have and possess nothing, to be poor, vile and abject: to be
daily afflicted of God, and the world: and yet to rejoice and be patient.

It is the worlds wonder. 2. Cor. 4.8.9.10.

So that we are taught in Scripture, by Faith to believe these with infinite
more of this kind without reasoning the matter or inquiring the manner
thereof, by humane and carnal wisdom. Thus in general we see how these do
prove the great necessity of this duty Denying our selves: So especially
this duty is most requisite in the point of Justification.

For this is such that reason scoffs at, Natural pride would not admit,
neither can or will, Reason see reason here: why we should confess our selves
corrupted, guilty, condemned, unable to help our selves, and so to be forced
utterly to renounce our self, and to look for absolution, freedom and
righteousness in and by another. Man's nature takes check at this, thinking it
an unsafe way, an unwarrantable way, a way that disgraces and reproaches the
worldly wise, and worldly civil men, equalling them with the veriest fools
and most notorious sinners, teaching that all sorts of men must be alike
justified by another righteousness; and that the greatest sinner, having once
repented is accepted as well without any more ado of God, as him that was never
stained with any noted crimes.

Let us come to the other part of christian profession, 2. Obedience.
and hear all the duties that we are enjoined to perform either to God, to
man, or our selves: In all which is required the practice of his duty, the
renouncing of our wisdom, of our wills, of our own worth, of our own
desires, and self lone.

1. For first we can never live, either in a religious performance and
acceptance of our service to God.

2. Secondly, nor of duties of Justice and charity to our Neighbor.

3. Thirdly, nor of Sobriety to our selves.

Until we have denied our selves, and our own self love.

Which makes us 1. Bad Servants to God: Our selves being our own god. 2. Bad
Neighbors to others: All being too little for our selus, and 3. Bad governors
of our Selves: We being not our selves. Luke 15.17.


First, 1. Our duty to God.
if we consider God himself, we shall never either Love him truly, or Fear
him fillially, or put our Confidence in him firmly, or Depend on him
constantly, or be Thankful and Patient to him in Prosperity and Adversity,
or be Humbled under his hand, or Call upon his Name daily and zealously until
we go out of our selves. The knowledge of God.
And for the Knowledge of God, we reject it, and regard it not, being full we
can receive nothing, until we have learned this first lesson in Christ's
school, the Denying of our selves. Otherwise we shall make our Selves our
own God, Admiring our own wisdom, following our own Wills, yielding to our
own affections, applauding our own Thoughts, loving our own ways, depending
one none but our Selves, consulting with our selves and our Copes-mates,
admiring our deep Reach, Policy, Beauty, Strength, Learning, Dexterity,
Skill, and Diligence, when we have effected or brought any thing to pass. And
for Obedience though we may be brought to Sacrifice; that is, Obedience.
to perform outward service to God, yet obedience we reserve to our selves and
our own wills: And if at any time we do perform any duty of the first Table,
it is defi^ed by us with the fals^ ends we propound to our selves: As our own
Praise, Fame, Reputation, Honor, Preferment, Credit, Estimation and such like,
so that it becomes abominable to God, and yet we think our selves highly
Meritorious: Like pampering Parents, Simile.
who cocker their children and through excess of Love, disorder them in their
Behavior, Diet,

These things need no proof, our selves can testify against our selves, it
was so with us before we had learned this lesson in part; and alas is too much
in us yet. But most palpably it is to be seen in the Natural men of the
world in all their proceedings both public and private, both religious and
civil business.

Obedience is twofold, Our obedience is twofold.
Active, in doing that which God commands: Passive, in suffering that which
God inflicteth. The Denial of our selves is required in both these.

First, for the Active obedience in the worship of God this Denial is
necessary, 1. Active obedience.
for seeing the Lord forbids therein many things that are most pleasing to our
carnal reason; and one the contrary commands many things that are contrary to
the same, who sees not that without the Denial of our own wisdom and
reason, we shall neither shun the one, nor entertain the other. And indeed
from hence has sprung so many devised and false religions and manner of
worshipping of God, and from hence it is, that men are ready either to fall off
from the true worship, or to mingle therewith many of their inventions, it has
come from no other thing, then the not Denial of our reason, while we seek to
obtrude on God what we like, and think that the things we like not, that he
does so likewise.

Secondly, this is necessary in all the ordinances of God, and the means of
our salvation, as the preaching of the word, or the hearing of the same, the
right manner of calling on the name of God, and the right esteem and usage of
the holy Sacraments: For whence comes the neglect of that plain and simple
manner of preaching, and the speaking in the entising speeches of Eloquence,
but that in our carnal reason we think that more glorious, and such as
wherein we may show our own wit, and purchase an opinion of humane learning
and gain a plause: and in the mean while we make void the power of the
Cross, and the work of gods grace which most shows it self in our weakness:
Whence is it also, that of the multitude, the ordinance of preaching is counted
folly and is spurned against: but that men would be saved by other means
more agreeable to their carnal desires, or proud conceit of their own
wisdom. Whence is it likewise that though things be spoken never so plainly
out of Gods word, both for the dehorting from sundry vain opinions and vices,
and the exhorting to receive such and such doctrines of truth and piety, The
cause why the doctrine of Piety is not berter practiced is want of
Selfe-Denyall.
yet there is no more fruit in a willing forsaking the one, and a ready
embracing the other; but that men are wedded to their own wisdoms, will,
carnal affections, and Desires, which are crossed in many things in the Word
of God. Briefly, whence is either that base esteem and vnreuerent usage of the
holy Sacraments, but that we subject not our selves to a serious meditation and
a spiritual view of Gods goodness and wisdom shining in the same: Whence
also is that praying before Images, on Beads, the mediation of Saints, but
that these are agreeable to the courses of men, and man's own proper
imaginations, comparing and likening our dealing and seeking to God, with our
usual seeking to great ones: So that we shall never either with reverence,
use, or profit by Gods ordinances, without the whole denial of our selves.

Israelites, of whom God witnessed that they erred in their hearts, that is in
their thoughts and imaginations, because they understood not the ways of God,
that is the manner and course how God uses to deal with his Children, as first
to prove and try them, and then do them good at last, and because God works
by contraries, seeming to kill when he makes a live, to destroy when he
intends to build up and advance, so that we may bereby conceive how necessary
in this behalf the Denial of our selves is also. And so much for our Active
Obedience.

Fourthly, 2 The Passive Obedience.
this Denial is necessary to perform our Passive Obedience to God, for we
shall never willingly subject our selves to the taking up our cross, or the
undergoing of any troubles or persecution the Lord shall bring on us either for
his truth sake, or our trial and exercise unless we have learned to Deny our
own reason, will, wisdom and affections which Judge all such things hurtful
and unnecessary; and subject our wills to Gods holy will and wisdom imposing
the same for our good and his glory: for if any consult with flesh and blood,
who will be content to be in prison, when he may be rich, to be disgraced,
when he may be respected, etc. so that we may do nothing at all this way
without renouncing of our selves.

Secondly, 2 our duty to Neighbors.
for the duties to be performed to others, as to procure the good of others, to
seek their welfare, to reverence our superiors as we ought, or love our
equals and inferiors as we should, dealing equally withal men, to prefer
others before our selves, in giving honor, to be bountiful to strangers, not
to revenge, Mat. 5.44.
but do good to our enemies who hate us, and persecute us; and to perform
other properties of true love, set down by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.4. ^o 8.
1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. It is not possible without the Denial of our selves,
and an abating of self-love, whereby we become inhumane, that we desire to
dwell alone, or the furthest that nature will lead us, is To do as we would be
done unto; and not to proceed to that which Christian profession requires, to
wit: If thy enemy hunger, to feed him; And to him that smites thee on the
cheek, to turn the other; And to him that takes thy Cloak, to give him thy
Coat also. That Jonathan should be willing that David should have the
Kingdom; these must spring out of the Love of God, kindling in us a love to
our Neighbor for God and Christ's sake.

And whereas the right carrying of our Selves to others arises of a due
ordering of our Selves, 3 Our duties to ourselves.
therefore we shall not keep measure in any thing toward our selves, but
being drunken with our own admiration, we shall think all little enough we
can get or do for our selves, until we have banished Self-love; and like,
love, and do, that which God would have us. This St. Paul would teach, Titus
2.12. Titus 2.12.
That we must live soberly, before we can live justly: For whence comes
oppression of all sorts and kinds, but from this? That men out of Self-love,
and pleasing themselves in all their desires (as to satisfy the lust of the
eyes, the pride of life, the lust of the flesh; all things for belly and back)
nothing is thought too costly, too dainty, too much: Hence it is that an
immoderate desire of getting, keeping, spending, is enflamed, which seeks by
all means, right and wrong, for fuel to nourish the same withal: So that
Avarice, Intemperance, Vanity and Ambition, proceeds from an admiration of our
selves; So that when this cast forth, all these are banished with it: whence it
is, Esaias 11.6.
that that change is made in a man by Christianity, Essay 11.6. That the Wolf
and the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid should live together: And we have it
verified in two notable examples of Zacheus and Paul, in whom what a wonderful
change was made, the Scripture testifies: This Denial of our selves, in
behauing our selves to our selves is necessary for these ends.

Deny not our own Will, wisdom, reason, glory, etc: we shall raise our
works on false grounds, be carried on therein by carnal ends, be made to seek
our own glory, and to guide them according to our own hearts, and so though
the duty we do in it self be good, yet we shall many ways pollute the same;
as alas, daily experience testifies even against our selves, that in this
regard they fail much.

Prosperity, or Adversity, for without this, in Prosperity we shall be puffed
up, and ascribe it to our wisdom and strength: We shall envy at the
prosperity of others; and if we be in affliction we shall murmur and repine
against God: as David shows in his own example, Psalm. 73. Saying so foolish
and ignorant was he, while he thought to judge of these by his own reason,
and went not into the sanctuary of God to learn.

Thirdly, this is so necessary that we shall not be able to espy and
discover, muchlesse to dislike and abandon any evil affection and corruption
in our selves, if we have or shall not learn to Deny our selves, and to
search, judge, and esteem of our selves, as the Word of God does teach and
discover unto us, but we shall judge our vices to be virtues, and not suffer
any to tell us, or reprove us for the same.

Briefly to shut up this point with Mr. Calvin's Words: Mr. Calvin's words.
This makes a man resign himself and all that he has to the will of God, to
deliver all the affections of his heart to be Captiuated unto him: It makes him
to think thus; There is no more means of prospering to be hoped for, or to
be thought of, but by the blessing of God, on which we may safely cast our
selves. Secondly, that we are not to trust to the dexterity of our own wit,
or favor of men, or vain imaginations of fortune; but we are always to look
to God, to whom, if any thing succeed well it is to be imputed; if otherwise,
we are to subject our selves in silence and patience, and if any evil happen
unto us, we are not therefore to judge our selves miserable, neither to
complain of God for our Lot, muchlesse by evil means to seek recovery.

These and the like, does that worthy man make the fruits of the Denial of
our selves, And thus much touching the necessity of it, as that which we must
above all labor for, that we may cleave to the Lord in a constant profession
without separation, that we be not scandalized in the same, while we consult
with flesh and blood, and not with the Word of God; and therefore must resolve
to forgo the dearest thing: What is dearer or nearer a man then himself? This
how it ought to be meditated before hand, Luke 14.28. to the end.
Christ teaches us by two notable Parables, Luke 14. from the 28. verse to the
end: This is that which was required of Pharaohs daughter, as a figure of the
Church, Psalm 45. Psalm 45.
And the difficulty hereof Christ would show in that affectionate Petition,
Father if it be thy will, let this Cup pass, yet not my will, but thine be
full-filled.

So then not to multiply more perticulars, these may suffice to convince us of
the great necessity of this Denial, all which, will yet more clearly appear,
if we demonstrate the same by some notable examples.

To omit those that experience does show unto us in multitude of scoffers at
Gods word, cauiling against it for many things, because it delivers such
things, as suite not with their fancies and reason.

I say, Example 4.
omitting these let us look into the Scriptures.

And here first Naaman offers himself 2 King. 5.10.11. 1 Naaman.
2 King. 5.10, 11
who coming to be healed of a Leprosy, and imagining and propounding to
himself a most reasonable course for the same: when the Prophet Elisha
adjoined him another contrary to his expectation, how was he offended in
displeasure and ready to die? rather then to subject himself and his natural
reason to the course prescribed.

A second example is in the same book, 2 Kings 7.2. 2 The Prince of Israel. 2
Kings 7.2.
of the Prince of Israel, who would not believe the Prophet, telling of a
strange and sudden altering of the famine, because he could not in reason
conceive any way of it; therefore he would by no means believe it.

Yea Moses himself, when he would judge of Gods power by his own strength
and conceit, 3 Moses. Numb. 11.13. Number 20 11. Number. 13.28, 31 32, 33.
fell into a great distrust of God, Number. 11.13. That he could not give flesh
to such a multitude in the Wilderness. And Number. 20.11. He could not give
water out of a rock. Because Reason said in was impossible.

Notable is the example of Jonas, 4 Jonas.
for what made that at first he did not go to Nineuy but fled to Tarshish;
himself gives the reason: Jonah. 4 2.
Jonah 4.2. because he thought that if the people did humble themselves, God
would not destroy them: and so he should loose his labor, and be counted a
false Prophet. 5 Israelites.


What made many Israelites when their captivity was ended, choose rather to
dwell in Babell, rather then to return home? because they in carnal reason
put many fears and doubts both in the journey, and that they should never be
able to effect the great works they were to do; nor that they should dwell
quietly and safely amongst their enemies.

Let us come to the examples in the gospel, 6 Nichodemus
John 3.4.
how did Nichodemus stand amazed at the doctrine of regeneration, and while he
judged of it in a carnal manner said, that it could not be.

What made Peter bid Christ favor himself, 7 Peter.
Math. 16.22.
but that he sauoured not the things of God, and subjected not his judgment to
the doctrine of Christ, and nature of his kingdom.

What made the Disciples so displeased with those that brought little Children
to Christ, 8 Disciples.
Mat. 19.13.
but that in their carnal imagination and proud conceits, they thought that
Christ could nor would have any thing to do with children, not knowing him to
be a Savior of all, and that all must be like to them.

What made the Jews so offended with Christ's doctrine, 9. Jews. Ioh. 6.52.
about eating his flesh, and giving them better food then Manna? then because
they understood and judged of these things carnally, according to sense and
reason: and judged of Christ according to outward appearances.

Briefly, 10. The Pharisees. Luke. 7.37.
what made the Pharisees so often cavil at, and take offense at the doctrine and
doings of our Savior, as Luke 7.37.38. with his entertayning the sinful woman.
Luke. 15.3. Luke. 19.7.
Luke 15.2. For eating with Publicanes and sinners. Luke 19.7. For calling and
dyning with Zacheus. All these proceeded from a high conceit and pride of their
own holiness and righteousness, and judging carnally of Christ his doctrine
and doing: Yea why did they renounce the righteousness of Christ, but because
they loved and admired their own: and why did they not believe in him, but as
Christ told them they sought praise one of another, and sought not the honor
and glory that was of God. So that by all these examples it may appear how
dangerous a thing it is not to Deny our selves in all matters of religion, so
that nothing is well done, wherein carnal reason and wisdom has place, as
might further be showed by the examples of Sarah giving counsel to Abraham to
go in into his maid: And of Rebechas getting the birthright for her son
Jacob: though both these actions may seem to have bin one faith in the
promises made unto them: but let the forenamed examples suffice to show unto
us the Necessity of this duty; and so we pass on briefly to declare the
last, to wit, the Excellency thereof.

Now let us consider the Excellency of this duty, The third general head
contains the excellency of this duty of Denying of our selves.
although it may also appear by that which has been said, for if it be such,
as that without it we cannot embrace christian religion with perseverance,
neither perform any duty to God, or Man, or our selves, as we ought, then
sure, the Worth of this must needs be great, whereon all religion in practice
thereof consists: yet this will more plainly appear if we come to consider
examples, Examples out of Scripture.
wherein whatsoever singular work has been done, or any great virtues, or
acceptable service performed by any of Gods worthy servants, highly pleasing to
God, shall be evinced, to have sprung from this very ground, the Denial of
themselves: Note.
And on the contrary the want of it has carried diverse into many sins, and
foul and enormious offenses, and withheld them either from believing, or
judging a right either of Christ's doctrine and doing: so this takes away all
offense and so makes them blessed, as Christ pronounced them to be that took
no offense at him or his doctrine. The scope of all religion is, that due
Obedience may be given to god, and it is that which most pleases him. Now
this can proceed from no other root then the Denial of our selves: For we
cannot do the will of God, and in all things suffer our selves to be led by it,
till we are become fools in our own judgment and wisdom: And therefore
dare not will, nor trust to it, especially where we see it contrary to Gods
will: So that most of those worthy works which Saint Paul so highly extolls
Heb. Heb. 11.
11. have proceeded from no other root then this, which because it is taught
by faith, they are ascribed to it. But let us see some particulars to
demonstrate the same.

The first, 1. Noah. Genesis 6.22.
shall be of Noah's in preparing and building the Arc, whence came this obedience
but from this: Heb. 11.7.
True it is that the Apostle does ascribe it to Noah's faith, but why, that is
to be considered, which is this, that faith does shut up the eye of reason,
and carnal imaginations, and makes us wholly follow the will of God. For if
Noah had given way to a thousand thoughts, and fears of impossibility of
being so saved; and had not learned to deny his own wisdom, and reason, do
we think he had ever gone about it, especially continued to the end, if he
would have been led by reason arising thence he would rather have laughed at
it as unlikely matter and absurd, that either God should be so eruell, as to
destroy the whole world, or if Gods justice did provoke him to this, yet that
he and his, alone should escape alive, and that the Ship should not some way
or other miscarrie, requires more then nature and to go out of our selves by
faith in Gods promise. 2. Abraham.


But pass we from Noah to that memorable above all the example of Abraham, the
Father of the faithful and pattern of all obedience, whence arose that ready
and willing obeying Gods voice, in forsaking his country, kindred, James. 2.21.
and friends, Gen 12.1.4.5. Heb. 11.8, 9, 10
to go into a land he knew not what or where, but that he had learned a
renouncing of them all, with carnal wisdom that pleaded hard for the same.
But yet more memorable and notable was that work of his in being ready to
offer up and consecrate his son to God, Genesis 22.2.9, 10 Heb. 11.17.
to whose peculiar person the maine promise of blessedness was annexed. Was not
here an admirable Denial of himself? Oh what a conflict did he undergo in
the same against the affections of nature, and against all reason and humanity
in show: Sure if in any thing he had advised with the flesh, he had bin stayed,
but as in wisdom he concealed it from his wife Sarah least she should have
withstood him, so did he no less fight against himself and reason from which
he could not hide it: Neither may the praise of Isaac be obseured, Isaac.
who as a true figure of Christ understanding by his Father the will of God,
voluntarily offered up his own self. 3. Moses, Heb. 11.24.25.26.


The like we may see in the example of Moses who would not easily have
renounced his future hopes of his right to the greatest Kingdom that then was
in the world; and all the present pleasures of Pharoes court: and chosed rather
to suffer affliction with the Church of God: Sure flesh and blood taught him it
not: had he not been well instructed in this point, in an utter renouncing of
all things within him, and without him, made him so readily to do it.

Fourthly, 4. Jonathan.
famous for ever does the example of Jonathan deserve to be: who being by
birth, the heir of the kingdom of all Israel, yet understanding that it is
the will of god, to remove the kingdom from his fathers house and his
posterity, and translate it to a poor stripling of a mean house, (I mean
David,) forthwith obeyed: 2. Sam. 18.1.3.
That this, Jonathan did not only, not rise up against him, no did not
inwardly fret and envy him, 1. Sam. 20.4.12.13.30.31.32.33.34.35.
but unfeignedly loved him, faithfully and with danger of his life preserved him
from the fury of his own Father: How could he ever have done this, if he had
not learned utterly to renounce himself, and to offer himself to the will of
God: How many motives and proro^atins would humane reason, color of right,
promise, the glory of a kingdom, the falling from his hopes, how many such
like were cast into his mind, no doubt (being a man) but he valiantly
resisted them, and is become more glorious by so parting with his Kingdom,
then if he had swayed the Scepter, not only of that, but of all the kingdoms
of the world without this Denial.

Fifthly, 5. Naaman.
fit for this purpose is the example of Naaman, who though at first, 2. King
5.10.11.12.13.14.15.
he not Denying himself, had almost destroyed himself: who thought it
foolishness to go and wash in the waters of Jordan: yet in the end being
persuaded and ouer-ruled by good counsel subiecting his own will and reason,
to the Prophets command, found the benefit thereof by good experience, that
obedience is the best sacrifice: and to harken, better then the fat of Lambs.

Sixthly, 6. David. 2 Samuel 23.15.16.17.
well might David have a place in this rank, who had learned this Denial. 2.
Sam. 23.15.16.17. when (it may seem pressed through thirst) he desired the
water of the well of Bethleem, and that through the valor and undaunted
courage and magnanimity of his worthies it was got, he would not drink it,
but powered it out as sacrifice to the Lord: was not this a marvelous bridling
his affection? The like and much more appears in his behavior toward Saul,
that although himself anointed, and so injuriously persecuted by Saul, 1.
Sam. 24.4.9.10.11.17.19.
and having him twice closed in his hands, yet offered no violence to him? Oh
what a singular measure of Selse-denyall was here? The like also might be
showed in many other behauiours of his, as in sending back the Arc, when he
fled from Absolon, 2. Sam. 15.25.26.
and resigned himself wholly to the Lord.

Seauenthly, 7 Paul.
notable is the example of Paul, while partly he became all things to all men,
to the weak and strong, not pleasing himself in any thing, Cor. 2.9, 22.
but especially being newly converted, that Christ should send him from his
own Countrymen toward whom he burned in zeal, and being sent into Arabia
among Barbarous people without houses, that yet he so readily obayed, Gal. 1.16.
whence was it but from this ground, Gal. 1.16. That he consulted not with
flesh and blood, but was obeydient to the Heavenly counsel.

Eighthly, 8 John Baptist.
Excellent is the example of John Baptist; John 1.20, 21.
for when the Scribes and Pharisees sent an honorable Embassage to him,
offering him as it were to be Messiah: John 3.28.
John 1.20, 21. and after John 3.28. When his Disciples provoked with carnal
envy would have had him advance himself above Christ, as being his Ancient
and giving him (as they thought) his first credit: Lo there how John abases
himself; how he schools his Disciples; how he magnifies Christ; how he was
but a voice, but a sprinkler of water: It was Christ that baptized with fire
and the Holy Ghost: that is, who did and was able to give the grace signified
by Baptism, even all graces of the Spirit which is as fire: Now did he not in
all these things Deny himself, his goodness and his own glory, yea verily.

The last, 9 Christ Jesus.
and best example of all out of the Scripture I will produce, is of Christ
Jesus himself, the perfect pattern as of all other, so of this duty: what did
the whole course of his days on earth from his conception to his Ascension but
declare this: John 18.22. John 19.1, 2, 3. Mat. 16.53.
that he could so abase himself, be content to be scorned, hated,
persecuted, John 18.6.
(being able so easy to have destroyed his enemies) yet never put forth his
power to hurt him: Mat 26.39.42.
How did he in the Garden resign himself to God his Father: Upon the Cross
commend himself to him, and in all things committed himself to him that
judges righteously: he would not open his mouth to clear his own innocence,
least ours should have been shut for ever in silence and confusion. 10
Examples out of Ecclesiastical History of those that have Denied themselves.


Not unworthy may these Worthies have their place here, who have been shining
lights, and renouned Pillars in Gods Church, whose examples for Self-denial
is unto admiration as Ecclesiastical Stories mention. And first, see this
undaunted courage in that famous and worthy Martyr Ignatius, 1 Ignatius.
who suffered in the third persecution under cruel Traian the Emperor, who
when he was to be devoured of roaring Lions. Said, I am the the Wheat or
grain of Christ, I shall be ground with the teeth of wild Beasts, that I may
be found pure Bread. Eusibius and Hereom.


And likewise said, Let the fire, the gallows the devouring of Wild Beasts,
the breaking of my bones, the pulling assunder of my members, the pressing of
my whole body, or the torments of the devil or hell it self come upon me,
so that I may win Christ Jesus.

Behold, this brave mind and Self-denial in that blessed Martyr Policarpus
Bishop of Smerna, 2 Policarpus.
who suffered in the fourth persecution under Antonius Verus, who when he was
going to the place of his Execution, was by Nycetes received into his Chariot,
Eusebius lib. 4. ap. 15.
and persuaded by him to say by way of Salvation: My Lord Caesar and to
sacrifice, and so to save his life; but being nothing moved by these wicked
flatteries said resolutely: I will not follow your counsel; and when the
Proconsull bid him defy Christ, or else he had fire to burn him, and beasts
to tear him in pieces: He answered, foure-score and six years have I been
Christ's servant, yet in all this time he has not so much as once hurt me: How
then may I speak evil of my King and Sovereign Lord, that has thus
preserved me: As for your Beasts, and fire, let them come upon me, for I am not
persuaded by Repentance to turn from better to worse.

Memorable is the example of that excellent Martyr and merror of men Martyn
Luther a poor Monk who contended with the Pope and many Legions of his
Creatures and took the prey out of their teeth, 3 Luther.
they having the sword of most Maiestrates and power of most Scepters to sway
at their pleasures: Neither would he be allured by the fair promises, nor
terrified by the bloody threats of great Cardinal Caietan, to renounce his
faith formerly confessed: He was the man that professed, he would go to the
diet at Worms, although all the Tyles of the City were so many devils.

The like denial we may behold in that good Martyr Bishop Hooper whose words
were these: 4 Bish. Hooper.
Pray we unto God so to furnish us with Faith and patience, that we may rather
dye ten times then deny Christ once: what though man hate us so God love us; if
man kill the body, and God bring both body and soul to eternal life, the
exchange is good for us, and profitable.

The same spirit we have in that Reverend Martyr of Christ Jesus, Bishop
Ridley, 5 Bish. Ridley.
who let ever be a pattern for our immitation in this chief work of
Self-denial, who said: We never had a better or more just cause either to
contemn our life, or shed our blood: We cannot take in hand a more certain,
clear and manifest truth: For it is not for any Ceremony for which we
contend, but it touches the very substance of our whole Religion, yea even
Christ himself; for the which by Gods grace I will willingly ieopard here, to
loose life, lands, and goods, name and fame, and what is or can be unto me
pleasant in this world rather then Deny my Master Christ Jesus.

So then if these several and singular works in all these Worthies be duly
considered, it will plainly appear they had perfectly learned this Lesson of
Self-denial, and showed themselves to be courageous and undaunted Soldiers
of Christ Jesus, who therefore can deny but that this duty is most excellent?

Briefly, whosoever have ever renounced glory and greatness in the world, or
have undergone ignominy and rebuke for Christ and a good conscience; being
content to be counted fools in the world: It is manifest that with Paul they
consulted not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1.16.
Gal. 1.16. Yea, this was the cause of that absolute obedience in Christ; and
by this every Christian offers up spiritual Sacrifices, far more acceptable
then the Jewish.

Instead of a Ram: we kills our irefull passions.

Instead of a Goat: Our unclean affections.

Instead of Birds: Our wandering imaginations.

And briefly by suppressing the motions of sin, make Martyrs of our selves:
Oh then how above all things must this excellent duty be learned, and enquired,
how it may be taken forth? For who hearing a thing to be necessary and
excellent does not desire it, and to that end seeks how it may be attained.

Now then the Means briefly may be these. Means to attain to this denial.
1 Prayer.


Surely first by earnest Prayer to God in this behalf; as Christ taught in two
Petitions: Of the coming of his Kingdom in us: And that we may do his Will:
For of our selves we can do nothing in this high point.

Secondly, 2 Acknowledgment of our corruption.
unto prayer there must be adjoined a sight and acknowledgment of our own
natural corruption, and a diligent observation of our daily sins and a
suppressing of them by a continual pressing and urging of the authority of God
upon the conscience, for that must make the rest to hear: for by reason of
our natural corruption, the mind, reason, and judgment, the will, and
afections, are so corrupted, blind, perverted, and every way distempered, that
they are altogether unfit to judge of heavenly and spiritual things: and so not
to be conceited of them, nor to trust them in that kind.

Heereuppon we must labor for Regenneration, whereby our mind, judgment,
will, 3 Regeneration.
affections, are renewed, ordered, and made conformable to the mind and will
of God: so that the more we are Regenerate, the more wilingly we subject our
sense and reason to God; and mind and affect the same things with him.

Fourthly, 4 Faith.
Faith is an excellent means to make us deny our selves, for when we shall by
it have learned to live not by sense or light or reason, but to shut the eye of
all these, and to open the ear to follow the voice and direction of God, then
it will be no hard task as we have seen in all the former examples: who the
more strong in faith, the more ready in the practice of this.

Fifthly, 5 The consideration whose we are by covenant.
the consideration whose we are, and how we have entered a covenant with God,
wherein we promised to renounce the World, the Flesh, and Satan, and all the
vanities and pleasures of this life, and to consecrate our selves both souls
and bodies wholly to God, and being his servants to resolve to do his will: so
that it is not free to us, and in our power to dispose of ourselves as we
would: but remembering that both by covenant on our part we owe whatsoever we
are, and are to be nothing in our selves, of our selves, and for our selves:
but all things in God, by God, and for God.

Seeing this is so chief a duty of Christianity, 1 Use of reproof.
it serves first to reprove sundry sorts, who profess Christianity, yet are
far from this, such as live in open profaneness, as swearing, lying,
drunkenness, breach of Gods Saboths, uncleanness, wantonness, and pleasures,
for if they have not learned to Deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, how shall
they deny themselves? for a man may so far proceed, and yet come much short
of a Denial of himself: it serves also to reprove al those the ground and
rule of whose religion, is either their good meaning, or humane reason.

Secondly, 2 Use of instruction.
this shows how difficult the practice and works of Christians are: even a
fighting, and an offering of violence to themselves, rejecting and denying of
all the suits, motions, placets, and requests, that arise of our selves, and are
made plausible as tending to our own content; this whosoever tryes shall find
it a most hard thing, as to be thus and thus conceited of himself, and yet to
give no regard unto it, to be carried with a strong inclimation of Will, to
such a thing as is presented unto us as good, and yet to refuse and deny the
same, to renounce that which the bent of affections, and the earnest suite of
desire has carried us after: as was the worthy example of David, who when he
had earnestly desired the water of the well of Bethelem, powered it out upon
the ground and would not drink thereof: as on the contrary, when our
affections carry us to the mislike off, and flying from a thing as grievous,
yet to embrace that with joy and delight: oh how happy a thing it is? this is a
work far passing the feuerest Popish discipline, which in their blind
devotions men inflict on themselves: As to wallow in the snow, and to cast
themselves into the cold of waters: or to lie in hair cloth, or in shirts of
male; yea or with Baals Priests, to lanch their own flesh: yea or this also,
to sacrifice our own Children to an Idol.

Thirdly, 3 Use of trial.
this serves to be as a touchstone to try our estates by, for if we have not
attained this denial in some measure, we are yet to learn and to lay the
first foundation of religion, but if by Gods grace we are enabled to this
work, we have cause of much comfort in our selves.

Lastly, 4 Use of exhortation.
seeing this is so necessary and excelent a duty, let these be as two spurs
in our sides to stir us up, and put us forward to a laboring with our
selves, the practicing of the same, as being that, whereby we enter the schole
of Christ, as also being that whereby we continue in the same without offense:
oh how singular and worthy fruits would ensue of glory and obedience unto God,
and of Love and Unity amongst our selves, when all and every of our own Wills,
would meet in the one only will of God, as in a center: what though it be as
greuious to us to Deny our selves, as it was to old Jacob to part with his
beloved Beniamine, yet when he heard there was no remedy but either dye or
yeald: then he willingly refignes himself, Genesis 42.36.38. Genesis 43.8.10.
Simile.
and his son to God; and as Jacobs sons told their Father, that had it not
bin for that, they had returned again fresh victualed; so certainly were it
not that our beloved sins and inamored affections did restrain us, we had
bin richly leaded with all spiritual grace: but if at last we shall willingly
yeald: as Jacob met with joy he looked not, both in hearing of his son Joseph
and in seeing him in honor: so if we would resign our selves over to the Lord,
the Lord would abundantly bleffe us, and fill our hearts with joy, and at
death send his chariot of angels to fetch us to himself, to enjoy his
glorious presence, who is more dear and honorable then Joseph, and that not in
an earthly and fickle glory, but in that eternal and unchangeable happiness in
Heaven: to which end pray we the Lord that Lee would make the weapons of our
Spiritual warfarre, 2 Cor. 10.5.
so mighty, to cast down all strong imaginations, and bring every thought
into the subjection of Jesus Christ, that so in the end, God may be All in
All. Amen.

Glory to God alone.
FINIS.

