A true Medium of the moneys payable from 1613. to the year 1618. by the
Masters and owners of diverse Ships coming and going forth to sundry Ports in
this Land, and other places beyond the Seas for the Lights at Winterton.
According to an Order from the Lords of the Council to the Officers of the
Exchequor and Customhouse, and their Certificate upon the same. As follows.
Viz.
From Newcastle and other parts beyond the Seas Northward to London. 766. l.
04. s. 09. d.. To Yarmouth. 062. l. 08. s. 05. d.. To Ipswich. 036. l. 19. s.
10. d.. To Sandwich. 034. l. 09. s. 11. d.. To Chichester. 004. l. 16. s. 03.
d.. To Southampton. 002. l. 05. s. 01. d. To Poole. 000. l. 00. s. 09. d. To
Plimmouth. 000. l. 02. s. 02. d.. To Exeter and Dartmouth. 000. l. 12. s. 02.
d.. From Newcastle for Coals beyond the Seas. 032. l. 15. s. 06. d. From
Newcastle for Tonnage from the parts beyond the Seas. 026. l. 10. s. 00. d.
From Lynne for Tonnage from the parts beyond the Seas. 001. l. 05. s. 03. d.
Ships from Hull to the parts beyond the Seas at five shillings the Ship. 009.
l. 05. s. 00. d. Ships from Boston to the parts beyond the Seas at five
shillings the Ship. 000. l. 10. s. 00. d. Total. 978. l. 05. s. 03. d.


The true Medium of the Moneys payable in the Port of London, for the years
1619. and 1620. that the Patentees have enjoyed their Grant, amounts to the
sum of seven hundred and fourteen pounds thirteen shillings and two
pence, which is less then the Medium above written in the Port of London, by
one and fifty pounds eleven shillings seven pence, by reason of the restraint
of building with Timber. The Dutchmen forbearing to bring in Timber as formerly
they were accustomed.

THe Medium above written of the value of a penny per Tun of all shipping
liable to the payment of the allowance of Winterton Lights, was certified by
the Books of the Farmours of the Kings Customs, by the Officers of the
Custom house of London, and by the remembrancers Deputy of the Exchequor, who
were appointed by my Lord Zouch, my Lord of Falkland, the Master of the Rolls,
and Sir Edward Coke, to make search for the same, According to an Order given
by the Lords of the Council.

THe Annual charge for maintenance of these Lighthouses for Coals, Candles,
and Servants wages that continually attend them. As appears by the
attestation of Master Edward Owner, one of the Burgesses of this Honorable
Court of Parliament does amount to 230. l. 00. s. 00. d. The Officers of the
Custom houses have two shillings in the pound, and in some places three
shillings for their pains in collection and keeping books of account. 094. l.
00. s. 00. d. The King has a Rent of 006. l. 13. s. 04. d. The Tenants of the
ground have a Rent of 004. l. 00. s. 00. d. What the charge of the reparations
and removing the Lighthouses will be, it is uncertain, yet in one year the
Patentee paid for helping the wooden Tower, the glass windows, the new Cradle
of Iron, which every two years at least must be made new. 011. l. 16. s. 06.
d. All which in toto will exceed 350. l. 00. s. 00. d.


THe Patent is grounded in point of Law upon the Certificate of Master Serieant
Crew, Master Atturny General, and Sir Henry Yeluerton.

It is grounded in the point of conueniencie upon the return of a Commission
under the great Seal of England, directed for the trial thereof, where the
Aldermen, Burgesses, Masters of Shipping, Fishermen of great Yarmouth and
Winterton were examined upon Oath, And the necessity thereof certified in the
high Court of Chauncery, As may appear by the Copy of the Commission,
Examination, Certificate, and return under the Officer his hand of that Court.

It is grounded in point of charge upon the half of the voluntary
Contributions granted to Sir Edward Howard for one Light-house at
Dongeonnesse, although there be three Light-houses at Winterton, and that the
Patentee is tied to set up all other Light-houses within the compass of four
miles, which hereafter (by the alteration of Channels and Sands) may be found
necessary.

Moreover, a great number of the same Masters have set their hands voluntarily
to give the same allowance of a penny upon the Tun for a Light-house at
Kelsey in the River of Humber, as appears by Certificate.

The Scottish-men do all willingly pay a penny upon the Tun, as may appear by
Certificate under more then threescore Masters hands.

The party who is expressly employed by the Coast Towns to prosecute the
business against the Patentee, has confessed that the Shipping trading to
Newcastle, do make a voyage in a year more then ever they did before, and
that by the benefit of the Lights, whereby it will clearly appear, that the
profit made by this voyage, will surmount the charge paid in a whole year.

In like manner, the same party with diverse others have most willingly offered
a half penny upon the Tun, if the Patentee would condescend: he said
further, that he and all the rest of the Masters would be suitors to the Court
of Parliament, that no man living should have the performance of the service
except the Patentee, in regard that there could be no exceptions taken against
the same.

The voluntary contribution for Caster and Stamport Lights, is more then twice
as much as six pence in the twenty Chaldron, which if they do take only from
such Shipping as have use of the Lights at Winterton, as the Patentee does,
will not exceed 128. pounds a year, out of which deducting 60. pounds for the
interest of 600. pounds employed for their Tower, It will follow by consequent
that they must entertain the Lights at Winterton (besides the loss of their
stock) for 68. pounds a year, and the Patentees will abide any indifferent
trial whatsoever, that the Lights at Winterton, by an unavoidable charge (if
the preservation of the Shipping, Goods, and lives of men, be to be preferred
to a dangerous frugality in that kind by pinching the service) will exceed
230. pounds a year in Coals, Candles, and Servants wages, besides other
charge which cannot be eschewed. The which appears evidently by this example.

The Lights at Caster and Stamport erected by Thomas Bussell, and now kept by
the Masters of the Trinity-house, with one Candle oftentimes, and at most two
of six in the pound, there has within this last year fallen out five
Shipwracks, whereof three was in the night time, and diverse other Wracks, since
they had the keeping thereof. Whereas in Thomas Bussell and Grave Villet their
time, there was no loss at all neither at Dongeonnesse, nor at Wintertonnesse,
whilst private men have had the care thereof. And it shall be sufficiently
proved if need be, that at Dongeonesse and at Wintertonnesse, there have
perished above one hundred Ships since the date of the Statute 8. Eliz. which
(if this power be proper to that Corporation) should be laid to their charge,
as by whose carelessness and neglect all these woeful losses have happened, and
which by all appearance would never have been prevented by them if Thomas
Bussell had not been an humble suitor to the King for Caster and Stamport
Lights. Sir Edw. Howard for Dongeonnesse, and the Patentees for Wintertonnesse
Lights.

The Masters of Shipping that repine at the payment of this penny, whereby
their Shipping* Goods and lives are preserved, besides the gain they make by
the voyage more in a year, Do (...) for measuring their Coals upon the shore
at London eight pence upon the London Chaldron. The difference of which
services it may be considered by this Honorable Court.

There has been no exceptions taken against the prosecution of the business
before it past the great Seal: execution of the Patent after it was past, nor
in the trust reposed in the Patentee.

By all which Arguments above written, and their voluntary Contributions
granted to others for service less important and less chargeable, it would
appear that they aim rather at the Patentee then the penny, and that this
unseasonable offer of six pence upon every twenty Chaldron: (Besides, that it
is impossible, and that a Statute can hardly tie any man to give under hand
what he pleases) is but a fraudulent Compact betwixt the Masters of the
Trinity house, and the Masters of Shipping, who to wrest the authority from the
King, and to defeat the Patent, will offer to maintain them for nothing at
all, when in the mean time it will be as easy a matter to the Masters of the
Trinity-house, after they have gotten sole power in their hands to improve
their voluntary Contributions by the superintendency they have of Seafaring
men, being for the most part younger brothers of their Corporation, as to extort
from the Strangers under color of Pilottage, five, six, seven and eight
pounds every voyage made. Notwithstanding, that they are limited by their
Charter, to take only two shillings of twenty, one of ten, and eight pence
out of a noble of the Pilots wages. As also to take eight pence a foot as the
Ship draws deep: Besides Boyage, Beaconage, and Anchorage, payable by both
Subject and Stranger.

Wherefore the benefit redounding to the Commonwealth by many degrees
exceeding the charge, besides the safety of men's lives, the debt of the
Patentee which has been occasioned by the performance of this service, being
so heavy upon him and his suerties: The charge that he is at yearly in the
execution of it being so great, and the profit in regard of the uncertain
charge not answerable unto the common opinion, and it appears that the
Patentee has performed the trust reposed in him better then the Masters of the
Trinity-house, who not only in this particular, but in every thing else have
neglected the trust reposed in them, He is an humble suitor unto this Honorable
Assembly, that they may not Monopolize all unto themselves, but that the
Patentee may enjoy the benefit granted unto him by his Majesty.


