The Line of Proportion
depiction of a logarithmic number line

continuation of logarithmic number line

continuation of logarithmic number line

THE CONSTRVCTION, And Use of the Line of PROPORTION.

By help whereof the hardes^ Questions of Arithmetique and Geometry, as well
in broken as whole numbers, are resolved by Addition and Substraction.

BY EDM WINGATE, Gent.

Nulla dies sine Linea. LONDON Printed by John Dawson. 1628.

The Preface.
HAVING not many months ago published a discourse, declaring the nature and
use of the Logarithmeticall Tables, and observing the Table of Numbers there to
be too small for ordinary use, not giving indeed without much difficulty the
Logarithme of any number that exceeds 1000; I have invented this tabular Scale,
or Line of Proportion, by means whereof (as I take it) you shall find that
defect fully supplied: this Instrument yielding you the resolution of the
hardest questions of Arithmetique or Geometry, both in broken, and whole
Numbers, only by Addition and Substraction, when the term required happens
not to exceed 10000. although the terms propounded consist of never so many
places, as shall further appear by the Treatise following.

CHAP. I. The Definition of the Line of Proportion. CHAP. II. The Description
and Use of the Scale of Logarithmes. CHAP. III. The Description, Construction,
and Use of the Scale of Numbers. CHAP. IIII. The joint Use of the Scale of
Numbers, and the Scale of Logarithmes together.
THE CONSTRVCTION, and Use of the Line of PROPORTION.
CHAP. I. The Definition thereof.
THE Line of Proportion is a double scale, broken off into ten Fractions,
upon which the Logarithmes of numbers are found out.

To understand the nature of Logarithmes, I refer you to Master Brigges his
learned Work, entitled Arithmetica Logarithmica, and to the Treatise
mentioned in the Preface.

A Fraction is a tenth part of the Line of Proportion, consisting of six Lines
and five spaces; such as are the parts a b c d, and c d e f.

The Lines are those, by which the spaces are distinguished; So a b is the
first, g h the second, and c d the last line of the first Fraction, which c d
is also the first line of c d e f the Fraction following.

The spaces are the distances betwixt the lines; And they are either greater,
as the first and last spaces of each fraction; or less, such as are the other
three placed in the midst of each fraction.

These fractions, together with their Lines and spaces, must be understood to
join respectively one to another, in such sort that the whole Line of
Proportion may be conceived to be one entire and continued Line; As the left
end of the first fraction, marked by the Letters a g c must be conceived to
join with the right end of the second fraction, noted by d f, and the left end
of the second fraction, signed by c e, must be understood to join with the
right end of the third Fraction, marked by f k; and so of the rest: So that the
whole Line of Proportion, beginning at the right end of the first Fraction,
marked by b h a d, and ending at the left end of the last Fraction, signed by l
O m, must be conceived to be one entire Line, as is aforesaid.

A double scale, is when two several scales meet both upon one common Line;
So the Line of Proportion being composed of the two scales, which meet upon
the fourth Line (marked at the beginning by a, and at the end by O) may fitly
be called a double scale.

CHAP. II. The Description and Use of the scale of Logarithmes.
THe scales, whereof the Line of Proportion consists, are 1. the scale of
Logarithmes, 2. the scale of Numbers.

The scale of Logarithmes, is that described under the common Line a O; viz. in
the two last spaces of the Line of Proportion, which are first divided into ten
equal parts by the fractions themselves (each fraction being the tenth part of
the whole Line;) and these parts are signed at the right end of the fractions
by the figures 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and in the use of this scale for
the finding of any number upon it, are called thousands: Again, the same
spaces are divided upon each fraction (by cross lines struck through them)
into ten other equal parts, which are likewise noted in the last space of each
fraction, at the beginning of each part by the figures 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9. and are hereafter called hundreds; then each of these hundreds is
subdivided in the fourth space of each fraction into ten other equal parts,
which hereafter are termed tenths: Lastly, each of those tenths is again
supposed to be divided into ten parts, which are called units.

The use of this scale follows in the resolution of the proposition following.

A number being given that exceedes not 10000, to find it upon the scale of
Logarithmes.

BEfore we come to the resolution of this proposition, it must be observed that
the numbers propounded to be found upon this scale, must always consist of
four places, being either significant figures of ciphers, such as are 2372.
2370. 2300. 2080. 2008. 2000. 0264. 0064. 0008. 0004. etc. This being premised,
you may find any such number upon that scale by this direction following.

Find the first figure of the number given amongst the thousands, viz. the
figures placed at the right end of the fractions; thou amongst the hundreds
described upon the fraction, unto which that first figure directs you, search
the second figure of the number given; again, for the third figure count so
many tenths, as that figure has unities; And for the last figure count so many
units: This done the point of the common Line a O, where the last figure
happens to fall, is the point that represents the number given.

Example, 2 3 7 2 being given, I demand the point upon the common Line, that
represents the same number; 2 the first figure directs me to the third
fraction, signed by the figure 2; 3 the second figure leads me to the hundred,
marked upon that fraction by the figure 3; For 7. the third figure I count
seven tenths of that hundred, viz. to the point p; and for 2 the last figure I
count two units of that tenth: which done, I find the number given to be
represented upon the third fraction, at the point n. So 2370. is represented at
the point p; 2300. upon the same fraction at the beginning of the hundred,
signed by the figure 3; and 2000. at the beginning of the same fraction, the
three ciphers following 2. signifying that no hundreds, tenths, or units, are
to be taken in finding the point, which represents that number: So likewise
2080. is found upon the same fraction at the point q, the cipher in the second
place showing that no hundreds, and the other in the last place, that no units
are to be taken in finding out that number upon the scale: In like manner 2008,
is represented upon the same fraction at the point r: And 0264. 0064. 0008. and
0004. upon the first fraction at the points s, t, u, x.

Contrariwise, by inverting the rules of this proposition, any point of the
common Line being given, you may find the number represented by it: So the
points p n q r being given, the numbers represented by them are 2370. 2372.
2080. and 2008.

CHAP. III. The Description, Construction, and Use of the Scale of Numbers.
THe scale of Numbers, is that described abouc the common Line a O, viz. in the
three first spaces of the Line of Proportion, which are first divided into nine
proportional parts (distinguished by the great figures 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9.) the first beginning at the beginning of the Line noted by 1. and ending
at the line that crosses those three spaces upon the fourth fraction, marked
by the figure 2 on the right hand, and by a little cipher on the left: The
second beginning there, and ending at such another cross Line upon the fifth
fraction, signed by the figure 3: The third reaching from thence to another
cross line upon the seventh fractio^, noted by the figure 4. In like manner,
shall you find the fifth part to begin near the left end of the seventh
fraction, the sixth upon the eight, the seventh upon the ninth, and the eight
and nine parts upon the last fraction, all signed by their proper figures 5. 6.
7. 8. 9. Which parts are hereafter called Primes, and are each of them again
divided into ten other parts, according to the same proportion, noted in the
first space of the Line by the little figures 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
(each of them having the Primefigure unto which they belong annexed respectively
unto them) which parts are hereafter called seconds, which seconds are each of
them again subdivided into ten other parts by cross Lines struck through the
second and third spaces, and are hereafter termed thirds; which thirds are each
of them again divided, or at least supposed to be divided into ten parts, viz.
the thirds contained in the first, second, and third Primes, are really divided
into ten parts; but those betwixt the beginning of the fourth Prime, and the
end of the Line, are only divided into two parts, and therefore each of those
parts are conceived to have the value of five, which ten parts of the thirds
are hereafter called fourths: Lastly, each fourth in the first second and third
Primes is conceived to be again divided into ten parts, which are hereafter
termed fifts. Now the construction of this scale is in this manner:

Repair unto Mr. Brigges his Tables of Logarithmes, and supposing 1000. to be
represented at the beginning of the Line of Proportion, find in those Tables
the Logarithme of 1001. which is 3,00042, 40774, 7932, whereof take only
3,0004, the first five figures; then casting away 3 the Characteristique (his
office being only to show of how many places the number, unto which the
Logarithme belongs, consists, as I have formerly showed in the Treatise
aboue-mentioned) find by the proposition of the last chapter upon the scale of
Logarithmes 0004, the figures that remain, which are represented upon the
first Fraction at the point x; this done, just against that point in the scale
of Numbers mark the point z, which represents the number 1001 upon that scale,
then taking the Logarithme of 1002. do in like manner, and so proceed till
you have described all the divisions of the scale of Numbers upon the Line.

The use of this scale appears in the resolution of the propositions following.

PROPOSITION I. A whole number being given to find it upon the scale of
Numbers.
Find the first figure of the number given amongst the Primes of that scale;
then find the second figure amongst the seconds of that Prime; 3. for the third
figure count so many thirds of that second; 4. for the fourth count so many
fourths of that third; and lastly, if the number fall in the first, second, or
third Prime, for the fifth figure count so many fifts of the last fourth: this
done, the point, where the last figure falls upon the common Line a O, is the
point that represents the number given.

Example, 17268. being given, I demand the point upon the common Line, where it
is represented: 1. the first figure directs me to the first Prime, and 7. to
the seventh second of that Prime, placed upon the third fraction at the little
figures 71. then for 2 I count two thirds of that second, viz. to the point m,
and for 6 I count six fourths of that third, that is, to the point n; And last
of all for 8 the last figure, I take eight fifts of that fourth, so that I find
17268. the number given to be represented at the point e upon the third
fraction; So 1726. or 17260. is found at the point n; 172, 1720, or 17200. at
the point m; 17, 170, 1700, or 17000 at the seventh second of the first Prime,
1. 10. 100. 1000. etc. at the beginning of the Line; And 2. 20. 200. 2000. etc.
at the beginning of the second Prime: In like manner 2040. is represented at
the point ph upon the fourth fraction, the cipher in the second place
signifying that no seconds, and the other in the fourth or last place, showing
that no fourths are to be taken in finding out that number upon the scale: So
likewise 2008, is represented upon the same fraction at the point ps, the
ciphers in the second and third places showing that no seconds or thirds are to
be taken in the discovery of that number.

Contrariwise, by changing the rules of this proposition, any point of the
common Line being given, you may find the number represented by it, so the
points e upon the third fraction, and ps upon the fourth, represent the numbers
17268. and 2008.

From the premises arisethese corrollaries.

1. A number that consists of more figures then five, and falls in the first,
second, or third Prime, is represented at the point where the fifth figure
falls: So 17268347. is represented upon the third fraction at the points, and
20080372. upon the fourth at the p^^nt ps.

2. A number that consists of more figures then four, and falls between the
beginning of the fourth Prime, and the end of the Line, is represented at the
point, where the fourth figure falls: So 4236, and 4236873. are both
represented upon the seventh fraction at the point th.

3. A point of the common Line in the first, second, or third Prime, always
gives you a number, that consists of fine places; So the points e, n, and m
being given, the numbers represented by them are 17268, 17260 and 17200.

4. A point of the common Line between the beginning of the fourth Prime, and
the end of the Line, always yields you a number composed of four places: So
th, and ch upon the seventh fraction represent 4236, and 4230.

PROP: 2. A broken number being given to find it upon the scale of Numbers.
PRefixe the whole parts of the number given before the numerator of the
fraction, and thereby make them as it were one entire number; then by the
proposition aforegoing find the point which represents that number, which also
will be the point, that represents the broken number propounded.

Example, 172 68 / 100 being given, 172 being prefixed before 68, the numerator
of the fraction, constitutes the whole number 17268, which by the proposition
aforegoing is represented upon the third fraction at the point ^: So 17.26,
that is 17 26 / 100, and 1. 726, viz. 1 726 / 1000 are both represented upon
the same fraction at the point n; in like manner 20.40. and 20.08. are found
upon the fourth fraction at the points ph, and ps.

But here it is to be observed, that the fractions of the broken numbers
propounded to be found upon this scale, must always have for their denominator
a number consisting of an unit in the first place toward the left hand, and
nothing but ciphers toward the right, such as are 10. 100. 1000. 10000. etc.
And if the fractions of the broken numbers given be not such, they ought to be
reduced to fractions of that kind.

Now other fractions are reduced to fractions of that kind for the most part
upon view, as if the number given were 12. foot, and 9. inches, that number
being reduced is 12.75. viz. 12 75 / 100; and 12. pounds 14 shillings after
reduction is 12.7, that is 12 1 / 10. But when you meet with a broken number,
whose fraction is not reduccable upon view, it may be reduced by the rule of
three; for as the denominator of the fraction given is to 10. 100. or 1000.
etc. so is the numerator of the same fraction to the numerator of the fraction
required: So 17 98 / 305, that is, 17 years, and 98 days being given, the
proportion will be;

As 365 to 1000: So 98 to 268.

So that 1000 being the denominator, and 268 the numerator of the fraction
required, your number after reduction will stand thus 17 268 / 1000, or thus
17.268. Now to find 268. the fourth proportional by the help of the
Logarithmes, I refer you to the third Problem of the fifth chapter of my
book abouementioned: But in this case let the denominator of the fraction
required always exceed the denominator of the fraction given, as in the
example aforegoing 1000 exceeds 365.

CHAP. IIII. The joint Use of the scale of Numbers, and the scale of
Logarithmes together.
PROP. I. A whole number being given to find the Logarithme thereof.
Find upon the scale of Numbers, by the first proposition of the last chapter
the point that represents the number given, then by the proposition of the
second chapter observe upon the scale of Logarithmes the number represented by
that point; this done, if you prefixe before that number his proper
Characteristique, that entire number is the Logarithme required.

Now the Characteristique is the first figure of the Logarithme, consisting of
as many unities within one, as the number, unto which that Logarithme belongs,
consists of places: So the Characteristique of the numbers betwixt 1, and 10 is
0; betwixt 10, and 100 is 1; betwixt 100, and 1000 is 2; betwixt 1000, and
10000 is 3, etc.

Example, 17268 being given, I demand his Logarithme, by the first proposition
of the last Chapter I find 17268 upon the third fraction at the point ^, which
gives me upon the scale of Logarithmes by the proposition of the second chapter
the number 2372, before which, because the number given consists of five
places, I prefixe four, so that the entire Logarithme of 17268 the number
given is 42372: So the Logarithme of 2040 is 33096; and the Logarithme of 2008
is 33028, etc.

PROP. 2. A broken number being given, to find the Logarithme thereof.
Find upon the scale of Numbers by the last proposition of the last chapter
the point that represents the number given; then by the proposition of the
second chapter take upon the scale of Logarithmes the number represented by
that point; this done, if you place before that number his proper
Characteristique, that is, a figure consisting of so many unities, save one, as
the whole parts of the number given consists of places, that entire number is
that you look for.

Example, 172. 68 being given, I demand his Logarisme, that number is found by
the last proposition of the last chapter upon the third fraction at the point
^, which yields you upon the scale of Logarithmes by the proposition of the
second chapter the number 2372; And now because 172 (being the whole parts of
the number given) consists of three places, prefixe before 2372 the
Charactcristique 2; which done, the entire Logarithme of 172.68 will be found
22372: so the Logarithme of 17.26 is 12370, and the Logarithme of 1.726 is
02370.

PROP. 3. A Logarithme being given to find the number unto which it belongs.
NEglecting the Characteristique of the Logarithme given, find by the
proposition of the second chapter the point where the other figures thereof are
represented upon the scale of Logarithmes, then by the first proposition of the
last chapter take off upon the scale of Numbers the number represented by that
point; this done, observing of how many unities the Characteristique of the
Logarithme given consists, take one more of the first figures, that the number
taken upon the scale of numbers has toward the left hand, as if the
Characteristique be 0, take one of those figures, if it be 1, take two, if 2,
take three, etc. which figures will be the whole parts of the number required,
and if there remain any figures toward the right hand, they are the numerator
of a Fraction, whose denominator is a number consisting of an unity in the
first place toward the left hand, and of so many ciphers toward the right, as
there are figures remaining, which fraction is the broken parts of the number
demanded.

Example; The Logarithme 42372 being given, I demand the number unto which it
belongs; 2372 the other figures besides 4 the Characteristique I find by the
prop of the 2. chap. to be represented in the scale of Logarithmes upon the
third Fraction at the point n, at which point upon the scale of Numbers I find
by the 1 prop. of the last chapter to be represented the number 17268; and now
because the Characteristique of the Logarithme given is 4 the whole number
17268 is the number, unto which the Logarithme given appertains, but if the
Logar. given were 22372, his number would be 172.68; the Charact. 2 showing
that 172 the three first figures of the number found ought to be taken for the
whole parts, and 68 for the fraction of the number, unto which that Logarithme
belongs.

From this Proposition arise these Corrallaries.

1. When a Logarithme, whose Charact. exceeds 4, falls within the first,
second, or third Prime, the first five figures of the number, unto which it
belongs, can only be known; So if the Logarithine given were 72372, the five
first figures of the number, unto which it belongs are 17268.

2. When a Logarithme, whose Charact. exceedes 3 happens to fall betwixt the
beginning of the fourth Prime and the end of the Line, the first four figures
of the number, unto which it belongs, are only discoverable upon the Line: So
the Logarithme 76270 being given, the four first figures of the number, unto
which it belongs, are 4236, which you shall find represented upon the seventh
fraction at the point th.

But now in taking the numbers upon either of the scales observe this rule.

When you have directed your eye unto a point upon the common Line in taking a
n^mber upon either of the scales, first take the least parts represented by
that point, and then the rest in the same order.

As in the Example of the last proposition, the Logarithme 42372 being
propounded, your eye is directed by it upon the scale of Logarithmes unto the
point n; and therefore in remooving your view for taking upon the scale of
Numbers the number, unto which that Logarithme belongs, first take the filts,
viz. 8, then 6 the fourths, and so the rest in order; which done, carrying in
you mind, eight, six, two, seven, one, and beginning with 8 first, set them
down thus, 17268, as before.

In like manner, in the example of the 1. Prop. of this chapter the number 17268,
being given, your eye is directed upon the scale of Numbers unto the point ^;
and therefore in remooving your view for taking upon the scale of Logarithmes
the Logarithme of that number, first observe the units, viz. 2, then 7 the
tenths, and so the rest in order; this done, keeping in your mind the figures
so taken, set them down as before, thus, 2372. And in observing this Rule,
after a little practice, you shall find much ease, and readiness.

Thus having showed you how to find upon the Line of Proportion the number of
any Logarithme, and the Logarithme of any number propounded under the several
limitations of the rules aforegoing; for the use of the Logarithmes being
found, I refer you to the Treatises mentioned at the beginning of this
Discourse.

*

FINIS.

