THE PEDLERS Prophecy.



LONDON Printed by Tho. Creed, and are to be sold by William Barley, at his
shop in Gracious street. 1595.

The Pedlers Prophecy.
The Prologue.
FOr as much as we must talk of Prophecy,
We intend with pardon and supportation,
As learned men does well define and testify,
Thereof to make a true and pure declaration:
To prophecy of things is a divine inspiration,
Telling things to come with immovable verity:
A gift only proceeding from Gods high majesty.
A divine inspiration he calls prophecy,
That which does all other Prophecies exclude:
Which are no prophecies, but things of men's fantacies,
Invented to deceive the ignorant and rude:
But Satan is ready unbelievers to delude,
Though his members who are proved to be liars,
Yet they shame not to call themselves true propheciers.
The falsehood and vanities of these prestigiators,
Saint Augustine in nine or ten books de ciuitate dei,
Confuteth and proves them no true Relators;
But blasphemers and very Athaists,
And therefore by the judgment of God murders:
Not worthy to live, by the sentence of Gods mouth,
For into Lies and Fables they have turned the truth.
Saint Hierom upon Micha do testify,
That the term or vocable divination,
Which the devils mancyples calieth prophecy,
Is often taken in an evil consideration,
As in the same place he makes a plain relation:
That the true Prophets, in scripture Prophets are named,
Diuinators, are reproved, condemned, and blamed.
To that pernicious science Divination,
Are added a number of dyabiluall vanities,
Whereof I am not able to make recitation,
Neither do I esteem such wicked faculties,
I wish them extinct in all communalties,
For where they were they were permitted:
There was the prince and the people sore punished
And although I shall not rehearse them in order,
The first of all, he names Negromansie,
Phytonia some say, is of as high degree,
Peromansie, Heromansie, Hydromansie, Geomansie,
Phystonomy, Metapostopy, Spatulmansie, Gheromansie,
Then have you Homen, Agurium, Postyguum,
Aspicium, Magyam, Venesissimum, Sortilogullum,
There be a great many more then I can recite,
Whereof every one has his right:
That is to say, every one has his diuilish superstition,
Contrary to Gods word, and Christ's erudition,
Confounded be those children of perdicion.
Moses confounded them, so did Iobe and Esaias,
With all the Apostles, Prophets, and Doctors, utterly.
Of Gods Prophets, thus does Lactantius write,
They did not only of things to come prophecy,
But they spoke of one truth in one sprite,
Which was fulfilled in their times openly.
These were sent of God by precept verelie,
To be messengers of his divine majesty,
And to be correctors of men's iniquity.
To deride these, our Author has a Play compiled,
Which he calls the Pedlers Prophecy.
Out of the which* all such lewdness shall be exiled,
And other things spoken of very merely:
We shall use the manner of a comely Comedy.
The property thereof, is honest mirth to make,
The which to do at this time, I do undertake.
And whereas we shall speak of certain travelers,
We desire all honest persons not to be offended,
For we mean none but bankerouts and usurers,
Which to undo, other has intended:
Their abuse I wish heartily to be amended.
For the past shame bankrout, borrows beyond his estate,
Then he flees, keeps his house, or takes Ludgate.
Unless our Preface should too far it self extend:
And engender tediousness unto our audience,
With a few words more I will make an end:
Beseeching you to hear the rest with patience.
So doing, of our mirth you shall have intelligence.
I take my leave of you, for yonder comes the Peddler,
Which will take upon him to be a great medler.
Peddler. O this pack, this pack, this heavy pack,
It is so heavy, it has almost broke my back.
Weary, nay I was never so weary,
Since I passed Carowse Ferry:
Time it is to set it down,
Would to God I were near some good Town:
A penny for a pot of drink,
I shall die for thirst, truly I think.
A great way have I gone since I drank,
Fourteen mile beyond the Scottish bank.
Few Pedlers take such pain:
I am feign to buy all my ware in Spain.
And because I would have all my ware good,
Sometimes I pass unto Iasons wood.
Under the poole Antarticke there I was,
Whereas I spoke with the mighty Atlas.
Of whom for money I had a pasport,
That through Celum Imperium, I might resort.
From thence unto Primum Mobily,
There bought I a stone called Idake Toy,
In the which there is a spirit enclosed,
Whom truly when I am disposed,
I can tell what is said or done;
From under the Constellation of the Moon:
Unto the centor of the earth indeed,
Whither I purpose to go with all speed.
To Celum aquinum, I came from thence,
And there bestowed I the most of my pence:
Yet to tell you the truth of the matter,
I was almost perished with water;
Time it was to call for a boat,
Three days in the water, I stood up to the throat;
Yet as hard as the world went there,
To fill up my pack I bought more gear.
There bought I a stone called Calbrates,
Oh haphie is he that has such a stone:
I tell you that thousands cannot get one.
For this stone gives wisdom, honor and grace,
And defends from perils in every place.
If that with Dyostarydes you could speak,
Your mind unto him you might break.
Then came I to the firmament,
And to pass thence I had commandment.
Saturn was angry and very fearse,
The causes why, I will not now rehearse:
Jupiter could not pacify the cause,
Then Mars eased them with stafford laws.
Soll engendered such a sort of flies:
So that they had almost bitten out mine eyes.
Then passed I by Venus, Mercury, and the Moon,
From whence I came since yesterday at noone:
Yet as hard as the world was there,
To fill up my pack I bought more gear.
A stone I bought which Tenya they call,
This stone has the best property of all:
For it will make him to speak that is dumb,
And be able to tell of things to come.
This stone I bear under my tongue always,
So that I can tell what they do or say.
Well up with my pack and get me hence,
There is no remedy I must trudge for small pence.
Conyskins maids, Conyskins maid,
Yonder comes one, I am well apayde.

Here the maid enters. Maid. Welcome Peddler, have thou any fine needles here?
Or any stiff pinnes sharp at the point I pray you.

Ped. I have indeed, but they be some what dear:
Such as will break before they will bow,
Not like unto maidens the truth for to speak,
Which before they will break they will bend.

Ma. VVisely spoken John Hoddy-peake,
Your thrift and your wit, at the good ale you do spend:
If thou have any, at once bring them forth:
I may not stand prattling all day with thee.

Ped. I tell you my needles and pinnes be more worth,
Than you are worthy for your fair looks to see:
You will not buy, I know so much of your mind,
Therefore at this time you shall not have your lust:
For if my needles or pinnes should take any wind,
They would canker by and by, and take rust.

Ma. VVilt thou have me buy the pig in the poake?
I may see for love, and buy for money.

Ped. Where fire is, a man may perceive by the smoke,
Think not but that I know a Cat from a Cony:
I am acquainted well enough with hopes lay,
Learned I have to know chafe from corn:
Before ought you have of me you shall pay,
You shall not beguile, and then laugh me to scorn.

Ma. By God, and I know chalk from cheese,
I can discern an honest man from a knave,
If naught I gain by thee, naught, naught, will I leese.
None of thy wares, none of my money thou shall have.
Better then any thou have I can buy,
But to perceive what thou art I do begin:
If thou have either needles or pinnes there let me die,
You compass the country, some cheat by craft to win:
I never knew honest man of this occupation,
But either he was a dyser, a drunkard, or a maker of shift*
A picker, a cutpurse, a raiser of simulation,
Or such a one as run away with another man's wife.

Ped. Maid I pray you, let me have a word or two in your ear,
By the same token there stands a fat.

Ma. God for his passion, when were you there?
I beshrew his heart, that told you that.
I thought you had not been a Peddler long:
You were one of those that stood on the pillerie,
That you were not all hanged you had wrong,
For by the devil you wrought some sorcerie.

Ped. So sure as you are a maid and virgin pure,
So sure I stood on the pillarie.
And as sure as you are gentle and demure,
I never used enchantment or sorcerie,
But maid a word or two in your ear again,
If it may be it shall be as you said:
The same day there fell a great tempest of rain;
Stay a while, as hitherto you have staide.

Ma. You are inspired with the holy Ghost newly,
But the devil is within you so God me save.

Ped. This was said and done, the eighth day of July,
You shall have that you had not, and lose that you have.
Did you never hear of a maid called Pleias?
She had six sisters, and herself made up the seventh*
These were the daughters of the mighty Atlas,
Who by his own power holds up the heaven.
But mark what I say, when Hely shall stop her light,
Then maids of England, weep, wail, and sorrow*
For they that go maidens to bed over night,
I will not say I, what they shall do on the morrow.

Ma. I will keep counsel, I know not what ye mean,
You are too wise for me goodman Peddler.

Ped. I wish you to keep your raised work clean,
But in needle-worke I will be no medler.

Mother. Whope, where with sorrow art thou so long?
Have thou not bought thy needles yet?
You will have your scoperlets always among,
Get you home with sorrow I say, and lay to the spit:
When your father shall come to supper anon,
Then the meat to the fire shall scarely be laid,
What, you look that I should do all thing alone.

Ma. Mother, of this Peddler take heed and beware,
For he can tell all things that I have said and done.

Moth. He may see what a good huswife ye are,
Your idleness I warrant, he may perceive soon.

Ped. By my troth mother you say the truth,
By the fruits a man may soon know the tree,
There was never seen such idleness in youth,
And that in high and low of every degree.
For young men to be idle it is intolerable,
But maidens to be idle and of any state:
Is a thing most pernicious and detestable.
For idleness unto all mischief is an open gate.
I could rehearse a sort of damsels by name,
Which through idleness, learned things not to be spoken,
But what was their end they came all to shame:
As she did which dance for John Baptists head, by the same token.

Ma. As a lame man has no profit by his saire legs,
So out of the mouth of him that is not honest,
A good sentence is not worth a couple of eggs,
But is as profitable as is snow in harvest,
Who may speak worse against an evil life,
Then Pedlers whose whole trade is idleness:
Dycers, drunkards, makers of strife,
Very sincks and sentences of all wickedness.

Moth. Hold thy peace with sorrow, by S. Iemy I say,
Get thee forth, and go about thy business,
It is a pretty hearing for amayd to scold always,
He may swear that thou art full of idleness,
But I pray you tell me, have you any good pepper?
I would have an ounce and if it be good.

Ped. Without doubt you never spent better,
As fine Ienuper as any is in Fangringosse wood,
But I pray you let me answer your daughter,
Of her I tell you, you may have very great joy,
She is yours, and you have dearly bought her,
But yet you must bid her beware of one evil toy.
Well maid I pray you let me see your hand,
I will keep counsel, I swear by mine honesty.

Ma. Say what thou will, thou shall not see my hand,
For in thee is neither manners nor modesty.

Mo. He may see your hand perde so he may,
I cry you mercy, as angry as a thing of naught:

Ma. He shall see no hand of mine here to day*
I am as I am, and as you have me up brought.

Ped. I can tell as much by your face and look,
As I can tell by looking the lines of your hand:
Now surely of late I red in a book,
That few maidens shall be left in the land.
But to my words I would have you be attendant,
The sin of maidens God has already so punished,
That a man cannot get an honest maid servant,
Dead they are I ween, and clean extinguished:
But when the dog holds the bull with the golden horns,
Then thus it shall come to pass, I dare lay my head:
That for money we shall get no new Ale in corns,
For all English maids that year shall be dead.

Ma. When the Rambe pusheth against the Serpent,
Then perish all Pedlers and peaking Proctors:
The day will come that the Lion will be fervent,
Then take heed all dreamers, and doting Doctors.

Ped. Passion of God, now am I put to my trumpe,
Mother, I perceive your daughter has gone to school:
Marry there she paid me home again iumpe.
But mother, I pray you let me ask you one thing,
Can your daughter work at times void?

Mo. Yea forsooth, she works from morning to evening,
With the needle, and very well she can inbrayd.

Ped. Well, to huswiferie let her apply her mind:
For within a while shall be one Eclipse of the Sun,
As by good learning, surely I do find,
That then shall be finished that now is begun.
Proud looks, stretched out necks, and wanton eyes,
Their frolike cheer, thkir fine walks, and tripping:
With all their pleasures which they now do devise,
Their feasting, disguising, their kissing and clipping,
Rich shows, strange funerals, precious abilliments,
Golden collers, spangs, bracelets, bonets, and hoods,
Painted and laid out hair, filides, and nether ornaments.
Their chains, and sumptuous apparel, that cost great goods,
Earing jewels, iemmes, to set out their faces,
Change of garments, cassocks, vales, launes fine,
Needles, glasses, partlets, fillets, and bungraces,
With colors curious to make the face shine.
After this your needle work will be naught worth,
Therefore some other occupation you must learn:
You that intend to set your children forth,
Must teach them to labor, their livings to earne.

Hic intra Pater. Father. A couple of good huswifes, the mother and the
daughter,
To stand prating here all the day long:
What time of night shall we go to supper?
Every day I must be feine to sing one song.

Mo. By my troth husband you are like to have no roastmeat to night,
For I have had other business to day in hand:
Here is come such another wight,
As the like was never heard of in this land.

Daugh. By by troth father, he is but a prattling Peddler,
And to say the truth has nothing to sell:
But in soothsaying he would appear to be a medler.
But believe you nothing that he does tell.

Fa. A Peddler, marry the more naughty pack thou,
Have thou nothing else to do but with a Peddler to prate:
Get thee home, thou ill favored Sow,
It were well done to beat thee about the pate.

D. I beshrew thy knaves heart, thou have angered my father,
If thou have no needles, thou might tell me so than.

Ped. And it had pleased you, you might have gone away rather,
But hear you, declare what good you can:
Father why suffer you not your daughter to marry:
She is old enough to have an husband.

Mo. Nay alas poor wench, a while she may tarry,
For in faith she has neither house nor land.

Fa. Friend, whereas you spoke of my daughters marriage,
I am not of that mind that many an other man is,
Chastity with Gods help is a light carriage,
And therefore in this, I think I do not greatly amiss;
To marry my daughter I am half in doubt,
I will tell you other nations are so scattered about:
That marriages, that I do not greatly allow.
I and mine ancestors were English men borne,
And though I be but a simple man,
To marry my daughter to an Alian I think soorne,
And therefore I keep her from it, so long as I can.

Mo. Yea either they be Alians, or Aliant sons indeed,
Who through marriage of English women of late,
Has altered the true English blood and seed,
And therewithal English plain manners and good state.
All the naughty fashions in the world at this day,
Are by some means brought into England.
If by some means they be not commanded away,
Within a while they will us all withstand.
For here they do not only devour and spend;
As they be most deuourets truly:
But our commodities away they do send,
Rob and steal from English men daily.

Ped. Mother, there is a story of King Vertyger,
Whether it be true of say or no, I am not able:
Eugustus played the part of a murderer;
But some men takes it but for a fable.
But this is true, out of the South East,
Caine comes before, and shall come again,
A strange, horrible, and monsterous beast,
By whom all old women shall be devoured plain.

Daugh. Now mother, so God help me,
They that will believe him, is worse then mad.

Ped. The womanhead of your daughter here I do see.
I say no more, of mine honesty it is too bad.

Ma. By your honesty, a man may you as soon believe,
As I will do a dog when he swears by his christendom.

Ped. A stopping morsel anon to you I will give,
I will be even with you, I swear by my holy dome.

Mo. Is there such abeast as you speak off?
And will he devour none, but women that be old?

Ped. I promise you mother, I do not scoff,
Dreadful he is, and horrible to be hold.
An hugebeast, and of a marvelous strength,
From Dover to Wayd, head, tail, and mouth:
We esteem him to be larger in length,
And in breadth, from Donwish to* Perchmouth,
He has devoured all the old women in Affricke,
And now he hastes into Drop with all speed:
Merchant men can tell you, that use there to traffic,
To talk any more of the matter, what shall it need.

Fa. A Peddler going about to sell lies:
I think of them you have more plenty, than you have ware,
Such fellows do nothing else but devise
Tales and Fables, and such Lemers as these are.

Ped. Father be these lies that I speak,
He shall snatch up the husband with the wife:
And because the old man Gods laws do break,
In a strange nation he shall end his life.
But when this shall come to pass,
As it shall come to pass be sure of that,
Then fathers and mothers shall cry alas,
For their own children shall be thrown down flat.

Mo. By Saint Anne, but those words make me afraid,
The man knows more then we perchance:

Ma. Now surely mother as I am true maid,
He knows no more then the Faukener of France.

Ped. True maid, fie for shame, why do ye swear?
I know more then the priest spoke of on Sunday:
Remember you not what I said even now to you in your ear?
The matter was broken the six day of May.
But when angry Saturn shall have the regiment,
And rule again as he did first:
Then fair maids shall die through famishment,
And young springals shall perish for thirst.

Fa. I love none of this bibble babble I, by this light,
Peddler have thou any pure spectacles to sell?
I would have a pair that were of an old sight,
For I am above threescore and ten, to you I may tell.

Ma. He has as many spectacles, needles, and pinnes,
He goes about the country under that pretense.

Mo. Much money for wares you may take in Innes,
And besides the same, your charges and expense.

Ped. Father I have a pair of spectacles in my pack,
That will cause you to see as well behind as before:
For in your house is played many a knacke,
Which of my mind you shall know more.
Though my spectacles you intend to buy,
You shall perceive your own negligence,
You suffer your children to swear and lie,
And you laugh thereat and have patience,
Fathers and mothers, kinsfolks and friends,
So mordinately do their children love:
That they are parents of bodies, but poysoners of minds,
As my saying right well here shall prove.
But when Phoebus shall enter into the Lion:
There shall be such a great burning heat:
That shall burn up your children every one.
And they that be left on live, strange gotches shall eat.
Parents and masters in this most mirth truly,
Shall be cant up with a sudden rauishment:
Look for this in the month of July,
Ramnasia will not delaie her punishment.

Mo. Marry good Lord have mercy on us all,
Husband, I pray you bid him home to our house.

Fa. He shall be welcome, but our cheer is but small,
But yet he shall be sure of bacon and a piece of sowse.

Ma. The house is the worse where such Pedlers be,
Good Lord father, do ye believe ought that he does say?
I marvel what goodness in him you do see,
He shall not come in our house truly if I may.

Ped. I thank you surely with all my heart,
I will go home with you with a good will:
Of all that is in my pack you shall have part,
For of physic I tell you, I can good skill.

Mo. By God yongman, come and welcome heartily,
And care not greatly what my daughter says:
For though she speak to you somewhat angerly,
Yet I warrant you she means no very good faith.

Ma. No by my troth, I cannot bear anger long,
Mine anger is soon come, and soon gone:

Ped. Then I pray you let us have a song,
In token that we be friends, and all as one.

Fa. Now by troth, because you speak of a song, wan I was young,
I past the Lark, and pleasant Nightingale:
Like an Angel I would have sung,
And specially when my throat had bin well washed with good Ale,

Ped. Then a song of the Peddler now let us have,
You know your rests, and when you shall come in.

Ma. Then let us sing the Peddler is a knave,
When you will Peddler, you may begin.

Hic, Content. Fa. Woman, woman, get you home at once,
And see that we have good cheer to night.

Mo. You shall be sure to have good Ale, for that have no bones,
Without any chewing, it will go down right.

Ma. That do all Pedlers love as their lives,
And specially when one meets with another.

Fa. Then may you be one of their wives:
Get ye home and help your mother.
Exeunt Matter and Filia. Goodman Peddler, if I wist you would not be angry,
To ask you a question I would be bold.

Ped. I can tell what is done at Alexaadry,
Say what you will, you shall find me cold.

Fa. I pray you tell me, are you a Peddler by your occupation*
I judge you rather to be a man of science.

Ped. There needs no further declaration,
For here your self have obsolued your own sentence.
What man think not I am altogether a fool,
I know what a man is by his sisnomie,
At little Wytham seven years I went to school:
And there learned I the science of Morosophie.
Wherein by your nose, by the red streamer,
Another is, you keep fast your faculties.

Fa. By my troth, there thou hitst the nail on the head.
Dream do you say? Lord how I dream every night:
Sometime I dream that I am dead,
And sometime that I am young, lusty, and light.

Ped. Father, many times you are in a strange taking,
And namely when you should be in quiet:
You dream sometimes being broad waking:
For the bright sunlight, is not for old men's diet.
But do you dream father, do you say?
Lord, Lord, that is a true prophecy:
As touching that there is one does inuay,
And says that a boy of an hundred year old shall die.

Fa. A boy of an hundred year, marry sir, here is a toy:
By God Peddler, all that thou say is not true:
How can one of an hundredth year old be a boy,
That is all like as an old garment could be a new.

Ped. The eldest that be, were sometimes boys,
Wherein they followed their own sensual will:
If men of great age use the same toys,
What are they else but very boys still.

Fa. Age is right honorable, the Preacher does say,
By God Peddler, you had not need to dispraise age:
There was never less reverence then is at this day,
For very children now presume against the sage.

Ped. Children borne of wicked parents says he,
Shall be witness of their parents wickedness:
For how could the children so mischievous be,
Except their parents suffered their unhappiness,
But there is much evil seed sown and vpsprong,
For lack of moisture and pleasant dewes,
They shall wither away while they be young,
A while they shall tarry here for pleasant shows.
But age you do say is right honorable,
Which age consists in many years and long time,
A man's wisdom is his age commendable,
And his age is a pure life without crime.

Fa. I marvel where you had all this gear,
You have a great deal of this other men lack.

Ped. About the Country with me I do it bear,
Store of such gear I tell you I have in my pack.

Fa. I will see some of your ware anon, by your leave,
Come, come, I pray you let us go hence.

Ped. Behold how my pack to the ground does cleave,
I would it were on my shoulder, as leefe as forty pence.

Exeunt. Enter a Mariner. Mar. I am a Mariner by Science and Art,
And have used the seas a long space:
Whereas I have had troubles enough for my part,
Yet have I escaped all dangers, I thank God of his grace.
Few men alive I suppose at this day,
That have traveled further then I have done,
Therefore somewhat of my mind anon I will say,
As shall be declared more plainly soon.
Of two things in the mean season I will complain,
First is of the scarcity of good mariners,
And that those few, to learn do disdain,
Of such as are both cunning and good Artificers,
Whereupon some takes upon them to be masters,
Whereas yet they were never learners diligent,
Such of many men, are the way casters,
For will is their wisdom, and their knowledge is ire impatient
If that in any science it is needful to be expert,
In this requires great intelligence:
For some may on both lives and goods subvert,
Which guides without wit and experience,
Too much proof of this we have had of late,
Therefore with whom men does venture, let them take heed
For though the Swallow be able much to prate,
Yet her notes are most unpleasant indeed.

Enters the Traveler. Tra. God send me better luck in this voyage,
Then I have had this six or seven years,
For if I have no better fortune in this passage,
I may go learn to botch with a pair of sheeres,
I am glad to see you master Mariner,
I would little have thought to have found you here.

Mar. I am glad to see you also master Traveler,
Tell me how do you now a days, I pray you what cheer.

Tra. I thank God I have my health reasonably,
But we are so nipt in our customs these days,
That it pincheth a great sort unreasonably,
And causes many one to find other delays.

Mar. Masters we know what belongs unto merchandise
But it behooves us your counsels to keep,
You are wise enough to practice your enterprise,
You must wake, when other men does sleep.
Is not twenty shillings well given to save twenty pound,
And if it be ten pound, I trow you will not greatly stick,
To save and get means, a new way may be found,
Before you be rubbed, see you do not kick.

Tra. By the mass it is not as you do think,
For Officers so diligently do wait:
That neither for love nor money they will wink,
Narrowly they look, and always lay bait.

Mar. Before the harm of the wound, see you do not complain,
For merchants were never so rich as now they be,
The Whole substance of the Realm do conteme,
How they flow in possessions every man see.

Tra. You speak of such as are merchants indeed,
Which in all places have their Factors,
If this country help not, another does speed,
Doubtless such men are rich, and notable actors.
But as for such as I am, young men Travelers,
Which are compelled to travel for their gain,
We are in worse case then any other Artificers,
But that I say, able to prove I can:
There was not so many bankrouts this 100* year,
In times past, the sea has enriched many a man,
But what causes of late it does appear.

Mar. In times past men were content with mediocritie,
They would no more borrow, then they thought to pay,
For they that will presume above their ability,
Must by diverse means fall into decaie:
But it is a common practice used now in this land,
Many one does themselves bankrouts make:
When they have gotten other men's goods into their hand,
Then their houses they keep, or else Ludgate they take.

Enter Artificer. Arti. God speed you both masters heartily forsooth,
My coming hither is to talk with a Peddler,
He promised me here, this day to keep a booth,
For in many things he makes himself a great medler.

Mar. I am no Peddler, but a poor Mariner I am,
Neither one nor other was here since I came,
Therefore of any Peddler I can nothing say.

Arti. I was at my neighbors house the last night,
And there was a Peddler selling many things,
Somewhat he had whereof we might have no sight:
But good store he had of points, pinnes, and rings.
I think surely that he is some Coniurer,
For I never laughed better in all my life,
My neighbors says plainly that he is a sorcerer,
But Lord how he angered the old wife.
At the first she made him much of her counsel,
And showed him certain Images which she did keep,
I wisse quoth she, I love these better then the new Gospel,
And for pure love unto them, she began to weep:
The false knave stood still and naught did say,
A pair of beads under her Apearne she had:
On these quoth she, I say our Ladies Salter every day,
And at them the Peddler railed as he had been mad.

Mar. Why Pedlers were wont to have beads to sell,
I marvel that they will rebuke superstition.

Arti. What he has I cannot tell,
But thus he plaide on such condition.

Tra. Many Pedlers in my time have I known,
But one honest man of them I never knew,
They sell many times more than is their own,
And utter old baggage for that should be new.

Arti. I think he has not been a Peddler long,
But he will go near to tell what you have done:
For any thing I can see, he will do no man wrong,
But he make good shift where he become.

Tra. What any man has done, what does he know,
I will gage with him an hundredth pound:
That any thing done secretly he shall not show,
Neither he nor any that lives on the ground.

Enter Peddler. Ped. Who told me that you were a Traveler?
And whom all the world could not satisfy?
In the devils name you are a merchant venturer,
Of your spoils the Barbarians can testify.
Conyskins maids, conyskins for old pastes,
What lack you? what buy you? any good pinnes,
Knit caps for children, biggens and wastes?
Come let us bargain, bring forth your Conyskins.

Tra. Is this the Peddler that you spoke off?
I judge him to be lunaticke and out of his mind.

Arti. I would advise not over much with him to scoff,
For tame enough you are like him to find.

Tra. What care I for a thousand varlets,
By God I advise him not me to abuse.

Ped. What will you give for a pack of good scarlets,
Other will be glad of them ye refuse,
In faith I mock not, why look you big?
What man, I come hither to be merry,
In your life time you have not known a liuelier twig,
I will say nothing that shall make you angry.

Mar. You are welcome hither friend, I dare undertake,
You spoke of a pack of scarlets even now,
I tell you here are they that are able money to make,
Are you able to perform them, how say you?

Ped. I spoke it, but I promised it not yet,
What will you give for a trusse of cloth of Tissue?

Mar. This fellow does appear to be out of his wit,
A runnagate in whom is little virtue.

Arti. Friend, dispraise no further then you may dispraise,
For what he does man, neither you nor I do know.

Tra. There be too many such runnagates at these days,
All the whole world with such idle persons does flow.

Ped. By my troth you say very truth,
The truth with your own mouth is verified,
The most of your sort are idle from their youth,
Yea, so I say, because they are never well occupied,
As touching that in a book of latin of late I did find,
Which does the manner of Travelers publish,
The quick Mariner says, that travelers in the East part of Jude,
Through seas and floods they work all the euish.
Worse and all this another Poet does say,
That merchants, God and his Saints does forswear,
So that advantage obtain thereby they may,
VVorthie to be drowned in hell and to burn there.

Arti. He can rehearse all this in latin, and a great deal more,
And will do it, if you do it of him gently require.

Ped. Think not but that I have such gear in store,
I will speak it in latin at your desire.
Pariuratta suo post ponet mittunt lucre mircatur,
Stigijs non nisi olignis aquis.
Besides this, there is written in the same book,
The shamefullest slanders that ever I did see:
When you will master Traveler, thereon you may look,
The devil on the lie, and yet great slanders they be.

Tra. It is pity that he is no better examined,
He goes about the country under this pretense:
To work some mischief he is determined,
We shall hear more I dare lay forty pence.

Mar. By my troth, if I should speak indifferently,
His talk is according to most men's report.

Ped. That unhappy writer, writes vnreuently,
All that I said, I spoke but in sport.

Arti. Although perchance some has offended,
Yet ye ought not the whole company to defame:
He runs far that cannot be amended,
For one man's faults, you may not all men blame.

Tra. Who would any sentence regard,
Spoken of such a runnagate as this is,
But if such licencious things may be heard,
We shall say that all is amiss:
But as for the worshipful state of merchandise,
Is known to the public wealth to be necessary:
Therefore he that speak against that exercise,
To the Commonwealth is an utter adversary.

Ped. He is indeed sir, you will not say the contrary,
But he that writ the book somewhat has seen,
He prays God, that some of you may soon miscarry,
For the whole decaie of that you have been,
If English pure Coin in other countries,
Be but worth an half penny in a shilling more then it is here,
You will find means to deceive all degrees,
And convey the most part over in a year.

Mar. Much wind thou do waste I tell thee in vain,
But if things be amiss as thou do express:
As they are not, as to all men does appear plain,
Yet are not we able any thing to redress.

Ped. Who should hold with the shoe but the sole?
The Mariner and the Traveler are all one:
In the realm alteadie you have a foul hole,
Whereof you shall know more of my mind anon.

Arti. I supposed that our fortunes thou could have told,
Such talk as this who would regard?

Ped. You are not like to live till you be old,
Your fortune is to die upward.

Tra. Surely thou will never die in thy bed,
For Sursumcorda belong to such idle Pedlers:
Ere it be long I will cause you to be sped,
And also with you, such slanderous medlers.

Ped. Your state will continue but a while,
When Juno shall be desorsed from Jupiter,
Then for pride, covetousness, excess, and guile,
Shall perish every ventring Traveler,
There shall not be left one merchant says he,
And no man shall buy your merchandise any more,
That time will come that thus it shall be,
Therefore evil gotten goods do you again restore.

Tra. Thou speak to us of Jupiter and Juno,
But let us know what thou meanest thereby:
Thou shall declare thy sayings before thou go,
Or else thy words again recant and deny.

Mar. Jupiter over a far country, Creta was a King,
Juno the daughter of Saturnus was his wife:
Unchaste was he, and wrought many an evil thing,
Therefore between them two, there was an evil life.

Arti. I love none of these lying Poets indeed,
I marvel what favor to them, men can have:
For they do nothing else, but men's minds with vanities feed,
And hinder our faith, which should our souls save.

Ped. Look what I have said, I will say, and say again,
That for pride, covetousness, and excess:
All the travelers from Armenia, or the highest mountain*
In one hour shall lose their substance and riches.
Sephyrus with horrible blasts shall blow,
The heart of the sea shall ear up your treasure,
The huge waves shall all ships overthrow:
They shall be drowned and all their pleasures*
I will tell you also when that shall come to pass,
When the daughter of Pluto shall reign over all:
Also when the daughter of Alkeron shall guide Mydas,
Then by and by shall merchants have a great fall.

Mar. Such fellows going abroad the country,
Make many simple folks them to believe:

Tra. Yea and with a few lies bond and free,
He deceives, and are glad money to give:

Arti. By such shifts he utters much ware:
I have heard him say now, more then ever I heard him say.

Tra. Let him say what he will, I do not care,
I suppose here is none, that does his saying greatly way.

Ped. Words wey not, but are light, and fly in the wind,
But mark when words shall be turned into fire*
Then words full heavy you are like to find,
For that shall fall upon you that did upon Tire.

Mar. If such hard chances happen unto Travelers*
To lose their lives and goods as thou do prophecy*
What shall happen to us that be Mariners?
We are like to be consumed, and all our ships utterly.

Ped. When Bacchus was disposed to sail unto Naxion*
The Mariners promised to bring him thither,
But they returned toward another nation,
Purposing of him to make a spoil together.
They thought to have sold Bacchus for money,
But he being a God, prophesied their treachery,
Turned into gall, that they had made bony,
And anon justly recompensed their injury.
Their Taklings and Cables, they turned into Serpents,
Their other Balassing into Tygars, and other beasts else,
He reued the Mariners, of their mischievous intents,
Threw them into the seas, and turned them into Makerels*
Therefore the son of man, joins you together.
A garment they say, shall perish with the sleeves,
At such a time as you do not consider.

Mar. This man with the holy Ghost is inspired,
But the devil within him is no doubt:
I trust to see such cold prophets fired,
Before your false and prattling prophecies, be brought about.

Arti. If things amiss were by penance amended,
The plagues of God devised, he would wihhold:
The Peddler in my judgment has not offended,
In that of plagues to come he has us told.

Mar. Hang him knave, hang him,
Who made him privy of Gods counsel?
Why you horeson villain,
What have we brought into the land?

Ped Forty thousand enemies to the Crown,
The deadly poison of hell,
Mark what I have said, and hereto will I (...)
I leave to speak of that which a way (...),
I mean coin, and by fraud, craft, and guile,
I will not speak of all, fear least I do vary,
But God will recompense it within a while*
Jews, Ruffians, Moors, Turks, and Tartarians.
With these you have mixed the virgins people,
Anabaptists, Lybertines, Epicurians and Arians,
Infinite of these, your country to infeeble,
The maidens, men, may go learn to pick a sallet:
Houses for money they can none get, (...)*
Poor Crafts men are compelled to take bag and wallet*
But for your great sins, Tire shall shortly sink.

Arti. The diuill of lie that is, such a number of Alians,
And that of all nations are come hi^^^^ to dwell,
As he said, even Jews and Barbarians,
So that the Realm is like to (...) another hell.

Ped. I speak not of this Realm, you take me amiss,
All my talk is of the noble Ci^ie of Tire,
There shall not be left a man against the wall to piss,
And those that plagues consume not, shall be destroyed with fire,
I confess one God the blessed Trinity,
God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost,
This God intends shortly to make a triplicitie,
Whereby shall be consumed, from the least to the most,
But this I say to you master Mariner,
You are skilled well you say in Astronomy,
Of the state of Charles Waine, you are not to learn,
When Art^pholos hides his fisnomy*
Then of the foresaid gear* God does you warn,
When Arthur shall be(...),
And go before the great (...)e,
Then out of hand comes all this gear forward,
Which shortly will come to (...) I fear.

Tra. Lo here are bugs to make children afraid*
I think the frantic Peddler be (...)*
But what great things of him will be said*
If any things according to his prattling does hit.

Mar. Then where was such a Prophet as our Peddler was*
To know of things never to be done:
I warrant you this gear will come to pass,
When our Lady has a new son.

Arti. Surely I am afraid with the prophecy,
Which in holy scripture I have learned:
The threats of God, by Esaias and Jeremy,
Has all the whole world sufficiently warned,
But I marvel of one thing brother Peddler,
That in all your talk you allege no scripture,
For he that in prophecies will be a medler,
By the word of God must his matters assure.

Ped. The days are come to pass spoken of before,
That such as can see, are yet still blind:
And they that of knowledge have great store,
Yet are they without understanding of the mind.
Artificer, artificer, you are an artificer,
That is, one living by an occupation,
God grant you be better than the Traveler,
And better then the conueyer of abomination.

Arti. I would gladly get my living by mine Art,
But Aliants chop up houses so in the City,
That we poor crafts men must needs depart,
And beg if they will, the more is the pity.

Ped. What say the most pestelent Leasemongers?
If that all the houses in London I were able to let,
I would let them all to Alians and strangers,
Before in any of them an Englishman I would set*
For why a stranger will give me what I will require*
And at his day he will keep touch and pay:
An English man in London cannot an house hyre*
Except he be undone for ever and a day.
Three parts in London are already Alians,
Other mongrels, Alians children, mischieuously mixed,
And that with the most detestable Barbarians,
Which here for ever has their dwellings fixed:
Still you Mariners bring them in daily,
So you may have pence,
You make your selves rich and go gaily,
I would you were as ready to carry them hence.
You would bring in the devil for pence and groates:
Ye shall see them one day play their parts gaily,
When we think least, they shall cut our throats.

Mar. They that will talk at their pleasure what they will,
Shall hear again, that shall them displease,
But what frantike fools say, it does not greatly skill,
For your talk does neither profit nor disprofit a peace:
But whereas thou laiest to the charge of Mariners,
That we have filled the land full of Alians,
Thou beliest us, we bring in none but Gospellers,
And such as we know to be very good Christians.

Ped. Oh holy Gospel, o tidings of health most pure,
Thou art made a cloak to all abomination,
Vengeance hangs over your head be you sure,
For misusing the word of man's salvation,
What mischief and outrage has been wrought,
And that under the pretense of the Gospel,
There is no heresy, no impiety, no sacrilege on sought,
And all painted out, with the color of the Gospel.

Arti. Of the Gospel we do boast, and do it profess,
But more honest fidelity is among Turks,
O the boasting, the pride, and the fleshly excess,
Among us is neither true faith, nor yet good works.

Tra. Speak of your self friend* and of no man else,
You know no man's conscience but your own,
We are men of flesh and blood, and no Angels,
What every man is, to God it is known.

Ped. Will you have one word for all?


All. What is that?
Ye are naught all:
And so naught, that ye are past amendment,
Therefore the vengeance of God on you must fall,
And now approaches the time of aduengement,
Tire with all her Travelers proud and gay,
With all her cunning Artificers in their Arts,
Shall be consumed in one day,
And this shall happen for the hardness of your hearts.
But as for Ilion, the tormentor of the slain,
Shall be ploughed up like a corn field:
After he that came, do come again,
In Ilion shall be found neither woman nor child.

Tra. Look that thou study for the true interpretation,
Of your fond and fantastical prophecy,
I will cause you to be had in examination,
And that within these few days, I promise you verily.

Ped. O that all bankrouts, pirates, and usurers,
Ingroses, filthy farmers, and sacrilegers,
Burglaries, lease mongers, promoters, false Mariners,
Might be examined, with counterfeit Artificers.

Arti. All things spoken here, I wish for my part
That they were trodden under the Table:
For he has uttered nothing but the fancies of his heart,
Who can let a man merrily to fable.

Mar. Fable quoth he, by S. Mary sir, his fables touch the quick,
He mingleth his fable with unhappy sentences:
By the faith of my body, he does not my conscience a little pick:
He shall answer them, that has more astriences.

Ped. Conyskins maids, Conyskins for old pastes,
What lack you, what buy you, any good pinnes,
Knit caps for children, biggens, and wastes,
Come let us bargain, bring forth your Conyskins,
I pray you rid my pack you three,
I promise you, I will sell you very good cheap,
If upon the price we can agree,
Of wares for each of you, I have a very great heap.

Tra. Then open thy pack, let me see what thou have here,
If thou have any ware for me, some* money thou shall(...)
For merchant Trauelles I have such gear,
As no man in the world is able to make,
I have a stone in my pack whereon is a name,
Which stone if you please, here next your heart,
Shall defend you from peril and shame,
And keep you from pain, when you hence depart,
But I have a thing perchance you love better,
Although it be not so comely to behold.
A thing wherewith you may make a water.
Wherewith all things that you touch shall be turned to gold.

Mar. This wildbraine does but only mock and scoff,
You shall be tied a little shorter one day.

Tra. If thou have such gear as thou speak off*
Let me know the price, and for it I will pay,
And thou will meet me anon at the sign of the Do,
Thou and I will reason more of the matter.

Ped. And it will please you to help to sing a ballet before you go*
I will teach you cunningly to make the water.

Arti. I know the Peddler can sing pleasantly,
Both upon the book, and also without.

Tra. I will sing, seeing he desires me so instantly,
But to sing by heart, to agree I stand in doubt.

Ped. Behold I have ballet books here,
Truly pricked, with your rests, and where you shall come in.

Mar. Then we sour will make an honest quere,
I will follow, if the Peddler will begin.

Hic Cant. Tra. I have business, I must needs go hence,
Farewell Peddler, thou know my mind.

Ped. Against my coming, provide a purse of pence,
For I can sell you a prosperous and a good wind.
I have in my pack also another stone,
Used with another thing that I do know,
Will cause a rough wind soon to be calm anon,
And in what quarter you will the wind to blow.

Mar. All thy words here are enigmata, that are speeches dark,
Which I would have thee declare what they do mean:
For I had as leeue hear a band-dog bark,
As to hear thee talk, and all is not worth a bean.

Ped. Master Mariner for you I have an Adamant,
I suppose there is no better in this world wide:
Although it be rough and unpleasant,
Yet you had never the like, your needle to guide.
Also for the master of a ship I have a Card,
Compiled by A(...), the first Astronomer*
If to the value thereof, you will give me reward,
You shall have it before another master Mariner.

Mar. Then no more ado, but I pray thee go with me abord,
Thou shall be sure to have poor Mariners cheer:
Harm shall thou have none, I promise thee at a word,
Thou shall be sure to have bread, beef, and bear.

Exit. Ped. I will promise you to come the next tide,
If for money I can get a whery boat:
If not, I will take my nag and ride,
I pass not a little for wetting of my coat.

Arti. You shall disappoint them both at this season,
You shall go home with me and take such as I have.

Ped. To break my promise it were against all reason,
Yet a thing for true Artificers I do save,
I have in my pack only one tool,
Which will serve for all kind of occupations*
Euclides. the first of Geometrisians school*
Invented it through marvelous inspirations.
Thereon you may make a Sithe the grass for to mow,
Also a Drappell to join ships together:
A Coulter or Share, to plough before they do sow,
The rest of the Tales you may now consider.

Arti. You have a marvelous meaning by the tool I am sure,
I would you should show me there of the signification*

Ped. Such a tool it is, I as will endure,
Even unto the worlds consumation,
After I have performed my promise truly,
With the Mariner and also the Traveler,
I will return again this way duly,
And then you shall see my tool, master Artificer.

Exit. Arti. This Peddler makes me maruellously to muse,
I think God has revealed to him things to come,
To the ignorant, they appear marvelous news,
But of ancient sayings they appear to be a some.
Well I will tarry here till his return again,
I will hear how with the Mariner and the traveler he has sped,
Although his counsels they do disdain,
Yet it is good by wisdom always to be led.

Enters Landlord. Land. A sir, I have been at your house twice or thrice to
day,
You know whereof you and I did reason,
Let me hear what to it you will say?
Liberty I granted you till this season,
I tell you I may have three pound for my good will*
And double as much rent as you do give,
You shall know the party, and see his bill,
And that within these few days, if you will not me believe.

Arti. I beseech you landlord to show me some favor,
You know that of the house I have bestowed cost,
All this time you have known my behavior,
Therefore I pray you let not all my labor be lost:
I and mine ancestors in the house long time have dwelt,
And I trust I have always paid my rent:
Both sweet and sower, joy and pain, there we have felt,
And always to deal honestly was our intent.

Land. Will you not have me to do as all men do?
Shall I not make that I can of mine own?
You know my mind if you will not agree thereto,
What I will do within these few days with it, shall be known

Arti. You know that I have good evidence to show,
If any pity be in you, I pray you hear my boon:
If you put me out of my house, my days will be few,
And both I and my family quite undone;
Therefore I pray you tell me what you will require?
And I shall be contented my lease to renew.

Land. No more then other will give I do desire,
And daily for the same to me they do sue.

Arti. Oh what a wretched world is this for poor men,
Oh unreasonable covetousness of Landlords at this day,
Of the house whereof I have years threescore and ten,
I must out, except beyond all reason I will pay.
O what wretches are at these days alive,
To their utter undoing other men's houses to take:
I am sure he shall never be able to thrive,
I know what he is able thereof to make.

Land. All Landlords deal not so honestly as I deal,
I would you should have it before another:
You know what to you I did reveal,
I can do no more, if you were my brother.

Enters Peddler. Ped. Conyskins maids, conyskins for pinnes and laces,
Wot ye what sir, I have been at both places;
I can tell thee such news as thou never heardst off,
Earnest matter, I will neither fable nor scoff,
The Mariner has promised the Traveler
To carry him as far as the River Awroer,
In the which he shall find the stones whereof I told,
Wherewith all thing that they touch, shall be turned to gold.
They are like thereby to have little advantage,
For they are like to perish at the same voyage.
To pass through Marybosse Ferry they have chosen,
In the which sea, unto death they shall be frozen.
The Mariners shall be turned into Makerels,
And the Travelers into Pickerels.
Pykes they say in the sault water will not live,
Pity it were that Pykes in the water should thrive,
For all young Frye in the sea they would eat,
So that upon fasting days we should get no meat.
Therefore on the sea they shall be turned into Seals,
And their wives into Barganders and Teales,
Yet among the gods, for their wives was great dissension,
But I trust they will soon end their contention.
Some made reasons, and would have the women to be Woodcocks,
Nay quoth the other, it were meeter they should be Pecocks.
To conclude, because they are so tender and nesh,
They are like to be made neither good fish nor good flesh.

Arti. You have broken promise, you said you would not fable,
But now I perceive you are very unstable.

Land. Unstable, mary sir that is most sure:
He is so far out of his wits, that he is past cure.

Ped. You are a Landlord and have many Tenants,
A great mischance is happened among your servants.

Land. My servants were well enough within this hour.


Ped. Now one of them does another devour.
Sir it is a strange thing to see your house,
This year there is like to be good store of sowse:
Your wife by the stroke of God is turned to a Cow,
And your youngest daughter, she is turned to a Sow*
The rest of your children, a sort of prittie twigges,
Now are they altered, and turned to pigges.

Land. You are a knave, I dare lay my life,
I will teach you to rail, on an honest man's wife.

Ped. To me you may say your pleasure and mind,
But as I have said, you are like it to find.
Your Oxen and cattle, are turned to Hedgehogs,
And your great multitude of sheep, are turned into Frogs.
The greatest wonder it is yet behind,
All your Tenants have left their humane kind.
Some are turned into Spaniels, and some into Greyhounds,
These make not a little ado upon your grounds.
That you are a Landlord I do understand,
Now to look to this gear, it stands you in hand.

Land. Between game and earnest, I desire thee,
Tell me the troth, if any such things there be.

Arti. There is no such thing be your sure,
For all that he speaks is under a figure.

Ped. Did you never hear of one called Acteon?


Land. Yes indeed, I heard of such a one.


Ped. You are like to play Acteons part,
For you shall be turned to a wild heart.
And the dogs which to keep you were wont,
With most cruel death shall you hunt.
What will your raised rents help?
When you shall be torn of every whelpe.
Your insatiable covetousness, your shameful simony,
Your sacrilege accursed, by Gods own testimony.
These and such other plagues on you shall light,
When Tyton like the Sun, shall shine at midnight.
Watch, for within these few it will be,
They are alive that these plagues shall see.

Arti. Hear thou Peddler? come away I pray thee heartily,
For things are wrought against thee secretly.
A heinous complaint of thee, my Landlord have made,
And with other things they purpose thee to lade.
They say that with Nigromansie thou art a medler,
Wherefore by my counsel thou shall be no longer a Peddler.

Ped. Why then how shall I sell my ware?


Arti. Tush, tush, for that take thou no care.


Ped. Of points in my pack I have an whole gross.


Art. A straw for points, by them thou can have no loss.


Ped. But I suppose you cannot tell what points they be:


Arti. When thou come home to my house, then I will see.


Ped. I will come anon, but I am past care,
Sing and be merry, hab or nab, away the mare.
It begins, it springs, it flourishes,
Woe be unto them that such plants nourishes.
I dare lay as much as I am worth,
That strange monsters they shall bring forth.
Did you never hear of an Island called Thewle?
Near to the Orcardes compassed with the sea,
Near the same place there is a pleasant land,
Wherein is great wonders as I understand.
This land was sometime full of men,
Such, as one of them were as good as ten:
Now are they altered into beasts and fowls,
As into Lions, Bears, Kytes, Swine, and Owls.
God is able to take from them their beastly heart,
And into the shape of men again them convert.
Seven years to declare his pomp,
He punished the mighty king Nabuchodonozor,
If all men had seen these men, as I have seen,
And see them at these days, it would make them weep I ween.

Exit. Here enters the Interpreter. Inter. Saint Clement says, written unto
saint James,
That he is a right interpreter of holy writ:
Which stands not upon words, Countries, and names,
But such one as expounds the meaning of the spirit.
An Interpretor thereof, I am called by name:
For of the tongues I am able to make translation,
My practice has been long time in the same.
And of Mysteries I am able to make declaration:
It greeueth me at the heart, God I take to record,
To see the variety, and chiefly in religion,
That it may be soon amended, I beseech Christ our Lord,
Or else let us look shortly for a grievous destruction.
My coming hither truly at this season,
Is chiefly to hear the talk of a Peddler:
I will be glad by learning with him to reason,
For I hear say, that in high matters he is a medler.

Here enters the Justice. Just. Where is this Peddler? where is this runnagate?
What sir is he one of your scholars?

Interp. It is your pleasure all things well to interpret,
But they are not the best Judges, that were golden collers,
I heard of such a fellow indeed as you have done,
And hither am I come with him to dispute:
And if he were here you should perceive soon,
That by good learning I would his folly confute.

Just. Dispute, nay I would not stand to dispute I trow,
But I wot, through the liberty of your preaching,
Much mischief among men begins to grow,
I tell you, many men like not your teaching.

Inter. Truth, indeed none that be of your condition,
To withstand Gods word you have set your face:
So drowned ye are in rustie superstition,
That Gods word in your heart, can tke no place.
You are called in the Commonwealth to be a Justice,
Therefore all your words and acts ought to be right:
You have taken an oath justly to do your office,
And to defend the truth with all your might*
But truly the verity you do not defend,
But you persecute it with all your power:
The upright and fatherless you do reprehend,
The malefactors you let pass, both day and hour.

Just. Talk your pleasure, here are but we two,
Boast not too much of your innocence,
What, we know well enough what ye do,
All the world speaks of your insolency:
You may preach, teach, cry out and yell,
The hearing thereof, many men do give,
But whether you speak of heaven or hell,
Not one among a thousand do you believe.
I will lay twenty pound, I will do more with one word
Then you shall do with twenty Sermons truly:
For the people think you speak but in board,
Because you lead your lives so unruly.

Ped. No man will hear the Painter, but a popish priest.


Inter. Truth, for so says God by the Prophet Esaias,
All mischief shall happen upon thee in one day.
For the multitude of thy Inchanters verily*
And for the hardness of hearts that will not obey.

Just. And if you can tell us where any such be,
Whether it be Nigromansor or sorcerer,
We shall do unto them, as it apperteineth ye shall see,
And they shall be handled like a thief or a murderer.

In. And it please you sir, I am none of those that love to be a medler,
But I speak a few words and only for this cause:
It was my chance of late to talk with a Peddler,
Whose words me thought, agreed not with Gods laws.
He takes upon him fondly to prophecy,
And says that a dead man shall kill many alive,
And the one unborn as yet in his mothers belly,
They that be dead, to life again shall revive:
I wot not what he meant by this gear,
But he tells many such things:
Such a fellow I suppose you did never hear,
He tells wonders of Emperors and Kings.

Just. You are an Interpreter of dark sentences,
What say you to the Pedlers high prophecy:

Inter. He that is ignorant of all honest science,
Unto knowledge and virtue, is an utter enemy.
O most unhappy Hamlet, country shire,
Where such unjust Justice have the governance:
Neither for sin nor discord you do enquire,
But unto God and his word, you are an hindrance.
An Interpreter I am called indeed,
But of Gods word and the tongues ancient,
Pedlers dreams are good, old Papists to seed,
And such as despise the word of God omnipotent.

Just. Talk your pleasure, you are not like to talk long,
Your time of prattling is almost at a point:
I trust shortly to hear you sing a new song,
Or else you are like to lose your bestioynt.

Ped. By my faith and troth, so do the Peddler prophecy,
The days are come says he, that Bishops and Priests all,
Because they are the beginners of all controversy,
In one day they shall be consumed both great and small.

Inter. I trust brother that you are instructed so,
That to a prating Pedlers words you will give no credit,

Just. Whether it be prating I cannot say or no,
But he has given a most seemly verdite.

Ped. Right reverent Interpreter, learned and wise:
I suppose that you are of that judgment,
That he that utters another man's vice,
Is not therefore partaker of his lewd document:
I say no more, but God amend all that is amiss,
I thought here more to have said:
My words they be not, but they be his,
Which to utter truly, I am afraid.

Let the Peddler be going out. Just. Tarry Priest, tarry, I pray thee heartily,
To take them for thy words, no man is so unwise,
For speaking of them I promise thee verily,
No man shall hurt thee, as I am true Justice.

Ped. Nay sir, he has not so much of the Clergy spoken,
But much more he railed upon Justices:
For Gods sake apprehend him, and cause him to open
The things he has spoken of men in their offices.

Inter. The worshipful Justice, will take none advantage
Of any thing rehearsed of another man's saying:
And as for me, I intend to bring you into no bondage,
For a lewd foolish fellows prattling bewraying.

P. Go to then, the Peddler says that all preachers and priests
Shall Be turned into Swallows the next year,
And the new unlearned Ministers, into Robin Redbrests,
They shall keep the wood, and sing no more in the quere.
He tells the cause why are never at a stay,
For look as in garments they do varry,
So do they in ministration day by day,
Therefore in the Church they are not like to tarry.
But like as the Swallow has a new pleasant voice,
Yet the summer is near she does signify,
So at their words certain men do rejoice,
For a truth to come they do testify:
But when that comes that indeed shall come,
That more for love then for lucre men shall teach,
The Swallows in holes, shall sleep as things dombe,
For Eunock and Ely in sackcloth shall preach.
These and other things he does prophecy,
And namely against them that leave their vocation,
Intruding themselves as he says, most unworthy,
Into that office of preaching and ministration.

Just. If the Peddler has no worse talk then this,
His words in my judgment are tolerable:
For all in the Church methinkes is amiss,
Nothing can I see much commendable.
Think you it does not grieve us at the hearts?
To have a Tinker or a Cobbler to minister to us:
Yea, and the lewdest fellows in all our parts,
Takes upon him matters of gravity to discus.

Inter. I will answer you perticularly to your reason,
First, whereas you say his words be tolerable,
I will prove them fables, and clean out of season,
And against Gods words, blasphemy most damnable.
First both Christ's Preachers, and his erudition,
Which erudition is the blessed word of verity,
Thy falling, Peddler, has brought into suspicion,
Prophesying of a doctrine of more sincerity.
Secondly, whereas you say that all is amiss,
You mean because we have removed Idolatry,
Superstition, and hypocrisy, wherein your trust is:
And has placed there Gods word, only necessary.
Thirdly, whereas you say it does your hearts grieve,
That Tinkers and Cobblers should use ministration,
If Christ should come from heaven and preach, I believe
That you would despise both him and his predication,
Were not the Apostles Fishers for the most part all?
And into the whole world passed their sound,
Not one Justice to that office he did call,
Hard it is among you one faithful to be found.
But I beseech God once to open your eyes,
For of Gods word you let the true passage:
God has given you over, to believe lies,
Rather then the Gospel, the heavenly fathers message.

Ped. By my troth, even so did the Peddler speak,
Too bad he railed against Justices,
It makes the heart in my body to break,
To hear his Inuectiues against all Officers.

Just. I pray thee tell me what he said?
A prating knaves words, can no honest man offend.

Ped. To utter such lewd talk I am half afraid,
Would to God you would go about, him to apprehend.

Just. I pray thee tell me as much as thou art able,
We will apprehend him well enough, no doubt.

Ped. Of Gentlemen he rehearsed a fond fable,
I wot not how the devil he brought it about:
Gentlemen quoth he, that be no Gentlemen borne,
But such as come up by spiritual spoil:
Shall be turned into horses, to eat haie and corn,
And among other beasts compelled to toil.

Inter. Think you that these words are meet abroad to be blown,
It appears that he raileth thus on every state:

Ped. Time it is that such as he were known,
For else he and they will cause much hate.
The Justices quoth he, to hell quick shall sink,
For that they are not hinderers of the verity:
But because at other men's matters they do wink,
Living themselves like epicures, in all carnallitie.
Therefore the most of the^ says he, shall be turned into moles,
Because they are covetous, and in heart blind:
Yet some of them shall be turned into black birds, called coals,
Them he mean, that be ever gentle and kind.

Just. What manner of man is he, and of what nature?
I judge him to be lunaticke or stark mad.

Ped. A little man sir, even of my stature,
And as touching age, in faith but a lad.

Inter. I would it might please you and other Magistrates,
Earnestly to look upon such makers of disturbance:

Just. I would it might please you to remove these runnagates,
And to ease our minds of such incombrance.
For as long as such be in place,
You shall never be had in reputation:
Yet I will not say but diverse men have grace,
But they be out of the peoples estimation.

Inter. As long as they be blameless in conversation,
And in doctrine sincere and sound approved:
They need not pass of the peoples estimation,
For both of God and the world, they cannot be loved.

Here enters the Judge. Judge. God speed you my masters, forsooth all three,
And you worshipful master Justice my friend:
It does me good to see you so well agree,
Trusting in God that you be all of one mind.

Interp. You are as welcome hither, right honorable Judge,
God forbid among wise men, there should be discord:
For whereas there is division and grudge,
There follows desolation, as says Christ our Lord.

Just. Truly, your honor is welcome hither,
This reverent father and I, were commoning hard:
Of the prophecy of a runnagate Peddler,
Whose saying in my judgment, no man will regard.

Ped. Yet sir, saving your advise,
Men ought to rail upon authority,
For The Apostle Paul both godly and wise,
Revoked his words spoken with severity:

Iud. Indeed I heard of such a one,
And there goes a great brute of his prophecy.

Ped. All his talk is not worth a hering bone,
For of many of them I am able to testify,
Seruing-men quoth he, that wear breeches like faggots,
Which in fleshly idleness consume their lives,
Shall be first converted into maggots,
And afterward turned to drones, and live in hiues.

Iud. He means unhappily by this fable,
I would I had him in my keeping a while.

Ped. A fellow he is most unconstant and unstable,
And such a one as will you right soon beguile:
And told a tale of the Prophcie of Jeremy:
When God bad hide by the River Euphrates,
I wot not what he meant by that Prophecy,
For anon he was in hand with Socrates.

Just. Does the prophecy speak of any such matter?
Such things to be red, methinkes are base:

Inter. In no wise I would have you to take it as vain clatter,
For a great mystery is meant in that place:
The very Text makes the meaning plain,
Which I will read and expound if you will:

Iud. No, no, we will not put you to that pain,
But we will hear the Pedlers prophecy still.
I pray you tell me, talks he not of the state of this region?
Of the Queens Majesty, and of the Council:
What says he concerning religion?
How likes he by the Preachers of the Gospel?

Ped. Not one word talks he of this religion,
Neither of Queen, Council, Lord, Knight, nor Squire:
All his talk is of a land called Ilion,
And of a City far of, called Tire.
Mary thus he says, though Princes themselves be good,
Yet are they like at Gods hand to be punished:
For at their hands, God will require their subjects blood,
Which through their sufferance into sin has perished.

Iud. VVhereat is the Peddler so sore offended?
What is it that he misliketh most?

Ped. He says the world is so ill it cannot be amended.
And that we sin daily against the holy Ghost,
Marry one thing comes now to my remembrance,
He cries out upon suppressed lands:
The abuse of them cries to God for vengeance,
For most of them are come into wicked men's hands.
When the Peddler told this tale, truly he wept:
Alas, alas, quoth he, how are the poor Tenants handled?
They which through their labors good houses kept,
Now are they thrown out, their goods wasted and mangled.
Of them to me he told a great process,
Would to God quoth he, they had bin reserved to the crown,
They would have maintained the Princes with riches,
And have kept wealthy Tenants, in every Town.

Iud. As I have learned here by my brothers report,
He entermedleth with matters of religion:
With men of all states and of mighty sort,
Which will be an occasion, to move strife and sedition.

Just. He medleth with Princes causes me think,
These words are not tolerable in a subject,
We had not need at such matters to wink,
It is more then time him to correct.

Iud. I pray thee amongst all his communication,
What would he of Judges say?

Ped. Now truly my Lord, I never liked his conversation,
Yet to know his mind, I held him up with yea and nay:
Nay my Lord, if I should speak all that he have said,
I might chance to get my self displeasure:
Your honor knows that words are not weyed,
Where the tongue uses no reasonable measure.

Iud. I pray you tell me as much as you can,
What he has talked of any state?
And I promise you, as I am true man,
Of us you shall have neither displeasure nor hate.

Ped. All Judges quoth he, love rewards, and follow gifts,
They pervert justice, and equal judgment:
To save malefactors, they make foul shifts,
And some receive money to condemn the innocent.
He cries out of strangers and free Denisons,
Which are deuourers of this Realm:
Not only devour they like monstrous Camelions,
But also steal, and send over by the stream.
He says that for money they are made free,
And one of these panch-bellied Alians,
Devour more, then ten men of our country,
Worse then Dogs, Epicures, and Arrians.

Inter. Though certain of his words be true indeed,
Yet there is a mean in time to speak,

Just. For his truth telling he shall have his meed,
We will provide an haulter his neck to break.

Ped. Of all his talk thus he did conclude,
Since men upon the earth was first create,
Of Inchanters and Coniurers, there was never such a multitude,
Both of young and old, of every estate:
So many says he, be in the said Ilion,
That all of whom we have spoken of here,
Shall be altered and changed by evil spirits delusion,
Into beasts, fowls, and fishes, within a year:
So that Ilion, and the populous City Tire,
Shall be filled with monsters, fierce and hugious:
Insomuch that from heaven God shall send fire,
To destroy those wicked and religious.

Inter. By my conjecture, thus means the Peddler,
He says men given to licentious life:
And that each one, of another state is a medler,
Which will be an occasion of much strife.
He says so much untruth and mutual hate,
And no man contented with his vocation*
He says men degenerate from humane state,
Therefore from kind, he feineth an alteration.
I confess many things to be out of frame,
Yet that to redress, we refer to authority:
The enterprise of base medlers, we do greatly blame*
Wishing them to be rebuked with all severity.

Iud. As for prattling of Pedlers we do not pass,
But for all things amiss, I wish amendment,
If ought be no worse then ever it was,
God give us grace to obey his commandment.

Just. For all things amiss, there would soon be redress*
If every state would justly execute their office:
And if all men would their faults confess,
We should be the more meet to do God service.

Ped. I have business to do and must needs depart,
But because I have the Pedlers words here recited:
I ask pardon, with most lowly and penitent heart,
Beseeching your honors, that nothing be required.

Inter. Of necessity we must depart all,
And therefore it is meet that we go together:
But first upon our heavenly father let us all call,
That mercifully he will all states consider.

Iud. First let us pray for the Queens Majesty on this part,
Almighty God prosper and defend her Royal Majesty,
Amen say all those, that have a true English heart,
We have all cause to pray for her Graces prosperity.

Just. Also her honorable Council God prosper and save,
And that honorable T. N. etc. of N. chiefly:
Whom as our good Lord and master, found we have,
Good Lord we beseech thee, to be his guide daily.

Inter. O heavenly father, send workmen into thy harvest,
And preserve them that are already sent:
Suffer no wolves them to molest,
Let them accomplish that whereto they are bent.

Iud. Lord save thy people, and bless thine heritage,
Thy mercy good Lord, upon this Communaltie extend.

Just. Thy Name be praised evermore from age to age*


Inter. As it is now and ever shall be, world without end.


Amen. Ped. You shall know more of my mind anon*
Whist, peace a while, till they be gone.

Here they sing an heavenly song. And after they be out, the Peddler speaks as
follows. Ped. A sir, was not this a pretty cast of a Peddler?
I had none other way but this* my matters to open:
Henceforth I intend to be no medler,
But let them mark well what I have spoken.
See and foresee, look within, and look without:
Though it be far off, yet it will come:
See the third time and look about,
Not without, but within, see ye, see some.
And when you have seen that you shall see,
You will think upon the Peddler I ween:
He will be a Drone that now is a Be,
I say no more, but God save our Queen.
Be ready at midday, and also at midnight,
Go forward apace, and also look back:
An heavy purse makes a man's heart light,
There is no remedy, I must again to my pack.

Exit. FINIS.

