Almighty God I pray, his Holy spirit to send:
True trial touching truth, time trimly here does try:
Except the Scribes therefore we pass in righteousness, we dye.
Minds many moved be, all truth to establysh:
Papes popish puffed in Plutoes pride, all popery here do wysh.
Void from them all good men, which godly be in mind:
Since Satan assaileth some so sore, and still their hearts does blind.
Embrace and love the Truth, on Christ's side stiffly stand:
Deny the Pope Satan the Turk, reject them quite from hand.
And never wish in will, with wicked men t'agree:
Xp^e says we can not their ways hold, and eke his servant be.
Reject, and expel quite, that which displease God may:
Incline to Christ, the truth embrace, be sure thereon to stay.
Rejoice though Rigor raunge, and run for to obtain:
Upon thee persecution bear, great joys to have again.
Muse nothing on these days, but wey the time now frail:
The tried truth time under treades, in time truth will prevail.
In time the wicked laugh, in time the just lament:
Muse not therefore, the just to try, the Lords will now is bent.
Employ thy will and mind, to the Scriptures divine:
Be not seduced in no wise, from truth do not decline.
Refuse (if faith thou have) a Christian dumme to be:
Yield out thy talent with increase, and look thy faith be free.
No doubt if dumme thou lurk, clokyng thy faith for fear:
God will thee plague, and to good men, thy faint faith will appear.
Enclyne thine ear hereto, and this well understand:
Try out the sense hereof by truth, all wickedness withstand.
Heaven with the Lord of Lords, we shall not inherit:
Except our righteousness far pass the Scribe and hipocrite.
All wicked men we see, now glory much in mind:
Lookyng for mass, an Idol which to them has been full kind.
Truly those naughty men, think now within short time:
Here, for Jesus Christ's true word, to plant Satan's doctrine.
Yea still they hope in deed, and still look for a day:
No doubt, Christ's gospel to exclude, and popes laws to bear sway.
God save our noble Queen, Lord grant this we require:
Among us here long she may reign, and cut short papes desire.
Send out thy wrath (O Lord) confound with open shame:
Those which in heart unto her grace, long life do not proclaim.
Out pull those hateful hearts, which in spite rage and boil:
Against thy truth, her grace, good men (O Lord) you can them foil.
Nothing but wickedness, such in their hearts embrace,
Among us here although they say, and bear out a smooth face.
Now Lord thy flock defend, Lord bless thine heritage:
Direct thy spirit over us all, in this our time and age.
Encourage us against rageyng Satan always,
Quicken our minds, strength us herein, O Lord to thee we pray:
Vouch safe eke on those men, thy heavenly spirit to send,
O Lord enspire them with thy grace, their erryng lives t'amend.
Destroy all errors here, illuminate their heart:
Call home all those which have run wide, to the truth them conuart.
Heal those which broken be (O Lord I say) in mind:
Reduce and bring to thee in truth, all wicked Jews unkind.
Infidels and eke Turks, Paganes which know thee not:
So shall we all be to thee one inheritance and lot.
Tread under and suppress all vice, and eke expel
Our hollow hearted hipocrites, which love not thy Gospel:
Put in their hearts such grace (O Lord) that they may now:
Hope in thee their eternal God, and to thee their hearts bow.
Ever to watch and pray, as thou have taught the same:
Ready to be with oil in lamp, heaven with thee to attain.
We hopyng on thee thus, all vain hope now confound:
In heaven with thee at length will we thy worthy praise forth sound.
Lord grant that we may reign, in joys celestial:
Such as will still thy foes remain, shall to pains infernal.
O Lord grant this request, Lord let thy kingdom cum:
Now watch and pray we will, for why? Tempus edax rerum.
FINIS.
(quod) Christopher Wilson.

SOme hope you see,
(The more pity)
Not in the Lord of might:
Whose hearts and mind,
His ways should find,
To praise him day and night.
With heart and voice,
They should rejoice,
Only in Christ I say:
And not to hope,
To see the Pope,
With his laws to bear sway.
Lament I do,
Here to see now,
The joys that some be in:
Wyshyng for Mass,
I say alas,
The cloak of filthy sin.
I may here write,
And truth endite,
Affirm plainly and say:
The word of truth,
(The more is ruth)
Is sown in stony way.
For all teaching,
And true preaching,
Some hearts be hard as steel:
There is no way,
Their hearts to stay,
Or cause them truth to seele.
But stout they be,
In all Popery,
As by this man does seente:
Whose shameless face,
Put forth this case,
And bad his neighbors deem:
Where best should be,
To make (quod he)
An altar for our Mass:
Let us first be,
Herein (quod he)
It will thus come to pass.
This friend of Popes,
Offered ten grotes,
This altar there to make:
Where mass should be.
Have here (quod he)
This money mine here take.
Lord our Queen save,
We cry and crave,
In godly state always:
Defend her grace,
Long time and space,
Among us here we pray.
Imprinted at London without Aldersgate, in little Britain: by Alex. Lacy.
The. 16. of August. 1566.


