THE Commendation of Cocks, and Cock-fighting. Wherein is showed, that
Cocke-fighting was before the coming of Christ.



LONDON, Printed for Henry Tomes, and are to be sold at his Shop over against
Graies Inn gate in Holburne, 16^7.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Henry Bedingfield in the County of Norffolke
Knight: George Wilson wishes in this world, health, wealth, and prosperity:
and in the world to come, eternal felicity.
THis Treatise (right Worshipful) tending to the commendation of Cocks, and
Cocke-fighting, was by me long since promised in London, Bostone, and other
places: but like an ill Debtor, I have broken many days of payment: yet now at
the last I have made perfourmance, although perchance not altogether in such
good manner, as some men may expect, yet is it in the best sort that I can: and
as it is, I hope you will accept it. Mison could not paint so exquisitely, as
Apelles did, yet Darius allowed of his labors. Silly Baucis could not feast
Jupiter in silver plate, but in wodden vessels. All that honor Esculape,
cannot deck his shrine with Jewels: neither can all they that write, express
their minds, so well as they would. But as Apollo gave Oracles, as well to the
poor man for his mite, as to the rich man for his million: so I doubt not, but
your worship will accept of this my poor offering, and patronize this book as
willingly, as I dedicate it heartily, and although I know it is unworthy, to
wear your worthy name: yet have I (presuming on your wonted courtesy) placed
it on the browe of it, to be an ornament unto it to grace it, and a shield to
defend it, against all envious detractors. Now, the reason why I have made
choice of you, rather than of any other, is, both in regard of the good will
you bear to Cocke-fighting, (wherein I know you take exceeding great delight)
and also to manifest my love, and duty unto your worship, to whom I am more
than much beholding, for many and most undeserved courtesies. Being loath to
trouble you with too tedious an Epistle, in all humility, commending my book
to your favorable protection, I end, hoping one day to do something that
shall be more worthy of your acceptance, till when and ever, I rest your
Worships, to command.

George Wilson.

To the Reader whosoever.
GEntle Reader, in regard that I have always been greatly affectioned to the
most pleasant sport of Cock-fighting, I have thought good to show unto thee
(in this following treatise) the excellent nature, rare qualities, stout
courage, undaunted resolution, and the most admirable virtues, that are in
fighting Cocks, and withal to discribe, and show forth the manner, custom,
and good order that is observed and used in the pleasing pastime of
Cock-fighting, with a brief repetition of the high commendations that learned
writers, and mighty princes, as Themistocles, Plutarch, Pliny, Caesar, Mark
Anthony, and many other great personages have given unto them, not only to
satisfy and please mine own humor therein, but to fulfill the earnest request
and expectation of diverse men of great account, who have long time labored
with me, and often incited me to do it. Wherefore considering with my self,
that although many men in this Realm, hold it in most high estimation, yet
there are not, nor have been any, that ever gave it any public commendation. I
thought good to show my simple skill in the discribing of it; which description
although it be far inferior to the worthiness of my subject: yet I entreat
thee to accept it kindly, or else to amend it quickly: but if thou will
neither accept of it, nor amend it, but scorn my work, and contemn me for
my good will, then the care is taken: and I am constant in my resolution. Thus
kindly commending both my self and my Book, to the courtesy of all courteous
Readers, I bid thee farewell. From Wretton in the County of Noffolke.

Thine in what he may, G. W.

The Commendation of Cocks, and Cocke-fighting.
Chapter. I.
IT is written in the first Chapter of the first Book of Moses, called
Genesis: that God gave unto man, Sovereignty, Rule, and Dominion over the
fishes in the sea; over the fowls of the air; and over every living thing
that he had made: and behold, it was exceeding good, and was appointed unto man
for to do him homage, and to serve him in all places, and times, in his
several and necessary uses and not only for clothing and sustenance for his
body; but also for recreation and pastime, to delight his mind: as with
Cocke-fighting, Hawking, Hunting, and such like. For honest recreation is not
prohibited by the word of God: but rather tolerated and allowed.

The Kingly Prophet David, rehearsing the miraculous works of the Almighty, in
the 104 Psalm, says, speaking of the sea; there go the ships, and there is
that Leuiathan, whom thou have made to take his pastime therein. Now if the
fish be admitted to take their pastime in the sea, and the fowls to sport them
in the air? How much more may man (which is the king of Creatures) take his
pleasure upon the earth? for our Savior Christ says, you are of more worth,
then many Sparrowes. And the wise Solomon verifieth, that this is the portion
of a man under the sun, to eat, and to drink, and to make his heart merry
with the moderate use of the good creatures of God.

Diverse other places in the Holy Scriptures, tending to this effect, might be
alleged, to prove and maintain the lawfulness of mirth and modest pastime:
which in all ages, and in all places whatsoever, has always been both
tolerated, and commended: but I will omit the recital of them, and proceed
in my pretended description of Cocks, and Cocke-fighting: which pleasant, and
delightful sport, is so excellent of it self, that it meriteth much praise;
and so ancient, that it may easily be proved: it was used long time before
our Savior Christ's peregrination: for do but look into Plutarchs Books,
called the lives of the Romans, and you shall find in the story of M.
Antonius, that the Soothsayers counseled him to beware and take heed of
Caesar, because his Cocks did always loose the day, when they fought with
Caesar's. And I also read, that Themistocles, that worthy, valiant and
time-eternized Conqueror, when he besieged the famous and great Country
Dalmatia, did use Cocke-fighting: for at his beginning, and first entrance into
that enterprise, before he gave any assault, or made any offer of battery
against the country: he commanded that two Cocks of the kind, should be
brought unto him, and be set down to fight before him, in the open view of all
his valiant soldiers, whom he earnestly requested most seriously to behold and
mark the battle, which was performed on both parts, with such stout courage,
and magnanimity, that all the spectators did admire, and wonder to behold the
dreadfulnesse of their fight, the deep indented wounds that each of them had,
and in the end with what exceeding great resolution, both of the^ died: which
bloody battle was no sooner ended, but Themistocles commanding silence, began
this Oration.

RIght worthy Gentlemen, courageous Companions, and my most valiant and loving
Soldiers, it is oftentimes seen, that he which is least able to bear, shall
have the greatest burden laid upon his back, as appears most apparently by
me at this instant, who being ordained and appointed to be your Governor, and
the chief General of the field; whereas many of you are more worthy, and
better able to have supplied my place, and discharged my office, than my self
am. But since it is my Princes pleasure, to prefer me to this high
pre-eminence and great dignity, although I cannot perform all that is
requisite to be done, by a man of so great a command, in such absolute manner
as I gladly would: yet will I not fail to show my uttermost endeavor to
accomplish, and atchieue whatsoever I can. Now the occasion of this our present
warlike preparation, is not unknown to you all, but ye means how we shall bring
to pass our intended purposes, is unknown to any, and remains doubtful
both to you, and to me: and therefore the better to effect what we do intend,
I thought it not amiss, but rather most necessary, to present unto your
public view the fierce fight, and cruel combat of these two (late
undaunted, but now dead) Cocks, that the sight of the courage which they
showed in this quarrel, might pierce into your hearts, and make a deep
impression in your discreet considerations, that thereby you might be the more
enboldened and encouraged, than you could have been by all the words of
comfort that I can relate, or by all the examples of former accidents that may
be repeated. I might here take occasion to unfold, and show unto you the
sundry shifts, and subtle euasions, which they used in their fight, for the
eschewing of each dangerous blow interchangeably passing betwixt them; but for
your selves could not but perceive it, I will let pass as a thing not
material to be any more recyted And now only as your Director I advise you, as
your Captain I council you, and as your friend and fellow soldier I
instantly exhort you, to call to mind the invincible courage of these
unreasonable creatures: what cruelty they endured in this conflict, how many
bleeding wounds they sustained, never showing so much as any sign of
yielding, no not at the very last gasp of their lives: when being not able to
strike, stand, or see each other, yet even then they manifested their
incredible valor, until the one was left dead with the blows of his
adversary, and the other not able to live, having obtained so doubtful a
victory: and all this doubtless for no other cause so far as I can
conjecture) then for the love of their Hens Now therefore most heroical minded
Genmen, and courageous Soldiers, if these creatures wanting the use of reason,
who are only guided by nature, have showed such stout, undaunted and admirable
courage for the love of their pheeres: let not us which are men, endued with
wisdom and understanding, and with far greater prerogatives of nature, then
any other inferior creatures, they being subject unto us, and made for our
use: but we having our natures much indeered, and bettered by art, Let not us I
say, show more cowardice and faint hearted timorousness, then these silly
fowls of the air have done.

I read of many men in former times, which to disport their Princes, have
entered into doubtful fraies, and most dangerous combats insomuch, that some of
them in those actions, have ended their lives by the dint of their dearest
companions swords. Some have consumed their days in travel, and undergone
death in most tyrannical manner, with great misery, and much extremity for
the good of their country, sacking nothing, but fame for themselves, yet
desirous to procure profit to their native soiles. Other some have suffered
death for the entire affection which they did bear unto their friends: diverse
have plunged themselves into manifest and mighty perils for the defense of
their wives and children: and very many have been more willing to loose their
lives, then to loose their lands and temporal livings: but never any (I
think) has been so much subject to cowardice, that they would not fight to
saueguard their own lives. Yet this is our cause now, nay our cause is more
then so, to animate us unto this conflict: for we are commanded by our Prince
(whom of necessity we must obey) and challenged by our mortal enemies, who
seek the death of our Prince: the speedy subversion, and utter overthrow of
our native Country, the ransacking of our substance, the violating of our
virgins, the rauishing of our wives, and lastly, the most bloody Massacre of
all our children and friends: reserving our selves, to endure some extreme and
intolerable tortures. Therefore (I beseech you) arm your selves with courage
correspondent for such a conflict: and let us choose and resolve rather to die
valiantly with honor, then to yield our selves cowardly to the mercy of our
merciless enemies, who have made preparation for our general destruction.
These words Themistocles uttered with such vehemency of spirit, and with such
a show of undoubted valor, that all the whole army (which before was somewhat
daunted and discouraged with the force and multitude of their enemies) had now
(by this instigation) so far abandoned and chased away all former fear, that
nothing could discourage them, for now they seemed to disdain and contemn all
occasions, which might in any sort dismay them: every one thinking so well, and
conceiving such a good opinion of their General, that they thought themselves
happy to be under his government, and deemed every hour to be a day long,
until they might buckle with their boasting adversaries.

Whereupon they having made fit preparation for all their warlike provision,
they struck up an Alarm, sounded their trumpets, cornets, clarions, phifes,
and other musical instruments used in wars, with such a triumphant noise, as
was able to have animated an effeminate minded Soldier. And in this manner
they marched courageously toward their enemies, whom they assailed so fiercely
with such unspeakable valor, that the bloody Massacre which they made amongst
them, (whom they slaughtered in great abundance) was a sufficient witness to
warrant their courageous resolutions, they charging them on every side so
valiantly, that the fame of that famous and heroical act of Chivalry and
Princely prowess performed in that piece of service, will never be buried in
oblivion so long as the Annalls of the Grecians remain, or a Greek is living
to record the same.

Chapter. II.
LYcurgus ye law giver of Lacedemonia, counseled the Lacedaemonians to be both
as constant, and as courageous as a Cock is: for this is certain, that he is
so constant to his Hens, that he will rather die, then depart from them: and
so courageous, that he will never yield unto his adversary, until death
enforce him. And Pliny that famous writer says, That the Cock loves his
Hens so entirely, that he will take the meat out of his own mouth, and then
clucking them about him, he will bestow it most liberally and kindly among
them. And moreover, if any other Cock do chance to come within his regiment,
precinct, or liberty, to tread any of his Hens, he will straight ways
encounter with his intruding adversary, and valiantly adventure his life with
him, be he never so strong, or stout, rather then yield him any jot or part of
his pleasure.

Here may all men take occasion by this example of the Cock, to weigh and
consider with themselves, how loving and kind they ought to be unto their
wives, and how vigilant and careful they should be over them which are so
nearly, and dearly bound unto them by the Law of God, as to be one flesh,
one mind, one faith, and one troth: as though both they were but one body: in
which course, they are commanded by the Almighty, to continue unto the end of
their lives.

Now this being performed (as it ought to be) what would it do, but work
this effect? that as in our Cocks, our wives see and know, we take exeeding
great pleasure and delight: so it would also incite, and cause them to say unto
themselves, we are induced and persuaded, nay, in a manner we are even
compelled, and as it were enforced to love our husbands Cocks, and to make
much of them, because they do show unto them a good and a perswasiue example,
how they should love, regard, defend, and cherish us: for they perceiving such
constant, faithful, and unfeigned love, to be and remain in unreasonable
creatures which are only guided and governed by nature, will surely be moved
thereby, and stirred up to a far greater love toward us, having more
wisdom, reason, and understanding in themselves, then all other kinds of
living creatures. Now therefore, for our own parts, we will do this from
henceforth, we will rather want meat our selves, then the Cocks shall: and
by this means, we shall allure our husbands to manifest their love toward us,
and procure them to continue it to us.

Thus would our wives say among themselves; but to pass over that point, we
read, that rash Isadas the Lacedemon Lord, going out naked with an host of men
against the Theban powers, in which desperate attempted fight, he prevailed and
got a great victory. Afterward, he being asked why he went forth in that
manner, made this answers; The crauen Cock (says he) had rather be covered in a
roope, the^ come forth to fight, or if of necessity he be enforced, he will
sooner run out of danger, then endure it: but the Cock of the Game will
always be forward to the fight, and never leave it, for any danger that is in
it: neither will he desire any other engine, either to defend himself, or to
offend his enemy, more then ^ame Nature has endowed him with; and shall not I
be as valourous as a Coeke is? Thus did Isadas (by example of the Cock)
answer to their objection.

Now there are some men which will say, that notwithstanding all the courage
that is in our fighting Cocks, yet they are crowned but with a comb: but
Pliny says, that nature did crown him with a Diadem: and that his comb was
given him (as indeed who can deny it) to be an ornament to adorn him, and
not (as some fools think) to be a note of disgrace, and scandal to him.
Heliodorus in his Ethiopian History reports, that Cocks were had in such
great estimation amongst the Egiptians, (whither Cha^iclea the daughter of
Astyages the King of the Ethiops was by thieves violently carried) that both
the Priests in Memphis, and most of the people which inhabited near to the
River Nilus, did keep Cocks in their lodging-chambers, to be as an Allarum
bell unto them, to make them to be vigilant and watchful: the one for that
being often wakened, they might call upon their Idols Osiris, and Isis, (whom
they worship as their God, and their Goddess) and the other that they might
thereby be moved to make all things sure, and be stirred up to defend
themselves against robbers, and thieves, by whom (in those parts) they were
mightily oppressed.

Thus you may see that even amongst the heathens, Cocks were highly respected,
and much valued, many hundredth years ago; and no doubt but they are so still
at this instant: and in my opinion, they deserve, and merit more to be
esteemed of all men, then any other foul does, for what foul this day living
in the air, or upon the face of the earth, is so pleasurable, and so
profitable as the Cock is? I confess that the Arabian Phaenix is both rarer,
and chaster; but for the use and behoof of man, the Cock is far better. In
both of them has Dame Nature done her best, and (to express great wonders in
small creatures) has made them both more excellent, and more admirable, then
any other feathered fowls.

The Phoenix is much prized of many, but not more praised of all then the Cock
is, for the one is not so worthy of commendations for her rareness and
chastity (which comes of necessity, because there is no more of that kind)
as the other is for his courage and constancy, who (though he has great
society) will rather die, then derogate from any of his company,

Master Michaell Drayton, an excellent Poet, now living in London, in a Book
of his called Englands Heroical Epistles, speaking of the Phoenix, says thus.

The Arabian Bird that never is but one,
Is only chaste because she is alone:
But had our mother Nature made them two,
They would have done as Doves, and Sparrowes do.
Now, what does the Dove, but by his billing beget others, or the Sparrow, (but
as the Cock does) by treading, engender, breed, and increase his own kind.
And had the Phoenix a Pheere do so with, she would (in short time) grow to
this pass, to be neither so chaste, nor so rare, as she now is.

Jove's armor bearer, the Eagle is every way greater, but no way so good as the
Cock is: for though he be the king of Birds, and therefore feared of all, yet
he is a greedy and a devouring cormorant that prays upon them, and therefore
beloved of none. Our Faulkons, and other swift winged Hawks will sore hye, and
sometimes delight us a little: but the pleasure and pastime which they make us
is nothing in comparison of that which our Cocks yield us. And yet Hawking is
a sport of many great Personages, and brave spirited gentlemen, much used, and
mightily accounted of, and to speak as I think: it is a thing that deserves
both to be loved, and commended: yet Cocks afford us far more pleasure, than
Hawks can, though Hawks be ten times more chargeable, and troublesome, and
require ten times more attendance, than our Cocks do.

Then seeing our fighting Cocks are no whit inferior to the Phoenix for
virtue, to the Eagle in goodness, (though far less in greatness) nor to
Hawks for man's commodity, profit, and delectable pleasure: but rather less
chargeable, and ten times more comfortable. Surely we have special cause, both
to be mightily addicted to them, and also to make exceeding much of them.

Chapter. III.
THe Apostle Saint Peter, with a vain ostentation, boasting of his own
strength, told our Savior Christ in the Gospel, that though all men forsook
him, yet he would not leave him, but rather die with him: so proud was he of
his faith, and so prodigal of his love. But Christ (who as he says himself,
knew what was in man, and to how many infirmities frail flesh is subject) said
unto him; this night before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice; and as
he said it came to pass: for before the cock crew, he both denied him, and
foresware him, saying, he knew not the man: but so soon as the Cock did crow,
it came immediately into his mind, what his master had said, and then instantly
(as the text says) he went out and wept betterly. Thus you may see it verified
out of our Saviors own mouth, that the crowing of Cocks was seriously noted,
and duly observed in his time, and also that the voice of the Cock was (by
Christ's institution) ordained (like the voice of a Preacher) to call Peter to
repentance, and to induce him to power forth tears out of his eyes, to pacify
the wrath of God, for his heinous offense..

What an unspeakable comfort was that Cock unto Noah, which in the time of the
deluge, suruiued with him in the Arc, whose shril-tongued far resounding
voice (when he crowed) was heard by all the people in the world, at one
instant. And what an incomparable comfort are Cocks continually unto us, for
in all Countries they are the Farmers clocks, who duly and truly declare unto
them, how the night passes, and when the day light appears: and for this
cause did the Swath-rutters make great account of Cocks, for when they were
enticed, and procured to come into England in the co^motion time, their wives
came with them, and brought their Cocks at their backs, which manifested an
entire affection that they bare unto them, when they choose rather to bring
them with them, than any other thing which they enjoyed: if you read the
Chronicles, you shall find this to be most true. But what need I to recite,
or allege any circumstance of such antiquity, for approbation of my argument,
when we our selves, by daily experience, cannot choose but see and perceive
what exceeding great comfort and consolation all men have, or may have by them.

I remember that in my young time, I being in bed with an Uncle of mine a
learned Minister and a zealous Professor of the word of God, how that after
midnight, the Cock crowed, whereat my Uncle awaked, and told me that the voice
of the Cock did put him in mind of the passion of our Savior Christ, and then
instantly he fell to most earnest praying. Likewise a man of good worship
credibly informed me, that he knew a Gentleman, that had many good Cocks of
the game which he loved maruailously well, and wherein he took great felicity
and delight all his life time; and at the last falling into a grievous
sickness, and lying upon his deathbed, he requested his kindred and friends
which were about him, to place his Cocks with their Coopes so near unto his
beds head as possibly they could do, which being performed according to his
request, he heard them crow; whereat he said, now have I obtained that which I
desired; for these delectable voices shall be my sweete-sounding trumpets, to
admonish and put me in mind of my immortal, and celestial Judge, before
whom all flesh must appear, to receive recompense according to their
demerits, whether they be good or evil.

Also our late Prince of famous memory King Henry the Eight, did take such
pleasure and wonderful delight in the Cocks of the game, that he caused a most
sumptuous, and stately Cockpit to be erected in West-minster, wherein his
Majesty might disport himself with Cocke-fighting, among his most noble and
loving subjects, who in like manner did affect that pastime so well, and
conceived so good an opinion of it, not only because the King was so addicted
to it, but also in regard of the great valor and incomparable courage that the
Cocks showed in their battles; the which did inflame their hearts, that they
caused Cocke-pits to be made in many Cities, Boroughes, and Towns throughout
the whole Realm. To which Cocke-pits resorted, both Dukes, Earls, Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, and Yeomen, there to recreate and delight themselves with
Cocke-fighting,

Now this is to be noted that in this pleasant exercise there is no collusion,
deceit, fraud, or cozening tolerated, nor any used (as in most other games,
and pastimes customarily there is,) neither is there any brawlings, or quarrels
suffered in those places: but all men, must there use civil and good
behavior, what degree or calling soever he be of. And also it is there decreed
upon, and set down as an irreuocable order, that no man by cursing banning, or
swearing, shall blaspheme God, or take his name in vain, but that all of them
shall speak modestly, and deal according to truth and whosoever shall descent
from it, or do otherwise than is appointed, must undergo the punishment
prescribed by the Nobility aforesaid: which laws then instituted and
ordained, are yet to be seen extant, both in Suffolk and Norffolke, and I hope
will still remain and continue to the end of the world; which good observation,
has induced many to keep Cocks of the game, and I doubt not but that in
time, it will incite a number more, both to breed them, and bring them up, to
the intent, that they may have sport with them to content and delight
themselves: for this is most certain, that if ever any thing in the world were
delectable, and pleasant to the heart of man, and did beget in him any
mirthfull ^^^^sance and consolation, it was, and is the excellent sport of
Cock fighting (as Themistocles has sufficiently declared.) And this property
or hidden mystery, it has in it; that whosoever does affect it, or (as diverse
good men are) be much addicted to it, and then afterward, either of his own
accord, or by any other man's instigation, or persuasion, do neglect it, and
refrain it, let him expect and look for no other thing, but always to be
melancholy, sad, and disconsolate, and desirous to wander alone, ever musing on
the worst things, and not of the best: but rather imagining evil, than good.
And this I know by experience, proved by many men of good account, to their
hinderance and grief, and to my exceeding great sorrow: and therefore I would
admonish, advise, and counsel all men, that take delight and pleasure, in that
delicious and pleasant pastime, never to forsake or leave it, or to alienate
themselves from it, so long as it shall please the almighty to bless and
prosper them; for that which I have here rehearsed is neither fable, nor
fiction, but an undoubted truth and a thing that is most certain: wherefore I
for mine own part, am thus resolved so long as life and health last, and God
lend my limbs ability, and strength to bear me. I will never abstain from
it, when conveniently I may be at it, nor never consent to give over that
heart-pleasing pastime.

Chapter. IIII.
WHen Flammius the Grecian in a set battle, had overthrown and spoiled a huge
army, which the world-subduing Macedon brought thither: It is recorded for a
most certain truth, that he and his company for joy of that unexpected
Victory, showted so loud, and so long together, that the clamorous noise of
their exclamation seemed to shake the foundations of the earth, and so deasened
the ears of all creatures that came within the sound thereof, that the fowls
of the air, were thereby enforced to fall down to the earth, and there lay
(as it were in a trance) being amazed, and astonished at the noise of their
ayre-filling clamors. At which instant, even in the midst of their exceeding
great outcry: It is said that their Cocks (whereof they had abundance)
clapped their wings, and crowed so often and so cheerfully, with such
alacrity of spirit, as if they had participated, or had a fellow-feeling of
that soule-rauishing joy, which was in their Masters: whereupon Calymachus
said, that he had rather hear Cocks crow, than music sound: for (says he)
the one cannot so much content my mind, as the other does comfort my heart.

Who would think that the crowing of a Cock should make a Lion quake? and yet
it does so, which is a most strange and a miraculous thing, that he, which is
the King of beasts, of whom it is said, that the roaring of his voice, will
engender fear in all the beasts in the Forest, and make them tremble at the
terror of it, should himself tremble and be terrified (like a faint-hearted
and a timorous-flying hare) with the sound of a silly Cocks voice, yet of a
truth it is, for of all things in the world, he cannot abide to hear a Cock
crow; whereey we may most apparently perceive, the omnipotent power of the
Almighty, who by the smallest creatures, can curb, and control the
greatest: as he did Pharaoh by lice, and by the weakest confound the strongest,
as he did Holofernes by the hand of Judith; Sisera, by Iaell; and great Goliath
by little David. We may read in the 48 Chapter of the Prophecy of Esaias, that
the Lord God, in that place commands the Prophet to cry aloude, and spare
not to lift up his voice like a Trumpet, and for this cause only, to tell the
house of Jacob their sins, and Israel their offenses.

Now what is it for a Preacher to eleuate, and lift up his voice, but (as the
Cock does) to rowze up himself, and clap his wings, that is, to shake of all
ignorance, sloth, and negligence in himself, and then to cry aloude unto
others cheerfully, to utter his voice with vehemency of spirit, and to
deliver his message manfully, boldly, and with a good courage; as the Cock
did, when he crowed near to Caiphas house. Thus you see that of Cocks we
may learn many good lessons, whereof we might make profitable uses if we would
rightly apply them unto our selves: As first, to be constant and loving to our
wives, as they are to their Hens. Secondly, to be valorous and to fight
courageously against our enemies, and (as they do) never give over, but either
get the victory, or else die valiantly. Thirdly, to be vigilant, and watchful
(as they are) and to avoid slothfulness, which generally reigns too much in
us. And lastly, to stretch forth our selves, and to strain our voices in the
uttering of Gods affairs.

The blessed Apostle Saint Paul in the first Epistle to Timothy, the 6
Chapter, and the 12 verse, charge Timothy to fight, the good fight of Faith,
(and consequently in him exhorts all Christians to do the same) whereupon one
(interpreting the same text) says thus: as the Cock of the game, having
received a hurt, or a wound from his adversary, does straight ways close, and
fight with him, until he has overcome him, or else be killed by him: so we
being often stricken, and secretly wounded by the slye insinuating blows of
Satan (our old and continual adversary) should with the sword of the spirit
fight courageously against all his assaults and temptations, until (by faith
and prayers) we have overcome them, or by the power and providence of God be
delivered from them.

Another thing now comes into my mind, which I noted in the disputation,
between Master Bannes and Stephen Gardener, Master Barnes preaching in
London at Paul's Cross, compared himself to a Cock of the game, and Stephen
Gardener to another; but (quoth he) Stephen has no spurs, signifying
thereby, that (in his opinion) Gardener was not so well armed at all points, to
endanger and offend his adversary as himself was. Furthermore, it is grown
to be a custom here amongst us in this Realm of England, that when we have
any troubles, suits in law, or causes of weight in hand, our especial friend
demanding of us, if we have not solicited and made means to such a man to be a
Mediator for us, or to be friend us in ye matter, we most commonly will make
them this answer, I have made that Cocke-sure; so rare, singular, and so
excellent a creature is ye Cock, that diverse good things have relation unto
him, and even a multitude of things might be spoken of him.

I remember I once heard a Yorke-shire man (that dwells near to the borders
of Scotland) say, that he would not give a Cock of the game, which he had in
his Coope at home, for half the Cowes the best man in their Town had in his
milking-yard. Many more things I could repeat, and allege for the credit and
commendation of the Cocks of the game: but those that are already rehearsed,
may serve for a sufficient probability of their virtues, courage, and
excellent qualities, without any further recitals, or more testimonies;
wherefore I will now proceed, and explain unto you the distinction, and
difference, which is betwixt them and other Cocks: and withal make a brief
repetition of some strange and most admirable battles, which my self have
seen, in diverse and sundry places at Cocke-fightings, to the great
contentation, both of my self and many others: and therewithal conclude, and
knit up this little Treatise.

Chapter. V.
THere be some men which will commune with themselves and say: we admire and
marvel much, why these people be so zealously affected, and so much in love
with the Cocks of the game, more tha^ with any other Cocks, imagining with
themselves, yea, and persuading their own hearts, that their Cocks of the
Dunghill, are as good in every degree, as they are, and make them as much
pastime as they can. But believe me, my honest friends, it is neither so, nor
so; for there be diverse and sundry kinds and sorts of Cocks, but for brevity
sake, I will only entreat but of three sorts, or several kinds: that is, the
Cocks of the game, the halfebred Cocks, and the Dunghill, or crauen Cocks.
The Cocks of the game are so called, because they carry the credit away from
all other Cocks in battle, which is the only cause they are so highly
esteemed, and so much valued as they be; for it is generally and commonly
seen, that the most heroycall and noble hearted men, take greatest delight in
those things which are of most courage, and greatest valor, and that of all
others (in my opinion) is the Cocks of the game: as already I have
sufficiently declared. But as for your crauen Cocks, the best and chiefest
pastime, that they will or can make you is, when they are well boiled, or
stewed, and laid in a platter with good store of plumbes about them, and then
you may assure your selves they will not shrink for a blow, but otherwise let
them be well matched, and close coupled to Cocks of the game, and I dare
assure you, they will quickly take their leave of them, and in most cowardly
and base manner run away from them, to your great grief and coffeehouse.
Yet notwithstanding all this, there be some simple men, which will report and
say thus of them, they serve our turns well enough to crow, and to tread our
Hens. Well, I grant, and believe they do so, and that is the greatest valor
or virtue that is in them; but to compare them with the Cocks of the game, you
mistake your mark, and are more than much deceived, for there is no comparison
to be made of or betwixt them, nor any indifferent equality in them: for Moses
says in the Book of Genesis, that God in the creation made all things
perfect, absosolutely good, and in their right kind, but most of your Cocks
(by gross and irregular breeding) are become imperfect, and so consequently
prove crauins, and cowardly minded fowls: and in that manner will remain,
and continue in dispight of you, do what you can to help it, which causes
all men that breed Cocks. (if either they love them, or desire to have any
pastime with them) to eschew and avoid them, as much as possibly in them
lies: for what man amongst a thousand (if he have any spark of wisdom
knowledge, or understanding in him) that does breed, keep, or nourish up any
creature whatsoever, but will desire to bring up that which of it self is most
absolute, and of the perfectest kind, and best breed that can or may be
gotten, or procured? Now lastly, as concerning your halfe-bred cocks, which
are engendered by the cock of the game, and of the crauen Hen, or by the right
bred, and best qualified Hen, and of the Dunghill and degenerate cock: what
will they do but even when you expect, and hope for best of them, and (seeing
them fight) think the battle to be surely won on their sides, deceive your
expectation, and frustrate your hopes, for if one of them, do but chance to
loose an eye, or receives any hurt, or damage that seems to be prejudicial to
him, then God be with your game, for he is gone, the house is too hot, the
fight too fierce, and the danger too great for him to endure it. Therefore I
do still magnify, and extol the cocks of the game, because their courage can
never be quayled, nor their hearts daunted by any wound, or hurt, how deep
soever it be indented. For confirmation and proof whereof, I will show you an
instance.

There was a cock about Shroue-tide last, which in the cocke-pit in the city
of Norwich, fought with a strong, and a stout adversary, until such time as
both his eyes were beaten out, his head sore wounded, and shrewdly battered,
and all his body most pitifully bruised, and then with the sudden astonishment
of a sound blow, which from his cruel adversary he received, being beaten
down, and lying for dead, not stirring any whit, nor seeming otherwise (to the
beholders) tha^ to be stark dead, he suddenly started up, contrary to all
their expectations, (when there was offered twenty shillings, yea, twenty
pounds to be laid to one, that there was no breath remaining in his body and
closed with his adversary, at whom he stroke most violent blows, and never
gave over, until (to the amazement of all the spectators) he had most
valiantly slain him. Oh strange action oh stout heart, and undaunted mind,
who would imagine such great courage should be in so small a creature, or
almost believe (but that their eyes may daily behold, and see it) that such
dreadlesse fear, scorning valor, should remain in a cock. Tell me (I pray)
you that make as much account of a sqeaking Castrell, or a scuruie Hobbie, as
you do of a good Hawke? you that think every Dunghill crauen, to be as good
as a cock of the game; tell me (I say) when did you ever see any of your
base-bred Cocks show such courage, or do such an admirable action? surely
never, neither shall you ever know any of them perform the like. Thus you may
see by this one instance, that they are not so good, as the other are, but
far inferior to them: and therefore who (but rough hewn clownes, and
rusticke Corridons) would breed and bring up crauens, when he may have of the
right kind.

Chapter. VI.
AMongst many other Battles fought, and diverse great exployts done by Cocks of
the game in sundry places, give me a little leave (I pray) to report unto you,
what credit a Cock of mine own breeding (whom I called Iipsey) won at
Saint Edmunds-Burie in Suffolk, where he played his prize so excellently, and
fought so courageously, that after many admirable, and almost incredible acts
achieved by him, diverse Gentlemen and my very good friends, in commendation
of him caused his picture to be drawn and painted upon a cloth. Whereupon
these, or the like words were written.

O noble Iipsey, such a Cock art thou,
As Bury Town, did nere contain till now.
Wherefore to praise thy worth and spread thy fame,
We make this show in honor of thy name.
So soon as the painted cloth was thus finished, the cock was put into a
pretty fine cage, which two men carried betwixt them, the cloth being borne a
good distance before them, and in this manner having the waights of the Town
with us, the trained Soldiers, the Cocke-masters, and diverse others: we
marched too and fro, throughout the whole town: which being done, we returned
to the Cocke-pit again, where the Cock was no sooner set down, but all the
Soldiers discharged their pieces over him, which we thought would have daunted
and discoraged him for ever: yet notwithstanding all the noise they made, he
was nothing dismaide, but in the very middle of the volley of shot, he clapped
his wings and crowned, which was as much valor, as I, or I think any of the
company ever saw in a Cock. I do assure you this is most certain, and the
said Town and County will avouch the same.

Also no longer ago, than the 4 day of May 1602, at a Cocke-fighting in the
City of Norwich aforesaid, a Cock called Tarlecon (who was so entitled,
because he always came to the fight like a Drummer, making a thundering noise
with his wings) which Cock having there fought many battles, with mighty and
fierce Adversaries: and being both wearied with long fighting, and also very
hardly matched, at the length he had his eyes both of them beaten out of his
head, his spurs broken off, and his bill bruised, and rigorously rent from off
his face, so that their remained no hope of him, but that he should be
instantly killed, and so of necessity loose all the wagers that he fought for,
yet behold a rare and miraculous wonder, a most admirable seldom or never
seen accident; for all this he fought still most stoutly with his Adversary,
and would never shrink from him, or give him over, until he had (which to all
men there present seemed to be an impossibility) most courageously slain him.
Oh inestimable stoutnesse! oh invincible valor! oh miraculous magnanimity! oh
more than Lion-hearted fowls! who does great not admire at their undaunted and
naught-dreading minds: or who has ever seen, or heard, or read of so great
courage in any living creatures in the world, as is in them. Whhat is he, or
where lives he (that bears the true mind of a man, that would not love them,
feed them, cherish them, and make much of them, if they did understand, and
know the manifold virtues, and exceeding great valor that is in them? man never
kept, the world never bred, the earth never bare more exquisite and worthy to
be beloved creatures, than Cocks are. Many more commendations, than I have
rehearsed may be given unto them, and many far more excellent things might be
spoken of them, both in regard of their nature, nurture, virtues, qualities,
and courage, than either I have expressed, or am any way able to express
sufficiently: Wherefore I am resolved to leave that Herculean task, for some
more blessed brain to take in hand: and only content my self with that, which
I have already done, not doubting, but that in time, this illiterate and
imperfect Embrion, will intimate and allure some of Apolloes sacred heirs,
some of Thamisis sweet singing Swans, some heauen-inspired soule-enchanting
Poet, to carroll forth at full, in high and heart-pleasing strains, their due
and well deserved praises: which thing I would be most glad of, and will
heartily pray for.

FINIS.

