A compendious or short Treatise, gathered out of the chyefe and principal
Authors of Phisycke, containing certain precepts necessary to the
preseruacion of health, and long continuance of the same: very pleasant
and profitable to read. ()

To the right honorable mastie Wylliam Cicyll Esquier, one of the two
principal Secretaries to the king his most excellent majesty Henry Wyngfield
wysheth long co^tinuaunce of true welfare, and like prosperouse success.
H^uyng without any my desert enjoyed the commodity of your benevolence and
good will, I have often devised, and ben desirous ^accomplyshe some thing which
I might exhibit unto you, as a testimony and pledge of my pore earnest zeal
and entier affection. And knowing by late proof, that if my power were to
declare ye same by some gift of price, ye would not well take it: being so
sincere and vpryght, rather to esteem the good will, then the value. The
consideracion of the which thing has moved me at this my present being
here, to take in hand this small and simple treatise, presenting it unto you
for a new years gift, that it might openly appear how inwardly I bear you
(according to my bounden duty) my pore heart and seruyse. And albeit that lack
of time, and let of business as it is well known, has withdrawn from me
leisure requisite to the absolute finyshynge here of. Yet I trust well in your
wonted gentleness that you will both in good part take my simple labor here
employed (until some worcester thyer thing may happen,) and also for lack of power
^accepte my poor good will, hertely wyshyng that such profit may proceed
unto you by this process, as you may evermore enjoy a healthful mind in a
whole and sound body, being worthy for your excellen^e deserts long
continuance of the same.

At London the first of January. An 1551.
Who so will have his days in health long endure,
And without pain or grief to live and fare well.
These precepts let him practice, or faithfully put in ^re,
And of health he may be siker, and sickness so expel.
The preface to the gentle Reader.
THe sharpenes and quick Ingeni^^.
capacity of man's wit (which is the best gift, and greatest treasure,
granted memoria.
to mankind:) The memory, trusty, firm, and strong in reteyning and keeping
things committed to her custodi: are not so much necessary or expediente to
the having of a perfect and exact knowledge of the tongues and liberal
faculties (wherein all treasures of science and wisdom are comprehended,) as
Juditi^*
is a pure and sincere judgment. Furthermore, to have so vncorrupt or vpryght
judgment, truly to judge and esteem every thing to be as it is, is a thing
very hard and difficulte: Not only for because of the great variety and
dissension in opinions, but also for the vain and uncertain confectures which
be in many sciences, as Palmestry, Pyromancie, and Astrology, and other
faculties un leful by the laws o^ God and man. Wherefore onles man know such
secret mysteries and hyd operacions Experientia.
of nature by experience, he can never come to the knowledge there Longa vi ta
ad scientie cognitionem necessaria
of, the judgment is so amassed, opressed, and overwhelmed with darkness.

Moreover, experience also is oftentimes uncertain and fallible, both for the
imbecillitie of our judgment, and also for that our life time is feeble,
frail, and of short continuance.

Wherefore of these premises the noble Physicion Hippocrates of most worthy
memory did plainlye gather, that no man can come to the perfect and exact
knoweledge of learning in short continuance, so that it is requisite that life
be prolonged, And there is no man so dull, no such lack wit, but that knows
well enough, yt this thing may be easily performed if he use wisdom and
diligent provision in the ordryng thereof, Which thing to be true, not only
experience, but also the diligent and expert cure of phisycke is a sure witness
and testimony. For it is daily seen, that feeble and weak bo^ies by this
providence and moderacion in living, live as long as those which be valeaunt,
lusty, and strong. To the confirmacio^ where of, Plato and Aristotle bear me
witness, that a man of excellent lernyng and wisdom named He ^odicus, which
was in all his life as feeble and syckely as any man living at that time, by
such providence and order in diete, to have iyued until he was an hundred
years old. I let pass many other, of whom Plutarche makes mention, which
although they were very feeble and weak, yet they by observing these
precepts of living, and vsyng great diligence to preserve the same, have lived
long time without any grievous or paynefull syckenes. Which things considered
and kept in remembrance, causes many not a little to meruell what should be
the cause of so sudden a change and alteracion in our bodies at this time
from their nature which have been before us. For now adays if a man live to
fyfty or. lx. year, it is thought a great age. And the most part of men ere
this time even in their florishyng youth are attached with fearful death which
shakes of their fresh color, their bewty, and their strength. And yet the
case is plain, that man's life might continue as long now as it has done
before time, if we in leadyng forth thereof would use such diligence and
circu^spectio^ as did our progenitors. Which thing I speak not as any
derogatio^ unto gods honor, as who say, that we can appoint or constitute any
time, excepting always ye power of God which is wonderful and also merciful
above man's reason or counsel, preserving, or striking, who^, when, or where it
shall like his divine power. For oftentimes as holy scripture does record,
horrible syn has been ye cause of short life. And as it Genesis xvi.
is written ye first book of Moses in ye first age, one man lived as long as.
v. or. vi. do now, but shortly after, like as men, so did sin increase on the
earth. Wherefore the Lord said: my spirit shall not always strive in man
because he is flesh, and his days shall be a. C. and. xx. years, but none at
all, or very few does approach nere unto this age: And truly to speak as I
think our imtemperance, continual bankettyng, and daily ingurgitacions of
meats and drinks, is great occasion of short life now adays. The spirit
of glotonie so triumphyng among us in his glorious chariot called welfare,
driuynge all smelfeastes and bealye guts as his prisoners before him into the
dungeon of surfeit, where they be tormented with sondrie painful diseases,
driven, drawn, and finally drowned. Such miserable nature remains in some
me^, that to live idel^y and voluptuously, they will chose rather to be sick
then to be whole: rather to have pain then pleasure, rather to dye then to
live. For this is not a rare thing, but in daily experience, that by such
revel, gourmandise, and daily surfetyng, many cruellye are put to death,
oftentimes in floryshynge youth, in the most pleasant time of their life.
Wherefore the saying of the wise man Solomon is truly on them verified, mo dye
says he by surfeit and inte^perance, then does by battle and outward
bostilitie. For the reformacion whereof, and to restrain their prompte
disposicion from such beastly nature, and wanto^ appetire: I have gathered of
the most principal writers of physic, this compendious extract, wherein are
contained certain obseruacions and precepts very necessary and profitable to
the prolo^ging of life: which being well observed, put in due execution, and
discretelye ordered, does conserve and keep our life long in health, without
the whythe all pleasures be paynful, riches unprofitable, and yet few consider
this (the more pity it is) but this omittyng, I have proceeded in this place
with over far circumstaunce, and also with somewhat to much liberty of
words, more then in a preface is requisite, for that it greueth me that me^ns
minds be taken prisoners, and subdued to glotonie and intemperance. And now
will I come to my matter purposed and first enterprise begone (which except I
be much deceived) shall m^nister to the diligent readers, both commodity, and
profit. ()

The heat in our bodies which is called vital, because as long as it endures
the body is living and quick, and all the powers thereof, which be three in
number: natural, vital, animal, do perform their operacions, is noryshed
and sed with moystnes, by the superfluous increase or diminucion whereof, over
or under his natural assignment, the life runs on hasard, the body is
dissoluid, and death immediately follows, which many men have in extreme hate,
and most fearfully abhor.

The first Chapter.
THat same quick and liuelye power in our bodies which is called life,
supported by natural heat and moisture, lives and dwells in the body,
which two so together are conglutinate or knyt, that the one can not be
separate from the other, and the humiditie or moystnes is a very noryce to this
natural heat, which by power digestive for her sustentacion receives of her
noryce such inyce as is comfortable to her appetite. These two qualities be
the material causes of our living. For a more plain declaracion whereof, I
will use a familier example daily represented before our eyes. As the light
and bryghtenesse of the lamp comes of the oil and the weke, semblably this
vital power comenly called life, proceeds of natural heat and moisture: and
when the oil is consumed and wasted, the light of the lamp is extinguyshed
and quenched: also when there is to much excess or abundaunce thereof being
wateryshe or corrupt, the light is in danger to be drowned, Likewise it
fares by the increase and diminucio^ of humiditie in our bodies. For if
moisture be wantyng or superfluous, if it be more or less then is convenient
to the natural proporcio^ and temperature of the body: it does shortly
debilitate, make feeble and weak natural heat, which so weakened in short
continuance is clean extinct and so the body is dissolved, and life distroyed.

Morie^di necessitas obduas causas
Ob humoris resolutionem cuinullis modis resisti potest. Ob humoris
p^trefactiout de qua quomodo vitari potest, est nobis hoc loco explicandum.
If for lack of moystnes natural heat be destroyed, the body dies by
resolucion or consumpcion. If the natural heat be drowned by superfluouse
moisture, or else by moisture viciate and unnatural, the body dies by
suffocacion, putrefaction, or corrupcio^. This suffocacion comes unto the
body, when any of the four humors (which every man is composed and made of)
does exceade their proportion that nature has limited, or else when any of
them be putrified and rotten, specially when there is either great abundaunce
of flewme in the body, or else when it does approach to putrefaction or
rottennes, whereof is the fever quotidiane engendered: wherefore pituita is so
called (as some men think) quia petit vitam.

This necessary therefore and co^ueniente form or discipline of living, which
to the prolongacion of man's life, is requisite and profitable, does as well
instruct us how to be vigilant and circu^spect, least natural moisture in our
bobodies be not lyghtlye consumed and wasted, as also to avoid the danger of
death, which comes by putrefaction of humors. And that every man may wyselye
and discretelye order these precepts, to the prolongacion of his life, with
long continuance of health: it is expedient and necessary that every man
know the natural habit and disposition of his own body. For if the body be
hot and dry, and the conduites thereof open, and his humors subtle or
thin: then he must use those things which do resyst consumption or wastyng,
for because his body lacking natural moisture is lightlye thereunto disposed.
And to satisfy the desire of such, which per adventure by these general words
hot and dry, do not yet perceive what I mean thereby, here for the plain
understanding thereof, it shall be declared by sensible tokens Such as have
bodies hot and dry, their pore^, which be little holes in the skyn, dispersed
through out all the body be great and open, wherefore the skyn in feelyng is
rough, and the vulgar people ignoraunte of letters do call such as be of that
disposition or natural habit, goose skynned. Also their veins be so little
that by the outward se^ses they can not well be perceived. And a contrary
disposition has contrary totokens, as a smoth or soft skin, large and ample
veins, and such as be of this constitucion must use such things which
specially do resyst putrefaction and corrupcion of ye humors which shall be
declared hereafter. But such persons which by aptitude of their nature be given
only to studious meditacion, which with vigilant and constant study abandon al
pleasures, and give them selves wholely to the exercise of the wit: These most
of all other have need to be provident, wise, and circu^specte in these
things, for as much as their bodies be disposed as well to consu^ption and
wastyng of humiditie, as to putrefaction by to much abundaunce and excess of
humors. To the euidente proof whereof it is to be noted that their brain
always declineth to drynes and horns by reason of the continual mocion of the
wyrte which is always occupied, and the phantasye always conceiuyng things,
and committynge them to memory, and also because the bodies of these men M.
fici^^. lib. i de stud* ca* tu^nd. ca* tercio*
be always in rest and idleness, for lack of competent exercise they be
full of flewme and melancholye. Wherefore the first cause does threten
consumpcion of humiditie, the later putrefactio^ of humors: therefore they must
use things which resyst the one as well as the other, of the which hereafter
in place convenient shall be spoken abu^dantly.

How it is necessary to the prolongation of life to have equal and just
portion of natural heat and moisture called radical. For if inequality be
thereof, the body shortly dies.

The second chapter.
IN ministringe of oil to a lamp, every man is circumspect: for they perceive
well if they put in to much at one time, they drown the light, or else if by
negligence they forget to putce any oil in, for lack of humiditie the light
is extingwyshed and goth forth. By example whereof we may learn discretelye to
temper heat and moisture in our bodies, by virtue and power of the which,
life time may de prolonged.

First therefore because this life is enclosed in a mortal body, a vessel
frail, bryckle, and of short co^tinuaunce, we may not refuse and cast away
all regard or respect thereof, or neglecte our duties in attendyng of it, for
as much as it co^teineth in it precious treasures. but with vigila^t custody
entreat and order it, not in much cherysheyng or pamperyng of it, not
sufferyng it to be subdued to all joys, pleasures, delicacie, and
voluptuousenes. For by such belie chere all the powers are weakened, the
goodlye bewtye of the visage, and shape of mankind, also strength of the
body decays and vanishes away in short time. Wherefore we must accustume
our self to a moderacion in diet which may comfort nature, and not fill
the belie. It is written that Galene the prince of all Physicians, which in
his time was had in wonderful reverence, did never in all his Life eat so
much, but that he left with a great appetite and desire to eat more. Neither
did he use to eat by and by after he had risen, which we call breakefastes,
that be given to assuage the guawyng and complayntes of a young stomach (and
yet he lived Celius auti-lecti lib. xvi,
as Celius writes. xx. years, or as some other affirm a hundred and fortye,)
albeit breakefastes to be necessary in this Realm, a certain worshypfull and
well learned man deserving notable remembrance, has proved by good reason, for
as much as choler being fervent in the stomach se^deth up fumosities unto the
head, and causes headache, or sometime becomes adust, whereby happens
perilous syckenes if the heat enclosed in the stomach have not convenient
matter to work on Wherefore they be necessary in this Realm, specially to
young men or colericke. But to return to our purpose, it is to be remembered
that the lamp burns long, the light whereof is tempered according to the
oil, so that it do not hastelye, but by little and little burn and waste up the
same.

Likewise we in all our life time, specially in youth, must be advertised
that this heat naturally graffed in us, be not superfluous or abundaunt, then
very like shortly to consume all humiditye called radical, which oftentimes
is great occasion of short life.

Furthermore by our outward senses we perceive the lamp not to burn clerelye
if the oil be not pure and clear but thycke, turbulent and full of dregs.
For shortly bubbels which rise on the dregs drown and extincte the light.
But we in the time of our nativity have received of nature oil, I mean
moisture radical, pure, and ayerye. Wherefore that which is daily engendered in
our body in the place of that which is consumed by heat, wherwyth this heat
is fed and noryshed, ought not only to be of just and equal portion and
quantity to that which was before, but also in all conditions like unto it,
and that it may be so conformable unto it, it must not only be pure and
ayerye, but also not having any part of fece or dregs.) Which if you will
escape and avoid, you must beware of cruditie which is a vicious concoction of
things received, they not being wholly or perfectly alterid. Remedies
convenient and fit therefore shall be expressed in the chapter following.

Also much rest, idleness, or slug gyshenes, wherefore we must not neglecte
competente exercise, and that in due and co^ueniente time, which surely is a
thing so necessary to the preseruacion of health, that without it no man may
long be without syckenesse, which is affirmed by Cornelius Celsus saying Corn.
Celsus. lib. x.
that sluggyshnes dulleth the body, labor does strength it: the first
brings the inco^modties of age shortly, the last makes a man long time
lusty, and most of all to absteyne from such meats which engender dregs,
making ill juice, and norishyng, and such as engender melancholy, as biefe
very old, flesh or fyshe very salt, chese hard and old, wine thick and
black, gose, ducke and swanue, also fruits not ripe and much used. There be
also many mo like kinds of meats which I purposely pas oue^, forasmuch as I
desire to be in this treatise co^pe^dious. But he that will know more abundantly
of these and such other, let him read the book of Galene, where he entreats
of the nature and operacions of meats, and he shall be therein fully satisfied.

What things diminy she or consume natural moisture, and what super fluoufly
increas^ the same. Also that good digestion is very necessary to the
prolongation of life.

The third chapter.
THese things following in short continuance exhaus^e and dri up natural
moisture Great and abundante esfusion of blood, either by fyghting or by other
chance of fortune, violente l^ws^^es of the belie being long soluble.
Immoderate sweating the p^res and conduites of the body ^o^uch opened.
Overmuch ^amili^^ acquaintance with ^^^^s, of wanton delight the gods and
patrones, great thyrst or honger, ^mmoderat watch, overmuch use of thiges hot
and dry. Also affectes and passions of the myud, as ire and wrath, also
sorrow, heuines, and daily lan guishyng in torments incurable, then the
which there is nothing more enemy to life, for it co^sumeth both natural
heat, and moisture of the body, also it does extenuate or make the body
lean, dulleth the wit, darkeneth spirits, lets the use and judgment of
reason, and oppresses memory. Which things be ratified by the authority and
witness of Salomo^ Sorrow says he, dries up the Prou. xv.
bones. For like as the mothe in the garment, and the worm in the tree, so
does heaviness anoye the herce of man.

Things contrary to these which went before, make moisture unnatural and
superfluous to redound in the body: as often drun kennes, which does both
exhaust heat, and makes abundaunce of evil moisture, and also causes
cruditie. For when the meat is not well concocte or boiled in the stomach,
then there is tomuche evil and corrupt juice where by natural heat is
drowned, oppressed, and overwhelmed. Foresene therefore that good digestion is
so necessary to the prolongacion of life, let us if affectionatly we covet the
preservation thereof with all our endeavor and ^^udye use diligence and
circumspection, that we run not into this cruditie. But considering that it
is great occasion both of consumption of humiditie, and also of suffocation of
heat diligently to avoid it in using a moderation both in meat and drink.

For over much ingurgitacion of meats and drynkes, or the vicious quality
thereof, or the receiving of them out of order, and gredy and hasty fedynge
without mastication or good chewyng, or much and very often drinkyng at meals
or between meals be the chief causes of this affecte or dissease. Let us
therefore give good attendaunce that the meat be not hard to concoc^^, or that
it be not over sweet, as bankettynge dyshes or ^lles that they be not of
diverse qualities, which do specially corrupt digest^o^. Nature teaches us
things necessary which be but few and sone prepared, folishnes has
invented things superfluous which are without number and hard to comby. If
thou give necessaries unto nature, she is delited and made strong as with
things fi^te for her appetite. But if thou give her superfluous, she is
weakened and afflicted as with gobbets not agreyng unto her dyete.

Last of al let us beware of sleep at after nonnes, of long watching and
sittyng up of nyghtes, which al with many other mo do greatly let digestion.
When I speak of digestio^, I do not mean that only which is in the stomach,
but the second also which is in the liver, and the third in the veins, and
the fourth or last which is finished in all the members which, surely to their
perfeccion have need of good space and continuance which in nine hours
space, as some me^ think is brought to pas. And if the least of the^ al be in
any wise let or troubled, noryshment is not dueli ministered. Moreover as it
is necessary to the prolongacion of life to help digestion and make it perfect:
So likewise ^urgynge of exc^eme^tes is as necessary. Also to keep the skin
clean from any fylth, and those places would be often cleansed, out of the
which filthiness comes from the inward parts, as the head, the ears, the
nosethi^les, the eyes, ye armeholes and ye other secret places yt nature
hydeth, and honesty scase would have named. The. iii. thing which does make
strong and lus^y the lively and quick power of ye body is exercise and labor,
which thing to be ne cessarye is known by this, that those original things
corruptible, whereof all living creatures are composed and made, be ever more
in continual motion as the air, the fire, and the water.

But in this place it seems expediente, seeing I did promise the same before,
to declare some remedies against this cruditie where with many be affected and
troubeled, and therewyth to make a perfect conclusion of this chapter. Galene
and all other do agree in this case, that peper bruised and eaten with meat is
very expediente. And where there is much wynd in the stomach, then to eat
all times of the day the medicine made of three kinds of pepper* time, anise
seed, and honey clarified, which is called diatrion piperi on, and if flewme be
abundaunt, then oximel, that is to say, honye and water soden together with
the roots and seeds of fen^l and persley, and a quantity of vinegre put
thereto in the boylyng is very commendable. The rest are fullye handled and set
forth of Galene in his books de Cacoclymia.

By what tokens one may know whether the blood in bys body b^ good or ^^o and
if it be vi^^ate or ill, how to rectify it: For nothing is more necessary to
the producing of life, then good blood,

The fourth Chapter
THe most famous and expert Physicians, among all other precepts which
specially apperteme to the prolongacion of man's life do advise and counsel
us to eat such meat as makes good juice, and such we call fine and wholesome
meats which engender good norishment, yt is to wit good and laudable blud,
which causes above all things the life long to continue in health. And good
blood is known by this, it is not cold, not dry, not dark and ^urbule^t, nor
of ye color of a beasts liver, but it is hot, moist and cler^. Yet it is not
of fervent and burning hot^^s as is fire, nor yet of thyn humiditie or moisture
as is water. For if ye blood aproche nygh to ye nature and condition of fire,
it makes natural heat overmuch to surmou^t in the body, by the superfluous
increase whereof humor radical is lightly consumed. And if ye blud aproch
never to ye nature of water, it does extenuat, abate, and diminyshe natural
heat, and with overmuch thynne and wa^ry moisture does drown and opresse it.
Wherefore such evil blood makes both heat and moisture to exceade their bounds
and transcend their limits appointed by nature, whereby life is like to fall
in ruin. And verily if natural moisture be mingled with wa^ry and thyn blood,
it sone receives putrefaction, which is often cause and occasion of fevers and
agues called putride. And for this cause it is not holesom to eat fruits or
herbs cold, for they much and abu^dantly eaten do shortly fill ye veins with
juice crude and raw, which sone will receive putrefactio^. Of these premises
it follows therefore yt the blud in our bodies be nether very hot like fire,
neither very thin and moist like water, but in keeping ye golden mean between
both.

Hitherto ye quality of good blood is declared, and now like wise the
substance thereof shall be sufficientlye expressed. Good blood is neither over
thycke nor over thynne, But as in his quality, semblably in his substance
does keep and retain the mean, and in all conditions is corresponde^t to the
quality of the air.

If the substance of the blood be thin, it ngendreth humiditie, ill,
uncertain, and not long continuyng, and makes the spirits apt to be
dissolved and consumed whereby nature is mortified.

Spiritus,
Naturalis in hepate, Uitalis in cord, Animalis in cerebro,
If it be over thycke, it does debilitate and obfuscate the wit, stops the
pores, and gives occasion of suffocation of the life, and the spirits which
by thycke blood be condensat and made tucbulent because of their thyckenes be
nothing fytte or convenient for life, for they put out and suffocate natural
heat, upon the which the f^ndacion of life is builded. Like as a great thick
smoke does over whelme the flame of the fire, and will not suffer it to burn
out clearly. I let pas that it is so dark that it makes man's life heavy, sad,
and full of pensiuenes, such as for the most part those that are of a
melancholic constitucion be.

Good and pure blood is as necessary to the noryshing of the life, as good
oils be for a lamp. Wherefore such meats must be pycked out and chosen,
which engender pure and good blood. Rayses in a place showing us how to reteyne
and keep still long time the freshnes of youth, and keep back crooked, feeble
and withered age, aduertiseth us to use such meats as engender good blood,
which be precordiall and confortatiues of the heart, and also other like which
would be known of such as write of the nature and operation of meats, for
this short treatise can not receive them.

How that he which desires the course of his life long to continue must
have diligent respect or regard to the election of his mansion or dwelling
place.

The fyft Chapter.
THe place where a man purposes to dwell is diligently to be considered of
the^ which desire to live long in health, for as much as the air which is
according to the diversity of places good or evil, is special cause of long
life or short. Wherefore of all other things air is chiefly to be observed,
because it does both enclose us, and also enter into our bodies, specially the
most noble member the heart. For this cause we must chose a dwelling place
where the air is pure and clear, and fly far from those places where the
air is evil, stynking, and corrupt, and corruption of the air is either
impured unto influences of sundry stars, or else to great standing waters
which never be refreshed, or else to carrion lyinge long above the ground, or
else to a great multitude of people in small rome living uncleanly or
sluttishely. Marcilius Ficinus remembers Libr. ^. cap. vii.
two things which most of all are to be observed in election of places.
Never think (says he) yt you can live long in those places where either
fruit can not be kept long from rottennes and corrupcion, or else where men,
as you may see, be but of short time and continuance of life. And these
places be best which be high, where the air is subtle and pure, not moist,
nor cold. Low places in valeyes, or among fennes and maryshe grounds be
worse.

The same author says in the place before alleged that it is unwholesome to
use dungynge of the ground, as plowmen be accustomed to do, to the^tent the
ground may be more batryll and fertyle, and also unwholesome for the
inhabitaunies to make standing waters in pastures for beasts to drink of. For
in such places all things be sone corrupted, wherefore says he, I can not
allow or approve their judgment, which did find fault with Hesiode the
Hesiodus (...). 2. ^^gou ca^ eme^on.
greek poet, for that he in his bokede re rustica, did purposelye pass over
these two things before remembered, for he very wisely did more regard the
holesomnes of the air, then the rankenes of the ground.

But to return to the election of places most conueniente for habitacio^. High
places on mounteines and hills be best, which have their situacion against
the east or the, north, and it is to be kept in remembrance (as some men
think) necessary that all the doors and wyndowes of the house be situate
either against the east or the north. For this cause (as I think) the winds
that come from thence be more laudable then the other two* be: In bringing
wholesome air, and in prolongynge of life by expulsyng of evil vapoures. But
if we be of necessity compelled to dwell in those places which be low,
watrye, and uncleanly, Marcilius does advertise us to use hot and sweet fragrant
sauoures, and to temper our meats with saunders, cinamome, and safron, also to
use moderate and competent exercise of the body, and not to suffer extreme
cold, but often sitting in such wether by a fire side.

How wyue is necessary to the prolon gation of life by reason it helps
dige^^ion, and conforteth nature al heat, also the incommodities which proceed
of dronkennes.

The syxte Chapter.
PLato the wisest of all philophers does affirm yt wine moderatelye drunk
norysheth and conforteth as well the body as the spirits of man, and
therefore god did ordeine it for mankind as a necessari remedy against the
inco^modities of age, that thereby they should seem to return unto youth and
forget heuines, for by his qualities which be heat and moisture, nature is
chieflye conserved. Also Galene says that wine is of good norishme^t for the
body, and does preserve health, and that there is no other kinds of meat or
drink that does so much comfort natural heat, and so helps digestion. The
profit that comes by moderate drinkyng of wine is that it does clarifye the
thick and troublesome blood, it does cleanse and open the passages and pores of
the body, and specially the veins it does take away stopping of the liver,
it does expel from the heart dark fumositie which does inge^der heaviness and
so row, it causes a man to forget all care, and makes him merry and joyful.
Wherefore it is wholesome for all ages, for all times, and al regions so that it
be taken moderately and as he yt drynketh it has been accustumed to it, if he
drink no more then his nature may well sustayn and bear. Albeit concerning
ages, touching the regimente of wine, A^icene says: to give children wine to
drink, is as one would lay fire to fire made of dry wood, but he says that
one may give an old man as much wine to drink as he can bear without
detrime^t or hurt. Old folks are cold, and wine heateth, their spirits are
heavy, and wine makes them light and clear, and comenly old folks sleep
ill, but wine makes Rayses li bro. iii, al mansoris
them to sleep well. Also Rayses says: wine universally does comfort the
stomach and the liver, and it causes the meats to pass down easily, it
does quycken the corporal might and wit. But over much ingurgitacion of wine,
and wine drunk superfluouse does hurt the liver, the brain, and the senewes,
it does inge^der crampes, palseies, apaplexies, and oftentimes daily experience
teaches, sudden death. Drunkenness is engendered of a gross and thycke fume,
which ascending up to the brain, does there cover the places where reason and
memory lies, no otherwise then the clouds do cover the light of the sun,
where by all the senses as well internal as external be so troubled that they
can not execute their offices and duties appointed of nature, the
inconveniences which come by drunke^nes be these that follow.

The first is corruption of the livers complexion, for it resolves the heat
thereof, whereby the liver loses his natural generation of blood, and in place
of blud inge^dreth a watrishnes and causes ye dropsye.

The second is corruption of the brains co^plection. It does dispose a hot
brain to a woodnes and fransie, the cold to the falling evil, forgetfulness and
palsy. The. iii. is weakness of senewes and disseases thereof as the crampe,
palseis, gout, dropsies. Which things well considered and kept in
remembrance should (except I be much deceived) refrain something their
prompt disposition from such wa^ton appetites. But truly there is no man
knowing the duties belonging to an honest he^t but will sorowfully bewail, and
piteously lament the folyshe peruersitie of many, which by their negligent and
dissolute living wylfully commit their bo dies to be tormented with grievous and
painful sickenesses, the dolor whereof, if by counsel and practice of physycke
at the first brunt be not apeased and pacified, for which the art of phisycke
is rated, accused, and put in blame. And thus the pacientes transpose and lay
away the fault which in them self is culpable: Unto the imbecillitie or
feebleness of the art. But if effectual report were made unto such by the
informatio^ of honest and approved physicians how such disseases by their
negligence procured can not easily be expel'ed onles the original occasions
thereof be somthyng diminyshed, and so by aduisemente and good order in diet
preceding to prevent ye special causes thereof: then not only of their
maladies they should be ye sooner cured, but also physicians should avoid ye
reprocheful rebukes and ^uyl reports which of long time they have sustained,
and consequentlye the noble science of Phisycke should be eftsoon restored to
her pristinat honor and dignity. And verelye that part of physycke
surmounteth all the other, Diatetici
which do the tracte and deuyse necessary and convenient form of living
which we should diligently and circumspectlye observe in time of our health
and welfare, if affectionatly we covet the preseruacion and long co^tinuaunce
thereof.

A diet prescribed for old men, with certain medicines against the
incommodities of age.

The seventh Chapter.
THey which are past the dangerous passage of youth, and now approach to
old age, which is about fyftie year, what time both natural heat and
strength begin to decay, must diligently have respect and regard to.ii. of
the seven planets: Uenus and Saturnus. The first does signify storyshyng
youth, the later withered and teble age. They therefore which ve under Saturn,
as old men, must use circumspection that they be not entangled with the
blandime^^es of Uenus, of wa^ton appetites chief patroness. Also they must
beware that they suffer not extreme cold, nor use not to be out of their
houses in the air of the night time, which things are known to bring damage
to that age. Also they must use such meats as engender good and pure blood, as
the yolks of rier eggs new laid. Also wine fragrante and something sweet,
which ingenderith good spirits. They must not use much honger or thyrst, and
specially avoid much watchyng of the nyghtes. Remedies for the provocation of
sleep shall be remembered in the next Chapter.

Exercise of the body would not be much used in age, also heauynes and sorrow
of the mind would be above all things expelled. For the body can not seem
young and lusty, onles the mind bequiet, merry and pleasant. If old men be
very cold, let them lay this fomente or applicacion to their stomachs
which is of wonderful efficacy and power in prolonging life. R. all the
inward part of a hot new baked loaf sieped a little space in good
maluissye, and then rolled in poulder of mintes, and so laid to the stomach
or holden to the nose, is to old men wonderful profitable, for as Diogenes
Laertius writes: By virtue of this fomente did the renoumed and famous
philosopher Democritus (belong sickness at deaths door) keep and retain the
liuelye spirits within his body, and lived a good space after.

Furthermore light frications and baynes be very good and necessari for aged
men. Also the juice of good licorice is supposed of many to increase natural
heat and moisture. Almond milk, sugar, and raysynes would be also used. Rasis
does greatly commend mirabolanes called kebuly, condite in India, and does
command old men against the inco^modities of age daily to eat of them.

Remedies for old men, or any other that can not sleep.

The eight Chapter,
Lack of sleep comes of great drives of ye brayn, which makes short ye
course of life, and nothing so much e^creseth mela^choly, so that men hereby be
oftentimes disposed to frensies and madness the vest remedies to resyste this
evil be these that follow. After supper to eat raw lettes with a little bread,
to drink after, a little good and pure wine. For lettes eaten in the evening,
as Diascorides records, provoke sleep merueilously. Wherefore Galene the
most noble physician, for this intent and purpose was accustumed to have his
poryge made with lettes.

Moreover vehement prouocations shall be to take a confectio^ at night made on
this wise. ^.ii. ounces of white poppie seed and.i. ounce of lettes seed, half
a drame of safron.vi. ounces of white sugar, and sethe all together in the
sirupe of poppie, and eat of this confection.ii. dra^mes at one time and also
by itself a little of the syrup of popie. For the same purpose it is good to
anoint the forehead and temples with oil of violets, with the oil of the
herb called nymphea, in english called a water rose, and with oil of
almondes, and to hold at their nose a little vynegre or rose water, Also it is
good to beset the bed and straw the chamber with cold herbs as endive,
purslane mallows, camomile, vinetree leaves, and such other. Marcilius
Ficinus approves often whashyng of the head with water wherein poppie, lettes,
purslan, malowes, roses, camomile, the leaves of wyllowes and vine trees be
sodden, of each a like quantity and also with this water not only to wash the
head, but also the arms, legs, and all the body.

And here I have purposely left out many other more vehement prouocations
which be not used but when great need does require and they be only used when
phisicious cast their patientes into sleep to the entente to cut them
without pain or grief. They be called of the Grecianes Narcotica, and
Anodoyna, of the Latins Stupefaciencia, indolorifica, or molestia vaca^tia.
And here I conclude to speak of remedies against immoderate watchyng, whereby
the incommodities of age may be somethyng mitigate, and also life time
prolo^ged.

Of the golden drink Auxum potabile, and somethyng of the virtue thereof.

The nynth Chapter.
THere is no man having the fre use of reason that will deny man's life
chiefelye to be conserved by the strength and power of that which is
extracted as well forth of the virtue o^ herbs as other metalles called the
quint essence, Foreseyng that not only the opinions of sage and wise
Philosophers have in this thing concluded, but also we may see the experience
of it in our own bodies: For forth of the meats being gross of substance
which we receive daily to the sustentation of nature, is extract by power
digestive the quinte essence of those same meats where doyth nature is fed
and noryshed, that which is gross and evil being separate away, by power
e^pu^siue, as gobbettes not agreynge to her dyer. Wherefore she abhorryng them,
desires to have them expelled by sundry kinds of excrementes: but now to my
purpose.

Of al other that quint eise^ce is the best and most precious, which is
extracte forth of the precious metal gold, for it of al other is most
temperate, not object to corruption, and as Astronomers aflirme, for the goodly
and shynyng color and also for his temperature it is resembled to two of the
most worthy planettes having supremitie over the rest: that is to wit Sol,
and Jupiter. Of this is made a golden drink called aurnm potabile, which is of
great strength and virtue in producinge of our life. Of this aurum potabile is
a book entitled Celu^ philosophicu^, unto the which book for the more ample
and plain declaration hereof, I remitte the studious reader, for this little
treatise can not receive it.

Of the opinion of the^ which say man's life by degrees of seven years to be in
danger of death or misfortune.

The tenth Chapter.
FOr as much as shortness of time and business otherwise takes from me labor
and study requisite to the exact and perfect finyshyng of this my purpose and
enterprise begone, whereby I am constrained to leave many things unspoken
concerning certain precepts of Astronomy, by the healpe whereof Astronomers
promise preservation of health and continuance of the same, which things
omitted I purpose only to remember their opinion which affirm ourelyfe
evermore at seven years end to be in danger of death or misfortune, which
years the Astronomers call Auuos c^^nactericos, they are called also An ^^
sca^ar^s ^tadatii or dectetorii, which they prove to be by this reason:
Foreseyng that all the Planettes do reign by order of succession and course.
Every hour of the day semblably they raygne in order, every day in the
week, also every planet in order gives influence and constellacion for the
space of a month to the child conceived in the womb, and brought forth vy
generation. Whereby wise Astrologers castyng the day and hour of the chyldes
natiuitye, do indge his natural inclinacion, and to what things he is of
nature aptlye dysposed. And consequentlye they say that every planet in order
for a years space gives influence and constellacion unto man's life. For a more
evident declaracion whereof it is to be noted that Saturn the highest planet
in the first month after the child is conceived, has supremitie and chief
rule over the child lying in the womb, not having perfect shape of man or
woman, and so by discention unto the loweste. In the seventh month, Luna has
rule and governance, and so after the child is borne and brought forth by
ascension again (...) first year of the childs age, the Moon has
sovereignty and gives her influence. In the second Mercuri, in the third,
Uenus, in the fourth Sol, in the fifte Mars, in the syxt Jupiter, in the
seventh Saturn, and so in order returnyng again, that such course there is
in all man's life which causes in our bodies every seven year a great
alteracion and change.

Wherefore every seven year is thought dangerous and ieoperdous for the
causes before mentioned.

For this cause by ye aduertiseme^t of ancient writers at every seven years
end we should consult with phisicions, wise and well learned, to know how to
escape the danger then imminent. For by certain remedies Ptolomeus affirms
that the manaces and threatenings of the planettes may be repressed. Also he
affirms that man's life may be prolonged by virtue and power of certain
Images made of precious stones or other metal, if they be made at time
oportunate and convenient, according to the raygne of the planettes, as
Philost^atus tells of a man named Appolonius, which by the virtue of seven
rings which he made, geuyng every one of them a name according to the names
of the planettes, and vsinge daily to put the ringes on his fingers as the
planettes raygned in the days of the week: ly^ed an hundred years reteinyng
still the young and goodlye beauty of the visage, the liuelye power and quick
vigoure of the mind, and strength of the body. Albeit I let pas to write of
such astrologicall Images, for because such witchcraft and sorcerye is
superstitious and deuyllishe, unlawful by the laws of god and man. Wherefore
all trust and confidence taken from such detestable practice, these medicines
only may be lawefully used to drive away the in commodities of age, which on
the earth God has created for man's necessity.

A confutation of the exoniouse opinion of certain philosophers which thought
phisycke to be of such efficacy and power to make the body immortal. with the
causes of bodily death, and the necessity thereof.

The eleventh Chapter.
THere were in time paste certain philosophers, which supposed that by such
craft and other like as is before hearted, the bodi of man might be made
immortal. Which opinion to be folyshe, perverse, and erronions it may sone
appear to al them which will either follow daily experience or natural
reason, to leave of that I should first have named, and that is the most true
and substanciall reason: verelye the determinate sentence of almyghtie god.
Albeit not only philosophers, but also phisicions by ouermuche affiaunce and
trust had in their science supposed that this thing might be brought to pass
against whose presumption and arrogancy the noble physician Auicene, the
chief of the Arabians, in form following replieth, saying: The science of
phisytke does not make a manim mortal, nor does not defend surely out bodies
from outward hurtefull things, no nor can not assure every man to life, to the
last term and day of his life. But of two things it makes us sure: that is
from putrefaction and corruption and also defends that natural moisture be
not lightly dissolved or consumed. Wherefore that cruel Lady of destenie named
A^ropos whom we call comenlye death assayleth and pursues our bodies to
destroy and kill them by two sundry manner of ways. Whereof the first is
called resolution or consumption of natural moisture which in continuance and
precesse of time must of necessity be consumed and wasted, and can by no
phisycke be avoided.

And all the precepts which here be gathered together if they be discretelye
used, and put in due execution, serve specially for this purpose, that it be
not lyghtlye, as in floryshyng youth or child age consumed or wasted, but be
deferred to old age as long as nature will permit and suffer.

The latter cause by the which death assayleth the body is called
putrefaction or corruption of natural humiditie, which may be easelye
avoided if man be circumspecte in vsyng the counsels before written, and to
keep the body in safety and health. From the danger hereof does belong the
diligent consideration and right use of those things which be called in
physic not natural, which be six in number. Air, meat and drink, sleep
and watch, moving and rest, emptines and repletion, and affectes of the
mind. Of the use whereof is some thing spoken in master Eliots Castle, and
there fore here omitted.

But now to return to this necessitye of our dying, to the which by force and
constraynt we are driven, and comes by this reason. Natural heat in our
bodies by continuance and process of time is a necessatie cause of her own
de struction. For if it should always continue in our bodies, then should we
live, but the thing is contrary, for at the length it does consume and wast
her own matter whereof she is made, that is natural moisture. For a more
euidente and plain declaration whereof, it is to be considered that like as
the light of the lamp does by continuance of time consume the oil which is
cause of the light, and so is at length extingwyshed: Likewise it fares by
natural heat in our bodies, and the more it aprocheth to age, the more it
becomes drier, whereby heat is diminyshed, which diminution of natural heat is
caused of two things, the one is overmuch drynes in all the members, the other
is lack of moisture, which of necessity, immediately after causes death to
come, and the body to be dissolved. This I think sufficient to the confutacion
of the opinion before remembered. One thing I had almost forgotten, which
although it be but a faynyng of the poets, yet it is necessary to the
amplifiyng of our purpose, and does contain in it things delectable, worthy
knowledge.

The poets feign there to be. iii. fatal Ladies, or Ladies of destinye in
whose will it stands to prolonge and shorten man's life, and they be called of
the Latins Parce, because as I suppose they favor no man. The first named
Clotho, is feigned to hold a rock or distafe in her hand. The second named
Lachesis to pluck forth the threede, and the third called Athrop^s, to
pluck asunder and break the same, whereby they understand that the first of
these Ladies has power of our life at the beginning of it, and the second
lady to stretche forth and draw along man's life, the third lady at her
pleasure, and when she will to shorten it, so as it run not his full course.

An Epiloge or brief rehearsal of the pr^misses.
This is sufficient for the declaracion of those things which be necessary
and expediente to be known to the preservation of the health, and long
continuance of the same, which specialye does consyst in reducing natural
heat and moisture to an equal and just temperature in making digestion good
and perfect, in rectifieng of blood viciate or corrupt, in consideracion to be
had concerning, a mansion or dwelling place, in ordinary diet to be
observed, in preparing necessary remedies against inordinate watching finallye
in the power and strength of that which being extracte out of herbs and other
metalles is called a quine essence, which being studiousely read, and put in
due execution, I trust shall be to the readers, both commodious and profitable:
o^ whom I pray that my small and simple ^abo^^es hece^^ bestowed at vacant
time from other lettes and business, may be favorably accepted, and hereafter
when I shall perceive where ^^her my little power, or poor ^^beuoure may
better accomplish the thing for their commodity, there shall no labor let me
from doing of it. Thus fare ye well gentle Readers.

FINIS.
Uiue, vale Lector, si quid scis rectius istis Candidus imperti, si non scis
viere gratus.
Imprinted at London by Robert Stough ten, dwelling within Ludgate at the
sign of the Bishops Myter.


