JACOBS STAFF TO BEAR UP THE Faithful. AND TO BEAT DOWN, THE Profane.

Touching the one's assured, and the others conceited title, unto God himself,
and all his precious promises.

WHEREIN. The Saints interest is justified, to be absolutely infaillible, the
Sinners claim detected, to be apparently deceivable, notwithstanding all
infernal suggestions of fear, and infidelity in the one, or of presumption,
and security in the other.

Formerly preached at Hamburgh by JOHN VVING late Pastor to the English Church
there, as his farewell to the famous followship of Merchant Adventurers of
England resident in that City.

And now published, and dedicated, to the honor and use, of that most worthy
Society, there, or wheresoever being.

All things are yours: you are Christ's. 1. Cor. 1.^^, ^^. AT FLVSHING. Printed
by Martin Abraham vander Nolck, dwelling at the sign of the Printing house.
1621.

SOCIETAS ADVENTVRARIA (Ana-gramma.) RE-RATA VIVIS DEO SANCTA.
REDDITE QVOD SVVM EST CVIQVE. blazon or coat of arms

What er'e can be concluded from a NAME
Yours does include: all happiness and fame.
Thus spel'd, thus anagram'd, it boade's your Fate,
Then which, there cannot be, a happier State
With MEN, to enjoy your reconfirmed GLORY;
And with your GOD to be reputed HOLY.
What can I wish, but THESE with all increase?
And after THESE, those joys that never cease.
TO THE Right Worshipful, and my worthy friends Master RICHARD GORE, Deputy,
the Asistants, and Generality, of the famous fellowship of Merchant Adventurers
of England, resident in Hamburgh, JOHN WING wishes all present prosperity on
earth, and all perfect happiness in heaven.
AS I have sometimes read, and oftentimes ruminated, the kind question of that
Pagan Prince, concerning the honorable reward of his faithful servant; So have
I been abash't in my self, that I have not enquired so carefully, what was
due to you for your love, as he did to him for his loyalty. [VVhat honor (said
he) has been done to Mordocay for this?] should I not have asketd my self the
same long since, for your kindness, not much inferior to his service? And now
that (of late) I have begun this inquisition, my conscience answers with shame:
[There has nothing been done] with shame (I say) and blushing, that a heathen
shall thus remember an inferior, and a christian should thus forget such
friends, as I have found you all to be: whose favor and kindness though it be
not upon record in chronicle, yet does it well deserve so to be. And now to
do you the best honor, that can come within my power; I do here present unto
you, and to all men, this true commemoration, and thankful acknowledgment of
these your favors, which were so abundantly bestowed on your part, although
so undeserved on mine. We Scholars, have nothing but papers to honor our
best friends withal, our most, and best is done, when we have put their good
names in print, and by public jmpression, given the world notice of the
precious respects, their good nature has cast upon us.

And if this my endeavor, may be accounted but your least honor, I have what
I desire, as one aim of this publication. The matter published, intends an
honor jnfinitely higher, even of God, who once enabled me to speak it, and
has now encouraged me to divulge it, principally for the glory of his name,
and next, for the renown, and fame of yours, whose rare liberality, it were
most jnjurious to bury in these days, wherein so little of the like is alive. I
beseech you take in good part, what I present unto you from a good heart. I was
once hopeful to have been more happy in my residence with you, then I can be
in writing to you. But the almighty meant it otherwise, on him I cast all my
cares, and strive daily for contentment, and comfort, in a state (in many
regardes) much more mean. I hope nothing shall be offensive to you, of that I
have written, it being all grateful, when it was spoken. If in the latter end
I seem more plain, and downright, in diverse passages both concerning you,
and my self. I pray you pardon me, it was to sustain my own vprightnes, and
to wype away those foul and unworthy jmputations, wherewith some malignant
minds and mouths did as falsely, as basely, reproach and traduce me, (and
that to my face) for such gross miscarriage among you, as made me incapable of
so good a condition and service as yours was. God for bid J should justify
them till I dye (said Job, and so say I) and give away my jnnocency. I had
rather dye blameles, then live blemished. And to bunge up, and make mute for
ever, these evil tongues, I could not but relate, that truth, which is able to
remove their sclanders, and reveal my integrity, to all persons, that shall
please to pervse these particulers. The Lord of his infinite goodness, make good
this poor attempt of mine to you all, and to all others, into whose hands and
hearts, I desire it may come. The same God, be ever your God, and shine upon you
in the pure light of his sweet countenance, that all things may be fully
discovered unto you, which may further you to him, where you may shine with
him, in that glorious and inaccessible light, which noe corruption can inherit,
or attain. To his grace and blessing, in incessant desire of your temporal
prosperity in your Society, and spiritual and eternal prosperity, of soul
and body; I commend every one of you, with my own soul, and so rest.

Your late Pastor, and unfeigned wellwiller for ever JOHN WING.
From my house in Flushing September 12. 1621,
TO THE READER:
Reader look for no apology, or excuse for this work of mine, I make no
question but the matter contained in it will plead a necessity of making it
public. Read and pervse that thoroughly. The second part of my former labor,
thou shall look for (if the Lord will, and I live) e're long, but not
presently, for I have something to do before I can finish it. Pray for me that
I may be furnished with grace, to write for thy good. Faerwell in the Lord.

JOHN WING

Page Lin. Error. Correction. 5. 20. with stand which stand 8. 6. at ouce at
once. 20. 6. harh right has right. 22. 17. wit us with us. 45. 5. yet blessed.
ye blessed 94. 12. thy put out they put out 99. 31. abborted abhorred. 109.
31. and agine and again. 119. 32. last refuse. last refuge 125. 2. and
oeur-base and over-base. 137. 20. he speak it. he speak it 138. 24. cry to
their. cry to her. 139. 13. such the breasts. suck the breasts. 156. 23. they
Good thy God 157. 7. the any the one 162. 2. not sorrow not. Sorrow 175. 5.
consider and so consider and see 175. 32. you condition your condition 181. 4.
thy are they are 184. 27. to a bette to abette. 195. 28, timerarious
temerarious 2^5. 3. or thee or thee Words to be put in. Page Lin. 11. 1. we
bold, we be bold. 57. 8. ever hope. ever we hope. 78. 19, weakness. and
weakness. 97. 16. not if. not do if. 170. 19. if Lord, if the Lord. Words to be
put out. Page Lin. 143, 32. put out did. 171. 1. put out this 174. 11. put out
but. 186. 18. put out the.

In many places and pages herin, is set for herein

JACOBS STAFF. OR, A declaration, and confirmation, of the most comfortable
interest, which all the faithful have, in the Lord, and all his Promises.
AS ALSO, A detection and confutation, of that false and jdle claim, which
ungodly persons vainly pretend unto both Discovered in certain Sermons on
Genesis 32.9. And Jacob said: O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father
Isaac, thou Lord that sayd'st unto me; Return unto thy country and to thy
kindred, and I will deal well with thee.
That which we find written by David, long after Jacobs time, did Jacob find
and feel, long before David's days, to wit, [that, Psalm. 58, 11.
Verily there is reward for the righteous, and that, undoubtedly there is a God
that judges the world] never man might speak this more experime^tally, and
happily, then he, who found the Lord most gracious to reward his vprightnes,
and most righteous to reveng his jnjuries. We read but of few, that have met
with harder measure at the hands of men, and scarce of any who have reaped more
favor from the hands of God, then this blessed Patriarch did. Touching whom,
many things are spoken, and he take's up much room in this holy history; some
part whereof is spent in the discovery of such passages, as fell out between
him and Laban, since they came first together. And in their procedings, one the
one part, we have recorded, what conscionable carriage there was in Jacob,
whose rare, and matchless fidelity, was made apparent, and did show it self,
in all the service he did him, it being performed (during so many years) with
extraordinary honesty, and endeavor. On the other, there is discovered, the
monstrous unkindness, gross jnjustice, and many other the unsavory fruits of a
currish nature, and covetous heart, in Laban, whose eye was ever evil, upon all
Jacobs good, insomuch that he did daily vex himself, with perpetual repining
at his wealth, welfare, and, prosperity.

The just Lord seeing this in Laban, looks down from heaven, with gracious
regard upon Jacob, and resolves to recompense his righteousness unto him seeing
he had done so much, and endured so much, from such a churlish kinsman, and
unworthy master as Laban had showed himself to be. He shall reap the fruit of
his pains and piety. Gods hand shall be liberal, though Laba^ be close-sisted:
Jacob shall well know, that he has a master in heaven, who will make him a full
mend's for all his integrity to his master on earth. And to the end he may as
fully enjoy it, as God is minded freely to bestow it, he is warned of God to
go for his country, and leave Laban, with whom he could never comfortably
posesse the sweetness of any of those many good things, the Lord did so kindly
cast upon him.

Jacob taking knowledge of his heavenly calling, and commission to be gone,
does instanly resolve on his departure dispatcheth his business, sets things
in order, and disposes himself, and all his, to remove with all possible
expedition, according to the commandment of God warranting him (forh with) so
to do.

Being thus, so suddanily gone, as Laban took noe notice of it till one told
him of it, three days after: [such being the diligence, and conscience of a
good servant, that the heart of his master may have confidence in him, and not
need to care for, or look after him, or his business, for diverse days
together] as soon as he did know it, he hastes, and poasteth after him, with
all speed, to overtake him, if he can, and at mount Gilead he does. And there
(his heart being big swollen, and ready too burst with choler and
coffeehouse) he meane's to have a saying to him; Jacob shall know a piece of
his mind ere they part, if once he can come to the speech of him.

But before Laban may speak with Jacob, God must speak with Laban and
(jntending to overule his wrathful mind, and outrageous mouth) the Lord does
so school him, that he cannot give him an unkind word, but is become as
cool, and as calm, as a man may be, he speake's most familiarly to him,
make's a most freindly league with him, and take's his leave most lovingly of
him, and so they part exceeding peaceably one from the other.

This being done, and Laban being gone, Jacob journieth homeward, and because
the Lord did forsee, he should ^^cou^ter many extreamityes, e're he came to his
ways end, he sent his host, (even an host of Angels) to him, that by them he
might be hartened, against all those hart-breakings, which he might meet
withal, as he went forward in his journey. And it was but need, he should
have some cordialls, considering what calamities ^ee was to wade through as he
went. For no sooner has Gods host left him, but, he heare's of another host
coming of purpose to surprise him, and that from his Brother, which makes the
mischeife so much the more eminent and bitter. One woe is past, but another
comes; (and a far worse then the former) he has done with Laban, and is
well quit of him, but he is now to begin with Esaw. And indeed, this second
distress did every way exceed the first, for, whereas (before) he had to do
but with a covetous, and unkind master; now, he is to deal with a cruel and
bloody-minded brother; nothing was in question with Laban but matter of
commodity, the worst that could come, was but a little loss of some goods, and
cattle, that Laban thought too much for him: but the least of this, is for his
life and state too, himself and all that he has, are like to miscarry in this
combat, his brother having vowed his death, that he would kill him wheresoever
he met him. Jacob foreseeing this exigent, because of his unavoidable necessity
to pass by his brother Esawes territoryes, in his travel, (whose old grudge
against himself, he could not but remember,) he does his best to obtain a
pacification, sends ambassadors to him to treat of a truce, and to parley
with him about conditions of peace, if upon any terms he will accept it. But
Esaw will none of that, he is bitterly enraged, the messegers return, and
signify how resolute he is for revenge, he will hear of no league, but has
levied an army of four hundredth men against him, coming himself in person
with them, intending to make havoc of his brother, and all that he had.

Jacob is not a little troubled at this tidings, but much appaled and perplexed,
and now he bestirrs himself and devises what to do in this time of his
extraordinary terror, and danger. The means he makes use of are two.

partly, Civil, and Politic. partly, Spiritull, and religious.
He begins first with the former, and falls to deviding of his family, and his
flocks, that all might not be seized at once, but that if the one part were
surprised, the other might shift for themselves, and not become a pray to
Esawes incompassionate heart, and cruel hand. Having so done, now in the
second place, he is a suitor to god for his safety, a duty that should be first
done [but we se how (sometimes) frailty works before faith even in the most
faithful; nature gets the upper hand of grace, and disorder's our actions,
making them so grossly praeposterous, that policy, takes precedence of piety,
and the god of heaven is put behinde].

This prayer of his, for protection, and aid against this present peril,
begin's at the words of our text, and is continued from this nynth verse, to
the end of the twelfth.

And thus we are come by an orderly and direct course to the wodrs of our
text, withstand in clear cohaerence with the rest of this holy history, thus.
Jacob being to go for his country, by order from God, and as he goes, seeing
he cannot avoyde it, but he must pass by his brother Esaw, he uses double
endeavor to appease his anger, and prevent the peril, that he and his, might
sustain by it. One of these courses is the dividing of his people and cattle;
the other is the prayer he make's to his god, to save him harmless in this
distress, and deliver him from this his brother who was so barbarously bent
against him.

In which prayer (that we may proceed from the dependence of these words to
their, division) we have these particulers apparently considerable before us.

First, the Praeface or introduction to the prayer. verse. 9. Secondly, the
Prayer it self. ver. 10.11.12.
The first particular, to wit, the Praeface, is all wherewith we have to do at
this time, and in it we may further observe.

First, who it is that prays: Jacob, [And Jacob sayd] Secondly, who it is
that is prayed unto, God: [O Lord God] Thirdly, the encouragements he has to
pray unto God, and they are such, as by faith he apprehends, and his faith
(being well employed) fasteneth in a two-folde manner upon God, and lays
double hold upon him. First, in regard of the covenant, God made with his
progenitors: [God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isac] Secondly, in
regard of the jmmediate warrant, given him of God for the undertaking of this
business and this is also double. First, the precept which the lord laid upon
him to go the voyage [Thou Lord that sayd'st unto me: Return into thy
country, and to thy kindred] Secondly, the promise made unto him if he did
obey, according to the precept imposed [And I will deal well with thee.]


And this is the resolution of the words, and their distribution, into their
several branches, or members.

From which (in due order), we should descend to their interpretation, if there
were any necessity so to do, but they are easy, and open, to the simplest
apprehension, there is nothing doubtful, or difficult at all, the weakest
understanding may well know what to make of every word. We will therefore
overpasse this, and put on to the several instructions contained in them, as
they lie in their order.

And First, for the party praying, and the party prayed unto, we will be
willingly silent, inasmuch as all men know, that, [All prayers are to be made
to God only, whosoever make's them]. In this particular, there is a universal
accord, among all that soundly acknowledge a diety, whosoever rightly knowe's
there is a God, cannot but know withal, that none can be prayed unto but he
that is acknowledged to be God; there being none but he alone, that is gracious
enough, to hear our petitions. wise enough, to know our wants. able enough, to
supply them.
where suitors be innumerable, and the wants of every suitor innumerable also,
and no suitor able (as he ought) to discover his own necessityes, had there
not need be an infinite eye, to see them. an insinite ear, to hear them. an
infinite hand, to help them?
especially considering, that at one and the same time (nay, in the same
moment, or instant of time) many thousands may be petitioners, and every one of
these for many several things?

And can any creature have to do in this infinite court of request wherein the
clyents are thousands, and the causes millions? may it be possible that Peter,
or Paul, (suppose them to be employed in heaven as mediators of intercession)
should hear and entreat, for multitudes of men, every man having a multitude
of necessityes, and they all praying at once? if they can hear and help,
wherein are their eyes and ears less then Gods? why are they not honored as
more then inferior mediators? if not; why are thy esteemed so much? either
then they must be diefyed, and made equal with God, or discarded from having
any thing to do in this business, wherein, it is Gods only honor, to be the only
doer, because he alone is perfectly able to hear in all places, to help in all
cases.

But we leave this, and pass on to that which hartened Jacob to pray: the
encouragments that quickened him, were two-folde (as we told you before).

The first of these comforts is, the consideration of the covenant of God made,
both with his progenitors, and with himself also, and he pleade's this interest
in both respects, as we see. [God of my father etc:] and again, [thou Lord
that sayd'stvnto me]: because if he should be overcome of any evil in this his
journey, so, that he could not come to the place whither he was commanded to
go, and whereunto God had engaged himself for his safe conduct, then were Gods
honor gone, who promised both his praedicessors and himself, that he should
come well home. From which practice of Jacobs, pleading thus with God, we are
to learn thus much for our instruction.

That whosoever would go to God with any comfort by prayer,

No man's prayer can be accepted, no man praying, can be hartened with any hope
of a happy success in his suite, if he cannot entitle God to himself, and
himself to God: and he that can call him [my God] cannot come in vain, or go
away vn-regarded.

The evidence of this truth is very abundant in the book of God, but we will
abridge our selves, and be content with a few confirmations, it were needeles
to multiply many in a point so plain.

David was a great man with God, few men had more suites in heaven then he, we
can scarce find such another clyent in Gods court of requests as he was, none
more ordinary, none more earnest: his miseries and discomforts were wonderful
many and exceeding heavy, and therefore he had need go the nearest and surest
way, he could for comfort when he prayed, and above all other, he took this;
whenever he made any request, he made sure of his right, and pleaded that, in
all his petitions, as it may be observed every where, but because it would be
tadious to particulate every instance, we may take a taste in two or three,
that are pregnant to this purpose.

In the. 16. Psalm. 16 1.2.
Psalm he begin's with prayer for his preservation, now because he knew Gods
promise pertayned to none but his own, therefore in the next verse, he adds
his interest, saying [ thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my God] and this
he brings to joy and cheer himself with hope of being heard; suitable to that
which in another Psalm he says to the same end: [I am thine, oh save me].
Psalm. 119.94.


Again, in the 18 Psalm, he intending so to speak that he might speed, he
laye's hold on the Lord in all respects, and entitle's himself to him every
way: [my strength, ver. 1.2.
my rock, my fortress, my deliverer, my God, verse. 3.
my buckler, etc.] and having thus made sure work, that God is his, in all
these regards; in the next verse, he resolue's to make his suite, and assure's
himself of being answered; ver. 6.
nay; he avoucheth plainly (a little after) that he was heard; [In my distress
I called upon the Lord; I cried unto my god and he heard my voice] etc.

The like we might note out of the 22 Psalm, which he begin's thus [my God, my
God,]. And the same is to be seen in more, then twenty psalms more, if we
should urge all particulers; none was more fervent in prayer with God, nothing
was more frequent in all the prayers he made to God, then this very thing. And
have ye ever heard of any petitioner that sped better, or that prevayled more,
then he did? nay, may we not think that he was a great gayner by this course,
when (hereupon) he exhorts others out of his own abundant and happy
experience in this particular, to power out and emity their hearts, and wholly to
unlade and lay them open before the Lord, which no man (you know) will do, but
to him, in whom he has more then ordinary interest, and with whom he is
exceeding intimate and familiar. Thus you see the point is most plain in his
practice, who is a singular praeside^t unto us herin, no man ever laid more
claim to god, in prayer, no man ever obtained more comfort from god by prayer;
and does not this assure us the^, that it is most true that he that goes to
the Lord with most right, shall come from him with most rejoicing.

I did the rather choose David to give evidence in this matter, because he was a
man so inward with god, and so excelling in this practice, that we cannot find
many to match him: yet if we should take notice of other holy men of god, we
should soon discern the same carriage in them: but we will spare to multiply
any, or to nottfy more examples, let us come to consider the reasons of the
point: and they are these that follow.

First, the ground and evidence of our consolation in any thing, is our right
we have in the same, wherewith may we bold, but with our own? what is any
thing, (nay, every thing) to us, if it be not ours? our right, is our
rejoicing: our comfort in all things, come's from the claim we can lay to
them. The dim light of nature and reason, saw this, where no illumination of
grace or religion did shine as yet, Jonah. 1.
in those poor perplexed Pagans, whose course in their own persons, and whose
counsel to the Prophet, proves this point, ver. 5.
for themselves, the text tells us [ they cryea every one to his own God] and
when the Prophet (being found a sleep in this distress) is awaked and
exhorted to pray, he is willed to pray to his own God, [ call upon thy God]:
ver. 6.
and do not both these make it most manifest, that a man can have no heart to
pray, noe hope to speed, unless he have interest in that God to whom he
prays. These silly men could see that it was booteles for them to pray to his
God, or he to theirs, if any benefit may be expected, it must be from our own,
and none else. And this is our first reason.

Secondly, God himself does comfort and cheer up men upon this ground, that he
will be theirs, and they shall be his. So we find once, Genesis 15.1.
and again in his appearance to Abraham, when he will harten him against all
harms he says thus [ Fear not Abraham, for I am thy Buckler, and thine
exceeding great reward], it had been small happiness to him to know that god
had been a buckler or any thing else, Genesis 17.1.2.4.7.
but to be his, is the thing wherewith the Lord joye's his very soul. So
again, at another time, God will bind him to proceed, and persevere in his
vprightnes, now because that exact carriage of-times bring's men into calamity,
the Lord to quicken him, does not only tell him how able and allsufficient he
is to do him good, but that he will enter into covenant with him, and become
his God, and this covenant of God, is that, which has comfort enough in it to
carry him currantly, through all discomforts whatsoever. And intruth, he that
has the Lord to be his, may well account himself a most happy man, because
then, all the infinite and unspeakable perfections of God, are ours and we may
go with boldness and freedom to beg that mercy, which is above the heavens:
that wisdom, which is unsearchable. that providence, which is unutterable that
Power, which is irresistable
and all that goodness, and kindness, and those compassions which are
inconceivable: that we may have the benefit of these excellencies for our best
good, is not this a comfort? when a man may know that all that heaven has,
nay, all that the God of heaven has, is ours, and a man may go to both, as to
his own. Assuredly if we can but believe, that god is wise enough to give us a
sufficient reason of sound consolation, and able enough to make that good which
he giue's as a reason to us, to wit, the interest of himself, then have we
reason to acknowledge that he may pray comfortably, that has power to make this
claim, to him, and all that is in him. And this is our second reason.

Thirdly; contained in the 17 of Ioh, Joh. 17.
and continued through the whole chapter, let us consider, that when he powre's
out those his most sweet suplications for us, he does, (as it were) press,
and urge his father with arguments, to hear him for us, and to accept us in
him, and among many other jnducements of that kind, he does principally plead
this which we have now in hand, even, the interest his father had in us, and
this he does once and again; ver. 6. ver. 6.
[I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world: ver. 9.
thine they were, and thou gave them me]. Again, ver. 9. [I pray for them, I
pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are
thine]. And again, ver. 10. [ All mine are thine, and, thine are mine; Holy
father, keep them in thy name, even them, whom have given me, that they may
be one, as we are one]. In all these, we se how he is instant with God his
father for us, on this ground that we are his, and he ours; which title, and
right, when he has so earnestly insisted upon, the^ he come's to the requests
he make's for us, which are very many, and most heavenly, both touching our
present state of grace during the days of our being here, and our eternal
state of happiness when we go hence.

During the days of our abode on earth, ver. 13.1^.17.19.21.23.
he prays that, his joy might be fulfilled in us. that, we might be kept from
evil. that, we might be sanctified in the truth. that, we might be one with
himself and his father. that, not only we our selves, but also the world, may
know that the Lord does love us, even as he loves Christ himself.


And, as if all this were not enough, that we should enjoy so much good, and be
free from all evil for the present, he is yet a further suitor to his father
for us, that when the time of our pilgrimage is out here, we may posesse the
glory of heaven, ver. 22.
which glory, (even the same that he had with his father before all worlds) he
professes he has given to us, ver. 24.
and prays, that his father would invest us into it, and give us posession of
it.

Thus does the Lord Jesus abound in these most blessed desires of our best
good, and provokes, (yea, and prevails with) his father, to bestow them all
upon us because, both he has interest in us, and we in him. If this could not
have been avouched, it had been to little purpose that Christ himself had
prayed, nay, it is certain he would not at all have made any request to God
his father for us, for we se expressly, that he will not open his mouth for
others, but excludes them: ver. 6.
[I pray not for the world].

Now then, if this were that which did jnduce our Lord Jesus Christ, in his
prayer to be so myndfull of us, if because we were his, he does so prosecute
his father to be merciful to us, let us think whether our interest in the
Lord be not an excellent encouragme^t for us to go to our God. Christ himself
went not without it, every true christian may go freely with it. He that knew
best, what would most move his fathers affection, made use of this for our
jmitation And this is our third reason.

Fourthly, loue-tokens with he has given them, even those saving graces which
they have received from him, by which they are known to be his, and to have
interest in him, because they are never given to any that are none of his, they
only do partake of them, that are dear and precious to him. Now whosoever can
come to him and show him his own, which he has left with them, they cannot
but speed, they shall surely prevayle, Genesis 38.18.25.26.
as (you know) Thamar did upon Judah when she had his own signet, and
braceletts, and staff, and brought them forth before him, he could not choose
but own them, and acknowledge her, and favor her. Even so, if we can bring
that before the Lord which he has give^ us, and lay his own graces in his
sight, when we pray, we shall not speak to him in vain, he love's to hear
the voice of his own spirit in us, for when he heare's that, he knowe's one of
his own saints is the suitor, Cant. 5.2.
and that [it is the voice of his beloued] for none can pray by the power of
grace but they that have it, and it is jmpossible any should have it, but those
only to whom he giue's it, and that is, only to such as he has selected to
himself, from the rest of the sinful world. Hence it is, that the apostle
tell's us that this spirit of grace does both assure us that [we are the sons
of god], Romans 8.15 16
and (being so) it does also cheer us with, boldness to [cry Abba, father].
And this is our fourth reason.

Fifthly, we are not, nor cannot be thoroughly armed against the noisome
temptations of Satan, if we have not this assurance that God is ours. Of all
duties the devil is most jmpatient of Prayer, he cannot brook, or abide that
by any means, and therefore he bend's all his infernal forces against us in
that service. Now if we be not rightly assured, and resolutely settled, in the
persuasion of our souls, that the Lord is ours, and that we are the Lords, he
will have mighty and heavy adva^tage upon us, and still lie tempting, and
teazing of us, with hideous affrightments; saying, or suggesting; what have
thou to do to go to God, seeing thou art none of his, he, none of thine?
dare thou draw near to him, not knowing thy self to be his child, he will
sooner punish thy presumption, then hear thy petition; he call's none, but his
own to come to him, and seeing thou intrudest thy self thou may rather fear
his curse, then hope of any comfort. These, and the like miserable objections,
or vpbraydings, can none claw off, but they that can lay, good claim to the
living God. And whosoever are soundly assured that they can, shall either not
feel these things, or, if they do, they need not fear them, their interest
will jnable them against all, that hell can suggest against them.

Sixthly, and lastly, the truth we teach may most plainly appear by our
consideration of their estate, who have no interest in the Lord, and are none
of his; what are such in the Lords account and construction, and whether do
they pray or not? and if they do, with what good affection, or assurance of
gracious answer? Does not God repute them strangers, and enemies to him, such
as he does not know, nor they him, nay more, such as because they are not
known of him, nor he of them, are (therefore) hated as adversaries to him.
Ignorance of God make's a man a stranger and an adversary to God. All that have
not interest in him, are not only straugers but enemies also. It is Gods own
assertion, there is no mean between a stranger and an enemy, he that is one,
is both; God couple's them together, Col. 1.21.
who can part them a sunder? [ you (says the apostle) which were strangers and
enemies] so that if a man have not interest in God, he is at emnity with him,
he who knowe's not God for his father, must know God for his foe; if thou art
not his child, thou can not but be his enemy. Ponder this well, and see what
will follow hereupon; to wit, that whosoever prays without right and interest
in the Lord, may hope for no more happiness, then he that is a suitor to one
that is both a mere stranger, and a manifest enemy to him, and that (you know)
can be but a poor issue, a pitiful success. And I do appeal to the soul
of any ungodly person, with what affection, or consolation he had prayed, with
what favor and compassion he has been answered. Let him speak without
flattery of his own heart, and I fear not to be judged by himself. But if he
should flatter himself, and others, and affirm he has prayed comfortably, and
been answered graciously, it is apparent that he has lied both to God, and
men, for the Lord protests his deepest detestation both of their persons, and
supplications, and procliameth to all men, that, either they are not heard at
all, or, if in any kind they obtain any thing, it is nothing but a curse,
Mal. 2.2,
or a [blessing acursed] to them. Now then if such be the misery, and
unhappiness of those that have no interest in the Lord, their mercy and comfort
must be much, that have it, and can go to God with sound assurance of it.
Look what odds there is between a father and an adversary, between one that
is dearly beloved, and deeply abhorred, such must be the difference of their
suites, and the success of them, that can claim a title in the Lord, and that
cannot. And this is our last reason.

And now (I hope) the point is plentifully and plainly proved, and that you
are all persuaded, that he may go to God with joy, that has God for his God.

From the prooffe of which truth, let us now proceed to the application of the
same, and that to all sorts of menwhome it does, or may concern and they are
both, the children of God, for consolation. ungodly men, for reprehension. all
men, for instruction.


And first to begin with the saints of God, consolation.
who have this propriety in God, and can truly entitle themselves unto him,
they are to know, that the truth and the true comfort, of this we teach, has
unto them, neither end nor measure; a beginning indeed it has, and it breede's,
and growe's, by degre'es in them, but end or measure, it knows none. It is
both an infinite, and eternal joy unto them, to know themselves to be the
Lords, and the Lord to be theirs.

The holy apostle intending to teach all men, the meane's of true rejoicing in
the Lord, laye's his ground herin, (showing thereby, that the ground of all
sound happiness, ^. Cor. 1.^0.
is in this particular) to wit, that [Christ is of God, made unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption] note; that he says not Christ to
be in himself all, or any of these, but that the joy, and advantage of each of
them, is in this, that he is made unto us, that is, made of God, our wisdom:
our righteousness. our sanctification. our redemption.


And hence he infers that which follows [that, as it is written, if any
man glory, let him glory in the Lord], ver. 31.
as if he should say; many joy and boast in the Lord Jesus, but it is according
to their own vain conceit, but the man that will rejoice warra^tably, and as
it is written, let him make this sure; that, what Christ is, he is un to him,
his, wisdom, his righteousness etc. all other is but fond, but this is souna,
rejoicing; Satan's abetts us to the former, but God will bear us out in this
latter.

And the comfort, benefit, joy, and advantage hereof will appear to be more
then we can speak, 1. Pet. 1.^.
[euen, joy unspeakable and glorious] if we shall but speak of some few, of
those infinite perticulers, wherein the happiness of this our tnterest does
appear; our instances shall not be many, but those we take, shall be manifest to
our purpose; and we will make choice of such especially, as may most despite
the devil, who in nothing more, does show himself to be indeed a devil and an
adversary to us, then in this our interest and right, which he endeavour's to
nullify, and make void, as in all passages betwixt God and us, so most
especially in these whereof we are now to treat, which are evident to every
sincere christians experience in himself, and observation in others

The first, is in the very point we have in hand, prayer, wherein he never
spare's to vex, Consolation in Prayer.
and torture our souls, with our alienation from God, vpbrayding us that we
are none of his, nor he any of ours; and therefore what make we to call upon
him, to whom we can make no claim? and so does all he can, either to
discourage us from prayer, if it may be; or if not, to discomfort us in prayer.
But we have (notwitstanding) wherein to rejoice with God, and (as we said) our
right in him, is our rejoicing before him, and that in this particular of our
prayers: For why? from hence, that he is ours, and we his, we have both, free
access unto him. and, gracious acceptance with him.
a man may go freely to his own, and be sure to be accepted when he come's,
where he has right.

Who ever went to God with this claim, that came without this comfort? Look
upon some of the saints of God and see how they have done, and go and do
likewise, when good king Asa came to God in the great distress, and
extraordinary danger, wherein he was, by reason of his many and mighty enemies;
note, how he falls upon God and faste'ns with his interest urged once, 2.
Chron. 14.11. ver. 12.13.14.15.
jtterated again, and again [ and Asa cried unto the Lord his God] and
again, [ Help us o Lord our God] and yet again. [ O Lord thou art our God].
Thus freely he went, and thus freely he spoke to God, and the success did well
show, that such a prayer may do more then an army of men with great power. The
Lord can witholde no comfort from the^, that thus lay hold on him.

The like may be noted in worthy Nehemiah, who besought the Lord for the Jews
of the captivity, he that reads, let him consider how abu^dantly he does
press the Lord with his right in them, and theirs in him, nothing is more
ordinary in all his requests then this particular [ hear the prayer of thy
servant, Neh. 1.6.
which I pray before thee for the children of Israel thy servants: and again [
Now these are thy people and thy servants and yet again, ver. 10. ver. 11.
[ let thine ear be open to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of
thy servants, which desire to fear thy name. Thus you see how he insisteth
hereupon, as, upon that which he did apprehend and persuade himself might be a
maine motive with God to obtain what he asked. And the sequel did well show,
that this supplication was of force with the Lord, to do them good for whom
he prayed.

It were most easy to produce the practice of many more, even of all the saints
of God, who have received the earnest of the spirit, and are sealed to be his,
but we will let go all other, and take knowledge of one, for all, even of
Jesus Christ, who is Lord over all, and ought to be all in all, unto us. Mat.
26.


Let us go into the garden, and hear him pray there, lo, he besought the
Lord three times, and in every request this shall be added, ver. 39.
and not omitted in any one, [ O my father if it be possible let this cup
passe] and the second time, ver. 42. ver. 44.
[O my father if this cup may not passe] etc. and yet again, the third time
[the same words] says the Evagelist, that is to say, words to the same purpose
and of the same sense, note.
though not of the same syllables, for we find them something varied, by the
other Eva^gelists Mark, and Luke, as touching the letter.

From thence let us follow him to his cross, and there we shall find him in
the same kind calling upon his father, [my God my God]; mat 27.64.
and this he did in his utmost extremity, when he was under the full weight of
his fathers infinite indignation, and at such a time, and in such a straight,
every one will endeavor, to utter that which may be most effectual to move
them to whom we make our suites, and our savior thus using this, does thereby
make it evident to be of excellent, and singular jmportance, to prevail with
the Lord, in the heaviest estate wherein we can be, under heaven.

Nay, let us not look only on what he did in his own practice, but what he
does coma^d us to do in ours, when he would teach his disciples (and with them
all christians) so to pray that they might be happy after they had prayed, he
will have them begin with their interest, mat. 6.9.
and say [Our father] etc: this must stand in the forefront, as the first, and
most forcible thing, to set upon God withal; showing clearly, that he can
have no comfort to pray, who cannot thus begin his prayer, if a man cannot make
his title good in the first place, all will be but vain and jdle that follewe's,
it is but folly to seek the face of God, if we do not know him to be our
father, and cannot boldly so call him, when we call upon him.

And it is well to be noted, Romans 8.
that the apostle tell's us that the same spirit that assure's us we are the
children of God, does not only embolden us (as was remembered before) to cry
[Abba father] but in case it stand so wit us, ver. 15.
that (through any extremity of body, or impotency and distress of mind) we
cannot pray (which was once David's case, Psa. 77.3.4.
and may be the condition, of any true, and tender hearted christian,) I say,
this spirit does pray, and prefer, our requests for us, our very assurance it
self, will speak for us, through we could not speak for our selves. Even
this, that we are Gods, is (if we could utter no more,) enough to harten us, in
the hope of being heard, as we find by him, who said this and no more, Psalm.
146.6.7.
[ I said unto the Lord thou art my God; hear my prayer o Lord] and further, [
O Lord God of my saluation] etc.

Nay not only in prayer, but in the whole worship of God are we cheered, by
this same reason; so says the spirit of God. Psa. 95.6.
[ Come let us worship etc, for he is the Lord our God, we are the people of
his pasture and the sheept of his hands], so that, if upon any terms, a man
will come to the Lord, this must be one, and one of the main things, he must
mention before the Lord.

Thus our consolation come's upon us in regard of our prayers, when we can go
to God as to our own, it matters not, how Satan may otherwise entwitte us, as
long he cannot overturne our title.

And the joy, and comfort of this consideration, will yet shine more clearly
upon us, if we mark well how wicked men, when they come to speak to God do
not once offer to utter one word of interest, but still come, with general
appellation, without any special, or particular impropriation of God to
themselfs, mat. 25.11.
or of themselves to him: all that they say is [Lord, Lord, open unto vs] it
may be, to blind us withal, they dare, (being themselves blinded by the God
of this world] presume, and be jmpudently overbolde, with the Lord, 2. Cor. 4.4
and call (or rather miscall) him theirs, but when the great day shall come,
wherein they shall be detected and discern their own estates, standing before
their judge, the mighty God, and speaking immediately to him, they shall fear,
and not once dare, to offer the pleading of any interest, they shall stand
without, and cry, and houle, to him, who being none of their Lord, does
condemn and cast them, into internal, and infinite damnation of soul and
body.

Oh, that their souls could consider this, who thus forget both God, and
themselves, Psalm. 50.22.
and now (before men) fawn upon him with profane tongues and hypocritical
hearts, speaking of him as of their sweet Jesus, and their dear savior,
whenas, (before his own face) they dare not at all entitle him so: who sees
not but that their former prayers were vile, (being hypocritically
presumptuous,) and these latter vain, and themselves reprobated of God, for
pretending a title before men, and wanting it, when they appear before
himself. But of this, we shall have better occasion, to speak more in our next
use.

In the mean time, this want of interest in them, is that which debarre's them
of all present comfort, and brings them under Gods eternal curse, all their
suplications be cast away first, and themselves also, at last, because they
have it not. And what can be the consequence hereof to the saints of God, but
this, that they by virtue of this their right, in, and through Christ, shall
have both their persons and petitions accepted of God, to whom they may go
with all solace and rejoicing of soul and spirit, notwithstanding many other
miserable faylings, because all the infinite compassions of God, Psalm. 103.13.
are to be exercised only upon his own, whom he has promised to spare, and
forbear, as a man does his son whom he loves.

And this is the first comfort that flow'es from our interest, Psa. 34.15
that our prayers shall have happy issue with him, who is our God, and whose we
are, [For his eyes are upon the righteous, and his cares are open to their cry]
our claim does outcry our corruption, as the apostle avoucheth of Elias his
prayer; Jam 5.
and least any man should say, I, Elias, oh, he was a rare, and extraordinary
man, of singular graces, and more admirable piety, then is now to be found,
alas, what are we to Elias? the holy ghost answer's, that he was a man, and a
corrupt man, as we are, ver. 17.
[subiect to the like passions] as the story of his life does show, yet being a
righteous man, and having right in the Lord, Judge. 15.18.16.
his prayer was powerful, and prevailing. And so was Samsons also, who went
much out of the way, in many things, yet being the Lords, one that he had set
apart to himself, and appropriated to his service, it was the good pleasure of
his will to hear his desires, and help him in all his distresses. And the same
might we say of many more, upon whom we cannot now insist, because it is time
we set forward toward one second consolation.

And that is touching our afflictions, and miseries, Consolation in Affliction.
in the midst whereof, (seem they never so insufferable) our interest in the
Lord, will ease our souls, and joy our spirits within us.

And hereof we have abundant witness, in the book of God, taken both from God
himself, and from his saints, yea, and from sinful and ungodly men, too.

If we will hearken what the Lord God does say in this case, behold he vtter's
his mind most freely, that we may be free from all fear, in respect of any
perils. I will not cloy you with a multitude of witnesses. See what he says
by his prophet Isaiah, who heard it once, yea twice from God, that such as are
his shall not sink, in theit deepest sorrows.

Look cap. 41. where he cheere's his people, and giue's them words of
wonderful hartening, saying, Jsa. 41.
[Feare not, be not dismayed,] but upon what ground? why even upon this, ver.
10.
which will bear them up in all bitterness, [ for I am with thee, for I am thy
God, I will help thee, I will stre^gthe^, I will uphold thee, with theright
hand of my righteousnes] and again [feare not, for I the Lord thy God whill
help thee] and yet again, [ fear not, ver. 13.
thou worm (that is, were thy state never so weak, and despicable) I will
help thee says the Lord and thy redeemer.] ver. 14.
Again, the 43. chapter begins with the same words of encouragement, [feare
not,] but why? Jsa. 43. Ver. 1.
[ for I have called and redeemed thee, thou art mine.] oh, but we have many
and mighty miseries to pass through, well, saye's God, let the worst come that
can come, if it be as extreme as fire and water (and they we say have no
mercy,) yet says the Lord, fear not, I will go with thee, when thou wadest
through the greatest woes, that the world can yield: and least any should
doubt, or demand, what might make the Lord, or move him, to be so unspeakably
kind, and gracious, he answers by repeating the same reason again, that he
had given before, [ for I am the Lord thy God, thy holy one of Israel thy
Saviour] etc: Lo here, how the Lord does dwell upon this argument to perfwade
their perplexed spirits, how well it shall be with them, even at the worst that
can come unto them.

And hereunto, would all the Prophets give witness, if we should summon them one
by one, for the Lord speaks much to this purpose in every of them, but one
word of God, were enough to satisfy the whole world, if there were no more,
and therefore it shall be needles for us to quoate more in this matter.

Let us hear his children speak, (whose language we shall sinde to be like
their fathers) and as soon as they tell us their minds herin, it will most
readily appear, that they apprehended, the most special reason of their
comfort and releife, to consist in the right, and claim, which (in their
miserablest condition) they could make unto God.

Ask David, Psa. 23.1.
he will tell us, that seeing [the Lord is his shepheard] he shall not want any
good thing, even then when things go never so ill with him; in his sorrows
he shall have consolation; ver. 4.
in his dangers, preservation; supply, in his wants; safety, in his ways; and
whatsoever may be meet for him, in any estate which may befall him.

The same he speaks again elsewhere, and double's the declaration of his
interest in God saying, Psalm. 116.16.
[ Behold Lord, for I am thy servant, I am thy servant] etc. And this he does
there, where he has discourced of the heaviest afflictions, that ever befell
him, showing evidently, that if he had not been so near, and dear, to the
Lord as he was, he had sunk and perished, in those calamities which had now
seized on him, but seeing he could (with good assurance) say he was Gods, that
estate was to him recouerable, which to another (for want of this worthy
comfort) had been desperate and incurable.

Nay, let us enquire of more then one, ask all the Jews, either in Isatahs
time, or in leremiahs. Behold, in both prophets, how they plead, and prove
their comfort in the midst of their calamities. Jsa. 63.16.
[ Doubtless (say they) thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us,
and Israel know us not, thou o Lord art our father, and our redeemer etc.] and
again [we are thine] etc. ver. 19.


And if we look into their state in Ieremiahs time, when the hand of God was
grievous upon them, as both the title, and the whole tennor of the book does
relate, (it being called [the Lamentations] from their lamentable condition
therein described) we shall see them plunged, into the deepest, and deadlyest
distresses, that it was possible for people to endure, howbeit, they could yet
hold up their heads and cheer up their hearts, with their title to the Lord,
Lam. 3.24
saying [ the Lord is my portion says my soul, therefore I will hope in him].
Even that estate which was so woeful, unhappy, and hopeless, yet is conceived
to be curable, and (under the heaviest, burden, and bitterness, thereof) they are
hopeful, hearty, and comfortable, because they can boldly say, that god is
their portion, and they are his people: nothing was left but this, this alone
was enough, to lift them out of the desperate conceit of their own estate. All
external, and visible signs, and tokens of Gods favor were gone, both
temporal in regard of their land and the happiness they had, in all the good
things thereof and spiritual in regard of the temple and the holiness of the
things of God therein, but this inward and invisible assurance and seal of Gods
interest in the^, and theirs in him, that remains, and by it, they are
revived, and kept in such heart, and hope, that they can comfort, and joy
themselves therein, as in that which will hold out, and hold them up, when all
other consolations fail. And so we see Gods people do say the same herin,
that God himself does.

But let us enquire of ungodly men and, we shall perceive the power of this
truth to be such, that they who have not, any part, or portion in it
themselves, are copelled to confess the comfort of it for others. Such is the
clear light and the quickening life of it, that even these, are dazeled with
it, and can do no less, but freely acknow ledge the same, through that strong
conviction which does enforce the^ to believe it, and yet afford's the^ no true
comfort by it. Many a wicked man stands convinced of much truth, comforted by
none, nay the truth they know, is so far from making them any way
confortable, that it make's them more inexcusable. So was it in this point,
with those two pagan kings Nebuchadnezzar, and Darius. Nebuchadnezzar had
tyra^nically thrown the three children into the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.
for refusing to worship his false God. The true God was resolved to rescue
them, seeing he saw their faith, and affia^ce in him to be so sound, and
immovable, (and note, that this their resolution of spiritual loyallty, was
grounded on their interest they had in God), as they tell the king to his teeth
[our God is able to deliver vs] etc. and being freed from the fury of the king,
ver. 17.
and feircenes of the fire, he who cast the^ in (eve^ this heathen tyrant) when
he saw their miraculous delivera^ce by the mighty hand of God, cannot contain
himself, but must magnify both this their God, and those his servants, and that
not only by words, but by a law and statute, made to that end, saing [ Blessed
be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, ver 28. ver. 29.
and Abednego, who has sent his Angel and delivered his servants] etc.
[Therefore I make a decree] etc.

The like to this is seen in the 6. Dan. 6
chapter in Daniels case, against whom an unjust and cruel act was got, that
for his piety to the Lord, he must now be made a pray to the lions: well, the
decree is granted and irrevocably sealed, according to the manner of the Medes,
and Persia^s. The king as soon as he came to know how it was, was exceeding
sorry for what he had done, and does what he can to free Daniell, but when he
see's that it cannot be, he labor's to comfort him against that distress,
from which he could not deliver him, and what is it where with he does
endeavor to cheer him? a man would think it must (sure) be some
extraordinary argument, that must encourage a man in this case: why it is even
this, [Thy God, whom thou servest, ver. 16. ver. 20. ver. 22.
he will deliver thee] and again, [ O Daniell the servant of the living God,
thy God] and withal note Daniells answer [my God, has sent his Angell] etc.
Thus this godles man, must give witness to this gracious truth, and confess
that a man's right in the Lord, is able to bear him out against the greatest
cruelty, that can be excercised upon him. Nay, the Lord did not only make this
man, but those beasts also, Psalm. 105.15.
(the lions) after a sort, to know, that they had a servant of his among them,
whom they might not touch, a prophet to whom they must do no harm.

Thus we have abundant evidence hereunto, and we see this our second consolation
is most clear, that a man who has the Lord to his friend, and is interessed
into him, 1. Pet. 1.8.
has wherein to joy, [though for a season he may be in heavines through many
afflictions,] as the apostle Peter speaks: and well may he rejoice in this
truth that has these three, to bear record to it; when God speaks it, and
Godly men acknowledge it, and ungodly men cannot deny it, it must needs be a
truth past all controlement, and of singular good consequent, to the marvelous
comfort of so many as have part in it. For this is a sure thing; his own, in
what measure soever it be, the mercy is infinite, which does accompany their
least visitation; but as for wicked men (being none of his) some measure there
may be (in their present calamities) but no mercy at all, in any of them. And
this is the second consolation.

The third follow'es, Consolation against Corruption.
by how much the virtue of it, does exte^d it self to help us against the
venyme of our corruption. A true christian is much more tender and sensible, of
sin, then of sorrow, of transgression, then affliction, of any thing that
dishonour's God, then of all things, that do, or can, distress himself. Noe
darts of the devil, can so much dismay the mind of a child of God, and make
him fear he is none of Gods, as those which Satan shoote's at us, in this
respect. He knowe's too well, that the offenses of the faithful will pinch,
and wring them, and therefore he is ever arguing from them, against us, to
anihilate our interest in our God, and labor's ever to prove, that we can have
no good title, being guilty of such great, and gross transgression, as he
usually (by infernal aggrauation) suggesteth the sins of Gods saints, to be.
It is his manner to make the most, and the worst, of all their faylings, and to
gall, and sting their consciences, with the greatness of them. When he tempts
us to them, natural infirmities, but when he accuses us for them, they are
notorious impieties, now we are foul, where before we were but frail. And
such evils as he can prevail with us to commit, he urges against the comfort
of our interect in him, against whom they are committed; and thinks he has
enough against us, to prove us none of Gods, because (since our calling) we
have so sinned against him.

But our God whose children we are, (and he our Father) will have us to know,
and understand better, both in respect of our sins, and in respect of our
selves.

Touching our sins, that it is too true, that (after true grace received) we
transgress too groffly, and we are no way to deny it, but by all means to be
thoroughly humbled for it, and to greive in our souls that we should live, to
greive him (by sin) who has taken us on, to be his own.

But touching our selves, no such consequence can follow, as Satan would
infer, to wit, that because we are sinners, therefore we are not saints; we
are offenders, therefore not faithful; we have such, and such evils in us,
therefore we have no interest in God; this argumentation is Satanicall, God
never disputed so, against any of his.

Nay, Gods reasoning is quite contrary, for whereas the devil does urge our
offenses to frustrate our right in the Lord: the Lord does urge our interest in
him, to confirm his love and favor to us, and to nullify our sins in his
sight. And this we will not only say, but show, to be a truth both from that
evidence of Gods word, (against which Satan may cavil, but the truth thereof he
shall never cancel), and from that happy experience, in such of his holy ones,
as have found that from his hand, which (to comfort our hearts) they have left
upon sacred record for ever.

Let us take some taste of both, that we may see how good the Lord is to his
own, though they be evil before him; yet ever with this caution; that what we
shall speak, do harten no man to commit the least sin, but to encounter Satan
when he would have us add infidelity, to our jmpiety; and make our state
desperate now, which was but distressed before. Nothing is more sure then this,
that God never gave any man any assurance of this good who does thereby abett
himself in any evil: A caution.
it is to arm us against temptation, not to increase corruption, that the Lord
reavealeth this truth. He that so peruert's it, has no propriety in God at
all.

But let us come to the point, our interest in our God, is good armor of
prooffe, against the feircest assaults of Satan when he vpbraideth our sin
against God, to oppose our consolation in God.

To do thus, is the fruit of his malice, but many a saint of God has made
better use of their right and have relieved their consciences, with that which
has been wrested against them; to rob them of their best comfort.

When David had fallen foully in the matter of Vriah, multiplying one fearful
sin upon another, so, as that a man would wonder whith what face, he should
offer, or dare, to look the Lord in the face, we find nothing more encouraged
him to go, nothing carried him but this, that yet the Lord was his; so we
perceive by his own words [ Deliver me from blood etc O God, Ps. 51.14.
who art the God of my salvation] God was yet, his God, and that hartened him
to seek his pardon.

The same was the prophet Ionahs course, he was in as bad a case as a good man
might be, standing guilty of gross rebellion, against the Lords express
comaund given unto him, and for the same persued, apprehended, and punished
strangly, by that hand of God that would have protected and rewarded him in his
obedience. Now being in such a close prison, as wherinto never man came but he.
and that for such an egregious fact, what hope can he have of ever coming near
God again, or if he have any hope, whereon is, or may, it be grounded? why even
hervpon that, yet, at the worst he is the Lords, and can so assure himself,
(as we see he does, once and again,) in that prayer that he make's, where we
are certified by the holy Ghost, that [Ionah prayed unto the Lord his God,
Jonah. 2.1 ver. 6.
out of the fishes belly] and further, [thou have brought my life from the pit,
o Lord my God.] Behold, though he had miserably failed before God, yet his
right in God failed not, God does acknowledge himself to be his; Jonah can
challeng this interest, and pray thereupon and so pray that the Lord is
pleased both to hear, and to help, as we see he did, both in releasing him
from his present affliction, and in receiving him into his former favor, and
entrusting him (the second time) in that service, about which he had employed
him, (and wherein the prophet had so wretchedly rebelled) before.

The same may we see in the poor prodigal in the gospel, Luk 15.18.
who is the image, and representation of us all (even of all the faith full
that offend) what had he to plead, or to put him into any hope, that he might
return, and be received again into that house, from whence, he had (of his
own accord) so foolishly departed; and that, he who had given him a childs
portion already, would ever know him for his child more, seeing he had run
through all, and spent it so ryotously, and lewdly, in such base, and
rebellions courses as he had followed? why this he had, and this was all, and
fully enough, to give him hopeful assurance, of happy entertainment; that, yet
for all this, he from whom he feed, and against whom he did offend, was his
father. This was that which cheered him against all his misery, and impiety,
and that enabled him first to purpose his return home, and afterward to
practice the same, he is my father; therefore I will go to him, though I have
failed against him.

But what should we stand upon particular persons? let us see what comfort the
Lord has promised to all his own, 1 King. 8.46.
in this case. When Solomon dedicated the temple, and prayed most divinely
therein, he presupposing (as well he might, for it was too sure,) that Gods
people might, and would ceartainly sin against him, and (by sin) so far
provoke him against them, that they might either be cast out of their land into
captivity, or have some other heavy judgment inflicted upon them; hereupon, he
is a suitor to God for them, that he would (even in this their sinful estate)
be gracious to them; and what says he, that might move the Lord to commiserate
them in this their calamitous condition? even this very thing, [for they are
thy people, and thine inheritance etc:] ver. 50.51
and if any man would know what God said to this request of his, he may read it
in the next chapter [I have heard thy prayer, and thy supplication etc. cap.
9.^.


Now this being universal, for all the people of God it gives assurance from
God to every one, who has any assurance in God, that (notwithstanding their
miscarriages) they are capable of his kindness and favor.

And hereof Nehemiah took good notice, whenas, Neh. 1.
(many a day after this) he living to see that fullfilled, which Solomon
foresaw, and feared, betook himself to God on the behalf of the Jews now
having offended, and being captivated, ver. 5.
and he remember's God of this prayer of Solomon, and this promise of his, and
repeateth the covenant, wherein was contained, and enclosed the interest
between God and them, urging him with his own truth [thou that keep
covenant and mercy] etc. and with the peoples interest [Now these are thy
servants, and thy people] etc. ver. 5.
ver. 10.
and having thus faith fully dealt with God, God could not but deal most
graciously with him, and them, as the sequel showed.

Nay, shall we see what God proffers (in this case) of his own free accord,
and out of infinite and most gracious favor, to all his offending saints,
surely, if we could see it as we ought, it would even swallow us up into
admiration and amazement; for such, and so inconceivable is his kindness to his
own herin, that he does not only encourage them to pray (for all their
impiety) but does also teach them how to entreat him, and put's words into
their mouths that may prevayle upon himself, telling them what they shall say
when they come to supplicate before him, in this their sinful state. Ps.
89.26. ver. 30.31 etc.
So we find in the Psalm, [He shall cry unto me, thou art my father, my God,
and the rock of my salvation] and then God shewe's what shall follow, to wit,
that they shall be partakers of all his mercy, though they have committed much
impiety, no evil that they have done against him, shall deprive them of any
good, he intends to them.

Does not the Lord (hereupon) invite the backsliding I sraell, to return and
be received into grace again? and do not they come with these comfortable
words [Behold we come unto thee, Ier. 3.22.
for thou art the Lord our God.]

Is not Israel (and that when it was every way, Hos. 14.1
an ill time with the^) hence hartened, to come home to God? [O Israel return
unto the Lord thy God] are they not taught of God how to make their
supplications before him, so, as he may show the^ mercy? [Take unto you words,
and say, take a way all iniquity, and receive us graciously etc.]

Oh, dear brethren, that we could spend more then a few thoughts upon this
infinite mercy of our heavenly father, and well bethink us of their blessedness
that be his, even at their worst. What happiness is it to be once his? when as
we see, no sin, no punishment (after that) can make us truly unhappy any more?

Let us take some time to take these things into our consideration the true
meditation whereof would melt and dissolve the soul of any that is not
hell-hardened, and seared up to eternal wrath; that the Lord should make so
much of such as be his own, that his interest in them, (and theirs in him)
should so overstand all their iniquity, that all his goodness should ever stand
with them.

And fully to fortify and secure, the souls of all the elect in this comfort
so, as that they may ever rest vnremovably therein, and be firmly fenced,
against the strength of the most infernal temptations in this particular: let
us call to mind and remember, and ponder well, that the Lord Jesus Christ,
(our dear redeemer) laid claim to his father in the midst of his sufferings,
when he stood in the steed, and state, of all elect sinners, and was now so
heavily crush't with his fathers jndignation, and the laws curse and
maleaiction the full weight (that is, the infinite fullnes) thereof, lying upon
his righteous soul and body, that he could not contain, but must cry out (in
our nature) as a forsaken creature, yet he know'es both what he saye's, and
whose he is, [my God, my God.] Behold, the sins of all the saints of God, and
all the justice due unto them, cannot cancel this claim between Christ and
his father, it is still my God, my God, in the midst of inconceivable calamity:
the curse of the law, cannot cut off this love between God and him.

And what can follow from hence to us? but many most heavenly consolations; to
wit that, if all the sins of all the elect could not part God and him, much
less can, all the sins of any one of the elect, do it in themselves; if the
guilt of millions of men, (and every man having many millions of sin,) did not
undo this knot of love, between the Lord and his Christ, how can it be
conceived that the sins of any one can dissolve it, though they be exceeding
many: considering that he was now under the law, and we (through his subjection
thereunto,) are free from the law, and under grace, as also, that his father
frowned upon him for our sake's, but for his, the lord shynes upon us, as
being satisfied for those offenses of ours, the deadly poison, and dreadful
sling whereof, he felt on our behalf, that so we might escape the same.

Now is Gods law satisfied, and his love purchased, and we redeemed from the
one, and restored to the other: how then can we fear any such force in our
iniquities as to sever between the Lord and us? seeing now (notwitstanding our
sins) we appear [ spotles and blameles before him in loue], Ephesians. 1.4.
and are as fully reconciled, as if we had never once offended.

Small matters will not part great friends; our sins are not great, when Gods
grace come's to measure them, or, when we compare them there with. Men do not
(much less does God,) make the most, and speak the worst, of their friends
faylings, we take little notice of their offenses that are greatly in our
favor, the Lord does likewise, who promises to put away the sins of his
saints as the winds do a cloud or a fog, because they are his servants, and
that, he will's them in any wise to remember [ Remember these, for thou art my
servant, Is. 44.21.
O Jacob and I sraell, for thou art my servant, thou shall not be forgotten of
me,] [ I have put away thy sins as a mist etc. ver. 22.
]

There is no possibility, that any impiety of ours, should either make us none
of Gods, none of ours. None of Gods elect can commit that sin which should make
them none of his. [They that are borne of God (says saint John) do not, 1.
Ioh. 3.9.
nor cannot comitt sin] that is to say, they cannot sin so, as by their sin
committed, the Lord, and they should be parted, and all interest, fall between
them.

If we look how the Lord accounts of his childrens corruptions (after their
calling) we shall see, Numb. 23.21.
that he does behold the^ with a most merciful eye, or rather not at all
behold the^, but in his love overlooke's them, and looke's upon us, as if we
were without them, as if we were just, and righteous persons, for so are the
saints often called, in opposition to sinners and ungodly men. Lo, Ioh 9.31. 1 Timothy 1.6.
our iniquities cannot blemish our name before God, how shall they be able to
blott out our right?

Our Lord Jesus Christ, who (as we heard even now) made his own claim good,
when he did bear all our evil, did also make it well to appear, that the
virtue thereof is become ours, inasmuch, as immediately after his resurrection,
he send's Mary to his disciples, to certify them that he was risen, and giue's
his message to her in these words, Ioh. 20.17.
[ Go say to my brethren: Behold I ascend to my father, and to your father,
to my God and to your God] these were the first fruits of his favor, wherein
(you see) they are called brethren, of whom the last news we heard, was
[that they all forsook him and fled] yet does Christ lesus entitle himself to
them, (being not ashamed to call them (and us all) brethren) and them, with
himself to God calling him, my father your father, my God your God. Nay, even
Peter is included in this number, Mar. 16.7.
and goe's for a brother, he is put in by name, by one Euangelest, least any
man should imagine that his foul denial should have thrust him out.

Who is he then that dreame's? (or if any do) whence is it that he is deluded?
once to conceit, that there can be any such poysonfull power in the evils of
Gods elect, as may eat out, either his precious respect to them, or their
dear, and undoubted right in him: no, no, his kindness is so incomparably
beyond any corruption in us, that a foolish man might with as good reason
fear, that one drop of water, were able to quench the whole element of fire,
or, one spark of fire, might dry, and drink up the whole Ocean of water,
as that any transgression of ours, could cancel that incomprehensible
compassion of his, by virtue whereof, we are (for ever) most firmly united to
him.

For this cause appeared the son of God (says John) that he might loose the
works of the devil,] 1. Ioh. 3.8.
and tie us to our God again, whose, we were once before, (but mutably) in our
creation, that henceforth we might ever be his, (and that vmmoueably) by
redemption. And did Jesus Christ do, and endure so much, both in his life and
death, and all to make us fast to our best father by this blessed interest? and
shall it now enter into any man's heart, that the perfection, power, and meritt
of all this, shall perish, and be of none effect, through our corruption? Far
be it from any soul, to offer such indignity, to Christ's meritts, and Gods
love to him, and mercy to us in him. I say not but our sins may provoke him to
chastise us sharply, but to reject us utterly, Psalm. 89.33.34.^5.
that cannot be: and that we may believe it, the Lord our God, has both said
and sworn it.

The child of a natural father cannot do any thing, that can disanull that
band of blood which is between them; he may do much, (yea too much) to
provoke his father against him, but it is not possible, he should do that
which should make him none of his father, or himself, no child to his father.
He may most truly say [he is my father, and I am his childe] when he has
transgressed deeply.

How much more impossible is it then, that our heavenly father should give us
over, or that we should so transgress, as to take away that far nearer, and
supernatural conjunction, which is sealed by the blood of Christ, which blood
of his, has not only a reconciling virtue for our rebellions past, but also a
purging, and a preserving virtue for time to come, to clear us of the guilt of
those evils we do commit, and to keep us from committing such as might any
way impair our interest.

Here is then, a great calm of comfort, for every soul that is afflicted, and
tossed with tempests; that is, with violent and vile temptations, which (in
this kind) Satan does cast upon them: here may the souls of Gods saints ankor
safely, and return to their rest, as into that haven, wherein they shall need
to fear no wrack, or ruin in the least, but may expect most hopeful, and
happy success of all their heavy conflicts with, To. 16.20.
the devil, that Jesus Christ shall [trample him under their feet shortly]
(as he does promise) and, raise up them, to those heavenly advantages, Micah.
7.19.
which they shall enjoy with him their head; [casting their sins into the
bottom of the sea,] that they may never reviue, or be recovered again, to
rise against us; Ezekiel. 18.22.
nay not so much as once [mentioning them unto vs] in way of reproach, but
remooving them as far from himself, as they would have removed us from him;
that so we might ever be joined to the Lord, yea so inseparably joynted into
him, that we may be for ever and ever one with him, and so be assured that we
are his, and he ours, for ever and ever, in that vnrepealable covenant of life
and peace, which he has more deeply sealed in the blood of his son, then any
guilt of our sin can cancel.

Whereof to secure our souls let us once for all (er'e we couclude this
comfort) take good knowledge that such is his goodness that rather the^ our
sins, shall make us none of his, Ps. 61. 2. Cor. 5.21.
he has made our sins, none of ours, laying them upon [that rock that is
higher then we] even upon Christ [who was made sin for us and whose
righteousness is made ours, rather then (for want thereof,) we should not be his.
So that now Christ is our sin, we are Gods righteousness, how then can it be,
God should not be our father? can those sins hinder whose property is altered,
and they laid upon another? No, no, it is enough for the sins of wicked men
(whose sins are their own, and themselves none of Christ's) to bar them,
from clayming any confortable interest in the Lord, Romans 7.17
the faylings of the saithfull are of no such force. [It is no more I (saye's
Paul) but sin that dwells in me] and if our sins may be said to be rone of
ours, it is absolutely impossible but we should be Gods: and so to be, how
often does the Lord in infinite mercy acknowledge us, and shall not we in duty
acknowledge him? shall we dare to neglect his love, and deny his grace, so
freely and frequently offered unto us. Far be this fearful evil, from all
the faithful.

And now (in consideration of the premises) let all the faithful draw necre
unto him in faith, and he will draw near unto them in favor, and they shall be
his sons and daughters, and he their God, and father for ever. And this is our
third consolation.

The fourth and las^ followe's, and that is not the least, but indeed the
greatest, Consolation.
comprehending the best benefit of this our interest in our God: to wit, all
the good which we can receive either here, while we are under vanity and
corruption, or that which the Lord does further reserve for our possession in
the glory of his own kingdom, when mortality shall be swallowed up of life.

All the promises of this life, and of that which is to come, are wrapped up,
in this our title unto God. He that has God to be his, has them all for his
own, and may safely claim them, and shall assuredly come to enjoy them, in
due time.

It is a remarkable thing, that throughout all Gods book (which is the
storehouse of his blessed promises unto us) all the mercy promised, and every
promise wherein any happiness is contained, has this seal: [And I will be their
God, and they shall be my people.] Moses and the Prophets are full, and do
abound with this comfortable close of Gods covenant, of which covenant
whatsoever the contents be, this is still the conclusion, and ratification; [I
will be theirs, they shall be myne] and that includes the full confirmation of
every favor, of what rate, or sort, soever it be.

It would not be meet to urge any particulers now, because we have much to say
touching the promises in our next point; yet thus much I must say, (and it
concerne's every sincere christian to consent unto it with his heart,) that if
we have any assurance either, of grace, or any other good thing, in present
possession on earth. or, of glory and all eternal good, in future expectation
in heaven.
the assurance we have, flowe's from the interest we have, none but they that
are the Lords, shall partake of either, Psalm. 84.11.
and they that are his, shall have both: so says David sweetly, [The Lord
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he witholde from them that
walk uprightly: 1. Cor. 3.21.
] and the apostle sumne's up all within this circuit [All things are yours,]
and that not only in general, or in the gross, but more particulerly, he
come's to a distribution, ver. 22.
[whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come, ver. 23.
all are yours,] and whence is it, that all is so surely ours? even hence [and
ye are Christ's] this clause confirme's all that went before; and is the
reason that ratifyeth the same fally.

So then if a man would now sit him down, and set himself to think of all
the infinite fullnes, and unspeakable plenty, and variety, of those good things
which the Lord does either give on earth, or reserve in heaven, and having
enlarged his heart, to comprehend as many of them as he could think might make
him truly and fully happy, to the absolute joy, and contentment of his very
soul, he should now further think, why? these things are to be had, many have
them already, many more shall have them heareafter, how may I also come by
them, and be sure to enjoy them. The holy ghost does readily tell us the way
and means, which is, to become Christ's, be you sure of that one thing, and all
these things are sure to you. They that are his, shall have all these, and
more, then their own, or man's imagination can comprehend; heavens fullnes
cannot be conceived of any creature; Angels are not able to express, what
Gods saints shall inherit and posesse, when they come to the consummation of
that their happiness, which is prepared of God, purchased by Christ; reserved
for them, and they preserved unto it; by the power, and through the favor of
that God in Christ who at the last day shall call all his own, with those
sweet words [ Come ye^ blessed (children) of my father, receive the kingdom
prepared for you etc.] It was ordained, and intended only to these, and all
they are as sure to have it, as Christ himself who does now sit at the right
hand of his father.

And thus we have (in some measure) opened some of those consolations unto you
which this our interest does yield unto us; I say some, and in some measure,
because an absolute manifestation of them all, cannot be undertaken by us, or
entertained by you. Our assurance is evident, and we can declare it, but our
inheritance is infinite, and none can utter it. Howbeit I hope we have said
enough, to make the comfort of this point clear, that it is a most happy thing
to have right in the Lord, and to know him to be ours, and our selves his. The
which, seeing none but the saints of God candoe, the benefit and joy hereof
remains only and wholly to them, and that in all, and every of the particulers
aforesaid, which if we shall briefly sum up together, and recall the
particulers, it will presently and most plainly appear, that they are indeed
happy by this heavenly truth.

In a word then, is it not matter of much happiness? that, we may go to God and
pray boldly. that, we be enabled to bear affliction cherefully. that, we be
armed against sin thoroughly. that, we may be assured of all good absolutely.


These (as, we have heard) are the sweet consolations of this saving truth,
and in them, all and in every of them, may the saints of God solace their
souls, and refresh their spirtis to know themselves capable of such
advantages, by the interest they have in the Lord their God, who has founded
his favors upon this truth, and it is not more ceartaine, and undoubted, that
[the foundation of God abides sure, 1. Tim. 2.16.
and that the Lord does know who are his,] then that, they who are his, may
know all these good things to be theirs.

And thus much for the first use of this point, unto the saints of God.

Now we will set forward to the second, Reprehension
and that concerne's wicked and ungodly men: whose impudency and presumption in
entitleing themselves to God, is equal, (if not beyond) the infidelity, and
fear, of the faithful, who are so backward herin. It has ever been the
practice of that old serpent the aiuell, to withdraw Gods people from all
their priueledges, that they might not claim them, and to encourage ungodly
persons (to whom they pertain not) to challeng them: that so he might draw
them both, under heavy jmpiety, the one to rob themselves in refusing their
right, the other to rob God, and his children in seizing upon that which the
Lord intended only to his own.

The devil knowe's too well what he does, The heinous evil of ungodly men, in
making claim to God.
(oh, that themselves did know it well,) when he abetts jmpious persons either
to conceit that God is theirs, or, to call him so, it being such an jmpiety as
scarce any is more insufferable or provoking, and because he foresee's how it
will anger, and incense the Lord, therefore is he so busy to set sinful men
about it. Satan vnderstand's what damage it is to God; what danger to ungodly
men; and what advantage to himself. And to the end they may also understand it,
let us ponder and particulate the evil of it so plainly, as they may see it,
and (seeing it) either shan and surcease it, or make their sin (by occasion of
this discovery) out of measure sinful if, they continue to commit it,

And this we will the rather endeavor, because I am persuaded many a wicked
man, never jmagine's it sinful, but think's he may safely (yea, that it is
duty to) call God his father, and therefore in commiseration of their estate,
and desire of their information and reformation, we will do our best to make
declaration of the monstrous impiety hereof.

And first, putting of God into the devils place For whereas he is avouched to
be [the God of this world] (that is, 2. Cor. 4.4
of all those that are of the world) and by Christ he is called the [ father of
all profane and impious persons; these ungodly wretches, Job. 8.44.
do father themselves upon God, and make the world believe that he is their
father, and their God, who are wicked, whereas, he has revealed his wrath from
heaven against them, and does from his very soul abhor them, as the base
brood of Belzeebub, and the loathsome spawne of Satan by reason of their sin.
Thus is the Lord thrust from his throne of glory, and his honor laid in the
dust: and what an egregious abuse and abasement this is, we may measure by our
own, if the like to it were offered to any of us.

Suppose some base varlet, the known bastard of some notorious strumpet,
should thus fawn upon a man of approved honesty and honor (admit, he were a
Prince) and wheresoever he came, be still calling him his father, and laying
challeng, and claim unto him, were it not an infamy and an injury not to be
borne? would any man endure it that had power to punish it? were it not such a
wound in a Princes good name, as might enrage him to send such a villane to the
executioner, rather then to suffer him to live, daily to disgrace him in
calling him his father.

Surely the greatest patience under heaven, would be overcharged with this
reproach, we cannot dream that ever this fellow should be endured to make any
request, or if he did, that he might hope of any acceptance, but instead of
being graciously answered, he might expect to be fearfully punished, for
abusing him, whom he did so bear himself upon. For what would the world
think of him that should let such a fellow alone, but that (sure) he is foul
and has lived basely, seeing such a base companion is suffered to challeng him
as his father.

And (beloved) if such a thing would thus iniure, and anger us, let us think,
how it will affect the Lord, who is so jealous, of his honor, and sensible of
his dishonor, as he has revealed himself to be, and whose glory, and fame, is
so infinitely above ours, he being the king of glory, and king of saints, and
the father (only) of his natural son Christ, and of so many as in him, he
adopteth to be his children by grace: let us (I say) bethink our selves, how
this will be taken, that our father which is in heaven, should by Satan's
suggestion, and these men's appellation, become the father of all those
infernal helhounds, and lyms of Satan, whom he (for the honor of his
justice) has cast into hell, to their perpetual shame and contempt.

The devil, can tell, (though he will not tell it you: ye wicked one's) that
this is a ready way to enreage the Lord against you, and to provoke him to
power out the feircenes of his greatest fury upon you; there cannot be a
quicker course, to fill Satan's kingdom, and cast men into hell fire, then by
suborning ungodly men to call God father, for in setting them on (in this
manner), to call God theirs, he make's them thereby seven times more his own,
then they were before.

Now is it not bydeous, (I had almost said, unpardonable) jmpiety, to vnthrone
the Lord of heaven, and thrust him into the base condition of his cursed
vassal, to rob him of this honor, to be the God of all his elect, and holy
ones, and become the father of all profane person? Thus does every godles man,
when he call's God father, for if he may be (in any sense) a father to such, he
can in no sense, be said to be the same to his own.

Secondly, (though it begin) here: for as the Lord is abased, so is the devil
exalted, and put into the place of the most high. For if God be the God of
ungodly men, to whose right must Gods people belong? It is impossible that both
should appertain to one party, if therefore the wicked have God to be theirs,
the interest of the saints, must needs be in Satan: and so he is set up, and
the most high made vile. The Devil himself (and all that took part with him
in that accursed practice) was banished heaven (as it is supposed) for aspiring
into Gods place, but this is to give away the glory of the everliving, God,
and put his most professed adversary into the actual possession of the same.
And if heavens infinite justice were so exceeding neauy upon him only for the
attempt, what will it be upon these for the act? Oh, that their souls could
thoroughly consider this, who thus speak; ah, they little dream what high
treason it is against the majesty of God, to utter that which at once
dishonour's the Lord, and advances the devil. But I leave them to the Lord,
by whom I desire they may be awaked, that they sleep not (in this sin) to
death, yea to damnation.

Thirdly, wonderful, and a woeful hardening of wicked men in their evil
ways, and an utter dishartening of such as would undertake the things that be
good. What jmpious person, or ungodly miscreant will take his sin to heart, or
think it worth any such sorrow as is required to repentance, if in this his
sinful estate he may bear himself upon God? who would come out of that
condition, wherein he may claim God to be his own.

Again, what comfort can he have that is now coming on to religion, to go
on, and make a proceeding in piety, a progress in grace, and holiness, to
strain toward a more holy, exact, pure, and precise estate, wherein he may
more sanctify the Lord, and subdue himself; when he shall observe such sinful
persons as savor of noe grace, to make as bold with the Lord as the best of
his own saints.

So that this divelish jmpudency of ungodly persons, does cause them to commit
two cutlls at once, to wit, to appale all piety, and applaud all prophanes,
hindering some from entering on the former, and hartening many to run on in the
latter, till they be past all recovery. This is to make sad the heart of the
righteous, and to make glad the soul of the sinner, and both these, the Lord
does deeply abhor.

Fourthly and lastly, to make up the measure of this evil, or rather, to make
it out of measure evil, Devil himself, was never so vile, as in this
particular to dare to entitle himself to God, or once (in any place) to call
the Lord his. Where does, or may it appear in all Gods book that ever he
offered it. Others interest he has indeed acknowledged, as when he confessed
Christ to be the son of God [I know who thou art, Mar. 5.7.
thou art Jesus the son of the living God] and when he gave testimony to the
Apostles [these are the servants of the most high God etc.] Act. 16.17.
but where did he ever challeng any right or make any claim of his own, to
call God his? is any man able to show it? no sure; why then for a wicked man
thus to do, is an offense more foul* then the devil will be found guilty
off.

And who can conceive the extent of that man's sin, Note.
or the damnation due to him for the same, whom the devil can draw to do
worse then he himself dare's do. We may well think there is something in it,
that Satan will not do as you sinners do, in this kind. What may we think
of it? or what may an jmpious wretch think of himself in it? when he shall see
himself (in some sort) more sinful then the author of sin. It may be the
devil does not claim any right, because he knowe's he has none, and that it
is but vain, the sin will increase his confusion, and no way advantage him.
Would to God wicked men were herin, as wise as the devil, and knew also that
it were vain for them to do thus, and that it would make their state more
vile, increasing their sin to make it more heinous, and adding to their
punishment, to make it more heavy; seeing that (in their present estate of
ungodliness) they are no more capable of this comfort then Satan is.

Cease then (O ye sifnull men) to do that indignity to the Lord which the
devil dare's not offer, will ye be more sinful, more shameless then he; nay
then, many a divelish wretch, who having had occasion to speak of God, yet
have had more modesty, and not so much jmpiety, as you herin. Pharaoh might be
instanced for one, when he so often called for Moses and Aron, to pray to the
Lord for his deliverance from diverse plagues, you never hear him say (no not
once) pray to the Lord my God, Exo 8 25.
but either [to the Lord] or [to the Lord your God.] Jeroboam may be brought
for another, who (as at other times, so) in that one, wherein he intended
violence to the man of God, and God executed justice upon him for the same, by
the drying up of that cruel hand, which was stretched out to smite him whom
the Lord sent to warn him of his sin: jmmediately upon the manifestation of
that strange vengance upon him, the godles wretch is enforced to entreat the
man of God to be a suitor for him, that his hand might be restored unto him,
and in uttering his mind to him herin, what saie's he? why, even that which
may shame, and confound, the profane o'nes of our days, 1. Kin. 13.6.
[intreat now, the Lord thy God for me etc.] he does not, he dare's not call
him his God, yet you know he is branded of God for much jmpiety, but not to be
blamed for this. Behold, these imps, of hell, (with many more, that it were
most easy to multiply,) though in many things they were most abbominable, yet
in this one they would not be so execrable, as the audacious sinners of our
days are.

And will ye out-goe the devil himself, and such of his as are marked of the
Lord for monstrous rebels, and for miserable reprobates. Surely it shall be
easier for these in the day of judgment, then for you. But, if you will (in the
mean time) be exhorted and instructed, know, that it is now easier to see this
sin, and to shun both it, and the vengeance due unto it, and to seek the face
of the Lord unfeignedly, that you may come out of this sin of calling him yours,
and by grace be called effectually to become his. This may be done, while the
day of grace yet shyneth, endeavor to it, before that day of the Lord come,
(which is darkness and not light,) wherein they only shall find grace with the
Lord, who (before hand) can find that grace in themselves, whereby they are
made like unto him, and by the evidence of this consimilitude, can claim their
interest in him. And this is our second use, unto wicked men.

The third follows, Information.
and that concerns all men for information in a point exceeding needful and
important, whereof it is now time that we take some good notice, considering
what has been said of the happiness of such as have it, and their misery that
are without it. And that is, the way and means to come to a true trial of our
selves herin, whether the Lord be our God or not, and how we may assuredly know
and discern the same.

There are ceartaine infaillible marks whereby this interest is made manifest,
and he that is without them is undoubtedly (as yet) without any interest in the
Lord.

Let us endeavor to make enquiry after them, that so if we have them we may
joy, if not, yet (knowing what they are) we may seek them where they are.

Well then, would any man be thoroughly resolved how to determine this case of
conscience and to know (without controversy) how he may know, whether the Lord
be his, and he the Lords or not? let him then understand, that where any such
propriety is between God and man, the same cannot be hyd, but will break out
upon him, in whom it is, and that by such apparent signs, as will show
themselves to be undeniable evidences thereof. It is no close, or concealed
matter, it is not nice or abstruse to discover this right, where it is; it will
reveal it self, by such operations of God in us, as do argue the same
effectually.

For of this one thing we may not be ignorant, that the interest between God
and his children, is not merely tituler, as if to entitle him ours, were all:
no, it is a true, real, and powerful interest, arising (touching the
declaration thereof) out of those things which he has so wrought in us, as by
them we may well know he has wrought us into himself. It is his work in us
whereby (alone) we are warranted to be his. But come we to understand the
particulers, what works these are, that so, by a wise discerning of them, we
may not be deceived in our own estate and right. For it does manifestly
appear, that the want of this search, has occasioned much mistaking on either
side, making both some of Gods saints (who have this right) not to think so,
and others (who where never posest of it,) to presume upon it. To the end
therefore that neither may at any time heareafter be misconceiued of their own
condition, but both may know themselves as they are, we will now begin to make
plain declaration of the particulers which will put this point out of
question. The ceartaine signs of our interest in God.
Yet before we enter upon any one of them, we are to know that they are all
consisting of such things as he has given us. Whosoever is the Lords, has
something of his to show, even some such things as are not given to any but his
own, noe common kindnesses, or general mercies, but such peculiar previledges
as are preper to the elect alone, and (being see,) do argue infaillibly that
they are elected of the Lord, to be his precious and beloved ones. And now to
come unto them they are these that follow.

First, whosoever may make any claim to the Lord, disclaim all sin, and
separate himself from it, utterly in affection, and in action as much as is
possible. Our own corruption must be loathsome to us, and so must the
contagious fellowship of such as live in sin. We cannot cleave to our God till
we leave the society of sin and sinners, and make an entyre separation from
both. And upon such a disunion with both these; we are joined to the Lord, and
have heavenly communion with him, and marveylous comfort in him. The Lord
himself proclaime's this to be a proper note and cognizance, of such as he will
call his own. So we find by the apostle [what communion has light with
darkness etc.] that is to say, it has none, 2. Cor. 6. ver. 14.
neither indeed can have, and thereupon, he presses further upon them this
duty, to the due performance whereof, he annexeth this happy propriety of being
interessed into God saying [wherefore come out from among them, ver. 17.
and separate your selues] (that is, from them only in their sin, and such sin
alone as will pollute you and become yours by participation with them: for all
sins are not catching, or of a polluting nature to another, though some are;
every sickness is not a pestilence, nor every sin in another man contagious to
me) and then being thus separated, ver. 18
[I will recetue you and you shall be my sons and daughters says the Lord God
almighty] your sincere and wise separation from the sins of these, that would
make you guilty with themselves, shall be unto you an assured evidence, a
ceartaine assurance, of your holy conjunction to me, if you will deny their
sinful communion, I will acknowledge you for my children, if you be none of
theirs, you are mine.

This (you see) is Gods cuidence, and the truth of this is very evident to
every man's experience, no man can be ignorant of himself herin, which way his
affection goe's, (and that way, sure, his actions will after) whether he do
like, and can brook the corrupt company of ungodly persons, if he do, he is
yet none of Gods, let him not dare, but fear, to call God father, being one of
the infernal fraternity of those vassalls of sin, who are sworn brothers in
drunkenes, or any other jmpiety. He that love's these, is loathed and abhorred
of the Lord. But the soul that hates the society of such persons, is beloved
of him, and precious to him, no son or daughter more dear, (nay nothing so
dear) to a natural father, or mother, as these are to the Lord, who does
(upon this condition) adopt them for his dearest children.

By this segregation are Gods saints, known from the rest of the woeful world,
who are suffered (and that in much justice) to lie in wickedness. The Apostle
concluded this most clearly where he says, 1. Ioh. 5.19.
[we knew that we are of God. and the whole world lies in wickednes] note that
he says it is a known difference between those that are Gods, and those that
are the worlds, that the one are called out, the other are let alone, to lie
still in their wickedness.

Hence it is, that those whom God accounts to be of the charch, I mean of the
true body of Christ, he calls them a people called out, that is, put a part
from all others to have fellowship with him, and such as are so, are his, the
rest (not thus selected) remain in their wretched and sinful state. It was
our communion with sin, that made us none of Gods, when (in our created state)
we fell from him; it must therefore be our separation from sin, that must bring
us into communion with God again, if ever hope to have fellowship with him.
And that we are to know this, the holy Ghost tells us plainly saying [ But know
ye, that the Lord has set apart, or ( as it were) choisely culled, and picked
out a godly man for himself if we will know our selves to pertain to God, we
must see our selves thus severed from the world, being weaned from wicked
persons and practices, wo^ne in affection, and conversation, to live with the
Lord in the sociiety of his saints. If our hearts be estranged from the former
and united to these latter, we are in happy case. The Lord delights in that
man, Psa. 16.^.
Whese delight is in his saints, and whose detestation of sin and sinners, does
show it self. He is affected of the Lord, who affect's no evil in himself, or
others. And this is the first sign of our assured right in the Lord.

Secondly, if together with this separation from evil, reformation of evil,
we have yet further assurance of this our right in our God. For the Lord never
works any one of these alone, and leave's us so, but adds one singular
work of his grace to another, reformation to separation; and this must needs
be so, because we are not sincerely separted, till we be soundly reformed.
Hereupon the Lord put's this as a principal condition of the ensealing of his
covenant of life and peace with us, that we both refrain from evil, and
reform it also, manifesting the former, by the latter.

Let us look what (in one place of a multitude we might allege) the Lord
says to this purpose, by the prophet Jeremiah. Jer 32.38 ver. 39. ver. 40.
[And I will be their God, and they shall be my people; And I will give them one
heart and one way that they may fear me for ever, etc: And I will make an ever
lasting covenant with them that I will not turn a way from them to do them
good, but I will put my fear into their hearts, and they shall never depart
from me etc. Behold here is the sum and abridgment, of Gods gracious
covenant, with a mutual (and most merciful) offer of himself to be theirs,
and acceptance of them to be his; but upon what terms? even upon those
aforesaid, to wit, that they be posest with the fear of his majesty (and, the
fear of the Lord is to hate evil, Pro.
and to depart from it, as Solomon says) and walk before him so, as that
they never turn back from him, but go on, constantly, and conscionably in a
holy course of heavenly conversation before his majesty, in which reformed
carriage of theirs he has most lovingly promised, not only that he will not
depart from them, but that they shall not depart from him; note: [they shall
never depart from me] that is, they shall be so preserved by the power, and
through the favor, of God, that though Satan, and their sin, do their worst,
yet they shall not leave the Lord, or fall from him; noe though (through the
extreme violence, of some extraordinary, and execrable temptation) they should
desire, endeavor, or strive to go from God, yet (says God) they shall not,
do they, or their sin, or the devil what they can. And this is a most
confortable cordaill against those faint heart quaumes, which oftimes do fill
the hearts of the saints with miserables fears: they are afraid they shall fall
from God, and are in great doubt they shall prove hypocrites, and apostates,
when all is done, and the devil takes pleasure to affright them thus with such
fearful and perplexing thoughts: why but do if you can, the Lord says you
shall not depart from him; you are like a foolish child in the arms of his
father, carrying him over a river, who looke's down and seeing the water,
crye's out, Oh I shall fall, I shall fall, whenas his father holde's him so
fast, that he shall not fall though he should strive thereunto, there being
more strength in the father to support, and care to keep the child, then
there is ability in the child to do himself this evil. Thus is it between
God and some of his children, who are excercised with these noisome doubtings;
but we see, and hear, what the Lord says, he is more powerful, and more
careful over us, then to suffer us to do our selves this evil, though we
should be so overcome of the devil that we should offer it. Look you to your
reformation, let the Lord alone with your protection, if you be his, you need
not fear falling from him, and if he have given you conscience to amend your
evil ways ands works, and to make them good, his goodness shall dwell with
you, and you are within the compass of that kind interest which is peculiar
to all his saints. I shall not need to call other prophets to give attestation
to this truth, it is the general voice of them all, that as Israel had fallen
from God by their rebellion, so they should now be fully joined to him by
reformation. And all reason assents her unto, inasmuch as we know till Adam
(and we in him) was deformed, he was Gods, and being so his title ceased, and
he became Satan's: our reformed state then, must be the evidence of our restored
estate to God again, as our corrupted estate was, of our alienation from him.

Look we after this, and labor for it; seeing it argues that we are fast to
God if we be reformed; and let them tremble to entitle themselves to the Lord,
whose evil does yet cleave unto them, and continue in them, without that due
reformation which the Lord does require, and for which, he does condition with
so many as he accepts. Noe unreformed person has any right in God. If any
of them dream they have, let them know the Lord does directy disclaim them,
and cannot endure they should come so near him, as to meddle with any thing of
his, (to wit, as with their own,) till they show forth the fruits of a
reformed life. So we read [what have thou to do to take my covenant in thy
mouth, Psalm. 50.19.17.
seeing thou hate to be reformed?] lo, the Lord says they have nothing to
do with any holy thing (by right) who are not reformed. And hereupon John
Babtist forbade the boasting Jews to crack of their kindred with Abraham,
Mat. 3.7.
seeing they were not yet purged of their impiety, nay he tell's them they are
so far from having any title in him to be reputed the generation of the
righteous, that he call's them (to their faces) a generation of vipers, such
(as in their present estate) were under no posstbility of mercy, nor could be
delivered from the wrath of God. The Lord proves the Jews to be none of his,
because they had not put away their iniquities, so says he by his prophet [
Plead with your mother, Hos. 2.2.3
plead, for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband etc.] So then, till we
have put away our evil, we cannot hope to be posest of any good: but
amendment of our ways, is the only way to our best welfare. And this is the
second sign of our interest in God.

Thirdly, as our reformation, affection to God is a singular evidence of our
interest, we cannot be affectionate to any, but our own and not to affect our
own, were monstrous. Nothing sooner bewraie's interest then affection. All men
think we have part, in that which we take to heart.

Nature without grace, reason without religion, can conclude this; nay we may
se reason for this, in beasts that want reason, who cannot contain themselves,
but do express this power of mere nature to be in the^.

And he who has given it to every creature in some measure, has retained the
insinitenes of it in himself beyond measure, and also communicated something of
it, unto such as he has sealed to be his own.

If we look upon the Lord himself herin, how vnspeakablie does his affection
abound to his beloved ones, when he powers it out in such plentiful manner as
is manifest in these and many such patheticall speeches. Psalm. 81.13. Hos. 6.4.
micah. 6.3 Mat. 23 37.


Oh, that my people would have hearkened etc. O, Jsraell what shall I say unto
thee, etc: O my people testify against me. etc. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc:
By all which, he labors even to break into their hearts with the abundance of
his affection, yea (indeed) to break their hearts, and even to melt them with
the manifestation her of, and it is all built, upon this interest between God
and them.

Now the safest way for us to show our title in him, is the same whereby his
appears unto us, if we can now reflect our affections upon him again, the
evidence of our right cannot fail,

Nature can do it, why should not grace? nay ceartainly where the true nature
and power of grace is, it cannot but be done. If we take notice of natures
course, the current is most violent, and it ouerflowe's all banks, and bounds
exceedingly, as might be showed in infinite examples of all sorts.

How did Joseph break out upon his brethere^, when his heart so burned within
him, that he could not hold longer, but he must needs now let them know who
he is, and that in these words [I am Joseph your brother]. How did Elisha
declare his interest in his master Eliah but in these words, [my father, my
father]. And David overfondely to Absalom, [O my son Absalom, O Absalom my son,
my son etc]. To a stranger we cannot do thus, it must be to a near, friend, a
child, or brother.

Now can nature be so sensible and tender where it has an interest, and shall
grace be sensles and silent? no, it is not possible that the Lord should be
ours, and we not love him in our very soul, and that our bowels should not
earne, yea burn in our bodies, to think of his blessed goodness to us. It is
an absolute impossibility, to have no joyful sense of his glory, and that his
dishonor should not be grievous and bitter to us. Had we the lively operation
of his grace within us, we could not hear his name blasphemed, his worship
derided, his servants (our brethren and fellow saints) abused, and sit still,
and say nothing. Noe we would speak or break, we must have vent; for our
spirits would (as it were) rise, and swell within us: we shall so travel
inwardly with indignation and anguish, that till we be disburdened, our
extremity will be more then can be endured; the zeal of God will fire us, and
cast us into a holy fury against these profane wretches, and enforce us with a
discrete violence to set upon them (in due time and place) and to let them
know, that he was somebody to us, whom they so injured; a friend, a father,
yea a God of ours, the honor of whose name, and ordinances, and servants, we
will redeem with the loss of all our dearest advantages.

And so soon as this affectionate feeling does appear in us, so soon does
out interell show it self; and they that can be basely muzled and sit as if
their mouths were bung'd up, at the blasphemies of these cursed miscreants,
do show what strangers they are to God, how little they have to do with him,
how far they are from any right in him. We see among men how easy a thing it
is, to digest a discourse of the losses or miseryes of strangers, but if one
come to tell us of our own, or any near freindes of ours, that are under
them, we instantly show it by our greiuing, as we should also do, by our
gladness, if any report of their good come unto us. And every man that see's us
either way moved, can quickly imagine there is something between us and them,
for whose sakes we are thus affected.

So then they that want affection do confute themselves, when they call God
theirs, and are apparently convinced to be void of true love to his holy
majesty, having only abundance of self-loue to themselves: inasmuch as they
never claim any intrest in him but when they want some good they would feign
have from him, then can they come and faynedly speak to him and call him
father, but when he wants his glory and is vilefyed, they are mute and
speechless to men, What is this, but to fawn upon God, as our dogs do upon
us, only to get something for themselves, as being altogether sensible of their
own necessityes, but not at all of our injuryes.

Shame and blush (thou sinful wretch) so much as once to surmize, that thou
have any part or portion in him, of whose glory thou art so senseless; know
thy self to be none of his, seeing thou can digest his indignity with silence.
Were it thy natural father, or, but some base ale-bench brother; words would
be too little to show thy dislike, thy knife in his belly, or dagger in his
bowels, or some such hellish outrage as were inhumane, would be his reward,
and thy revenge of such abuse. But against him whom thou (sinfully) call
thy God, shall all violence, yea villainy, be offered by him, and endured by
thee, without the least appearance of any detestation or distaste. What
patience is that, which can seem to be in a dead sleep when the Lord of
heaven is wounded, and yet grow mad, with over-abundance of, distemper when our
selves, or ours are wronged?

That wicked high priest shall condemn thee, who rent his clothes when he
heard blasphemy as he conceited it: behold a Jew is sensible of supposed
blasphemy; can any man imagine thee to be a christian or have any part in
Christ, who can hear that which is real and re-itterated blasphemy and take
no notice of it? What said the sons of Jacob in defense of their carriage
toward the Sichemites [should they abuse our sister as a whore? they thought
nothing too much, to be done to them, who had so shamefully handled their
sister. And shall they abuse God thy father, and Christ thy savior, and
pollute and prostitute their sacred honors, and thou make show of no
indignation? who can conceive thee to be any thing a kyn to them in any
respect, that shall observe this? Noe it cannot be there should more interest,
then there is affection, and that in such senseless sott's is none at all.

Again, as when others speak of God, so when we our selves speak to God, we
would be affectionate if we had any interest, or right in him. Our prayers
would be very patheticall, and our minds and mouths would speak to gether,
and as feelingly would we speak to him, as an infant cries after his mother.
We know there is more then a little difference between our speech to a mere
stranger, and a most loving father, so much there is, (or should be) as every
man can quickly and easily perceive it by us,, when we are to utter our minds
upon any occasion whether civil or natural to the one and the other.

But with what cold, and frozen affections do men come to seek the face of
the Lord, and to speak unto him, is too apparent, when as in the service they
perform unto him, there is not the least appearance of any right they have in
him, men bring him (even millions of those men who call him theirs) such lean,
thin, and withered sacrifises, consisting of nothing but bare words, and so
barren of any one propriety, either of a true prayer, or a true suitor, that
(if themselves were the judges, and bound to judge with a righteous judgment,
according to the rules of his word, or of their own works in other kinds)
they must needs sentence themselves to be such, as are known of the Lord,
(and should be known to themselves) to be noen of his, for want of this true
affection, whereof we have now spoken' and whereupon we can stand no longer,
because it is time that we hasten forward, to the things that follow. Know
therefore (in a word) that as the Apostle says of words, so we may say of
affection in this particular, by our affection we shall be justified to be the
Lords, (if we have it toward God,) and by our affection we shall be condemned,
if we have it not, to be none of his. And this is our third sign.

Fourthly, consimilitude and likeness unto God does also assuredly conclude, we
have right in him. If we bear his image we are his. Children are usually so
like their parents, that when we take notice of the semblance between them, we
use to say, sure this child must needs be such a man's, or woman's, because he
is so like him, or her. See, he has his fathers face, countenance, feature,
etc: he cannot be but his, he may safely swear the child is his own, for he
is the very picture of him. Thus, when we see such likeness, we suppose that it
is more then likely, that they are near one to another.

The argument is more undoubted, and demonstrative, between God and his
children, then between men and theirs, for in nature it is not universally and
infaillibly true, that consimilitude does argue consanguinity, strangers may be
exceeding like one another. But in grace, between God and his, it is an
absolute, and vncontroelable evidence of interest. Never any did bear his
image, but the same was his own. It is not more assured that a man-child is
the son of a man, then that a holy man, or woman, is the child of God: all his
children are like himself, he has power to make them so, and it is his
revealed resolution that so it shall be, and therefore it must follow, that if
we carry not the image of God, we can claim no interest in him.

Adam, (I mean the first Adam) was the son of God by creation, and how like
himself the Lord made him, may be collected both out of his resolution before
his creation [let us make man in our image] and by the act it self, when he
endowed him with such singular excellency of grace, as wherein he carried the
admirable impressions of his most glorious maker, in such holiness, knowledge,
and righteousness, as in a creatures perfection might be a representation of the
infinitenes of them all, in God himself the creator, And while (but alas it was
but a little while) that Adam stood in these perfections of created grace, the
Lord acknowledged him for his own. But as soon as he lost these, his title was
gone, he was now no more the Lords, but Satan's that misled him.

Christ Jesus (the second Adam) was the son of God by an eternal, and
inconceivable kind of generation, and how did his sonship (when in times
fullnes he was incarnate) show it self? whereby was he known to be the true
natural son of the most high? why even by this, that he was so like his
father, that, as himself says, [he that has seen me has seen my father]
and as the Apostle says, Joh. 14.9. Heb. 1.3.
he was [the bright and express image of his person. By this lively
similitude, was he known to be the son of the living God. And as he never had
any natural son but he, so never was any so like him as this son was, for he
was the same with him, even one with him, in all those supernatural
excellencyes which might express the nature of God.

And as it was with these two, whereof the one was his son by creation, the
other by generation, so must, and will it be (in their measure) with all his
sons and daughters by grace and regeneration. They must also be like unto him,
who (in his love) has begotten them anew, Ezeh. 6.3.26.
and to the end they may be so, the holy ghost tell's us we must have, now
hearts, new spirits, new affections, new minds and dispositions, all new;
according to that of the Apostle, 2. Co. 5.17.
[If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, or, (as the word imports) a
new creation, made all new, behold J make all things a-new] and again, Gal
6.15.
[For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avayleth any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature (or creation)] and thus new we must be, that
we may be like to Jesus Christ who in opposition to the old Adam, is called the
[new man] by whom we must be cast into a new moulde to be made conformable to
him. And therefore the apostle urges our consimilitude to Christ, and newnes
of life together, and infers them one upon another, that wheresoever newnes
of life is, To 6.4.5.
there is a clear conformity to Christ Jesus.

And this jmage or similitude unto our savior is abundantly pressed upon us,
and made known to be the mind of God, and a manifest evidence of our interst
in many particulers. Nothing is more frequently called for at our hands, then
that we should be holy as he is holy, merciful as be is merciful, perfect as
he is perfect, followers or imitators of Christ, like minded to him, and
learning of him all patience, kindness, humility meekenes, and every saving
grace, whereby it may appear that [we are made partakers of the divine nature]
in the co^municable qualities thereof, 2. Pet. 1.4.
and so assuredly interessed into him of whose nature we do partake.

That so, as we have borne the image of the earthly Adam in sin and
corruption, (and thereby made it too evident, that we are his children and
heirs of condemnation) so also we should bear the image of the heavenly
Adam, in holiness and sanctification, and thereby be sealed to be his sons and
daughters, yea his members, reserved to the glory of Gods kingdom. And that
this image of his (to wit, our conformity to Christ) is an evidence infallible
and undoubted hereof, is most clear by that which the Apostle directly lays
down and avoucheth when he tells us, that [ those whom the Lord did
foreknow (to be his elect) them, To. 8.26.
he did predestinate to be like the image of his sonne] so that we see how the
depth of this profound doctrine of praedestination may be sounded, and soundly
discerned (as touching the evidence of the same) by every man in himself, and
one may ceartainly know himself to be predestined of God to live for ever
with him in life and glory, if he be cast into a new moulde and made a new
lump like to Jesus Christ. Most true it is, that Gods praedestination is
touching the doctrine thereof in the causes and reasons of the same, (why some,
and so few, should be ordayneth to happiness, and others, and so many, to hell
torments) may be matter of amezement unto us, but the discerning of the same in
our own particular, is nothing difficult, but most easy and manifest. For if a
man do carry the image of the Lord Jesus in grace and holiness, he is (without
controversy) appointed to be glorified with him, but while he continues in a
cursed conformity to sin and corruption, and bears the likeness of the old
Adam, or rather of the old serpent, he may know he belong's not to Gods decree
of election, because all such as appertain thereunto, are as well
predestined to be gracious on earth, as to be glorious in heaven. These two
were never parted yet, in any person whatsoever: Gods predestination of grace
is as absolute as of glory, and the former must be the forerunner of the
latter. But we will not digress into any further discourse of this matter. The
point we have in hand is undeniably true, and cannot be doubted off, that if we
be like him, we are his: and he that is not, the same is none of his.

Now then, let every man search himself, and endeavor to apprehend aright how
it is with him herin, that he may well understand, whether he has belyed the
Lord or not, when he has called him his. For he that does so, and is not like
him, has lied unto God fo often, as he has laid claim to him. Enquire then and
see, what piety, what zeal, what humility, patience, holiness, purity, and
vprightnes is in thee; look well upon thy self, nay, into thy self, and let
others look upon thee, what characters and impressions of God are to be seen,
whose image and superscription thou carryest, in thy conscience before God, in
thy conversation before men; if Christ's, thou art a current christian, and an
heir apparent of heaven, thou may as boldly say thou art the Lords, as any
man child may say he is the son of a man. But if those monstrous and
diabolical parts of impiety and prophanes appear in thee, which are found in
swearers, drunkards, sabbath breakers, covetous, idolatrous, unjust or unclean
persons: know, thou art as ceartainly the devils, Ioh. 8.44.
as thou art conceitedly Gods Christ himself tell's thee so, [Yee are of your
father the diuell] there is no more reason such a one should call God his, then
that a beast should be accounted the child of a man. Every thing begett's, and
bring's forth his like: all creatures that propagate, and procreate, produce
evermore of their own kind, all plants that have life, and no sense; all
beasts, that have life, and sense and no reason; all men which have both life,
sense, and reason, this is the universal order, and perpetual ordinance of
God for nature. And shall the almighty, (who has all these perfections
infinitely, and infinite more besides these) shall he only breed, and bring
forth divelish monsters, children that hear no representation of him, but are
branded withal the hellish parts and lym's, whereof reprobates are composed.

Who can believe a blasphemer, (or any of the fornamed offenders) when they say
[Our father] nay it is wonder how they can believe themselves, 2. These. 2.11.
were they not [giuen over to strong delusions to believe lies that they might
be damned] it were impossible they should not see how hydeously they did
slander and vilefy him, who is God to be blessed for ever; and who will one day
be infinitely avenged upon them, as for all other their damnable impietyes among
men, so especially for this dishonor done to himself, whom they have abused
by innumerable falsehoods in their often calling of him father. Go now (ye
wicked wretches) and weep, and mourn, for this, that being the base brood of
Satan, and the hellish monsters of sin, ye have fathered your selves upon him,
whose soul does loath you, because you are not like unto him. It is double
blindness you are given over unto in this point; who having the whole school of
nature in all the works of God, and the universal and clear current of his
word to teach you this one lesson: That nothing produces any thing, but that
which is like it self: and yet you cannot learn to leave lying against the
Lord, in laying a false claim unto him, having nothing in you like unto him.
Pray for eye-salue to discern this evil, and wayle before him whom you have
so wickedly abused; there is yet a possibility that you may become his, and be
made like unto him, for he has power to change you from what you are, to what
you should be, he can make [a thistle to become a myrrh tree, Isa. 55.12. Mat.
3.9.
and the bryar a fyrre tree,] he can [raise up children to Abraham of these
stones] nothing is, or can be so evil, and unlike him, which he cannot alter
into his own image.

And they that are thus changed already, are happy, and have the Lord for their
God, to whom they may boldly, and freely go as to their father, who has
graciously begotten them, whenas they can carry with them the evidences of his
holy image in them, in any measure of that true grace they have received from
him.

For this one thing we must carefully consider, Note.
(that we may not discomfort our own souls) that it is not the likeness of
quantity, or equality, but of quality only, that we urge upon you, and that God
expects in you. When he says, and we teach, that men must be holy as he is
holy, merciful as he is merciful, etc: we do not (neither does God) mean,
there should be so much of these in you as in himself: Noe such matter: but
only that there should be some measure of them, (and any measure does argue the
nature of a thing) the truth whereof, is also further discerned by the growth of
the same. Now then if you can go to God and show him some beginnings of his
own graces, you are his. An infant the members and parts of whole body are
exceeding little and of no strength in respect of one that is a grown man, yet
is known by those feeble hands, and other weak lineaments to be the child of
his father. Their likeness does argue it, though they want greatness And so is a
child of God approved to be his, by those graces that be in him, though yet
they be infirm, and infinitely short of that they should be. We may not then
dismay our selves, and make void the evidences of our consolation in the Lord
our God, because we have not much but little, (yea very much too little) grace
and piety in us, that which we have must joy us, that which we want should
humble us, we may make our claim by the very least grain of true grace we
have gotten, but our claim is confirmed by our increasing therein and gayning
of more.

He has told us that [he will not despise the small things,] Zach. 4.10. Mat.
12.20.
nor [ quench (but kindle) the smoking flax, nor break (but bind up) the
bruised reed,] and why should we despair of our estate, in that which he does
not despise? no, let us unfeignedly bless him for the first friuts of our
interest in him, and beseech him to stamp and jmprint his jmage more deeply in
us, that not only our selves may perceive it, but men may see it, and so he
that has given it, may be glorified of us in it, and by the clear and
comfortable assurance of our childe-hood (by this our consimilitude,) Satan's
assaults may be resisted, and himself constantly honored of us all our days.
And this is the fourth sign of our right in our God.

The sift and last, Spirit of God. And this is the absolute assurance of our
being his. Whosoever has received the spirit of God, God has received that
man for his own. This is affirmed fully by John: 1. Joh. 3.24.
who assures us that we are, nay [that we may know we are his, by the spirit
which he has given vs] and hereunto the Apostle attesteth, Rom 8.6.
when he tells us that [if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is
none of his.] This is further evident by such particulers as whereunto this
spirit (thus given) is compared, to wit, to [ a scale, Ephe. 1.14.15.
and an earnest penny], and both these (as all men know) do assure men of
their right in any thing that is conditioned for, between man and man. And the
Lord in discovering his spirit unto us under these terms, does thereby give
us to understand that it has a conveying power and an assuring property to
give us real and undoubted interest in himself, and all such good things as
from him, are to be given to us. Hence it is also that this spirit is said to
enable us by uncontrollable testimony to avouch, To. ^.15. Gal 4.6.
that we are the sons of God, and he our father, and thereupon we are bidden by
virtue thereof to cry boldly Abba father that is to claim him as our father.

But here it may be some will say unto me,

I answer it is true, present point we have in hand, Assurances of Gods spirit
in us
and such evidences of the spirit in us, as are also evidences of our interest
in God, we will give you, or some few of them.

First therefore, effectually received so, as that by it we may know that we
are Gods, is, that by it we are asisted to offer up spiritual sacrifices to
God, to pray in the spirit, or by the power thereof speaking in us, unto him,
who gave this his spirit to us. These prayers (that they may be known to be
spiritual) most consist of such matter as this spirit (by the light thereof
shyning in us) does suggest and for their manner, they must be uttered (whether
by voice, or other ways) with such feeling of our wants, and such affection to
him, who can supply us, as flows from the life of the same spirit: and
concluded with such assurance of success by faith, as the joy of the same
spirit does minister to us, and that whether we be heard or not. For that
spirit will assure, and convince every one who has it, that the event of all
our petitions is good because every answer given unto us, is evermore the fruit
of the infinite wisdom, and love of God unto us both which being (as they are)
combyned in all the issues of our supplications, we cannot conceive (by any
thing that this spirit begets in us) but that it is best for us, which way
soeever it be, if we speed it is good, if we speed not, it is as good, says
the spirit in us, (though our foolish flesh does not think so) because God
jmployeth the same wisdom and love to deny us now, as he did at other times to
give us our desires. And they that have thus received the spirit in this duty
of prayer, may by the presence, and power of it workeing in this manner in
them, be assured they have right in God, who himself is a spirit, and does thus
send his spirit into the hearts of all his elect.

Secondly, the same spirit which does thus furnish us to pray for any good,
does also minister to us, resolution and endeavor to do all the good we are
re-required unto, by God. I say resolution, to be thoroughly persuaded that we
ought, and endeavor to strive to the utmost, that we may do as much as is
possible to be done.

The spirit of God never work's desire of having good from God, without desire
of doing good before God. It teaches men how to practice, as well as how to
pray: and make's men as willing to obey Gods precepts, as they are, that the
Lord should answer there prayers. And when once a man has gotten a heart thus
resolved, upon universal and constant obedience to the Lord, and that he had
(of the two) rather do the will of God, then have his own will accomplished,
he may assuredly know, he has right in the Lord. And hereof is the spirit of
God a witness where it says. Rev. 22.14.
[ Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to,
(or that their right may be in) the tree of life etc.] which tree of life, is
Jesus Christ, the Lord of life. Is it not plain here, that they who do the
commandments (that is, do their utmost to do them) have right in Jesus
Christ, and may truly say he is theirs, and that they are his, by right. And
this may yet more clearly appear, if we consider that the Lord does often use
this argument of his interest in his people as a principal instigation to
persuade them to obedience. In the praeface to the commandments, this is
praemized to provoke their subjection to the whole law, Exodus 20. Levi. 18.4.5.
[I am the Lord thy God] and again, [ I am the Lord your God, ye shall
(therefore) do my judgments and keep my ordinances] and this was the reason
of the peoples resolution in Ioshuas time [ For the Lord is our God etc: Josh.
24.17.18.
therefore will we also serve the Lord, for he is our God] Now would God urge
it to his people, or his people allege it to the Lord, in this particular of
their incitation to all conscionable walking before the Lord, if it were not
the band of his spirit to bind them thereunto. He then, that has received in
himself a settled resolution, that he ought, and a sincere desire, joined with
endeavor, that he might, walk in all the commandments of God, the same is
the Lords; God will graciously acknowledge him, he may comfortably lay claim to
God.

Thirdly, as to do all good, all evil of punishment or persecution and to
resist all evil of sin, and corruption, is a sure sign of the spirits
residence in us, and of our interest in God by it. Reu. 21.7.
He that can courageously endure the one, and conscionably do the other, he is
one of Gods own dear one's. God himself has spoken it. [He that ouercometh,
shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.] The
spirit of God does not only subdue us to it self in all good, but it also
subdueth all evil to us, To 8.37.
and make's us more then co^querours in both, as the holy ghost tells us. To
withstand jmpiety resolutely, and to undergo persecution valiantly, is a
property of one of Gods own. When neither temptations to sin, nor tyranny of
men, can draw a man from God, it is a sure sign such a one is fastened to God,
and sealed as one of his. Neither of these was ever given to any ungodly
person, no lym of Satan has any power in either. And nothing but the spirit of
God can give this power to any man. He that has it then, has the spirit and
he who has the spirit of God, the same is Gods, as we heard before. Every one
will judge that ceartainly he must be very near to a man, who can neither be
entised by any alurement, nor constrained by any enforcement, to displease him,
but that scorns all advantages, and beare's all jnjuries, rather then he will
do any thing that maybe grievous to him, who would not say; were he not his
near friend, or his father he would never refuse such offers, suffer such
oppressions as he does, for his sake. By the same reason is our nearenes unto
God concluded. And this conquering power of his spirit, whereby we prevayle
against all things in this kind, is not communicable to any, but such who have
received the same as their earnest penny and seal that they are the Lords. And
these three (among many others which we might speak of) are sufficient
assurances unto us, that we have received this spirit, which spirit does assure
us that we are the children of God.

And thus we see the signs of our interect in the Lord our God, whereupon we
have the more largely, and somewhat the longer insisted because it is much
material to every man to know well and be steadfastly settled, in the assured
evidence, and true trial of this point, wherein so many wicked men do deceive
themselves by secure presumption; and so many of Gods own children are
deceived in themselves (through their own ignorance weakness) for want of due
information.

We have now no more to say touching this use of the point but (by these
aforesaid signs) to set every one a work, even a searching of himself whether
he can find them within him or not. And therein let every one in the fear of
God (and as he tender's the favor of God) deal soundely, and impartially with
his own soul and, sift himself as in the sight of God, before whom, he must
appear one day, and be judged acording to this word which has (from him)
been spoken herin. He that cannot discern them in himself, let him haste to
the Lord, of whom they may be had, and cease clayming any right in the Lord,
till he have obtained them, and begin to greiue in his own soul, for that he
has been so seduced all this while, thus boldly to abuse the Lord, being
none of his, not thinking themselves a little judebted to his patience, who has
rejourned that justice (which even for this sin) might long since have seized
upon them and sent them to Satan whose vassalls all such are, as by him are set
on thus blindely to challeng the Lord to be theirs, without any sight, or
sound assurance of these signs in themselves,

And to them that have obtained and received them, who do see them in
themselves, and can show them to others; whereunto come's all this that we have
said, but unto their wonderful consolation, the confirmation whereof, flowe's
naturally from the possession of these peculiar loue-tokens, which the Lord
gives to none, but to such, as to whom he gives himself, that they that have
them, might also know, that they have him. And what a happiness that is, who can
imagine? for what can a man have more, to make him most happy? he that rightly
knowe's what God is, may give some guess at the absolute, and unspeakable
advantages of that man, who has right in the Lord, and from the glimpse of
them (for that is all that can be gotten in this life, their infinite fulness is
reserved till we come to glory) may learn to give some praise (even with his
soul) unto him, for the most gracious recovery of this interest unto us, which
once we razed out by our own rebellion, and he has raised us into it again,
out of the riches of his grace. Who shall not laud him, and love him for this?
that when we were so wicked that we would not be his, but gave, or sold our
selves to Satan, he will, yet, be so loving that he will give himself to be
ours, and redeem and purchase us again (though it cost dear) to become his.
Oh, that we could magnify him according to this mercy, but it being beyond
measure, we are not able to attain to such a strain of thankfullnes, yet let
us (dearly beloved) strain the utmost we can, and do our best to breath out
his honor, who has made us so jnestimably happy.

The saints of God have abounded in times past, and both blessed God because he
is the God of his people and blessed those people who are the people of God.
Moses thus blessed Israel: Deuteronomy. 33.29. 1. King. 8.55.56. etc. Psa. 33.12.
Psa. 144.15.
and so did Solomon too David exceedes all other in this subject, and is so
often upon it, both for himself and for the people, as if he could never say
enough to the point. So we find [Blessed is that nation whose] God is the
Lord, and the people that he has chosen for his inheritance; and the same in
another psalm (yea in many other psalms) is repeated, And in the name of all
the saints he speake's [ all thy works shall praise thee o Lord, Psa. 118.28.
and thy Saints shall bless thee]. And for his own part, [ Thou art my god
and J will praise thee, thou art my God and I will exalt thee]. And last of
all, Psa. 100.4.
on the behalf of all lands, [Enter into his gates with thanksgiving and into
his courts with praise, be thankful unto him and speak good of his name] and
why? even for this, that [ we are his people, and the sheep of his tasture.
Now go we and endeavor to do likewise, seeing he has showed the like love
unto us, that our whole man soul and body, may bless him all our days.

As also seeing it is such a marueillous mercy to be the Lords, let us by all
means make our use and benefit thereof; so often as we go to him by
supplication, and so often as Satan sett's upon us by temptation, let us help
our selves herewith, for it is both a singular jnducement to move the Lord to
show us mercy, and it is also an excellent shield against Satan's fury. The Lord
cannot witholde his favors from his own, neither can the Devil fasten his
fiery darts upon them. To prove our selves Gods, is armor of proffe against
him, he cannot pierce it, or wound us, so long as we have it well gyrt about
us. But if we leave it off, or let it hang loose, we may soon be hurt. Let us
look to it then, and be careful herin that we damage not our selves, and give
our enemy advantage against us. If herin we acquit our selves well, and can
follow the Lord with this fruit of his love, his heart is open to us for good,
if not, Satan will follow us, and we lie open to him for evil. It is good then
to make our best of this our interest, and to plead it incessantly before the
God of heaven, from whom we have it. Whenever we speak to him, let him hear
of us, as of those that have right in him. Whatsoever we beg, let this be
remembered, [I am thine] for this has been urged by all the people of God,
when they have prayed for any thing.

for illumination: I am thine, oh give me understanding for preservation; I am
thine oh save me: for confirmation, or compassion, I am the son of thy handmayd
etc.
And so for all other comforts of any kind whatsoever, this was ever urged,
as we might abundantly instance in Moses, in David, in Eliah: Iehosophat:
Hezekiah, and many more, who many a time pressed God with it. Yea (which is
well worth our nothing) God himself has often rendered this, as that which
has (as it were) wrought upon himself to respect them in his grace, as it were
easy to allege out of many scriptures. That one may serve for all, which we
find by the prophet [But thou Israel art my servant, Is. 41.8. ver. 9.
Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend etc. Thou art my
servant, I have chosen thee and not cast thee away.] And if the Lord himself
do make this use of it to magnify his own grace to us, we may co^fortably
plead it before him to prevail with him therewith; we may be well assured
that, that which he makes an argument of magnifying his mercy on us, would be
of excellent use and force, to plead before him to move him to manifest the
same mercy to us. Let us not then in any wise be sparing herin, we cannot be
too bold, nor too abundant, the Lord like's that prayer, and love's that
suitor the better, that is most full of it. And the devil will have least to
do with those which are nearest, and fastest to God. And therefore (to
conclude and shut up this point) be it now our perpetual care and endeavor to
do according to the tennor of that truth we have heard in this our first
instruction arising from this interest so stissly pleaded by this blessed
Patriarch, in that he enter's thus into his petition, with these words [O God
of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac: etc. Showing clearly that he
that would have his prayers enter into heaven, and be entertained with God,
must go in this way, with them. And so much for our first lesson laid down
in these words.

The end of the first Sermon.
Having done with his first encouragme^t, we proceed to the consideration of
his second, as it lies in the text following [Thou Lord which saidest unto me;
Return into thy country etc.] where in he (now) pleads his warrant he had
from God, as (before) he did his interest he had in God. And herein we have two
things to think off, the first, is the warrant it self, the second, his
assuming, and application thereof home to himself.

The former to wit, his warrant he divides into two particulers: 1. a precept:
Return into thy country etc 2. a promise and I will deal well with thee.
From both which, we might well note unto you (in the next place) this worthy
lesson, that Whatsoever we do without warrant from God, is wickedly done. So
much warrant as any man has to do any thing, so much comfort shall he have
in the doing of it.

If this were not an absolute, and an undeniable truth, why did the Lord give
Jacob this commission for his journey, or why should Jacob take it, and make
this use of it to God himself, as he does: it were no favor or mercy to have
it, no point of faith, no part of our duty to use, or to urge it, if we might
be justified in any thing we undertake without it. But we purpose not to
prosecute this point, at this present, but to take another occasion (if the
Lord please) to handle it at large.

The thing we aim at, is not so much the matter of the warrant it self, as
Jacobs taking of it home and applying of it to himself, in that he says [Thou
Lord who saydest unto me] From which practice of his, we may observe, and you
must learn thus much. That it is the duty of every chirstian to carry the word
of God home to his own heart, and to apply it particulerly to himself.

Look what sacred truth the Lord has left recorded for us, and either in any
general special, or particular rule of his word revealed to us, as tending to
our particular estate, the same so far as it touches us in any thing that
does, or may concern us, the Lord looke's we should lay it to our hearts, and
appropriate it to our selves as our own. Every true christian is bound to
apply every part of Gods truth to himself evermore making that his own, which
is meant to him.

The instance of our text, contains so clear an evidence and confirmation of
this doctrine, and this holy Patriarchs practice is so pregnant for the point
that we shall not need to seek far for more witness, to enforce the truth of
it. Let us a little consider his carriage herin.

We heard before, how God had spoken unto him, about this business of his
removal into his country, here now, we have himself not only relating what
God said to him herin, but also applying the same to his own heart, and state:
now that he is to go to heaven for direction and comfort in the same, in
speaking to God, he speaks that which God spoke to him [thou Lord who said
unto me etc.] he cleave's fast unto that which he heard from God, and let us God
hear of it from him again, he claymes Gods kindness, builde's upon his precept
and promise as upon a foundation of direction, consolation and assurance,
sufficiently able to bear him out against all opposition what-soever. The
precept leade's him to begin his journey, the promise hartens him to go on,
hoth are good to him in the duty he had to do. And (we see) that as Jacob is
faithful in applying all this, so is the Lord careful in reporting this his
practice unto us, and make's Moses (many years after it was performed) to
receive it from his spirit by inspiration, and to register it in this his
blessed book, that it may remain written for all ages to come for his
approbation, for our imitation, that we might follow him who has gone before
us herin, and not only know, what Jacob has done but what the God of Jacob
require's of us from this light of his truth, both to know and to do, in any
such cases as may ever become ours, in any passage between the Lord and us.

In a word, what he here did, is therefore written and related, that we might
go and do likewise, walking in the same path which this true survant of God
has trodden out before us, which if we shall endeavor conscionably to do, and
to be upright with the Lord in the same, what our benefit and advantage shall be,
the sequel will show, and we shall ever find it our happiness to lay Gods
truth to heart. Thus we see the case is clear in the particular of our text.

If we shall look further abroad, for our more assurance in the truth of this
instruction, and take up such testimonies as we might soon find, and fasten
upon to this present purpose, multitudes would flow apace upon us, and it would
be much more easy to ouer-abounde, then want any, evidence. But we will not
cloy your memories with a multiplicity.

Shall we enquire at the Law, according to the holy Prophets counsel? why, it
is clear for this point. It is a ruled case with, the great lawgiver, even
the, Lord who is [that one lawgiver, which is able to save and destroy] has
given it once, and again, and many times in express charge to his people.
Consider seriously what he says by Moses [And these words which I commands
thee shall be in thy hart] And thou shall teach them to thy children etc. Dent.
6.6. ver. 7.8.
And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as
frontlets between thine eyes.] Now what means all this? what may all these
injunctions intend which are set down here, and itterated elsewhere? Surely
there is something in it, that we must have them so engraven, that our minds
may posesse them, our mouths may publish them, at home and abroad, by day,
and by night, at bed and board, to our posterity daily, to others occasionally,
can all this be for formal discourse, or supersiciall accquaintance with the
word of God? no sure, there is more meant then this, come's to (which alone is
nothing) the Lords mind is, that we should have special familarity with his
word, and be in continual meditation, and practice thereof, (signified by the
binding of it on our hands and eyes) all these particulers that are named here,
are to persuade us to that one principal truth, that we teach, to wit, that we
must take home all the holy truth of God into our souls.

From the law we may pass to the Prophets, but as we go we will see what
Solomon says to it, which if we do, we shall hear of many heavenly sayings
to this purpose both in his Proverbs, and his book called the Preacher.

In the former, we have many consells to this practice with comforts belonging
to them. As first, where he exhorts men to [receiue Gods words, and to hide
his commandments, Pro. 2.1. ver. 2.
to incline their ear, and apply their hearts to knowledge and understanding.]
And again, that men should [not forget the Law of God, cap. 3 1.
but let their hearts keep his commandements] and yet again, that we ought to
endeavor that [our hearts do retain God words,] cap. 4.4.
and that [we embrace them, and in noe wise, ver. 8.
let them goe] he is much upon this matter, as upon a thing of much
consequence, and mighty importance, often advising all men hereunto. And in his
latter book, Eccles, 12.11.
he tell's us that [the words of the wise, should be unto us as goades, and as
nails, fastened upon us, yea, into us] sticking close to us, and keeping fast
within us.

Thus we see Solomon's mind, and know well what it is, and now let us ask the
Prophets, and they will soon tell us theirs, (for Moses and the Prophets, and
all the men of God, are all in one tune for this truth) it has been evermore
their manner to come to men with Gods message, and to tell them their own from
him, not going behind the door, or speaking behind their backs, but
personally, and to their heads, delivering the mind of God to the mightiest of
them, as it were easy to instance in innumerable examples, not only of these
more general prophecies, that concern peoples and nations, but in those most
special which were indiuidually directed against Princes, Potentates, and the
great one's of the earth, as the king of Judah, Israel, Babell, Egypt,
Nineveh, etc. and the like, every of which with many more, were spoken too, to
their faces, in those particulers wherein the Lord did intend they should know
his mind.

So we see we have the Law and the Prophets sure to us in this particular, if
now we shall also give ear to the Gospel, it will also give abundant evidence
hereunto both from Christ himself, and also from his Apostles in this point:
Christ sometimes spoke plainly and spoke noe parable, as where he says
[Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it] sometimes (and more
then once) in diverse parables he is again upon it as in the parable of the
seed, which must be laid deep, and covered close in the ground, and not
supersicially sowed, for every foul to carry away: in the parrable of the
leaven, which must be raked up into the midst of the meal, and be mixed so
with it, that it may never be severed from it again, but leaven every part of
the lump. And for the apostles they are of the same mind with Christ their
master, and speak to the same purpose. Peter would have us [receive the word
as newborn babes receive milke] which is not only eaten and swallowed, 1.
Pet. 2.2.
but concocted and digested and becomes nutrimentall, and is converted into
the substance of their bodies. col. 3.16.
Paul, would have it dwell in us richly] that our hearts might be a habitation,
Jam. 1.21.
or house to receive and harbor the same. James he would have it [engrassted
in us]. and so incorporated that it might (as it were) become one with us, and
being so, he assures us of the saving power thereof, saying it will be able to
save our soules].

And now having all these witnesses, what can we have more, or what need we
so much, to confirm a truth so clear? here (you see) is the vniver sall
assent, and concurrence of all Gods servants, yea, and of his son too every
one that spoke by his spirits inspratio^, spoke more or less, to this truths
confirmation. But it would be needelesse to add more testimony.

Let us come to consider of such reasons, as may further lead us into the
light, and perswsiaon hereof; that we may see as well, why we must thus take
home Gods truth, as only to know that so we must do. It is a wise man's part,
not only to know what he must do, but also to understand why, that the reason
of his duty may be discerned of him, as well as the jnjunction.

And if we apply our selves to consider, wherefore we must apply Gods truth in
this manner, we shall soon perceive, that it is a thing consorting with
clear, and apparent reason and that, in diverse respects some few whereof, we
will lay down before you.

First, our application of Gods word, main end of his publishing the same
unto us, he revealed it that we might recetue it, it was left written to us,
that it should be written in us.

Does not God himself give us this as a reason in plain terms, and that by
more then one or two, of those whom he sent to deliver his mind.

What says Moses to all Israel, Deuteronomy. 27.29.
and (in them) to all the Israel of God. [Things revealed belong to us, and to
our children] what God has revealed, is revealed to us, and for us, and
appertains (by his appointment) to us. What says Paul, to the Romans, and
(in them) to all Christians, To. 15.4.
[Whatsoeuer is written is written for our instruction, that we through
patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.] And the same is said
of more, whom we name not now. Now if so it be, that this was a principal
part of the Lords mind and meaning, to leave his word with us that it might
cleave to us, and we lay it close to heart, then it must follow, that either we
must faithfully endeavor to do according hereunto, or profanely neglect the
same, and so (as much as in us lies) jmpiously frustrate, the gracious
intendeme^t of our most loving God, which if wilfully we shall do, what can be
a more wicked act? what can bring a more woe full effect? may we not most justly
expect that the punishment of such an jmpiety will be unspeakable to utter,
insufferable to endure. So then, seeing this is Gods end in recording his word
that we might receive the same, let us (by all means) attend thereunto, and
do our best that he may attain his own end which he has made known unto us.

Our second reason may be taken from such simulitudes and semblances,

And in the survey of them, we shall soore apprehend reason to believe this
point. Gods word (in regard of our receiving of it) is compared to many things
but these are the most pregnant among others. Some times it is likened to
rain, Jsa 55.10.11. mat. 4. Psalm. 107.20.
As the rain that falls on the earth, so shall my word be] to food, man
lineth not by bread only, but by every word of God] to physike: he sent forth
his word and healed them to armor: Take unto you the whole armor of God: the
sword of the spirit: the gospel of peace: etc.
And to a multitude more of such things as these are, all which, are nothing
but only in their application, all the use and benefit of each of these
consists wholly therein: common sense will say so much to us. For, what is
rain, so long as it hangs in the clouds, and fal'ls not into the dry and
thirsty earth, which many times yawnes and gapes for it beforeit come? what is
food, while it is in the bakers shop, or butchers shambles, or in our kitchen,
or on our table, or in our mouths, if we receive it not into our bodies? what
is physike to us, while it remains only described in the physicians bill, or
enclosed in the apothecaryes box, or in our own hand or any where else
vnapplyed, if it be owtward; or vnreceiued if it be inward? what is armor or
munition, while it is in the armorers shop, or in our own sheath, or taken
into our own hand and not drawn out for our defense.

We all know, that all these excellent things are anihilated, and made vterly
unprofitable to us, having noe power to do us any good, unless we take them
to us. Noe rain, can make the earth fruit-full: noe food or physike can make
the body healthful; noe weapons can defend us, nothing can pleasure us;
without application. The earth must drink in the rain, the food and physike
must be taken in, the armor must be gyrt on, and then shall we be bettered by
it, whereas, if these things be not so applied they perish.

Now the Lord in his wisdom, suiting his word unto these resemblances, which
are such as we (even in our weakness) may easily understand to be wholly lost, in
case we lay them not home, does therein by plain reason teach us this point of
religion, that as these earthly and natural creatures and comforts, so also
his own eternal and heavenly word, will not, nor cannot do us any good,
unless we make the same use of it to our souls as we would do of these
things for our bodies. And it is not to be acknowledged as a mean favor to
us, considering our wonderful incapacity of understanding, that it pleases
him thus in pity our frailty, to cloth these divine and celestial things in
such temporal comparatiues as are familiar with us, and wherein we may soonest,
and easiest apprehend them. For we can sooner ken a holy thing in a sensible
habit borrowed from art, or nature, then in his own. This the Lord saw in us,
and therefore he put's his own spiritual things into such similitudes as
wherein we can best see them. And this is our second Reason.

Now seeing we see so clear a light of reason shyning to us, both from Gods end
in revealing his word: and from the end of all other things he has given us
for our good, and that from the consideration of both these sorts of things, it
is now very apparent, that nothing is, or can be further good to us, (how good
soever it be, in it self) then we take it to our selves; we cannot but assent
to this truth, as to that for which, we see found reason to believe and
embrace it.

And these two shall suffice for reasons of this instruction, not that we could
not urge, or allege more, (which were most easy to do) but because we shall
have fitter occasion to make use of them in one of the uses of the point,
whereunto we will now come and lay them in the same order that the uses of the
former point did, towit, 1. to Gods people. 2. to wicked men. 3. to all men.


And first, 1. Use. to the saints. 2. fold.
for the people of God, we must from this point of doctrine send them a double
portion: namely, one of singular consolation, with (I am sure) they desire; and
another of just reprehension, which they do (as assuredly) deserve. And the
worst, they shall have first, that so when they have been well chidden, for
their aversnes, we may afterward cheer and joy them, in their piety and
holiness. All physicians of the body, do first purge the peccant humors, and
then give cordialls; in like manner must we do with our spiritual patients in
this particular, for I know not in what one point of heavenly truth, the people
of God are more peevish, froward, and adverse then in this, and therefore we
must endeavor to deal the more thoroughly, that we may make them most healthy,
wherein (by too much experience) we find them so exceeding foul and faulty.

We will begin then, with their just reproffe, kindly with them, the
consolation following will be more seasonable to them. And how far even the
faithful may be deservedly and, tartely spoken to, will evidently appear to
him that observes their gross irregularity in this sweet point of Gods
saving truth, wherein it is heavy to see, how grievous they are to God, who in
the tendering of this truth, is most gracious to them: His offer is a
wonderful mercy, their refusal is a woeful jmpiety.

Whether it be their gnorance, or diffidence, fear or faint-hartednes, one or
other, any, or all these, or any thing else, it is to me uncertain; but sure it
is, that the Devil it is, that make's them so froward and affrightfull, that
they do not, (and they plead they dare not) take home Gods holy truth to
their hearts, but forbear it as forbidden fruit, fearing to taste, touch, or
handle any of that which the Lord in infinite favor jntendeth to them, being
that which does clearly concern their states, and would, (would they be so
wise as to apply it,) assuredly comfort their hearts.

Nay, Satan is so mighty in them herin, and does so strongly posesse, and
strangly persuade them, that they do not only not accept, or entertain, but
do shun, decline, and avoid, the words of grace, and fly from every precious
promise as from some deadly poison, or stinging serpent, and when we have
urged, and pressed all that we can conceive to be of any power to persuade men
to participate of the sweet sayings of God, they put of all from themselves,
and send us away with sensles exemption, and alienation of all that the Lord
means in mercy to them, saying of themselves as Iehu to wicked Iehoram, 2
king 9.22.
[what have thou to do with peace] or as the wicked Jews to Judas [what is
that to us?] mat. 27.
Thus are we put off, and thy put out, of the possibility of any of this
comfort when we (or rather the Lord by us) speake's peace unto them, what have
I to do with peace? if we open Gods good treasure unto them, and endeavor to
convay the riches of Gods truth unto their poor distressed hearts, then, what
is that to me? They will grant all we say to be true in it self, as it is Gods
word and give full, and free assent to the same, but if you offer to bring it
home to them, it is none of theirs, not true of them, they have a superseadeas
for it from Satan, to make it all void, and of none effect in their
particular, the property is altered if it come to be their case, that which we
speak is all true but it is much mistaken if it be brought home to their hearts
and states, as if all that God spoke were true, but all he spoke to them, were
false; then which conceit, what can be either, more unreasonable or more
abominable.

Thus does Satan labor to pervert and frustrate the faithful word of God,
which he has left to prop up, and sustain the souls of his saints in their
distresses. In which attempt of his, Ephesians. 4 27.
who have [giuen more place to the diuell] then the children of God who are
expressly forbidden to do it; and who have not known their heave^ly father
so well as to trust him in the truth of his blessed promises, but have an ear
open to every infernal suggestion, and shut against Gods own sure
consolations: refusing those sweetest words of grace which might (if they did
receive them) make them truly happy.

A practice, of such peevishnes and jmpiety, as must needs be very hateful
and displeasing to God, very hurtful and pernicious to those that are faulty
in it, because it is most apparently repugnant.

to the nature of God. to all his precepts. to all his childrens practice.
It is every way against the nature of God, as doing infinite jnjury, disgrace,
and indignity; To that wisdom that revealed these his promises, and sorted
them out according to our afflicted state: To that truth that confime's and
seal'es them to us, and us to them: To that love whereby we are accepted into
the number of those who are capable of them, which is not the case of every
one, (no, it is noe common thing) but proper to the Lords own sheep to feed
here, and to them alone are the comforts of his blessed promises enclosed.

And as against his nature, in his wisdom, truth, and love, so further is
this practice against his law comanding us to do otherwise, for are we not
enjoined (as we were before informed) to lay them to our hearts; to bind them
on our hands; to hyde them within us; to have them still about us, as the
ornaments we wear to adorn us, or the weapons that defend us? is it not the
mind of God (do not we know it to be so?) that he would have the souls of
his saints to be the harbor receptacle, and storehouse of all commodity and
advantage spiritual, that comes from heaven?

And as it opposes both his love, and his law, (two woeful things to be
withstood) so also, goe's it against the holy practice of all those his most
beloved one's, whose examples ought to have been our instructions and
encouragments herein, whose faith we should have followed, considering what was
the end of their conversatio^; their forwardnes (in this particular) shame's
your sloth, their holy violence your base cowardice, and gross negligence,
Do but look upon some few practices and set them before you for your further
conviction; Exodus 31.10.11.
O ye of little faith. Moses was (after a sort) forbidden to fasten upon God
and his promises, and promised fair too, if he would let the Lord alone, and
not press him on Israells behalf with his words of truth, yet he will not
cease or be set down, ver. 13.14
or said nay, but come's upon God with many a strong argument drawn from his
own evidence, and does not leave him, till he has prevayled with him. And if
he did this for others, (and that when God did seem to diswade him) what would
he have done for himself, where God did command him?

Nehemiah, Neh. 1.5.10.
(whom we named in the former point) does also most eagerly entitle himself,
and the people to the ancient promises of God made long before, and is an
earnest suitor to the Lord, to make that good upon them, which in his goodness
he had many years agone promised to them.

But of all other, and above all other, David does exceed in this one thing,
and may be the special pattern of all Gods people in this practice, he was
good at it indeed, as we might see in many Psalms, Psalm. 119.
but if we survey but some particulers of that one, wherein he abounds, we
shall see cause of wonder and admiration to see the odds between his faith,
and the infidelity of Gods people now adays. Let us see how he behave's
himself. Sometimes, ver. 49.
he putts God in mind of his promises, [Remember thy promise made to thy
servants wherein thou have caused me to trust. Sometimes, he reveale's the
comforting, ver. 50.
yea the quickening power of them, [it is my comfort in my trouble, for thy
promise has quickened me.] Sometimes he prays for them, and rests upon them,
and does (after a sort) challenge God of his promise. ver. 76.
[Let thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according to thy promise.]
Sometimes, he proclaims the sweetness of them to his taste (and that he could
not if he had not taken them near) [oh how sweet unto me are thy words etc.]
And lastly, ver. 103.
(not to be too tedious in instancing) he does lay a downeright claim unto
them, as his own land intayled to him, and never to be taken from him [Thy
testimonies have I claymed as mine heritage for ever, ver. 111.
for thy are the joy of my heart.] Thus does good David bestirre him herin, and
goe's before all Gods people, whose commendation, and comfort it would
assuredly be, to trace him in these steps.

But we need not stand on particular persons, for we find that whole churches
have done the same, in the days of their sorrows. So we read of the church
[Haue respect to thy covenant] and again [The Lord will not cast of his
people, Psalm. 74.20. Psalm. 94.14. micah. 7.20.
nor forsake his inheritance] and yet again [Thou wilt perform thy truth to
Jacob, and thy mercy to Abraham which thou have sworn to our forefathers of
old.] In all these (and many the like, which we spare to urge), we see the
saints carriage, and practice, whether we consider them apart or combined
together into one body.

And now is it a small thing that this threefolde cord should be so lightly
broken, wherewith the Lord would bind his people to this practice? shall
himself, his law, and his holy ones, be all so slighted of us? Have we so many
worthy jnducement to draw us on, and so many worthies that have gone before
us, and shall we lie behind, and not once strive or stir that way, nay
(which is yet worse) run a clean contrary course, and fly from our own
comforts, to the fearful aishonour of God, and danger of our own souls
through this desperate infidelity?

Oh dear Christians, whereunto will this come? what shall we say unto you? ^.
Cor. 4.21.
how shall we entreat you? let us demand the apostles question, [shall we come
among you with a rod or with the spirit of meeknes] when we have to do with
you for this fault? well, I know we must be wonderful wary, when we have to
do with wounded consciences, we will not be too tart with the Lords tender
lambs, but endeavor (since reprooffe must have place here) to mix
reprehension and commiseration together, inasmuch as we have to do with
afflicted souls, and humbled spirits which speak not according to the truth,
in a settled resolution, but according to the distraction and terror of some
present temptation, wherewith their adversary the devil does so feircely
assault, and so furiously fight against them that they are not able to stand
under his strokes, but faint and sink, because he is so violent and they so
impotent; feign they would be better persuaded, and believe, and profess
otherwise, if they could; but their enemy aboundes with outrage, and they are
void of courage, and hence it is he overules them, and having captivated the
power of Gods spirit in them (for the present) he make's them speak according
to his own; and the truth is, that the people of God (in their perplexity) are
the devils parhots and by him made to utter that evil, which (many times) he
knowe's not well, how to vent otherwise.

Oh, that these poor souls (the true and most proper subjects of all good
men's pity, and prayers) did but well know, and were thoroughly convinced, that
it is not they that do it, but sin, yea Satan dwelling in them, and that the
Lord will of his especial grace discharge them of it, and charge it (as well
he may) upon him, who is both his adversary, and theirs.

But the devil is so subtle in dealing with Gods sorrowful saints, that he
will be exceeding loath to be seen in this, or known of it, but rather lays
it upon God, and provokes many a distracted saint (that is not himself), to
surmize, that it is no small jmpiety against God to appropriate the promises.
And the better to seduce them therein, he puts such pretenses into their minds,
and mouths, as they dream and jmagine to be of God; against whom they think
they should fearfully offend, if they should claim these heavenly comforts to
themselves. Which pretenses of his, seeing they are the maine impediments which
hinder the happiness of Gods people, let us take such knowledge of them, as may
make them apparently known to be infernal, and therefore in no wise to be
believed but always abborted. Among many other, two (to my observation) are
most usual, and do prevail upon the faithful and so afright them that they
dare not meddle, but do (in some sort forsake their own mercy. He suggesteth
into the dejected souls of these afflicted saints to make their hearts the more
fearful 1. that the promises of God are not assigned to them by name, how then
can they have any interest in them? 2. that they are so unworthy of them, in
regard of their wickedness, that they dare not own them or have any thing to
do with them.


These are the sear-crewes, the bug-beares, wherewith he make's them to
forbear, and put off all.

But you that thus speak, according to temptation now speak according to
truth, and shame the devil the father of lies, who suborne's these fruitles
things against you, to rob you of the riches of Gods unspeakable grace: Job.
28.2.
Spoke out I say, and tell me: Is not this to darken the truth of God by words
without knowledge, which no man ought to do?]

Is not this to disparage his truth and faithfullnes, who is [Amen, Reu 1.2.
Cor. 1.20.
the true and faithful witnes]: and that faith that [all his promises are yea
and Amen unto us] that we might be rooted in the assurance of them?

Is not this to be beyond all Gods bounds and to be besides ones self, in our
spiritual estate, and being overcome of a mystical frenzy, to cast of all
affiance in the Lord, Job. 9.16.^7.
speaking strongly in this distemper as Job did, if I had called unto him, and
he had answered me, yet would J not believe that he had hearkened to my voice.]

And shall we stand on that which (we see) will not bear us, but let us fall,
nay, throw us down and make us fall? for so will these aforesaid pretenses
do.

No, be it far from us to do so. And that it may be so, let us come
nearer, to a more straight and narrow inquisition touching them: which that we
may the better do, we will set upon them severally, and so set them out
before you, that we may show them, and you may see them, to be the base
subornations of Satan, and by him bent to abuse God, and beguile you of your
blessedness; and these two are all his only ends.

For the first, which sti^ks so much with many, Pretense.
and whereat they stumble; to wit, that because they are not named they dare not
intermedle; they know not that they are meant, or may make bolae with that
which is written, and wherein others are by name interessed: You tell us that
you find these good words in Gods book and do nothing doubt of the truth of
them, no question but the Lords mind was, that Abraham, David, and those other
whose names are recorded with these comfortable sayings, should rejoice in them
(and if their hearts did not leap at them they were too blame) seeing these
consolations were directed personally to them: had they been so to us, we
could have been happy, had we been the men, it had been our consolation
also: but alas who are we to them? where are our name's to be found?

But what a poor, and pitiful plea, this is, Evindeces against it.
how idle and empty of all good evidence to prove any thing either directly or
by consequence (to this present point, or any other good purpose) will quickly
appear, if we once come to look into it, and as we discover it, we shall see,
there is nothing worth looking upon, in it.

Only, here by the way, (before we set upon it) we may discern a subtilty of
Satan whereby he does notoriously abuse you, as once in another case (he did)
diverse others. For when as there was some question made of Paul's doctrine; Act.
18.14.
Gallio told the Jews that if their motion were a matter of weight and
substance he would have hearkened to them, but being but of words and names (as
he thought) it was not worth the hearing. The truth was, that that matter was
of more then words or names or such trivial stuff, even of the foundation
Jesus Christ, and the truth of the Gospel, but the devil deluded that Gallio,
(as now he does many a man) to think slightly of the great things of God: but
here he does contrary, for this which we have in hand, is but a question of
words and names, and no more, and he strikes this jmpression deeply, as if
all the happiness of a christian, and all the hope of heaven, lay upon it. Thus
doubly deals the devil: to a wicked man the main truth of God shall be a
matter of no weight, and to a child of God that which has no weight at all in
it, shall overbeare the main truth of God,

But this by the way, to show how Satan befoole's both sorts. I would all Gods
people were as wise in this, which is of no moment, as wicked Gallio was, in
that which he thought to be so. And that they may be so we will now lay open
the nakedness of this matter of names in particular, and that so clearly (I
hope), that hereafter it shall not be so much as once named among christians,
when they shall once see, the notable vanities, nay the notorious jmpieties,
that will follow upon the pressing of it, to this purpose. And that they may be
seen how sinful they are, we will set some of them down in order before you,
whereof you shall do well seriously to consider, for you shall find them
exceeding gross. 1. Evidence confuted.


First, it thwarteth, and manifestly overturneth Gods most wise and gracious
manner of speaking by his spirit throught out the scriptures in this point of
the application of his heavenly truth. His course and order of speaking is this.

When any divine truth of his is revealed, it is so uttered, as it may most
plainly appear, that he did intend and mean the application of the matter
and substance thereof (except in some personal circumstance) as well to every
true Christian not named, as unto any to whom it was directly spoken, and
particulerly directed.

And that this is an undeniable truth, may be made very evident, by many
allegations both out of the old testament, and the new. In the old testament,
such as speak by Gods spirit spoke thus. David for one, applies to himself,
that which is common to all Christians, [It is written of me, Psalm. 40.7.
that I should do thy will O God] where is this written more of David then of
any other man? many things were spoken to him by name from God, but this was no
more to him then to us, yet (you see) he assumeth and applies it to himself as
written to him, because he could not but know, that obedience to the will of
God, did as directly appertain to him, and would be as exactly required of
him, as of any other man. If this had been sent by name to him from God, he
could have said no more then he does, and thus much (you see) he says, though
no man's name be mentioned, because he knew that every man was meant.

The people of God in another Psalm do the same as we may read (and it very
good for us to note; Psalm. 66.6.
) He turned the sea to dry land, they passed through the river on foot, th^re
did we rejoice in him] mark, how the people of God speak here of a thing long
since past, a mercy showed to their forefathers yet the benefit and favor is
acknowledged to God and he magnified for it as if it had been done to them
selves; the change of the person is worth observation; [they passed through
etc: there did we rejoyce]. Another like unto this we find in the prophet
Hosea where that which is entreated off, is spoken personally of Jacob (to wit,
of his wrestling with God) but the people of God in that time, take it home and
apply it unto themselves, so the words infer. Hos. 12.4.
[ He had power over the Angel and prevailed, he wept and prayed: he found
him in Bethel, there he spoke with us. The gracious, and consolatory words,
given by Christ (called here the angel as being the angel, of the covenant) to
Jacob touching his prevailing with God, and Gods benediction of him, are here
said to be spoken to them, [there he spoke with vs] they claim them, as if the
Lord had blessed them, as he did him. Thus have Gods people in the old
testament done.

And they in the new have done likewise, if we consider a few examples it will
easily appear.

Our Lord Jesus Christ is clear in this case, when he does apply those very
words of God as spoken to the Jews that then were, which were uttered to their
progenitors many a year before [ Have ye not read that which was spoken to
you by God, mat. 22.31.32.
I am the God of Abrah^m, etc] see, he aske's them why they did not make use of
this as spoken to themselves, Exodus
which yet by voice from God was said to Moses out of the midst of the bush
that burned but consumed not. Have ye not read says Christ)? as of he should
say; it is your negligence that you have not, and if you have read, it is your
ignorance that you know not, that thus you ought to apply the words of God, if
you have read what was spoken to Moses (in this matter) and imagine that God
meant it to no more but him, you err, it is an erroneous reading of Gods word,
and argue's we want knowledge when we make that peculiar, to anyone, which the
Lord meant to all his own.

And as Christ began, so have his Apostles followed in the same course: witness
that we sinde by Paul in those two places which (among many others) are
excellent and very remarkable to this purpose, in his epistle to the Hebrews.
First, in the twelft chapter [ have yea forgotten the consolation, or
exhortation, that speakch unto you as unto sons: my son despise not etc this
exhortation, or consolation (call it whether you will) was given by Solomon, or
by God to Solomon, in his time, as is to be seen in his Proverbes; Pro. 3.11
yet by the Apostle you may see it is said to be spoken to those Hebrews to
whom he wrought at this time, which was not a few years after Solomon's days.
As if the apostle should have said; though God might speak to Solomon as to
his son, or Solomon from God in the singular number [my son] yet know, he meant
this saying to more then Solomon or those that lived in Solomon's time; God
intended to counsel and to comfort all his sons and daughters indefinitely to
the end of the wordle, in whose days, or in what time or age soever, they
should live.

Secondly, in the next chapter (to wit the thirteenth) he has another
admirable application of a saying very sweet and exceeding comfortable, which
was long before Solomon's days spoken to Joshua, to harten and encourage him to
go about that great business of bringing the people of God into Cannaan (the
land which was promised to them) and their for fathers which being a work very
difficult and full of danger, the Lord to cheer him up, Josh. 1.5.
and set him on, tell's him [ he with with him, and that he will not fatle nor
forsake him,] but go with him, and stand by him. This very speech the Apostle
would have these Hebrews to believe, as if it had been spoken to every one of
them as particulerly, Heb 13.5
as it was to Joshua, and therefore says [ Let your conversation be without
covetousnes for it is written J will not fail thee nor forsake thee] and
infers hereupon to them with himself. [ So that we may boldly say etc] you
as boldly as I, ^ep. 6.
and I and you as boldly as Joshua, may say, that the Lord is our helper, and
that he will not fail us, nor forsake us, it is as true to all Christians as
ever it was to him; we, as well as he, may build our comfort upon it, and be
bold to claim our comfort from it.

Nay, if we look upon the wicked and sinful Sadduces who were a most wicked
and insolent sect, and did many times oppose Christ himself, and his Apostles
after him, yet they had learned this truth (though it may be, but to serve
their own turn, and to cavil withal) for when they came to wrangle with
Christ about the resurrection, they could allege and pretend a law of Moses,
written to the Jews of old time, before ever the world saw any Sadduces, and
this law is urged by them, as written to them; their words do show it [master
Moses wrote unto us] what Moses wrote to the Jews in general, Mark. 12.19.
can these heretical, and degenerated Jews extend to themselves in
particular. And this was not only done by them, but by the Pharisees also, as
appears in the many boastes they make, when the brag of their being of
Abraham's lineage, and also of those many great previledges coming unto them
thereby.

Now seeing we have so many to witness this unto us, both out of the old
testament, and out of the new, and not only the good, but the bad also, can do
thus, and not stand upon any matter of being named, or not named; if Gods
manner of speaking be thus true, and as truly comfortable, to the successors of
those saints to whom he spoke, as to themselves: why should not we give
creddit to God, and take comfort to our selves in these promises of his (seeing
we see by these testimonies) that we are as much interessed into them, as any
that were ever named. It is nothing to be named or not named, in Gods book to
be intended by God himself, is all in all; and so are all saints I am sure:
for in Christ neither Jew nor Gentile, one nor other of the faithful is
differenced, but what I say unto you (says Christ) [I say unto all]. Mar.
13.37. Mat. 8.11.


And aganie [many shall come from the east, and west, etc and sit down with
Abraham, Jsaac, and Jacob, in the kingdome]: behold few are nominated many are
meant, and they that are not nominated, are as sure of heaven as Abraham or
Isaac, or Jacob. Gal. 3.14.
And yet again That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles etc]
lo, the Gentiles who are intended are sure of as good a blessing as Abraham
who is named, you could have been no happier, if God had appeared to you as he
did to Abraham, and blessed you as he did him, for his blessing shall be yours.
Oh that they which are so name-sick, could consider this, when they often
sigh, and say within themselves, had I been in Abraham's state, had the Lord
spoken to me, and blessed me, as he did him, I had been happy: why; you are as
happy now (but for your conceit); God who tell's you the blessing of Abraham
shall come on the Gentiles, does therein assure you of as much happiness as ever
he had, or you could have had, if you your self had been Abraham.

Now then, seeing this pretense does pervert Gods course of convaying comforts
to his saints, and nullifyes his manner of speaking, to this purpose, let such
as have desire of comfort, cease to plead it any more. And this is the first
cuill of this pretense.

Secondly, extent of Gods blessed truth, and argues that the Lord did mean,
no more then he did name.

A thing that never came into his heart, as being utterly false, and manifestly
contrary to our own reason, and to the courses of common equity among men, in
all civil passages whatsoever, as it were easy to instance in multitudes.

Look we upon our own legal proceedings and conveyances. In a band or
obligation, some one party is named who owes the debt, and some one to whom it
must be paid.

In a man's last will and testament, legacies are bequeathed to some one, or few
by name; but we all know that more are meant in both: the damage of the one if
it be not paid, the advantage of the other if it be received, does extend and
redounde to the heirs, excecutors, administrators, and the successors of
these, to all generations, the childrens children, and their childrens children
may rue the non-payment of a band, and a man's posterity through many ages, may
rejoice in the possession of such a portion of land or money, as may be
bequeathed to them. Thousands may feel the good or evil fruit of that which
some one or two are named unto: and the right of those who surviue and succeed
as heirs etc. to the parties who are either debtors or legaters, is every way
the same, as theirs is, who were personally interessed there into.

And the law of nations is as open, and the equity thereof as apparent, and
justice may be claymed (in any case of clear equity) as well by any man's
successors, as by a man's self, it being intended to all the subjects of a
kingdom, and their posterity for ever.

Now if this be the benefit of that right, which is coming unto us, and may be
challenged by us, from the laws of men; let us consider wisely, what may
accrue unto us by the law of the everliving God, who being justice it self,
cannot make a law, which should be either at all unjust, or in the least, less
just then ours, nay we may conceive, yea we must believe, that his is
jncomparebly beyond ours in all points of justice, as being the foundation of
all true equity under heaven.

And if we will but call this into careful consideration; it will be most easy
to us to apprehend that our right is undeniable and undoubted, and that by this
law of God we may recover our comforts abundantly in Jesus Christ, in whom all
the faithful are made by grace, such as may boldly appropriate the truth of
all Gods goodness to themselves.

Are not all the people of God heirs, eve^ heirs of all his most precious
promises? I am sure they are so called more then once, or twice by the apostle
in diverse of his epistles. To the Romans. To. 9.8.
[the children of Promise are counted for the seed,] to the Galathians [now we
are children of promise, Gal. 4.28. Gal. 3.29.
as Isaac was] and again in the same Epistle ye are Abraham's seed and heirs
according to promise] and in his epistle to the Hebrews he does both affirm
it, and itterate it [God being willing to show more abundantly to the heirs of
promise] And in another chapter they are so called again. Meb. 6.17 Cap. 11.9.


Are not the promises of God the inheritance (as was noted before) of his
people. Psalm. 119.111.
David did so account them [Thy promises have I claymed as mine heritage for
ever, for they are the joy of my heart.] And God by his prophet would have all
his people to repute them so, for in the conclusion of that chapter which is a
very treasury of most sweet consolations, this is added as the seal of them
all, to all that are the Lords [This is the heritage of the Lords servants
etc.] Thus it is clear that we are heirs of the promises, and that the
promises are our inheritance. Note.
And by the way, this one thing we may note as a most comfortable difference
between God and men in this case, that whereas some one child, (the eldest)
is the heir, and carrye's away the inheritance, and the rest have but petty
portions; we are to know for our joy, that all the Lords children are heirs,
yea coheires and that not only with one another, but with Jesus Christ, and
that not alone of the promises, To. 8.17.
but of the glory promised? So says the holy Ghost. [ If we be children we
are heirs, even coheires with Jesus Christ etc.]

Again as the scripture does call us heirs, so, does it also account us as
the executors, Ioh. 17.10.
successors, and assigns of the promises aforesaid: what says Christ? [I pray
not for these alone, but for all that shall believe.] What says Peter? Act.
2.39.
[For the promises are made to you and to your seed, and to as many as God
shall call.] Are not these (and many more such sayings in the scriptures)
sufficient assignements to secure and satisfy the souls of Gods saints in the
sweetness of this truth? to say they be not, is to blame God; and if they be,
how much too blame are we, not to make our use of them?

Were it not a silly and a shameful thing for any to come in open court,
(being summoned thither to receive his debt, or his legacy) and to refuse to
have any thing to do with either, upon this jdle allegation; saying, my name
is not in this band, or in this will, I know not whether I may safely meddle
with this money or not. Surely if any one should be found that were thus
simple and absurd, every one would pass sentence on him, and say he were
worthy to be begged, for a fool, that would thus foolishly refuse his own
right, and benefit, which is as absolutely his, who is an heir, excecutor, or
assign of him who is named, as if himself were also named.

Now if in man's court this were a ridiculous plea and such as was hardly ever
heard off, how may we think God will take it at our hands, when we thus weakly
take part with Satan, against his glory and our own good, and cast off our
propriety in the things pertainig to both, upon this simple, and sinful shift,
which he sugesteth, whereby he cuningly mak'es us rob both God and our own
souls; God of the honor of his love and favor; our own souls of the most
worthy comforts and advantages, and those most gracious legacyes which are
given and assigned to us, by the last will and testament of the Lord Jesus.

Nay, let this spiritual sillynes be so far from us, that we rather do as
wordly men do in these cases; who when they have hope of any such temporal
advantage, do all they can to prove themselves to be the parties to whom it
appertains, laboring by all might and main to make it appear, that they
are the heirs or legators in such a case, that so the comodity may come to
them: sparing no pains, no expense, to search the kings roles, the church
regiesters, and all kind of written evidences, by any of which, it may in the
least appear, that they are the men who must enjoy this money, or legacy.

This should be our course, it would become us well to do thus, why should not
we in this manner bestirre our selves to make good these good things to us?
especially whenas it is a matter so easy for a man to prove himself the heir
of promise, the son or daughter of Abraham, and that as truly (in regard of all
good things from God) as Isaac was, as was noted even now to wit, Gal. 3.9.
by our faith [ So then they which be of the Faith of Abraham are blessed with
faithful Abraham] and blessed as children of Abraham as is plainly avouched
and notifyed before, ver. 7.
[ know ye that they that are of Faith are the children of Abraham]. Know ye,
or be it known to you (says the holy Ghost) that thus it is. Go then, and
enquire after this one evidence, (which being received in any true measure from
God) gives you as absolute assurance of all good, as ever Abraham had. If you
have his faith you have his right, to all comforts both here, and in heaven. I
say if you have his Faith, I say not so much faith, but such faith, as he had;
a man is sufficiently proved to be the lawful heir of his father though he
come short of the extent, and measure of many things his father had. Our faith,
(even the least measure given us in the soundnes and truth thereof), does avouch
us not only the children of Abraham but of God too, Gael. 3.19.
as the apostle adds [we are all the sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ].

Let us not then thus fondely pretend any thing against our selves, but give
our hearts soundly to contend for that which may bring true benefit unto us. To
be the successors of the saints in grace and holiness, is as good as to be
named. Christ argue's the Jews (because they granted themselves the children
of them that slew the Prophets) to be guilty of the blood of the Prophets, and
laye's it upon them in these terms [That upon you may come all the blood
which was shed from the blood of righteous Abell, to the blood of Zacharias
etc. whom ye slew etc.] Now the same evidence that may convince a wicked man,
may comfort a child of God, to wit, that he is a child, a successor in grace
to the saints, as they were in sin to those bloody persecutors. And this is our
second evidence against this pretense.

Thirdly, this pretense of being named, then living, and there named, as if it
were then true to them, but neither now, nor then, to any body else.

If this point of being named be so material as these who thus urge it do
make it, then it was good scripture, and Gods truth to them, but it must needs
dye with them, and become a dead letter to us that now live.

And would not this inference be monstrous, and unspeakably blasphemous that we
(that are Gods children) should devise arguments against Gods word, the
jmmutability whereof is so often avouched every where, that heaven and earth
must pass before one jot or title may fall thereof: and yet with one breath we
will make it all void as a thing of naught, and (by our argumentation)
conclude that now it stands for a cipher, rather them for any scripture.

what need the devil more advantage, he has now enough to work the utter
subversion of all religion, seeing (out of the mouths of religions persons) he
can gather conclusio^s to prove the scripture (which is the ground of religion)
not to be (as once it was) of any power authority, force, and virtue but rather
like some ban^ that is ca^celled, some lease or deed expired, making Gods
truth as momentany, fading and mortal, as the men were to whom it was spoken,
whereas we are to know, that God speaks contrarily, that albeit, [ all flest be
grass, yet the word of the Lord endures for ever as being like the Lord
himself who spoke it, eternal and unchangeable.

If we shut not this out, all atheism will be let in, this is an open gap to all
ungodliness, for, if none have right in the scriptures but they that are named,
there is now no book of God, no revealed will of his, no scripture, no rules
of any religion extant: the life of all is tied to the length of their days to
whom it was spoken, and so they being dead his truth is deceased with them
and has no more power to help us then a dead man has to help himself. And
thus every godles wretch may now lift up his head and triumph, that there is no
curb for his corruption, no bridle for his rebellion, he has what he would
have; seeing these precise fools which make such a do, about religion, have
(now when they have done all) undone all religion, and taught them a trick to
cast off all that is revealed against their jmpietyes: because they are not
named, they need neither fear nor care for any thing, that is either
forbidden or commanded.

Nay, (which is yet more; and more hellish) by this reason of those that in
this particular are thus unreasonable, the Lord must make as many Bibles as
there be ages and generations of men, and put in all the names of all men both
good and bad too, if he make account to be believed or obeyed. We must expect
new editions of the scripture daily, wherein every one may read his own part
and know it to be his own by his proper name annexed thereunto. Yea long before
our days, even in all the ages of the old and new testament, should many
Bibles have been extant, besides that one, which concerned but a few
Patriarcks Prophets, and Apostles, whereas the multitude of believers was very
great besides these, we may safely think the Lord had many people, beside
these principal and extraordinary persons, who were especially spoken to.

Now then, seeing the Lord in his wisdom never saw it meet to pen, and publish
more then one Bible, and that noe people of God, in any time or state of the
church did, or could ever challe^g more, how gross and egregiously sinful,
and senseless are these, who utter that, which if (in this particular of names
whereof we now speak) it might be justified, must condemn all Gods people of
folly, and God himself of injury. God must be unjust to witholde his will, they
must be unwise, not to call for that which they might as well know, did
concern themselves as Abraham, David, or any other, whose name is so often
mentioned and recorded in this. Inasmuch then, as God himself remayne's only
wise without doing this, and his people of all ages were wise in not desiring
any such thing: cease we from this infernal infatuation, which proclaims our
folly, and infidelity to be of a deeper strain, then any age has ever seen.
Let us be sorrowful for what is past, and silent for heareafter, and know that
the truth of the scripture stands not upon men's names, but upon Gods own
nature, who for his own names sake, (though our names be not there) will
fulfill it unto us in every tittle of that saving truth, which by faith we can
apprehend. And this is our third evidence against this pretense.

Fourthly: nameing whereas (intruth) that of it self can evince no comfort at
all: and thereof we may be soon persuaded, if we consider these two things.

1. that, many are named, who are never comforted in Gods book. 2. that, the
only comfort of a child of God is to have his name written in another book to
wit, that book of life.
For the first, he knowe's nothing as he ought to know, who knows not, that
many are named in the bible for evil, not for good, nay it had been good for
them (in some sort) that they had, had no names recorded there. As Cain, Saul,
Ahitophell, Judas, with many others who are so far from being comforted by
their names registered, that they are shamed, branded, and have their names left
for everlasting reproach and infamy, that all ages and generations of men to
the worlds end, might know what monstrous hypocrttes they were on earth, what
miserable reprobates they are in hell.

For the second, who knows not; that the true joy and comfort of a christian
cannot consist at all in being named in Gods book, for even many of his holy
ones are also marked with a black coal for some saylings whereby they are
blemished to this day: but that which may joy them indeed, is the assurance of
their names being written in the book of life, many may have names in the
Bible, who have none in that book, but whosoever has his name written there,
is sure of all comforts that are revealed and promised here. Hence it was that
our savior gave that Item to his disciples who returning from the excecution
of their commission, were almost ouerjoyed with the happy success they found,
and came to Christ with most glad hearts, [Master, Luk 10 9.
even the devils are subdued to us] well says he, that is some matter to joy
in, you may be glad of that, but if you would joy in that which is indeed a
sound cause of rejoicing, as being such wherein none but Gods elect have any
part, ver. 20.
[ Rejoice (says he) in this, that your names are written in the book of
life] in the other, reprobates may rejoice as well as you, but in this they
have no portion, it is your only, and your all-sufficient cause of rejoicing.
And the consolation of being written in this celestial register, is both
peculiar only to true christians, and common to all; none but the faithful can
have it, and none of the faithful but have it.

So says the spirit, [they that overcome, Ren. 3.5.
their names are written, and shall not be blotted out of the lambs book of
life,] cap. 20.15.
and [every one wohse name was not found written in the book of life, was
cast into the lake of fire and brimstone] but [they whose names were found
there, might enter into that holy, cap. 21.27.
and most glorious city.]

So then we see plainly, by these particulers, that these two things will
follow, to wit, 1. that a man may have his name written in the Bible, and yet
not in heaven, as many hypocrites and reprobates have; and. 2. that a man may
not have his name here, yet written in heaven as millions of the elect have.
And if these two propositions be true and unreprovable (as we see they are)
what validity can be found in these fond conceits of ours? what consequence
of comfort or discomfort is is to any man whether he be named in this book of
God or not? Let us surcease to mention this which cannot profsit us, and make
sure of the other, which is such a sure evidence of our salvation. And this is
our fourth evidence against this pretense.

Fifthly, popish, and does confirm the papists in their error of denying the
ceartainety of the salvation of the elect; and when they argue against the
truth of God herin, they urge this very thing; where (say they) is it written
that I such a one, or such a one by name John, Thomas, Mary, Martha, or any man
or woman, shall be saved. This is their language up and down, and shall the
people of God speak it? shall Satan make christians to speak as antichrist
does? God for bid.

It were a most easy matter to make them a full answer and quitt them with like
questions in other cases: where is it written that any man by name hall rise at
the last day; is it not therefore sure that they shall, because they are not
named? by this reason all papists must be notorious heretics as some of their
holy fathers have been, who have showed themselves damned hell hounds in
denying as evident truth as this. Again I would feign know of any papists
whether no more shall be believed of any man then that which is written of him by
name; if not, then no man has any thing at all to believe now, because no man
that now lives has his name in the scripture; if yea, then why may not this
truth of the assurance of salvation be believed of the faithful, as well as
any other wherein they are no more named then in this?

But our purpose is not to refute them now, but to reprove you, who confirm
and harden them in this their falsehood and heresy by the like allegations of
the same things for your selves. The devil is equally subtle to seduce you
both, to witholde the truth of God in unrighteousness, and to turn it into a
lie, by suggesting this pretense of names into your minds and mouths. Do but
think what dishonor the Lord has, what disadvantage his truth has hereby,
that his aduersarys who speak so blasphemously, can allege, that they speak
no other then his own children do (even the sincerest of them) who live, and
look to their ways most exactly.

Thus Satan make's you ignorant papists unawares, and make's them jmpudent
papists through your ignorance herin. And shall we support that (popery) which
we hate? And this is our fifth Evidence against this pretense.

The sixth and last is, prophanes as well as popery. It is the manner of the
most impious and ignorant persons that live, to throw out these or the like
interrogatoryes unto us, and that in a scornful and unsavory manner. When we
have convinced them of their sin, and Gods curse due thereunto, and that so
plainly by the power and evidence of the scripture, that there is noe denial
or evasion to be made, but that such a sin, and such a sinner must be accursed;
then as their last refuse, in defense of the sin, and defiance of the reprooffe
due unto it, they fly to this [where is this or that written of you or of me,
or of any man particulerly?] show us that by all your divinity if you can, and
so with this accursed enquiry they insult against God, his truth, his
ministers, and make themselves wholly incapable of reformation going on, in all
ungodliness with a high hand, and a hellish heart, because (forsooth) we cannot
show their names entitled to the justice of God, and that the arrows of his
vengeance are shot at them personally.

And this, they either do, or may say, they have learned of these pure and
scrupulous persons, who made a marveilous show they would (in no wise) sin
against God, yet are too well known to allege the same sinful excuse for
themselves. And has any christian a heart to utter that, which has so much
evil in it, and no good at all? shall any who fear the Lord unfeignedly,
harten proqhane persons, and strengthen their hands against him, and his word,
who cast of the care of both so desperately? And this is our sixth and last
evidence against this first pretense.

I might prosecute this particular much more plentifully, but I will not,
hopeing that, that which is said will hunt it out of their hearts, who see the
sin and jmpiety of it, which thus far we have endeavored to discover, that
we might once learn, for ever to abandon and abhor to speak after Satan. If
in the laying out of this, any have thought me too long, let him know, that the
evil is exceeding gross, and has (you see) so much jmpiety in it, that too
much cannot be spoken against it. The Lord and his sacred truth, and his poor
saints are the loosers by it; the devil, the pope and the profane, they gain
abundantly, al take their advantage^ against God, from the mouths of his own
people, the inferences and consequences of whose pretense in this thing do
produce in finite evils, as you have heard in the particulers above mentioned,
whereunto we will add no more now, but proceed to the examination of that
which they further pretend, in the second place.

And that is their unworthiness of the promises, apply the good words of God) we
are no way worthy of these comforts and kindnesses and therefore may not
imagine them to be ours.

Well, be it granted, we will most willingly yield it, that you are not (nor
cannot be in your self) worthy, nothing is more true, it were extreme pride,
and unspeakable presumption for any man to conceit, there were any worth in
him at all, by which he might merit, or make claim to the least comfort he can
receive. But what of all this? what follows hence? or what is it you would
couclude here upon? Is this it, that you have no worthiness, therefore you can
have no comfort, you have no desert, therefore you have no right, to the
favors of God? Know then, that these inferences are as injurious to God, and
as offensive before him, as the former were in your first pretense, which we
have fully frustrated.

That you are not worthy is undeniable, but that therefore you may not meddle is
damnable: Evidences against it.
the antecedent is Gods, the consequent is the devils, who draws evil out of
good, as God does good out of evil. And dare you yoke Gods true propositions,
and the devils false conclusions, together? It seems you dare, because you
do; but because we are persuaded that your dar^ing and doing (and the impiety
of both) do proceed from Satan's vehement temptation, working (as in the
former) upon your ignorance; infidenlity, and want of informatten; we will
therefore do our best to instruct you herin, and unsold the fearful
consequences of this corrupt conceit, that you may see, and resist them, for if
you well advise concerning them, it will manisestly appear, that the evil of
this second pretense is no whit inferior, to that which we have detected in
the first.

To begin then, first evidence against this second pretense is, the
contradiction it has with the other, for if there be any strength in this,
there is none in that which went before, and if that be sound, this is sight.
For why? what avails it for one to have his name in Gods book, and himself
to be directly spoken too, if he be not worthy of any thing promised to him;
and if a man be worthy, then (by this reasoning) his nameing, or not nameing,
is a matter of nothing. Thus these two Satanticall conceits do cut one
another throats, any man may jmagine they are not of God, I ceause they agree
not with one another, it is for the father of lies thus to confute, yea
confound himself in that which he suggesteth. The God of truth never speake's
any thing which will not well consert with it self, there is a heavenly harmony
in all that the God of heaven saye's: But the devil (being himself a
destroyer) suborne's that which will both destroy it self, and us, and yet we
are so unwise as not to know it.

But let us note it more narrowly now, and take good notice of in this pretense
compared with the former.

That which was urged before did (as we have showed) nullify Gods truth to all
except such as were named, this which is pretended now, does make their title
void too; before you thought Abraham, David, etc. happy men, for being named
they might apply the promises; now unless they were worthy their nameing does
not help; so that, what the first pretense did leave but to few, this second
does take from all, and now no Patriarch, Prophet, or Apostle, is in better
case (by this allegation) then one of us; for unless they have worth in them,
they can have no warrant to apply the comforts of God so that now (even these
holy men) are as sarre to seek of their consolation (for want of worthiness) as
we weere for want of names.

That the best of them was not worthy, I think you believe, and it is evident
they were not, by their own acknowledgment, they that have had most grace from
God have been most abased in their own eyes, and have ever disclaymed with
all deadly detestation and defiance, the entertaynement of any such proud
conceits.

The man we have so often named, and of whom our text does entreat, even
Jacob who here does (as you see) so comfortably entitle himself unto these
promises of God, and so powerfully apply them; he in the next verse to our text
renounceth all worthiness and freely confesses, he is less (in worthynes) then
the least of all Gods mercyes, not worthy of any one, noe not of the least of
any of them; and surely all the servants of Jacobs God are of the same mind.
Yet you see, he (and many more whom we have notifyed) did take home the truth
of God with warrant enough from God though they found no worthiness thereof in
themselves.

Now then, seeing (you see) whereunto this come's that what is pleaded in this,
does devour and make void what was urged in the other, and that these two
cannot by any means agree with one another, you have good reason to agree to
neither, but notwithstanding we have neither names in Gods book, nor worthynes
in our selves, let us apply the promises of Gods love and savor to our souls;
for they do not depend upon any such things as these: Noe child of God ever
had any worthynes, yet every one has had the interest and benefit of his
blessed promises. This is our first evidence against this second pretense.

Secondly, our own thoughts of our selves, above and beyond Gods thoughts of
us, as if what we apprehended of our selves were all in all, and what the Lord
thought of us were nothing at all: whereas the truth is, that it must go with
us, and be with us, according as our God is minded toward us. All the hope and
happiness, and all the sear and misery of a man, does wholly consist in that
which God conceives of him. His good opinion of us, does assure us to be in a
good (nay a most excellent) condition; but it is woeful with the man of whom
the Lord thinks ill: he is indeed in a hard case, of whom he has a hard
conceit.

If our own conceits of our own estates might rule the roaste, and bear all
before it, what sure ground of any safety could we have in any thing, being
subject to such gross aberration in all our apprehensions; for, through the
force of temptation we are diversely (and for the must part erroneously)
opinionated of our selves, sometimes too presumptuously, as David [when he
thought he should never have been moved:] Psalm. 3 v. 6 Ion. 2.4.
sometimes to dejectedly, as Jonas [when he gave himself quite over for a cast
away] our ignorance and Satan's malice, working with it, make's us many times
proud and praeposterous, many times slavish and (...)-base, ever amiss, never
in the right, for our own estates: therefore there is nothing to be gathered
from this false ground of what we imagine, seeing the Lord (who knows our
thoughts long before they come into our hearts) has told us that the
imaginations of our hearts are evil continually. Genesis 6.5.


Nay, (which is yet more) we may not measure our future estate, (in this
manner) upon those good and warrantable thoughts we have of our selves; as when
God commands, and his spirit enlighteneth us to see our unworthiness, and to
think meanly of our selves as we ought to do in regard of our sins desert,
we may not hence collect any such conclusion as we would here infer.

For the devil does abuse us by double pollieye, both in causing us (many
times) to miss the true apprehension of our estate, and if at any time the
spirit of God lead us into a true understanding of the same, he perverts the
consequence thereof, and make's that false. We being then so subject to this
twofolde miscarriage, either of false opinion, or false conclusion (by him
suggested (upon our true persuasion,) let it be far from us, to frame or
enforce any thing concerning our final condition, upon what we think for the
present. God never built any thing at all that belonges either to our present
state of grace, or our eternal state of glory upon this hay, stubble, and
chafe of our apprehensions.

It is the Lords, approbation, or disallowance which all the world must stick
to; for by it, all men either stand or fall, sink or swim, live or dye are
condemed or justified for ever. Our right and part in himself and all his
promises lies hereupon. He cannot err or be misguided touching us, being the
most righteous judge both of Angels and men, the elect and reprobate of both,
as he says all is, and so it must be for ever and ever. Isa. 55.8.


Hence it is that the Lord sendes the Jews word that [his thoughts are not as
their thoughts] as if he should say, it matters not what you think; what I
think, is the thing you must depend upon: ver. 9.
and that he explanes unto them in the very next verse, where he affirms his
thoughts to exceed theirs [as far as the heavens sur pass the carth,] which
are every way much more high and excellent.

What then, though you think your self unworthy? if the Lord think you
worthy it is well enough, you are bound to the one, he is free to the other,
though it be your duty to account meanly of your self, yet it is his mercy to
accept you as worthy of his best favors, and your estate must be conceived of,
according to his, not your own estimate. So God relleth his people by his
prophet Jeremiah. Ier. 29.11
[I know the thoughts that I have thought concerning you (says the Lord)
thoughts of peace and not of evil to give you and expected end] Ioe according
to his thoughts so is it unto us, by his thinking thus of us, we attain an
expected end. Indeed to be but meanly conceited of our selves, is no other
then we ought to be, and if we could think ill of our selves without any
further such ill consequence concluded thereupon, it were well with us, and a
sure sign that God thought well of us, as we might instance in many
particulers upon whom it has well appeared, that Gods thoughts of them have
not been as their own have been. Job 40.4. cap. 42.6.7.8. Jer. 31.18.19.20.
Job thought himself vile, but God accounted preciously of him as he that
reads may see. ^phraim blamed himself exceedingly, and laid much to his own
charge; God acquitted him, yea commended, and comforted him abundantly.

And the same might we say of many more but one shall serve for all, and that
is Paul, who laye's out himself at large in regard of that wickedness which made
him utterly unworthy of any mercy, but most worthy of Gods greatest vengeance
and sury. He does freely confess his foul offenses past, his blasphemy
against God, his tyranny against his saints, etc. And in regard of these we may
conceive that he thought himself for ever utterly unworthy to intermedle in
that holy ministration of the Apostleship, and much less worthy of any
interest in Gods kingdom of glory, but did he thence (as you do) conclude
that he should never receive any consolation because he was unworthy; Noe, but
the clear contrary, he measured his estate not by his own estimation of
himself, but by the Lords approbation of him: 1. Tim. 1.12.13.
mark his words [And I thank our Lord Jesus Christ who enabled me; for he
counted me faithful, and put me into his service.]

Consider well the power of this truth in this holy Apostle, there was good
reason he should judge himself unworthy, yet no reason, that he should
(therefore) esteem himself incapable of Gods favor, he settle's his soul and
rests his heart as upon a rock, on that which the God of heaven did conceive of
him, and as God did account of him so was he comforted in himself.

All the thoughts of his own worthlessnes could not debar his blessedness,
but Gods accounting of him worthy, made him blessed. And this is our second
evidence against this pretense.

Thirdly, unworthiness is the only bar of our interest and benefit in Gods
promises, and so consequently that our worthynes is our evidence to claim
them by; and neither of these, have either any truth, or true comfort in them,
but much presumption is in the one, and foul falsehood in both.

For why? it is more then manifest that the Lord never meant to found his
favors upon any such ground in us, but only and merely, upon his own free
grace, love, and faithfullnes, that in these he might be magnisied of us.

Do we not understand thus much plainly, by that which the Lord says, when
he putts the case with David and his posterity (including and intending all his
children with them in their generations) that suppose, Psalm, 89.
or admit that on their part, all might be ill, in regard of their rebellion
and vnfaithfullnes against him, and that he, or his, should break his law,
neglect his love, forget his statutes, fail in much good, fall into much
evil, etc; yet for all this, (says the Lord) I will not fail or forget, or
neglect him, or them, well I may scourge them, and make them smart for their
desobedience, but my faithfullnes shall remain, my covenant shall not be
broken, I will not alter the word that is gone out of my lips etc. with very
much more there added and enlarged by the Lord, of purpose to confirm this
truth, that he will be glorified in the fruit of his own grace, without any
worth of ours at all, that he may be honored of us in his most worthy
excellency, of compassion and favor so freely, and so fully cast upon us. But
this we spoke of before.

And so we did of the poor prodigal too, who could not discern any worth in
himself, but saw and was convinced of his base and most unworthy estate, yet
resolves not to let go, or give over, but to rise and go to his father with
all expedition, in hope to find some favor and compassion and to say to him,
[I am not worthy to be called thy son] Lo, he was so far from building any
thing upon his worthynes, or to cast himself down by want thereof, that he will
plead he is not worthy, even then, when he hopes of acceptance and
entertainment. And of this we also spoke in our former point, and therefore
spare to urge it more largely now.

It is the faith fullnes of God, not the worthiness of man, that is the evidence
of any good unto us, and that is every where pressed by the Apostle upon Gods
people He is faithful who has promised] God is faith full who will stablieh
you] and the like in many places; but one, above all I commed unto your
consideration, 2. Tim. 2.13.
to wit that, to Timothy [Though we believe not, yet he abides faith full, he
cannot deny himself] note here, how the Apostle pleads Gods faithfullnes,
against our failing and vnfaithfullnes, and would have us know, that though on
our part there should be want of faith, yet on his there neither is, nor can be
any want of faithfullnes, [Though we believe not] that is, not as we would, not
as we should, though our graces want weight and measure, yet his grace is the
same, to wit, infinite and above measure: the meaning is not though we had no
faith at all, or did not at all believe, for then might paga^s and infidells
flesh themselves, and gather heart here; noe the Lord never made them any such
promise, nor spoke any word (in his whole book) to joy them in the least, but
only to his own, who having got a grain of faith do believe, yet wanting
much more then they hauc, do not believe as they would or should, and to those
the Apostle says, let them be of good cheer, and know, that though much want
be in them, there is infinite fullnes in God, he abides faithful, he
abounds in faithfullnes, and it is as sure that his children shall find and
acknowledge it, to their comfort, as it is ceartaine; that God [cannot deny
himself] which clause as it confirms his favor fully to his own, so does
it clearly exclude all jmpious persons who believe not at all, for unto these
cannot God deny himself (in this sense) because he never acknowledged them, or
made any promise of grace unto them. So that (we now see) our want, will not
make God wanting to us, he props up our hearts, and applies our happiness from
the faithfullnes he has, not from the worthynes we have.

Besides, we may further see, what a silly plea this matter of unworthiness is,
whenas they who allege it to this end, do make the favor and love of God
far inferior to man's. It is not ordinary with men that die, to bequeath
money, to give legacyes, and to cast kindnesses upon very abject, and unworthy
persons, nay, not only upon the poor who have no worth in them to challeng it
by, but it may be, upon malefactors in goales and prisons, who have much
wickedness, and vileness in them, and are so far from being worthy of any
thing, that they are most unworthy of every thing, and deserve punishment
rather then releife, justice rather then kindness. Yet is it usual with men to
consider the state, and supply the want, even of these persons

And were any of them, or any other, so simple in this (as you are sinful in
the other) to cast off, refuse, and reject all, because they were not worthy of
that which was given, and to deny the receipt because they had no desert? sure I
think no age can yield an instance of any such egregious folly: that any one
of these was ever heard to say, I am not worthy of this legacy, therefore I
dare have nothing to do with it.

And shall we (as by this our allegation we do) make our God less loving,
less liberal then man? shall they give to infants, who could deserve nothing,
to poor men, who have deserved nothing, to vile persons who have deserved no
such thing? and shall the Lords hand be shorter then ours? Again shall all
these accept and take home what is given them, and not urge any thing of their
own to deprive themselves of it? and shall we offer that to God which was
never offered by any to men? and be more fools and jdiotts for our souls then
ever any were for their bodies? what shame, what sin, were this to us before
God, and men? How jdely do we extol the love of God to be in conceivably
infinite in words, whenas in deeds we deny it, and make the world think, it
comes short of that which may be found in men, yea in such men, (it may be) as
were never beloved of God, for even many wicked men are (in their generation)
thus kind, to those in whom no worthiness can be found. The jujury and
dishonor of God is not a little herin, the Lord will look you should do him
right (as you have thus haynously wronged him) by repentance for what is past,
and reformation hearafter, that now you leave urging your own unworthiness (to
any such end as this) and never leave lauding his goodness, and proclayming his
favor all your days. If you will (as indeed you ought) to discover your own
want of worth to the full, do it but beware of eclypsing his worthynes by it.
Nay you must be so far from that, that you must endeavor rather that his
worthynes may shine more clearly, through your baseness. Throughout the
scriptures the greatest glass and glory, of Gods infinite goodness to us, has
been our want of worth to receive it from him. Let this then, carry us to him
whose bounty is so great to those, that have not any thing of their own to
claim it by. Poor, and unworthy persons do flock to the doors and swarm
about the habitations of those that are known to be open-harted, and of a
liberal mind and hand. Let us do in like manner: Go we also to our God,
whose heart is loving and whose hand is free, giving the best things in most
abundant manner and vpbrayding no man with any thing. Jam. 1.5.
And as these poor and needy people, do not question, what is, or what is
not, in themselves, neither let us, but run we to him, and receive we of him,
what he of his own grace shall please to cast upon us, without any
consideration of any thing at all in us.

As for the consiquence of this our unworthiness which does (as it is thus
pleaded) vnavoydably imply that our worthynes is the thing by which we may
challeng the application, and posession, of Gods faithful promises; I say
nothing but this one thing, (which I which all that fear the Lord wisely to
consider) namely, that as I know from their souls they hate to think of any
merit of their own, knowing it to be a thing the Lord does abhor; so withal
that they would seriously take notice of this notortus subtilty in Satan, and
simplicity in themselves, that he can, and does abuse them with such
suggestions as do necessarily draw in those conclusions, which are loathed of
God, and detested by them. In time of temptation they are not their own men,
but easily deluded with such conceits, as seem to savor of marveillous
humility, whereunto when they give place they stand (by direct and undeniable
consequence) guilty of monstrous spiritual pride and much other jmptety.

These snares of the devil they are taken in, before they be aware, or know
where they are, and being once toyled and entangled in them, it is no small
trouble to themselves, and to the messengers of God to get them out, because
this their adversary love's to hold his advantage, and to grate upon them with
that impiety in the consequent, whereof they never once dreamed in the
antecedent, as (I dare say) in this particular, that will follow from that
their tongue utters, which their heart abhorr's: let us not follow our enemy
then, who is so mischeivous, but run, incessantly after our good God, for he
is abundantly gracious. And this is our 3. Evidence against this second
pretense.

Fourthly, wide of all good, this way will lead us if we trace and follow the
temptor herin.

If we may not apply or partake of that whereof we are not worthy, but shun, and
decline the same, how woeful and unhappy had we all been, if he should have
pleaded this for himself, who was the undertaker with God, for all the evil
due to the elect.

If our Lord Jesus Christ had urged his father with this, when he was to
undergo all evil for us, as now we do, when we are to taste of the goodness
of God for our selves, where had we been? what had been our case? no man can
deny but he might as justly, and truly, have avouched that he was unworthy of
any evil, as the worst of us is of any good; he did no more deserve his
fathers indignation which he had through us, then we can the multitude of those
compassions, which we have through him.

Now if he should have cast off all upon this plea, and urged God his father
with his innocenty, holiness, and all those other excellencyes which did abound
in him; and further, that as he did abound in all good, so he did never offend
his father in any evil, and that (in both regards) he was unworthily
afflicted: Ezekiel. 28.4.
and so claymed the equity of the law, that [the soul that sinned should die,]
and he being no way worthy of any evil should escape all. Where should we have
appeared? had we been ever able to stand before the face of God? or to hold
up our heads, with any hope of a happy estate?

But we see our savior, (notwithstanding he might well say, he was worthy of
none of all that evil which was inflicted upon him,) yet he applies and
takes home to himself, all that truth of God which (to this end) the prophetts
had so plentifully fore-tolde of him. Among many other evidences hereof, we may
take notice of that one, which is related to be done by himself to those two
who went to Emaus, (...). 24.27.
[he began at Moses, and all the Prophets and expounded unto them, in all the
scriptures, the things that did concern himself, ver. 44.
] and again [These are the words which I said unto you etc, that all things
must be fulfilled which were written of me, in the Law of Moses, and in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms.] Was not here a worthy pattern of application of
all that God had reveiled of him, who (in himself) was utterly unworthy to
taste one drop of that bitter cup, the whole whereof, in all the venyme dregs,
and lees, he drunk up for us. Now if the Lord Jesus would, and did apply
(though he deserved none) all the evil that was foretold concerning him
throughout the scriptures, should not we do the like for all our good? shall
we (who would be christians) so grossly degenerate from Jesus Christ? Nay rather
let us go search the scriptures too, and diligently persuse, the law, the
prophets, and the gospel also, and whatsoever is written in any of them for
our comfort and peace, let us apply it.

If Christ had not done it in his particular, it had been woe with us: if we
do it in our own, it cannot but be well with us, for why? (as we are in
Christ) there is nothing written but it is happy to us, whereof we may be soon
persuaded if we remenber, that all the evil was (on our behalf) applied to
him, all the good remaynes (for his sake) to be made good to us; besides the
holy ghost assures us that [ whatsoever is written, To. 15.4.
is written that we through patience, etc might have comfort and hope in the
seriptures] whatsoever is not comfortable Christ has taken it, whatsoever is,
he has left for us to take to our selves. And this is our. 4. and last
evidence against this second pretense,

And thus we have encountered these two principal jmpediments, which hinder
the application of Gods most heavenly promises unto us; not, that there are noe
more to be spoken against, or that, we could speak no more against these: but
we intended the discovery of these only as being the main; and thus much only
against them, as the most notorious things wherein they offend against God that
make any use, or allegation of them.

What remains now, but that all that love the Lord, and desire to be beloved
of him, should put on all constant resolution, and contend stoutly aginst all
temptation, giving no place to the devil or any instigation of his, touching
the application of the truth of God.

Let it not greiue us a little, that we have given see much ear to him already,
and that the Lord has been so slenderly believed of us. Our insidelity has
done the Lord wonderful dishonor, we have ill showed our selves children of
such a father, whenas like froward infants we have refused the sweetness he has
provided for us, and even put into our mouths.

We must soundly repent of this refractary carriage, or else we may live, to cry
for that which now we will not have. It were our part and duty rather to pant
after the truth of God, and to faint for want of it, then thus frowardly to put
it from us, when it is so lovingly proffered to us.

We little know, what we do, in refusing to receive his gracious truth; he
never spoke that, which was not worthy that we should hear it conscionably,
and lay it up carefully. Let us resolve to do so heareafter, and think him
worthy of all praise from us, who has revealed his truth so clearly, as it
may be entertained of us comfortably.

And if we will thus do, and endeavor hereunto, we shall soon see what
inconceivable consolations the Lord has reserved for us in those promises, he
has revealed to us. If this reproffe work kindly, to purge out this evil,
we may then give you some taste of the good the Lord has in store for you.

Shall we speak evil to our selves, where God speake's good, or turn his
goodness into our own evil? this is for Satan, not for saints, to do. Strive
we to do as the Lord would have us, and if we will now cease to lend an care
to the devil, and further, and for ever, hearken to our God, we shall see what
more he has to say to his people in the second place from the truth of the
doctrine which we have propounded.

And all that is said by God touching his people is only good, apply that truth
of God which God speaks to him, then may all the Lords saints know for a
surety, that all the sacred, blessed, and sweet sayings of God contained in
his book, are now become their own, the Lord intende's they should apply, and
enjoy them. Not a good word is fallen any where from the mouth of God, but the
same is wholly, and solely, meant to the souls of his children, he sptake it of
purpose that they might take it, it was revealed by him, that it might be
received by them. Noe heavenly tidings of gladness and great joy, no speech of
life and peace, either for present, or eternal happiness, but it is meant, and
sent by God to them, and from him, they have it, sometimes immediately from his
own mouth [I will hearken what the Lord God will say for he will speak peace
to his people and to his saints etc. Psalm. 83.8. Luke 2.10.
] sometimes by the ministrey of Angels [Beholde we bring you glad tidings of
great joy etc.] The Lord has nothing to say on his churches, and childrens
behalf, but (when thy speak to him) to [answer them with good words, and
comfortable words, Zach. 1.13.
] as the prophet Zachariah tell's us. Whatsoever is found any where, that
savours of any saving efficacy, or excellency, it is appropriated to them by
the Lord himself who is the sole author, and the allsufficient founder of the
same. He sets open the fountain of grace and compassion to the house of David
his servants, Zach. 13.1.
and to their only use, benesit and behooffe is it reserved, such only may
drink of the water thereof, as he has of his grace put apart to partake of
himself, it is noe open place for all persons, or any ordinary, for all
comers, but enclosed, and jmpaled to the Lords people alone.

All the consolations of God are theirs, Isa. 52.12,
God himself says it both by his prophet. I, even I, am he that comforteth]
and by his apostle [blessed be God the father of all mercy, and God of all
consolation who comfort us in all our tribulation etc] nay, he gives so much
that if they will receive it, their consolations may abound, not only in
themselves, but toward others they may have comfort to spare [that we may
comfort others with the same comforts wherewith we were comforted of God.]

Comfort ye comfort ye my people will your God say, Isa. 30.1.
speak comfortably to Jerusalem, cry unto her that her jniquity is pardoned,
her warfare is accomplished etc] Behold how freely, and how fully the Lord
speake's, how he doubles his comforts, [Comfort ye, comfort yee] and jtterates
his words, [Speake comfortably, cry unto their] and this (says the prophet)
[will your God say:] it may be (nay it is sure) the divell^, and the world will
say otherwise to you, and thus to others, it is their manner miserably to
misapply all that God says; they use (having their heads, yea their hearts;
full of idle proclamations) to promise peace to themselves, and their fellows
in jmpiety and prophanes, and out of their own spirits to bless themselves,
and discomfort the saints of the living God; but if the Lord once open his
mouth and come to speak his mind, we are to know, that his words, which are
simply good in themselves, and himself absolutely able to make them good to us,
are to be uttered only to his own, none but they are spoken too, when he
speaks good. He draws out the breasts of his consolations to them, but shuts
up his bosom to all others, not a drop of this milk is for any man's mouth but
his own babes, and to them both breasts are tendered, that they might drink
freely and have their full draught. So says the Lord by his prophet. Isa.
66.10
[Rejoyce with Jerusalem all ye that love her etc: that ye may suck the
breasts of her consolations and be satiffyed that ye may milk out and be
satiffyed with the abundance of her glory. For thus says the Lord, ver. 11.
ver. 12.
I will extend peace like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing
stream; then shall ye suck, and be borne upon her sides, and be dandeled
upon her knees.

As one whom his mother comfort, ver. 13.
so will I comfort you and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye
shall see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish and the
hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants etc.] Thus, in this most
comfortable metaphor does the Lord make known his mercy and favor, and we all
know, the most that can be manifested in nature is between the tender babe and
the loving mother, and this similitude the Lord assumeth, to resemble his unto
us, the nature whereof cannot be fully shaddowed by any thing under heaven, but
is most nearly laid out in this representation.

To the Lords people the stream runs full, but there is nothing for strangers,
no current come's to them, the Lord opens it only to his beloved, to all others
it is shut up, and they shut out from having any thing to do with any drop of
it: he will nurse and nourish none but his own tender ones, and they shall have
all that his breasts, ye that his bowels can yield.

They shall be [filled as with marrow and fatnes, Psalm. 63.^.
] and shall drink of the rivers of his house, (and they you know) contain
nothing but water of life.

It would be endless to enter upon all particulers, it is enough that the
apostle says, that [all the promises, are yea, and Amen] and again, that [all
is yours.] If any thing be good, we may engrosse it without sin, for it is all
our own. If any thing sweet, yea more sweet then the honey and the honey comb
we may feed freely upon it, without surfeit, for it was all ordained for us. If
any thing may be more advantage then the most fine gold, and more enrich us
then all spoils, we may get and compass all that we can of it, it is no
impiety, but our duty, to covet in this case. In a word, the best of every good
thing is ours.

What should I say more? yet who can say enough of this particular? seeing the
Lord himself has said more then all the world can utter touching this matter,
to the end that his saints might have abunda^t co^solatio^s measured unto them,
filled up to the brym, pressed down and running over; Ioh. 16.24
and [ these things says Christ, (and the same say I) have I spoken that your
joys maybe full.]

I do most undoubtedly assure my self, and durst undertake to avouch that
there are in Gods book more then a million, of celestial beatitudes, either
literally expressed, or inclusively contained, and all, and every one of them
are only and wholly for the saints to feed, and fasten upon, that their souls
might speak as comfortably, and as considently, to, and of themselves, from
God, Genesis 27.33.
as Isaac said to Esaw (when he cried out for a blessing and could not catch
it) [I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed.] If the Lord have a mynt, nay
he has more, for his word is like a most rich mine, of the best metal, all
the treasure thereof, with the field wherein it is hid, is ours, the purchase is
made, the price is paid; behold it is bought (with all the admirable
advantages thereof) for those that are the beloved of God, to whom it is see
simple for ever, in a most clear, and more undoubted title, then any man's
inheritance under heaven can be holden by, in the legal tenure of any
temporal estate. And this being our own ground, why should we not reap all
the commodity of it, and carry the fruit home to our selves? shall we suffer
others to encroach and gather it from us? or let it lie there ungathered at
all? if we do either of these, we cannot answer our gross ingratitude to God,
our egregious injury to our selves, seeing we wilfully deprive, and rob our
souls of those happy benefits which we refuse.

All the precious words of God are yours to apply; his sure mercies are yours
to receive, they were once uttered by God himself and by his holy secretaryes
recorded for ever, for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation. I hope
then seeing these things are so, (and more then these too, are, not only so, as
we say, but better then we can speak) there is peace and consolation to the
saints, and they have wherein to joy and solace themselves in the Lord their
God, and that love of his, so liberally laid out unto them. What is written
and expressed in the scriptures for good in regard of their state of grace that
shall they have (so far as they can be any way capable thereof) in present
posession: And what is further written, to give us some glimpse, and guess, of
that blessedness which is infinitely above all that can be written or spoken,
that shall you be sure to receive at the hands of God when you come to heaven.
Only all this must be first believed by faith, and when once our faith has
fastened upon it, we shall then experimentally find and feel it. Note.
It is Gods order of working and his manner of conveying, first to reveal a
thing to our faith, and afterward to let us feel it. Abraham must first
believe he shall have a son, and afterward receive him. And all they whose
faith was famous, and their names are left upon that record which can never be
razed in that 11. to the Hebrews did believe the promises before they received
them.

It is hard to say whether any thing can be communicated to us as a favor
which we receive not in faith, and whereupon faith never fastened.

I am sure no spiritual advantages can come any other way, and he that has
temporal favors without faith, has them without comfort.

But to return, and to come to the close of this use of the saints comfort,
why should not they sing for joy, for whom all these songs of joy, are endyted
of God and by him (as it were tuned) of purpose with wonderful variety, and
pleasure, to prevent (if it be possible) if not, to abate, alay, and qualify,
those our sorrows, discomforts, and calamityes spiritual, wherewith Satan does
so annoy and perplexe us, And shall all this be in vain unto us? what? shall
the voice of God be in vain? the voice of God I say, who is such a father,
such a mother to us, as we have heard? shall we frustrate that word of his,
which was never fruiltles to any? which made the world, and does to this day
manage the same? shall we give our God cause to complain against us, and to
say to us, as (in the gospel) he did to others, [I have piped unto you, and
ye have not daunced?] shall we be so stupid, and sensles, dead, and blockish
to the true God, as those jdole false Gods are to such as serve them, [who have
eyes and see not, ears and hear not, hands and handle not, feet and walk
not,] but remain altogether incapable of sense and motion? shall the singular
love of our God find such a sinful issue in us?

O let these devises of the devil be as far from us, as we would be from
him, and as deeply hated of us, as they would make us hated of God. Give a
listening ear, and lay up that most loving speech of God [Are not my words
good to him that walks uprightly?] mica. 2.7^
Yea ceartainly, all the words of God are good, to all that are good in his
reputation and acceptance.

Come near then, ye blessed and beloved of the Lord, come near I say, and
fall to freely, and take your fill of this cup of your Gods consolation: this
his wine and oil, is good to glad your hearts, and to make you to have a
cheerful countenance nay (which is an invalable benefit) a cheerful
conscience. Open your mouths wide yea, as wide as you can, and he will fill
them; extend, dilate, enlarge your heart to the uttermost, there can be no just
fear of want of grace in him, all the doubt is, that you will want place to
receive it; make as much room as is possible, and the Lord will power it in
freely, even till it overflow, as David tell's us he did unto him, when he
confessed that [his cup did run did over,] and the apostle, Psalm. 23.
when he also acknowledges further, that the Lord [can do unto us exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask, or think;] Ephesians 3.20.
and both these sayings do show apparently, that the Lord has more to give,
them we can either ask, or receive. We cannot want so much as he can spare,
nor beg so much as we may have.

Well, Psalm. 115.15.
and worthily might the Psalmist say [yee are the blessed of the Lord] who can
deem you less, that see's all the blessedness that is written in Gods book,
and reserved with God in the highst heavens, to be intended and appropriated to
you, by the Lord himself?

Now then inasmuch as you see Gods favor, let him see your faith, set that
grace a work on this goodness of his.

Do not suffer your selves to be deluded any more by him, who in all his
endeavors meane's no glory to God, no good to you, but mischief to both, by
laboring to cancel his truth to you, and to make void your faith toward him.

Grace him not so much, as to give him the hearing of any thing he offreth to
whisper into your hearts. Cast off all his suggestions with contempt and scorn,
let him see himself despised, and his sabttityes abhorred; Jam. 4.7.
that is the next way to be rid of him, if we resolutely resist him.

And let us strive now and ever to cleave to our God, who can comfort, and do
us good: his voice has sweetness and virtue in it, as well to work good in us,
as to speak good to us, it is all one to him, to give us good things, as to
give us good words. If he say it, it is done; why then do we not as he says,
and lend our best attention to his consolatios. Crave we pardon for our
perverseness past, and power against it fortime to come, that nothing may for
ever heareafter hinder the sound application of Gods saving truth unto us.

And thus we have now at length finished our first use, which concerns both
the righteous reprehension, and the gracious consolation of the saints of God,
who have now had the double portion we promised them.

We are now to put on to the second use of the same, to wicked men reprehe^sion.
of the application of Gods truth. Which being a duty whereunto all men are
bound, they also are enwrapped within the cords of this doctrine, and tied to
take home that part of Gods holy truth which does concern themselves.

And if thus they do, as it is their duty, (and their not doing of it, will
draw down heavy vengeance upon them) then, will their misery and fear, flow
apace upon them, even so fast, that they shall not be able, either to escape
the swiftnes of it, but it will come to them; nor, to withstand the rage and
violence thereof but it will seize them, in spite of all their cursed security
and presumption, whereby they often put their evil far from them. Nay
whether they do take it home or not, it will take, yea overtake, yea and
overturne them too, according to Gods own fearful threatening by Moses [All
these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee, Deuteronomy. 28.15.
till thou be destroyed.]

So that a wicked man's evil is every way, open before him, assured to him, let
him turn himself which way he will, he is in an ill case, if he apply not Gods
truth, he incurres double danger, for the Lord will both plague him for
disobedience to this doctrine, and the truth of God in the terror thereof, will
apply it self, and fasten upon him whether he will or not: and if he do
according as God has said in the lesson before named, then must he also know,
that there is no good at all appertayning to him, but all the evil thath Gods
book reveale's. Nothing is more plain, then that the Lord never meant any
good to any ungodly man: any good did I say? oh it were well with them if that
were all; but to speak as the truth is, and as they shall feel from God in
case they continue in their jmpiety and prophanes, he does not only intend them
no good, but he intendes them nothing but evil, and all evil of every kind,
which is written, all the curses, comminations, heavy sentences, woeful
sayings, all miserable and misceivous messages, either of present justice, or
future vengeance; whatsoever it be that the wisdom of God has revealed from
heaven, or the justice of God has reserved to be executed, either here on
earth in part of payment, in temporal curses, or fully, and finally in hell in
that infinite vengeance, which is jmmeasurable and everlasting; all this, in
every jot and tittle thereof, is theirs, and they must drink off this whole
cup, of the Lords wrath and enraged jndignation, to the bottom, in all the
bitterness of the same.

Go ye sinners and ungodly persons of all sorts, read over and pervse, every
part, every page of Gods sacred book, and in what leaf or line soever ye
meet with any thing that favors of confusion, or sounde's like a curse, or
sentence of comdemnation, say to your selves, as our Jacob does here, [Thou
Lord say this to me] this part of Gods truth is my portion, and belongs to
me, my jmpiety applei's this to me, my wickedness does draw me under this woeful
censure.

But because Gods book is so laden and fraught with dreadful threatenings,
hence (now I think of it) may a man give a great guess at the cause and
reason, why ungodly persons have no delight or pleasure to read the
scriptures, but prefer every vain pa^phlet before those divine words which
were inspired by Gods spirit; a filthy play book invented by the devil, and
by him prompted and put into the brayine of some base impiont varlet, whose
hellish tongue, and, hand he does employ, to pronounce, and pen it, has more
readers, more acceptance, and attention, then those blessed words which God
has breathed into those holy men, who spoke from himself unto us; and why is
this? why is it thus? surely a more eminent reason of this jmpiety cannot be
rendered then this, that, the Lords book boade's them no good, every word is a
woe unto them; and therefore they take no more pleasure therein, then a fellon,
traitor, murderer or some other malefactor does, to read those laws or
statutes which declare the sentence due to such offenses, as he stands guilty
off, in his own knowledge.

But to return to the terror of transgressors; you are to know, that
whatsoever is spoken for evil, it is spoken to you, any potion that is
terrible, or dreadful is prepared of the Lord and full mixed for you, and by
you it must be drunk out, to the very dregs, that you in this kind of
application of it, may either be purged to your true and timely reformation, or
poisoned to your eternal destruction.

Never once dream of thrusting off these things from your selves, you cannot
shift off that which the Lord will fasten upon you what he sett's on, none can
shake off: believe it, believe it, there is noe shunning of that which the Lord
saye's, you must either hear it, or bear it, or both. God will not be set so
light by, of any flesh, as to have his words go wholly unregarded.

He that will hear his own, may so be wrought upon, as that he shall not
bear it, it may work upon him that repentance to salvation which is never to
be repented off. But he that does either refuse to hear, or hears without
fruit, let him know, that he is the man that must bear, those curses, which he
either hears not at all, or not as he ought; as it were most easy to manifest
in the most miserable experience of many a wretch, who turning away his ear
from the Lords message, the Lord has turned the heavy contents of the same
loose upon himself; and made him to cry out woefully in the ears of God and
men, under the insufferable sense and terror of that, unto the tidings whereof
their ear was contemptuous, and would not take seasonable notice.

It has too palpably appeared to be the manner of the most wicked men (and I
know not whether any thing may be a more manifest eare-marke of an jmpious and
ungodly person) to be extremely jmpatient when the truth of God has been
plainly told them; these are of the number of those wretches which were
foretold by the Apostle, that [endure not wholesome doctrine,] that which
soundes not sweetly, and is not melodious, is no meat or music for them,
they are so far from application, that they will not give God audience, but
either wilfully withdraw themselves from the house of God where it is spoken,
or being present, bewray that damned humor of hellish perverseness and impatience
against the Lord and his messenger, which has been found in that godles
Jeroboam, and diverse such branded rebels: and for which (among other their
impietyes) the Lord has left them recorded unto us as the fearful and
rejected objects, of his justice and fury.

It Is a heavy sign men mean to live and dye in their sins, when once they
refuse application of the word, inasmuch as even the application of Gods truth,
is the life of all instruction, the death of all corruption; I know not a more
apparent token of a man whom the Lord is resolved everlastingly to reject,
then when he has given him over to a wrangling disposition, and quarrelling
spirit against the faithful ministey of the word, if that will chafe him, and
make him fret and fume it is past question, that he has a heart both hating God
and hated of God, hardened and enraged by the devil, and with him to be
plagued for ever.

Oh, that you could consider this, who go out of Gods house with that hellish
resolution that (in another case) Dagons priests did, not to tread upon the
threshold thereof any more in haste, noe you will not come to church to be so
bayted, and yet who can do less then bayte you, that come to the temple of
the Lord, as Bears to the stake, as beggars to the stocks. But consider I pray
you, you that so abhor application, how woeful your estate is, that must be
bayted if you come, and reprobated if you come not to hear the Lord speak
unto you. If the first be so bitter, what is the latter? while thou art a
wicked person thou can avoid neither.

Look throughout the history of Gods book, and take notice who have been the
most notorious miscreants, whom the Lord has noted, as [vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction,] and you shall soon find those to be the principal
castawayes, upon whom the word of God has been castaway, who have either not
heard it, or with no proffit, or patience, but with murmuration and resistance.
I could instance Cain, to whom God spoke himself, and Jeroboam before named,
and Ahab, and Ihojakim, and Elyes sons, and a multitude more of most woeful and
accursed miscreants, whose want of application of the word of God unto them,
was one eminent evidence of their just perdition.

Remember what God says to you by his prophet [woe be to him that striveth
with his maker] woe, I say to him that spurns against the needful
manifestation of that misery whereunto his sin has made him subject before his
maker. Can any thing be of worse consequence to us, or heap more vengeance
upon us then this?

Among men, you know what a heinous matter it is, for any offender or
malefactor, having deserved imprisonement, to offer to break out, and run
away, or if he cannot do so, to grow stuburne, headdy, and unruly in the
prison, and if the king send any to examine his fault, and to arraigne him for
his offense, to give them surly answers, unseemly, reproachful and reviling
speeches, to such a one the jailer is more straight, and lays more jrons upon
him; the judge is more severe, and gives him the heavier censure which shall be
excecuted to the vttmost extremity, without any mitigation or favor.

And can any man jmagine that that is not hydeous in Gods eyes, which is
heinous in man's? Is it not his course to double his curses upon such as
struggle to avoyde and decline the declaration and application of them? shall
they not suffer for their obstiancy and impatiency as well as for other any
impiety? yea assuredly they shall and let them know, that where they add one
evil to another, the Lord will add to their, punishment and multiply it out of
measure, as they do their sin.

If therefore, either by infernal flattery, and mystical collusion of your
own souls in secret, Job. 31.
which was a thing that Job execrated; or by open refusal and jmpious
renuntiation of what the Lord speaks, a thing whereof the Jews were most
grossly guilty, Ier. 44.16.
and for which, they were abhorred of God; or by both these, or any other
wicked way or means, you seek cunningly to work, and wind out your self,
from taking such particular notice of Gods threatenings against your sin, and
your self, as he requires and your iniquity deserves; be you well assured,
and know ceartainely, that by such corrupt and ungodly carriage, you shall at
once, increase the Lords provocation against you, and your own confusion
before him, To. 2.5.
and so [ store up wrath against the day of wrath, and the just declaration
(and excecution) of his iudgement] upon your soul and body for ever.

And that you may see I speak not this without book, I pray you look what
God says in his book to this purpose, how read you in the sift book of Moses
called Deuteronomie; read there, and strive to understand what you read, and
out of your understanding of it ponder that saying and lay it up in your hearts:
There you shall hear God speaking thus touching the point we have now in hand:
Dent. 29.18. ver. 19.
[Least there should be among you any root that bears gall and worm wood;
and it come to pass that when he hears the words of this curse, that he
bless himself in his heart and say, I shall have peace though I walk in the
imagination of my own heart, ver. 20.
to add drunkenesse to thirst; The Lord will not spare that man, but the anger
of the Lord, and his iealousy shall smoke against him and all the curses that
are written in this book shall lie upon him, ver. 21.
and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. And the Lord shall
separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of Israel according to all the
curses of the covenant etc. ver. 21.
So that the generation to come shall say when they see these plagues etc.

Thus you see the Lord does manifest, (and that in many words) his mind
concerning this matter, and that we may the better discern his meaning, we may
bretfely abridge all that these words do import, into two particulers.

1. how heinous a thing it is in Gods sight sinfully to shift off the saving
truth of God from our selves. 2. how heavy the hand of God will be in the
extreme and extraordinary punishment of him that does so.
The act is exceedingly amplified, and aggravated, if we do well consider the
particulers of the text, wherein we find it branched and blazed out, to be an
evil consisting of many evils, a very composition of many impietyes, and much
corruption.

First, it is an impious thwarting of God, a crossing of him; even a giving
him, the lie to his face, when any man shall dare to say [I shall have peace
though etc.] Is not this extreme impudency, thus to out face the Lord of
heaven in his own truth? to tell him (as it were) to his teeth, that we shall
have peace, when he says resolutely we shall have none in any ungodly way are
we nor undertakers against the wisdom power, and justice, of God, by all
which, that which he has here uttered against this sin, shall be assuredly
executed upon the sinner? shall we offer to say [I shall have peace] when the
Lord, who is only wise, allmighty, and most just, says we shall not? is not
this to make the world believe, that we think our selves able well enough, to
secure our selves against him, and know a way how to avoid, that which he says
he will inflict? as if we could go beyond God, and overeach him, by some
policy or power of our own.

Secondly, it is a proud exalting of our selves above the Lord and a trusting
upon our own vain lying and blasphemous words [blessing our selves] and
giving no creddit to his most stable and immutable words of truth; as if our
blessing of our selves, had far more efficacy to save and comfort us, then
his words of cursing have to cast us down, and terrefy us.

Thirdly, it is an increasing of sin, we add one evil to another, and so
lade our souls with more and more impiety, augmenting our evil before the
Lord, and encouraging our selves in the same, by this blessing of our selves in
our sinful courses, and casting aside Gods righteous and heavy curses.

All these three amplifications of this impious and hellish act, are apparent
in the text and thus much sin does he commit, that applies not, but puts
off the sacred word, and truth of God from himself.

The punishment due to this threefolde act of impiety, followe's in the text
too, and it is laid out both negative and affirmatively.

Negatiuely in that one woeful sentence [The Lord will not spare,] or, [the
Lord will not be merciful to that man] a truth clearly contradictory to the
conceit of these accursed miscreants, who are so be sotted, that they can
believe nor apprehend, nothing in the Lord but mercy, and so make him a
notorious monster therein, as if he had nothing else in him.

Affirmatively, and that many ways, in such miserable sayings as follow; and
every one worse then other, if we note them; Such a sinner shall feel; 1. the
anger of God, and to put him out of hope of appeasing it, it is added that, 2.
the jealousy of the Lord shall break out, and smoke against him, and jealousy
is jmplacaple rage, such as will heap upon an offender 3. [all the curses
written in Gods booke] none, no not one, to be avoided or escaped: among the
rest. 3. notorious curses are named to wit, 1. that [his name shall be blotted
out from under heaven.] 2. that [the Lord shall separate him unto evil.] 3.
that [the ages to come] shall fall into admiration of that man's fearful
condition.


Lo, thus shall it be done to the man that the Lord will ave^ge himself upon,
for this one sin of shifting off the sacred truth of God from himself. He shall
have no mercy from God, but all the misery that may be, he shall be the unhappy
object of Gods heavy anger, of his fearful jealousy, of all his curses, unto
which the Lord shall so set him apart and pick him out, that he shall be the
wonderment of all succeeding times. This is the Lord doom upon him, who
fawneth upon himself in his prophanes, and flies (as much as in him lies) and
will not hear of the justice of God, revealed in his word, against his
wickedness,

Let us then (dear christians) take heed, and beware of a stubborn heart, a
stiff neck, an jmpious spirit, to throw away what the Lord says to us, Do
not provoke him to jealousy, we are not able to deal with him, he is stronger
then we; know we that nothing well more vex, or sooner provoke him hereunto,
then this jmpiety, of refusing to apply his word to our selves. He is heavily
jealous (as well he may be) of that man's estate, that will not endure his truth.

For why? consider I pray you, what good can be in him, what evil can be out
of him, who rejects what God says? it is not possible he should have any
good, who will none of that word, which is the only ground of all good to us,
and the only guide of us unto it: neither is any evil jmpossible, but all most
easy to be fastened upon the man, who forsakes the sole and sovereign means
of his good. That man must needs hear Satan, that hears not God, and if
once the devil be master of our ear, and have it at command, what can be so
corrupt or accursed, which he will not convay into us?

How much better, and more happy were it for us, to hearken to the heavenly
voice of God, though that he says, should seem heavy to us. The worst he
speaks is to make us good, and to further our best estate. He does wish us
well in the most woeful sentences he vtters against us. Let him that has an
ear to hear, hear what the Lord says, which if we will do, we shall many
time hear him complain against his people, and giving this one jmpiety as a
principal cause of their wonder full misery [But they would not incline their
ear.]

And when he wished, and meant them all good, he says [ Oh that my people
would have heard] then (says he) I would have comforted them, and crush't
their enemies; but he complayneth mournefully against them [but my people would
not heart etc, therefore I gave them up to the hardness of their own hearts,]
that they might be perverted by their own counsels, and so come to sinall
confusion through this perversenes. Seeing then this sin makes the Lord to give
over men, now let every man that woull not be given over of God, give over this
sin, and for ever resolve to lay home the Lords truth to himself, that it may
live in us, and we may live in it, and by it, before the Lord: Put we on that
resolution unfeignedly, Ier. 42.5.
which the Jews in Jeremies time did dissemblingly profess when they said
[The Lord be a true and faithful witness between thee and us if we do not
according to all things for which the Lord shall send thee to us, ver. 6.
Whether it be good or evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord they Good
etc.] Let our deeds be as good, as their words were here, and it shall be well
with us. Take the truth the Lord intends thee, and it shall assuredly be well
with thee. And this is our second use of this point to sinful men.

We go on now to the third and last use, and that concerns all men,
information.
both saints and sinners, holy and profane, one or others, it is matter of
information to them all, and to every of them, to betake themselves forthwith
to do, according to this truth of God, which now we have made manifest unto
you to know.

You see it is Gods mind that all men should apply his word, good motives and
considerations that may the better carry the any, and the other, to the
practice of this doctrine of application.

Gods people had need of some provocations, spurs hereunto, To the godly.
both are too backward (as we have largely heard) let us do our best to
further them both hereunto. We will begin with the best first, and let the
saints see, what a multitude of mighty inducements they have to draw them thus
to do. A few we will press in particular, by which it will appear (upon
serious consideration) how it stants them upon to apply that now, which till
now, they have so groyssly neglected and let alone.

First therefore, nullify and frustrate them, you make them utterly void of
all truth and virtue.

Think thoroughly of it, for it is thus and no better, you do thus and no
otherwise.

And that you may see that so it is, remember and call to mind thus much; God
never meant his promises to any but to his own people, for their sakes alone
himself did reveal, and his penmen did write them: it never came into his
heart that any man else, shoull meddle with them: he call's them precious
promises because it should be known, they are not commen meat for every man
but food only for the faithful whom he has chosen to be a precious and
peculiar people to himself. Now if this were his mind and meaning, whereunto
shall these promises serve if you receive them not? to whom shall they go, if
you take them not home? if thus the case stand, that wicked men must not have
them, and you will not, what shall become of them? to whom, or to what shall
they appertain? what may be the use or benefit of them? It is not Gods mind
to give them to sinners, it is not yours to take them to your selves, what
shall they do? when they are useful to neither, are they not void to both?
and so become as a cancelled writing; wherein no man has right, whereof no man
can have good. Oh that you could lay this to heart, and well ponder this evil
of yours; is it a small thing to anihiliate the greatest part of that, whereof
rather then one whitt shall perish, Reu. 22.19.
heaven and earth shall fail, and from which whosever does detract, or
diminish in the least, the Lord will diminish of his happiness (that is, abolish
him from all hope of being happy) and increase his curses upon him? This is the
first evil of your refusal; and it is fearful, and the manifestation of it
should move you more then a little, to fear that practice which may, and will
pull you into such horrible impiety, and also pull such heavy plagues upon you,
But, this is not all, it is but the first, and not the worst, of some other,
that follow as infailliblely upon this practice, as this does.

Secondly then, actually make them void to you (being a great part of Gods
gracious truth) but, (which is yet more sinful and ^^^^^full) it does
occasionally make all the rest of the scripture void which concerns wicked
men, and so the whole truth of God (a thing which I tremble to utter,) I say,
the whole truth of God, is frustrate and through us become nothing, or as a
thing of naught, by our sinful refusal of our part. And this will be as
palpably evident as the former, if you take knowledge that the devil who
drawe's you to deny your portion, does (by you) draw others to do the same,
and make your refusal the occasion of theirs. Let any child of God who
digesteth not Gods promises, speak to a wicked man in case of any impiety or
rebellion against God, and bestow a reprooffe upon him, out of Gods word, in
uttering some curse and commination against his swearing, drunkenes, or any
other evil; the devil does prompt him presently, and put into his head what
to reply, and stop your mouth withal; why (says the godles wretch) should I
tremble or trouble my self with these words of God that concern me, when you
are not conforted at all, with those that belong to you? what, are his
threatenings more true to me, then his promises are to you? must I yield to the
one, and you resist the other? Go first and learn your own lesson by heart,
and when I see that you take your portion to heart, I will think the more of
mine; till then, I have as little reason to be disquieted, as you have to be
comforted: I will never believe that one piece of Gods word is truer then
another, or that any part of it, is more true to me, then some part of it is to
you. And therefore till I see you affected with that which is spoken to you, I
neither care nor fear what you can say to me. What woeful work is here? what
heavy disadvantage is taken against you? what hellish damage is done to the
living God in his eternal truth? Before you made void the promises; now wicked
men (by you) do make void the threatenings, and so between both, no part of
scripture has any power in it. The wicked caitisse that thus cast's off
admonition, and reprehension shall have his reward for his offense; but woe to
them by whom the offense come's. Shall the devil and his lyms thus trample
upon, and abuse Gods book and will you be their leaders thereunto? shall your
evil practice be pleaded to justify theirs? shall the Lord speak in vain to
them, because you will not believe him? Can you think this to be a small
offense, nay rather can you conceive how great it is? you shall do well to
deliberate upon it, that you may discern and detest it.

See, how it disables you to speak a word in season to any, either good or bad
you must bunge up your mouth in silence, or speak with shame to others till
the Lord open your heart to believe him your self.

If you shall offer either to comfort a weak brother, or to condemn a wicked
transgresser, both may, and will fall upon you, with your own infidelity, and
how justly they may up brayd you, and regect what you speak, is easy to
understand out of that which we have said. And this is the second sin of your
not applying Gods promises, which you see does disable the word of God to do
others good, as well as your self, and utterly disable you to do that duty you
owe to others, in any christian counsel or other use of the scripture what
soever: so you are bound from all aledging of it to any till you can assent to
it in your own heart. And what a world of wickedness is here? O ye that are the
saints of the living God see to it, see I say whereto your perversues come's,
that it has neitther end nor measure either in your selves, or any others. If
you have a God, believe in him; if he be your father trust him; if he have any
truth rest upon it; do not expose or prostitute his truth to the comtempt of
Satan, and wicked persons. Let this move and make you to take home yours, that
you may be the fitter and better able to give others theirs, or at the least,
it may be their own sin alone, and no way yours, if they do it not. If this
may not prevayle what can? yet this is not all, let us put on to more, if so
any thing may stir us.

Thirdly then, not have his promises and the comfort of them now, shall live to
find a woeful want of them; and in that heavy estate, as now they have been
offered in vain by the Lord to them; so shall they (in the time of that
extremity) seek them in vain of him.

Now their heart is shut against his hand, then shall his hand be shut up
against their hearts. No counsel, command, precept, or persuasion of God, would
prevail with them to receive them; and it is come to pass, that no prayer,
cry, or supplication, will prevail with God to give them. They shall smart
thoroughly for this sin, and then know what it was to cast of a comfort, when
they cry, sigh, and groan for it, and go without it. We deal thus with our
froward and foolish children, and we think it a just course of punishing their
perverseness. Thus does the Lord: the souls of many of his sons and daughters
can say it with much sorrow and more shame. Shame because they might have been
happier and would not sorrow because now they would be happier then they are
and cannot.

I shall not need to produce particular examples of any in Gods book, Job,
and David and others, who in this particular being somewhat pettish, and much
out of the way sometimes, could tell us the truth of this by dear experience;
time was when they loathed this celestial manna, and their souls refused
comfort, and they were deadly sick of this spiritual frett; But not long
after, they longed for that which they would not meddle withal before. I know
there are more then a good many, (even of those that be good) that have failed
in this sin, and felt the like punishment from that just hand of our God who
will not suffer such an evil to go vnavenged in his own. The many and
mournful tears of more then a few, have told us, how they have wept much,
for those favors which in time past they, esteemed nothing.

How righteous a thing is it with the Lord to with hold that from us, which we
would not take from him? As then any christian desire's to avoid this fearful
sin, and woeful punishment, so let him take Gods truth to himself while he may
have it; least his wrath break out, and that to the breaking of your hearts,
both for the giult of your sin in refusing, and the grief of your soul in
wanting that consolation which might have abounded in you, What ingratitude can
be grosser then this, that Gods kindness should not be regarded, or received of
us, when as it is for our greatest good, and the least of it wholly undeserved
of us. His grace and mercy in tendering is unspeakable, by that we may measure
the greatness of our sin in rejecting, The truth is, that as his goodness is
beyond measure in the one, so is our evil in the other. Let us fear then to
be thus foul, in a fault so ill taken at our hands, and let us even force our
hearts to entertain what the Lord in infinite favor and love does so
graciously cast upon us. Remember we that this our sin does keep many a soul
long without comfort, and might keep them ever, empty of it. But the grace of
God in giving it at last, does not take away, or extenvate our egregious
impiety in refusing it at first. But let us yet proceed to a fourth motive.

Fourthly then, let it be further considered, notably the devil does abuse us,
and how notoriously we (being thus abused by him) do dishonor and greiue God.
Both these do appear in this one thing, wherein he prevails with us, namely,
to make many a child of God to misapply the curses, terrors, and threatings of
God against themselves, which God himself never intended should trouble them,
or in the least belong unto them. If you read or hear, from any preacher in
public, any person in private, any thing that soundes heavily, and tendes to
the terresying of the soul, or to the discovery of the damnation due to some
jmpious and impenitent wretch, that can you snatch to your selves, and lay it
upon your poor hearts, though the Lord that revealed it, and the party that
spoke it, never had any meaning it should ever come there; such a sentence as
appertaine's only to a castaway, is caught after as eagerly, and applied as
closely, as if God himself had set it on. This can the devil make us do. But
do we know, what we do in thus doing? Do but mark, and we shall see a
multiplication of sin in this very thing; you would little think what a bundle
of impiety is here lapt up together and how many offenses lie within this one,
when herein wear ruled by Satan.

Is not this to be ruled by Satan in that which is evil, and to rebel against
God in that which is good? Is not this, not only not to apply the scripture
which belongs to us, but also to pervert that which belongs not to us, in
misapplying of it? Is not this to let all the world see that the God of this
world, can do more with us, and in us, then the God of heaven? Is not this to
curse where the Lord curses not (wherein we are worse then Balaam) and to make
sad that heart, which the Lord would not have made sad? Is not this to be open
enemies to our own souls, when we will none of that which is good, to edify
us, but eat that poison which may destroy us, and so bring our selves (as
much as in us lies) to eternal consusion? In a word, is not this to greive
the Lord to gratify the devil, and wilfully to wound our selves? I wonder what
evil it is which might not be brought within the compass of this practice.
This that we see in it, and say unto you, is apparent, but it is the least part
of that which the God of heaven could aggravate against us if he should come to
scan the length and breadth, and height of this offense, it would exceed all
dimension, and draw us (in the severity of divine justice) under everlasting
damnation.

And will we thus sin when we have received knowledge of this truth? and heap
so many jnpietyes one upon another in this miserable manner? will the Lord
endure it, or can he suffer this jniury from his own? or shall any that are
his offer it when once they understand the evil of it? I hope not; think,
think I say, that it was not a little patience in the Lord that has borne it
thus long, and that it is not a little kindness that we are borne with, in an
evil of this extent and quality; well let us think it enough, nay too much,
that we have been faulty, and seeing such a mass of jnquity in it, let us
meet the Lord with unfeigned repentance for it, and smite our own blind and
rebellious hearts, who have been lead into, and made to lie down under such a
heavy, (yea hellish) load of transgression without any understanding of the
state of the sin, or our own souls by the guilt thereof. This is our fourth
motive, let us go forward to a fifth.

Fifthly then, to wit, in regard of wicked men, and also in regard of himself.

First in regard of wicked men, Wicked men apply scripture.
in drawing us to do thus he make's us worse then many of the most ungodly
that Gods book does mention, whom we find to have applied, and taken home to
themselves what the Lord said to them by himself; or sent to them by others. It
were easy to abound in naming persons of both sorts, but we will content our
selves with a few. Cursed Cain, (the first castaway of all mankind, the prime
reprobate of the world,) the Lord spoke much to him touching his sin and
punishment; did he refuse to apply any of those perticulers which were spoken
to him, either before his sin committed or after? did he not give God the
hearing of all that he said, (though it is too true that much of it never did
him any good), nay did he not understand all those fearful comminations of
himself which the Lord breathed out against his barbarous fact? and so take
them as intended to himself, as that his heart was wounded with them, and he
cried out desperately because of the doom which was passed upon him? The whole
current of the story shewe's he acknowledged all to be his, that was said to
him, yea even that which was harshest, and hardest of digestion. Wretched and
rejected Saul, did not he so too, when Samuel told him his own from God, in
regard of his state temporal and eternal, and gave him to understand that God
had cast him away from his own kingdom on earth, and from the kingdom of
heaven too; does it appear that he cast off any thing spoken by Gods prophet
to this purpose? nay the contrary is clear, that he did conceive God meant all
to him and so he took it as the sequel shewe's. Impious Ahab, that ungodly
person who was so foul both injdolatry, jniustice, and cruelty, who was noted
for a slave of Satan [one that had sold himself to work wickednes] when he
was to receive his sentence for these sins from Eliah, (howsoever before he had
stormed and raged in his madd sit) yet now he hearkeneth to the message of God,
and that in such manner, that he makes a sorry shift to be humbled after a
sort, and cries and is something dejected, the speech of the man of God sticks
by him, he cannot, he does not shun it.

How many more of this rout, might I recko^ up who with Foelix have trembled at
some divine doctrines, and have not attained such a strain of sin as to betake
themselves to a universal and perpetual denial of all that the Lord has
spoken to them? and shall we be worse then these wicked ones? shall Satan lead
us to more jmpiety (in this particular) then he brought them who were his
vassals? shall they be honester men herein then we? who would not blush and be
abasht, to see such profane and forlorn servants of sin, to overgoe the
saints and servants of the living God, in this one point of goodness. Shall a
Cain quake and carry himself as a man so deeply affected with the word of God?
and shall an Ahab, and a Saul, and such others (as are sealed up to eternal
shame and contempt) do the same? And shall Saints be behind these Sinners,
and refuse to apply their part of the Lords truth, when such infernal vassalls
have done it? shall the devil bring these before the Lord to upbraid him to
his face, that he has some reprobates who will do more in this point of duty,
then some that go for his children, and are accounted holy and religions? and
that he can prevail with some of his lym's to give creddit to Gods divine
truth even for their evil, when many of his own holy ones, do refuse to
entertain the truth thereof some for their good?

Oh, what shall our God loose, and what shall Satan gain, when it shall come
hereunto, that the devil shall plead this advantage too truly? what may we
expect who put weapons into his hands to fight against the Lord, whose honor
(herin) he will not spare to his utmost, to endamage and abuse, that he may
enforce him (in just reveng of this insufferable indignity done thereunto) to
fight against us, with the sharpest engine's of his justice.

Thus in regard of wicked men does he wound us, (and these wounds are deadly,
if the Lords hand do not heal our hearts of them;) but this is not all, nor
indeed the worst of the two respects which we mentioned before. And that we
may well believe, because the next micheife is in regard of Satan himself, and
we know him to be worse then all the wicked men in the world.

Secondly then, The diwell applies scrip ture.
in regard of himself, we are to know (for our further reproach herin, and our
more forcible provocation hereunto) that the devil himself has behaved himself
better in this point of application of Gods truth, then many of Gods own have
done; and that; whether we consider his application of it, either to others or
to himself.

To others, To others.
how readily (though abusively) did he apply those words of the holy ghost in
the Psalm to our our Lord Jesus Christ [it is written, Mat. 4.6.
he shall give his Angels charge over thee, and in their bands they shall
bear thee up etc:] which words (in their true sense) were as true of Christ as
of any other in the world. 1. Sam. 28.1^.


The like hereunto he did also apply unto Saul, when he told him that [the
Lord has done even as he spoke by my hand] when he counterfeited the person of
Samuel, and did his best, to transform himself into a true Prophet;
persuading Saul that the word was now fulfilled upon him, which God had
formerly threatened to him, 1. Sam. 15 28.
to wit, that [the Lord had rent the kingdom from him and given it to one
better then himself.] Diverse more such instances might be produced, to show how
forward Satan is to apply the truth of God to others. To himself.


Neither indeed (to do him right, and to give him his due, though he be a
devil) has he been backward to take home Gods truth to himself, as it were
most easy to make apparent in many perticulers. That one may be in stead of
all, which we find uttered by himself, when Christ came to disposesse him of
the man who was so extraordinarily vexed by him [why art thou come to torment
me before the time?]

Behold how he, even the devil, who delude's and hinder's you from
appropriating the Lords truth to yours souls, can, and does apply the same
both to others, and to himself and that (as we see) in the worst sense, to wit,
of that torment whereunto he is reserved at the last day, which he believes,
and knows to be most true of himself, that he shall feel it for ever and
ever.

Now (beloved) let us consider this motive well and thoroughly, and sit down,
and seriously surmize with our selves what the Lord will say to our souls (and
what we shall answer to him) on this consideration that the very devil
himself, and divelish men have done him that honor in his truth, which we have
denied unto him. How, or with what faces shall we stand before him, when he
shall upbraid us with both these? shall we not see cause to fall grovelong on
our faces before him, and to lie down in our confusion, covering our selves
with shame to see Satan and his slaves laid in balance against us, and our
selves found lighter then they before the Lord, in this thing? what soul would
not blush, what conscience would not bleed, to behold this thing? yea but to
present it before it self in imagination, or meditation, which thing I advise
every Christian (culpable hereof) advisely to do, that the same may never be
actually presented by the Lord before them. If any thing may take place upon
us, let this (above all) provoke us. Say with your selves (when the temptor
come's to carry your hearts from receiving the truth of God) now thou come to
abuse me infinitely, to make me worse then thy self to bring me under the guilt
of that, wherein thou will plead that thou art more righteous then I, and wilt
also produce thy infernal vassalls to have been more faithful, then thou
would have me to be, in this practice. Away feinde my God shall never have
thus much against me, he has too much already, shall I add this unto all, and
dishonor him (herin) more then thou have done? Such soliloqnies, or speeches
within our own hearts would well beseem us, and (I think) if we used them at
every temptation, they would set Satan further from us, and soon make him
weary of us, and us, of this our fearful jmpiety, against which we have urged
thus many motives, and pressed each motive so largely, to the end, that (if
Lord might please) we might see an end of this heavy evil in the holy ones of
God, which is a thing to be prayed for incessantly of all saints, that so the
Lord might once have the glory, and we the good of his truth, and Satan the
shame of all his suggestions to the contrary.

Thus having done with the saints of God for this matter, To the ungodly.
we are now to see if we can move, ungodly men, to do their duty to God in
this point of application. And so much the rather do we endeavor this. by
how much it may be noted that they seldom or never come to Gods house as
clients to a court, to hear their own cause pleaded, but ever as attorneyes,
to hear and speak for other men: they come not as guests to this spiritual
feast, but as caruers; not as merchants to this this most rich and beneficial
mart, but as broakers; they are evermore wholly for other men, no body for
themselves in this blessed business. They know where to bostow every lesson the
preacher delivers, they can find a fit party for each reproffe he vtters; here
were for such a one, and such a one (say they in their vain thoughts) when
they hear the minister lay it on, upon such sins, as they surmize's them to be
guilty off.

Thus they can soon dispose of all that is delivered and find room for it in
other men's consciences, and conversations, as for themselves, they conceive
nothing to concern them, unless now and then Satan prompt them to put up
something which they imagine may harten them in their prophanes, or to lay
theevish hands upon some of Gods sacred promises whereby they may be (in the
devils, and their construction thereof, abetted in some sinful course.

Now to touch these, and to teach them better what they have to do, (as their
duty) in this particular, we need not say much, because much of that which
has been spoken to Gods people (in this case) does concern wicked men also,
and does equally press both, to do that which the Lord requires. Howbeit we
must breifely give these ungodly ones something to understand from God for
their own parts, in this point, that (if it may be) they may also be brought
to better practice.

First then, let them know, jmpiety in themselves. The Lords injury is not
little, when what he speaks from his own most sacred mouth, and breathed into
man by his own celestial spirit, shall be all in vain, when such holy and
powerful words as his are, full of divine virtue and heavenly influence,
shall be frustrate, void and of none effect, but go unregarded (as some idle
tale) all the days of a wretched man's life.

And thine jmpiety is not less, who as an adder go and come dease, from
the glorious voice of the God of heaven, and by applying nothing, make it to
appear that thy ungodly heart does think, that either the Lord has nothing to
say that is worth thy hearing, or good for condition, or that thou have no
need of any, of all that unspeakable good, which is spoken from him by his
messengers. Now how these two, or either of them will be answered to the Lord,
let it be well considered by every sinful man.

Secondly, rejection of a man, and of a man's damnation before God, when he
shutts up the soul of a man that none of his word can enter, and so close's
up his eyes that he cannot see any of his truth to concern himself. This is
most manifest by the express words of the Apostle. 2. Cor. 4.^.4.
[If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of
this world has blinded their minds etc, least they light of the glorious
gospel should shine unto them] see here, they that lay not Gods truth to heart,
are only such as are lost, that is, cast away and let go of God into the jaws
of Satan, as Judas is said to be the lost child of perdition. Joh. 17.12 Isa.
6. Mat. 13.14.15.
And to the same purpose long since spoke the Prophet Isaiah; and Christ after
him, where he says that men's hearts are hardened, and their understandings
darkened, that hearing they may hear and not perceive (any of Gods truth to be
good for themselves,) and this spiritual obstruction in the judgment, is an
infaillible argument of Gods purpose to confound the soul and body of a man
for ever and ever; for so it is added, least they should convert and J should
heal them.

And if we should go to examples, who but reprobates have heard Gods word and
not applied it to the bettering of themselves. Nay, which is more, reprobates
should hear Gods word without all application. For why? if the Lord give not a
man a heart to receive the word of his grace, it is most ceartaine that the Lord
has not a heart to receive that man into grace. Were it not easy to instance
Elyes sons whose not taking home to heart their fathers counsel from God is
said to be the evidence of their destruction; note the words of the text well
[Notwithstanding they obeyed not the voice of their father, 1. Sam. ^.25.
because the Lord would destroy them:] this was the sign of their destruction
from God, because his word did them no good. Unto these I could add others
more, but we need not. If then this be so, that we see what their state is
that apply not Gods truth, even a state of perdition, and that this not
application is a most evident sign of this condition: I hope it will cause any
that shall consider it, to cast about, and to take better notice of himself in
this thing.

Thirdly, let all ungodly men know, such promises as sometimes they snatch at,
when they hear any thing that does (as they corruptly conceive) humor and
please them, I say let them know that herin, they wrong both the Lord his
children. and themselves.


The Lord, in meddling with that which he never meant them, for his promises (as
we have heard) are the proper inheritance of his own people: now to be too
bold with that which is the Lords, and to use it amiss, is an abuse offered
to him. His children are injured, in that their bread is taken from them by
these dogs. The blessed promises are their bread, and no meat for any that are
ungodly; and therefore for a wicked men to seize on them, is but but the part
of an unmannerly curr who catche's that from his masters hand for himself which
he meant his child should have. But the most and worst evil is their own,
and that appears in this, that these promises of God thus usurped by them,
are (in Gods justice) poisoned to them, and do become occasions of their
woeful hardening in their wicked courses. The Lord does curse this
misapplication of his truth, and make's his word (thus abused) the savor of
death unto death. And so they go on in ungodliness, being smothered by the
prince of darkness, and see not their way to lead unto death.

Fourthly, lastly, in not applying the threatenings which the Lord has
appointed as their due portion, what do they, but in like manner (as before)
injure the Lord who has assigned them to their souls? refusing to receive
what he offer's to them, and making utterly void (to their utmost power) all
that part of the holy book of God, which does consist of curses, terrors, and
comminations; for seeing (as was said before of the promises, in reprooffe of
the people of God) that Gods meane's not his children should have them, and
ungodly men (to whom they are meant by God) do not mean to take them; are
they not left void, as serving for none, as good for nothing; Besides how many
sins are wrapped up in thy refusal of these threatenings (O thou wicked man;)
consider and so is there not infidelity, Joh.
that thou belevest not they belong to thee? and he that believes not is
condemned already. Is there not pride of heart that stoope's not to that which
may humble thee? Pro.
and all that are proud in heart are abomination to the Lord. Is their not
gross ignorance, that thou know not the state of thy heart to require this
physike? and has not God sworn, that ignorant persons shall never come to
heaven? Psalm. 95.10.11.
[They have not known my ways, therefore I swear in my wrath they shall never
enter into my rest.] Nay what impiety is there not, in this neglect to take
notice of that which, the Lord would fasten upon you for your humilitation, and
so (consequently) for your salvation, if you would receive the same. And do
you not (in thus doing) forsake your own mercy, and force Gods justice upon
your own souls? How happy were it, you could see your unhappiness herin. But
because you will not conscionably look after it, the Lord will not show it,
and so you sink and perish in the indignation of God for want of due
consideration of it.

Thus you have your motives (such as we can give unto you) to persuade your
better care, and circumspection touching your selves and your souls estate
before the great God of heaven by whom you must be adjudged at the last and
great day of his glorious appearance.

You see, that, as yet, you condition is miserable and accursed, for, either
you apply none of his truth at all, or you misapply all you meddle with, and
his majesty cannot bear either of these, both being dishonorable to him, and
damnable to you.

Gather these few motives into your minds, and ponder well and thoroughly upon
them, think how it is in each particular, and in them all together; let them
take place upon you, give no more place to the devil, that Gods heavenly word
should have no place in you. Desire to open your hearts to his voice, but first
desire him to open them to himself; he never opened heaven to any whose heart he
did not open to hear and apply his word aright. If therefore (after all that
is said) you remain (as before) closed, and stopped up; that the truth of God
cannot enter, know for a surety from the God of truth that heaven is shut
against you, hell only is open to you, and thither must you go to him, even
Satan, that would not suffer you to come to God, whose suggestio^s as you
obayed, so now shall you receive of the Lord the just recompense of reward due
thereunto from his infinite wrath and vengeance for ever and ever.

But if you will return and repent he will leave a blessing behind him, ^ocl.
2.
there is mercy with him for you here, there is glory with him for you in
heaven.

And thus much for those motives that may incite all sorts of men to apply the
truth of God.

Now if any child of God, or any other, would know upon what terms they
might be bold to apply the promises of grace, let them look back into the
signs of their interest into Christ laid open in the former point page 55.
etc. and they will also serve for sound warrant hereunto; for whatsoever does
interest us into him, does together with him give us right to all other things.

The end of the second sermon.
NOw from the application of the things God spoke unto Jacob we are by due
order to proceed to the things that were spoken to him which he does apply
unto himself, and they are lying in these latter words of the verse. Return
into thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee: which
words do contain in them these two particulers.

1. a precept. Return into thy country, and to thy kindred. 2. a promise. And
J will deal well with thee.
I might take them a sunder and handle them severally (and I did intend it)
but because time will not suffer me to do so, I will gripe them together,
and entreat of them both at once, in one general instruction: and that is
this. That, whosoever will be willing to do as God will have him, shall be sure to
fare well.

The only way to be well dealt withal, is to resolve to be ruled by the Lord,
to be ordered by him, to be at his finding, and disposing for all our ways, of
settling or remooving, going or abiding to, or from, any place, to set upon, or
let alone any practice.

This is the high way to be truly happy: the only course that can be, to be
in a state assuredly comfortable, that a man will cast himself and his affairs
upon the Lord, and do in all things as he will have him.

God himself shall tell us the truth of this point from heaven, and avouch and
seal it unto us by his own most sacred word to Jacob: which words (we see)
Jacob does plead before the Lord, and fathers them upon him, and urges them to
him and the Lord does graciously acknowledge them as his own, and does
actually accomplish them upon him (as in all other cases he had done before)
so in this particular now in hand, wherein though he feared nothing more then
hard, and rigourous dealing, cruel, and tyrannical carriage, yet being
willing to do as God bade him, he sound nothing less, but in stead thereof,
he had all loving entreaty, and most kind and brotherly entertainment that
might be. Now then seeing God first spoke it to Jacob, Jacob does now urge it to
God; God in this and ever after, made it good to him, it is a truth past
controversy, an undoubted truth that may pass without all color of doubt or
question. It may well go for a rule. That he that will be ruled by God shall
ceartainely fare well.

Neither did this begin to be a truth now at this time, as if it had never
been so before, but it was thus from the beginning, and began to be
experimentally true, as the first man that ever God made and gave a law unto
for doing his will, can well and soundly certify us, that well doing, and
well-being went ever together.

How much present happiness, comfort, and welfare was provided for Adam, in the
state of his innocence and obedience? it had been happy for him, and us, had
he continued in his subjection to the law of his maker, [doe this and live.]
How well was he in his paradise; wherein, what he was in his person by created
nature and grace, what he had for his portion, in things natural and
spiritual, we can give some guess out of the records of sacred writtings,
but what he should have been (had he continued his obedience without
transgression) when from earth he should have been translated to heavens
happiness, that we cannot once conceave, neither can the infinite
immeasurablenes of it, enter our hearts in any measure.

But in what he was, and should further have been in what he had, and should
further have enjoyed, we see enough to assure us of this truth sufficiently.

And as true as it was to him he being the root of all mankind, and in the
stead of us all, so true had it been to us all, had he, and we, stood in that
state of integrity and incorruption, wherein he was created.

Nay, that we may yet see the immovable goodness of God, that he is still of
the same mind, though we are not the same men, and though we fail in our
obedience, he faile's not in his kindness. Behold he is God, and changes not,
immutable in favor, constant in his compassions, a sure freinde to a faithful
man, a well-willer to a well-doer, still and ever: that howsoever we have
offended against him provoked and greived him, and enforced him to deprive us
of our happy estate; yet, has he raised us again, and brought us into such a
blessed condition, as wherein, yet we may be made most happy partakers of the
truth of this instruction.

Pass we from Adam to Abraham: and we shall soon see it to be still true: The
Lord bidd's him go out of his country and leave all behind him (as now he
will have Jacob return into his, and take all with him) and now let us look
upon the condition and terms of his obedience, Genesis 12.1.2. cap. 35.1.2.
what is promised to him in the text, why even this [I will bless thee, and
thou shall be a blessing] and again, [I am the buckler, and thine exceeding
great reward] and was not all this performed to him in truth? was not God as
good as his word with advantage? yes, that he was, as we all know. True it is,
never any was put to greater matter of obedience, and it is as true, that never
any was crowned with more precious favors and abundant mercyes from God: his
name is as famous for Gods kindness to him, as his is for obedience to God. We
read of the faith of Abraham wherein he was so famous that he is enstyled [the
father of the faithfull] and Abraham is honored not only in his graces,
before men, but also in his extraordinary prerogatives received from God, he
being called the freinde of God (which honorable appellation was not (by name)
given to any in all the old testament, but, yet it is vouchsafed to all the
faithful by Christ in the new [I call you no more servants but freinds] and
again, Joh. 15.14. Gal. 3.14.
[yee are me friends if ye do whatsoever I command you]) and the blessedness
we have by Christ, is entitled the blessing of Abraham, that the blessing of
Abraham might come upon the Gentiles etc.

Now what happiness Abraham found, in yielding himself to God, to do as he
would have him in all things, the same found his posterity also: and generally
(not to insist upon any more particular instances) the Lord has entailed our
welfare to all his precepts, as we may find in all and every of them, that
nothing is more frequent then the promises of his grace annexed to the promise
of our obedience; still the Lord fasten's and tye's the one too the other every
where.

Moses is most abundant in many places in this particular, Deuteronomy. 5.29.33. cap.
6.18.24. cap. 10.13 cap. 12.28 cap. 16.13
almost in every chapter of Deuteronomie, no one thing is so often itterated as
this, Take heed and do according to all that I command you, that it may be
well with you, and with your children for ever. It is ordinary (almost) in all
chapters, and often found in diverse verses of some one.

And to the end we might be sure of all absolute assurance of all this good, in
thus doing the Lord does (as it were) put us into possession of the same saing
[And all these blessings shall come upon thee, cap. 28.2.
and shall overtake thee] first all in general: [all these blessings shall
overtake you] secondly every one in particular, as it is in the verses
following where thy are particulated at large.

Neither is Moses the only man that thus speake's, but the Prophets also utter
the same words very often, speak the same language every where, as it were
most easy to instance in more places, then time will permit us now to quoate.

Say ye it shall be well with the righteous says Isaiah. Isa. 3.10. Jer. 32, 29
I will do thus, and thus (says God by Jeremiah) for the wealth of them and
their children, speaking of his covenant of grace.

Testimonies (you see) would abound if we should muster up all that we could
find in the scriptures, but we will spare them and enquire after some reasons
of the point, and they are these that follow.

First, if this were not a truth, that, at all to any good; for, what heart can
any man have to be obedient to the Lord, and to submit to his law, if so be,
we might not be sure of something for so doing.

All these good words of God, were worth little, and men should have small
mind, to bend themselves to the best obedience of their hearts, and lives, to
please the Lord in all things, if it were not for the hope hereof, and that they
might build upon this blessedness whereof we speak.

But we must know that nothing of all this that the Lord says, is any whitt in
vain, neither can be, but that every jott and tittle of it was, and is, truly
intended unto the faithful by him, who never spoke any thing but seriously, as
he did indeed mind, and intend the same.

Secondly, devil would prove (at least semingly) to the world, a better
play master then God, for why? he promise's, and makes proffers to such as he
can bewitch to do his will, of great things. Mat. 4.9. Job. 21. Psalm. 73.
So he did to Christ [All these things I will give thee;] So the Saints
complain in Jobs and David's days, how well wicked men fared (in all respects)
being the servants of sin and Satan, wondering exceedingly how and why it
should be, or could be so.

And good Jeremiah he was even at his wits end, Ier. 12.1.2.3.
and stumbled so shrewdly at this, that he was almost clean down, and even
driven to a nonplus when he saw how well it went with wicked men.

Now because the Devil (who although in no sense indeed he can be; and yet,
to the blinded sense of sinful men, he seeme's to be) a better master then the
Lord; and also to the end that no enlightened mind should once imagine any
such thing; God himself will have us know that his promises, (and his payment
too) are such, and so royal, that as we say in our proverb, there is [no
service to a King] so we might well take up this for a more true, even for a
most true proverb, yea principle [no service to the King of Kings,] which
thing he will so evidence and make good, that not only his own shall see it,
but wicked men shall assent to it, Psalm 58.11.12.
and be forced to say verily there is a reward for the righteous.

Thirdly, [piety has the promise both of this life, and the life to come;] of
things present, and future: now how can this be true, in case our doctrine were
false? and if it have the promise of both, sure it shall be well with them
indeed, and they cannot but be well dealt with all, who will be ordered by God.

The Lord cannot frustrate, neither will make void, any whitt of that word of
truth he has spoken; but justify, and verify every jott in his work upon his
faithful one's.

But if he should not deal well with his own, he should nullify, and
anihilate all his truth, and faithfullnes. all his mercy, and kindness. all his
love, and goodness.


The glory of his righteousness, and honor of his holiness were gone, his own
saints had nothing to settle and rest their souls and hearts upon, nothing at
all to trust to: Besides what occasion would the slaves of Satan, and vassalls
of sin take, to vpbrayde us that we serve a master that will do us good, as
far as good words will go, and no further. I might add as many manifest
reasons as testimonies hereof, it were as easy to abound in the one, as in the
other, but what needs it?

The good pleasure of his will that thus it shall be, is infinitely above, and
beyond all allegations which he, or any lym's of his, have, or can have, to
contradict it, in the least; the devil and wicked men, are to weak to wage
evidence or arguments with God, in the prooffe of the truth of any point of
divinity.

And seeing this his gracious pleasure is to this purpose so apparently
revealed, let us rest and trust therein, and resolve our selves as fully
satiffied for the truth hereof. I but, that the devil will not let us do, if
he can choose, and therefore he bend's his greatest forces against this blessed
instruction, and does besiege, and lay battery to the souls of Gods saints, to
see if he can enforce them from the truth hereof, and on the other side he
fortifyes the profane spirit of impious persons in the contrary persuasion.

Two things are principally objected, A double Objectio^.
first the hard measure, and unhappy condition of Gods saints. Secondly the
welfare, and prosperity of ungodly persons. The one being rebels to the Lord
are raised on high, and have what they will, yea more then their heart can wish
as the Psalm says. Psalm. 73.7.
The other being Loyal, and obedient subjects, ever ready to do his will to
the utmost, are in the worst case of any other me^, none so perplexed within,
none so persecuted without, as they: scarce any are in so bad a case, none in
worse.

These are the two horns (like those of Hananiah) that he does run at men
with, with all might, and maine, endeavoring the overturning both of this
sacred truth, and the true comfort of it, and the setting up of a godles
liberty of sinning to all men.

But we, that we may save harmeles the honor of our God, and the glory of
this his holy truth, and (at once) confute, yea confound; every such absurd,
and infernal argumentation, as may make any insurection against the majesty
of the most high, to abate any man's heart or heat in goodness, or to C^ette any
soul in any sinfullnes; it shall become us well, to answer these cavills, and
to quitt the Lord in his truth, and to comfort his servants in the same,
notwithstanding this diabolical opposition.

Know we therefore, and believe, that what soever seems to be true, either
in the one allegation, or the other, either for the ill usage of Gods chosen or
for the peace, and contentment of sinful persons, yet neither jndeede is any
thing against the truth we have spoken, which shall remain infallible
undoubted, and undeniable, so long as the heaven and earth shall have a being.

Touching the ill usage of Gods children consider I pray you these things.

First, that the world may deal ill with men, lord deals well with them.
Answer to the 1 branch.
Joseph found it so in his particular. Christ told his disciples so [in the
world ye shall have troubles; but be of good comfort.] Though therefore, the
world do offer us hard measure yet it noe way hinders the heavenly truth of
what we speak. Secondly, worse the world deal's with the Lords people, the
better will the Lord be to them. To. 8.28.
So says the Apostle [for the sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in vs]. So again, 2. Cor.
1.5.
[as our sufferings abound for Christ, so shall our consolations abound much
more by Christ] And yet again, the Apostle says, that the saints [rejoice
with joy unspeakable and glorious, though they be in heavines through many
afflictions] And yet once more Saint John in his relevation tell's us, Reu. 7.
what Gods Angel told him, therefore they are in the presence of God, day and
night etc.

And the reason hereof is because by the worlds bad usage, their graces by
tried more thoroughly, and so themsclues are crowned more gloriously.

Thirdly, indeed evil, but the outside of it, the only appearance thereof,
not the substance; so says the Apostle, when he tell's them, that he was [as
anknowne, as dying, as sorrowing, as poor, as having nothing, etc.] yet though
it seemed thus, it was not so indeed but far otherwise as the text
avoucheth. Nay (which is yet more) we may be assured that all those things that
be accounted so evil by men, are in Gods intention truly good; and so shall be
to us in the issue, and consequence of them, if with the eye of faith we
endeavor to look upon them. So David said of Shemeis railing: God will do me
good etc. and again, it is good for me that I was afflicted.

Fourthly, tie himself evermore to make it true, in external, and temporal
things, but will give it us (it may be even in these two sometimes) but
howsoever in things spiritual, and eternal, and these are the things wherein
he deals well with us indeed; other favors are both too common, and too mean,
to be the reputed either the best fruits of his favor, or the only reward of
his churches faithfulness.

Fifthly, infallibly concluded from the external state (only) of a christian.
How God deals with many of his own, is not to be discerned by any of these
things alone, neither can be. You see how the son of his love, our Lord Christ
fared in these owtward and earthly respects, should any thing be concluded
against him upon this ground and if not against Christ why, against
Christians?


Besides, what should I tell you of the sanctification, and sweetening, of the
worst that the world can do to the Lords beloved ones, how the Lord does
invert their courses, and deceave the world miserably, in their expectation
that way; how the Devil by Adam in intending to do all the elect much evil,
God by Christ has done them infinitely much more good, then the evil could
amount unto, when Satan had done his worst. Thus we see that every way we are
satisfied in this branch of the objection: And it matters nothing now, what
construction men make of any thing done (by men) to the Saints of God, the
question is only of that which God himself does, and of that good which he
produces out of that evil which men do unto us, and let us look well upon
either, or both of these, and we shall find our text and the doctrine thereof
most true.

Now touching the other branch of wicked men's prosperity, it is a thing to be
much pitied not to be at all envyed, and that we may not either jdlely, or
ignorantly wonder at it, let us wisely consider these ensuing particulers.

First, Answer to the 2 branch.
that the happy estate of wicked men here on earth, is all the heaven, the
poor souls are ever like to have, and therefore who can grudge them any good
they can catch here? hence, they must never hope or look for more, no not for
on drop, or dram of any delight, but endless, easeles, and remediles misery for
ever and ever. Did not Abraham tell the rich man so in the parable [Sonne,
rememler that thou in thy life time ha^st they pleasure, and Lazarus pain, but
now, he is comforted and thou art tormented.] This world is all the heil Gods
people shall have, here they meet with all the miseryes they shall ever feel,
all their weeping and wayling is in this earth: And the same is the heaven of
ungodly persons, all whose joys and comforts, as they may much abound here,
so here they must have an end also.

Secondly, justice and indignation, and they have it and keep it merely as a
mischeife unto them, to further their fearful and final confusion. Pro. 1.32.
All their contentments do but help to kill them. So says Solomon [ease
slays the foolish and the prosperity of fools destroys them.] Give an
ungodly man, what he would have or crave, I think it would be ease and
prosperity, that he would seek after, why eve^ this kills, and destroye's him
says God. And the same says the prophet Isajah (as we heard before) when he
tell's us, that the Lord would have them made fatt, it is only for slaughter,
that they might not be saved, but cast away, and comdemned for ever.

Thirdly, good thing any wicked enjoye's in this world (be it, he had never
truly, and properly be called good to him, but all such particulers as he does
posesse, (though they may be good blessings in themselves) yet to them, they
are no better nor no other, then so many curses cast upon them by the Lord for
evil.

This does Moses most manifestly witness and declare when he tell's all the
world from God, that all rebellious and disobedient persons, who are not ruled
by the law of the Lord shall be accursed in every respect both in what they are:
Deuteronomy. 28.15.16. etc
cursed shall thou be in thy body: and in what they have; cursed shall thou be
in thy cattle corn, and all increase. and in what they do: cursed shall thou
be in all that thou put thy hand unto.


Note well, they are not cursed, in the want of these things, (every body would
think it a curse to be deprived of them, and to have, no children, cattle,
friut, or increase) but they have them, yet are accursed in them, and with
them, even while they do enjoy them: as Malachie once told the wicked priests
that God would [curse their blessings] nay, that he had done it already: that
albeit they had blessings, yet as blessings they had them not, but in the
nature and state of curses. And is it not a most hydeous and heavy judgment,
that a man should have blessings and be without the blessedness of them, and not
only so, but to be baned, poisoned, and utterly overthrown by them? Thus bad,
and no better, is a wicked man's state, when it is at the best, in all the
benefits this world can bestow upon them.

Fourthly, and lastly, harden their sinful hearts, and to multiply their sins
against the Lord. It was ever the use (or rather the abuse) that profane men
made of Gods mercies, to flesh and harten themselves (by them) in their
wretched courses.

For thus they (by the devils asistance) do discourse and argue within
themselves. God does thus and thus bless me, with such and such abundance; I
have so much, and so much of this and of that; why should I not think my
estate such as he is pleased withal? and so good as content's him: I hear
these hott preachers take on against such and such sins, I cannot tell, but I
see those sinners (as they call, and account them) thrive better then
themselves, or any of their disciples, that are so eager after other religious
matters. And wherefore should I not believe that God think's well of us, when
he deale's so well with us?

Thus, on go they (by occasion of the good things they have) to be well
conceited of their evil state, and so gather conclusions to continue in the
same, and that must needs add to the number, and measure of their sins, and
make the weight of them absolutely in supportable, and the vengance of God, due
unto them infinitely insufferable. This is all (when it is well summed up) that
a wicked man's blessings come to, to harden his heart, to heap to his sin, to
help on Gods speedy indignation, and his own swift damnation.

Thus we have proved the truth of the point, and freed it from falsehood; and it
being fully confirmed, and cleared, we are now to pass unto the uses of the
same which are such as concern all sorts of persons, good and bad, holy and
profane joyntely and severally.

And first, it is exceeding comfortable to all Gods saints, freely to the
Lords wisdom, and guidance in every thing. Never any lost by this master, that
ever did any of his work, and was ruled by him therein, noe he has ever showed
himself to be the best master to appoint the best work. to allow the best
wages.


For why? such as have been the servants of this Lord, have ever had good pay
for the performance of any thing, where about they have been employed for him.
Good pay did I say? nay that word is not great enough, it has been more then
good, eve^ the best that this world could yield, and better then the best that
under heaven is to be had; many of them (I am sure) have sped better then ever
they made any account off, and have had more happiness then their hearts could
desire, or ever thought off, witness Abraham both in his posession, and
posterity; he that call's him out of his own land, gave him both much more
land, and (which was more) heyers to enjoy it after him, and both these were
more then he made account off, or could recko^ upon. Joseph whose rare
fidelity, and piety, patience, humility, and honesty, was recompensed with
wonderful, and (I dare say, on his part unexpected) prosperity, doubtless he
never once did dream to be the second in the kingdom, the greatest Peer and
next in place to the King himself, assuredly he looked for no such issue of
exaltation, yet the Lord gave it him as the reward of his obedience to him, and
being ruled by him.

Jacob here, who when he fled to this Laban (as himself says) was in mean
condition, and poor state, as verse 12. but now is opulent, rich, and
exceeding abundant in all kind of stock and store.

How many more witnesses, were it most easy to produce to the attestation of
this consolation? David who met with a kingdom, and being faithful in that
which was less, was put in trust over that which was greater, even the
greatest power under heaven, to be the sovereign prince of Gods own people.

Mary who abiding, and mourning at the sepulcher, and desiring but to find the
dead body of Christ, there found him alive, and speaking most graciously to
her, so that she was made the first happy messenger, of his most glorious and
triumphant resurrection.

The saints Heb. 13. who got Angels to be their guests, in being harborours to
the poor members of Christ. Multitudes more might be multiplied, to make good
the joy of this truth, to every soul, that is subdued unto it, and resolved to
do as the Lord will have it. Ephesians. 3.20.
The Apostle says enough, that [ he is able to do exceeding abuntdantly,
beyond all that we can ask or think. Even in this life, so graciously does he
deal with us, and does thus unto us. But in that which is to come, he
infinitely exceedes this, and does assure us thoroughly, that to him that
works shall be given reward, beyond all, not only more then can be desired, but
more then can be imagined, man's heart cannot conceive how happy he shall be in
this matter, that the does sincerly serve his God: what sweet sentences do we
find? [Enter into thy masters joy]; To. 2.7.
[Receaue the kingdom prepared for you.] [To them that by continuance in well
doing, seek (and they shall be sure to find) honor and glory, and jmmortality,
and eternal life,] note, no less then all this, and [I will deal well with
thee], and is not this good dealing for well-doing? If it be not, what is, or
can be? if it be, who can but be comforted and cheered that has got a heart to
do well, according to Gods will, seeing such a heart is attended with such
happiness as we have seen.

In the next place, our second use meets with all such whom the Lord rules
not, praedominant, and powerful, to carry them to every corrupt and finfull
practice against his law, his love, his whole revealed will, such (I mean) as
not being subdued unto him, rebels against him, and therefore reserved to his
wrath and justice to be punished by him. Those (I mean) whom the world may
rule, the devil may rule, who to each other in any vanity or jmpiety, are at
as much command as the Centurions servants were to him, (as he told Christ) to
come and go and do, they being ready to come, to go, to do, or not do,
this or that; or any thing, at his pleasure. These men need no more misery
then the privation of the joy we have spoken off; howbeit the loss of that is
not all their sorrow, but the least part of that heavy condition which shall
ceartainly befall them noe, noe, over and above, the absence of the sweet joy
and consolation of the saints, they have assurance of misery and vengeance,
completely opposite to our happiness, and that being unspeakable, their
mischeife must needs be insufferable. A man is in dreadful state, when he
cannot be sure God will deal well with him, nay when he cannot but, be sure he
will deal not graciously, but righteously, not mercifully, but miserably
with us, according to the strict, and exquisite terms of absolute justice,
and exasperated wrath, Oh, who is able to abide it, when God will be exact? or
can any possbility be conceived, that any flesh may either stand it out, or
shun it? no, no, it is an absolute impossibility to conceit either. He that
will not be ruled by God must, and shall rue it, when the time is come of the
Lords visitation, and recompense to be rendered to every rebellious person. So
says our Lord Christ, [The wrath of God abides on him]. Joh. 5.2. The.
1.7.8.6.
So the Apostle [when the Lord Jesus shall appear in flaming fire rendering
vengeance to them etc. which shall be punished with everlasting perdition. And
does not the same Apostle conclude the quite contrary to ungodly one's, To. 2.9.
to that which we noted out of the same chap. saying [Tribulation and anguish
shall be upon every soul that does evill]

Now if unto these scriptures we should enquire after insta^ces, we might
soon furnish our selves with more then a few. Sodom and Gomorah would not by
ruled by God, and when the Lord saw that he could not prevail with them, how
dealt he with them? fire and brimstone came from heaven upon there bodies, and
their souls were cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, that burns for
ever in hell. The old world was also most wicked and rebellious against the
Lord, Noah could have no audience from God among them; how dealt the Lord with
them? why he drowned their bodies, besides what may be conceived of their
souls, though I will not affirm they were all eternally rejected. And what
should I need to produce particular persons, when we have the whole world to
witness it? I could name, Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, and many other accursed
caytiffes, and most miserable miscreants, who would not do as the Lord would
have them, but followed the prophanes and stubbornes of their own vile
spirits, and the Lord measured unto them in instice, as he did to his own in
mercy, even strange and unexpected justice, such (I assure my self) as they
never looked for, or once conceited could have befallen them. And let us know,
that he is still the same God in severity, and indignation, if we be the same
men, in impiety and rebellion; if he find us out in the one, assuredly we
shall feel him in the other; and that to our eternal horror of heart before
his face, when his hand shall be heavy upon us, as our hearts have been hellish
before him.

A third use of this point enforces the truth of the same upon us, judgments,
and powerful in our practice herein, that both may fully accord in us, and we
be faithful, and not faint, before the Lord in both, and either. Faithful (I
say) and not faint, for in holy writ these two are opposed to each other, for
neither the faint are reputed faithful, nor the faithful, faint. Reu. 2.10.
Hence the holy ghost exhorts [Feare none of those things which thou shall
suffer, behold the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be
tried and you shall have tribulation ten days; be thou faithful unto death
and I will give thee the crown of life. Hence the Apostle uses the phrase
oppositiuely saying, of himself, and his fellow laborers, we are bold, and
faint not. Hence his counsel to the Ephesians was, that they should not faint
at his tribulations etc.

And much need there is that, this should be powerfully pressed upon us, that
we may be thoroughly posest of it, for God does know, that no thing is
performed more feebly, and more faintely, with more jmbecility, and jmpotency,
then his business; men are not more fearful and hartles in any thing, then in
the things of God, especially if they have not a safe outside, that the world
ca^ fancy. In matter of holiness, men are miserably timorous. In matter of sin,
desperately timerarious. There must be such a rule made, and such ado, before a
man can be gotten to go Gods way, especially if it seem rough, it is so long
er'e one can bring his heart to be ruled by him, as it is both wonderful it
should be so, and woeful that it is so.

But our own wisdom (though deceivable, is easily followed: our own way
(though damnable) is lightly trod by our selves, and others are quickly led
into it. The mischeife is this, that all the difficulty is to bring us into the
way of God, and to make us resolute to follow the same, being once in it. How
well were it, had we got this measure of abnegation of our selves; that once we
could be settled in this mind, that the Lord should have us at his beck, and
but say the word, and we would do the deed, without all dispute, or any
delay; yea we would set upon it (if the Lord will have it) whatsoever it cost,
or whatsoever come of it, yea that nothing should so much as once seem, or be
conceited to be evil that he commands; and that not the least of our
jmaginatio^s should dare to stir, or offer to make any insurrection, against
the high pleasure of his most holy majesty.

Paul was excellent at this in his particular as we read in his story thereof.
Agabus had foretold his martyrdom, and showed it by a sign himself with
Paul's girdle, both before Paul's face, and (as it seems by the sequel) in the
sight of many other of the saints; who being wonderfully affected at it, do
earnestly entreat him (seeing he had this fair warning) to do his best to
escape, and shun it. But what was the answer of Paul to them? Act. 10.22.23.24
why (in sum) this, that seeing he saw it was the mind of God, that thus it
should be, he was ready, and resolute, to undergo it, no fears of his own,
no tears of others, (who loved him entyrely) could do any thing; God should
rule him to the loss of his dearest life. This was a mind truly christian and
courageous. This was a man rightly resolute and magnanimous.

Here was a spirit subdued to Gods spirit, worthy approbation in him, worthy
jmitation in us.

Pray we for the like it will come well to pass with us if we can (as by
prayer we may) obtain it, if we have not hearts, that the Lord may command to
the death, it will be heavy with us, his justice will abandon us to death
eternal, if for the honor of his truth, we will not undergo a temporal. Let
us then (in no wise) forget our part, to do well, and the Lord will not (nay
he cannot) forget his promise, to deal well, if nothing do hinder us in the
one, nothing shall hinder him in the other.

And to animate and harten us hereunto, that with cheerfulnes (and without
fearfullnes) we may willingly undergo the hardest task, that the Lord shall
please to set us about: let us but cast our thoughts a little, upon the odds
and advantage, accrewing unto us by this course, The difference is not small,
between our doing well before God, and Gods dealing well, with us. Alas, what
are our deeds at the best but poor, weak, maimed, and corupted obedience, it
bring's no good to God, to whom it is done. And what is his dealing well to us
at the least, is it not all true and absolute good, both for present, and for
future time, yea to all eternity, beyond time? It were very easy to amplify
this odds abundantly, for the one (to wit) Gods part toward us, is
incomparably beyond ours. But what need we many words about it, when it may be
all said in one.

Look what difference there is between God and us, in all goodness and
excellency, wherein we cannot but confess, he does (every way) infinitely, and
jmmeasurably exceed us; so much more (as he is more then we) is his well
dealing beyond, and better then our well-doing. And have we not sound reason
then to go through stitch, with the work of God, and to resolve to be ruled
by him whatsoever seeming reason, in the world, may stand up, and offer to rise
against it. The very odds and advantage, is able to overturne all opposition;
and interruption, in every heart that the Lord has subdued to himself, and
sanctified with the true savor, Conclusion.
and power, of saving grace.

And now (my dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus) in the truth of this point, as
in the last lesson (which from me, you must take forth) I must leave you, but
my trust is, that neither you, nor I, shall ever take leave of it, or it of us,
but that this truth of God, shall dwell in all our hearts, all our days. It is
a lesson, as well becoming me to learn, as to teach. It is a lesson, I have
been, and (I hope) ever shall be, learning better by heart, every day, that I may
express it in life more and more, to my last day. It is a lesson which I may
(in good sense) entitle, the sum and abridgment, of all the lessons, and
truths of God, I have taught you from time to time, every of which, whereto
have they tended, but to inform you in the point of obedience to the Lord,
upon the blessed hope of his heavenly promises of your best welfare, to be
accomplished upon you. It is the lesson wherein the Lord himself instructed
Adam, as being the abridged model of his whole mind, [Doe this and liue] and
thence the Apostle call's our obedience to God, Micah. 6.8.
[obedience to life]. The prophet Micah taught it, in his time [he has showed
thee O man what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee etc]. And if the
Lord have showed us what is good, let us show our selves unto him, in all good
carriage conformable thereunto, for what he require's is not only good in act
before him, but better in issue for us.

[VVe were created to good works that we should walk in them] says the holy
ghost. Nay, do we not daily pray that his will may be done of us, [Thy will
be done etc]? And if to be ruled by God, were the end of our creation, and the
aim of our petitions; as also considering (as we have seen) that in thus
doing we shall receive endless felicity and consolation: O dear christians; let
us (even in our souls) endeavor our utmost hereunto, let the almighty
evermore master and manage, our hearts and lives, to rule, and overule both,
according to the good pleasure of his will, that we may approove our selves to
be upright practitioners of the power of this truth: So shall we be sure to
have the Lord to friend, and to live in his favor here, and afterward be as
sure to live with him, and see his face, for ever and ever; for himself has
assured us that [they that have done good, shall go into life everlasting.]

And unto the building of you all up in the assurance of this most blessed
condition, both my preaching unto you, and my practice before you, and my
prayers for you, have all jointely, and severally, done their best, from time
to time, (as the Lord has enabled me) since I first came among you, and you
so lovingly cast your early, and unexpected kindness upon me.

Since which time (that I may with your patience, and pardon, tune this my last
string to that sweetest strain, both touching you, and my self) and make
clear declaration, before God, and Angels, and men. how, I have been with
you; and how, you have been with me; and we both, with each other,
and so (while I can) begin to sing to my beloved, a song of my beloved,
because when I come to speak of our parting, I can be no more musical, but
mournful and (not my harpe-but) even my hart-strings will fail: Suffer me I
beseech you, to open my self unto you, and to rip up, and relate, the manner
both of my Entrance among you, and of my Continuance with you, and how our God
has dealt with us both, in both these. My entrance. Vthes. 2.1


Touching the former, I presume I may make use of the Apostles words, and
appeal unto them, and apply them to my particular, on your behalf [.
Brethren you your selves know, that our entrance in unto you was not in
vain.] Reu. 3.7.
You well know, that he that has the key of David, who shuts and no man
opens, and opens and no man shuts; you know I say, and so do I, that
it was he, that vnlock't your loving hearts, and set open the door of your
christian desires, to my first entertainment and employment, soon after my
arrival in this place, whenas (I being a mere stranger among you) I might not
(with reason) have any such hope or expectation; yet beyond both, I found your
abundant favor. Strange love, among strangers, much like that which has been
spoken off, but most like that which God (who is love) has freely showed to
us, (without merit) when we were strangers (and enemies also) to him. But they
that are most like him in mercy, shall be most like him in glory.

Touching the latter, My co^tinua^ce Act. 20.18.
to wit, my Continuance with you (since this my Entrance) I will also take up
the same Apostles words [you know from the first day that I came, after what
manner J have been with you at all seasons] you have not been strangers,
either to my public ministration, or to my private conversation, in both and
either of which, I have desired to lead you toward heaven, with light of
truth, and life according to the truth I taught, so far as frailty might
permit. I am not willing to speak much of either, yet something I must say of
both, but all I speak shall be [vere, and verecunde,] with modesty, and truth.

For my personal carriage and demeanor, I have ever aimed at such a course, in
the whole passage thereof, as might be safely jmitable to you all, that you
might follow me with a right foot, in that happy way, wherein the holy Ghost
does advise us to [make straight paths unto our feet,] Heb. 12.13.
that we might run the way of Gods commandments.

This I say was my aim, (and that I dare boldly say) and I have gone as near
it as I could, but through weakness, or want of due watchfullnes, I know I have
erred, and trodden a-wry, being sometimes wide, and sometimes short, of that,
we should strive unto. I hope you all acknowledge, that all flesh and blood
may, and does miscary, and if we be any thing more, through the grace given us
of God, yet have we so much more of that worser, then of this better part;
that there can be no possibility of our perpetual vprightnes, before men, (who
are our fellow offenders,) how much less before the Lord, whose eyes are so
peircing, and so pure? To arrogate Papal jmmunity, of being infallible in
judgment, or unblameable in life, and to affirm a possibility of not erring in
either, is blasphemously to derogate from the Lords own excellency, who alone
is able to challenge the whole world, to tax, or attaint him, in any (yea the
least appearance) of any evil whatsoever.

For my speech, when God has given us occasion of private discource, as, by
your most kind and ordinary invitations of me to your ordinaryes, we found
many opportunityes when we [did eat our bread together with cheerefullnes] you
are my witnesses, that I have tempered my talk to the time, to the persons
present, and matter presented.

If it were divine, (as many a time, it was, and we have, had heavenly sauce,
to our earthly food) you know I had ever labored your edification, and
building up to God, in the saving knowledge of his sacred will, in all points
and passages incident to every kind of divinity, and according to the quality
and nature of the question, propunded, we have accordingly given such
satisfaction, as we have received from God: whether in positive divinity, to
explane and confirm a proposition: or in textuall, to interpret words or
phrases: or in polemicall, to decide a controversy: or in scholasticall, to
unsold a nice distinction: or in case-divinity to relieve a conscience; or
lastly, in that which is mystical, to vnty knotts, and reveal obscurities: In
each of these something we have had (sometimes) to do, and as the Lord enabled
me, I have endeavored (to the best of my weak understanding) to inform and
satiffy you.

If our discourse were humane, then as (for your edification before) so for
your delight now, you will bear me record, that I have done my best to speak
to your contentment, in any kind of learning, wherewith I have been
accquainted, whether in any of the arts, or in history, or in poesy, or in
mythologie, in every of which (especially in the last) I have taken many
occasions to report unto you, such things as I have taken notice off, out of
the Jewish Rabbines, and Thalmud, and out of the Popes legend, wherein are
contained millions of matters, whereof, many are blasphemous, many ridiculous,
many monstrous, many frivolous, and almost all, so foulely fabulous, and
incapable of truth, or creddit, that the books might well be entitled a very
fardle of fables, and falshoodes (taking their denomination from the far
greater part) inasmuch as they swarm with such incedible narrations, as no man
can judge them, to be other then notorious lies. These I have frequently, and
abundantly related in your hearing, not that you should believe, but abhor,
the stories and think with commiseration of those miserable souls, both Jews
and Papists, who are led, and fed, with this froth and filthy scumme, of
infernal inventions, and have them read, instead of the Gospel, to giude
them. As also that we might (hence) be the more moved, to magnify the great
name of our good God, who has not dealt so with us, that we should believe
lies, but be nourished with his own word of truth, which is his power to our
salvation,

If any were so weak as once to conceit, these things (or any the like,
reported out of other writers) were spoken for truth, he or they, must ever
know, that what we relate out of our reading, must evermore carry creddit,
according to the authors, not the relators creddit. It would much disharten
scholars and kill the proffit, of much pleasant discourse, if we should be so
grossly mistaken. Nay, it become's us to make use of all kind of learning, as
any occasion is offered to us, to vent what we know in any particulers. It was a
good rule and well given to all men by one, [bene loquuta, quae sapienter
audita] those things are well spoken, which are wisely taken. Discretion in
hearing, does minister much delight to us in speaking. Not only what we speak
but from whom, must be well heeded, when we have any opportunity to discover
things of this nature.

And as thus it has been in our table talk, when we have had much sweet
society, and conference together, so when the Lord has give^ me any occasion
of private and secret passage with any of you, by way of counsel or
admonitton, in any case of conscience, I cannot say, but my (or rather, Gods)
words, have found such entertainment and acceptance, as I can safely and truly
report, and leave upon perpetual record, to the praise of this place, the
peace and happiness of those persons, the commendation of your society, the
consolation of all that may succeed me in this ministry, who may hereby
conceive comfortably, how hopefully they may sow, how happily they may reap,
and that their labors shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Concerning my public ministration; it pleased you first, to choose me as an
assistant to your Pastor, in your weekly lecture, and some service of the
sabbath: your favor in this was much, but it was much more, when (not long
after) upon his departure, you took me totally into your service, and (by a
lawful and free election, put me into the Pastoral charge and function and
(under God) committed your souls to my ministrey. A greater trust cannot be
cast upon a creature. And how I would have watched over you, the [watchman of
Israel] does well know; and how far I have actually endeavored it, this
public place, (I hope) does witness in part, out of which, I have not failed to
teach you, all that I could (in my best understanding) judge profitable for
you; I have showed the whole counsel of God, so far as it pleased him to
send it to my knowledge; I have not (willingly) purloyned, or witholden, any
part of his truth that might concern either.

the, reprehension of your sins or thee in formation of your judgments or the
reformation of your lives. or, the consolation, and salvation of your souls.
And all this in singlenes of heart, in sincerity, (howbeit in much infirmity)
without partiality, and flattery (which may be called high treason, in a
Preacher), because it betrayeth, both the honor of God, and the souls of men,
into the hands of Satan.

Besides, that private inspection, which (as I was able) I carried with a
wakefull eye upon you, in particular, that not one of you might wander, or be
lost, for want of looking to.

And how you have received, and embraced, these my ministerial endeavors, my
conscience, and your carriage do both most comfortably witness, inasmuch, as
thus much I may truly avouch before the Lord, to his praise, and your
approbation, that I have never vndertake^ to lay seige to any jmpiety, which
had overun all, or the most part, as a common enemy, but the Lord was the
conqueror, and you yielded your selves to be subdued to him, and ordered by
his holy word and will.

It were easy for me (if it were expedient for you) to instance some few
perticulers, which as the first fruits of my labors, I saw reformed among you,
but I spare to nominate any, but cannot spare to notify thus much, that all men
may see, what glory to himself, and what good to your selves, and me, the Lord
meant us in his mercy.

This beginning of good, made my service, my happiness, and this place began to
be like a little heaven to me; yea (to speak the truth from my heart, as before
the Lord) I much doubt whether, (out of heaven) I shall ever be so happy
again, as I did apprehend my self to be, when you (like the Apostles hearers)
began thus, to crown my labors, with the timely earnest, of such an
amendment; my hope was I should have been longer happy with you, but it
fails me; howbeit my souls incessant desire is and shall be, that the hope of
your happiness, may never fail you, in any that shall come after me.

Thus were we both entered into a blessed race, to the end whereof, I know the
Lord can bring us, though we may not go both together, as my soul desired,
yet (if we fail not to meet the Lord) we cannot (by his grace) but meet
together, in the glory of that kingdom, which he has promised, to all that
persevere in vprightnes before him.

The God of heaven knows, that I did so prize your worthy society (in these
spiritual respects) that I could have abundantly joyed to have been [your
servant for Jesus sake,] all my days; I did prefer it to all other, as most
dear and precious to me under heaven. Had I not reason, when I see the Lord
himself, assimulating us to each other, under those representations, wherein the
parties are in dearest relation to one another: as of father and child, mother
and infant? whence we are sometimes said to beget men to God, and sometimes, to
travel in our birth, till Christ be formed in our people.

Who can be insensible of the separation of these, between whom, the
conjunction is so near? surely none but he alone, can support me against the
sorrow thereof, who has promised to gather all his own, in such an
inconceivable kind of conjunction as shall make us everlastingly one, both
with one another, and with himself, and our savior, where he will be our father
and our king, and we (through his Christ) shall be his children, and kings too,
to reign with him to all eternity,

Thus, have I been with you, in my poor duties: but in all that I have said,
you (and all men) must ever except my infirmityes, which are not few, and my
manifold frailtyes; which (as I am sinful flesh and blood), could not be
wholly hid, or vn-obserued. We are men, (said Paul, and Barnabas, when the
sottish people would have worshipped them as Gods) subject to the same passions
that you are. [Elias (a man of admired graces) was a man subject to the same
passions that we are], said the Apostle James. Behold neither Prophets, nor
Apostles, but have weaknesses, with their graces, and do express their
inperfections, with their best actions. How much less may we hope, or you
expect, we should be free: free? nay how can you wonder at our far greater
faylings, when as you know us to be of far lesser graces; if their
extraordinary measure and power of Gods spirit, were accompained with ordinary
corruption, should our extraordinary miscarriages seem strange, whenas
ordinary grace, is the most, and best, we can attain?

Be not offended then at us, or at religion for our sakes, because you see our
evil, with our good; be humbled (rather) in your selves, and fear your one
greater danger, and think with your selves; if these men who draw so near
unto God, who spend their lives (as it were) in heaven, whose lives are, (or
ought to be) nothing but a continual conference, and familiarity with the
Lord, cannot yet be free of frailty, and offense; sure I may doubt my estate,
least that which appears in them, will usurp over my, if they feel so
much, I may fear, least it will overflow, and sincke me. Thus meditating, you
shall be kept, from being at all offended at us, and the more from offending God
your selves: you will be the more compassionate over us, the more circumspect
over your own ways, and so the Lord shall have honor in us both, and you
will learn to do to us, as he does to all his, [accept us according to that
which we have, not according to that we have not] not despising our ministrey,
because of our infirmity, but rather, seeing the Lord does entrust us over you,
you should yield your selves unto us, as to Gods guides. I beseech you again,
that you will neither be offended at our faylings, nor draw them into example,
to cause you to offend, we never desire further jmitation from Christians, then
we take from Christ. It is the grief, and greatest wound of our souls, that
we can be no more like our Lord, and master, who has entrusted us, nor more
sit for the performance of his pleasure: O let no man be the worse, for our
weakness.

All the joy we have is herin, that (notwithstanding our evil) the Lord has
judged us faithful, and put us into his service, and given us the seal of our
ministrey, in causing his work to prosper in our hand. It is his will to put
this treasure into earthen vessels, that the glory might be his, not ours.
Respect, and consider of us as we are; take your part of the treasure which is
heavenly, take pity on the vessel, which is earthly; and the father of
mercyes shall measure mercy to you, as you shall do to us, whose spirits
(indeed) are willing but our flesh is weak; if we can be upright, we are
accepted with God; perfect we cannot be.

Thus now in all respects, I have been with you.

Now how you have been with me, I wish I had ability to declare according to
mine own desire, and your desert. The forenamed favors of my first and second
election; your christian defense of mine jnnocency against those unjust
calminations which were cast upon me: the many sweet encouragements I had from
you in my ministration, that I might cheerfully serve the Lord in the gospel
of his son, during the time I was to abide among you: your gladness of my
continuance thus long, and the desires you have showed of my longer abode, had
it been the Lords pleasure, (or in your power) that so it should have been:
and besides all these, a multitude more of kindnesses, in one kind or another,
continually cast upon me.

Know, I pray you, that all these favors are engraven, upon a most grateful
heart; and that, as the Lord will not be unrighteous to forget your labor of
love to recompense it: so neither can I be so barbarously oblivious, as not to
remember both you, and them, to the Lord, yea and unto men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify him, who has given you hearts to do good, and to
distribute so abundantly.

I must say of you in the time past, as Jacob said in my text for the future,
and I cannot but acknowledge and avow, that you have performed that to me,
which was promised to him: you have dealt well with me every way. The world I
have found like a churlish Laban, both unkind, and unjust toward me: but you
have I found like the Lord, who gives over-measure of kidnes, beyond
justice, and merit. And this has abundantly appeared above all, in that
double, yea treble, testimony of your respect to me; to wit, in that honor you
vouch safed me, to become an unworthy member, of your most worthy body; as also
in that liberal support you gave me, at my departure, which was such as I
found no mean prop to my poor estate, which was then falling into a
consumption, and is not ^^ed to this day; and lapay, in that honorable
attestation you gave me, with vntue s^ll consent, under your seal. In all
these, your love did superabounde, toward me: yet, I do here before the Lord
and you, truly witness and testify, that I do not nor dare not nor cannot, so
over love, either my self, or all the wealth under heaven, but that I could
have accounted my heart, and state, incomparably more comfortable in your
service, then in your kinanes, in your spiritual, then in mine own temporal
advantage: and might I have still enjoyed my liberty among you to have
honored God, and done you good, I had been in full contentment, to my hearts
desire.

But I see it may not be, I must out of my paradise; I will not say the devil
either entises, or enforces me out; I desire to look only, upon the hand of
God in all things, (as I taught you all to do do, not long since) and the
greatest heavines of my heart is this, that he sees me not worthy, or fit to
abide in it, because I have honored him so little, during the time I enjoyed it.

And so at his pleasure, that shutts and no man ope^s I now pass away; as I
came in, when he did open and no man did shutt: my souls desire is, and has
been, that the Lord might have his will, above mine, and that his good
pleasure, might ever be predominant, and overule all my desires. Let us all
labor to believe that, that is (and must be) our best estate, which come's
upon us from him [ who is God to be blessed for ever,] who manifests, and
magnifieth himself to be only wise, and infinitely gracious, in all things that
come to pass upon his children. Faith will thus judge, and determine, though
our flesh, would fasten other persuasions upon us. And (thus considered) I dare
not but conceit my remoouall to be better then my resting here, howbeit nature
does distaste it, as a thing exceeding bitter. Grace can make that truly good,
which corruption apprehends to be a heavy evil. And when once sanctification
hoth conquered coruption, and got the upper hand, and that the Lord has taken
the scales of ignorrant, and erroneous judgment, from mine eyes, that I may see
himself clearly in this thing, I know I cannot but be comforted, with joy
unspeakable and glorious.

In the mean time, I now behold you with heavines whom I must behold no
more, in this heavenly duty and ministration; my soul overflowe's with sorrow,
and I am unspeakably affucted in my spirit, that I shall not (thus) see your
faces any more, nor you mine again in this place, and service. But our God
shall behold us both, and all of us, in the brightness of the face of his son
Jesus Christ, and (if we will strive to look unto him as we ought) the luster
and beams, of his most blessed countenance, will break through all these
foggs and mist of our natural perturbations, which appear abundantly in the
mournful tears, wherewith now we do so sorrowfully salute one another,
which, whether they do more break, or solace my heart, is hard to say: I
cannot but deeply symphathize with your sorrow, yet can I not but joy again,
to behold your dear regard of me, expressed in these affection^te
significations. Thus these two do fight an eager combat within me, but grief
prevails (I see) both in you, and my se^f, for this our unseasonable
separation.

But now it is see that I must go, and according to the good pleasure of his
will, who here spoke unto Jacob, as soon as I hear, I desire to obey, and [to
return into my countrey]; and I desire nothing (seeing I must be gone) but to
depart in true peace, as I signified to you all, the last Lords day, when we
did all feast with the Prince of peace, that it might appear, we parted as the
children of peace, in his blessing and love, whose bread and wine of blessing,
we did lovingly eat and drink together. I must leave you, but know, he will
not leave you, nor me, nor any of his, how soever it be so, that we must live
a sunder in this world.

Stay you here in this land of Labans, who receive you, to enrich themselves,
and affect you little futher, then they find that you are beneficial to them.
Be faithful in your employments, the Lord can send you home with his blessing
in abundance, though you might at first come over this Jorden, but with your
staff, or but some slender support, and portion, in external things.

My soul does wish every one of you Jacobs wealth, but with Jacobs faith, his
prosperity, with his piety, the Lord make you equal to him in greatness, and
goodness also. Yea the God of, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob dee you all good, and
bestow his best benedictio^s upon your Society, that the body thereof, may ever
inherit her ancient honors and advantages, and the members may share, not only
these common comforts, but every one in particular, his own welfare and
benefit beside. Of this one thing you must ever be ceartainly assured, and
persuaded, that you cannot be more happy then Pagans may be, but in the
prosperity of soul and body together, if the Lord divide these, and do give
abundance, only to the owtward man, this is his heavy justice, these are your
unhappy riches.

Therefore am I (and ever shall be) a hearty wellwiller, to the wellbeing of both;
Gods law does command, and your love has bound me, to be an incessant suitor
for this double mercy, and if (accordingly) I be not, so far as I may, or
can, let me find no favor in earth, no felicity in heaven.

And so I leave you to the love of God, whose power, guard you against all
evil. grace, guide you unto all good. peace, rule in your hearts. mercy,
compass you about in all estates.
As the church of Christ, I leave you, to him that is head of the church, and
savior of his body. As my late flock, I leave you, to the great shepherd of
your souls. As my loving friends, I leave you, to him that is the helper of
the freindles. As christians, I leave you to Jesus Christ both your Lord, and
mine, he abide with you, his graces abound in you, his holy spirit be your
comforter on earth, your conductor to heaven.
I cannot make an end, or give over the multiplication of my souls wishes, of
your souls and bodies good; I am full of matter, and my spirit within me
constraines me to go on; but dolor can keep no decorum, it is an ill orator,
and (you see) affection drowne's both matter and method; yet I must conquer my
felfe and end unwillingly, and so I endeavor ( spite of my longing heart, to
wish longer) desiring only this one thing that, what good, this time will not
permit me to utter, the Lord of his goodness may please to express upon you
all, for ever.


That so it may come to pass, that in all respects and states what soever,
wherein you are, or may be considered, you may in every of them be truly
blessed; that as men, you may be, faithful. as merchants, you may be samous.
as christ^aens, you may be gracious. as saints, you may be glorious.


More then these, I cannot pray for, and I do and will pray, that you may
never enjoy less, from the hands of the living God, who gives abundantly, and
vpraydeth no man, who sincerely, seeks his face, for any present, or future
favor.

And so, Jamt. 5.
now (dear Christians (f^^hers, brethren, sisters, from the greatest to the
meanest, my faithful and affectionate hort, bidds you all farewell: you are
all beloved of me, and my love desires, you may every one be blessed of God
with me. That as, while I was present with you, I did my best to help you
forward toward Christ's kingdom, so absent, I may meet you there, when once
the time is come, and the date out, that we must depose this earthly
tabernacle; O let our cheise care be that we may be sure (beforehand) that we
shall change it for a heavenly: I say beforehand, because the Lord make's few
comfortable exchanges with man, at the last day or hour of his dissolution, or
ot last day of the worlds consummation. We never read but of one (the good
theife) that sped well at such a time. I am sure there is none that ought to
suppose, or once sarmize, that himself shall be the second man, that shall reap
the like measure of extraordinary favor.

You see how I am suddenly slip't into discourse again, and forgotten my
ending, let your love pardon, this excess of mine. Might my speech be as long,
as my heart is large, or could it possibly be so, when should I surcease, these
my hartiest benedictions, these my kindest valedictions? which I neither know,
how to express as I would, or to end when I should. But I am now resolved to
master my self wholely, and to end instantly, and (not to detayne you longer)
my last salutations shall be in the gracious words of the holy Ghost, inspired,
into Paul, when he was to take his leave of the Ephesians: Act. 20.33.
[Now brethren I commend you to God, and the word of his grace, which is able
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance, among them that are
sanstified.] of the Thessalonians: 1. The. 5.23.
[Now the very Ged peace sanctify you throught, and I pray God that your whole
spirit, and soul, and body, may be preserved blameless, unto the appearance
of our Lord Jesus Christ.] of the Hebrews: [Now the God of peace etc; Heb.
13.20.21.
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that
which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom (by us all) be
glory, and honor, for ever and ever.


Finally, I end in all the divine and heavenly deprecations, and blessings of
all Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, yea of Jesus Christ himself (uttered in
the days of his flesh, while he dwelt among us) which I wish the Lord may
assign, and make over to you, that you may feel them, in the full fruit and
consolation, of every particular petition, contained in them all, and your
souls be filled with the sweetness of them, [as with marrow and fattnes], and
in their fullnes, you may rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

And now I will constrain my self silence, and muzle my overflowing mind and
mouth, shutting up all, with sincere suplication of all good, to you all, from
our God, who is all in all.

And to glorify and honor this God, let us for ever join our endeovours, and
at present join our prayers to him, because we know he [is able to do unto
us, exceeding abundantly above all, that we can ask or thinke] All ye that
love the Lord do this, all true hearts, all upright spirits, confoederate,
combine, conjoyne herin, that with one mind, and one mouth, we may bless God,
even our Father. Do the same all ye that desire to be beloved of the Lord,
and (through his love) to live with him for ever,

So shall it assuredly come to pass, that God, who is love, and who is life it
self, shall turn all. our heavines, into Hallelujahs. our mortality, into
life. our misery, into glory.
[Faith full is he which has promised, who will also do it] in his due time:
To him be praise and glory, in all his whole family, the Church tryumpha^t in
heaven, the churshes militant on earth, and in all saints apart, both now, and
for ever and ever: Amen, Amen, and let all, that love the Son of God. the Sion
of God. their own souls. and the souls of all true christians
say again, and evermore Amen: Amen, even so be it says my sorrowful soul,
once more, and evermore; breathing out her last, and best desires, that the
Lord may seal all these supplications, with an answer and issue, gracious to
us, and glorious to himself, according to the most wise counsel, of his sacred
will.

Glory be to God on high.

