CHRIST'S FAREWELL to Jerusalem, AND last Prophecy.

A SERMON Preached in the Quier of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, at the
Funeral of that Reverend and worthy man, Mr. Doctor Colfe, Vice-Deane of the
said Church, October. 12. 1613.

By THOMAS WILSON, Minister of Gods word.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Burton, and are to be sold at the sign of the
green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1614.

To his fellow laborers in the Lord, Mr. Abraham Colfe Pastor of Lewsham
beside Greenewitch, and Mr. Isaac Colfe Pastor of Hearne beside Canterbury,
and to their six Brethren with their loving Sister Mis. Mann of London, all
happiness in Christ.
HEaring by just and certain report, not of a few, what working and effect my
mean labors at the Funeral of your FATHER (that grave and godly Minister of
Christ) had, through Gods blessing, in the hearts of sundry, and very many
hearers, that hour in great companies assembled: and being once and again, by
writing and word, earnestly solicited to copy out that SERMON which I uttered
by help of memory, without any benefit of Notes, through straightnes of time,
and store of business: I condiscended against all thought and purpose on my
part (when I first conceived, and was delivered of this less then nine hours
birth) not only to copy it out and put it in paper, for the private use of
some; but to commit it to the Press, for the more public good of many, which
were not present auditors: Every good thing being so much the better the more
common it is; and writing being ordained of GOD to be a mean of the teaching
of his Church, as well as lively voice.

Now, after I entered this resolution, upon these grounds, to whom could I more
fitly dedicate it then to your selves, his nine CHILDREN, whom toward his last
breath he did as earnestly covet to make you heirs of his graces, as of his
goods? Pictures serve to put us in mind of our friends departed; so let this
Sermon and testimony given him at the preaching of it, be to you a Monument of
your good Father, who left behind him much more goodness to imitate, then
goods to enjoy: yet of earthly substance so much as may witness how greatly
God had blessed him with worldly and spiritual blessings, with the dew of
heaven, as well as with grace from heaven.

Walk carefully in his steps: think it to be your greatest shame to
degenerate, and your chiefest commendation to resemble him. As he before his
death provided for four of you Flocks to feed, fields to sow, houses to
build; so like good shepherds attend the flocks whereof the holy Ghost has
made you overseers, and which Christ has purchased with his own blood. Let not
such a rich prize perish through your negligence and sloth, but as scribes,
taught to the kingdom of God, store up old and new things in abundance, which
you may draw out to refresh the tender Lambs and dear sheep of Christ:
Withal, like good Husbandmen provide pure and good seed, which you may
scatter in the morning and in the evening, in season and out of season; for ye
know not which will prosper. Finally, as skillful builders, lay no other
foundation then that which is laid already, even Christ Jesus, the head corner
stone, upon which see you do build Gold, Silver, and precious stones, that is,
pure Doctrine, which will abide the examination of the spirit; that when the
LROD of the house comes you may hear the blessed voice, Enter into your
Masters joy ye faithful servants. Farewell.

Yours Thomas Wilson
.
The Testimony which was given unto Mr. Richard Colfe, Doctor of DIVINITY,
and Prebendarie of the Cathedral Church of Christ in Canterbury, at his
Funeral, being kept October 12. 1613.
TOuching this reverend man (whose last obsequies and Funeral rights we come
now to perform) I am bound to say something, in three respects: First, of God,
that he may have the praise of his own work and gifts in him. Secondly, of
himself, that his due and right may be rendered unto him. Thirdly, of you the
Auditors that unto you may be ministered, some just matter of imitation: for the
godly lives of the Saints dead are good patterns for the Saints that live.
Heb. Chap. 1, verse. 12.

Now, that which I have to say may be comprehended in few words: he was,
first, bonus vir, secondly, bonus Christianus, thirdly, bonus Theologus,
fourthly, bonus Pastor. Light of nature taught natural men to say, homo homini
charus esse debet eo quod homo est. Homo homini deus. A good man.
His singular humanity and courtesy sending from his presence none unsatisfied
or discontented (as it is written of an Emperor of Rome,) his sweet nature and
amiable behavior and peaceable disposition toward all men, that had to do
with him; also his humane compassion, pitying and relieueuing (as he could)
the miseries of men: his loathnesse either to speak or to do hurt unto
others, or to suffer any evil to be spoken or done by others: All these do
bear witnesset of him, that he was a good man. Neither indeed could he be
less, if the Poet have well described a good man, when he thus wrote, Vir
bonus est quis? qui consulta legum qui patres, iuraques seruat: For he
submitted himself unto superior powers, being a diligent observer of good
orders, and good laws, both teaching and practicing subjection to lawful
authority.

A good Christian.
But unto his morrall goodness God added much Christian and spiritual goodness.
For in time of his prosperity and health, his unfeigned love to the Saints,
(holding all dear unto him which were dear unto GOD) communicating unto their
necessities, even for Christ's sake: more particularly, his contributions
toward poor Scholars of the University, for their maintenance and increase
in learning and piety: also his unblameable and honest conversation, led
according unto the book which he studied, professed, and preached, do speak
for his sound Christianity.

In time of many and very great affliction (whereof some were both exceeding
sharp, Patience.
by anguish, and long for the continuance) his wonderful patience in bearing
evils, almost intolerable, without signification of the least grudge or
coffeehouse in mind, when the beholders were forced through compassion to
turn away their eyes from looking upon his extremities; yet did he still
endure, not only with patience, but with cheerfulness, the heavy hand of God,
kissing (as it were) the rod that smote him, being even another Job for
patience, as he was another Moses for meekenes. Meekness.
My self inwardly and long acquainted with him, yet never, or very seldom did
I see him moved unto anger for any private or worldly matter; but as that
servant Moises, which was meek and gentle in his own causes, showed himself
severe and stout, hot and earnest in Gods quarrel, Exodus 32. 19. so this our
brother, otherwise not to be stirred, yet ( cum question fuit de veritate) he
did declare himself very angry against gainsayers, taking more to heart, and
being more displeased with the hurt done unto the truth, than unto himself.

Trust.
Moreover, his constant faith, continuing to trust in God, even then when he did
more then kill him (for death was more to be chused then his tedious
calamity:) his fixed hope, Hope.
and fervent calling upon that God which so frowned upon him, and struck him
so rigorously; Prayers.
his plentiful prayers for his Wife and Children, that they might be kept
upright and unspotted in this perverse and slippery age: Godly counsels.
His godly comforts and counsel to his Wife, to depend upon Gods providence,
to bring up his Children well in the knowledge of Christ; also to his children,
that they would truly and greatly fear God, least together with an earthly
parent they lost their heavenly father, and so have no father at all: Care of
children.
His religious education of his children, out of a great desire that they might
serve God either in Church or Commonwealth as God should dispose them. These
his graces do strongly and sufficiently testify what a good Christian he was.
Which yet was further manifested by his singular humility, Humility.
behauing himself lowly in an high estate; so far from being high-minded, or
wise in his own eyes, as he did ever think meanly of his own gifts, which
were rich and many, when he was very ready both to speak and judge reverently
of other men's gifts, being sometime both poor and few.

A good Divine.
Now, what a good Divine he was I refer you to these proofs following.
First, to his learned, judicious expositions and Meditations, uttered in this
Church (in a frequent and learned assembly) upon sundry Texts of holy
Scripture, Judicious Lectures.
as namely, upon the whole 8. Psalm, and 127. Psalm. and Math. 7. verse 24. to
the end of the Chapter, and 1 Cor. 14. and on the Epistle of Christ, sent to
the Church of Laodicea, Reu. 3. but especially on 2. These. Chapter 2. from
verse 6. to the end, wherein, he demonstratiuely and substantially proved the
Papacy to be Antichristianity, there so lively and fully described by Paul.

Evangelical Teacher.
Further, whereas the Apostle says that to every man is given his proper gift
of God, to some after this manner, to another after that, Gods servants and
children, amongst many graces have some one gift which does chiefly grace them
whereby they excel both others and themselves:) I may truly say, and let it be
said without offense, that (...), of this our Brother was a special slight
and faculty, in revealing and preaching Christ, which he did with that
dextoritie as sundry, both godly and learned persons have heard him not only
with affection but with admiration also. Thirdly, Degree of Doctor.
the University, his mother, conferred upon him the greatest dignity which
she had to give unto her children, and that not without due desert on his part,
as some of the Heads of houses, who heard his Divinity Acts, or exercises,
have reported, and affirmed them to have been performed with general
approbation, and great credit. Whereof I do not marvel, for certainly he
was a very great student, and of long continuance; he was well seen and
expert in the three languages, namely, in the holy tongue, the language of
Canaan, by the benefit whereof, as also by much reading of our modern writers,
together with most learned interpreters, both evangelical and pontificiall
(namely, Vatablus, Arias Montanus, Tremelius, Beza, and others) he became an
excellent Textman, and so an excellent Divine. Bonus enim Textuarius est bonus
Theologus.) He was conversant, with good fruit, in the ancient Fathers, and
acquainted himself with the Scholemen also. Not above six days before his
death he showed himself in conference as ready in Schole-distinctions, as if
he had but newly come out of the Schools.

A good Pastor.
He gave a taste how good a Pastor he was, both by personal pains in
preaching the Word unto his flock plainly, without ostentation of wit, or
learning: Also, by his provision of a well qualified man to be his assistant in
that weighty charge.

And as a good Scribe, taught to the kingdom of GOD, he would have drawn
things, both old and new, more plentifully out of his store, if he had
recovered his health again, for he often wished that he might live to preach
Christ; lamenting it that he was not able. But he has served his time, and
finished his course; and his flock has lost a skillful Shepherd; his Wife a
loving Husband; his Children a kind Father; his Servants a mild and just
Master; his acquaintance a fast friend; his reverend Brethren a faithful
fellow and companion.

This is all that I have to say of him; such as love him will think it too
little, and such as did not, will judge it too much; but less I could not say,
and more I need not say. The sum of all is, Qualis vita, finis ita; he
lived well, and dyed well; full of days, in a good age, in the favor both of
God and good men. God be praised, that has happily ended his painful
pilgrimage: and the same God give you all grace to come after him in the same
steps of faith and patience, wherein he went before.

Amen.
A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury. October. 12. 1613.
Luke 23. verse. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. And there followed him a great multitude of
people, and of women, which women bewailed and lamented him, etc.
Sum of the Text.
THese words are a part of that peerless and matchless story, concerning the
precious passion of our blessed Savior. And whereas both before and after this
text, many and sundry reproachful and painful things are reported to be done
unto him: Yet this present parcel of scripture does mention some honorable
things that did befall him about his death, as namely, the lamentation of
diverse women, and good people, in witness of his innocence, that he died a
just, and good a man, in which behalf they bewailed him, and not for the cause
of his misery alone: for then they would have mourned for the two thieves
that were crucified with him. Again the horrible judgment threatened here by
Jesus unto the Jews, for putting him so cruelly to death, is an evidence of
his uprightness, and how dear and beloved he was unto God his father,
howsoever for a time he did forsake him, that he might suffer afflictiue
things to merit the redemption of mankind.

Division of the Text.
This Text is divided into two general parts: the first is a report of a
lamentation, set forth by three circumstances: first, of the persons that
mourned, who were certain people and women which came after him, even at the
heels: secondly, of the person for whom ( to wit) Jesus: thirdly, the measure
of their sorrow, which was very great, like to the sorrow of a mother that
laments at the funeral of her only begotten child, as the Greek word here
used does import funeral sorrow, and as the Prophet Zachary did foretell; in
Chap. 12. ver. 10. of his prophecy, they shall lament him, as one lamenteth
for her only son.

The other part of our Text was the event that followed this mourning; namely,
a grave speech, which our Savior uttered by occasion thereof, ver. 28. Which
speech is partly prohibitory, Weep not for me, verse. 28.
secondly, exhoriatory, but weep for your selves; thirdly, comminatory,
threatening not a few or light ones, but an heap of heavy judgments, declared
by the sayings of women that had children, verse. 29.
Blessed, etc. and of persons of all sexes and degrees, verse. 30.
then shall they begin, etc. Fourthly, confirmatorie, rendering a reason why the
Jews must be so plagued, in an allegorical sentence, wherein Jesus, for his
innocence and good works which he did, is likened to a green Tree, which is
both fruitful and unfit for burning: the Jews for their wickedness are
compared to a dry tree, which is both barren and meet for burning, these must
in no wise escape the fire of Gods vengeance, when his own Son (a green
tree) is so sore afflicted.

Interpretation.
And there followed him.] That is, came near unto him, even behind his back.
They bewailed and lamented him, that is, their inward sorrow was so vehement as
it brast out into tears, as appears by verse. 28. What women these were that
thus followed and lamented, though not expressed in the Text; yet probable to
have been such as had heard his doctrine, of whom read in Luke 8.2.3. John
11. 1. 2. and elsewhere. It is the manner at Executions and Funerals of persons
of note and name, that many flock and follow to the place, some out of
curiosity to hear and see: some out of compassion to bewail and lament their
case and their loss. So it was here, many followed Christ as enemies, some as
friends out of love, much grieved that a man so innocent and so beneficent,
which had done so much good to so many, by his doctrine and miracles, should
so unjustly suffer.

First of all, Observations.
note here how manifold testimony was given to Jesus of his innocence from
all sorts of persons and creatures. Judas which betrayed him, affirmed him to
be an innocent, Matt. 27.4. Pilate which condemned him, not only with his
mouth, said, What evil has he done? Matthew. 27.23. and again, I find no
fault in him at all, John 19.4. but by the Ceremony of washing his hands,
publicly protested so much, Matthew. 27.24. His Wife being troubled about Jesus
in her dream, sent her husband this message, Have thou nothing to do with
that just man, Matthew. 27. 19. The Centurion seeing what happened, said, Of a
truth this was the Son of God, Luke 23. Many people and women in our Text by
their tears condemn the cruelty of the Priests and Elders, and other Jews,
and justify his integrity. Yea, not reasonable, but even insensible
creatures, as the Graves which opened, the stones which cleft asunder, the Sun
which was Eclipsed, the Air darkened, all these (as with one voice) did
proclaim him an innocent person.

We read of a certain Heathen Philosopher, who upon the strange accidents
about the suffering of Jesus, uttered these words, Aut mundi machina
dissoluitur, aut Deus naturae patitur.

Use 1.
This serves to the confutation and confounding of these wicked Jews, which
thought, and still do think that Christ suffered as an evil doer, a seducer,
or seditious person, whereas his death had not taken away sin from others, if
any sin had been in himself. It became us to have a Savior, separate from
sinners, holy, undefiled, etc. Hebr. 7.26.

for; therefore it must needs be he came to save such sinners, the just to die
for the unjust, to seek up that which is lost.

Secondly, 2 Observation.
learn here our Christian duty, which is to mourn, and be touched with
heaviness for the death of godly persons; as the Israelites mourned for Jacob,
a right good man: and afterward for Mosesan upright Maiestrate and singular
Prophet, Deuteronomy. vlt. Also, the Jews lamented sore for zealous Josiah, that
restorer of Religion, keeping a yearly remembrance of his death, see Lam. 1.
ver. 2. When Stephen the protomartyr, a man full of Faith and the holy Ghost,
dyed, there was great lamentation made for him, Act. 8.2. and Paul having said
to the Christians at Melitum, that they should see his face no more, they fell
upon his neck and weptsore, Act. 20.38. There be diverse reasons why we ought
to be affected with sorrow, when righteous persons are taken from us. First,
Gods Commandment. 1 Thessal. 4.13. Eccles. 7.4. Secondly, the example of holy
men, and of Jesus, weeping at the death of Lazarus, John 11.35. Thirdly,
because the world is continued and spared for the sake of good men, Genesis 18. If
ten righteous men had been found in Sodom, God had not punished it. To Paul,
Act. 27.24. God gave all the lives of those which were in the Ship with him.
Certainly, the just by their prayers stand in the gap, and do stay and hold
back many judgments that they break not out and fall down upon the heads of
the wicked.

Again, the taking away of good men is commonly the forerunner of some
calamity. Genesis 19.
When Lot was out of Sodom then came down fire from heaven to consume them.
And after the death of Josiah, Gods people were carried captives into a
strange Land. Esaias 57.1.
Esaias says generally, that righteous persons are removed hence, that they may
not see the evil to come. Gal. 2.
At a word, godly persons be the props and pillars of Church and Commonwealth.

The meditation of this doctrine will help us: Use 1.
First, to make better account of good men, to whom we are so much beholden;
that we have them in singular love, Mat. 10.
honoring a Prophet and a righteous man, because they be such.

Secondly, 2. Use has 3 branches
this checketh three sorts of persons. First, those which hate the just (as
Cain hated Abel;) and think them to be the troublers of the world (as Achab
falsely thought of Elias;) accusing them as enemies to Kings and States, (as
CHRIST and his Apostles were judged of;) putting them to death as evil doers
(as Antipas was, Reu. 3.) Secondly those which being shamelesly wicked, do
rejoice at the fall of good men, esteeming it a great benefit to be without
them, as they in the Psalm, cheered themselves with David's sickness, saying,
There, there, so would we have it: he is down, and shall never rise again.
Or, as the Jews triumphed when they had nailed JESUS to the Cross, and that
he had given up the Ghost. Thirdly, such as through senseless blockishnesse
are without all feeling of sorrow when God strikes at such famous Lamps (as
this lying before us) which long gave shine unto the world by his wholesome
doctrine and good life.

Use 3.
Lastly, it must provoke us all in such cases to be touched in heart, working
our selves to grieve at such Judgments when they happen, that we be not found
hardened, like those of whom Esaias complains, that when merciful men were
taken from the Church, they did not consider it in their heart, they regarded
not that God delivered them from future evil, Esaias 57.1. Thus much of the
first general part, The lamentation made for Jesus.

Text.
But Jesus turned back to them.] Here begins the second general part, to
wit, the Speech or Sermon of Jesus, occasioned by this Lamentation. And ere we
come to examine the particulars, I commend this Lesson, as to all Christians,
yet more specially to the Ministers of Christ, that they attend their Calling
to the utmost, being prompt to instruct, reprove, and admonish, as long as they
may. See how Jesus being set in great affliction, near to a cruel death, led
between Soldiers, bound with cords, yet remembers his vocation: and being
sent of God into the world, with commandment from his Father, to teach his
will, to call men to repentance, he accordingly, even to the last period of
his life, warns the Jews of their sin, and threatens Gods judgments for
the same; and as a Prophet fore-telleth their misery.

Thus did Jeremy when the King and Princes, by the malice of the Priests, had
cast him into prison, yet even then he causes Baruch to write his
Prophesies, and to read them to the people. Also Paul being prisoner at Rome,
Act. 28. 31. yet even there he taught the kingdom of God by mouth to such as
came to him; and remembering Gods Word was unbound, wrote many divine Epistles,
as that to Galat. Ephesians. Philip. Collos. 2 to Timothy, etc. to the great
edification of Gods Church present and future. The Martyrs in Q. Mary's days,
Ridly, Bradford, Rogers, etc. being barred from preaching Christ out of the
Pulpit, yet from the prisonhouse wrote many godly Letters to the Brethren.

He was bound, etc.



Text. Interpret.
And said, weep not for me, but etc.] This which is here translated ( for
me, and for your selves,) in the original it is read, upon me, and upon your
selves, that is to say, weep not for my sake, but for your own cause, which
prohibition, is not so to be understood, as if Jesus had simply disallowed
their weeping for him, but in some respect only: for these that wept for him
were ignorant of the true cause of his death, which they ascribed unto his
own infirmity, and to the violence of his enemies, as if he had been
compelled to dye, and could not have resisted their rage: whereas none did take
away from him his life, Ioh. 10.18
he laid it down of himself, partly out of the great love that he bare to
mankind, and partly to declare the obedience toward his heavenly Father, who
had appointed to redeem the world by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 8.
Philip. 2.8. Christ therefore vvorthily blamed these Mourners, weeping for him,
as for one enforced to dye against his will, for he dyed most voluntarily,
suffering death because he would, not as one that could not avoid it, having
Legions of Angels at commandment. Mat. 26.53.


Again, this particle ( not) is found in Scripture to signify not always an
absolute, but a comparatiue denial sometimes, as in Hosea, Chap. 6. 6. I will
have Mercy, not Sacrifice; that is, I desire Mercy rather then Sacrifice.
Likewise, in Psalm 51.16.17. 1 Cor. 1.17. Ephesians. 6.12. and often elsewhere:
so it is here, ( not for me, but for your selves) that is, more, and rather for
your selves then for me, who shall reap no loss and damage, but much gain by
my death, after which I shall rise again, and ascend into heaven, and there
reign in glory for ever: but unto you, the Jews, my death shall not be the
end, but the beginning of sorrows; therefore mourn for the horrible Judgments
hanging over your own heads, and weep not on my behalf, whose death is to my
self both advantage and advancement.

Obseruat.
Hence we may learn how hard a thing it is, even for the godly, to keep a
measure either (in joy and gladness) or in sorrow and heaviness: but either
we shall weep more then we should, or less, or for what cause we ought
not; so vveake and unable we are to govern our passions. Use.
Therefore we ought to watch, and pray to God to moderate them by his good
Spirit.

Exo. 32.19
If Moses, that man of God; and Paul, that chosen vessel; Act. 15.39
with Barnabas, that Son of Comfort, were foiled by their passions: Job
3.3.4.5.
if Job and Jacob so much yielded to heaviness, as the one cursed his
birthday, Genesis 35.37
and the other refused to be comforted, what cause have others (far inferior
to them in graces) to mistrust their own frailetie, and to fly to the throne
of Grace, both for pardon of all excess in affections, and for power to stay
them in compass for time to come?

Verse 29. For behold, the days will come, when they shall say, etc.
THese be words of Prophetical commination, Text.
or threatening prediction, foretelling the most grievous and great
tribulations, which are noted and set forth by the speeches of Mothers, in
respect of their Children, for whom they should be so distressed and perplexed,
as to do contrary to custom and reason. For, Children and the fruit of the
womb are a reward and heritage of God; both for an ornament to their Parents,
as Olive branches set about their Table, Psalm. 128.4. And for their adiument
and defense, being as sharp arrows drawn out of a quiver, wherewith the enemy
in the gate is repelled: therefore such were accustomed to be held happy, which
had their quiver full of them, Psalm. 127.4.5. Contrariwise, barrenness, among
the Jews, was wont to be accounted a malediction. Genesis 30.1.
Whence it came that Rachel did so take on with Jacob for a child, when she
was barren, Genesis 30. Genesis 16.1.2.
And that Sarah did so much covet a child, as she gave her Maid Agar to
Abraham, to wipe away the infamy of sterilitie. Hannah likewise 1 Samuel 1.7.
wept and mourned under this curse of an unfruitful womb: yet lo, such
unheard of and intolerable calamities should light upon the Jews, for
murdering Christ their Savior, as childing and fruitful women should
pronounce them happy which were childlesse, and reckon it their greatest
unhappiness to have Sons and Daughters: and that for these considerations;
partly because when those evil and woeful times should come, mothers should be
grieved not so much for themselves, as for their Children, whose harms use to
move the bowels of tender mothers very greatly: no compassions to the
compassions of a mother toward her distressed babes, 1 Kings 3. 26. Partly, for
that (a thing horible to think of, more direful to act it) many mothers
through rage of hunger, occasioned by famine in time of the Seige, should be
forced to broyle and eat their own children for food, to save their lives
with the death of their sweet infants, as it happened by Josephus report.

Lastly, Children would be a great hinderance and clogge (as it were) at the
heels of their Parents, to stay their flight, by which they otherwise might
have preserved themselves, as some did. Whereupon, our Savior utters ( Mat.
24.) a vvoe to such women as should be with child, or give suck in those
days. The cause of all these terrible Judgments were, amongst other sins of
the Jews, as their infidelity, hypocrisy, contempt of the word, hardness of
heart, yet especially the extreme savage unthankfulness, and barbarous
cruelty in putting causlesse to a shameful death the innocent man Jesus:
having had Prophets and just men sent unto them, some they reviled, others they
beat and ill entreated, God at last sending his own and only Son, him they
cast out of the Vineyard and slew: therefore the Lord of the Vineyard waxed hot
with indignation, and vvhetting his sword, came against those Husbandmen in
his fierce wrath, and destroyed them with a vvoderfull destruction, some
forty years after the Passion of our Lord: for the which Christ admonishes
these people that bewailed him, telling them they had greater reason to lament
their own heavy case, and the affliction of their Children, then to weep
for his cause.

1. Obser.
From hence we have sundry things for our instruction and admonition: First of
all, we may hereby discover the error of such men, Manichees.
as though there were two Gods, one of the old Testament, and another of the
new: and that the God of the new Testament, of the twain was the milder,
whereas there is but one only God, and the same always like to himself, God
is ever but one, both for nature and for will: as extremely hating and
punishing sin now under the Gospel, as he was wont to do under the Law;
nay, more extremely, because now he has afforded greater grace, and afforded
more means against sin. All the old Testament cannot yield an example of
such severity in punishing sin as here is threatened touching the destruction
of Jerusalem and downe-fall of the Jews. No sorrow was like their sorrow, nor
no plague was like unto their plague.

Therefore let all men greatly fear the divine Justice, Use.
and he warned to take heed how they offend and provoke it.

Secondly, 2. Obser.
we may observe the force and poison of sin, when it is continued in,
impenitently: it is able to turn the nature of things, and to change blessings
into cursings, and comforts into plagues and confusions. What greater earthly
blessings, then the fruit of the womb? Children are called a treasure given
from God: Gold and Silver cannot purchase it: Kings and Princes have desired to
have them, and could not, yet through sin these impenitent Jews were brought
to this pass, through their wickedness I say, as that they accounted their
Children accursed, and their greatest misery the fruit of their womb. Wonder
not at this, for seeing obstinacy in sin can make God of a Father to be a
Judge; Christ of a Savior, and cornerstone to support to be a stone of
offense to stumble at; the Gospel of the savor of life to be a savor of
death; the Sacraments, to be a Judgment and not a nourishment: if in
spiritual things Sin have this power to alter their property, what marvel
though in worldly things it can prevail so far as to cause that to be
occasion of evil which was ordained for our good and welfare; as our Table to
be our snare, our riches to become thorns to choke, our Children to be our
unhappiness and woe?

Use.
Let all obstinate sinners which live in the service of sin, and
notwithstanding all admonitions from Gods Word, Works, and Spirit, and from
their own conscience also, yet hate to be reformed, let such take knowledge of
this doctrine, and lay it to heart, and hasten to be reclaimed; else let them
fear least an hour come when those things which are now a delight to them, as
their wives, children, silver, gold, houses, lands, meat, drink; yea, the very
creatures of God, which be so comfortable, as Sun, Moon, Stars, do
through their stubbornness in sin prove bitterness to them, even as bitter
as gall and wormwood: so as it be grievous unto them to look upon these good
things; and to think that ever they enjoyed them, be as heavy to them as
death. This God can bring to pass, that men shall curse their parents, their
birthday, their benefits, themselves, and all. For if God did such strange
things unto the Jews his chosen and peculiar people, Exodus 19.
his treasure, whom he took out of all nations to be his own, to whom he
made such great promises, and gave so many and notable privileges, the Law,
the Covenant the service of God, the Adoption, the Arc of the testimony,
(visible token of his presence.) If Jerusalem the City of the great King,
where was the Temple, the Altar, the Sacrifices, the Priesthood, and where God
said, he would for ever rest and dwell; yet for impenitency in their sin were
made desolate, and not only deprived of Gods protection, but contrary to the
order set in nature, had all their blessings accursed: then we the Inhabitants
in England, howsoever we be blessed with many prerogatives and favors, the
word of God, the Ministry, the Sacraments, good Laws, and Maiestrates, long
and great Peace, and Plenty, yet if we will not turn from our pride,
covetousness, ambition, uncleanness, and other sins, which are too ripe and
rife amongst us, we may look when God should bring the like confusion among
us, and make us to be a proverb, a reproach and pointing of the finger unto al
our neighbor nations, as he did the Israelites before us. Are we better then
they? should God change the course of his Justice for our sakes?

Observation.
Furthermore, if the just God have such sharp and terrible vengeance to power
out against unrepentant sinners in this world, (where there is a time of
patience and mercy;) Oh how horrible and intolerable torments may the wicked
(which go on in their iniquities) expect to suffer in the world to come, when
judgment shall be executed without mercy, and where the fury of Gods wrath
(like a consuming fire) shall break forth in all extremity, for the full and
perfect punishment of sinners, who shall be bitten and vexed with the
euer-gnawing worm of a guilty conscience, and burned in a fire of hot
indignation that never shall go out! All good things being taken away, nothing
but evil shall be present: let this be as an Iron rod to drive sinners unto
speedy and serious repentance, and amendment of life.

Moreover, Observation.
of all other sins which we ought to repent of, namely, and especially, of
cruelty, and of cruelty against the Lord Jesus. This was the crime (among
many others) which principally provoked God against his own people and City,
even for that they crucified the Lord of glory, and put to death that just One,
after they had rayled, and spitted on him, and beaten, and shamefully entreated
him; howbeit, this sin of cruelty against Jesus, I doubt it is little
thought on, or mistrusted to be amongst us, (because Jesus is long since gone
from us) whereas there be sundry ways how men may now, How many ways Christ
may be killed.
and do often fall into it. For even they which let slip out of mind the
bloodshed of Jesus, and forgetting they were

back again unto the Cross, to bring Christ down from above? Romans 10.6.

Moreover, they which do in cruel Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act.
9.4.

And what other thing do they then Matthew. 25. It is truly said of an ancient
writer, Si non pauisti occidists: for the Apostle James writes, Chap. 5. of
the covetous rich men, that they do kill the just by vvithdrawing their wages
from them (vvhereupon they should live,) also we perceive by the words of
Christ in the Gospel, that not to save life (when we may) is to destroy and to
take away life: and the truth is, it is a like cruel, utterly to quench ones
life by violence, or by hardness of heart, to keep away that from him whereby
he should preserve life.

Ezekiel, Chap. 13. ver. 18. says of false prophets, that they do hunt the
souls of the people (as a wild beast does hunt the poor Lamb to kill him.)
It is the sentence of our Savior CHRIST, John 10. that hirelings do love the
fleece and lucre better then the souls of the flock, do come to kill and to
destroy. Finally, it is expressly written in the Proverbs, that there the people
do perish where vision or preaching fails. There is no cruelty to the
soule-crueltie, which first or last will call down for wrath upon the heads of
those which are guilty of it. If Abels blood cried to God for vengeance, how
much more will the blood of souls do it?

In the first of Daniel, when Daniel and the other children of the Jews,
desired to be fed with pulse, and not with meat which came from the Kings
table, the Eunuch which kept them answered that he durst not. For (says he) if
your faces be not well liked when the King shall look upon you, he will take
away my head from me. I do not say unto Idoll-Shepheards and dumb dogs,
(through whose negligence or ignorance, the souls of the people have
leanenesse entered into their souls, and look with evil favored
countenances) that God will strike their heads from their shoulders, but this I
dare say and avouch, that without true repentance he will cast both their
boydes and souls into hell; and with the evil steward in the Gospel, who said
in his heart, my Master will defer his coming, and so fall to beating his
fellow-seruants, they shall be cut in pieces, and their portion shall be given
them with Hipocrits, and at the last they shall be burned with fire and
brimstone. O therefore that evil and sloathfull Ministers would consider this
in time, and lay it near unto their heart and repent of their cruelty past,
and hence forth carry more merciful hearts toward the inheritance of Christ,
yeerning and pitying the spiritual necessities of Christ his sheep, after
his own example, Matthew 9. 36.

Lastly, it is greatly to be wished, that all unjust and Sacriligious persons,
and Patrons, who are the direct and effectual occasions of plunging many
souls, into endless perditions, by wrongfully detaining the hyers of Gods
laborers, by which means the Church of Christ is pestered with foolish
Ministers, and blind Shepherds, that God I say, would give them better minds,
and change their bloody hearts into pitiful hearts, to take compassion on
their brethren, which do by heaps run unto destruction. For Christ Jesus
will not for ever put it up, to be so cruelly dealt with in his people, which
be dear and precious to him as the apple of his eye. Text.


Verse 30. Then shall they begin to say unto the Mountains, fall on us, etc.
THese words are borrowed out of the Prophet Hosea, Interpret.
Chap. 10. ve. 8. Where God threatens unto sinful Idolatrous Samaria such
extreme judgments, as they should rather choose to suffer any violence, then to
live and languish in their miseries. Here Christ foretells the Jews, that
this shall be just their case, even such a miserable condition they should be
in, as they should seek death, and it should fly from them; desire to be
crushed by the weight of hills and mountains, rather then to enjoy life with
such anxitie and unhappiness. How this was fulfilled is reported by Josephus,
Joseph. lib. 7. ca. 8.
a Jew, himself an eye and ear witness of all that horrible calamity that
came upon Jerusalem, according to this prediction of Christ. Hardly without
abundance of tears, can one read the most bitter evils, and perplexed
afflictions and shifts, which partly by famine, partly by sword, partly by
flight (running into Caves and Mountains to hide themselves) they were plunged
into, such an heap of most comfortless miseries, as the very Romans, their
enemies, pitied and grieved to look upon their desolations.

Obser.
Where observe the truth of Christ his predictions, that as his promises; so his
threatenings of temporal and eternal woes they are all yea and Amen. As
himself is so be his words, all faithful and true. His wisdom is such, so
uncontrollable as cannot be deceived touching the events foretold: his power so
invincible as cannot be resisted; and his truth so infallible as it is never
falsified and altered. Shall he speak and not do? threaten and not execute?
heaven and earth may sooner pass, then one jot or tittle of his word should
fall to ground. God is not as men that he should lie, or as the sons of men,
that he should repent.

Use.
Let all men therefore fully assure themselves of the most certain and
undoubted effects of Christ's words to be such as is foreshewed. Which on the to
wit, all good in this life, as far as shall be expedient for their salvation,
and all those good things promised in heaven; as the sight and the presence of
God in glory, the company of innumerable Angels, and blessed Spirits of just
men, that their bodies shall shine as the Sun, their souls be replenished
with perfect knowledge and fullness of pleasure, that new name, that Paradise
of GOD, Reu. 2. and 3.
that tree of life, that crown of immortality, that white stone, etc. even
all that blessedness which the word speaks of.

Also on the other side the wicked heart, that euer-gnawing worm, that
neuer-ending torment, that fellowship of the Devil and his Angels, etc. whereof
the Scripture makes mention: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Text.
Verse 31. For if this be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the
dry?
THis is the AEtiologia, or confirmation, proving that the Jews cannot always
stand and prosper, but must come down, by an argument, a minori ad mains, from
the less to the more, thus: It is less likely that righteous persons (which
be fruitful in good works, like green Trees) should be punished, then the
wicked and impenitent, which be as dry and rotten wood. Therefore, if heavy
afflictions were inflicted on Christ, who was full of grace, as good juice or
sap, which burst out into fruit, ripe and good; much more shall miseries fall
upon barraine and unfruitful Jews. When the Husbandman spares not the green
wood, but burns it, how will he spare the dry, which is far fitter for
the fire?

Here, in the Greek (by a Sinechdoche Wood is put for Tree, Interpret.
as Genesis 2. Wood of life, and Wood of knowledge of good and evil, for Tree,
etc. And that word, by a Metonimie of the effect, is translated ( green) which
in the original is as much as ( moist) opposed unto dry. The whole sentence
for meaning is like that in Peter, 1 Epist. Chap 4 v. 17. 18. If the righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and Sinner appear? And if Judgment
begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of them which obey not the
Gospel?

Out of this our Sentence I observe for our instruction, Obseruat.
the condition both of the righteous and of the wicked. Touching the
righteous, their condition is like the estate of CHRIST their head: Christ
being full of grace, Ioh. 3.34.
having the Spirit above measure, did live most innocently, Ioh. 3.34.
bearing plenty of good fruit, teaching the people, and doing good by his
strange works, as well as by sound doctrine, like unto a green tree, and yet
was hated in the world, and sore afflicted: likewise the Elect, which be his
members, Christians be like Christ both for holiness and afflictions.
must be conformed unto him both in holiness and in suffering. Romans 8. 29. God
has predestined us to be made like unto his Son. Hence it is, that as Christ
is compared unto a green tree, so the faithful are by the Prophet Esaias (
Chap. 6. 1.) called Trees of righteousness. Part of their condition to be
fruitful Trees.
And in the first Psalm, ver. 3. in respect of their regeneration, whereby
they are ingrafted into Christ; and of the grace of sanctification, whereby
they are enabled to bear fruit much and seasonable, they are likened to a tree
planted by the rivers of water, which brings forth fruit in her due time. In
another Psalm the righteous man is compared to a green Olive, which is green
and fructifies all the year long: so the godly are holy, not by starts and
fits; but all their life long. Herein being contrary to the nature of all
vvorldly trees, that the longer they are, the more green they wax, and the
more fruit they bring forth, as it is written, Psalm. 92. 13. 14. Such as are
planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God: they
shall still bring forth fruit, in their age they shall be fat and flourishing,
whereas other trees the longer they stand, the less fruitful they be. The
fruits of this our Christian tree, be rehearsed by the Apostle, Galat. 5. ver.
22. 23. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. Also in the Ephesians. 5.
verse. 9. 2 Pet. 1. ver. 5. 6. 7.

From this first condition there is offered unto the righteous, Use 1.
Admonition.
matter both of admonition and of comfort. They are hereby warned above all
things to take heed of barrenness in their profession, and to study how to
be fruitful and profitable continually: carefully doing the works both of
their general and particular Callings, out of a sincere desire to glorify
God, and to benefit their neighbors. As earthly Husbandmen which have planted
their grounds with trees, after they have dunged, watered, trimmed and pruned
them, they expect that they should bring forth fruit (as they may by good right
and reason) if they miss of their hope, and their trees prove barren after all
their cost and labor bestowed, they cut them down, and cast them into the
fire, as did that man, mentioned in the Gospel, Luke 13. ver. 6. 7. who
coming to his vineyard, and finding his Fig Tree empty, took order with the
dresser to have it hewn down: so God that heavenly husbandman, which has
grafted you, as Trees, in the Orchard of his Church, will proceed against you
in all rigor and severity, when he comes to visit you, and to look for
fruit, he shall find your branches either empty and bare, or with a few
clusters upon them, after all his pains and charge, after so many gracious
instructions, and benefits, both bodily and spiritual; which ought to have
prevailed so greatly with you, as to have made you think, not only of
bringing forth fruit, but of increasing and abounding in fruit, as the Apostle
prays for the Colossiaus, Chap. 1 v. 10. And as he exhorts the
Thessalonians, that they may increase in love, and abound in every good word,
and in every good work: so that it is not enough for Christians sometimes to
do well, and to speak well, to bring forth a little fruit, as it were a
sprinckle, here a Fig, and there a Grape: but according to the time that they
have stood and continued in the Church, and the means they have had to grow up
in godliness, they ought to strive to be abundant and plentiful in the fruits
of righteousness, for God will require much where he has committed much.

Whereof it would come to pass, Use 2. a double comfort.
that (amongst many other) you shall reap these two comfors especially: first,
that the more green and flourishing good, and that he did all things well:
now what greater consolation can there be to a godly mind in the whole world,
then to bear the image of Christ's holiness and goodness? for they that be
good and holy as Christ was good and holy, they are sure to be like him in
happiness, as they are like him in fruitfulness. Whosoever imitateth his
innocence shall be partakers with him of his glory: for where Christ is, there
must his servants be, John 14. But unto this comfort which is very great, add
a second, which is not small; namely, that Figs, Grapes, or other fruits, are
not so delightful and pleasing to the Husband man, as the good works which
do grow upon the Christian tree are grateful and acceptable unto GOD, through
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Hence good works be termed, Heb. 12. the sweet
fruits of righteousness; and in the Canticles, Cha. 4. ver. 13. 14. Christ
says of his Church, that her plants are as an Orchard of Pomegranates, with
sweet fruits, as Camphire, Spikenard, even Spikenard, and Saffran, Calamces,
and Cinamom, with all the trees of incense, Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the
chief spices. Oh what a comfort is this to know that the chiefest and choysest
spices are not so sweet to our taste, as our good works be pleasing unto our
heavenly Father!

But to pass on to the other part of the condition, Part of their condition,
the Cross.
which concerns the godly in this life: it might be wondered that they being
for innocence of life and plentifulnesse of good fruits so like Christ, so
pleasing to God, even as green fruitful Trees are to the husbandman, yet as if
they were the worst of all men, hated of God and man, they should undergo and
suffer so many heavy and hard troubles and dangers, their life being as full of
misery as it is short for continuance (as Job says;) Job 14. 1.
their days as evil as few, (as Jacob complained;) they being subject to
peculiar afflictions for righteousness sake, Genesis 47. 9.
such as Scripture calls crosses and persecutions; beside those tribulations
which be common to all men, so as the righteous, looked upon with a fleshly
eye, and considered according to their present and temporal estate might be
esteemed of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19
(as Paul speaks of them all) which believe, and the very scumme or filth of
the world, and ofscouring of all things (as he writes of himself and
fellow-helpers in the Ministry;) this I say, 2. Cor. 4
might give unto us just occasion of meruailing and astonishment, were it not
that the Scripture has not only taught it so plainly that God will have this
to be the condition of the faithful, Mat. 16.
to bear the cross, Act. 14.22
to pass in to heaven through many afflictions, 2 Timothy 2. 11
to suffer and dye here with Christ, to have trouble in the world, Ioh. 16.33
to be reviled and persecuted for Christ, Mat. 5.11.12.
etc. and withal, has evidently revealed the causes of Gods counsel and will
in this behalf; why his pleasure is (contrary to the course and custom of
worldly husbandmen) to bring the moist and green tree first to the fire of
affliction, and afterward the dry and withered (as Christ speaks here;) to
begin his judgment at his own house, as Peter says, 1 Pet. 4. 17. to disple
and chastise the children, when the bastards are left without correction, Heb.
12.7. The reasons of this administration are, Why God first affliteth the godly.
first of all to conform the faithful now unto their brethren and
fellow-seruants the Prophets, Apostles, and other Saints which have gone before
us, Mat. 5.11. 1 Pet. 5.9. but especially to their elder brother Christ Jesus,
Heb. 12.2.3.
who endured the shame, Heb. 2.10.
and bare his cross, and by affliction was consecrate of his Father; so his
will is that the rest of the children whom he has sanctified, should follow
his steps, dying and suffering with him, that they might reign and live with
him, see Romans 8. and 2 Timothy 2.12.

Secondly, to purge out corruptions in herent, and remaining sins, that they
might be more fruitful in good works, as men do lop and cut their Vines and
other trees, least growing too rank in leaves, they should bring forth little
fruit. John 19 2. 3. Therefore Job says, the corrections which God has
sealed, are sent to take down his pride (that he may walk humbly with his
God) and to turn him from his enterprise (that he may live holy and
unblameably blameably before God and men.

Thirdly, to make man know what is in himself. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. to his faith, as
gold is tried and purged in a furnace, 1 Pet. 1.7. to manifest and increase
patience, Romans 5.4. that the children of God by their strength of faith, and
patience, which they find to be given them of God, to enable them to bear the
burden of the Cross, and to endure tentations, to stand fast in the evil
day, they may grow to experience, and from thence by degrees come unto that
hope of glory which confounds not, but fills the heart with joy
unspeakable and glorious, Romans 5.3.4.5. 1 Pet, 1.

Fourthly, to withdraw and weane them from the love of these wroldly things,
that the world may be crucified to them, and they to the world, Gal. 6. Also to
stir up and excite their prayers, to quicken their faith, to manifest Gods
power and goodness, both in upholding, and delivering them in their great
weakness and fears. 2 Cor. 12.

Lastly, to give to the godly which now are troubled, certain demonstration of
rest hereafter, 2 These. 2. 6. and to the wicked which now have rest, strong
evidence of future anguish, as the Apostle teaches in the same place. 2 These.
1. 5. 6. your tribulations and persecutions which ye suffer, are a token of the
righteous judgment of God, etc. For it is a righteous thing with God, to
recompense tribulation to them which trouble you, and to you which are
troubled rest with us. Which well agrees with the doctrine of our Text, that
if God strike the righteous, he will less spare the wicked. Uses and duties.
From this consideration of the will of God, and the ends of counsel in
smiting the godly here more grieously sometime then he does his enemies, we
have certain duties to be learned, and practiced. The first is, follows a
calm, and fair seasons, and night day, and Winter Summer; so sickness
succeeds health; poverty riches; adversity prosperity, sorrow joy: therefore as
Mariners in a calm provide against a storm, and provident men in plenty look
out, and lay up for the days of famine, as Joseph did: so Gods children are
bound in prosperity to prepare for adversity; for these take turns, and
nothing else is seen under the Sun. Satan, and the wicked will not suffer
the godly to lack trouble and affliction. Cross is a necessary and perpetual
companion of the Gospel. Crux Euangelijl; comes.
Wherefore as a man that means to build, Luke 14.33
will first cast and consider whether he have means sufficient; and as a
Captain will weigh his forces ere he go to war: so good Christians must
arm themselves, and get a resolution, with strength and power from heaven, to
go through stitch with their profession: for he is not worthy to be Christ's
Disciple that has not this settled affection, to forsake all for his Saviors
sake, and for his Gospel. What Paul said of himself, every one in some
measure must be ready to do, not only to be bound, but to dye for the Lord
Jesus.

A second use of the former doctrine is, 2. Duty.
to admonish the Children of God to be patient and well-contented with
afflictions, when they shall happen, howsoever long and sharp they prove,
seeing it is the pleasure of their Father, and the portion of all their
brethren (those afflictions which they suffer being accomplished in the rest of
the Saints which be, or have been, or shall be in the world, 1 Pet. 5.) for
all that will live godly, must (a necessity in it, not expediency alone)
suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 1. and that they have Christ their guide and
Captain, who has led them the way, and does both minister strength enough to
bear and abide the cross, and has promised the victory, Romans 16.20. Yea, and
turns the crosses of his people to such and so manifold commodities. The
meditation of these things must prevail to stay them from grutching or
fainting, and keep them in their uprightness and constancy, without being
weary in their mind, or weary of well-doing. 3. Use.
Finally this rebukes the profane persons, two ways, both because they rashly
judge of the righteous, when they be under the scourge, censuring them for
hypocrites and men hated and cast out of GOD, forlorn and desperate, (as
Elihu, and the other did of Job) and the Courtiers of Saul, of David, and the
Jews of CHRIST. Whom they thought to be quite forsaken, because they saw him
sore plagued, and not delivered: and also for that they falsely sooth and
flatter themselves in their sins, as if they were dear to God and beloved
of him, because of his indulgence and lenity toward them, presuming of God,
that he will not destroy them, but with blessings and kindnesses still fill and
follow them, boasting (as if they were at a covenant with hell, and death) that
no evil shall come near them, that they shall sit and reign as Queens, and
feel no misery, nor ever be removed: wherein they are deceived; for if these
things be done to the green tree, what will be done to the dry!

That we may now draw to an end, A transition to the condition and tvvofold
estate of the wicked in this life.
as out of the former part of this verse, we have seen the condition of the
godly, both for their doing and suffering, their holiness and affliction; so
let us in few words observe the estate of the wicked impenitent sinners, what
they are to God or in his sight, and what God will do to them. Howeuer ungodly
sinners, and close hypocrites may be had in admiration of others, and for their
outward riches, and greatness in the world, or some internal gifts of the
mind, as Learning, Wisdom, Eloquence, 1 Unfruitfulness.
knowledge of Arts and Tongues, may be accounted highly of, as if they were
some great personages, and be something in their own eyes men of worth and
renown, such as all ought to reverence, yet in the judgment of GOD (whose
judgment is according to truth, Rom 2. 3
for he judges not after appearance, but sees what is in their hearts) they
are most vile and base, being in very deed void of goodness, and good for
nothing. There is no more saving and true grace in them, 1 Samuel.
then there is sap or juice in a rotten log; no more fruit comes from them
then from dry wood. Even the Scribes, Pharisees, the Priests and Elders of the
Jews which would be saluted Rabby, Matthew. 22.
that is, Master, a name of reverence, given to such as excelled many, and
esteemed themselves the guides and lights of the blind and ignorant, the
builders of the Church, rare for holiness as well as learning, Romans 2.
yet Christ who knew them perfectly, and much better then they knew themselves,
pronounceeth of them here, to be no better then dry trees, barraine and rotten,
worthy to be burned.

What is more contemptible or unprofitable then stubble and chafe, which men
neglect and tread under foot, or cast out of doors? yet by Esaias 5.4. also by
Mal. 4.1.2. the wicked are compared unto such things as are of none or little
use and moment. In the first Psalm as the wicked be described what they are
for quality, such as do not meditate in the law and doctrine of the word, to
know, believe it, and do thereafter; so in the same place, for their vileness
and unfruitfulness, they are likened unto the dust, Psalm. 1. verse. 3.
which lies in the street, and is trod upon by all men, clean contrary to the
tree planted by the river, being full of the moisture of Justification, and of
the fruits of sanctification.

Our Savior universally affirms of all which are not his members, John 15.6.
that they are without fruit, like the withered branches of a vine, which men
gather and cast into the fire. But Inde, verse. 12. does yet further nullify,
and vilefie such unrighteous persons, calling them clouds without water,
carried about with the wind, corrupt trees, without fruit, twice dead and
plucked up by the roots: at a word, that which the world judges in their
malicious corrupt opinion, the true servants and Saints of God to be. 2. Cor.
4. the same unregenerate and unrepentant sinners be indeed, even the filth and
garbage which is thrown out of the city upon the common dunghill.

Did Hypocrites, which take the law of God in their mouth, Psalm. 50.
and yet hate to be reformed, casting the word behind them, Mat. 7.4.5.6.
and open sinners, which like Swine and Dogs, do obstinately continue in their
uncleanness, contemning all admonitions, hating and hurting their admonishers,
having shaken out of their heart both fear of God and shame of men (like that
evil Judge in the Gospel, Luke 18.3.) did (I say) these men believe firmly,
Telluris invtile ^o^dus, fruges consumere nati.
and seriously consider this their baseness and barrenness, that they be but
unprofitable burdens of the earth, borne to consume fruits, not to bear
fruits; Oh how might it strike them with dread and horror, and cause them
speedely and earnestly, without daliance or delay, to change their minds, and
to hasten their amendment, especially, if so they look into themselves, what
they be for lack of grace, as they ponder what the most just and severe Judge
of the world will be, and do to them through the rigous of his Justice, which
shall be at length (when his patience is expired) as a consuming flame to
devour such dry sticks.

When Esaias writes this of the obstinate Jews, Their unhappiness.
(which despised the warnings of the Prophets, and cast off the Law of the
Lord of hosts; As the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chafe
is consumed of the flame, so their root shall be rottenness, and their bud
dust, Cha. 5.24. and in Chap. 33.11. Ye shall conceive chafe, and bring forth
stubble, and the fire of your breath shall devour you. Also in Chap. 47.14.
Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall consume them, they shall not
be able to deliver their lives from the power of the fire. Lastly, when
Malachie denounces thus against despisers, Chap. 4.1. The day comes that
shall burn as an Oven, and the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be
stubble, and the day comes, that shall burn them and leave them neither root
nor branch. I pray you what else may these comminations mean, but so much in
effect as David speaks in the Psalm. 37.19. That the wicked after they have
long lived in prosperity and glory, flourishing as a Bay tree, shall at length
suddenly and horribly perish? and as he says in another Psalm, They shall
come to a fearful end, and the transgressour: shall be destroyed, Pro. 29.1.
Psalm. 37. Or as Solomon his son shows their ruin, They that harden their
necks shall perish, and shall not be cured; they shall be broken down, and
never be built up (as it is Psalm. 28.5.) or as Christ threatens they shall be
gathered, bound up, and cast into the fire, John 15.5.6. As thorns, and
Briers, and dry rotten branches, they shall be sewell for the flame of Gods
indignation, which when the hour of his judgment comes, shall as easily,
speedily, and unrecoverably overthrow his enemies, as the fire licketh up and
consumes either stubble, or chafe, or dry wood, or as the wind disperseth
the dust; or as the Husbandman cutteth down the fruitless Fig tree.

Use.
Wherefore let not wicked doers and unfruitful Christians, who live to
themselves and not to Christ, please themselves, or take their case to be good
because they are boren with, and blessed, do prosper and find God patient,
for this mirth and pleasure will last but a while, a moment as it were, as
craking of thorns, and shall be turned into eternal woe; the good things
which they see and use are but temporal and momentanie, and light; but the
evils which they see not have an eternal weight. Woe be to them which are rich
(says Christ) they have received their comfort. Woe be to them that now laugh,
for they shall wail and weep. These words plainly speak of a change (a
woeful change) which shall beside ungodly rich men: and no marvel if it go
full ill with the wicked at length, seeing it goes so hard with good men.
When the green tree is brought to the fire, the dry vvood can not long escape
scot-free; no, not even in this life: many times they are many of them even
here strangely plagued, and the longer suffered the heavier is their wounds,
Tarditas vindictae grauitate poenae compensatur.
in the end; as a hand lifted up on high gives the more grievous blow, the
slownesse of revenge is recompensed with heaviness, and weight of the pain. God
struck Abell, put Jacob to much trouble, afflicted the Israelites in Egypt,
greatly exercised Elias, chased David out of his country, put him in danger of
his life oftentimes (the waters came over his soul) yet winked in the mean
time at Cain, Esau, Egiptians, Pharaoh, Saul, Achab and Iezabel, as if he had
forgotten them, but in fine he set their sins in order before them, and tare
them in pieces when there was none to deliver them.

Though Christ be a man of sorrows, become a worm and no man, be rayled upon
by wicked mouths, murdered by unrighteous hands, and the Jews his
crucifiers, in the mean while, and sometime after, laugh, rejoice and triumph,
yet will not God always keep silence, but pays them home their wages, even
full measure into their bosom he renders them vengeance. What horrible
judgments did God execute upon those bloody persecuters in Queen Mary's
days, even in the eyes of men, howsoever with great and long sufferance he
had spared them?

But if the wicked (as innumerable heaps of them do,) after a prosperous
life have a peaceable death, live in wealth, and go to their Graves with
honor and pomp, yet afterward there abides for them the more fearful and
grievous torments and damnation: For look how much they have had of pleasure,
so much shall they taste of torment, Revel. 18. And as they have heaped sins
upon sins, so shall they stacke and store up wrath (as a man should every day
carry a stick toward a pile of wood, therewith at last to be burned) against
the day of wrath and of the just declaration of the righteous judgment of God.
Romans 2. 5. The Rich-man is now in hell, in flaming fire and torment, who once
fared deliciously, and was costly clothed every day.

The use whereunto this estate of the wicked, Use.
thus woeful and unhappy, must serve (if we deal wisely,) is, first of all in
respect of the righteous, to hold them from impatiencie and fretting, such as
David, ( Psalm. 37. and 73.) and Jeremy did fall into, when they saw the
outward felicity of the wicked, how they lived without peril or fear, in all
plenty and glory, it had almost made them trip, and think them the only
blessed men, certainly it wrought repining grief and impatiency in them. I
fretted (says David) to see the ungodly so prosper: howbeit looking forward to
their end, they saw how they were set in slippery places, and must come down
in a moment, and miserably perish. If such holy men were offended, how may we
mistrust our selves, lest the honor and riches of evil men be a scandal and
an offense to us, and make us weary of all, and to give over our uprightness,
and to like of their ways, and choose their conversation? Howbeit, arm your
selves against such stumbling blocks, by this meditation, that when the green
tree has such things done unto it, the things done to the dry, what will they
be? And if God have a rod for the the righteous, he has a sword for the
unjust, which he will whet, and draw, and strike them dead withal. A Scorpion
for sinners, for a scourge wherewith he chastises his Children. A cup he
has in his hand, full of wine mixed, whereof his Children and the wicked do
both drink; Psa. 11.4.5
they, the top and uppermost; these drink up the very dregs. Stripes and
vvounds are prepared for the righteous; but Fire and Brimstone, Hayle, Storm
and Tempest, shall be the portion of Sinners. He comes against the godly which
offend of weakness, as a Father, angry with his negligent and forgetful
child; but as a fierce Judge against the wicked, which sin wilfully and of
malice.

Wherewith as just men have cause to be contented, Use
not murmuring when they see one part of his judgment toward themselves, but
waiting to behold the whole proceeding and course of it toward his enemies: so
it ought to amaze and astonish all evil livers, considering their destruction
sleeps not, but comes on toward them with a swift foot, as travel upon a
woman, or a thief in the night shall suddenly supprise them, and mightily
confound them, as an host of armed men, Prou 1. 25 26.27.28.
or as a Whirle-winde, because they hated knowledge, and regarded not
instruction: he called and they heard not, they answered not when he cried to
them; but despised his counsel, and would none of his correction: therefore
when their fear comes, he shall not hear their cry, nor answer when they
call, but shall laugh at their desolation, and mock when their dreadful fall
comes.

If men when they hear such things threatened, and withal do see with their
eyes such green trees (as this our text speaks of, or this which now lies
before us) so wonderfully smitten of God, with such unwonted distresses and
discases, would enter into such a serious meditation concerning themselves as
this; when these vnharmfull and holy persons, merciful and righteous men,
which feared God and lived justly, eschewing evil, could not escape the fierce
wrath of God; what will be mine end, which have lifted up my mind to vanity,
and walked in crooked ways, minding earthly things, and my heart set upon
evil works! oh, how happy might they become! And when they read that other
men's sins so burdened and bruised Christ, (himself being sinlesse and just)
let them think what will light upon their heads, being so full of sin, if
they do not turn from their iniquities with all their heart, and with all
their soul.

This is the profit which impenitent persons must labor to make of the
Judgments of God upon the righteous, and nor to do as they in Luke 13. 2. 3.
4. which forgot themselves, there own guilt and danger, and took such as
Pilate killed and mingled their blood with their Sacrifices, and them upon whom
the Tower of Shiloam fell, and crushed them to death, to be greatest sinners:
whereas our Savior directed their eyes back to look to themselves, and
consider their own perilous condition; that except they repented, they
likewise should perish.

FINIS.

