ABELS OFFERING. OR THE EARLY, and most ACCEPTED Sacrifice of a Christian.

Showing how soon every soul is bound to begin, and betake himself, not only
to the true, but also to the timely service of God.

A SERMON Preached at Hamburg in November 1617, and now published at the
instant entreaty of A Godly Christian.

BY JOHN WING (then) Pastor to the English church, there,

Hosea. 10.20. It is now time to seek the Lord, till he rain righteousness
upon you.

AT FLVSHING. Printed by Martin Abraham vander Nolck dwelling at the sign of
the Printing (...).

TO THE Right Honorable, THE OPHILVS, Lord Clinton, EARL of Lincoln, And to
the virtuous, and Right Honorable, the Lady BRIDGET his wife.
AND TO The Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord Say, and Seal, with the Virtuous
and Right Honorable, the Lady ELISABETH his wife.
JOHN WING A poor unworthy Minister of Jesus Christ, wishes all increase of
all true honor, and happiness, with God, and men.
RIght honorable Lords, and Ladies, I hope it shall not be any way
distastefull, or unpleasing to your honors, that a stranger is bold to salute
you, from beyond the seas, and to publish your names, there, where your
persons may be as unknown to others; as mine is to your selves. I have not
presumed on this double dedication without all reason; for why? it is famously
known, that you are the worthy examples of this subject, whereof I here treat.
And I cannot but think, that they are the fittest Patrones of divine books,
whom God has made, the faithful Patterns of the doctrine contained in them.
It is long since I have heard of your early, and happy proceedings in piety.
Having now this opportunity, I could not longer contain in silence, but
resolved to place you in the beginning of this little book, that they which
read, seeing such gracious and noble presidents, of the practice herein
pressed, might have the more powerful jnducements, to draw them, to do the
same. The Lord of heaven, keep you all, in your most holy course, and bring
you to the end of this happy race, that every of you may, (after all honorable
falicityes enjoyed on earth) posesse those infinite, and endless glories,
prepared, for all that love his name, in whom I rest,

FLVSHING. the 30. of October 1621. Yours Honors in all service, for the
honor of God. JOHN WING. Pastor to the English church, at Flushing in ZEELANT.

Page 18. lin. 23. put in, and gave Page, 43. lin. 33. put out he Page 49. lin.
24. for albe, read able
ABELS OFFERING, OR THE Early, and most acceptable sacrifice of a Christian.
Showing how soon, every soul is bound to begin to betake himself, not only
to the true, but also, to the timely service of God.
Genesis 4.4. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and the
fatt thereof.


THE three former chapters of this holy History being spent in the discovery of
the worlds creation, and of the most wonderful and glorious workmanship of
God, as in every other creature, so especially in Man, whose happy estate
while he stood, and miserable condition when he fell, and most gracious
recovery from his fall, with diverse other divine occurrents (next and
jmmediately following) being at large related unto us. It now pleases the holy
Ghost to go further in this sacred narration, and in the beginning of this
fourth chapter, to acquaint us with the multiplication of mankind. And here
we have the story of the first two, that were ever borne into the world, to
wit, the two first sons, of their, and our first parents, (I dispute not
whether they were twins, the text seems to contradict it, though some do
weakly conceit it, neither does it carry, or conclude any material
consequence, whether they were or not) concerning whom, we have a threefolde
description.

1. of their birth, and natural being. ver. 1.2. 2. of their business, and
civil being: ver. 2. 3. of their religion, and spiritual condition. ver. 3.4.
They were both borne into the world of their parents: by them also were they
both employed in the world; and these two are only named or mentioned without
any further discourse: But the third thing, to wit, that which concerns the
matter of religion, is that which the Lord does intend to treat off, and insist
upon. In the world, and affairs of the earth, men may lawfully be of diverse
professions, trades, and occupations and it is needful they should be so. But
in religion it cannot be thus; piety cannot admit a diversity, the blessed
worship of God will bear no variety at all, it must be uniform, as that one
God is, who is worshipped. And so was this of these two brethren, so far as
the same appeared visiblely to men, in the external act of sacrificing, which
practice they had (doubtless) learned of their parents, who were (without
question) taught of God how to exercise this duty, though the letter of the
scripture be silent in both as it is in diverse other excellent truths, which
yet we stand bound to acknowledge, by virtue of such evident, and undeniable
consequence as does clearly conclude the same, without litterall testimony in
any express terms to avouch it.

Now concerning the sacrifice of the sons of Adam, Cain, and Abell, there is a
double difference noted.

1. of the sacrifices they offered. 2. of the effect they found with God, to
whom they were offered.
That which is observable in their sacrifices, is this, that whereas Cain,
carelessly and without choice offered [of the fruit of the grounde] not regarding
what he offered, so he brought some what, contrary to the law of those
offerings, which required the first of all fruits: It is reported of Abell, and
commended in him, that he was very regard-full and respective, to sacrifice to
his God, of the first of his flock, and among the first, the best he could pick
and choose.

And according to the difference of these acts, the effect was also different
with the Lord, who seems to suite and fit, his justice to Cain, that as he
had no respect what offering he brought, so had God no respect to him, or that
he offered; and his favor to Abell, unto whose person and sacrifice, the Lord
had gracious regard, as he was most heedefull to present the choice, and
chief, of all he had to the Lord.

And in this particular does Moses, the man of God, and penman of this part of
Gods word, insist, and speaks much of the things that issued hereupon, both
on Ahells part, and Cains.

But here (it may be) some will move a question, how Moses who was borne many
hundred, and some thousands of years after the creation, could come to know
these things, and to set them down in such exact order unto us.

To move this question, is to make question of Gods truth, and to bring into
doubt, all that he has recorded in this whole book of Genesis, and all such
other things as fell out before his birth and ripe years, in Exodus; for in
his infancy we cannot conceive him to be any way one of Gods principal
secretaryes, or meet to be entrusted with this rare jmployment of penning any
part of scripture, especially considering that he was brought up in Pharaohs
court as a Pagan, for the first forty years of his life.

But for the clear manifestation of this matter, and for the justification of
the authority of this sacred book against all accursed cavills; we answer and
do acknowledge, that howsoever every thing reported therein by Moses were
acted long before his birth, yet nevertheless all things written therein, are
as absolutely true, as if Moses had been borne, and had seen, and heard, each
passage in his own person. The Lord made choice of a man living so long after
these things were done, that he might honor himself, and this his sacred
history above all humane, histories under heaven.

For whereas no profane writer is able infaillibly to report any thing (for
matter of fact) but what was done in his own days, and came to pass in his
own ceartayne knowledge; the Lord is able to instruct, such as he will set a
work to report the proceedings of his churches in all ages, in the
incontroleable truth of all things that came to pass, though they that record
it, were unborn when they were acted. And who knows whether the Lord has
not done this; and of purpose made use of such persons who had not a being in
the world, till long after the time wherein the things themselves which they
relate had their being, that so he might show himself an alsufficient
instructor of his servants in those things which were done long before their
time, and declared long after.

It is not my purpose to digress into any general discourse of those
evidences that do authorize, and warrant the whole scripture, which are
discovered at large by many worthy, judicious, and learned Divines only, that
it may manifestly appear that this book is no less scripture then any other,
let us take into our hearts the due consideration of those things which may as
vnreproveably argue God to be the author, as Moses to be the penner of the
same, and they are (among a multitude that might be produced) these few that
follow.

1. Moses does tell us of some passages concerning God before the creation,
which no creature could hear, or understand as that of the first creature, and
all the rest, when he said of every of them: [Let there be light, etc.] who
could tell what God spoke touching every of these, seeing as yet they were not,
and when they were, yet till man was created all other were void of
understanding.

2. He relates to us touching the creation of man, what God said of his making
to wit, the matter and form of his body, and the infusion of his soul, as
also of the manner of the making of the woman when the man was in a deep
sleep, and perceived it not, and what the man said of the woman, when the Lord
brought her to him.

3. After the creation, he report's the passages of man's fall, and discover's
the subtiltyes of Satan, in seducing the first man and the first woman, which
relations must needs be of God, for we cannot conceit that the devil would
so detect himself, in the evil both of his gross sin, and great punishment.

4. After man's fall, he tell's us of diverse secret passages, as of Adams
knowing his wife: of Cains anger conceived inwardly, and unjustly, against Abel
his brother, before it brake out: of Noah's drunckenes, and nakedness: of Lots
failing, and the manner thereof, how he was abused by his daughters, with their
close carriage of the matter, and how he knew not what was done, when he had
slept with them both: of the close conveyance which Rebecca used to obtain the
blessing for Jacob, with the most private circumstances thereof: and a multitude
more of the like to these things, so secret, that no flesh could know, or
relate, but they must needs be recorded by the Lord himself.

5. He make's narration of the sins, of the most holy men and women, either,
that which was common in those times to most of them, as the Polygamie of the
Patriarchs, or such offenses as any one of them particulerly fell into, not
sparing Abraham the friend of God, nor any of the sincerest of his servants,
which a good man would have done, had he been guided but by his own spirit.
Nay, (which does absolutely seal the truth and authority of his writings to be
of God) Moses spare's not himself in his own sins, but make's a manifest
discovery of his own infidelity, and unadvised anger, and the just punishment
of God upon him for them both. This impartiality, argue's a supernatural
spirit to guide it: when a man cannot spare his friend, nor himself but will
leave both, upon everlasting record to be blamed and blemished to all
posterity. A thing not usual (if at all used) in humane history, wherein men
speak, and write the best they can (and many times more then they should) of
themselves, and those whom they favor. It must be God that must make men thus
to do: and therefore this is one of the prerogatives royal of his writings.

6. And lastly, he tell's us of the most secret things that can be imagined;
nothing can be conceived so close as the counsel of heaven: what God speaks
there, who can hear? especially when he speaks not in any such sort, or so
openly where Angell's may hear, but in his own private closet, nay (which is
yet more) in his own breast or bosom: yet Moses can tell the world, not only
what God said in heaven, but what he said in his heart, and how he was jnwardly
affected. So we find in one chapter of this book, where Moses make's known
how God [repented, and was greived at his heart, at man's wickedness:] and in
another, how he was graciously disposed for the continnance of the constant
course and succession of all the affairs of this inferior world saying [And
the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the earth etc.] See, Moses
is privy to Gods heart, and can make us know, what were his most jnwarde
resolutions. And who could give him the least light, or acquaintance of these
things but God himself, who made him his secretary, and so made these secrets
known to him.

And thus by all these evidences, (which are common to all other scripture as
well as this, but coummunicable to no books but the book of God) we see that
there is no reason of doubting or debateing any thing in this part of holy
writ, (or any parcel of it) because it was penned by Moses, and he borne so
long after all things written and recorded in the same, were gone and past. He
had a singular and all sufficient tutor, even the most wise God, and he himself
did endite, all that he taught and enabled Moses to write, so that every jot
and tittle of this book of Genesis, must be of absolute and infaillible truth.

And so having now (by the way) cleared this scruple, we should proceed unto
our discovery of Abels sacrifice, as we have it here laid down, in the words
of the text which make report unto us what kind of sacrifice it was, and
whereof it consisted. But we must (first) take away another doubt, which may be
made by some, how Abell could know the mind of God for these matters, and so
readily offer a sacrifice of this kind, and do it so suitably to Gods
prescription, considering, that as yet the law of the offering of first fruits,
nor any other part of the moral, or ceremonial was not given. We answer, it
was given, but not written, as we have it now, it was given in those days by
divine tradition; originaly from God to man, and successively from man to man.

Then did the father inform the child, and acquaint him with the duties that
pertayned to piety, and the children they received it from their parents, and
obeyed it as from God.

And this course and manner of revealing the will of God by this kind of
tradition, endured all the days of the holy Patriarchs, and such as lived
after them, till Moses, and also during all the days of Moses, till that part
of his life, wherein the Lord employed him about the penning of this book, and
that is diversely conjectured of; some suppose it to be written before he went
into Egypt within the compass of these forty years wherein he kept sheep in
Madian; others imagine he did it immediately after his departing out of Egypt,
even in the first year thereof. Howbeit this, (as the former) is no point of
such importance, as that we must of necessity have an exact knowledge of the
same.

But that Gods law was delivered by this kind of tradition, till the time we
speak off, we nothing doubt, and therefore the more foul is that slander laid
upon us by the papist, that we acknowledge not, nor endure any traditions;
judeede those that are popish and unwritten, we cannot abide, but do abhor
them all, because none of them can be defended but by blasphemy, and some of
them (in particular) are apparently blasphemous. But that there were traditions
^^ce, to wit, such as the Lord by himself, or by his Angels, made known to
man; and man believed and related to his posterity, we do no more deny, then
we do that Moses penned this part of holy scripture, which (till his time) was
a tradition and unwritten, but can be none from that time forward. And if the
Lord have ceased his own, has any man power to erect more, that are none of
his? especially now that his holy will is sufficiently revealed, in the
writings of the Law, and Prophets, and the Gospel. That there were some
traditions we freely confess; that any are (of God) now we dirictly deny;
those that are (being not of God) we detest, because they are the fruit of the
Popes brain, who has a very crazy head in heavenly things, though he be
applauded to be the head of the church, and able to distill spiritual
influence into it.

But to return to Abel, it is probable, that he received the light and
knowledge he had to offer sacrifice, from his father, who from God did instruct
him how, and what to do, in such duties as were to be required of him. And
upon this did he embrace, and obey the Lord in his ordinances; which course of
his, and his forwardnes thus to do, in those times wherein no scripture was
penned, nor every man that spoke of the things of God traditionally, so
infalliblely inspired, as were all they, by whom the Lord has left his truth
written to us, shall rise up against us, to condemn our untowardness, who
refuse to be taught of God, and to be obedient to him, though he has left us a
more happy way to learn, then they had, who had but a part of his good
pleasure manifested, and that not written, whereas we have the whole, and
written, upon such records as can never be razed. The saints, of those times,
were most willing to take knowledge of the ways of God and yield their
obedience to them, by that means (which in comparison of ours) are but mean,
and were but weak, (yet enough to bring them to God, who lived by faith in the
truth thus revealed). The sinners of our days, to whom the Lord has
dispensed a more absolute, and most sufficient course, of coming near to him,
are far from the Lord, and will not give him, neither such, nor so much
duty, as these did, whose knowledge and practice is not so much magnifyed, as
ours shall be manifested and plagued of the Lord, who looke's they should be the
best scholars, who have the best teaching. these knew little of my mind (in
respect of you) yet have done much; I made it all known to you, yet have you
done little or nothing.

Let not this consideration be in vain, but think we, how cheerfully Abel
learned, and how conscionably he performed, the worship of his God, having but
little help to further him: that we by due ponderation hereof, may be both
ashamed for our faylings past, and enforce our selves, (as it were) by a holy
violence for time to come, to be more faithful and industrious, both to know,
and to do, what on our part, we owe unto the Lord, what vnsepakeable shame is
it? that we should lie behind them, that have gone before us in those duties,
wherein many of them, had but few to follow, nor any scripture to learn them:
but we have both Gods whole book to giude us, and all his blessed saints are
gone before us, yet are we exceeding short of those holy ones who lived
graciously in that age which may truly be called the infancy both of the world,
and of the church; But I will not dwell here, we see the holy Ghost beare's
record of Abels offering: let us now come to the words of the text which tell
us what manner of sacrifice it was. And Abel, he also brought of the
[firstlings] or, first borne [of his flock, Exodus 22.29.30. cap. 34.19 26.
Levit. 23.10.12. Number. 15.20.21. Deuteronomy. 12.17. cap. 18.4. cap. 26.1.2.11.
and of the fate of them.]

Of the first-lings, or, first borne] that is, the first increase of cattle
that the Lord gave him; The Lord made a most exact law for the offeri^g of the
first borne, both of man, and beast, and of all fruits unto him, and this law
of his we find to be very frequently repeated, in diverse places of the four
books of Moses Exodus Leviticus Numbers, and Deuteronomie. And as it was often
itterated by God to Jsraell, so was it faithfully obeyed by Israel before the
Lord, both before the captivity in Hezekiah days; 2. Chron. 31.1.51. Neh.
10.3.32.35.
and after, in the days of Nehemiah, as appears in the story of their
lives: nay, from the beginning, before this law was given (in writing) Abel (you
see) is careful to bring his first, and I nothing doubt, but Adam his father
did it before him, as we noted before.

But here it way be enquired wherefore these things were offered, in those
times, and among all the Jews to the time of Christ, and are not so now among
us, were they proper to their worship?

We answer, they were so as the Jewish people were a people peculiar to God,
and he taught them his mind after such a manner, as never any nation but they
had it, to wit, by shadows, types and ceremonies, such as were to endure for
a season, and to dye when once Jesus Christ the Lord of life did appear, and
had fulfilled this law of Jewish rites, which perished and became frustrate (in
Gods purpose) as soon as, his [consummatum est] was out of his mouth.

But if these Mosacaill rites were shadows, what was the substance? what was
the truth and signification of these types, and ceremonies, and of these first
fruits, and first borne, in particular?

We answer; Heb. 10.1
all men must know that the whole ceremonial law was a type, or shadow, the
apoctle tells us so, and (in the general) every ceremony therein did some
way respect Christ, who is the end of this law and has abolished the same; one
way or other, Christ was aimed at in each offering. Now for the matter meant
and signified by these first fruits, and first borne they also had their
reference to the Lord Jesus, who is entitled, 1. Cor. 15.1^.
both [the first fruits of them that sleepe] and, [the first borne of every
creature. Yet not to him only, (though principally) had they their total
relation, as if nothing else at all, were to be shaddowed by these things, but,
as to him (to wit, to Christ) they were strictly, and properly assigned, so,
in a larger sense and use, the perpetual morality of this law was, that our
choysest, and chief, our first, and best, the prime and principal, (not of
our fruits, or of our beast, but) of our lives, of our selves, should be given
to the service of our God. That as soon as he pleases to enlarge and increase
the abilityes of our bodies, and facultyes of our souls, that we can once
discern between good and evil, and are able to put a difference between
these in our opinion, and practice, we should incontinently, and forthwith
betake our selves to worship and obey the Lord, and from that time proceed in
the same, during all our days.

But it is further noted here, in the text, that Abells sacrifice was [Of the
fatt of his flock.]

Fatt in scriptures has diverse references, and (accordingly) diverse senses, as
the nature of things to which it is referred does require. It retayneth his
natural signification, when it is referred to natural things: we read of
Fatness attributed to the earth; to oil; Genesis 27.28. cap. 45.18
to wine; the best of which, God does call the fattest, and the fattest of any
thing is the best, as the fattest land, the best land; and so of the rest. And
so we account the fattest beast, the best, (especially being young too,) as
these firstborn were.

But when fattnes is affirmed of things spiritual (or things natural,
considered spiritually) it carries contrary senses, and signifies both the
best, and the worst. For we find David where he would show a most sinful
heart, to say, it is a [hart as fat as brawne,] and the Prophet Isaiah, Psalm.
119.20. Is. 6. Mat. 23.14.15. Psalm. 36.2. Psalm 92.^0.
and Christ after him, when they speak of a heart given over of God, say thus
[make the heart of this people fatt.] On the other side, the most abundant and
best blessings pertaining to the solacing of the saints, are called [the fatnes
of thy house:] and those godly and well-growne christians, who have eaten, and
fed freely, of those divine delicates, and by the benefit of them are come to
some good measure of ability, in good things, are said to be [fatt and
flourishing.]

But with this mystical sense, or use of the word we meddle not, in our text
it is taken most properly, for fat beasts, [the fat of his flock] that is the
best there. So that the sum of all that is said here of Abells offering is
this: that he being made partaker of true grace and guided by God to show it in
the fruits thereof, does by faith offer unto God such a sacrifice as was now
required, namely, the first, and (among all the first) the very best of the
flock he did attend.

I say now required, for after-ward God commanded and expected more, but as yet
there was no temple, or tabernacle, no high priest, nor any Levite, no fire
from heaven, (at least) that burnt continually, nor many other things, which
came in, in succeeding times: some when the Arc and tabernacle was erected,
more, when the Temple was builded, and all other things set in order, according
to Gods prescription touching each particular.

Abel (in the mean time) does his best, and offers to his utmost power, what
his present state, and the present time may permit, showing thereby that true
grace will do what it can, though it cannot do all it would, or should, in
the service of God; others may do more, in times and places which afforde more
means, but sincerity will show it self in the most that may be done for the
time being; though we enjoy but little means, or few helps to further us, yet
a sound heart will make some honest shift, to do something that may be
pleasing to God.

This is worth noteing (by the way) because it meete's fitly, with their
fearful jmpiety, who let all religion and piety alone, because they cannot
do all: like to miserable and desperate bankrupts, who because they are not
able to give every man all, will pay nothing at all to any man; which deceit
who could endure? Nay, learn to do better of good Abell (and all Gods saints
who lived in the first times) do something the most and best, thou can, and
the Lord will accept thee according to the willing mind thou have, to go as
far as weak means will further thee. weak grace, in not doing Gods work
completely, then he does evide^ce true grace in doing what he is able to do,
conscionably. The Lord regarde's men according to his means, and their minds,
in his service. They that offered uprightly before the preisthood was ordered,
were as acceptable to God, and some of them had as much, and all of them had as
true grace, as any that sacrificed after. wise christian, may employ much
grace, upon little means, and (I think) the least means that ever the Lord
does give, may exercise the most grace the best of us have, if we play the good
husbands, and set it well a work. But this is by the way, let us now make
toward the main thing, Heb. 11.4
we mean to handle in this offering of Abel, which is so commended in him,
both here and in other places of scripture.

that moral of this practice ceremonial, which concerns us christians, to
wit, That it is the undeniable duty of every one, to give unto God the glory of
his first abilityes, both of soul and body, and to bestow their first powers
in the service of his majesty.

This lesson Abell needed not to have learned of the first borne of his beasts,
had not his father Adam fallen, and deprived him (and us all,) of those first
and best fruits of created grace, which the Lord gave him, when he filled him
the first day of his life, with the perfection of all knowledge, holiness, and
righteousness, and made him as holy, and as happy, as a creature might be on
this earth. Had not these first fruits of this grace perished in the first
Adam, so, as that never man but he might taste them, they would have taught us
what to do as soon as we could have done any thing, that grace etc, would
quickly have carried us to the fountain of grace, from whence, as it came but
lately, it would have returned naturally, as the rivers into the sea. For Adams
graces were as natural, as his breath, it was all one to him, to do any duty
to God, and to himself, both were alike easy unto him.

But now the case is altered, it is nothing so, but clean contrary altogether,
his first best lesson must be taught Abel (yea and Adam too) by his first best
beast which he must now give to that God to whom he should have given himself
from his first being, this beast must be sacrifised to shame him, who being
once wholly Gods, has now made himself worse then the beast that perishes, now
must man have dumb schoolemasters that cannot speak, and unreasonable yea
senseless also, which cannot understand or hear his speech, and somewhat must
be done to them, as soon as they are in the world, to show man, what we once
(when time was) could have done, and what for ever he ought to do, from the
time of his own first being. The first of our flock, the first of our fruit,
must teach us to whom the first of our selves, does of right appertain: even
to the Lord, to whom a beast must be give^ ceremonially, in stead of a man
morally. And this being one moral and meaning of this ceremony, it most
needs be our duty thus to do. Even this shadow shewe's us, that as a
substance and a shadow, do from the first instant go together inseparably,
and for ever; so should we ha ve been to our God, ever from our beginning to
have followed him wheresoever he had gone before us, and to have cleaved
continually to him, in the obedience we owe him all the days of our life, both
first and last.

And this truth of God of the early offering of our selves unto the Lord, is
not only typed out and signified here, by these first beasts, and fruits, that
must be sacrificed; but it is substantially confirmed in other scriptures,
wherein the Lord does more expressly, manifest his mind in this matter.

I will not, (for I need not) heap up many evidences; let us consider only,
to what end it may be (if this be not Gods truth,) that the Lord does so often
call upon parents, touching their duty to their children on this behalf, to
nurture, to tutor, and instruct them, in all holy informations, even in their
childe-hood, nonage and minerity, so soon as they can be discerned to be
capable and understanding in any thing. [Teach a childe] says Salom on.
[Fathers, bring up your children in the fear and information of the Lord]
says Paul, with more that might be added. In any of which, dare any man jmagine
that the Lord calls for any thing more then his due, and if he do not, then
does the duty of our first days belong to the Lord, our first powers, and
abilities, are his in all right, and he must have our service, so soon as we
can do any.

Again, why are many commended in scripture for being careful herin, and
their examples recorded for our jmitation? is it not because we should trace
them in this truth which some of them have learned, more then we, with much
less teaching then we have? For instance, Josh. 24.2.13. Genesis 18.
Abraham, who in his own first times, was trained up in jdolatry with Terah
his father, and so he gave not the first fruits of his own life, yet for his
posterity, God prefumeth on his fidelity this way, and says, he knew his mind
so well for this matter, that he was fure [he would teach his children and
command them] in the things of God, and thereupon acquaints him with his secret
purpose concerning Sodom. We see Abraham did know this our doctrine to be his
duty, yet he had neither his fathers example, nor his own practice in his
first years, nor Solomon, nor Paul, to call upon him but the Lord himself
taught him this truth, him a heart to do it.

And have you not also read what is recorded of Hannah, ^. Sam. 1.
the happy mother of Samuel, and what her resolution was, when she went to
pray for a child before she had ever a one, namely this, to give him to God,
and that so, as the Lord might have the first fruits of him, even [from the
day of his birth to the day of his death,] and when the Lord saw her so well
resolved, he quickly granted what she desired.

It were as easy to instance many more, as these two, who have hearkened to God
herin, and honored him with the first of these fruits of their body which he
had given them, as of old these did with the fruits of their beasts. But we
will cease examples, and urge the reasons of the point, which are these that
follow.

First, God is the best master we can serve, and therefore we have reason to
go about his service the first thing we do, when once we can do any thing at
all. That he is our best master, appears not only in his nature, he being
every way infinitely good, but also in his infinite favor, which shows it
self, both in that he gives us the best work, and the best wages in the world.
Our work is to worship and obey him, and to do only those things which are
best for our selves, whereby we may be most happy in our souls and bodies,
both being at peace with him, and enjoying all things in a sanctified and
sweet estate. Our wages (besides his manifold mercyes here) is all
inconceivable blessedness, that heaven can afford us, the glory of that
kingdom, wherein we shall be glorious kings with himself for ever and ever. Now
what would any man do first, that were guided but by natural reason? even
that which he might benefit most by, Behold then here is.

the best master that can be desired the best service that can be performed.
the best wages that can be received.
Let any reasonable man judge whether he have not reason to set himself so
soon as is possible to this truth.

Secondly, they are like to prove his best servants, that begin soonest to
serve him, for why? our first abilityes are freest from sin, and least taynted
with evil, and so much more apt, and able to good, then when once they have
been habituated, and soaked, and seasoned nay poisoned, with astuall impiety,
aded to that natural impurity, which is in us, and by both these, made utterly
unmeet for the Lord, as they cannot but be, when once Satan has got in, and
had the first hansell of our hearts, and so posest us of a child, that we have
been his vassalls, in the base, and hellish bondage of sin and rebellion
against God: it is hard getting of him out, if he be once in possession, more
hard, if he have been in, long. But if the Lord enter us at first, we are his
for ever, he cannot be gotten out by all the devils in hell, if once he have
the happy possession of our hearts, he will hold his own. Seeing therefore we
are fittest for him in our first times, let us know, it is goodreason we should
then give our selves unto him, especially considering we can never (at the best
we can be) come any thing near that fitnes which once we had, when we were
full of that created grace whereof we spoke before.

Thirdly, our first fruits must of necessity be bestowed, and employed one way
or other, to good or to evil; to God or to the Devil, it cannot be avoided
but one of the two, must have the use of us from the first time we are fit for
any thing. We must needs belong either to the one, or to the other; religion
tell's us we cannot belong to both, and let reason speak to which of the two,
it is best belonging: I say let reason speak, for no man can be so
unreasonable, as to make any doubt, or the least demurre upon it. If the Lord
have us, it is that he would have, if the devil get us, woe unto us, we must
account with God, for all the service we have done him, even for every act, and
when this heavy account is made up, we must undergo Gods eternal curse for
our service, and receive the hire of our work with him (whom we have served)
in hell, where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out.

So that, inasmuch as our first fruits must go to one of these, and that it
will be so miserable with us, if Satan seize upon us, let us believe the truth
of our doctrine and do accordingly.

I, (will some say) that is a good motion, now, true it is, that once it was,
but it is as true, that now it is not, and that is well known, yea too well,
to our selves, and to God; how then would you have us do herein? does God
require what he knowe's we cannot do? do his precepts contain
jmpossibilityes? will he have us undertake that which we are not able.

I answer, truly) cannot on our part nullify any truth of God taught unto us,
any precept of God imposed on us: so long as all that we would excuse our
selves by, is long of our selves, and that whereby the Lord may accuse us most
justly, because (of our selves, without him) we fell from our perfection, and
power we had, to give all duty to him at all times.

True it is, and too true, that we cannot give our selves now from our first,
as we could have done in our created state, but what of that? does our
jmbecility weaken the necessity of this duty? is Gods commandment ever the
weaker because we are worse then we were, when he gave his? can our corruption
cancel or abate any jot or title of his truth? Noe, it does, and will stand in
full power, force, and virtue against us: we have enfeebled, and unfitted our
selves for God, but his law, his will is as absolute and as strong as ever, his
counsel must stand though we fall, he is all one in commanding, though we be
not so in obeying; it is we with whom the case is altered, not he, for he is
[Iehovah and changes not.] He need not, unless he please (for he is noe way
tied by any necessity) to take notice of our inabylity, if he do, he may the
more righteously reprove, and upbraid us; if he do not so, it is his greater
favor, not to cast it in our teeth. He may to this day expect, (and therefore
much more command) that every one of us should be as Adam was at his best, and
condemn and plague us for our vnfruitfullnes, if we be not: as Christ did
curse the fig tree for want of fruit, Mark. 11.13.
though it be expressly said by one Evangelist that [the time of figs was not
yet] that is, that time which ordinarily, now under nature corrupted, it did
usually bear fruit; it seems (nay it is more ceartaine) that before the
earth was cursed, all fruits should have been more frequent and abundant, yea,
almost continual (as some have conceived) like the trees in the paradise of
God. Reu. 22.2
And so our Savior to show, not only his power, but his righteousness, cursed
it, because it was not so fruitful, as it was by creation, taking no notice
of the vnfruitfullnes of it, or of the want of fruit which came to pass at
this time of the year, by reason of the curse through our corruption. all
times fruitful in those graces, of his good spirit, wherewith once he
furnished us, and made us, meet and able (at any time) to honor him. What
has he to do with our falling, and insufficiency to do his will? that lies
between the devil, and us, to answer, the Lord has no hand in it, nor cannot
be taxed with it in any respect, he commande's no more then he made us fit for.
So that there is no objecting this, to any good end, unless it be (as it ought
to be) to humble us, for that we are not, as we were once (and should have
been ever) and thereupon discerning our inability, to do the Lord all the
duty we owe him from our first breath; as also, seeing by absolute right, he may
as well challenge it of us, as of the first Adam; we hereupon bestirre our
selves the more, and the better, to hasten both our selves and others, unto the
practice of this instruction, and so turn all this (by the power of grace)
into a provocation, which corrupt nature (perversely) urges as an objection.

And thus the point is proved, and this scruple, (or cavil rather) removed,
let us now come to the uses of of the point, which are three, and do concern
all sorts of men: to wit.

the children of God, for consolation. the ungodly, for reprehension. all men,
for instruction.
hearts convinced of this truth, and lives, that have expressed it, since the
first day it was revealed to them from the Lord, before whom, they have
sincerely endeavored, to give him the first fruits of their knowledge of this
lesson, though, either through their own personal ignorance thereof, or
through the error of parents in their education, they have not given him the
first fruits of their practice while they were in their nonage.

It is a most happy thing to be rightly convicted of a divine truth, because
many are superficially persuaded, an will give a slight consent, (and less,
the Devil, if he be put to it, will not do) to many holy truths of God, but
they whom the Lord convinces a right, (as he does all his own) he
comforts, in giving them, a hearts resolution settled in their very souls, to
say within themselves; this is the undoubted truth of the euerliving God, thus,
we must do, and endeavor to stire up others to do the same; and if it be a
truth which we should have practiced before, we must repent for neglect past,
and be upright with God for the time remaining, and go the faster because we
began so late, and do our best to draw others after us, to that way which
both they, and we should have gone, long before. He that is thus convicted,
shall not go long vncomforted.

It is a simple impossibility, that men called at their ripe years, or in
their age, should give their first fruits to the Lord, those days are gone,
and past: but to give the Lord (at what time it pleases him to call us) the
glory of this truth, in our sound persuasion, that it is thus, and
singleharted humiliation, because it had not place in our practice before now,
and most careful provocation to our utmost possibility, that it may be thus in
ours, and all others, with whom, by any good means, we can prevayle, this is
to be truly happy, and in a most comfortable condition, and we are accepted of
God (thus doing) as if we had done it our selves from the first day of our life.

How famous is Abraham, few men so much renowned in religion as he, none more,
yet from his child hood, he had not done service, but to Satan in jdolatry,
and such other jmpiety, as usually accompanies that jniquity. But at the first
call, he came, and as soon as he heard he did obey, and perceiving that the
Lord had lost such duty by him, as in his former days he should have received
from him, he is co^vinced hereof, and resolved, that his children shall give
it, though his own childe-hood, was given to sin. And the discerning of this
in him, was that, that gave the Lord content, and Abraham comfort.

Is not Moses a man abundantly magnified, and that of God himself, as if he had
been (as indeed he was) some extraordinary servant of his, yet, for forty
years of his life, what was he, (so far as we find?) but such as others
were that lived in the court of that Pagan Prince, who was the oppressor, and
adversary of Gods people; it may be, he might be less gross, then some of his
fellow courtiers, who were inclined to egregious jmpiety, but that he was good,
or savoured of any saving grace, is more then appears to me. Howbeit inasmuch
as he freely and resolutely, cast off all the creddit, and profsit of his high
dignity, and pre-eminence in court, when the Lord would summon him to serve
him, it was well taken, that from that age, and time, he waited on the work of
God, though neither his childe-hood, nor youth were the Lords, in time past.

What should I multiply more (as I might) of many other most worthy saints, who
in the same case, have had the same comfort, what is over-past, and cannot be
actually recovered, and performed, if it be rightly repented of, in our selves,
and reformed in others (to our best power, it is all one, as if we had done it
in our own person. Let us bewail our own want of duty and Gods want of glory
by us, and do as Hannah did, for such as may come within our possibility to
dispose off, or persuade, namely, give them to the Lord from the first instant,
that we have any interest in them, and it shall be well with us.

And this I do (of purpose) insert here, because Satan is malicious, and
hungry, to gnaw upon the very hearts of Gods saints, when once he gett's a truth
by the end, wherein, their time (for performance) is past, then does he come
with his pearceing temptations to wound, and rende, the souls of such as are
single hearted, and to lay it in their dish, that this, and that, they should
have done long since, God should have had their whole lives for his service,
now many years be gone, and there can be noe recalling of them, and can they
think which way to make all well, when it is an utter jmpossibility to recover
one moment, much less, many years: with these, and the like spite full, and
grievous suggestions, he does teaze, and torture their gracious minds to
breed despair in them.

But now we are armed (I hope) to answer him, and that we may do, and pay him
double, both for himself, to whom we may say with joy and scorn; better once
then never, for thy part, thy first days were as due to God as mine, but he
will never call, but ever accurse thee; our selves; but for my part, though I
have lost my first days, my God will not lose me ever, seeing he call's once
and be that come's then, comes time enough for mercy, though he should have
came sooner in duty: and moreover, know the Lord has made many a happy man for
his best service, among those who in their first days have been foully misled:
I greive, that I gave him not my childe-hood, or youth, but if he please to
accept of my age I joy, and will joy, and do my best to offer all that I can
prevail withal, as soon, as I should have offered my self.

These and the like answers, will confound his cavills, and make him weary of
us: and he being thus resisted, our God and we, may be the more intimate and
familiar; in the sweetest passages of his singular favor.

And see we see there is sound comfort for such as are persuaded hereof, and
would have done it, and are humbled because God has been robbed of his right
in their minority.

Again; for such as have offered their first fruits to the Lord, there comfort
cannot be behind (if it exceed not) theirs that went before. Our A bell here,
who was so careful to give the Lord the first of his flock, and, (I cannot
easily doubt but, that he gave the first of himself also) how does the Lord
magnify him in this his service and duty? Did he not most graciously regard him
and his offering? has he not put it here into his own book to his perpetual
praise, Heb. 11.4. 1. Joh. 3.
and not only here, but elsewhere in the new testament once and again, that
from the beginning to the end of the world, he might be famous, wheresoever
either this, text, or those, should be preached, that which he has done,
should not be forgotten? Did he not most deeply avenge his innocent blood upon
his jmpious brother, and made him the first and most fearful spectacle of his
justice, and malediction, to the terror of all succeding generations? And
(which is more then all this) has not the Lord crowned him with glory and
immortality in the heavens with himself, as well as renouned him for holiness,
and piety here on earth?

He is the first, whose soul every saw the face of God, noe man ever went from
earth to heaven before him, among the innumerable spirits of just and perfect
men who now, and for ever live there with the Lord in glory. He was the first
martyr, and had the first crown none every dyed for the Lord before him, none
could live with the Lord before him: he was the Lords first witness, and among
all the Lords worthyes this righteous Abel (as Christ call's him) stood in the
fore-frunt of the battle, and shed the first blood for the faith, and
testimony of Jesus, before there was any to back or abett him.

And as the Lord took great notice of this first, so also, has he done in
like manner of the rest, who have began betime to be acquainted with him, in
his service. How came Samuel to be so rare a man, and to be numbered among the
most special favorites of God, Moses, Job, Daniell, Noah, etc? Why; do you
not remember what we have said of his mother, how she gave him to God (in
resolution) before she had him and was as good as her word, as soon as he was
weaned; do you not remember what is said of himself [ the child Samuel
ministered before the Lord] the child Samuel; this was worthy to be acounted
wonderful, that a child should minister before the Lord, especially being so
young, that; as yet) he knew not the voice or call of God, from Elyes, but ran
to Ely, once and again, when the Lord called upon him, about the first business
he had to do for him.

What may be the cause that Josiah is so mightily commended, that, as if he
were matchless it is said of him, [that there was none like before him] nor
any to succeed that should be such a one, as this peerless prince was; true
it is, that never any king, either of Jsraell or Judah (no not among the good
kings) before or after him, went so far in the work of Godfor the purgatio^
and purifying of his worship, as he did; this king did surmount them all: but
how is it that he came to do, what none had done, more then they all? why; he
begun to work the work of God betime, and that may be a main reason why he
did so much: at eight year old (says the scripture) [he sought the Lord, 2.
King. 23.1.
] and that is but in childe-hood, all men know.

What should I tell you of Solomon, of Timothy, and such others as I might
mention to this purpose; nothing is more sure, then this, that they have been
the rarest, and most excellent men, in piety, and religion, and the most able
instruments of Gods honor, who in the beginning of their days, have begun to
do good, they must needs be nearest heaven, who set out on their way,
soonest, and continue going on thither-warde.

Only, it is seldom, that we see any enter upon religion so early now a
days, they are very few, that begin to be so soon faith full. more are they
to be admired of godly men, and the more to be comforted of God, who are found
sucklings in grace, as soon as they are weanelings in nature, and hang upon
Gods breasts, when they have given over they mothers.

So that by all that has been said, it appears to be a happy thing, and
they to be most happy men, who have learned this lesson of the Lord, and walked
according to the light thereof, which leade's on directly in the way of life,
wherein howsoever a man may (possibly) meet with some molestation, and misery,
yet the end of it will (undoubtedly) be endless, and infinite glory, with him,
who will make those most glorious beyond all time who betook themselves to
glorify him betime.

Much might be spoken to enlarge their consolation who have hearts, to do
according to this instruction. But of this more hereafter: we now pass to our
2. Use.

will (because they must, and cannot for stark shame, say otherwise) after a
sort acknowledge this our doctrine to be true; yet walk (most wickedly) in a
course far wide of it, nay, clean contrary to it: their mouths cannot be
so monstruously finfull, but they must confess it to be a truth, howbeit,
their hellish hearts, and lives, do deny it in their most jmpious practice all
the days of their life: yea they have taught their tongues to lie herin
notoriously, and that not to men alone, but to the Lord, of whom and of whose
service they use to say, it is not yet time, it may be time enough heareafter.

O ye impious children of the father of lies, can you say it is true, that
every one should begin betime, and it were not amiss if it were so, and yet
tell God and men to their faces, that any time is time enought hereby, you show
your selves to be the very jmps of the devil, who has taught you such a
language, as one part of your speech confutes, nay confound's another, and such
a practice, as overturnes Gods truth which you dare not deny, and confirms
that falsehood which none ought to affirm: Miserable souls, how are ye given
over of God into the hands, nay into the bands of Satan, who if you speak or
breath out but one true word, can make your life, both to belly, and abolish
that, and to ratify every jot, and tittle of those infernal falshoodes, that
he suggests into your souls.

Do ye not sin presumptuously, and against the light of your own knowledge,
and conscience, that can thus speak, and dare thus do? and is such a sin a
light matter, or easy to answer to the judge of the whole world? know; you
will not find it so, in the day of the great and universal assize, when all
flesh shall at once, stand before him to give account, and receive recompense,
according to what they have done.

Notwithstanding the world has been ever full (and hell will be one day full,
of so many of them as repent not) of such, as either turn God out of all
time, or bring him in the tail of all the time they live, and that hour of
our life which falls out to be so near death, that a man ca^ neither serve
himself nor the world nor Satan, because of extreme imbecility of body, is
reserved for God, to serve him in, though it be but in saying Lord have mercy
upon me: And this they dream to be enough to bring them to heaven, that, or
their Pater noster, (if they can but have time to say it) will make them happy
enough, they care for no more, and so (poor sooles) they go like oxen to the
slaughter, conceiting that two or three words speaking, will purchase Gods
glorious kingdom, and posesse them of it, without any more a do. Which
jmagination, is more blasphemous then ever came into a Papists apprehension,
for as gross as they are, in the matter of merit, yet they are not so foul,
as to say that glory may be gotten with so slight desert, nay they exhort men
to do good works betime, and abundantly; I never read any of them that held,
heaven might be had for a few bare words, especially, proceeding from a mind,
and soul, more sick, then at the pangs of death the body can be.

And this pestilent conceit of prorogeuing time with God, is a universal
disease, and has slain many that are gone, and infected desperately millions
of men that yet live in the christian world. Every one throwe's off the day of
this duty, and breake's that commandment in the substance, which they were
bound to observe in the shadow, Exodus 22.29.20.
where God says [Thou shall not delay to offer thy first fruits] whether of
oxen, and cattle, of liquor or any other thing.

Delay, is a thing that the Lord still detested in any thing that he had for us
to do he would never endure protraction of time; he has ever pleaded with his
people for haste, and expedition, and for priority before all things yea, to be
put in the first place before all things, as well he does deserve to be, in the
conscience of the corruptest man among christians. And albeit, that both these
be so, that the Lord has so loved to be first served, and loathed in his
soul to be set behind, yet, as if prolonging, and poasting off the piactise
of piety, were a thing that would rather make us acceptable to the Lord, then
detestable in his sight: the divill (who is both Gods, and our avowed adversary
herin) does not only persuade jmpious persons to stay, and rejourne whatsoever
is required of them in true religion; but also, he puts into their minds, and
mouths what to plead against God, and their own best good, (but they little
know it) in the truth of this point which we now urge, and arme's them to open
their mouth with strange insolency against heaven, to defend their double
jmpiety, in devising damnable shifts to support them therein, that they may be
still, and (for ever,) holden fast in the cords of their jniquity, and linger
so long in their sinful courses, and accursed carriage, till time shall be no
more, and it be too late to wish for the day of grace the day of Gods patience,
and our repentance, which being now past and gone, we are to bear for ever,
the righteous vengeance of the wretched neglect of that happy opportunity.

It is a sure thing that Satan never helpe's man to a jmpious heart to do an
evil, but he also help's him to an jmpudent mouth to defend the sin he does:
Pretenses for putting of Gods service.
and because his pretenses are such, and do seem so plausible, as that they
do misleade the most part of men in the world, let us look into them a
little, and try whether they be current, or counterfeit, pure or hase, by the
truest touchstone, even the word of God, which is truth it self.

But before we come to any particulers, let us premise a few words in general
to all such as do plead any thing in this particular, to the end and purpose
before said; let them therefore know, and receive for a memorandum thus much.

That all that they speak is against God, and their own eternal good: and
that it is for the, Devil and his advantage to their own everlasting evil.

In all this plea, what are they? Adversaryes to God, and themselves; and
Advocates for the Devil against themselves. But let us hear them speak,
although, all they speak, be not worth the hearing.

They say (though God say the contrary, and themselves confess it too) that
though men should begin betime, and it were well if they would, yet there is no
such necessity lying upon it, that we should be so nice upon it: And why?

as they cursedly conceit) a man may make too much haste, too much a do, and
what need one be so curious, and precise, at present, there is time enough
(for these matters) heareafter.

This is their first Plea. Wherein, I must be bold to ask these men first,
whether they speak (when they thus speak) as they think, or not. If not,
what hellish hypocrisy is it in any man to belie his own mind, with his own
mouth? what woeful impiety is it, to utter that (in others hearing) which a
man's own heart does contradict within himself? If they do think as they say
(which I think every man would be well advised before he would do, if he knew
all) then let us see if we can show them, what blasphemy is wrapped up in this
speech, inasmuch as the scope thereof is guilty of the fearfullest felony that
(almost) may be committed.

God is robbed by them of his right, in the duty of their own, and the first
days of such other, as they do thus delude. They are robbed by Satan (but
with their own consent, for they plead for the theife) of that right which
Christ Jesus has purchased for such as are obedient to his truth.

Others also are robbed of the same good, by uttering these ungodly sayings, to
seduce them, sinfully to set off the time of their turning to the Lord. And I
think the man that knew this, would not be so free of these words, which are
so woeful as we see, were there noe more to be said against them.

But let us come nearer, The evil of it
and pry more narrowly into this plea, and the further we go, the more foul
abomination shall we find, and detect therein, and that in diverse respects, a
few whereof, we will notify before you.

cearteinety of more time yet to come, and to be remaining, unto our lives: why
should any man (in common sense) say it is time enough heareafter, if he were
not (as he thinks) assured of more time to come after-warde.

Now thus to surmize is gross sin, inasmuch as the Lord has taught us to
know, that we cannot expect much less warrant, one instant of time, or a
moment more to breath in, then we do already enjoy. Tro. 27.1. Iam. 4.14
Does not the wise man tell us, [we know not what a day shall bring forth?]
Does not the Apostle say as much for to morrow? [you know not what shall be to
morrow?] Was it not the fools saying in the Gospel [soule take thy ease,
eat, drink, and be merry, then have enough in store for many yeares] lo, he
dreamed of many days, nay years, yea he presumed upon both, when he had not
one day more to live out of hell, fulfilling that of the Prophet. [Destruction
shall come upon the wicked, and he shall not know the morning therof] yet will
these ungodly persons be presumeing of more time, and of time enough,
heareafter. Noe, noe, we have not spent our time past, so well, as that we may
undertake for more to come; had any man dealt with us as we have dealt with
God, I assure my self he should not live a day to an end, if we had power to
hang him up: the more wickedly do they carry themselves against the Lord, who
having long since, deserved to hang in hell fire, for not honoring him
heretofore, dare yet say, there is time for that hearcafter: as if we were
Gods, to foresee, and had foreknowledg of future things; the which to
arrogate, is extreme jmpiety. This is the first, but not the worst, of this
plea, Let us survey a second.

grace, more and better opportunity of repentance, and turning to God, then the
present is.

And this is worse then the former, and much more egregious in the sight of
God: for howsoever every days experience does witness in the course of
nature, and all things natural, that have life do testify, that the Lord is
pleased to bestow life and being upon creatures, and that (among men) as well
upon the unjust as the just, the infidel, as the faithful: Yet that together
with this, time of grace should be presumed upon, and taken for granted by any
mortal man (that is willingly graceless), and thrusts off, the call of God,
and his heavenly proffer of the same; is a thing so unreasonable and
senseless, so sinful and presumptuous, and an act of such arrogance against
the Lord, as he will severely punish, and noe way cherish, in the heart of man.

What? does the natural sun in the firmament, and the sun of righteousness,
keep both one course every day and hour? are the holy and precious things of
God that pertain to our best being, and the common benefits of the earth, both
at one rate? and to be had alike at all times? The sun in the firmament has
been rarely interrupted in her course; but the sun of righteousness has many
a time been darkened in diverse places, nay quite remooved from some places:
The former is for all times and seasons, the latter is for seasons only, not
tied to all times.

Therefore is the Lord still lying at us and calling eagerly upon us, touching
our awaking out of sin, and betaking ourselves to holiness, upon this ground [
And that considering the season] For now the season is come. [This is the day
of salvation, this is the acceptable season To day: if ye will heare] while it
is called to day with many more of the like every day in the year, is not the
day of grace, every time, not the season fit for this purpose.

The Lord is not tied or bound in duty, to give us one day or season, but if in
mercy he please to offer some few, no men may look for many; this gate is not
ever open to every one, it is often shutt, nay, Mat. 25.10.
it is ever shut to all such as were not ready to go in, when it was open.
Gods calender and ours differ much, our days are constant, we can ceartainely
foresee a year (or more) before us, when such a time will come; it is not so
here, the Lords almanacke gives noe such light or foresight, his happy times,
are hid from their eyes who were showed them long since, but would not then,
and shall not now, see them. Well may a sinful wretch find some saints days
there; that is, to his confusion, he may look upon the blessed seasons, they
have made use of, to give themselves to the Lord, but his own days he can
find none, but such as be past, and all written in red letters, in letters of
blood, for his blood is upon himself, who has neglected so great salvation,
in the season thereof, and let the work of God alone, till it be too late to
go about it. But let us yet see something further, what more will follow hence.

third, then in both the former: for why? it does not only presume upon time,
and upon time of grace, (and both without God); but more, it presumes to
dispose this time, and to order it to repentance at our pleasure.

And herein, what do we? (surely we are not well advised, in it) is not this
to usurp Gods place and prerogative?

We make our selves masters of the time, and of that which is to be done
therein, as if we might not only take the time when we will, but also do therein
what we will, and as if it were now in our power, and at our pleasure, to give
our selves to God when we think good. Which apprehensions are most proud in
us, and most unpleasing to him, being apparently prejudicial, to his wisdom
and providence whereby all our days, and all our ways are ordered.

In his goodness we live and move naturally: in his mercy we live and move
spiritually: in his power and assistance, we do any thing we ought that is
heavenly: and shall we arrogate all three to our selves, without any color of
ground or reason, and take these things so highly, (or rather so hellishly)
upon us, as if we were equal with God, yea, above him, rather, to dispose that
time to our selves, and in that time, to dispose our selves to that service,
which (for our own former contempt) the Lord does, and will, deny us in both?
that neither we shall have time to breath, or if we have, that yet no breath of
spiritual life shall be in us, to move toward any thing that is acceptable in
his sight.

Our betters have had better minds, who have confessed that without him, we
could be nothing; without him, we could have nothing; without him, we could do
nothing: and upon these thoughts, have cast all good things upon his wisdom to
dispose, his power to bring to pass, his loving kindness and favor to
increase, and encourage in us: acknowledging both themselves, and their times
to be in his hands. It would well become these that thus plead, to practice the
same, which because they do not, we see what jmpiety they incur herin; yet
is not this all, more remains.

of time enough heareafter, and of making too much have yet, argues that these
persons do think these two things to be true.

1. that God may be served too long. 2. that the Devil may be served too
little.
Both which do as naturally flow from their foul, and jmpure mouths, as
water from a fountain; for whereto else can their sayings tend, seeing (as we
said before) either God, or the Devil, must be served of us at all times, and
until we have sacrificed our selves to the Lord, the Devil has all our days.

And may we think that heaven can, or will, hear, and bear, the hydeous
blasphemy of both these, or either of them? what? may we serve the Lord too
soon? and, too soon give over the service of Satan? is the devil become the
better master, and God the worse, that our last time, may serve his turn, and
all the rest, little enough for the other? who has heard such things among the
heathens, or such speeches as do, as directly, and plainly infer and
conclude them, as if they did speak them? How unreasonable, how irreligious,
are both? nay, how excecrable is either of the two by it self? the one
applaude's the Devil above God, the other abases the Lord below the devil,
will either; can both be sufered? were not the patience of the almighty
infinite, these sinners would sink into hell, yea, into the nethermost hell,
but let them know; forbearance is no acquittance; he that does endure this so
long, will in the end avenge it, with the heaviest justice and wrath, that is
revealed from heaven, or reserved in hell
as against all other, so especially, against this mighty ungodliness of men,
then which what can be more monstrous or provoking, to draw swift damnation
upon their souls that thus speak: for what can be spoken to the greatest
disgrace of him that is most glorious, if this be not? and can we once surmize,
that the Lord will suffer such indignity and disparagemet at our hands and not
power out his indignation upon us? Especially, if withal, we well consider,
our own jujury we do our selves, besides this jmpiety against the Lord:
because the less service we do the Lord, and the more we do the devil, the
more woeful is it for us, in both respects: for that little we would give God is
rejected, and all that we do for Satan is plagued, and so by both, we are
wrapped under the eternal wrath of his dreadful majesty.

Thus and no better, then we have said, but much worse, then we can say, is the
sequel of this first pernicious apology, which men make against God, and
their own souls, in the procrastination of the power, and practice of this
truth. Now if a man should sum up all these together, would not the total,
be terrible (think you) to the soul that is guilty in the Items?

to assure our selves of more time of life. to presume that some of that,
shall be time of grace. to take upon us to dispose of that time, what we will do
therein. to jmagine God may have too much, and the devil too little, of our
service.
Is any one of these answerable before God? much less are they all excusable:
noe noe, every of them is high treason against his honor who order's all time.
his favor who gives all time of grace. his excellency and worthiness, who
deserves the duty of all our days.


These words must be eaten, and recalled, and that with more then ordinary
humiliation, grief, and detestation; or nothing can remain but his just
vengeance upon the transgressors; it is most true of this plea, 1. King. 1.23.
which Solomon spoke of Adoniahs desire, that [he had spoken this word against
his own life], and was thereupon instantly slain: and so might they be, who
have spoken these words against their own eternal life: and if the Lord
should now seize upon them to everlasting death, how righteous were it upon
these ungodly wretches? against whom the Apostle Jude says, the Lord will
come in great glory, and dreadful power, even ( among other things) [ for
their hard and cursed speakings] of which number, who can jmagine that these
are not? what need such have? there is time enough heareafter for these
matters: woeful man, that vtterest these words; is there so little need that
God should have his glory, that thou should (by giving it) be truly happy? if
thy whole time were given to God, were it enough? nay can any time be enough
for his duty? suppose one man might live from one end of the world to the
other, from the first day to the last of all time, to see both the creation and
consummation of all things, yea, and admit that man could live without sin too,
and not miscarry one moment, but be evermore doing that which might honor God?
could this man say he had given God enough? I trow not: for what time can be
(in equity) enough for him, whose least glory to his saints shall be infinite,
and eternal beyond all time? and yet these accursed mouths, dare stint the
Lord to the last, and least, and worst, time of their life, and think it
enough to. The Lord deliver us (says the apostle) from [vnreasonable and
wicked men,] which if these be not, who are, or can be?

Oh then, let us revoke, recant, and cancel presently, what we have spoken
wickedly; byte that tongue that uttered them, smite that heart that thought
them; accurse and excecrate that devil that suggested them; least our not
revoking of them, rende us from God, send us to Satan, the author of them. Let
us lay our hands vpou our mouths and resolve never to open them again to such
jmpious purpose, wherein.

the Lord of heaven is damnifyed: the souls of men are damned: the devil only
is advantaged.
God is dishonored, we are undone, the devil goe's away with all the gaynes
from both; which he could never do, if he could not thus line the lips, and
tip the tongues of some profane persons, to become his trumpets, to gather men
to damnation, by such delusions.

This is the first infernal plea, that is devised, and urged to deceive the
Lord of his first fruits of our time, but have they done? when they have said
thus? noe they have, yet, a second pretense, and a third too, to come. Let us
exanime the former.

age, this work may be done well enough, and time enough; then men are stayed
and know what they do, is it not fit for young giddy heads to meddle with such
matters.

Then there will be more leisure, when those days come, wherein men have given
over the proffits, pleasures, and vanities, of the world, and have nothing to
do, but to go to church, and serve God. This they pretend. The Evils of it.


Well, but though in the former there was much, in this latter there is much
more presumption: we will try it, and then we shall see it, in the particulers;
which are the apparent consequents of this pretense, which (upon due search) we
shall find, not to be so seemingly plausible, as they are really pernicious,
and damnable.

contradict the Lord in that which he says, for he will have the first of our
days (as we have heard,) these say, noe, it is not fit for young heads to
intermeddle,

Is not this to give God the lie, yea to make him a liar, who will (therefore)
have the first because they are fittest for him? is not this to charge folly
upon him that is only wise? as if he had not wisdom enough to choose that part
of our days for his duty, wherein we are most meet to do it; but we will take
it upon us, to be wiser then he, and assign him a season, better suiting this
business.

He says he will have our first, we will give the last time to him: does not
this infer, that he is far wide of the mark, and wonderfully over-seene,
and that we only are in the right?

So then these two, to make the most true and wise God (I tremble to utter it)
a fool, and a liar, these two I say, do make up the first jmpiety, of this
second plea: the vengeance and justice due to either of which, (much more to
both) is beyond mine, (or any creatures) ability, to express.

old age, and make's no question to live to see those days and years wherein
men are so accounted.

And this thwarteth all Gods truth touching the vnceartaniety, and shortness of
man's life, so often taught us every where; noe, the lives of these men must be
no vanities, dreams, or vapors; nor compared to winds, to smoke, to
nothings; they are during and permanent for 60.70. or more years. Howbeit, how
many have not lived so many hours, as they dreamed years, nor so many days,
as they accounted scores? the sun has shyned clearly upon some in the
morning, who were become carcases, er'e the evening: and others have seen it
set in the evening, whose eyes were sunk er'e morning, and yet they thought
themselves as likely to live, as long lyved, as any that thus speak. Even
moments have swept away millions of other men, yet these, must live many
years, at least, to be old, (how, or when, should God have them, else) and as
if God himself were bound, and had bound all his creatures to their good
behavior, that they must be saved harmless from any means of short life, or
sudden death, either they must be aged, or God must not have them: and sure,
I am persuaded he is most willing to lose them. But of this presumption we said
something before, therefore the less shall serve here.

have a heart to give your self to God then, or that, God has a heart to take
you then.

Assuredly (if it be well looked into) there is no reason for either, but very
much against both: for why? consider first, for our own hearts: what aptnes,
what ability, nay what possibility will, or can, there be in us, unto good, who
have been soak't, and steep't many years In all sin and jmpiety; what
holiness? what purity? in those parts of our bodies, and powers of our souls,
which hell has poisoned and envenomed all our days, and are now full of
deadly poison, the heart hardened, the conscience vnconvinced, the judgment
blinded, the affections earthly, the will rebellious, all, benumbed, and
utterly void of any spark of that quickening spirit, which must turn a man to
God: wherewith will ye come to the Lord? if you pray, it must be with a mouth
furred with blasphemy, with a mind fraught with all other jmpiety, whereto you
have been affected? what will ye give him, but a soul, and a body that have
both combyned to be rebels your whole life, against him, and is there any
power in these to be given to the Lord, who have sold themselves like Ahab, to
sin, and whom the Devil (the true owner now) will come, and claim as his
own, long since due unto him, and therefore will not e^dure they should be
give^ to any other from him.

It is against all humane reason, and common sense, that a man so jnvred to
sin, so accustomed and habituated to corruption, who has consumed his days
in nothing but in dishonouring and disobeying the Lord, and never knew what
belonged to the savor of saving grace, or to the beginning of any god work,
should now be able to begin and finish, that great work of giving himself up
to God, and that at and in, his own set time. Noe, there goe's more to it then
so: it is no such short work, no man can be so quick at it, especially,
those that have been so slow all their days before: it will ask longer time,
and more a do, before it be well begun, then these sotts do conceit, does
belong to the middle, and both ends of it.

God says that no man can come to him except he he be drawn; these men (it
seems) will come to God, whether he will or not, as if it were in their power
to draw God to themselves; but as he will not have his goodness, and power so
much abused, as to be drawn to them; so neither, will he endure, to have their
rebellious and debauched life so much honored, as now at last cast, to draw
them to him: but even let him alone with them, who has had their childehood,
and youth, to take their age too, and so to have all to himself. Customary sin
is not so lightly cast off, it is bred in the bone, it will not be easy to get
it out of the flesh, and that so, as Gods spirit may instantly enter, as these
do most idly apprehend.

Again consider the second, what heart can God have to accept of the devils
reversion, or the leavings of our lives? the doteage, the dog-dayes (as it
were) of all the time we live. Let old age be well considered, and the state
thereof pondered, in our selves, and all other creatures that serve us: is it
not the only time, wherein we cast off, our servants, or cattle, to baser uses,
as being unfit for ours? An old servingman, now overworne and decrepite, and
not fit to attend his Lord any longer, has a license to keep an alehouse,
or become's some tapster, and so is made servile to every base potcompanion:
An old horse, of good pace, of great price, before, for the saddle, the coach,
now to the myll, to the harrow, to any mean drudgery, and at last, to the
dogs. And can this age, wherein one man is not fit for another service, nor any
beast for man's use, be the meetest time for the most high, to be served in of
us? what shall we then think to become his, when we are a burden to the world,
2. Sam. 19 35.
and to our selves, and both weary of one another as Barzillai spoke to David,
of himself?

What man would be so used by his beast, as these men (more unreasonable then
beasts, herin) would use God: Admit a manns beast (like Balams ass) could
speak, if he should say to his master (as these do to the almighty.) While I
am young and strong, I must follow my pleasure, you must give me leave till my
old days, and then I will be yours to command, and give my self wholly to your
service. What would the owner answer, think you? would he yield to his beast,
and think well of the motion, and take him home to house, and make much of
him, when he were aged, and diseased, and both unfit, and unable, to do
business; surely noe; if he could not be broken, and brought to work before, he
should be beaten out now, though he did offer himself. And must God take that
from us, which we will not endure from beasts? the last, the worst, the dregs,
and reffuse of our days, must they fall to his share? the only unfit time for
any thing, must that be his only time, and all he shall have at our hands? Can
we hope of acceptance and entertaynement in heaven, then, when, men refuse,
and the world refuse's our service?

Woeful men, who has bewitched you, that you should not believe the truth?
Even Satan, who because he would have you wholly his own, does therefore
witholde you from being Gods, till you be unable to honor him, and it be
impossible, he should receive you; it is he that does abuse you herin, he
knowe's, it is with men in respect of God, as with beasts in respect of men, in
their aged days they are more fit for slaughter, then for service, so old men
(who have deferred their duty) are now more like to be adjudged of God, for
neglecting it in time past, then accepted for time to come.

What does not every, thing wear, and grow worse with age? all old things are
accounted little worth: old clothes to put on; old houses to dwell in; and
the same we might say of all other things in their kind, no man care's for, or
regared's any such. But this is wonderful, that men who see, that the fruit of
our sin in other creatures make's them unserviceable to us, ye see not, sin it
self abiding, and increasing in us, (for so long time) should make us so to
God. Time, use, age, does corrupt all other things to us, but sin, (the only
venyme and poison of all things) make's men (by this reckoning) most fit for
God, for the only time they choose for him is, when sin has had his greatest
sway, all their lives before: as if the corruption of our nature, and life, had
noe power at all, to enfeeble, or unfit us, for our God. Is not sin our
spiritual sickness, and the only desperate disease of our whole man? has it
not a corroding quality, to eat quite through all the parts of our bodies, all
the powers of our souls, to pollute, infect, and annoy us, in all respects?
and who (I pray you) would entertayne, an aged, diseased, and infected man into
his house, as more fit for his turn now, then in his former times, when he was
free from these contagious maladies? think, (by your own reason) what heart
the Lord of heaven can have, to take in these late comers, being in far
worse case, to serve him, then the most disabled man, may be to attend a Prince.

Now then, if we see reason to conceive, (as we cannot but do, if the Lord
enlighten our eyes) that our wilful, and woeful deferring of our duty till our
old days, does deprive us of hearts to go unfeignedly to God, and debar him
from having a heart, graciously to accept of us, then this plea is pernicious to
us, and we (now we know it) most jmpious in urging it, as we have done. But let
us come to the fourth and last, plea, for this proroguation, of piety.

last cast, as the theife on the cross did well find, and so shall we, we
hope, why should we not, even at our last breath.

This pretense is put upon us daily; upon all occasions we hear of it, at all
times it is laid in our dish, to bolster up rebellion against God, and to bar
repentance unto life. Noe word of God so much abused, no work of God more.
This president of the Lords extraordinary mercy, is made the ordinary packhorse
to carry all men's jmpiety: and seeing he was pleased to be so gracious to one,
he shall fare the worse with many, for millious of men do build their
gracelessues, upon this grace of his.

But because we find by pitiful experience, that this holy word, and this
holy work of God, (both being right worthy, to be thought upon with all the
admiration, and honor of our hearts) is become the common hackney whereon every
hell-hounde rides poast, to his own perdition; and as he goe's kicks and
winces, at Gods long suffering, and loving kindness: I will therefore endeavor
the uttermost that I am albe, to see if some may yet be recalled, that are gone
far, and others may be stayed, that are coming after, and some prevented,
that are setting out, to run this reprobate race.

Undoubtedly, did men deliberate at all, or could any wise consideration enter
into their soul's, they could not thus plead, they would not produce, this
rare and matchless example of favor and grace, to support their own ungodly
prophanes and jmpiety. Yea, and to add another evil to all the rest, in the
very use and urging of it; to wit, to pervert, and abuse the sacred word of
God, and to abase, and prostitute this glorious work of his; either of which,
whosoever does, he does it to his own destruction, he destroye's himself in
the very deed, 2. Tet. 3.16. 2. Cor. 4. 3.4.
if the apostle say true in one place; and in another too, where he tell's us,
that if the Gospel be hid (and so it is to them, that can see to do nothing
with it, but to abuse it) it is hid to them that are lost, who are hud winckt
by the devil, that they discern not the true sense, and use of the same, but
urge it, and argue from it, to such ends as God does abhor, that now his word
must wound himself, and nothing shall be made such an occasion of his
dishonor, as that which he once did, to renown himself, and the glory of his
goodness, The Evils of it
and favor for ever. And how do we jmagine the Lord will take it, that his
own acts should be thus mistaken, as to be made weapons against his own
majesty, which he ordained to destroy our jmpiety. Doubtless, that theife,
that malefactor, never did half the robbery, or any villainy comparable to that
which these men do, who thus abuse his example, to wrong the Lord, and their
own souls (and the souls of others) so unspeakably as they do. And that
they may see and understand, (as they shall, if the Lord have a purpose to save
them,) we will crave your patience and attention, to open in particular, the
heavy and hydeous evils, that are committed when this instance of Gods grace,
is so aledged.

common and ordinary, which God has made peculiar, and extraordinary.

Is it not thus? observe, and you shall see: what the Lord did at one time only
and never before, nor since, (that we read off,) to one man only, and not to
any other but he, (for a second example of such favor is not to be found in
all the revealed will of God;) and upon a cause, and consideration which shall
never be seen again, Christ being but once offered for us. This does every man
urge as his own at all times, and in all cases, without all consideration of
these perticulers before mentioned.

Is not this to eclipse, nay to cancel, the glory of the living God? and to
cast this most precious pearl before all swyne, and trample this most holy
thing under the feet of every profane person, that the greatest riches of his
grace should be reached out to the veryest wretches in the world, who build
nothing but contempt upon this loving kindness of the Lord? If it be such a
woeful thing to darken the counsel of God by words without knowledge (as it is
said in Job?) must it not needs be a thing more damnable, to darken the
kindness of God, with words against knowledge, as these cannot but be, to every
one of those that thus abuse them?

absurd, senseless and sinful collection were this, or the like. Once,
Balaams ass did speak, therefore every ass, should expect to do the same.
Once the sea went back, and the water stood upright as a wall on either hand to
Israel, therefore every man might look for the like passage: I think they
that presumed upon it, and followed after them, found it not so.

Once, God sent manna, and Quayles from heaven, and water out of a rock, why
should any man care to get meat or drink, he may hope to have the same means
to feed him.

Once, Naaman washed in Jorden and was clean: Once, men were thrown into a
fiery oven, and not burnt; Once, a bush did burn and not consume; Once, Christ
smote all his enemies down with a word or two. Why does not all the world
depend upon these perticulers, and resolve to be releived in the same miseryes,
by the same means? It were a thing soon done, to deliver a multitude more of
the like instances, wherein and from every of which, we might argue as
warrantably, as from this of the theife. But the world is wise enough, not to
be so befooled, in these things that belong to the body, they can see, and
say, these were all extraordinary, and miraculous and, not to be looked for
again: And are ye not blinded by the prince of darkness (ye sinful souls)
that ye should not more clearly see the same, in this that concern's soul
and body too, and the eternal state of both? Is there absurdity in those, and
sense in this? do those instances seem extraordinary, and may this seem so
common? cannot you hope to have the benefit of those, being miraculous, and
must this be for all men, which is matchless? Undoubtedly, either you must
look on them all alike, with a single eye, and discern them to be equally
impossible; or acknowledge that eye to be sinful, which can see odd's in
things of the same kind and nature, especially, such odd's as shall give God
the honor of his favor and power in the one, and rob him of both, in the
other.

But the spectacles wherewith they thus see, are Satan's, he make's them and
putts them on and teache's them to look thus asquint, on the things of God; If
for food, for physike; for passage over sea, for victory over enemies, or any
such things we should thus reason, the world would ^^sse at us, as most witles
fools, nay our own bellyes, our bodies, our dangers, would teach us to do
better, he must famish that gapes for quails out of the clouds, and he must
perish that looke's for Naamans cure, and he have his throat cut, that waits
to have all his enemies laid flat with a word: men will say there is no
proportion of reason in these things, and the same does the Lord (and the truth
of his religion) say, in this instance, if thou had an ear opened, a mind
sanctified, to hear and see it; as little reason would appear in this one, as
in all the other, and thou would as plainly see the jnevitable perdition of
thy self, in soul and body here, as in any of those things named there.

Do but consider well, whither this do not spoil, and utterly make void, the
verry marrow, and pith, the sap, and juice of Gods sacred word, I mean the
true application of the same, wherein consists the, life, and virtue, of all
that God reveale's, and he that shall dare either to abridge or, to enlarge


this, that it either fall short of Gods bounds, or do exceed them, shall
find heavy (yet just) measure at Gods hands.

The everlasting rule, Act. 10.15
and express canon of the scripture is this [That which God has sanctified,
do not then make common] this is Gods mind; that things be not made otherwise
then he meant them, that every thing be let alone, as he left it, and not once
meddled withal, to any other end. Who is he that shall now against the
clearest light of knowledge and conscience, violate, this absolute law of the
eternal God? But does not every soul do so, that, vrge's this word of God,
and suffers Satan to be his interpreter upon it, receiving his gloss, and
embracing the devils commentary upon Gods text.

He it is, that make's this pearl, (even this peerless, and pricelesse
pearl,) as ordinary as any pibble stone that lies in the high way. I call it a
pearl, and I acount it no less then peerless, because it cannot be
paraleled, in any place, but was a president of wonderful peculiarity in all
respects, as namely. to the party by whom. to the partys before whom. to the
party to whom; it was done


For the first, to wit the party by whom, it was peculiar to Jesus Christ, who
was God, and so could give grace, and forgive sin, and convert a man in one
moment, fully and extraordinarily: I think it would trouble the whole world,
to find an jufallible instance, that ever ordinary minister, or any mere man,
has done as much.

For the second, it was peculiar to the parties before whom, that the
adversaryes, and excecutioners of the Lord Jesus, might see the power of his
diety shyning (at this time) through all the reproach, and misery of his
humanity: and so be convinced (as some of them were) that he was the true
messiah, and son of God, able to go himself (at that time) to heaven, and
carry aneiher with him, by the virtue that was in him.

For the third, it was peculiar to the party to whom it was done, and that in
regard of his rare, and extraordinary repentance, expressed in many
particulers: the sudden chang of his heart, and tongut (for he, as well as his
fellow, did at first blaspheme Christ) now he rebuke's him, and condemns both
himself and his fellow justly: the excellent confession he made of Christ
before them all, and that now, when he was upon the torture, where he could
also, (not withstanding all pains) pray instantly; Did ever any barren dry
tree, bear so much fruit in an instant by any ordinary course? The fig tree
was very strangely and miraculously cursed, which so soon withered with a word
of Christ mouth; and was not this tree miraculously blessed, which so soon did
yield such abundance? nay, was it not a greater, even a double miracle, that
such a bramble such a rebel, should become an olive, and bear plentifully the
first day, and hour, of his being so?

Now then if all this be thus, that in each of these, and diverse other
instances, this particular were so peculiar, and extraordinary, what is it
that any wicked man nay conclude hence for himself, more then this, (and note
it well, thou godles, and graceless person, as thou read it. Note well.
) That when Jesus Christ shall come again in the flesh, and fall into the
hands of men to be crucified, and that two other must be hanged on either side
of him, and it come to thy turn to be one of those two, and the better of the
twain that hang's by him, upon whom he will show his diety to convert thee
miraculously, and unto whom again, thou show the fruits of repentance
extraordinarily, then, may thou be assured to speed as this theife did.

Other warrantize I can give none, upon any other terms then these, in any
common case: howsoever it is most true, that there want not evidences, nor
experiences, at any such time as the Lord shall please to exercise his
special patience, and grace; yet, by virtue of this example, or president,
(every way thus extraordinary) no such matter can be concluded, as most men
would make of it: To delay what is due to the Lord, and to rejourne what he
commands, has no color of ground or reason here, to do so is more then this
theife himself did, who having (in all likelihood) lived all his life without
God, or any means of good, does now come at the first call: which is more then
thou have done, nay thou being daily called upon, by the Lord, do poast off
thy coming to him, by his example, that came as soon as he was called: and if
thou do worse then he, doe'st hope to fare as well? nay rather, how
righteously may the just God take this allegation out of thy mouth, and retort
it upon thee, who pleadest the putting off, of thy service to the Lord, by his
pretense, that made more then ordinary haste to come to Jesus Christ, and went
so fast, toward him, that he got to heaven, the same day, with him.

Behold now whereunto it is come, that every ungodly man (that presse's this
president to this purpose) is condemned out of his own mouth, and the mouth of
jniquity is stopped by that very evidence, whereby it did open it self against
heaven. first of the mischeifes that arises from the misaledging of this
example, when men will so unreasonably and without all sense, press, and
plead, the last fruits of christ's mercy to one malefactor, to prevent the first
fruits of that duty, that all men owe to god their creator; and make that
ordinary to every one, which he was pleased to jmpropriate but once, and but to
one alone. and if they be so deep at the first step, let us look a little
further how in going forward this way, they plunge thenselves past all recovery
into perdition.

perverse; and perverted pressing of this theifes particular, to that end which
ungodly men urge it, does breed most evident and jrreconcileable
contradictions in the scriptures, and make bate, between one part of Gods
blessed word and another.

And he that does thus, (if he did know what he does) doubtless, would look
well about him er'e he would offer it: For why? to set the scripture together
by the ears, what is it? Is it not (as was observed before) to make God (who
is truth it self, and whose word it is) a liar, for if one piece be contrary to
another, all cannot be true and sound? Is it not to expose the sacred book of
God to contempt, in taking from it that incommunicable property, and
prerogative royal, that it has above all books under heaven, to be ever more
at absolute unity within it self, and making it like humane writings which are
full of error, and falsehood? Is it not to make our preaching vain, and your
faith vain, and to keep you still in your sins? for if the ground where upon
we preach, and you believe, be unsound, and not such absolute truth, as may
bear up both, then is neither to any purpose? Nay, is it not to bring all to
utter and remediles confusion, by shaking Gods foundation, and overthrowing the
whole frame of his blessed building, upon this infaillible truth of his own,
one title whereof, if it should be false, noe word of all the rest, would be
thought true, and foe these (like those pagans) do their best, to turn the
truth of God into a lie. Romans 1.26


Now is not the abusiue urging of this scripture, a setting of one word of God
against another? let us weigh it well, and we will see it, and say it also. For
why? It is a ruled case, and past all question, (as we have proved) that God
will have the first fruits of us all, we have made Gods mind undeniably
manifest for that, now if that be so, is not the allegation of this example,
as manifest a contradiction of this truth as may be; for why do men stand upon
this scripture? why is it so often urged and itterated? why are we replied
upon, when we reprove men's jmpiety, and have this evermore cast in our dish,
from day to day? Is it not to plead for proroguation of piety till hearafter?
does it not make men say (through their own jmpiety) that it is too soon yet?
it is not yet time; there is time enough for these things in time to come?

Are not these words made the only refuge of all rebellions against God, and a
counterpoyson to that early, and timely duty, that we owe unto him? do not men
think they have stopped our mouths, and satiffyed their own minds
sufficiently, when they have thus spoken; and done enough, to undo all, that
we can say to the contrary.

And I pray you what call you this, but contradiction, when you oppose, and set
this one word of God, against all the words of God spoken elsewhere; when he so
often call's for the 1. fruits, you will choke all, with that favor which was
once showed to one man, at the last? This is to confute one piece of scripture
by another: to overthrow Gods word, by Gods work, and so to divide God
against God, as Satan against Satan, to make the Lord say a thing, in one
place, and in another to unsay it: and (finally) to draw from the Lord himself
a dispensation, and liberty of sining, that so what he requires in so many
places of his law, he shoule release, and cancel in one part of his Gospel.

Let any man whom God has endued with any measure of sound understanding,
judge whether this be not to make a rent in the Lords revealed will; and if so
it be, it is time for us to judge our selves, for so doing, for before the Lord
will endure this, the soul that does it, shall be rent from him, and thrown
among reprobates; the judgment and damnation of these disgracers of God, and
depravers of his holy word, sleeps not; and there is noe way to shun, or
escape it, but by a through judging of your selves, in respect of this impiety,
which if they do not, whose mouths have spoken it, and whose minds have
thought it; vengeance shall surely overtake them, even that vengeance, which is
due to such as do this insufferable indignity, to God, and his word.

This is the 2. step they tread, who follow this way, and we see it sink's
deeper then the former, toward that dreadful confusion which cannot be avoyed,
if this fearful evil be not abandoned. Let us yet see further, to the third.

3. the producing, and aleadging of this president of the theife thus, (that we
may play the theiues with God, and rob him of his first fruits,) does breed,
and engender many foul falsehoods, and vile blasphemies in our hearts.

He that proposes this president for his apology, against the manifest light
of truth we have proved, makes this scripture, the patron of such
atheistical principles as, are to be abhorred in the thought of every man, and
not to be once uttered of any. Let us see some few of those many monstrous
untruths which we might mention.

authority of scripture, we may rejourne the obedience that long since we owed
unto the Lord.

Whereas the holy ghost is clearly opposite hereunto: God calls for nothing
more, (as we have heard) then the first, and condemns nothing more then
putting off what he command's. His servants, (such as he has effectually
called) have made all the haste and expedition that was possible: So says
David [I will run the way of thy commandements] and again [I made haste and
delayed not to keep thy righteous judgments] So says Cornelius to Peter [Then
I sent for thee jmmediately] and Paul says the same of himself [jmmediately I
consulted not with flesh and blood etc.] The evidence of God, Psalm. 119.32.60.
Act. 10.33. Gal. 1.16.
to hasten our duty is undeniable: the sin of not doing so, is in excusable:
yet by these men's arguments the same God that is so eager for expedition, does
warrant our delay. And can any thing be more false the^, that God should abet
these two contraries.

delay, but presumptuous delay, such, as men are guilty of by presuming
(against all good ground) they shall find the same measure of mercy that this
theife did.

Now to presume of pardon for a sin of presumption, is to presume of more
favor then the theife found, for, (for ought we know) his sin was not of
presumption; but either of mere ignorance if he were a Roman, (as some
suppose him and his fellow, to be) or of gross ignorance if he were a Jew.
Sure it is, he knew not Christ, for he reviled him at the first, as well as the
other. And must you (by his example) presume of delay in Gods duties, which he
never meant, and of mercy for presumptuous delay which this theife never found?
shall God become the prop of our presumtion, when it is a sin that his soul
hate's, and he is so far from having any mercy in store for it, that he has
not greater store of justice heaped up, scarce against any ungodliness; and they
that befaulty are said to store, or treasure up wrath, against the day of
wrath, that is, To. 2.5.
every day to augment, enlarge, and add unto their own damnation.

This jmpiety is next neighbor to that which is unpardonable, if once a man be
so jmpudent that he dares offend presumptuously, he had need bethink himself
where he is, and what he does, the next leap may be into the bottomless pit,
especially if he shall add this unto all, that he will father such offenses
upon the Lords allowance, and so turn his extraordinary mercy, into
extraordinary jmpiety. had another spirit when he prayed against presumptuous
sin, that he might be free from the great transgression; and did not the spirit
of the devil posesse these woeful men, Psa. 19.13
they would surely do the same. But Satan has enough, even all that he would
have, to make them build their presumption upon God, because he knowe's that by
so doing, he shall provoke God against them, to abhor them for ever. But let
us look yet a little further.

thus, does loose us, and bind God, we are enlarged for all our life till the
last, his hands are tied, and that with double bands.

Is not this undeniably true, and a clear consequent of this allegation? do
we not press it to put off that whereunto we are bound, not to give the Lord
first of our lives, but to be free to come when we will, though at the last
day, or hour, or instant? do we not take it for granted, that till we do
come, we must have health, peace, food, and all other favors from God? and
that we must be accepted also?

So we are free, God is bound: we are free from duty during our pleasure (and a
great deal of kindness we must have for many years, and do him no service)
but he is bound to mayntaine us till we come, and entertayne us when we come.
And is it not fearful and hydeous jmpiety, for us to seek to enslave the Lord
to our sinful lives, and to set our selves at liberty in them against him.

But perhaps you will say, God has bound himself saying. [At what time soever
a sinner shall repent him] and that Christ has done the same saying [he that
comes to me I cast not away].

Well, if (touching the former) we grant the truth of those words (though they
are not literally expressed in any text) that the Lord will refuse none, but
is tied to take them when they come, yet I hope it is with condition, of their
coming as they ought to come; that is, with warrant from him, at his call:
with abilitye of grace from him to repent: without both these, it is an
jmpossibility to come; and if we come not thus, (as we are bound to do) God
is free to refuse us. young years, may fear whether they shall be called in
their old days, and neglecting grace so long; how can they hope to have it at
such short warning as a little before death, or, (as the most of them say) at
the last gasp? and without these they cannot come.

If the word [whensoever,] or, [at what time soever etc.] Were in the text, I
hope it must be understood of Gods time, not of ours; it must be one of his
[whens] not of ours; we must not be chusers to tie him to our time; noe, he is
our commander and may bind us to his: [whensoevers] or [what times soever] are
not the times that he calls to repentance, for (besides what we said before)
that they cannot hope of any time to be called, who have refused the time
wherein they were called: we find in the parable, that after the eleaventh
hour, God sent not out to call any, it being a time too late, to begin; and
too short, to end, any business of his, showing that our last hour is noe time
for us to go to God, or for God to regard us.

The same is the sense of the latter, which Christ says: so that God is bound
to us in kindness, when we have performed our part of obedience. Do your duty,
you shall find mercy.

wild and vnlimmited propositions, understand what God says with all
reverence, wisdom, and sobriety, know, that every word of his flowe's from
infinite and unsearchable wisdom, and therefore must be conceived warily, as
doctrine of piety, not of liberty.

Beware of bynding God, and looseing thy felf, least (for so doing) he bind
thee hand and feet, and cast thee into utter darkness: do not once dare to
think that he that is only wise, could ever be so unwise, as to reveal, or
write any one word, that might j mbase himself, and give us any occasion to
abuse him, as in thus disputing from these propositions we do.

Nay, we are bound, and he is free, it was his free grace, to make any such
promises of grace, or glory to us, upon any terms, seeing we brake with him
and rebelled against him at the first, he might have chosen whether ever he
would have given us one good word or not; now seeing he has, let that be
acknowledged as his love, and let us confess our selves bound to every tittle
of his truth, that does or may concern us, and give our best obedience we can
to the same with joy, greiving always that we can give no better. Be it far
from us thus to captivate the Lord, so much as in one thought it is
abominable, it is for malefactors (such as we are) to be bound, not for him
who is God almighty, and to be blessed for ever. And be it as far from us to
free our selves, but always to confess our subjection to the Lord with all
humility, yea to accomt it our best liberty to be bound to him, whose law is
absolute liberty. The service of Satan is the basest bondage that can be, and
to be (by him) witholden from God (as we are) till the last of our lives, is
absolute slavery, and that whereby he meane's indeed (what soever he pretend's
to delude us) to pull us into his own chains, to be bound up with himself for
ever, for refusing to come under Gods yoke, when he did call us.

Thus we see in these few steps, how far from heaven, how near to hell these
men go, that make account to make but one leap from earth to heaven, and that
at last cast too; if we should follow them further, in such other most
blasphemous and cursed consequences, as would as well flow from this example
(as they aledge it) as any of those we have noted, and refuted; we might go
with them to hell gates, and see them shut in, to the rest of their fellows,
who have lived and dyed in the abuse of this word, and work of God, because
their, hearts and lives, were shut against God, and they would not open to him,
when he knocked seasonably to their salvation, but depended upon the mercy
showed to this theife, without any consideration of these other things that are
thereunto appertayning, noe the devil will not have them once dream.

Either of the extraordinary occasion of his conversion, which was to express
the power, and honor of Christ's diety, even now, in the time of his greatest
abaseme^t. Or, of the extraordinary means of his conversion, which was Christ
himself, Or, of the extraordinary manner of his conversion, which was in a
small time, on the gallows, or gibbett, or cross; call it as you will. Or of
the extraordinary manifestation of his co^version, by the honor he gave to
Christ, the shame he took to himself, before all Christ's enemies, and his
own, and that effectual prayer of faith, whereto he had so sweet an answer.
These things and the like, shall not once enter into the jmaginations of these
men; they only remember he found mercy, without any further thought of any of
the aforesaid particulers, that respected either what Christ did, or why; or
what he did; no, Satan hyde's these matters from them, least they should (seeing
so many words, and deeds too, went to this bargain) bethink themselves
better of it, and not rest in such a slight conceit of the matter as they have
done. This president, the devil make's his pretended pick-locke to open heaven
to all these that he can thus delude: but it proves intruth, his pitfall by
which, millious of men tumble into hell, in that last moment of time, wherein
all their life before, they made full account to go to heaven: and so before
they are a ware, the bottomless pit has swallowed them up, and there they
lie howling in endless, and easelesse misery, who thought verily, to have been
with this theife in glory.

Noe, noe, his conveyance was every way, and in all respects extraordinary, his
passage is jmpossible (for ought we know) to any other; especially for those
who would go the same way, and yet regard not at all the way he went.

Thus we have waded through some few, of those many things, which, are
ordinarily alleged to hinder the happy success of this sacred truth of God in
men's hearts, and their happiness by the obedience and practice of it. We will now
go no further in this way, the further we pass the fowler it will appear,
and our hope is that such as are not gone too far, but are yet within call,
may be recalled, by this voice of God, which has told them the danger of
every step they have gone as yet, and the damnation that they will run into, if
they (still go on) and return not, in due time, to save themselves, from the
wrath to come, which is reserved for all such, as resist Gods revealed will,
and labor to defend their protraction of duty, and their practice of jmpiety,
by such plea's and pretenses, as come from that hell originally, whereunto,
(they that persist in them) must go eternally.

And to preserve so many of them as is possible; now they have done pleading
for sin, (against the honor of God and the good of their own souls) we will
begin to plead both for God, and for them, and the happiness they may have by
this blessed truth of his, if they have such hearts as may yet be moved and
persuaded to embrace the same. third use, wherein we shall make tender unto them
of such motives, and considerations, as may jnduce any heart, (that is not wholly
hardened and sealed up, or seared by Satan, to a stark senclesse condition),
to yield both acknowledgment and obedience, to that which (in this behalf) the
Lord requires of them.

The thing the Lord expects, is the first fruits of our lives to be his, that
as soon as we can undertake any thing, we should betake our selves to his
service; and can we conceit he does this without right, or reason? Far be
such jmpious jmmaginations from our hearts. Let us pervse seriously, some few
particulers that may be powerful, and perswaaing with us herein. And first we
will begin with those grounds whereupon legally, the Lord required them, which
if we ponder, and parallel according to their moral, we shall see enough to
move men, to do as God would have them: Note then, that the first fruits were
to be given to these ensuing ends,

1. That the Lord might be honored in this favor and power, whereby he gave
Isarell that goodly land, by giving him his right in the first of every thing.

The first of all was the Lords right, and appropriated to himself, by his own
ordinance and decree: he that gave it not, robbed God of his due, and was guilty
of the higest sacrilege that could be committed.

Yea, the Lord was so absolute herein, that all the first should be entyre to
himself, that if it were not given him, Exodus 34.20.
yet they might not reserve it to their own use, as is evident in that
instance of the ass, which being an unclean beast, it was to be redeemed by a
lamb, but if the owner aid not redeem it, he might not let it live; but must
break the neck of it].

Now then, who sees not through this shadow, that our first time is the Lords
absolute right, and that we are theiues to our God, if we give not our selves
to him, and this felony we may not jmagine to be easily answered; it is no
slight matter to be false to the almighty, to be a robber of the most high, it
is not our book will save us, yet his book (if we will be ruled by it) will
show us the means how to be saved. The reproach of being a theife and a robber
is great, but the punishment is greater, he that repent's not sincerely of it,
will assuredly rue it.

2. God will have the first from us, that we might have right to the rest from
him.

Till he have his, nothing of all we have is ours, when we have given him his
right in the first, then, (and not till then) he gives us right to the rest,
and this is as plain as the former, in the law of Moses, in the places
forealedged,

Wherein as we see the great and most gracious goodness of God, in providing and
caering for our interest, that what we have, we might hold it from him in a
lawful and comfortable tenure. So the greater and more heavy is the moral
and meaning of this heavenly truth to them, who denying the Lord his right, do
thereby spoil their own, and by the jmpious neglect of giving the Lord his,
do proclaim to all men that nothing they have is theirs.

Every ungodly man that honors not the Lord with his first, is a theife and a
usurper of all he does posesse, and lives under the just reproach of a fellon
before God, and in the danger of that justice due to this offense, he is in
perpetual peril, every moment, and has heavens indignation hanging over his
head, ready at all times to be arrested, arraigned, condemned and excecuted by
the high posessor of heaven and earth, the great Lord and owner of all that
every man has, who give's no man title to any thing he has, unless he
himself first have his due.

A wicked man's food, raiment, riches, his whole estate is stolen goods,
wheresoever he goe's, whatsoever he does, how long, or little so ever he
live's, every instant of his life is perilous, and may prove the very moment of
his eternal death; his life is not his own, himself is not his own, he has
no right to the breath he drawe's, to the earth he treads on, to any thing
appertayning to his being: all is for feit to the Lord of all, for none-payment
of these first fruits.

And hereof may we be well assured; if we well consider, that the Lord would not
be so unwise, as to give us any thing to serve Satan withal, noe, he ever
gave us, that we might enjoy it to his honor, and to our own advantage. Now
if he please to give us hearts to give him the first, he will graciously
continue the same heart in us, to give him the rest also: whereas if Satan set in
first, it is great wonder if he have not the last too, for he uses to hold
hard for that which he once has.

3. the Lord will have the first, that the rest may be not only ours, but
sanctified to us also, that the right we have in it, and the use we have of it,
may both be seasoned and sweetened to us, when we have first given God that
which is Gods.

And without a use sanctified what is, or can any thing be to us? Beasts, that
want reason have a natural use of earthly comforts: Pagans, that want religion
have a civil use of that which they have, now there is no difference between
their tenure and ours, but this (wherein we exceed them) that we have both the
natural, and civil, sanctified unto us. It is theirs in that state wherein sin
left it, with the whole curse of sin upon it: It is ours as Christ Jesus has
purifyed it and made it holy to us. So all is poisoned to him that is in Gods
debt for this due: and to him that has discharged it (to his best ability) all
is blessed.

[ If the first fruits be holy (says the apostle) so is the lumpe] if they be
not, To. 11.16
the lump cannot be. Tie these two motives together, and see how strong they
are to bind us to the obedience of this instruction; if we have no right at
all, then we steal all we have, if no sanctified use, all we steal is
envenomed to us, so that first, we are theives to God in using what we have no
right in, and next, we are murderers of our selves, in the vnsanctifyed estate
of that we use. Now what mighty and unmatchable misery is it for a man, to live
by stealing all he eate's, and to dye in eating, all he steale's, Let us think
on these motives, which are the substance of those jnducements, which the
ceremonial law did but shadow.

We now proceed to press a few other, which may yet more move us, if we
ponder them as we ought: either in the benefit, that come's by the obedience of
this truth, or the evil that issue's from the neglect thereof. I pray you note
bath.

1. First, if we did give the Lord our first, do but think what a world of
sin we might save, which is committed and continued in, by millions till we do
give our selves to God.

Did we thoroughly know the danger of one sin (even the least we can be guilty
of,) we would do much to prevent it, seeing that, everlasting pordition is due
to it, but here is a course that would spare a multitude, nay all our
trangressions, for from the time we are the Lords, he reckon's no sin to us,
but account's us righteous, and accept's us blameless in his beloved.

Now to avoid sin, with the dishonor it brings to God, with the damnation it
brings to us, (yea, and to others too, by our example,) who would not render
the Lord his right, and most freely let him have his own from us, that Satan
might never have us as his own from God. Assuredly he that could ever
conceive the Lords damage, and his own disadvantage, by sin: what glory God
wants, what grief it is to his spirit, what provocation it is to his patience,
how jniurious to his goodness and favor, how abusiue to his long suffering and
loving kindenes; would never deny himself to the Lord from the first day he did
understand, how he might (acceptablely) yield himself unto him, what a siranger
should Satan be in us? what a familiar would God be to us? if we begin betimes
with him.

2. Consider that as we might save much sin, so this were also the only way,
to have much grace.

The more early any thing begins to be good, the more goodness is hoped from it:
the sooner any man sett's himself toward beaven, the more heavenly must he
needs be. Oh, what a most happy thing is it, when grace begins to grow betimes
in us; then is the Lord much honored by us, then are men much bettered by us,
then are we fitter for all duty; then are we more safe from sin, and the
co^tagion of sinners; then are we more able to work out our salvation; and
more sure to posesse the same. A man's life is a heaven upon earth, when his
graces are well grown in him, his affection, his conversation cannot but be in
heaven: such a man may be bold with his God at all times, and Satan can have
no hope to prevail against him, when it comes so to pass with a man in
good, as it did with him in evil, in whom the devil had been from a child,
he was the more hardly cast out, and so the more easily is he kept out, and
hardly, (nay never shall he possibly enter) to posesse that person, who of a
child and from the first has been gracious.

What have we in this world to do, or to busy our selves most about, but to
get that grace that may further us to glory: and what better way to get much,
then to fall to work, as soon as is possible?

3. Consider, that the Lord never gave any man a time of grace, that would dare
to set God a time to come for it.

The man that shall be so jmpious, and jmpudent; as to prescribe and lymit the
Lord, at what time he will come, never has heart to come at all. Is it not good
reason that when we neglect, (yea and despise too) so great salvation, as is
tendered, nay commanded to us, in our tender years, that he whom we have
denied in his time of grace, should deny us in our time of sin? especially
considering that he has power, to confine us, to the instant of his call; but
it is intolerable jmpiety in us, to bound him to ours. Shall God wait upon
the devil, and accept us at that hour, when our sin will let us come, we
having cast of his day, and hour, of mercy before?

How read we in the scriptures for this, what find we? nothing but thunder
and lightening, from heaven, to peale these wicked wretches to perdition, [They
that were bidae^ were not worthy] says Christ. And again [ The door was shut]
against them that were not prepared for the bridegroom, at the instant of his
coming, and though (at their own time) they came (afterward) with much
jntreaty, yet, it could not be opened, but they were banished thence, and
abandoned to hell. Pre. 1.24.25.26. Zach. 7.13.
And yet again, by the prophets: [Because I have called and you have refused,
therefore shall ye cry and not be heard] So that (you see) God sett's noe time
to him, that setts God any; nothing remayne's to such, but disdain from
heaven, damnation in hell.

4. Consider, that what extraordinary honor God ever intended to himself, by
any man, or men, whom he would make instruments of the same, he meant to make
all such persons gracious betime.

Do but ponder it well in the first Adam, and in the second, In the first, all
mankind might have been happy, and God mightily honored through all
generations; now to bring this about, Adam shall be righteous from his first
being, and honor the Lord from the time of his creation. In the second Adam,
all the elect shall be happy, and (through him) the glory of Gods infinite
favor, shall shine upon them; and to furnish him for this wonderful work, he
sanctified himself before he was borne, and (after) in our infancy, and (so)
throughout all ages of our life, during the days he lived. Indeed, he
attained not our old age (I will not take upon me peremptorily to determine
why; but) it may be it was to show, that old age does not easily attain him;
that so these presumptuous, old fools, might be the more terrefyed, and
daunted, from dareing to be so audacious, as they have been.

Did the Lord ever glorify himself in that man, or glorify that man with
himself, that (refusing to come when God called) came when himself would? name
one instance if it be possible, Noe, he will sanctify all such, as shall be
glorious to him in earth, or glorious with him in heaven, I say he will
sanctify all such, in his purpose before time, and in his practice, in such
time, as wherein they shall come when he shall call, be it more early, as
Jeremiah: Josiah; John Baptist: or more late, as Abraham, and such other, as we
have named before. He gave them hearts to attend his time, not one of them ever
dared to reject that, and to cause the Lord to attend theirs.

These few inducements I hope shall draw, and enforce us to the Lord, whose we
are, and whose all our days are, and all our abilityes both of body and soul;
from him we have them in mercy, if he have them not from us (again) in duty,
it had been better for us we had never been borne.

Lay these holy considerations to heart, and offer not to presume upon grace in
thine own time, it is presumptuous sin to do so: that man is extraordinarily
graceless, that dare's presume of grace in extraordinary time. They that come
to crave more then common kindness of us, must be more then common friends unto
us; little reason has God to be more then usually good to them, who have been
grossly evil to him; as all they are who render him not his right in their
first days. If we would be the Lords for ever, let us ever resolve to be so
at the first.

Dearly beloved, take these things into deliberatio^, let them lodge in our
hearts, rest, and rooste in our minds, that so the Lord our God may take us
into his favor and compassion. Old, young, middle-age, all ages, have this in
good remembrance, for it is a truth that make's us happy if we hearken to it,
miserable if we do not. To the aged I say (yet not I, but the Lord) look
backward, see how much of your glass is out, and forward, how little remains
to run, and run apace to the living God to be received, before all be gone, and
no hope be left; think that voice of God spoken to you: 1. Pet. 4.2.3.
[It is sufficient that we have spent the time past after the lusts of the
flesh etc] and thereupon hasten toward heaven with all expedition, it may (be
the Lord may take that little time that is left, and receive you into
everlasting habitations. To the young I say also, [ Remember thy Creator (and
thy redeemer too) in the days of thy youth] and jmagine that other voice of
heaven spoken to you [ for it is now time to a wake; To. 13.11
etc] it is great reason that the flower of your abilityes should be the Lords,
from whom you had them, and to whom your account must be made for them.

In a word, I say to you all, and to every one of you: Do but think 1. how
far it is to heaven, seeing we must go from sin to grace, that we may go
thence, to glory 2. how hard it is, to find the way, because flesh and blood
cannot show it: then 3 how hard to enter, and go on, because the gate is so
straight, and the enemy so strong, and we so weak, and wearied out with sin
continually clogging us. And so I end with that speech in Job: [ If thou will
seek unto God early, Job. 8.3.6.7;
and make thy supplication to the almighty: if thou be pure and upright, surely
he would now awake unto thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness
prosperous: and though thy beginning be but small, yet thy latter end should
greatly increase.] And that thus we may be, and thus do, Let all sorts
incessantly seek his face for ever.

Glory be to God on high.

