A SERMON PREACHED IN AUGUST THE 13. 1610. In Canterbury to the Corporation of
Black-smiths.

Declaring the goodness, necessity, antiquity and use of that Trade which
works in Iron. With directions to men of this, and of all other trades and
callings, how to carry themselves religiously and justly therein.

Whereunto are annexed a short Catechism, with two short Tables. The first
opening the parts of wisdom, to be learned from man's mortality, out of Psa.
90.12.

The latter laying forth the order of Gods Counsel, touching the salvation of
the elect, out of Romans 8.29.30.

By THOMAS WILSON Preacher.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign
of the Crown. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, MAI^TER DOCTOR SMITH, Master of Clare Hall in
Cambridge, health in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
LEt it not offend you that I your son so far inferior to you in gravity,
and sufficiency of knowledge, have thus presumed to follow you in be same
steps, I mean, preaching upon be same Text, and publishing this my ^ude
work. I have done nothing (neither ^ould I if I would) unto your disparagement
I do but lispe, where you speak; I ^reepe where you did go, and run: I
instructed the low shrubs, you the high and mighty Cedars. I the subject, you
the King, Prince, Council, and Nobles of the Land. You in a lofty, I in a low
style. I spoke to a few Mechanichans, you to a mighty Monarche, and many
worthy Peers. Your labors preferred to public view by motion of a most
reverent Father. Dedicated primarily to a most learned and excellent King; and
secondarily, to a great and noble Counselor. I alas do look no higher then to
your worshipful self (and have need of pardon for this presumption to) being
moved to show my self by some private persons, who desired this birth should
not die in the birth: But happily you will be offended that I call you father,
having no resemblance and likeness to you, not so much as in countenance,
gate, speech or Iesture. True it is, I resemble you in nothing at all; neither
in wit, nor clocution, learning, experience, reading, judgment: I have no
agreement nor concurrence with you in method, instruction, disposition,
application, phrase, example or sentence, scarce a word from you (for I had
seen you four years ago, and had not since looked on you.) Howbeit I am bold,
and I trust (without blame) to entitle you Father; because of your precedence
in years, gravity, graces, experience, degree and place, as also for that you
not only went before me in time, I being an after birth: but were the occasion
of this birth, in so much as when I was to choose a Text whereupon to preach
before a Corporation of Smiths; your entreating on this Scripture before me
moved, and brought me the sooner to think, and resolve of it as meet, and fit
for my purpose. If it shall please you not to disdain me, I will bind my self
not to envy you. Your labors may obscure mine, but my light cannot dim
yours, it shines too bright: yet Badgers skins helped the building of the
Tabernacle, as well as silk and purple. So as Gods children profit, and his
glory be promoted by the variety of our gifts, and endeavors, that shall
suffice me plentifully and I doubt not, but it will content you*

Fare you well. October. 25. 1610. THOMAS WILSON, One of the six Preachers in
Canterbury Church.

A Sermon Preached in Canterbury to the Corporation of Blacke-smiths, declaring
the goodness, necessity, antiquity, and use of that trade which works in Iron.
1. SAM. 13.19.20. There was not a Smith found throughout all the land of
Israel, for the Philistines said, least the Hebrews make them swords or
spears.

Wherefore all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every
man his mattocke, his share, his axe, and his weeding hook.


IT plainly appears by sacred Story, Sum of the text.
that God had delivered the Israelites into the hands of the Philistines, who
were become their Lords, and exercised do minion over them. Now in this tex^ it
is showed in few terms what art, and devise the Philistines did still use to
keep the neck of the Israelites in their yoke: namely this, by spoiling them
of all armor, and depriving them of all means how to come by any weapons: for
they rooted out of their land, both out of villages, and cities all the
Black-smiths.

The text is historical, Division.
and contains three parts. (in all the land not a Smith found.)

The other part of our text is, ^^ill (for the Philistines said.)

The third and last part is, a notation ^^d designement of the effects which
^llowed this evil brought upon Is^^l, by the crafty counsel of the
Phi^^stines. These effects concern the ^^^e both of war (lest the Hebrews
^ake them swords or spears) and of ^eace (all the Israelites went down to ^he
Philistines to sharpen every man his ^^^are, etc. Now let us proceed to the
^^terpretation of the words, that we may raise up doctrines out of them, and
make use of them for your edification.

There was no Smith.] Interpretaon.
There be Smiths) of sundry kinds and sorts, according to the diversity of the
subject wherein they work; there be that work in gold, in copper, in silver,
whence we have Goldsmiths, Siluer-smiths, as Demetrius Asts 10.24. Also
Copper-smiths 2. Tim. 4.14. but the circumstances do very clearly prove, that
our text speaks of the Black-smiths, and such as work i^ iron; for these
make swords and spears, Instruction. Dignity of this trade.
and by the hand of these shares, mattocks, and axes be both framed and
sharpened. Now in that i^ pleases the holy Ghost to take knowledge of this
trade or mystery, Lanaari a laudato non minima laus.
(if we rightly judge of it) to be named in the most sacred Scriptures by the
Spirit of God with approbation. If it be accounted a matter of grace,
countenance and credit to be mentioned with respect and commendation in a
profane story; how much more grace does it bring to a function or person to be
honored so far as with good alowance to be written and set down in holy writ.

I have certainly heard of a wealthy Citizen in London, who having (...) privy
Seal sent him from our ^^te famous Queen, took it to be no small favor done
unto him. Does the Queen (says he) know me, she shall lack no money, if I
have it; and may not our Black-smiths, then account it a favor and honor unto
him, that the King of heaven takes knowledge of him, and has put his name, and
memory (not in a piece of paper) but in the book of books? especially, seeing
sundry other vocations, of greater worth and value, in the eyes of the world
are past by of him, without the least touch or mention? To be short, do men of
mean sort think it to be a credit unto them if but a noble man do name them,
and speak of them with love and respect; may not I then justly affirm, and
speak it to be a dignity to this mean trade (as men account it) that the Lord
of Lords has from his own most holy mouth honored: yea, sanctified it by a
loving favorable mentioning of it?

Let the knowledge and consideration hereof serve for these purposes and uses.
cheerful workers. Lastly,

In the next place, Antiquity.
in that it has been used in the world, not for a few years, it is no start
up, and newly divised trade (as it were a yester-daies bird) but it was bred
and borne long since, and has had so many hundred of years gone over his head,
as it has now gotten not only gray, but white hairs, even as white as wool,
or snow. It is sixteen hundred years, and more, since the incarnation of
Christ, who was borne in the year of the world 3928. Howbeit, your trade was
living, and flourishing to, a great while before this time: even in the days
when Samuel, and Saul governed Israel, which was 490 years from the worlds
creation (as the learned affirm:) nay, which is more, we find, in the history
of Genesis, that Tubalkaine, Genesis 4.22.
the seventh from Adam, was the Father and Author of those that work in iron,
and in brass: so as your trade is very ancient, which does add no small
increase of credit, and grace unto it. For antiquity (when it is joined with
goodness) does more augment the esteem, and regard of a good thing. We are
commanded (ye know) to honor the gray head, and to rise before the person of
an old man. Leui. 19.32. It is written also, that old age when it is found in
the way of righteousness, it is a crown of glory to a man. Prou. 16.31. As
ancientnesse breeds reverence to persons, so it does to things when they be
good and commendable, wicked men the elder they be, the more to be detested;
but ^ertuous men, the more aged they be, ^e the more to be respected; for even
their age is a crown to them, when ^hemselues be righteous. In like man^er it
fares with things, which if they ^e evil they are the worse they more ^ncient
they be (for antiquity is a dis^arce to naughtiness) but if they be ^ood,
Consuetudo sine veritat estv tus error.
they be the better by being ancient: for antiquity does put more grace upon a
good thing, and makes it venerable. And were it not so that ^here were some
moment in priority of time, as well as of place, our two Universities should
deserve some blame, which have striuen so long both by word and writing which
should be more ancient. In a word, seeing it is written that old wine is better
then new, and a new friend is less to be esteemed then an old (as experience
teaches (it is therefore sure that the oldnesse, and long continuance of any
good calling should make it to be more acceptabl^ and gracious.

The which point being we^^ weighed of you, and exercise good trades when
goodness is commended by reue^ent antiquity?

Let us now pass forward to examine the necessity of your function, Necessity.
which appears in this, that when the ^^nd of Israel wanted it, the people
^here had a sensible, and great miss of it, neither should it be spoken of
^^ere as a judgment to want Smiths, ^f the having of them were not necessary.
Reason and experience teach, that good men, good creatures, good ordinances,
good vocations are never so well perceived how good and needful they be by
enjoying and having them, as by wanting and forgoing them. Carenmagis quam
fruendo. Virtutem presentem odimus omnas sublatu^; ex otulis quaerium in vidi.
This is a corruption in man's nature less to esteem and care for good things
which be present, then for those which be absent; the reason is, because the
want does more bewray the necessity and use. The exceeding and continual
lamentation for the death of Josiah (that good king) does tell us how much they
missed him being gone, who being present they did not so regard. Lam. 4. When
our Savior tells his hearers that the time would come, when they should desire
to see but one of the days of the Son of man. He does hereby insinuate that
the Mesiah being present in person, was without due respect to him and his
doctrine, and that the great need of him and his teaching would be more
discerned by the absence of them. The Sun is a glorious creature very
beautiful and benificial to the world, yet our daily beholding it does lessen
our account of it, and our thankfulness to God for it, were it taken from us
but one year, by the want of it we should be forced to learn the great and
manifold necessity of this one creature: What, do I speak of the Sun that
most lightsome and goodly creature, if we should lack either the air to
breath in, or the fire, or water, or the earth, or trees, fowls, or beasts, or
any one creature allotted of God to our necessities, though we had and enjoyed
all the rest, yet the want of that very one would be felt, and would teach us
experimentally the necessity of that, and of all the rest: and this which I
speak of the creatures, I would have understood of the members of our body,
whereof there is not the lest, but is needful; the foot, the lowest and
basest member, yet it cannot be said there is no need of it. 1. Cor. 12.21.
This which is true in the natural body, is verified also into the
Ecclesiastical, and political body in the Church and common wealth. There is
no Church Officer, or ordinance that can be spared: if we were without either
preaching, or reading, or Sacraments, or prayer, we should soon see that we
could not be long without it, and be well, so truly is that which is commonly
spoken, that God and nature has done nothing in vain. Deus et natura nihil
seterunt frustra.
Touching the common wealth, were it so with us here in England, as it was
sometimes with Gods people in Israel, that there were no governor, or
Magistrate in our land, as sometime there was no King in Israel. Judge. 18.1.
The horrible confusions, the excreable impieties, and iniquities, that would
abound in our state, and ouerflow it, as a winter-floud would enforce, even
those which be most impatient of authority, and most adverse to government, 1.
Sam. 8.5.
to cry out as that people did, make us now a king to judge us? Howsoever now
that we have the benefit of rule and rulers, we do not rightly value it: yet
were there no ruler to be found in all our land, we should quickly miss it: so
auailable and effectual is the absence of a thing to teach us the necessity of
it. After Magistracy, consider the ordinance of Matrimony, which howsoever by
being common grows contemptible with many (as other things do) yet the lack
of it, would soon proclaim and speak forth the necessity of it, in as much
as without it, Matrimoniumrei pu^^ Ecclesiae se^ men e^r^gn coelestis
seminarium.
the kingdom of heaven should misle many inhabitants, and the kingdoms of the
earth should in short time have none at all.

And no marvel that there is such need of these maine ordinances, seeing
there is not the meanest manuary trade, or art, but when it is lacking the body
politic does feel the miss of it with grief, and smart, whereof we have
sufficient proof in this very text, which instructs us to see that the whole
land of Israel was the worse for want of the Black-smiths, and sure it could
not otherwise be, for though the particular evils which came by this want, were
not mentioned in our text (of the which we shall speak more at large anon) yet
common reason and sense may teach us the truth hereof. For of many trades which
are now in this city used, tell me which of them all you could lack, or if
you did lack it, whether you should not feel the want of it, and think it a
great evil to be without it; yea though it were but your scauinger, or chimney
sweeper.

But if we should loose or be without either our Tailours, or Shooemakers, or
Smiths, Glouers, Ioyners, Carpenters, or any one of our meanest occupations,
though we should keep all the rest, yet those that be of the best, and richest
trades amongst us, should easily see the great need of that one, and how hardly
they could subsist without it. The mouse may pluck a thorn out of the Lions
foot, which the Lion could not do for himself: so the basest trades are
necessary even to the wealthiest, and most worshippifull Citizen, who because
they are not in all things sufficient to themselves, Solus Deus (...). Genesis
17.2.
therefore can no more lack the meanest tradesmen, then the meanest artisans
can lack them. For it fares so with trades and sciences, as it does with
linkes in a chain, or steps in a ladder, whereof if one or two be wanting, the
chain is broken, and the ladder were of no use, for we could neither ascend
nor descend by it. Likewise there is such a mutual, and reciprocal necessity
of trades in the commonwealth, that when any one fails all the rest are
impaired. The comon-wealth is like unto a kind and tender mother, which though
she be poor, and have a great charge of children, yet would she mourn for the
loss of any one of them; so the land would mourn if is wanted but a Peuterer,
or a Cutler, a needle-maker, or an iron monger.

But happily some will say, Of the necessity of trades.
we do all know they are needful for us.

It may be so, but there are many more that know this, then that do^ consider
it so, as to make a right use o^ it. Let me therefore entreat you to think
seriously upon it, and bend your minds so to consider it, as to make profit of
it.

And first of all, foro in civilly, and conscientiae Hereby we do know that
vermin are not Gods creatures, framed amongs^ his works of the six days:
because were they all destroyed, yet the world should not want any thing of his
perfection. Also it is a certain demonstration that Carbuncles, Wennes, Warts,
are no parts at all of the body: because they being cut off and taken away, the
body is not the worse, but the better. Semblablewise, there needs no better
reason to prove that common usurers, which live upon the loan of money, eating
other men's flesh to cherish their own, dice and card-makers, enterlude-makers,
and players, fortune tellers, and palmemaisters, coniecturall Mathematical
Astrologers, that by the Horoscope adventure to give judgment of the manners
and events of men, of their life and death. Also tapsters and beere-drawers,
Ballad-makers, pipers, and fiddlers, beare-warders, and hobby-horse-makers.
These, I say, and all such like, which are so needless and idle, that if none
of them at all were found in all this land; yet not only there would be no
want of them, but great cause to thank God for the want of them (being
properly and not by abuse, as alehouses and brewers be, only the nests and
nurceries to hatch and harbor many foul vices) need no better evidence against
them to convince them to be such as ought to be blotted out of the catalogue of
warrantable trades; because they be not only needelesse, but some of them also
unprofitable and hurtful: as on the other side it is an vngainsayable argument
to prove any calling lawful, if it may truly be said it is needful. Luke
19.34.
When the owners of the colt (mentioned in the Gospel) heard the Disciples
say the master has need of it, they let it go: Likewise, whatsoever trade or
function it be unto, which either Church, or comon-wealth, or family can say, I
have need of thee, we may very well and safely to that function or calling give
a dimittimus, and quietus est.

Beside this rule to discern of trades by, ye are to make a further use of the
^ormer point, eue^ this, both to repent ^our selves with true and unfeigned
g^iefe of heart; because ye have not seen, or not esteemed the goodness of
God in the benefit, and use of so many needful trades as he has afforded you
for commodity of life, but also inioyne it to your self as a law hereafter
better to think upon it, lifting up your minds so high as heaven, beholding
and acknowledging the mercies of your loving Father, even for the lest of these
mechanical occupations. Quod cuiqua^ contingit cuiuis potest.
Otherwise for your unthankfulness that may befall you, that befell these
Israelites, either wholly to want them, or enjoy them without a blessing,
putting the money which you earne by them into a bottomless bag.

The third and last use is, are the Fathers and Guardians of the common wealth
in this place, put in trust by God, and his Majesty, to see to the public
weal of it: Romans 13.1.2.3.
so it would please you to make a conscience of your duty herein, to afford your
countenance and protection to all painful tradesmen, and unto all needful
trades, the lowest as well as the highest, not so cherishing some as you
neglect the rest, but equally maintaining, and supporting them al, all being
equally behoofull, though all not equally excellent, and fruitful.

It is a good speech of the heathen Orator, that it is requisite in a good
governor so to respect one part of the weale-publicke, as that he does not
despise another. Hitherto I have entreated of the first part of our text: to
wit, the narration of the want, that Israel had of Smiths: wherein we have seen
the dignity, and the necessity of this vocation. I hasten now to the second
part of our text, Thesecond part of the Text, to wit, the reason of the want.
to examine the reason of this want. (For ^he Philistines said, lest they make
them words or spears.) These words do teach us to know that the reason of
this ^he Israelites want was the deep pol^cy of the subtle Philistines: who
^eing desirous still to keep Israel in ^^ruitude, craftily invented this
devise, Policy of the Philistines.
to take their Smiths wholly from them, to this end and purpose, that the
Hebrews might have no heart to rise up in rebellion against them, or no hope
of prevailing of they ^^d, being left destitute of weapons, either to defend
themselves, or to offend their adversaries, this was a dangerous drift.

These crafty uncircumcised Philistines dealt with Gods people, as common
robbers with us deal, with true men and honest travelers: whom they first
spoil of their weapons, and afterward bind them; so these Philistines that
they may keep the Israelites fa^^ bound in the cords of their tyranny they do
therefore take order that the^ may have no warlike weapons whe^^with to help
themselves.

This craft they learned of the ol^^ Serpent, Satan author of this policy.
the father of all lies and deceit, who has taught the Philistine^ of our time
the like craft in spiritua^ things, as he had inspired into the Philistines of
old for furtherance o^ their worldly matters. For our spiritual and Romish
Philistines hauin^ enthralled under the heavy yoke o^ their hellish idolatry
and heresies the greatest part of Europe, Popish policy.
to the en^ they may continue this iron yok^ holding in it kings, nations and
people: therefore have taken away the Lords Smiths, skillful and godly Pastors:
yea, not suffering the Lord people his Christian Israel (so much as they may)
to have that sword o^ the spirit, the word of God in their hands, or have in
their mother toung^ without peril.

Our own and the French stories ^^ford us examples of their bloody and cruel
counsels and practices in ^his kind, reporting of some put to ^^ath and burned,
because they have ^^ene convicted to have had but a ^hapter of the Bible, or a
portion of ^he Gospel translated in the vulgar ^^nguage. I have heard honest
Gen^^emen which have traveled into Ita^y and those parts near Rome to af^irme
at their return upon good ^nowledge, that not only no Bible, ^ut not any
other Protestant book *which might give any light unto ^^uth against Popish
errors) was to be found in the Italian tongue through all the Stationers and
Booksellers shops there.

This is the universal policy of the ^opish Prelacy in all places (where ^hey
can prevail) to deprive the people of all means to escape the slavery and
tyrannical butchery of consciences: for this purpose keeping from them by fire
and sword, both the weapon of the Scriptures, and such wise and expert Smiths
as might instruct them how to handle their weapon, herein lending their hand
and help to Satan (though with no such direct intention) to strengthen his
power and increase his dominion, which by no way is more established and
enlarged, then by driving out such Smiths from us, and denying that two edged
sword to us.

To descend from whole countries unto particular persons. When Satan would
draw any back into his snares who have escaped them, or hold those fast which
yet are entangled in his bands, is not this his ordinatie policy to persuade
tempted and troubled souls, that it boots them not to read or to hear, An
ancient and common policy of the Tempter.
and that it is in vain for them to pray, for God will not hear such sinners,
or else such sinners cannot pray to God? He knows full well how easy the
victo^y will be for him, if once he may ^aine this at our hands, that we
be^ome willing to cast away our weapons: for then as naked and unarmed ^en, so
we may be overcome by him without any stroke striking. No ^orldly enemy
fears the edge of a material sword, so much as Satan ^eareth the force of
fervent prayer: which prevails much with that God, whose power alone is
Satan's curb and bane: Therefore he resolves that he has more then half won
the field, if he may win this to make thee give over praying to God in the
mediation of Christ.

Now sithence we hear what policies old and new Philistines use for upholding
of their kingdoms, and whence they learn it, what remai^eth but this: that we
be admonished not only to beware of them, lest we be circumuented: But
furthermore, Christian policy.
to ^se such policy to good purposes, as they turn and employ unto evil and
mischievous ends. Children of the light should be wise in their generation.
Luke 16.
Our governors do imitate the devise of the old Philistines in the affairs of
the common wealth: for there is order taken by acts of Parliament, that such
Papists as be known Recusants, convicted to be such, refusing the oath of
Allegiance, shall be stripped of all their armor (saving for necessary defense
of their persons) that if any civil or foreign wars should arise, they
might lack means to hurt and annoy their king and country, to which it is so
well known, that they are so ill affected, like vipers, which come into the
world with the death of their damme: Also here at home, if a quarrel or fray
be likely to happen, the first care of our rulers and officers is this, to take
from them their weapons.

Let us imitate this policy also in our soul dangers, against the enemies
thereof, to dispoyle and rob them of such weapons wherewith they use to fight
against our souls. And seeing the lust of honor and promotion is the weapon
whereby Satan fights against the ambitious, and against the covetous and
letcherous, with the lust of money and pleasure; against the intemperate and
proud, the malicious and envious, with the concupiscence of delights, praises
and revenge: Let it be our wisdom to keep, or (if he have got hold of them)
to wrest these baits and instruments out of Satan's hands, that he may not
therewith subdue us to his will, and overthrow us with destruction.

Moreover, whosoever have heretofore given their members as weapons to sin to
commit iniquity, let him now contrariwise give his members as weapons to
righteousness, unto holiness.

Lastly, concerning you Blacksmiths, who have hot work in hand, which causes
dryness, and this engenders want of liquor to moysten, and this breeds
thirst, and thirst, not moderated, draws on drunkenness, and drunkenness
whets choler and wrath, and this kindles contention, and this pulls on words,
words beget blows, blows wounds, whereof sometimes follows death of body,
and danger of soul (being in fear of being deprived of both parts of your
self in one day, nay, in one hour:) let me therefore beseech you to be sober,
to drink for strength, not for excess, to live temperatly at home with your
wife and children: so shall ye withhold from Satan a perilous weapon,
wherewith (if ye should put it into his hand) he will be able to cut the very
throat of your soul unto your eternal perdition. Let this suffice concerning
the second part of this text. Now to the third and last.

The third thing observed in our text, The third part of the Text.
does concern the effects which did follow the pestilent policy of the
Philistines, in taking Smiths from the Hebrews. These effects do belong to the
time of war or of peace. In the time of war they had neither sword nor
spear, a sore defect: for it gave power and liberty to the treacherous, and
tyrannous Philistines, a great deal more easily, not only to keep under the
Israelites, but to kill them also: even to take away their lives when they
listed, as they had before taken away their liberty. We may very well by our
selves judge how miserable this case was, if we will but a little imagine it to
be our own case.

Though we be now at peace with all our neighbor countries; yet do but
suppose that we wanted spear, shield and sword, bow and bill, guns, and all
other military furniture offensive and defensive, is it not more then probable,
and likely that we could not be in this peace four and twenty days to an end:
but that one or other which now holds league of peace with us, more to serve
their own turn then for any love to us, would take the opportunity, especially
such as hold their hands off, because they are too weak for us: lacking not
will but might to destroy this noble kingdom, and be glad to make a spoil of
our riches, and a massaker of our persons.

And touching the other evil effect ensuing the want of Smiths, if it were so
with us, that for our axes wherewith we hew our wood, or mattocks wherewith we
dig our ground, our shares wherewith we plough our fields, and our hooks
wherewith we weed our corn, we should be enforced to travel so far as
Scotland, or Wales, or Holland to whet them when they were blunt and unfit for
use; might we not think this (and that worthily) to be a very great extremity?

This was the very case of the Israelites, whose land was much like in compass
(as appears by the maps) to this our Realm of England. There being then
neither in town nor city a Smith to be had, it must needs be that such as
dwelt in some part of the country, were driven to travel very far when they
had need but to whet a tool: for they were feign to go to the Philistines for
it, who had gotten all their Smiths into their coasts. From hence there is just
occasion offered to say something of the commodity of Black-smiths, as before
we spoke of their worth, ancientnesse, and needfulnesse. Commodity of Smiths in
peace.
For the times of peace what use and benefit they are to us it is more manifest
then I need to say much: for who is ignorant that this trade does help to
maintain husbandry, by which even the King is maintained. The life both of
prince and subject is preserved by the fruits of the ground, and these cannot
be attained without the aid of the Blacksmith, who shapeth and sharpens the
instruments by which the ground is manured.

What shall I tell you, that neither could you have Cities to dwell in, nor
Churches to serve God in, nor ships to transport, and import commodities by,
were it not for Smiths, who make those instruments, by which great Fabrics are
both made and maintained? Neither can we in the night lie safe in our beds, for
fear of thieves, if the Smiths daughter be not before their hands. Nor
travail in the day securely for robbers, were we not armed with weapons of
their framing. And touching the use of them in war; because every man does
sufficiently understand, that neither our harness can be at the first
fashioned, For war.
nor afterward burnished, and made fit for use, but by their hands; therefore I
am determined to spend, no more time in a thing so plain.

I will address my self now, Conclusion containing an exhotation to men of
all callings to behave themselves religiously and justly in them.
that I ^aue showed you the dignity, ant^quity, necessity, and commodiry of
th^s your calling, to instruct you how t^ carry your selves worthy so good ^^d
commendable a vocation. For the which purpose, there are two things sereof you
have special need, and ^st take special care of; the one is, that you walk
in your calling religio^sly: the other, that you behave your selves justly
therein.

But this I would have noted, that what I speak to you Black-smiths, for
exhortation to carry your selves uprightly and religiously in your callings:
the same I also speak to all sere present, of what art or function soever they
be. Hearken then, I pray you, and consider, that to a religious walking in your
calling, there be these five things very requisite. First, sound and distinct
knowledge. Secondly, true faith. Thirdly, Christian hope. Fourthly, fervent
prayer. And lastly, humble thankfulness, Of each of these a little, and but a
little.

To begin with knowledge, Knowledge.
That which the Apostle speaks of meats, and marriages, that they must be
sanctified by the word. 1. Tim. 4.4, or else the use of them cannot be holy and
good unto us, the very same is to be affirmed concerning all trades and
functions, that ye cannot use them with a good conscience, unless your minds
be first informed, and enlightened by the word to know their lawfulness, and
directed by the same word to the right use of them. Ignorance which is the
mother of error in opinion, is also the mother of sin in action: men do err
both in judgment, Mat. 22.29. ^. Faith. Heb. 11.
and practice, because they know not the Scriptures.

But what use is there for faith (will you say) toward the religious
performance of our manuary works? Yes very great: For it is written, that
without faith we cannot please God: neither we, nor our works can please God,
unless they become acceptable unto him through faith. Two actions of faith
there be needful to him, that will do the duties of his calling in a religious
sort, acceptable to God.

First, 1. Action of faith.
to apprehend the promise of forgiveness of sins by Christ, believing that
God is reconciled to our persons by the blood of that immaculate Lamb: for as
a gift can never be welcome unto us,

The second office of faith, 2. Action of faith.
is to assure our hearts, that our calling is warrantable, that we may do the
works thereof with a good conscience, and that through pardon of the wants,
and faults that stick to them, (as they come from us) they are accepted of God
through that mediator, by whom we know our selves to be accepted. If any of
you have gotten this faith, you may be bold and well persuaded, that the
meanest work you do in your calling, even to the wiping of a shoe, and
sweeping of a house, and driving in a horsenaile, is gracious unto that God,
who does ever more respect the manner, then the matter of our works. 3. Hope.
Labor therefore in faith, and labor also under hope; for seeing God has
made a covenant with you to be your God, and this covenant contains in it
things earthly belonging to this life, as well as spiritual things belonging
to the life to come; it is therefore your part, and duty, to do every work of
your calling with a sure expectation, and hope for a blessing from God.

Howbeit seeing the commandment enioynes such as will have, 4. Prayer.
and find, any blessing from God, that they must first ask, and seek it;
therefore it is your duty to give all diligence, as to join faith to your
knowledge, and hope to your faith: so ^o add prayer to your hope. Iam. 1.16.
Every good gift and perfect giving comes from above: and therefore you must
begin your work with prayer. 1. Tim. 4.4.
All the creatures of God, and all the lawful works of men are sanctified by
prayer; therefore either must godly prayer go before every lawful duty, or
else it will be polluted, and profained, and turned into sin to us. Moreover,
we cannot stir a finger without God, in whom we live, Acts 17.
move, and have our being, and as all our strength to work is from him, so all
success of our work comes from him also, (for the builder labors but in
vain, except God build the house) wherefore as you desire to see the fruit of
your labor, and that it should go well with you, in any wise see, and look to
it, that you call your family together in the beginning of the day, before you
begin your work, make an entrance by prayer, desiring your good God to
strengthen, direct, and to prosper your handy work, but this is not all, as
you begin the day with God, so if you do well you must end it with God. Humble
thanksgiving must always accompany hearty prayers, for he that commanded,
saying, Pray continually, 1. These. 1.18.19.
did also charge us in all things to give thanks. Again, if before our work we
shall pray for a help and a blessing, and after our work is prospered and
ended, should not return thanks to God, this would witness against us that we
sought rather our own profit then Gods praise: besides, for as much as
thankfulness is a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor to God, Heb. 13.
better liked then a bullock with horns, and hooues, and is all the rent,
charge, and homage, exacted of us, for all the good things which we hold of
God: therefore let every one be as willing and forward to offer up thanksgiving
before he sleep, as he was to send up prayers before his work: so shall God
be rightly glorified, and you soundly comforted in all that you put your hand
unto; 2. Justly,
especially if your care be as to walk religiously, so to deal justly in your
vocations, expressing the power of your piety toward God, by the fruits of
righteousness toward men, to which end you have need of two graces
principally, Love, and Integrity.

Love will cause you not to seek so much your own, Love.
as the profit and good of others. So it is testified of Love, that it does not
seek it own things. 1. Cor. 13. they that labor in their callings for no
other end but that they and others may live, they show forth not Christian,
but selfeloue, such as may be found in Turks, Jews, Pagans and Heathen, who by
the light of nature are stirred up to take care for themselves and their
families, 1. Tim. 5.6.7.
to provide food for the belly, and cloth for the back: yea, the very brute
beasts by the instinct of nature are moved to seek out for themselves, and
their young ones, that they may be able to live without perishing for want of
meat. Therefore as our Savior Christ said unto them that would love none, but
they that loved them; and would do good to none, but to them that do good to
them again, what a singular thing do ye? do not even the publicanes and
sinners the same? So I say to these that labor in their calling, diligently
and constantly: yet, for their living sake only, not for the common good of
that society wherein they live, what singular thing do ye? Do not the Pagans;
nay, the very brute beasts the same? Hearken therefore to the counsel of the
Apostle, willing us to do all things in love, which will make us to respect our
neighbor as well as our selves, and in serving our selves to serve others.

The next virtue required to your just walking in your callings, Integrity.
it is Integrity, that you do unto every one that which is right, making your
ware substantial, and your price equal, that you may give as good as you
take, avoiding all wrong, deceit, and oppression. To which purpose, I beseech
you, Reasons to persuade loving and just dealing.
to consider of these few reasons, why you ought after this sort to carry your
selves in your vocations.

First, unrighteous persons shall not inherit the hingdome of heaven. 1. Cor.
6.9. Therefore look to it, for as sure as God spoke this, Non tollitur
peceatum, nisi restituatur rabletum.
so sure it is they shall never be saved, that deal deciptfully, except they
repent, and restore if they be able. Again, if you deal subtly and
deceiptfully with your neighbors uttering bad ware in stead of good, or bad
and good together (as if all were good) or good ware only at too high a rate,
you shall give testimony to the world, and to your selves that you are his
children, who is the father of lies.

We use to terrify our children from lying with this argument, Acts, Paul does
conclude Elymas to be the child of the devil, because he was full of subtilty:
does it not then stand you upon as you would not be counted the children of
such a father, to abhor a deceiptfull lying tongue, and false weights, both
which are as abominable to God, as they be pleasing to satan.

Add hereunto that you cannot deceive, by uncharitable and unrighteous
practice in your callings, you give a deep wound. First, to your conscience.
Secondly, to your credit. And thirdly to your state. Your conscience by your
sin takes a greater gash then any sword can give unto your flesh, and it cannot
but be a great bleamish to your reputation and names, when you gain the report
of dishonest, and unfaithful dealers, the very fame and noise whereof will be
as a sharp and strong scourge, to drive away from you all your customers.

Think upon these things seriously when you are tempted to any falsehood and
injury, and do but ask your self, at that time, when you are about to offer
it unto others, whether ye could be pleased to have it done to your selves, and
if your conscience tell you, that you your selves would not be ill dealt
withal; then take heed how you offer ill measure to others. For this is the
law, and the Prophets, Mat. 7.
to do to others as we would be done to, I am sure if a smith, Pewterer, or
Ioyner, if he have to do with a Tailour, he will look to have all his cloth
put into his garment, or else to return to him that which is too much. Let the
Smith and the Cutler do likewise unto others: and the rather because if your
ware should not be substantial; it may prove not only hurtful to such as use
it, but turn to the harm and undoing also of many others, as if a sword have
not a strong back it may break, and be the overthrow of an army, if a struck
be not firm it may ouerturne the wagon, and the passengers, as is often seen
by lamentable experience, if a plough be not sharp it will make no furrow in
the earth.

Finally, your death, and of the last judgment. For would you seriously think
upon this, and believe that you are mortal, brittle, and glassy creatures, and
of a days continuance, like to the smoke that vanishes, like to the weauers
shuttle, and to the Eagles, that pass and fly away swiftly, hastening to your
graves, as the day to an end, having death ever at your elbow, ready as a
sergeant, or baylife to arrest you: in time to come, and surely if so holy men
as the Apostle Paul, and the Evangelist Timothy did set before their eyes the
terror of that day, 2. Cor. 5.10. 2. Tim. 4.1.2.
and the coming of that dreadful judge that they might hold themselves the
better to the duties of their callings, let not other men think if they
neglect such meditations, that they shall well and worthily discharg their
works? That ancient father Hierome professed of himself that whether he were
at home, or abroad, in work, or recreation, eating, drinking, walking,
talking, sleeping, waking thought still he heard a trumpet sound, and a voice
saying unto him, arise from the dead and come to judgment. Blessed are they
that are thus watchful, always thinking upon their own ends, and the worlds
end, that when the Bridgrome comes either, to every man particularly by
death, or to all generally by judgment, he may find us all ready and prepared,
with the good servant in the Gospel, having our loins girt, and our lamps
burning that we may enter with him into his joys, which God grant even for
Christ Jesus sake, to whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all praise,
and thanksgiving now and for ever. Amen.

The end of the Sermon.

