THE BEST MERCHANDISE OR, A CLEAR DISCOVERY OF The evident difference, and
admirable advantage, between our traffike with God, for the true treasure; and
with men, for temporal commodity.

WHEREIN IS SHEVVED

That our spiritual trading is both free from all the evil, and full of all
the good, which is incident to civil commerce; yea, that it overfloweth with
diverse excellent prerogatives, which the affairs of the earth cannot yield.

Preached at Middleburgh in Zeelandt, immediately before the remoovall, of the
famous fellowship of Merchant Adventurers of England, from thence, unto Delft,
in Hollandt.

And now published, and dedicated, to the honor and use, of that whole
society, there, or other where, residing.

By JOHN VVING, a true hearted well willer, to their temporal, and eternal
good, with God and men.

Pro. 23.23. Buy the truth, but sell it not. AT FLVSHING, Printed by Martin
Abraham vander Nolck, dwelling at the sign of the Printing house. 1622.

SOCIETAS ADVENTVRARIA (Ana-gramma.) RE-RATA VIVIS DEO SANCTA.


What er'e can be concluded from a NAME
Yours does include: all happiness and fame.
Thus spel'd, thus anagram'd, it boade's your Fate,
Then which, there cannot be, a happier State,
With MEN, to enjoy your reconfirmed GLORY;
And with your GOD to be reputed HOLY.
What can I wish, but THESE, withal increase?
And after THESE, those joys that never cease,
TO THE Right Worshipful, and my worthy friends Master EDWARD BENNET, Deputy,
the Assistance and Generality of the famous Fellowship of Merchant Adventurers
of England, resident at Delft in Hollandt.
JOHN WING, wishes all Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal happiness, here, and
in heaven.
I Am bold, (beloved, and much respected in the Lord) to send this
demonstration of my dearest affection after you; not, that that I account it
any competent recompense, but that you will (as I hope) receive it as some
greatfull remembrance of those your greater favors, which you have so kindly
communicated unto me. Some taste hereof, you had while I was so happy as to
speak (now and then) in your hearing, and because that was but a taste, (yet
well savoured of such as heard the same) I could not deny, or discourage, the
Christian desire of any, who were affected to feed more fully thereupon, It
was the last message that I delivered among you from God; and therefore,
inasmuch as you were upon your jmmediate remoovall, to attain a more happy
course of commerce with men, I thought it my part and duty (therein) to do my
best, for the furtherance of your most happy traffike with the Lord; that you
might (if by (...) possibility, I might help) be prosperous both in heaven and
earth at once, and grow abundantly rich, in body temporally, and in soul, and
body, eternally together. And God, who is Lord over all, and rich unto all,
grant, that you may enjoy this double blessedness, to the greatest praise of his
most glorious name, and the everlasting peace, and welfare, of your own hearts,
and states, for ever before him. To his grace and love, I commend you all for
ever; and to you all, (and to your love,) I commend this my poor endeavor;
nothing doubting, (yet earnestly desiring,) your kind acceptance of the same,
from him, who resolves ever to remain.

Yours, in all unfeigned affection for good. JOHN WING.
From my house in Flushing. March. 26. 1622.
The sum of the Sermons.
God who compare's his kingdom to your trade.
Would have you (Merchants) like his kingdom made.
VVhereto, sincerely if you do endeavor,
Both rich, and blessed, shall you be for ever.
For why? all things most sweetly do combyne
To raise rare proffit by Commerce divine.
It stands wholly of advantages.
There is no fear of loss, or damages.
Adventures, Sales, Exchanges, Bartars, Debts
All are secure, all gainful nothing lett's.
The Adventure's nothing, it is by the almighty borne.
Who for your safety, by himself has sworn.
That maugre, sin, and all the devils in hell
Your souls estate, for ever shall be well.
Your Sales are happy; of your sin that is naught.
And that (...) Bartar, for the grace, Christ bought.
And so you make most rich Returns, and
To give the best, for worst, God does (...) place;
The Exchange, is gainful, (...)
Less brings more, (...)
The more ((...) occasion) we deliver.
The more we do receive, from this free giver.
Noe desperate Debts, or Bankrupts in this trade.
God is the Credditour; Christ Surety made.
And both, have bound themselves to pay to us.
The principal, with gracious over plus
Nor need you doubt Bad Servants should deceive
You lay out all your self, and all receive
There is no trusting other agents here.
Each man, his own eternal state shall bear
And if to the reckoning day we wisely look
When our great Master will peruse his book.
The account will rise most happy to our share
That sweetest voice, with gladsome hearts we hear
Come faithful servant, take your masters joy
Posesse eternal bliss, without anoy
Lo^ here, is heaven for earth, for, trash, true tr^^sure
For some few cares and pains, joy without measure
Glory for grief, eternity for ages,
For little work, immortal, endless wages.
My soul does wish you were such Merchants all.
That he who to himself, his own will call,
May take you all, unto that bliss above you
Next unto Him, (and his Viceroy) J love you.
The method of the whole matter.
The Excellency of the best merchandise, does appear, in the consideration of
3. things.

FIRST, that it is free from all the evils of civil trade, there being in it.
No Adventure. No Bad Debts. No Bad Servant.
SECONDLY, that it is (...) of all the good, that civil trade has: for therein
we have ever Good Sales. Best Bartars. Exellent Exchange.
THIRDLY: that it overfloweth with much more good, then is to be found, in man's
commerce, because All our business is in one place, with one party, for one
commodity,
All is given us which we deal for. All we deal for, is exceeding good,
without any evil. Our greatest good comes when we have done tradeing.
The best Merchandise. OR, Tradeing for the true Treasure. WHEREIN The
excellent difference, and admirable advantage, that is between spiritual, and
temporal traffic, is clearly laid open, and discovered.
In ceartaine Sermons on Pro. 3.14.15. 14. For the merchandise thereof, is
better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof, it better then
fine gold.

15. She is more precious then rubies: and all the things thou can desire,
are not to be compared to her.


IT readily appears to every understanding reader, that these words do
contain an evident reason of that which is avouched in those that go next
before them in the 13. verse. In which verse, we hear the spirit of God
magnifying (and that with his own mouth that cannot lie) the most happy
blessedness and welbeing of that man, who has attained true wisdom and
understanding. [Happy (or blessed) is the man that finds wisdom, and the man
that gets vnderstanding]

Now, what is propounded in those words, is proved in these, the proposition is
in that 13. verse, the confirmation in this 14, and the 15. the thing that is
made known there, is made good, here.

It is Gods manner to ratify and confirm, what he does reveal unto us. It
cannot be doubted but that one word of his mouth, were enough to satisfy a
million of worlds, howbeit he will not only say a thing but he will also show
the same to us, and make it plain, that his words are agreeable to reason. And
that this may be apparent, it is his good pleasure sometimes to borrow his
evidence from our affairs, and those things that are familiar with us here
below, either in our natural, or civil estate. We must confess it to be much
favor, that he will afford us any confirmation of what he affirme's seeing his
word alone is so worthy to believed. But his kindness does much more excel,
when he will clear his truth by such assurance, as we may most easily
apprehend, and rightly understand, according to the light of that reason which
we have in our own ordinary business. Nothing is more sure, then that the
mysteryes of his kingdom do infinitely surpass all humane reach and
capacity, and are too wonderful for us to know, we may much sooner be amazed
at them, then accquainted with them. The well is deep (yea bottomless) and
we have nothing to draw with. Howbeit, the Lord lend's us buckets, and send's
us to such things as may enable us (in some measure) to see and search them
out, that we may behold these secret things with open face, shyning upon us,
and shaddowed to us, in such particulers whereof we are more capable and
apprehensive.

Sometimes, the Lord send's us to search out his truth, in the creatures that
are either, above, about, or below us, the heavens, the earth, and all things
between both, shall teach us.

Sometimes, he send's us to our selves, and will have us go no further then
home to learn; our own estate of body, and soul, shall be our instructor, and
arguments grounded upon what we see, what we feel, and what we find, and
understand in our selves jnwardly, owtwardly, or both ways naturally, shall
unfold some heavenly lesson to us.

And sometimes our civil profession shall persuade us of some spiritual
assertion; God will argue with us from our traffike, and commerce with men, and
those celestial and divine passages which are between him and us, shall be
enlightened and enlarged, by those temporal matters, that fall out between us
and others; our earthly business shall further our heavenly blessedness, in the
things that belong to the eternal benefit of our souls and bodies.

This singular and sweet variety of manifestation of Gods truth unto us, does
evince both the unspeakable abundance of our blindness, and infidelity, (showing
that we have no ability of our own to see, or to assent, to the holy sayings
of God) and that inconceivable grace of his, which does superabound, in
tendering these apparent declarations of them unto us; where upon if we fasten
not, our ignorance, and unbelief, will grow utterly inexcusable, and our state
desperately jncurable before the Lord, by them both

We may now see with shame enough, what inharent grace is natiuely in us,
(wherein some have so grossly gloried) what understanding and believing hearts
we have, when such a point as this must be proved to us, and that, we do not
know nor can believe, that he that gets true wisdom, is a happier man, then
he that attayneth temporary wealth, though God speak it, unless also he give
us a reason for it. But hopeing that (now) we see cause to blame our selves
thoroughly, and bless him unfeignedly: come we to consider of the reason here
given us of God, and lying in the words that we have read, [For the merchandise
thereof is better etc.]

Which words containing a manifest reason to settle us in the truth of that
man's benediction, who has gotten any spiritual riches, above his, that is
stored with all temporal: do show themselves to be a ratification, arising
from our civil profession, and it seems to be framed and jntended by the
wisdom of God, as if in others words he had spoken thus.

The world thinks that man well, and accounts him happy, who has gotten great
store of silver, gold, pearl, and precious stones: he is a blessed man who
has abundance of wealth; especially, if it has been attained by pains,
diligence, jndustry and providence in some lawful and hononrable employment
(because it may fall upon fools by succession, deed of gift, legacy, or the
like) he is the man that goe's current among men for one in good case, that
need care for nothing, nor fear anything.

Now saye's God, if he be so happy, and so high in your estimation, that has
thus risen to a great estate in his earthily condition: know assuredly, that
the man I mean, must be beyond him, whom you magnify in this manner, inasmuch
as all he has, is but base trath in comparison of that true treasure whereof I
speak; gold, silver, and such things, are not worthy to be once named, with
wisdom and understanding, these do as far exceed all temporary revenews,
as the most precious and prizelesse stones, do over value the flynts or pibble
stones of the high way, or the street.

And so much the more assuredly settled, is the happiness, and excellency of
their estate, by whom they are gotten, then his was, to whom they were once
given without any merchandising, or means at all used to obtain them. I am
sure it prooved too true in the first Adam who quickly lost, those excellencyes
which came so lightly: whereas that which is gotten for us by Christ, and
gotten by us in Christ, is not subject to such easy miscarriage. The first Adam
was like to one, who without any thought, and beyond all expectation of his
own, had mighty rents and riches befallen him: and we (in him) were like
foolish and prodigal heirs, that not considering whence our excellency came,
and what it cost, neither he for his own part, nor in our person, cared to
keep it, but lost it, and let it soon go, to the utter undoing of himself,
and his posterity. He (and we in him) had it easily, without any merchandising,
or any means at all (by him) used, it came unto him naturally, he that gave
him nature gave him grace, he was created holy and righteous; to be a man, and
to be so excellent, were both one, to him. But with the second Adam it is not
so (in regard of the elect in him) he has merchandised with his father for
us, and paid dear for the purchase of us: and what graces are accquired for
us, and attained by us in him, are not easy to be taken from us, because they
came so hardly to us.

This is the cohaerence, and general fumme of our text, it being a reason to
persuade men, to be enamoured with that wisdom and understanding which the
former verse does mention, and commend, that so, we having (once) entertained
it into true, and entyre affection, might the more eagerly endeavor (by all
means) to get it into our possession.

And this reason (if we mark it well) may be observed to be rising, and
graduall, from one step to another; for when the Lord says that wisdom is
better then any worldly wealth, he begin's with silver, which will buy any
meaner commodity, then he goes on to gold, yea fine gold, which is far
better then silver; from thence, to precious stones, which are richer then
gold, and least any thing under heaven, might seem, either in it self, or in
any man's conceit, to be equal, or near, unto these in worthynes, he add's,
that, not only what any man has, or may have, but all that can be desired by
any man, is not comparable, to the jnvaluable benefit and advantage, that
comes to us by these.

Thus having survayed the generalities of these words in their drift, and
scope, we will now come nearer, unto a more particular enquiry into them, as
they lie in their order before us.

[For] This word [For] is diversely used in scripture, but usually (though not
vninersally) it is a rational word, or a word inferring a cause or reason, of
something that went before, and when it is so, it notes the efficient cause
of a thing. Romans 8.2. the final cause. Romans 11.36. the jmpulsiue cause. Mat.
5.11.
Yet at other times, it notes no cause at all, but is only either, an
affirmation, as Genesis 28.16. or a connection, Ioh. 15.15. or an interrogation.
Mar. 9.11. or a declaration. Genesis 20.7 or a sign, sequel, or effect. Mat
25.35. Luke 7.47.


I observe these manifold senses of it, that we might not (ever) jmagine it to
argue, a reason, or cause (as the paepist do) who most absurdly press it upon
us for a cause, in many places where it is but a mere consequent, conceiting it
often to be a reason, and (without reason) obtrudeing it as a reason to us,
where it is none.

In our text it is a reason jndeede, and shows why that man is in better case
that has wisdom, then he that has ought else, because wisdom is better then
all other things he can compass: heavenly graces, are incomparably more
excellent then earthly riches, therefore, is he most blessed that obtayneth
them.

[The merchandise] you that are Merchants cannot but know the english of this
word, it being a metaphor borrowed by God from your own business. In religion
no such word can be natural, or found in his proper sense and signification,
inasmuch as it jmporteth necessarily, that which is an absolute, and utter
jmpossibility, in the things that pass between the Lord and us. In
merchandise men give to each other, the full worth and value of the things
received by bargain or contract, both parties are contented, and rest
satiffyed with that, which interchangeably passes from the one to the other,
and either challenges his own by right.

In this merchandise, and our dealings with God we are so far from any such
proceedings, that we cannot render to him one farthing of our own, for the
infinite good he conferreth upon us, and casts most kindly unto us, we can
give nothing to him, nor (by any right of our own) claim any thing from him,
we do not buy at all, but we beg all.

And yet the Lord is pleased to make use of such words as are assumed (as was
said) from our civil conversation, Reasons why we are said to buy wisdom.
and jmployments; the better to show us the best things, by that light
wherewith we may most easily discern them. Neither is this done (as I
conceive) without all respect of some good reason, which may be rendered hereof;
among many others that might be produced; I propound these few, to serious
consideration.

First, (now) grace, and goodness are not natural to us, as (once) they were in
the first Adam, who (as we noted even now) had this wisdom and understanding
created in him, and confe'rd upon him with his being.

He had it without any a-doe on his part, he was no sooner a man, then he was
wise, and gracious, and had this blessed understanding in him. It is nothing
so, but much otherwise, now, we must get that, which was given him, he had it
with wonderful facility, our attaynement will be with some difficulty. It is two
things (now) to be a man, and to be holy, it is not nature but endeavor
that must bring us to grace, if we ever have it: it is become an art, to be
excellent, there is a mystery in it, we must be bound to it, and serve for it,
before we can be free of their corporation who enjoy it, namely those alone
that are incorporated (by grace) into Christ Jesus.

Noe man is borne a natural merchant, neither can any be naturally religious,
it must be sought, it must be bought, we must be trained up in this trade of
heaven, this cunning comes not by kind, it will cost time, and pains, to be
well seen into this science. We must be heavenly merchants, if we will hope to
be happy men.

Secondly to show us some semblance, your civil and his spiritual, his true,
and your temporary merchandise.

Some semblance I say, for some there is, (yet not very much) and some is
enough to Gods purpose, and sufficient to teach us some blessed lessons, out of
our own book. Indeed the only reason why there is no more current
consimilitnde between them, is the better being of Gods merchandise above
man's, the one does so wonderfully overgoe the other, that in many particulers,
earthly merchandise is neither able, nor worthy, to become a shadow, or
representation, of the heavenly.

That correspondence that is, must be conceived in the true, strict, and wife
sense, of this, and other such words as are in use among merchants, to these
civil ends, which we will so far apply to spiritual purposes, as any
warrantable, and sound concurrence will go with us in the analogy of faith,
without any vain or fruitles fancy, of our own.

Would we then see in what sense heavenly things may be called a merchandise,
and in what sense not; this is easy to him that will understand.

In one main thing it holds not, for (as we heard a little before) in all
merchandising there is muination, and change of one good thing, for another,
commodity for commodity, or money for ware, to the just and estimated value, of
the rate, and worth of the things bought, or bartared: but (thus) cannot we
merchandise, or trade with the most high, we can neither buy, nor bartar with
him, because we want what to gine him, not only to the full worth, but we can
give him nothing of any worth to purchase those most worthy favors, and
advantages, whereof all his people are free partakers. It were intolerable
pride, and presumption not to be put up, or endured, at our hands, that we that
are vile, and worthles by sin, having all evil, and no good thing in us at
all, should once conceit or harbor one thought, of trading with God upon any
such terms of satisfying him for the least favor we have either in whole or
in part, with any thing that is ours. So that (herin) the merchandise (on our
part) is marred, because we have nothing to trade with.

Yet (in diverse other regards) it holds good, and is very justifiable if we
take good notice

First that God does call and, encourage us to this celestial commerce, and
bids us come and buy of him. So says Solomon. Pro. 23.23. buy the truth So
says Isaiah: Cap. 55.1. come buy without silver] So says Christ Reu. 3.18. I
counsel thee to buy of me]


Behold, he will account us buyers and will have us come to buy, who knowe's
we have nothing at all to pay:

And so much the more strange, may this seem to be if withal we remember,
that it cannot be found in any place, that God is said to be a seller, or to
sell us any thing which he would have us buy: these two words (in all men's
reason) are proper relatiues one to another yet the Lord will part, and make a
rent betwixt them, saying we shall buy, that which he no where says he will
sell: it is not read in all Gods book, that ever he sold any goodness to any
man, but that which we have from him, is every where called his free and must
gracious gift unto us.

Now and then, the Lord is said to sell his people into their enemies hands, as
in the books of Judges, and in the Psalm, the church thus complayneth. Ps.
44.12.
[Thou sellest thy people for naught and take no money for them] but this
kind of sale, is no such selling as is opposite to the buying before spoken
off, nor does it any way match, the merchandise. buy of God, whenas he cannot
be said to sell to us? why thus it may be, his kind of selling, (though it be
of another kind) what he himself does intend, and would have us to understand
by our buying, thus. His selling of his people for naught, did note the small
respect, the base esteem he had of them, when their notorious naughtines they
had deserved his neglect, and provoked the eyes of his glory against them, to
cast them out of their good land, and send them captives among Pagans. We our
selves when we have a jade of ill qualityes, will put him off to any man for
little or nothing. Now our buying may be smelt by the contrary hereunto, and by
it, must needs be meant our great care, regard, and estimate, of the graces
which the Lord is pleased (in his grace) to bestow upon us, that we have them
in singular respect, and most gracious account, as we would do: that plate or
those jewels, which cost us more dear.

So then God sold his people without money, when he did disrespect, and reject
them: we buy without money, when we prize, and repute highly of his graces. It
is not (we see) any money matter, to manage this merchandise, whatsoever we
buy, there is nothing to pay,, but something to perform; the driving of this
trade consists in action. He is a good dealer, that is a good doer. All that
we give for heavens inestimable excellencyes, is our truest valuation, our
highest estimate, and the dearest account of them, we are able to express,
when we have once known, and felt their worth within our souls: phil.
if we prize them preciously, our purchase is made; So did Paul, who accounted
all things (even the things which otherwise, were advantage to him) loss, and
dung, and exceeding vile, mat. 13.
as the basest excrements, in regard of the excellent knowledge of Christ. So
did he in he parable, that sold all, to buy that one pea^le, which he found.
pro. 2.3.4.5.
And our Solomon tell's us that we should all do so, and that if we do, it
will be well with us, we shall surely gain that, whereof we have so good
respect. And if we would be tried by a well exprerienced man, one that knew how
blessed it was to be posest of wisdom and understanding, take David for the
party, and his speech for your practice, herein he prosesse's these things were
to him, more dear then all things, better then thousands of gold and silver
Psalm. 119.72.103.
sweeter then the honey, and the honey comb


With many more the like sayings, showing his rare account of these graces,
wherewith he was abunda^tly enriched. So then to buy wisdom, or to merchandise
for it, is no more, then to repute it precious, and to think it worth buying,
keeping it with all care, as we do the best things we can buy, and making much
of it, yea the most we can make; both in opinion, and practice.

Secondly our attainement of wisdom, may be called a merchandise properly, in
respect of Christ, for he (on our behalf) was indeed the purchaser of his
fathers mercy to us, and the paymaster of his fathers justice, for us.

The apostle Paul tell's us, 2 cor. 6. 2. pet. 2.^.
that we are bought with a price, and the same does Peeter avouch also, and so
do others, and well, and warrantably they may, considering how dear we are
paid for, by him, who redeemed us at a high rate, (I had almost said too high a
rate) considering what base, debaushed, and worthles creatures we were;
nothing, worse then nothing; vanity, lighter then vanity: a whole world of such
vile contemptible vermyne, cannot be esteemed worth a drop of his blood, noe
nor a hair of his head: had it not been that the justice of God was to be
satiffyed the favor of God to be procured his law to be fulfilled his love to
be confirmed


And all righteousness to be wrought and accomplished: how had we (unworthy
wretches) been (of our selves) worth redeeming or respecting? noe, these
infinite, most excellent, and inconceivable things of God, were worthy of the
life, and death of lesus Christ, to work and bring them to that pass, that we
might be interressed into them, through his purchase of them, Now our Lord and
redeemer having bought us, and paid an alsufficient satisfaction for us, and
enabled us (by his power) to attain some saving grace, hence are we (in him)
said to buy grace, through grace. For merchandise, or buying spiritually, is [A
word of Grace] when it is attributed to us; whereof we may be the better
persuaded, if we remember that God is pleased to call the beginings of his
graces in us his earnest pennyes, once, and again, 2. Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13
by the apostle; thereby intimating (as it were) a bargain between him and
us, because he would harten and cheer us, i^ our holy course, as a father who
has an inheritance for his son, take's the money that any friends give him,
and to make him the more willing to part with that, which he cannot employ, he
tell's him, well, this you shall give me for this house and land; and it
shall be yours, one day.

But to pass this, let us labor to be wise, and wary beware, that in any wise
we bind not the Lord to any words, he is free to choose and use what he
pleases, is it not great reason that he should have liberty, of speaking who
is infinitely wese, in every word he speake's? and therefore when soever the
Lord takes any word of ours, wherein we cannot discern a clear co^currence of
his mind let us sift the more narrowly for his intendement therein and blame
our blindenes, that we cannot see it, as we should. It is not for nothing at
all, though it may be but for some one, or very few things) that he makes
choice of these civil terms, to teach us the knowledge and skill of
celestial truth thereby.

Let us not therefore slight off these words, or look with a shallow, or
superficial eye, upon them, but take them into our most serious consideration
to search out the meaning of God in them:

Thirdly, this word, both here and elsewhere, to illustrate our best being, in
the best things and call's his greatest mercyes, and our chiefest graces,
[Merchandise] because he would magnify and commend the course of a merchants
life, to be lawful, honest, and good, and a calling of his own institution
and allowance, in as much as he makes this employment, the honorable emblem,
of these admirable excellencyes, in whose enjoyment we are truly blessed before
him. If every christian that would be blessed must merchandise, can any
christian conceit basely of merchandiseing? the scriptures attestations of the
honor and excellency of this practice, trade and state of life, are many; I
thought good to mention this among the rest, the better to muzzle and bung up
the malignant tongve of any foul mouth, that shall ever bark against it so
currishly, and unchristianly, as diverse have done. And thus we see how and
wherefore, these things are called merchandise, The next word follows.

Thereof] that is, of the wisdom and understanding spoken of in the 13, verse,
whereby all graces are meant. It is a common thing through out the scripture,
to notify all good, or evil, under some one grace, or vice of either sort; but
it is more proper to this book, then any other to propound all graces, under
the name of wisdom all vices, under the name of Folly.


Throughout the Proverbs; Solom^n [wise man] is a complete christian, furnished
with all saving grace: and he that is called [a foole] here, is the man, that
is full of all impiety, and prophants.

But let us come a little nearer to this word [therof] and we shall find it to
be added out of inspeakeable wisdom in God, and that not only to evidence the
excellency of wisdom above wealth, hut alse, todifference, and distinguish
this merchandise, from another, which is obtruded upon millions of men and
pretended yea pressed to be true, and spiritual, when as upon due trial, it
will prove to be no better then carnal, and diabolical, to cozen, to gull,
and to delude, all such as deal in it, or meddle with it, who not knowing a
Peddler from a merchant, do take these trifeling vanit yes, for rich
commodityes.

I mean the merchandise of the [Great wheere] of whom, and of her merchants
and the things the buy'es and sell's, Saint Peter says some thing, and Saint
John says more in his Revelation. In which book, (and in diverse places
thereof), the Lord Jesus, does at large lay her and her doings open, that all
men may see how, with whom and wherein, she tradeth.

How she tradeth, let Peter tell us, (even that Peter, whom they brag to be
their Patron) he has evide^tly decyphered her vile dealing, 2. pet. 1. ver.
1. ver. 3.
to be privy, and close; covetous and catching; counter feit and fawning: so
says ye text: [ who shall privily bring in damnable heresies] and through
covetousnes make merchandise of you]: all whoores qualityes, as right as ean be.

With whom, Re. 1^.3.9.22.
she tradeth, Saint John tell's us, who are her merchants, no mean men, no
base fellows, but kings, and great ones and that of all nations too, VVherin
she tradeth: to wit, in any thing that may bring her in silver and gold, and
pomp and pelf, to gain which, she sells merits indulgences, masses,
dispensations, trent alls dirges, the fardle of all her fopperies is opened,
and set to sale, yea to enrich her self, she cares not to make prize of the
souls of men too; causing them to sell their souls to her, for such toys as
she tell's them, are good for them both living and dead, that she may sell them
to the devil, for such things, as she knowe's are good for her self, to
purchase more honor, wealth, and pewer to her king dome:

These are her wares, and none but she may sell them, noe monepoly is like
this; the Divill is sole owner, he will trust none but her to be his factor:
she, none but her own bratts to be her breakers: and so this trade of hellish
trash, is driven between them, and with it they couny-catch men's consciences,
and catch money out of men's purses, and for this double damage, give them some
jdle puppet, or foolish vanity, that shall trebble it; all they sell, has this
seal of a hellish, and infernal in vention, that all the proffit come's to
the seller, he willbe sure of money; the buyer has nothing but fruitles
vanity. And so they (silly souls) are gulled to lay out their silver, and
gold, and not for bread, or rather but for bread, even then, when they hope,
and believe they have bought A GOD.

Now [the merchandise therof] is as much worse then the merchandise of gold,
and silver, as this in our text is better then both, and no man endued of God
with any understanding, will once intermeddle here, the only traders, are these
infatuated fools, whom God has given over to strong delusion: the Devil
has gotten into his dominion:


And these mystical sotts do suffer (nay joy to see) them selves miserably
abused by these Catholic Inglers of whom they think they do receive, the
ernaments of Christ, whenas they have nothing but Antichristian excrements, and
so in steed of adorneing and bewtifying their souls, they do defile and
abase them out of measure.

For this cause, even because [hereof], does the holy Ghost insert most wisely,
this word [thereof] that wise men might be able to discern between the
merchandise of God, which evermore brings great advantage, and that of the man
of sin, which is never, more then mere cousenage. Now put we forward to the
next [is better] that is to say, every way beyond it, in all kind of benefits
and advantages. I cannot conceive the word [better] to bear any worse sense
here, then the best it has any where, because (as we shall show when we come
unto it) these divine graces, do so far exceed all wordly riches, as no man
can completely comprehend and discover. There is no comparison between them,
the one is not worthy to be named with the other; wealth is scarce good enough
to wait upon wisaome. But this is easy: we proceed.

[Then Silver: gold, yea, fine gold, etc.] the Lord is not sparing (we see)
to magnify wisdom, in that he does it in so many words, which words do
import most precious things: and that (as was remembered before) by a gradation,
or rising, from one good thing, to another that is better then it, and from
that to another yet better: as we all know Silver to excede all commodityes,
Gold to exceed silver. Precious stanes to exceed Gold.


And that no place might at all be left in man's heart, for any thought of a
thing, that might seem better, he putt's in all that man's heart can desire, or
Wish to enjoy, affirming, that to have saving grace, is a more happy thing,
then to have all things else, that the soul of an earthly minded man could
desire to have.

So that now we see what these words do contain, to wit, in the general, a
confirmation of that commendation of wisdom and understanding, which is given
us by the holy ghost, in the verse going before.

This confirmation (if we descend into particulers) is comparatiue and rises
from one good thing to another and from that to a better, to show that wisdom
is the hest of all good things, and exceeding far surmounreth all temporary
commodityes.

The parts are three. 1. the things compared, to wit, wisdom and wealth. 2.
the wealth wherewith wisdom is compared: which is partly expressed: silver,
gold, prectous stones, partly included: all that then caust desire. 3. the
disproportion between them, which shows not only, that wisdom is something
better then wealth, but also that it does incomparablely surpass and exceed
it.


Thus, being now come to the sense, and parts of the words, let us put forward
toward the matter that is contained in them: which that we may the better come
to understand, be it all ways, well and carefully remembered and considered of
us, that inasmuch as it pleases the Lord to speak unto us of these mystical
things in such manifest english, as he does, in calling it [A Merchandise] it
shall well become us to scan, and search, that we may see, how far, and
Wherein, the metaphor does mayntaine this truth; and make it appear, that the
odds and excellency lies here. And the more to enlighte^ us herein, let us
proportion THIS, merchandise, and MAN'S together, comparing the one with the
other, in such particulers, as wherein the correspondence will hold current,
and sound, by warrant from God.

To run through all passages, would be an endless race, and a fruitles endeavor,
taking up more time, then may be conveniently spared thereunto; we will not
therefore go that course, but strive to that way which may be nearest, and
clearest to the truth here intended, meddling only with such as are most
familiar to our notice, and most material to our purpose, and in opening
these, we will do our best to shun all extreamityes, both of incenes, and of
negligence, because, as it is not good, to be curious, so is it naught to be
careless, the one is jale, the other is evil, both are reproovable,
especially in matters of religion. It shall be safest for us to go that beaten
way wherein, we may look for Gods light to guide us, and to avoid all, corners,
and by-pathes. The evidence of his Word, to comfirme all we speak, the
assurance of his spirit, to comfort and quicke^ us in all that is spoken, are
the things we should seek for, the one makes it sound to our conscience, the
other make's it sweet to our experience, let us therefore labor for both
these, that so our instructions may become sensible to you, and you the more
happy by them.

Well then, let us approach to the main point; which we will first propound,
and then prove. And this it is.

GODS MERCHANDISE IS BEETER THEN MANS]: wisdom then for wealth, for Grace,
then for Goods, His commerce with us, does far exceed ours with one another,
and will be found (every way) infinitely more beneficial.

Who can doubt of this, that heare's the Lord himself both speak it, and urge
it, as he does? especially if withal he remember, what infinite knowledge, and
wisdom is in the Lord, that he is not as man, that he should be partially
over-affected to any thing he see's, or weakly over seen in any thing he
saye's. either touching his own graces: or touching our commodityes:


To set the one at too high a rate, or to undervalue the other, but most
uprightly to estimate both, in all equality, as they are, in their own rank,
and quality. So that his word which never failed, were enough to work any man's
heart to a full assurance of the truth hereof: howbeit, because, we may meet
with such faithless and unbelieving hearts as Thomas had, who must see and
feel before they will consent and confess; let us come nearer, and take
better notice of this truth, and we hope that in handling the point, we shall
have our hearts fully confirmed therein:

Let us look then, and pry into every particular, and (as it were) feel, and
put our fingers into them, and we shall find the prooffes of this doctrine as
undeniable to evince us, as the prints in Christ's body were to convince him:
and so from propounding what we say, we come now to prove the same.

That which we say is no more but this; that this merchandise with God, is
better then all merchandise with men. God himself says as much, and will bear
us out in that we say, by commission from heaven. But let us se (will some say)
wherein it surpasses? nay (say we) see if you can, wherein it surpasses not:
come along, and let us veiw some few things of many, that we might look upon,
and you will easily assent, that this is a true saying: and that we may not be
carried into any confusion in our jnquiry, and confirmation, let us range those
things into some order, which we produce for evidence in the point, and in
every of them the verity of what we speak, will appear unto us abundantly.

Let it then be carefully noted, and considered of us, that in three special
respects this trading has pre-eminence beyound yours, and every respect may be
in steed of a most apparent and incontroleable reason, to settle us in the
assured persuasion of the superabundant benefit of this heavenly and blessed
traffike.

Know then, that to the better being of this merebandise, these things do
concur.

1. that it has not some things that yours has. 2. that it bath some things
that yours has also. 3. that it bath somethings that yours bath not.
Some things are proper to your merchandise, alone, to wit, all that are bad,
as having any damage, or danger in them.

Some things are common to this with yours, to wit, all things that bring any
benefit.

Some things are proper to this alone, and not common, or any way communicable
to yours, to wit, all those most rare, excellent, and extraordinary
prerogatives (which may truly be entitled royal) because they are not
incident to terrenall trade, or temporary dealings, the things that are below
cannot be capable of those high advantages, which this does afford.

Now every of these will be most willing witnesses of our proposition, and
support it against all cavil and contradiction. And if in the prosecutio^ of
them (considering I must make use of your words) I shall not be so neat, and
exact in your artificial terms of trade, as the nature of Gods Metapher, and
the allusions thereof, to your merchandise does require, I hope you will
remember; that your words are out of our element, yet we will aim as near as
we can, for the illumination of your minds in this matter, and if we speak
jmproperly, pardon us, because we affect, rather evidence of prooving, then are
of speaking, in Gods matters. Our drift and main scope is divine, (so should
or hearts, and angues be too) we care not to be so complete, and accurate in
terms, as some are, who have more show of Retorike in one sermon, then
substance of religion in ten. And so we come to show the odds and excellency
of this trade in each of these three ranks before remembered.

First, this merchandise must needs be better then all other, because
whatsoever is bad in yours, is not to be found in this at all, it has nothing
that is any way evil, or jncommodions: and in yours there are many things (of
this kind) much complained off: as namely. Great, Adventures: Bad, debts. Bad,
commodityes. Bad, servants.


Here is a foure-folde danger, the hassard at sea is much, trusting of it in
sale is as much, many times your goods are ill conditioned, and some servants
are dishonestly minded: these are the means of many a merchants miscarriage,
and vndoeing.

But behold, this merchandise has none, (no not one) of these, let us sift
every one by it self, and we shall see it to be so. And first for Adventure,
we may be assured here is none at all, nor none there can be. Heavenly things
are subject to no hazzarde.

For your earthly, you must either abide the adventure, or buy the ensurance:
here neede's neither. All tradeing under heaven, in to all clymates, in all
commodityes, is more or less vnceartaine, and dangerous, and in the richest,
and rarest, there is most fear, because they are in places farthest remote,
But in this trade which is from heaven, it is nothing so.

God himself tell's us that wealth has wings and can, and will, fly from us:
that riches are vnceartaine: pro. 23.5. 1. Tim. 6.17. 1. Joh. 2.17. Jonah. 1.^
that they are things that perish: yea, that they perish in their using: nay,
that they perish, before they come to be used, even while they are in
transportation.

And some of his saints can say it by experience, who have fallen from a mighty
estate, to miserable poverty, and some (again) risen from a mean condition,
to wonderful wealth.

Yea some wicked men will witness it too, who tell us, Dan. 4.17.
that he that is great, God is able to abase; as it did well appear in the
fool in the Gospel, who let himself a long lease of many years, of all the
land and revenue he had, and, it was canceld, and expired the same night,
within few hours after he had sealed it, unto himfelf.

And if none of these had spoken it, your selves in that which some have felt,
and more have seen, would say it were as true as the Gospel, inasmuch as
daily news comes of shipwracks from one coast, of bankrupts from another, what
between fellonious Pirates, unskillful Pilots, unfaithful ser^ants, ill
wares, ill weathers, naughty times, jmprovidence in buying, oversight in
selling, and a multitude more such miserable and mournful instances, millions
of men sink in their states, and are dro^^n'd in these snares of the world,
what heavy catalogues of decayed men, come continually, who were thought great,
and prove worth little or nothing? what uncomfortable accounts does many a
merchant overlooke? that looked for advantage, and has lost of his principal,
(yea it may be his, whole principal) and that by those land pirates [I mean,
not those Bankrupts whom the Lord does humble, by casualties, incident to the
most honest among men, whose hearts are broken, more then their states, and more
(it may be) for other men's states, then their own, whose souls are more
woeful for want, wherewith to satiffy others, then for the wants they feel
them selves; these have both Gods comiseration, and mans] But the Bankrupts I
mean are those which break, with God and men both at once, who not
necessarily but villanously
make a rupture where none is, to jnjure others, and to enrich themselves,
building their own states upon the rujnes of many other men's, and in one act,
committing a four folae felony, in robbing God of his goodness. Men of their
goods. Themselves of their honesty, Many of their money.


My soul has a quarrel against these accursed cormorants, who devour
multitudes, and draw them into wonderful misery, to make up their own
mouths, not caring to overturne all trade, to raze the fondation, and pillars
of a common wealth, for the support of themselves; those are the vipers of
mankind, and the bane of the body civil that bred them; living, and gayning,
as the devil does, only by the vndoeing of every body they deal with. The
theife by the high way, the pirate at sea, the combination of all robbers, of
all roauers, are far short of these fellons: they profess stealing, and take
as much as they find, and a man knowe's what he lose's: these mystical, and
monstrous villanes, deceive and cousin us, in the use of our love to them,
confidence in them, commerce with them, that when we think we lend to do
them good, trust them with our goods, or trade with them to do our selves
good; behold, their fidelity is become felony, our kindenes is our damage,
all is lost we let them have they grow fatt with other men's flesh, and line
themselves with the skins, which they tear from all such, as they have traded
withal.

All and every of these (with more that might be reckoned up,) you know and
acknowledge to be as miserable, as they are manifest declarations of the
dangerous and vnceirtaine state of your merchandise, among men, and to that ill
pass, are the times, and the truth of men, now come, that you often tell us
(and too truly) you know not who to trust, how to be sure of your own, whom
to deal withal, without fear; of loss.

But in this trade and commerce whereof we treat, there is no such matter, nay,
there can be noe such miscarriage, in one kind or other: all is secure,
stable, str^e, and infallible, you need not fear, or doubt any thing in the
least. When we deal for our souls, we deal upon sure terms, and that we
might (as the Lord would have us) know this, we find him very plentifully
ensuring our spiritual estate unto us, by all kind of consirmation that can
be, 2. Cor. 20.21 Ps. ^9.35 Heb. 6.17.18.
by his promise. by his eath. by both together,


Yea by his whole self, who being wholly infinite, yet does ongage his whole
infinite essence (and all the unspeakable excellencyes, their in enclosed)
that nothing shall fail either of his goodness, to us, or of our good, from
him. What has Jesus Christ fayd in this case? has he not ^ssured us that h^ll
cannot prevail, noe not the g^^es, that is, the greatest power of hell? has
he not said that heaven must fail, before one jot or ^ittle of that which is
written for our souls comfort, shall be unfulfilled? Did he not tell Martha,
that that better part, which Mary had chosen, should never be taken from her?
Has he not bidden us to lay up for our selves treasures in heaven, and assured
us against all perils, that no theif^ can reach it, no r^^t, no mead, corrupt
or wrong it? all this, and much more has he said (of purpose) to establish our
hearts against all fear of any danger.

And as he has fayd thus much, so has he done much more. He has actually
undertaken to give us all security, that can be defired in this case. He has
secured us by his life, by his death, by all his obedience, both active, and
passive, what he did, what he endured, his rising from the grave, his ascending
into glory, and his perpetual intercession for us, at the right hand of his
father; all is for us, all this did he undergo (as it were) to under set and
prop up our hearts, that we might be fully confirmed in the sound assurance of
all heavenly happiness. These were all the dangers that might mischeife us: and
he has endured, and gone through them, that we might be free from all fear of
them, and having spoiled these powers, that opposed our best comforts, Ioh.
10.28.29.
he has assured us that we cannot perish, nor be taken out of his hand, and
bid's us be of good cheer, because he has overcome that world of our
enemies, that withstood us, and made utterly void all the venyme of the most
pernicious adversaryes we had, that they cannot at all endanger, nor any way
impair, these precious benefits. Satan our grand-enemy, he is trodden under our
feet: The world, and our own flesh; (his two main, and most hurtful
instruments of our evil) they are vanquished also: Nothing is left
unconquered, all is nullifyed, that might trouble us, in this our infallible
affiance, touching these things.

And hereupon, have the saints of God, been bold, and borne up themselves,
with all undaunted resolution of spirit. Job. 1925. Ps 116. co 2. pe. 1.19.
[I am sure my redeemer lives, and that I shall see him] says Job. [Ibeleeved
therefore I spake] says David [I know whom I have beleeued] says Paul. we
have a most sure worde] says Peter. And we may all say, we have a most sure
God, to our father, who changes not: a sure rock to our redeemer, who moves
not: a sure spirit to our comforter, who departs not, but abides by us for
ever. Here is sure work of all sides (we see), on Gods part, who would have
us settle our hearts, to make our election sure to our selves, for our own
parts. Never did any man, miscarry that was a true trader in this merchandise,
but every soul who has dealt soundly herein, was as ceartaine of his
spiritual benefit, as of his natural being.

Howbeit, not withstanding all that is said, yea, or that can be said, the
Devil (who is a mighty looser, by the manifestation hereof) does all he can, to
weaken, and infringe the faith of Gods elect, in this point of the faithfullnes
of God, that they may (like his vassalls) fear where no fear is; he does
daily fill their hearts, with this and that difficulty, thrusting, these, and
those jmposibilityes into their thoughts, presenting a world of jmpediments
unto them, to breed doubtfullnes, and distrust (yea, and ^espaire too) in
them, if by any means he may draw them thereunto, and affright them from that
affiance, wherewith they may most boldly, safely, and courageously repose
themselves, with joy upon the Lord.

But let us see what it is he opposes, and vpbraydeth us withal? Nay, (will
some say) what is it not, or wherewith does he not terrefy us? he sett's
heaven, earth, and hell against us, he persuaded us, that all things are
enemies to us.

Gods justice and severity. Our own sin and jmpiety. His own malice and
cruelty.
How are we able to witstand any one, much less, every one of these; they
being all far above our power.

Well, we confess they are too heavy for us to undergo; and would not only
endanger, but overturne, and drown all, if any one of them should be laid upon
us: but as the case stands, there is noe discomfort in them at all, though they
be put all together.

True it is, that God has much against, us, but it is as true that there is
absolute satisfaction made (on our behalf,) and so noe fear now, because his
anger is appeased toward us, his favor purchased for us, his love promised to
us, all reconciliation, all compassion eternally, and jrrevokeablely, assured,
and estated upon us.

It it also as true, that our own sins are many, and mighty, and simply
insupportable, and would sink us into the bottomeles pit, if their least
weight did lie upon us, but it is as true, that they are freely and fully
forgiven, and we reputed as guiltles, and accounted as jnnocent, as if we had
never committed any one of them: the Lord has laid strength upon one that is
mighty: and (even the strength of our sin, the whole law) and the curse thereof
he that is mighty has done great things for us, in carrying the iniquityes of
us all, and in being made sin, and made a curse for us, that we might be made
the righteousness of God, 2. Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13 14.
and so become (through grace,) to be everlastingly blessed with him, as the
Apostle speaks to the churches, of Corinth and Galatta.

And as for Satan's malice, howsoever it be much, yet it need to trouble but
little, nay, not at all, for he is a conquered, and a cap^i^ated enemy, killed to
our hand, and thrown under our feet, (as we heard before) well he may hate,
but he cannot hurt us, he may malice, but mischeife us he cannot: What is his
power, to the power of God that keepe's us? what is his subtilty, to the
wisdom of God that directs us? has it not most happily appeared that he has
been confounded in all his devises against us, and we comforted more
steadfastly; by that course, whereby he sought our rujne eternally? I think if
we look well into it, it is better with us now, then it was, before he began
to bring evil upon us. And what is (now) left of him, but the bare shadow, or
outside of an adversary, in regard of that he was, when he had power not only
to tempt, but to overturne us; but now he can only tempt us, we (in our Christ)
can ^verturne him.

Let us not then (like fools) fear, or discomfort our selves, or suffer
others to disquiet us with things of no consequence, in this our commerce with
our God. Say, our ships, be brittle, suppose our passage be boysterious; admit
what we carry, be corrupt, what is all this; when we further consider, that we
have an omnipotent Pilot, that can make our vessel thyte, the sea quiet, and
change our commodityes into better condition. The living God both can do, and
has promised that he will do, all this: and the more to assure us of so
much, it pleases him to utter and express his consolations unto us, in
seafaring men's terms, speaking to us, as unto men in sea dangers, Isai.
54.11 cap. 43.2.
saying [Oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempest etc.] and again, [VVhen
thou passes through the water I will be with thee, that the floods shall not
drown thee]; and by the apostle, he further tells us what good ground-t^kle we
have, to wit, an anchor, Heb. 6.19
sure and stedfast] that cannot fail us: though therefore some seeming danger
may show it self, yet assured danger there is none: something may appear very
perilous to our flesh and blood, to our frailty, ignorance, and infidelity, as
the grown sea, and the great billow, does to fresh water soldiers, who start
and shrink at every wa^e: but to our faith, and that power of grace given us
of God, nothing can proone terrible, howsoever it appear. We have a God that
can do whatsoever he will, Psa. 115.3.
and has power at his pleasure, to jmploy for our best good, and will do by
that power, according to his pleasure, whatsoever may any way redounde to the
happiness of their hearts, who unfeignedly defire to deal with him. Upon him, and
upon his power and favor we depend, fearing no present, or future peril, in
any thing appertayning to his kingdom, and those affairs that concern the
same. And in this resolution let all Gods saints set up their rest for ever,

For there is a crew of vpstart TRADERS, or rather INTRVDERS, I mean Papists,
and Arminia^s (I join them together, though the one be much younger then the
other, yet are both, late ^^vices in respect of the ancient truth of God) who
meddle, (or rather Peddle) in Gods merchandise, and tell men, that there is
great hazard, and adventure borne in this blessed trade, and no such manifest,
and undoubted security, as we plead, but danger of being ^a^k^^^pt, and failing
in Grace, in falling finally from it, and no c^^tainety of being blessed in
Glory, or assurance of being received into it.

Concerning these, I am persuaded verily, they speak as they think, and (I
think,) they find themselves, as they speak to others, for not being made
free of the fellowship of Gods faithful ones, the truth not having yet made
them free of the communion and corporation of the true saints; I can see noe
reason, (seeing they will be, INTERLOPING, in Error) but they should mistrust
danger, and meet with it too, and not enjoy the gracious previledgis, and
these most beneficial jmmunityes of that society, whereof they are not. And
seeing they are not members united, but monsters annexed thereunto, why should
they go upon as sure grounds as Gods own do. Especially seeing they will not
make God, so good a master, or his factors, so good merchants, as they grant
the Divill to be, for they confess that all that deal for him, are sure
enough of damnation, but of those that are agents for the Lord, it may be
doubted of their salvation, yea it is presumption, to rest infallibly upon it;
which if they spoke, and intended only of themselves, I could soon put it into
my creed, but being (as they mean it) universally true of the very elect,
what man (having the faith of Gods elect, in him) can believe it?

Some also there are among the multitude of our ignorant and vulgar
Protestants, who being neither well persuaded, nor at all experienced, in the
light, and power of this truth, think it something with the most, for any man
to secure his own soul of his eternal salvation: oh, say they, you must not
presume, but have a good hope, that all shall be well, it is too much to say
more. And is it so indeed? why then there is noe more safer, or faster holt;
of heavens everlasting treasures, then of the temporary vanities of the world,
for a man may say so much of them; it is not sin, to hope that such a ship
shall come safely to her port; and may noe more be said of the jmmutable things
of God, then of the worlds ^^oneab^es, which have so many ways, and means,
to miscarry? Are your conceits so gross, and confused, that they can put no
difference (nor understand the difference, Christ himself has put) between
the things that perish, and those that cannot perish? is it all one, to trade
with God, and man, in heaven, and in earth? in fadeing, corruptible, and
transitory tra^h, and in that enduring substance, which will outlast, both
heaven and earth? How prejudicial are these foolish sayings to his wisdom,
who evermore make's it a property incommunicable, a prerogative royal, to
spiritual things to be firm and not fadeing; and labor's (hereupon) to wynn
our hearts unto them, upon this consideration, that they are so certain, and
sure; and to weane, us from all things here below, because they are so
brittle, and unsound? How apparently, opposite is this speech to that of the
Apostle, who tell's us, that he was persuaded (and that thoroughly) that Neither
life, nor death, Romans ^.38.36.
nor, angels, nor principalityes, nor powers, nor things present nor things to
come, nor beight, nor depth, nor any other creature, (if any other could be
conceited) could separate him from the love of the Lord Jesus, in whom he
says, (not only of himself) but of all the elect of God, that we are made more
then conquerours, ver. 37.
through him that loved us, and in this especially showed his love unto us,
that he underwent, the brunt (and that most willingly) of whatsoever was
indeed dangerous, and by so doing, brought us from under the mutable freedom
of the first Adam, to be free from mutability, and miscarriage any more,
uniting us to himself, that (in the second Adam) we might be safe, and sound,
for ever.

Let this be remembered of us, and magnifyed by us, in him our Lord who has
done so great things for us, as to make us (in this thing) to be more happy,
then he, who was created in absolute happiness: he was without sin, not sure, we
are sure, though not without sin: his perfection (without Christ) made him not
free from mutability, and we (by Christ) are jmmatable, notwithstanding all our
jmperfections. So, now we trade upon better, (that is upon surer) terms then
he did, we cannot be so jnnocent, of evil, but we are more absolute in good,
then he was: he no sooner began to deal with God, but he broke straight; we
are secured from the first instant of our beginning, that we shall never fimally
fail.

Thus we see, this is the first priveledg of the first sort, which your
merchandese has, and Gods has not. ADVENTVRES are EVILS, and therefore they
are not incident to this trade, though to yours they be.

But this is but the first, and the beginning of the benefit of this trade, let
us look further for more encouragement to this celestial commerce, and the
further we go, the more good shall we still be sure to see. Set we then
toward a second, and that is this.

That as there is no hassarde in this heavenly trade, a bad debt, in all that
we deal for.

Noe BAD DEBTS can be made in this business, nay, no debts can be, made which
are not exceeding good, yea better, then all the ready money in the world, if
it were all aue to one man.

And this help's on the happiness of the former, for it all should come well,
arive safely, and we should (when it has passed all sea dangers) endanger it
our selves, in selling it, to untrusty buyers, who should not pay currantly,
where were the comfort of the former safety? where were the future benefit of
the commodity?

But if a man have it in sure posession, and sell it to such as will make sure
payment, then is he happy, and has his hearts desire.

And here it is so, and it cannot be otherwise; for why? who do we trust in
all we trade for? even HE alone is trusted, whose payment cannot be mistrusted:
we trust none but GOD, to whom we should be guilty of fearful blaspemy, if we
should harbor in our hearts, one jealous, or suspicious thought of inconstancy,
he being one [whose compassions cannot faile], Lam. 3.22
None but the Lord is our Debtor in the managing of this business: he who is
rich in mercy, Lord over all, rich unto all, able enough to pay; and as willing
as he is able, to give us content, nay (beyond that) more then we can ask, nay
(beyond that too;) more then we can receine.

We heard what alsufficiens security he has given us, by himself, by his son,
by his spirit, by his word, by his oath, by all, (and more then all) that we
could demand, or desire, to satisfy us. We all know, there can be no bad
debt, if the debtor be good, how then is there a possibility of any to be
found here, seeing we trust nothing upon any, but upon him, upon whom (we say)
we put all our trust: who although he by not (be any right that we can claim,
or challeagne) a debtor to any man, as owing any thing (by due) to his
creature, but (contrariwise) that all the world are debtors to him, and owe him
infinite dues, which are simply vnpayable (on our part) unto him, if he should
ask his own: Yet it pleases him to make himself, and to manifest himself, to
be our debtor, and of his own mere grace, and love, he will be see, assuring us
that we shall be paid to the full, yea, and that with unspeakable overplus;
and advantage.

He is content it should be said we lend unto him, Pr. 16.17
[He that is merciful to the poor, lends unto the Lord] and that he will be
our paymaster, [and the Lord shall repay unto him whatsoever he lays out] And
the payment he make's, the satisfaction and contentment he gives, is such, and
so excellent, as would ( if we well understood it) make us ever more desire to
have him more, and more, in our debt; happy is that man that has, or can have,
most debts standing out with God; the more, the better, he that is deope^^ in,
is undoubtedly most happy: and that for one special, and remarkable reason,
worthy of everlasting remembrance and observation, and that is this. That to
whom soever he once makes payment, made for ever. They shall never need to
trade more, who once are satisfied by this debtor, and the debt is as sure as
himself is, who is the debtor: it is not more ceartaine that he is in heaven,
then, that all (to whom he makes himself judebead) shall receive, plenary and
perfect payment, beyond all that can be either demanded, desired, or received:
his satisfaction is so super abundant, that we are not capable of the fullnes
thereof.

All bad debts come by trusting the world, or the Devil, or our selves, either
overmuch, or at all; for not one of them is worthy of any considence; they are
all three, so far from infallibylity, that they who most depend upon them,
shall find nothing but vanity and deceit in them. But he that relyeth upon the
living Lord, as sure as the Lord line's, that man shall be satisfied. There, he
is debtor, but he paye's them double,

Something they have in hand, they are presently paid in part, even in this
world, and in such a time as he knowe's may do them most good, and with such
either jnward, or outward comforts (or it may be, some of both sorts,) as they
are most fit to receine, and shall be most happy to have

Something is still resting to them, and remains to be received in heaven;
and that is the infinite glory, bliss, and felicity, which Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and the blessed Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, and those
jnnumerable spirits of just and perfect men, do enjoy, with all whom we shall
fit down in that kindome; and behold the Lord of life, and king of glory,
face to face, and partake those incomprehensible happinesses, which are
reserved for us (with them) there.

The least the Lord does ronder to us, (even of these baser blessings is more
satisfaction then we have, (or can have) right unto; but the best, (whether it
be of grace or of glory) does exceed not only our right, but even our thought
also, And hence it is, that we are (with so good reason) so often invited,
and incited by the holy Ghost, to Trust in the Lord] yea, [to trust perfectly
in him] to cast all our cares upon him: to, [commit both, our ways and our
selves, to him] and we are also told that [it is better to trust him then
princes] and yet we would think our debt good, and our money sure, if a Prince
were to be our paymaster; well, says David, it is better to trust in the Lord,
them in Princes he speake's it twice, that we may know he is well advised, in
it, and well assured of it, and to harten us here unto, he vndertake's we shall
never be confounded, or a shamed of our affiance in the Lord, who never
fails, Heb. 13.5
nor forsakes any one that truly reposeth his trust in him, Heb. 10.
and therefore would not have us cast away our confidence, which has great
recompense of reward. And none could speak this better then they that have
tried it, as both David, and Paul, and other of Gods saints have done, and in
like manner shall all saints do: if they can find occasion to do so, they
shall be sure to have occasion to say so.

With men, it is good (yea, be the men never so good, and sufficient) to get
in debts, because their state is mutable, their wealth, or their will,
mooveable, and it may quickly come to pass that they cannot, or will not pay,
but with the Lord, it is good to get him into our debt; for the longer it
run's, the larger shall our reward be, (if not before) yet at the resurrection
of the just, we shall be sure to have it to the full, yea, (as was noted before)
infinitely, far beyond all fullnes.

Again (which is yet more, more marked of us) his payment, shall not rest only
in our selves, the whole benefit of it shall not be ours alone, but it shall
extend it self, and reach to our posterity also; and this is much more then
any man will do at any time, but noe more then God will do at all times,
having protested his favor and respect to a thousand generations of them that
love him, and told us (many a time) how well many have fared for their fathers
sakes [The righteous is merciful etc (says David) and his seed enjoys the
blessig] and again [Blessed is the man that fears the Lord] etc [his seed
shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the just shall be blessed].

It is enough with men, and as much as either law, or conscience, does require
and command, that a man pay to one, if the debt be due to the father, (and
duly discharged) the credditor need not confer any thing upon the child,
being no way bound to pay one debt, to more then one party, but God will be
superabonda^t in what he does, no man shall be such a paymaestr as he is, for
beside the full, yea infinite comfort, and contentment that the father shall
receive, or has received, the child shall also reap some good thing from God,
because he was debtor to his father. The Lord was never in debted to any one,
but he paid more then one; as the scriptures do most abundantly testify.

Again, whereas among men there can be noe possibility of a bad debt to be
made, but the same must arise, either out of the ability, or honesty, of the
debtor, that decays in either, or both, we may be the more ceartainly
assured, that as in this merchandise there is none, so, neither can there be
any, because this God whom we only and wholly trust, who is to be blessed for
ever, cannot fail in either of these. God is the only debtor here, he make's
himself so; what heart of any man (unless of an jufidell, (...) or pagan) can
conceit, in the Lord, a possibility (...) in power or truth, or that he should
be any way incident to fail, in favor, or in faithfullnes? Can it enter into
the soul of any man, or may a thought hereof have any place, and entertayment
with a Christian, that he that is abone, should bankerupt, either by necessity,
or any other means? It were a most jmpious, and prodigious apprehension. How
should he want ability, in whom is all infinite fullnes, yea and all full
infinitenes also? How should he want truth or faithfullnes, to keep touch with
us, whose honor it is, (and ever has been) to hold with all, who ever dealt
with him, whose testimonies are very sure, yea most sure, and never failing,
noe not in any one, to whom (in the least thing) he was ever pleased to engage
himself.

Is he not [God all sufficient] as he told Abraham? yea, he who has all, Genesis
17.
alsufficientnesses, in him? the whole world can witness this (most truly) as
they are treatures: and millions of men (more comfortably) as they are
Christians. He never did, as many men do, run more in debt, then they are
worth, or have where with to pay: his debts are not of any necessity, as (most
men's are), but he will be a debtor only to whom he pleases, and none else; and
those to whom he is so, shall well see he does not, nor cannot disapoint them.

For why? (comsider I pray you) most men have power to make bebts, and to get
in with many, but what man can make money to get out, and give satisfaction
withal: if that were also in every man's power, who would be arrested,
jmprisoned, discreddited, and troubled for nonpayment? he were a man worthy of
noe pity, but of all extremity, that having a mine, and a mynt, would yet
lie by it, for debt: why the Lord our God, he has all this, he has as much
power to get out of debt, as pleasure to get in, rather then any shall fail,
he can create new comforts, and mynt new mercyes, if the fullnes of those
(already being) should fail: it is easy with him to make as many worlds, as
there are creatures in the world that is made: no, no, the Lord has tied
himself by such an jndissoluble band, that there can be no cause, (nay no
color) of suspicion of any fear hereof saying [Once have I sworwe that I will
not fayle] The heavens must want their fullnes: Psa. 89.35
the earth, the air, the sea, their abundance; all worlds must be emptyed,
e're the least of those that rely upon him shall go away disappointed: He has
speken, Ps. 132.11
and will not depart from it] (says David), he never went from his word yet:
all his words are faithful, and true, for he is amen, the true and faithful
witnes] he is God who cannot lie, as we have heard enough before: his word
being most true, himself more, even truth it self, what place is left for any
probability, of doubtfullnecistrust, or fear, in our hearts?

Now then, seeing all ill debts, come some of these ways, and none of these,
are any way incident to the Lord, they that trade here, may well, and truly
say, (even out of happy experience) that this merchandise is (in this respect)
far better then the mercha^dise of Gold or silver, because here is no
occasion of discomfort to any credditor, in any debt be has made, but t^^^
same is good, and current, he is sure to have it, with wonderful advantage and
benefit. God is capable of no necessity: nor culpable of any fraudulency, he
cannot over-trade himself, or be overseene in any thing he deals with us for;
how then should any thing be unsure? Who here among men that mourns not to
see the is tlamentable catalogues that come daily both of bad debts, and
debtors? I say of both, for every bad debt, does not argue a bad debtor; the
Lord may lay his hand upon some, and disable them to satisfy, where they have
received, which thing they would most willingly do, were it in their power,
and it does not a little perplexe them that it is not. The debt (in this case)
may be bad, but so is not the debtor, who not being any whit less honest in
heart, but more poor in estate, (and that by the hand of God) cannot be said to
be bad, unless it be in the construction of those base earth-wormes, who make
the world their chiefest good, hating poverty, as men do theevery. These (as
we said before) are the true objects of Gods compassion, and man's
comiseration, and he has no Christian heart, who lends not a hand (so far
as he may) to left up such, as the Lord has thus humbled, But for others, who
are truly called Bad debtors, from whom, God has not taken sufficitency of
means, but the Devil has robbed them of honesty of mind, to retain that
money to enrich themselves, which others ought, (by undeniable right) to
receive from them; what should I say, but what the Apostle once said, [Their
money perish with them], and they with their money, who thus gain it, and
retain it: yea, without repentance to God, and restitution to men, they shall
both surely perish, for the curse, (even the consuming curse) of God, cleaves
both to it, and them.

The catalogue of these caytiffes increases daily, it is long enoug (I think)
to reach from hence to hell, whereinto they shall all be cast, and be accursed
for ever, who upon pretended poverty of their own, do really rob, and
jmpoverish many. The Devil himself was never so bad as to make himself worse
then he is, as he has taught these vile varlets to do: it is his manner many
times, to make himself better then he is, (for his advantage) but never worse;
but these wretches, will feign to be poor, and penurious, even in despite of
God, and his good providence, who has take nothing from them, but given them
enough to give men their own, which because they will not do; he has
pleases to give them over to this new-founde, and most notorious villainy, that
their tail should be like the dragons, to draw so many down, as must fall by
their rising.

But of all those that ever had to do with God in this meraha^dise, can one be
named (in the whole world, or any age, or time thereof) whom he failed fully
to satisfy according to promise, and kindness too. All the Dinolls in hell
cannot instance any one, so exact and most absolute, has the faithfullnes of
God ever been to all his, in all things. Sooner shall the sun fail to give us
light, and the day to follow the night, then our God (sei^g he will be our
debtor) will fail us one jot: God himself has said it, we may therefore
safely believe it, and with joy settle our hearts upon it.

If we should, (nay if we could), survey the receipts of Gods servants, and take
knowledge, what they themselves have freely confessed, freely to have received,
it would soon appear, that they have had more then they can fully
acknowledge, and been made partakers of more then they could ask, or think,
Ephesians 3.20.
and that not a little, but abundantly, yea exceeding abundantly too, as the
Apostle witnesses. Nay if we enter seriously, and search narrowly, into our
selves, we could not but confess our receipts of kindness, and comfort from God,
to be many more the^ we can number, or account.

But we take so little notice (which is our great sin) of what God does cast
upon us, that we are not able ( as we ought) to cast it up, and feelingly to
confess it, either unto the Lord, for the landing of his name, or to men, to
lead them on, to the sound comfort, and benefit of this confidence.

And this is the second evil, incident to your merchandise, but exempted from
this. Let us come to enquire ter a third.

Thirdly, in this merchandise, nothing ill conditioned, nothing that is
counterfeited, or sophisticated, or that will shrink in any measure, but all
that come's to this Mart, is current, merchantable, and as it ought to be, in
every respect.

Noe man need fear, either cloth, or color, lengths or breadths, matter or
making, all is true, sufficient and without any fault, or exception.

And this you may well, and willingly believe, if you do but remember what is
the only commodity in request here, even [GRACE] so says our text, the
merchandise [THEREOF] that is, of wisdom and understanding, (named before,)
and comprehending all graces under them. This, and this alone, is salable here,
this (of it self) take's up the whole trade, all the doings, is for this one
thing, even for Grace, a commodity which is originally, and infinitely seated
in God himself, and graciously dispensed unto us, according to that measure
thereof, whereof we are most capable, and wherein we may be most meet and able to
honor him, who is the fountain of the same.

And how is it possible, that any of this should not be exceeding good, when it
flows from the Lord himself, and by him, is derived, and communicated to us,
through the purchase of Christ, by the power of the holy ghost: shall we think
that either, this fountain can yield any thing that is corrupt, or, that
Chrst would buy that for us which were naught. or that the holy ghost would
convay any thing, to us which is not good?


Far be all such jmpious, and unholy apprehensions from us, as (at once) to
blame, yea to shame, the blessed trinity, and to lay any jmputation, of falhood
upon God the father, or of foolishnes upon God the son, or of venity upon the
holy ghost: all which (yet) were most true, if any Grace that came from God
were unsound. So that in this trade there is no trash, or ill conditioned
commodity, offered to any.

But in yours is much, yea, (if yours, and all men's general complaints be
true) too much, he must be somebody that most so far see into a thing that
he may not be deeceived now days, inasmuch as many are grown from being
CRAFT MASTERS, to be MASTERS OF CRAFT and to live, and gain more by their
wits, in making a false commodity, then ever they did by the worth of a true,
studdying how they may, yet denying that they do, deceive. For that is the
manner of all Satan's art-smen, that their practice goes before their profession
in evil, but in good, their profession goe's not only before practice, but
without it also, because practice never folowe's. In diabolical dealings they
ever prastise, seldom profess; in divine affairs, they ever profess,
seldom, nay never practice.

And, as much of your bad ware is so cunningly, and artificially handled, that
it is not, nor cannot be easily discerned, but is taken, (or rather mistaken)
for good; So is it in this merchandise, (by Satan's subtilty, and men's
simplcity) come to pass, that many are deceived with the appearance of grace,
where the substance is not. The apostle tell's us that [Great is the mystery of
Godlines] and so indeed it is, and too great for us to know and learn as we
ought: and as true it is, that great is the mystery of Ungodliness (though
nothing so great, as the other) yet too great, for us to know, and shun as we
should. Hyprocrisy is spun with a fine thread, and made as fair as is
possible, to deceive the simple: and it does indeed delude the greatest part
of the christian world, misleading most men, and making them to think they
have saving, whenas (intruth) they have naught but deceiving Grace; that is,
that which they they thought was true grace, but were deceived by it.

Howbeit you most know that, this is not the merchandise meant here in our
text, all bad wares come out of the Devils warehouse, and his they are. Now
because they are so deceivably made, as that such multitudes are gul'd with
them, it shall be good for us, and it will be well worth our labor, and learning,
to endeavor (as every man does in his own element) to get some skill to
discern between true and false Grace, that you may be able to put a
difference between, that which is sound, and that which is only seeming. And
so much the more does it stand us upon, so to do; because if we be deceived
in this one thing, we are utterly undone for ever, and if we be not, we are made
for ever, and ever.

Let us fall to it then, and look well about us, for though here be more
difficulty, then in the most cunning collusion of any temporal commodity, yet
is it no j^possibility to try it out most manifestly upon good advise, and
diligent search. Some few things we will note therefore wherein Gods true
commodityes, and Satan's sophisticated vanities
may be well known one from another, though they seem to be both alike, both
in matter and color. Among others, note these three.

1. Seeming grace come's not from the same fountain that sound grace does,
They have not one father, nor one author: that which only seems is from
below, and it is carnal, sensual and divelish, Iam. 3.15
as the Apostle speaks: but that which is substantial, comes down from
abo^e, from the father of lights, from whom comes every good and perfect
gift, cap. 1.16.
as the same Apostle does also witness.

But, it may be, (some will say unto us) this is most true that you say, yet
are we not the wiser, for we know not how to know, which is from abo^e, which
is from below. Yea, but you may if you do carefully mark, whither it tends,
how it works in man. For as natural things do tend their own center, so
(in like manner) do supernatural things evermore incline to their own
author, whence they came originally. That saving grace which is from above,
will carry a man upward in all respects, it will make him heavenly minded
toward God. heavenly tongued toward men. heavenly ly^ed before God and men.


The affection, the communication, the conversation of that man who has it,
will be all of things that are above: do but mark well how kindly, holy
speeches fall from him, what occasions he takes, nay, (rather then fail) what
occasions he makes, to vent his graces, that he may employ them to the glory of
the giver, and the good of every hearer, all that flowe's from him will fly
upwards as the sparks do, that is naturally, freely, and of it own accord:
that which is sound and came from God, will to God again, from whom it first
came.

But that which is from below, (though it have some show as if it were from
above) has not this property, to ascend freely of it self. Indeed Satan
force's the hypocrite many times to seem very pious, and exceeding zealous,
and the hypocrite, forces himself to the uttermost, that he may appear unto
men, so to be, and by them be apprehended, and taken, for a true Jsralite. And
to this end he arme's them with all infernal subtilty, and cunning, to
conterfeit the carriage and demeavour of the dearest, and most conscionable
saints of God. But wise, and wary observation, will soon detect this wicked,
and diabolical juggling.

For why? they cannot but bewrayed, if we note, either, the time of the
continance or, the manner of utterance, of these things


For all that is done by this seeming grace, being but strayned, and forced, we
know that [ What soever is violent, cannot be permanent] for some time it may
hold, to delude others: but it cannot hold out, to discharge themselves,
either in the sight of God, whose pure eyes do pierce into the depth of their
consenage; or before the face of such men, as keep a wakefull and jealous eye,
upon their daily carriage, especially in matters of religion.

Or put case, it make some sorry shift to shuffle out a little longer then
ordinary, yet during the term it abides, this outside grace, has not that
free, frequent, and native operation, neither does it work so kindly, or
flow from the hypocrite with that facility at any time, that it does from the
faithful at all times, There is allwaies as much odds (to the eye of an
experienced, and understanding christian) as between the water that falls
from heaven, or flows out of the earth of it self, without man's endeavor,
and that, which is drawn out of the earth, and sprinkled upon it, by great
pains and labor. The dissembler knowe's this to be undeniable, inasmuch as
his borrowed Grace does not, nor cannot, bear up his heart to heaven, or call
him in secret before the searcher of all hearts, without, and beyond, any notice
of man, to humble and abase him before the higest majesty, and to raise him
again with those jnward and unknow co^sosations, which only they that are
intimate with their God, do find and feel. Noe, his Grace (like a ^arcase)
must have some other jmpulsive cause to move it, for of it self, it cannot
find work for it self. But that which the Lord gives unto any, he does ever
draw it again to himself; and his spirit from whence (as from a fountain) it
issued, is ever causing the stream to run from whence it came, and the same
spirit will still be pressing and provoking that gracious heart, toward those
blessed things that are above, by the secret and silent motions of the same;
and upward will the mind mount, with all alacrity. From God it came and to God
it will go.

2. Seeming grace, spring, so neither does in run through the same channel
that sound grace does.
It is not wrought in any man, by the same means that true grace is: and the
careful search of this, will soon show whence it is: Do but ask and enquire
diligently whence he had his grace? how he came by it? and when? when was the
time? what was the means? who was the instrument of that which he has. The
Lord does work noe grace in the hearts of men, but by the ordinary means he
has assigned and sanctified thereunto, to wit by his word, in the ministrey
thereof. And the work of his spirit with his word for the begetting of grace,
he does compare and assimulate (in the scriptures) to such things as whereof, it
is an utter jmpossibility to be insensible, or to let them slip, out of mind,
and memory.

Among many other, we may note that the coversion of a sinner to
sanctification, is likened to two observable things, that leave everlasting
jmpression in the soul of man during all his days: namely, to a man's
marriage: and a woman's Travayle: and that because in the first moment of true
grace received, we are espoused to the Lord, and bornea-new unto holiness. And
who is he or she that can let go the memory of either of these remarkable
things? Can we be united to the Lord Jesus, and not know how it came? Can we be
disburdened of so many mighty jmpietyes as must out, when grace gett's in, and
be ignorant of their departure? in both, can sanctity be entertained and Satan
abandoned, without feeling? did the one ever come in, or the other go out, so
quietly? can there be such a supernatural and divine change, and nothing a
do, or (at least) so little, as that we cannot tell how it came about? Nay,
those many and mighty sins will not part from us, nor those celestial graces
come so peaceably to us: our separation from them, and union to Christ, will
cost more then so; yea they will make us cry for very grief of heart, with
Rebecca, why am J so payned? it is no freindly, or kind combat, that is
fought between corruption and holiness, when they come to disposesse each
other: noe, it is the devils manner when he must out to rend and tear when he
goe's. Now the converance of grace being resembled to these things, to our
marriage to Christ, when he, and we are made one; and to the misery of her that
travaileth when she, and her infant become two; let any hypocrite, show how he
came by that he has, and discourse, of the means, and manner, how men are
united to Christ, and parted from sin, and if he affirm he has found both
these, press him in the perticulars, and ask him touching the nature, and
order of Gods working in these cases, and put him to it, and ask him if it be
possible that a man should have the sun in his bosom and not have
extraordinary, and unspeakable light, and heat; or be a posessor of Jesus
Christ the sun of righteousness and not express it by rare and powerful
operations, in matters of piety and religion.

Who, (in nature) has ever lived so long, as to forgett either the time of
his traivaile, or day of her marriage?

I think the earth can hardly yield an instance of any one that has done so.
Neither is it easy (if possible) among all the true conver^s in the world, to
find one that has forgotten that he was purged from his sins, and posessed of
grace; and who has wholly let slip the remembrance of the time, places and
means, wherein, and whereby, this eminent, and mighty, work of God, was
wrought in him. Yea though it were not by any man's public preaching or
ministrey, but by some private passage of reading, conference, or prayer, of
another, or by some affliction of our selves, or some of ours, or some other
hand of God, by which he (some times, yet much more seldom) draws some few
unto himself. The work of God in the transfiguration of a man, from sin to
holiness, and translation of a man from Satan, to himself, is marvelous, and
must, and will, (where it is thoroughly wrought) leave an everlasting, and
judelible jmpression in the party who is partaker of it. Should a Prince raise
a man from beggary and baseness, to honor and greatness; or bring a traitor from
the gallows, to the court, were it possible either should be unremembered? and
can this greater, and far more glorious work of God be blotted out, and
forgotten?

Now if being thus pressed, and put to particulars, the hypocrite should be (as
generally they are) forward to answer, that such a minister, at such a sermon,
treating on such a text, discovering such a point, did touch and work upon
him; then put that party to it thoroughly in that particular, be earnest upon
him, to discourse of that point, and to signify in what manner, and order it
wrought upon him? where it began, upon what corruption it wrought, how it
proceeded? what grace it first effected? and then what followed in the order,
and course of that celestial working? and if he be any thing free of
discourse (as many are, and any may be, out of some general jllumination in
such passages) then, for further, and furer trial and satisfaction, provoke
him, and cease not till you have prevailed with him to pray, and pour out some
request to God to the same effect, which he avouched, he once thus felt in
himself. And either in the former, or in the latter, or in both, this pretended
grace, will be taken tripping, it being but coined, (though he may make the best
of it, who forged it) it cannot go current with others, who are truly
experienced in the power of both: no, no, it will fumble, and fownder, and
fail, in these practices, which must have more then shadows, to perform
them, as they ought; and as they are enabled to do, who jndeede, have felt
them.

3. Seeming grace, as it neither come's from the same spring, nor goe's through
the same channel, that substantial grace does: foe neither can it (by any
means) perform that, which saving grace can do.
It is jmpotent, and wholly unable to kill any corruption, any, it can well away
to dwell with it, yea, and to cherish and foster it also, and (to say as the
truth is) it is given of Satan, to be the nurse of all gross wickedness, which
is the better convayed, under the cloak of this bastard goodness. Gal. 5.17.
But the grace that is given from God, by his spirit, lusts against our
flesh, and is jmpatient of the communion of any corruption, but does
continually combat, and skirmish with it, and conquer's, and gett's ground of
it more and more, not ceasing to make a daily, and a deadly war, against the
same, without any terms of truce, prosecuting it with a perpetual, and an
unappeasable enmity, without all admission of parley for the least
reconciliation.

It is also of as little power unto good, as unto evil, for why? it cannot
grow, or increase therein: and no wonder; for it is but the perewigg, or
picture, of that grace which is true; and you never heard that the picture of
any man's body, or the perewigg on any man's head did grow, or augment (in any
respect) as the living man did, though it might be never so like him in many
respects; noe, they stand at a stay, (as painted trees do), without any
mutation, or addition.

Now, do but note these two in any man whom you may have cause to mistrust,
take heedefull notice how sin dies, how grace growe's, mark carefully if you
can observe any corruption to consume, any fruit of the spirit to come on, and
you shall not easily miscarry, or be deceived, in the discerning of him, at
whom your Christian observation does aim. For all the power of men, or policy
of devils, is not able to give augmentation to any counterfeit; that which is
not true, cannot grow, all the wit, and art, in the world is not able to
effect it; and therefore, though, through the infernal and deceivable working
of Satan, there may be very much, (yea, so much) consimilitude in this
appearing grace, that it cannot (in other respects) be very quickly, or lightly
discerned from that which is powerful, yet, when the hypocrite, and the devil
have used their vtwost skill and cunning, to deceive; and combined together,
how they may most cunningly hyde that dissimulation, wherewith they delude men,
this one thing they can never attain, to add unto their pretended grace, that
any power of proceeding may be perceived in them, by him who has a peircing
eye of understanding, and looks therewith, and not with spectacles, (as men of
weak sight do) to whom small letters seem to grow greater, and greater,
then they are, or can be made to be.

Painted fire grows not more hot, neither does pictured water, become more
cold; the one flameth not, the other flows not, more then at the first
paynting: the artificial and well wrought perewig, (before mentioned) though
it be indeed the hair of a man, and may be so exactly closed to his head,
who weare's it for a cover to his baldnes, that it cannot be known, by color,
or closure, but to be the natural hair of his head that has it, yet it is
not his own, he must (if by any accident, 2. King. 6.5.
it fall off) cry, as the poor man did, of his hatchet that fell into the
water, [Alas it was but borrowed] and howbeit it may be hard, by any other
external appearance to know it to be so, yet by observation that it is ever of
one length, (seeing there is no possibility of le^gthening it) it is most easy
to know it to be, but as it is, not native, but adventiciall, noe work of God
for the bodies necessity, but made by man to cover an accidental deformity:
and so being still at a stand, and ever of one and the same size, eyery one
that observes, can soon see, it to be that which jndeed it is, and not that,
which it did (in some nice semblance) seem to be.

And the hypocite knowe's well enough that thus it is, and that no good thing
does, or can thrine, within him for want of that root, and moisture, that must
give life unto it. If one should appeal to the soul and ask the conscience
of the most notorious among them, whether he found any feeling work of God in
himself, and had now, stronger and more powerful operations in his heart, that
his zeal should be more fervent, his lone more affectionate, his whole jnward
man more enflamed after all good, more enraged against all evil, and that he
perceived a daily addition of a greater measure of sanctification, he could not
but condemn himself with his own mouth; or, though his jmpious heart could
abett, and embolden his jmpdent mouth, to belly himself, yet his life would
bewray his grace to be linelesse, inasmuch as the power of his progress is
palpably wanting, in their eyes, who does precisely observe the same.

And thus we have (by the way) a taste of some few of those many differences,
that are between true and false grace, among which I have (on this occasion)
observed these three, for the present, reserving the more full discovery
hereof, to a further time, and treatise,

In the mean time, now we see, that this our heavenly traffike is free, from
all bad, or base, or ill-conditioned commodityes, and that none are saleable
here but what are sound, and current, all other, (whatsoever it may appear to
be) is prohibited, and not vendible in this merchandising, whereof we now speak.

It is sound, and substantial grace, that passes here; it is as jmpossible
God should deceive us, as that, we should deceive him, with any other; no, no,
he has no trash, all we trade with him for, is absolute and of the best.

his gold is [tryed by the fire.] his silver is [purifyed seven times.] his
[bread is bread indeed.] his [flesh is meat indeed.]
To be free of the heavenly corporation of these happy merchants, (whereof
Christ is the only head, and governor) is to be free indeed: every thing is
real, the earth cannot yield any one commodity so universally current, and
staple, as every one is, that we trade for here.

And this is the third eminent advantage of this merchandihing, above man's, and
such an advantage it is, as might, and ought much to animate and inflame men to
be dealers herein, rather then in the richest society under heaven; who would
not be willing, and free, to buy and fell, where he knowe's he cannot be
deceived, but shall be sure of the best?

We now proceed to a fourth previledge, this. That in this trade there neither
is, nor can be, any BAD SERVANTS, any untrusty factors, no broaker, or agent,
can deceive or abuse us in this heavenly business; which yet in civil and
earthmerchandise is most usual all places do swarm with deceivers, men make
daily, and doleful complaints that they know not who to trust, or how to be
secured of that which the put into others hands,

But in this commerce, it is a mere jmpossibility that any one such should be
found, among all that ever did intermeddle in these divine affairs. And least
this should seem strange or incredible, you may be assured of the truth hereof
sufficiently, if you do but consider the reason of the same which (in a word)
you may understand to be thus much. That in the managing of this merchandise,
no man is, or may be permitted to have his affairs ordered by any other, but
every man is for himself, none else, can be for him. Noe deputation, or
assignation of any, is alowable, by the terms of this tradeing, what we do
must be done in our own persons, and not put, or entrusted on any creature,
either man, or Angel.

The Lord (the most wise disposer of these divine affairs) never gave liberty
to any freeman of this society to take auother, to do, or deal for him, in
any part of these passages, every particular whereof, require's our own
personal presence and practice, because all others are jncapable of this
employement on our behalf, and cannot do us any good, or stand us in any
stead, though we should presume to put them in our places.

Undeniable evidence of scripture, and jnvincible reason do concur, in one
consent for the justification hereof, that no man, in the managing of this
divine commerce, may justle in another, and shuffle out himself, in any thing
that is here to be done; for he who put's in another, put's out himself.

The current of the scripture run's strong this way, let us look upon the
stream, and we shall see it will overbeare all opposition, by the voice of
God, who by all his holy ones, has left his mind written touching this
matter. By Solomon, who says: [If thou be wise, Pro. 9 12. Hos. 10.^^
thou art wise for thy self.] By Hosea, who advises all people to [Sow to
themselves in righteousness.] By Christ, who exhorts us to [ Lay up treasures
for ourselves.] By Paul, who tells us that [ Every man must give account to God
for himself.]


And many more whose testimonies it is needles now to multiply unto you, by
jnnumerable instances, which might be produced, if there were any reason to
doubt, or demurre of this: but so far is it from that, that all reason does
assent unto it also. God thinks it unreasonable that any man should drive this
trade, do this business, by another, or by any but our selves; and we cannot
but be of the same mind, (and think it good reason) if we mind well, these
few considerations that follow.

1. These things are too high, excellent, and precious, too heavenly in their
nature, too heavy in their neglect, to be committed to the care of any, but our
selves, upon any terms.
The least of those things that belongs to this bufines lye's upon our life,
yea it concerns our eternal life, (which is infinitely more then our
natural) the happy gain, or woeful loss, of our everlasting bliss, and
being with God in the inconceivable foelicityes of heaven, for ever and ever,
stands upon our well, or ill looking to our estate in these passages. If we
look well to it, it cannot but be well with us; but if we fail herein, we are
undone in body and soul for ever, heaven is lost, we are lost, there is noe
prison, or punishment for such as break in this trade, but hell, from whence
it is gross folly, to have one hopeful thought of any recovery.

Now, what man is there (among men) so slight, and careless, that in matters
of this weight, and jmportance, wherein, and whereupon, all happiness, or misery
does consist, and will be assuredly consequent; will repose must in another, and
cast the care of his present, and future state, upon any agent whatsoever? we
would deem it no discretion to do it in temporal things, whether natural,
or civil, if either did touch our lives: and is it not monstrous dotage, to
offer it in these spiritual things, the meanest whereof, carries greater
consequence then the whole world and all things therein, can do.

Things of common and ordinary rate, which reach not to our making, or marking,
we dare cast upon other men, but of the main, we will be respective, and look
to that our selves, not trusting to others eyes, (save in petty things) but our
own shall be jealous, and vigilant. But in this merchandise, of grace nothing is
mean, or unworthy, of our most serious care and consideration not a commodity
we meddle withal but all lye's upon it, and the least of these, does as far
exceed the greatest of the earth, as the soul does the body: or, eternal
life, does our natural: or heaven, the earth, in happiness. or hell, our
temporary crosses and losses, in unhappiness.


There is not, neither can be, any proportion or comparison conceited between
these, the one being foe incomparably beyond the other in all excellency,
commodity, and whatsoever else may be apprehended to make a thing unspeakably
happy.

Who then can, or will, rest upon others in these things, which are of so high
a nature, so absolute necessity, so excellent in advantage, so miserable in
damage? surely none that has reason in himself can see reason, to do thus.

2. As the things are too high to be trusted upon others, so is God (with whom
alone we have to do, herein,) too good, to be served by any underlings of ours.
He is most worthy that we should our selves, in our own person, (and that in
all the powers of our souls) serve him in these affairs: and we are most
unworthy (at our best) to deal with him; how then can it be tolerable, that
we should set others about it? we our selves are but servants, in this
negotiation (he only that is in heaven is a Master) and shall we appoint him
other servants of ours, and set them a work in this so worthy an employment,
wherein the best of us is too bad, and unworthy to intermeddle. Dare any subject
offer this to his Prince, to send another in his place, at what time our own
presence and attendance is required, and that then, when the honor of his
crown, and safety of his person, is to be preserved, The majesty of a mortal
man cannot endure any such deputation, as to be served at second hand, by their
inferiors, who are his jmmediate officers. And do we dream that the highest
majesty of the jmmortall God (who is so high and excellent) can brook to be
thus basely abused of us, that we should turn those that serve us, to serve
him for us.

Every where, we are called upon in our own persons, [Thou shall do this, or
that] no where, is it allowed that, [Thou shall do it by another, or another
shall do it for thee.] The Lord has not dealt so with us, as by any other,
either in heaven or earth, to redeem us, but by himself, yet all men know, he
might, and could, (had he so pleased) have done us all good, by other means,
then his own jmmediate working, yet he would not, but did it himself to give
us an ensample, and by this blessed work of his own, to upbraid (most
righteously) all such as should dare thus jmpiously to idegenerate from so
dealing with him, in their bounden duty, as he has done with them in his
marveilous and most ab^ndant mercy.

3. The advantage of another man's industry, cannot (by any means) be made
ours, in this merchandise.
There can be noe kind of conveyance made, that is good in law (I mean in
Gods law,) whereby the grace that another gets, may become or be made over
to us: that which he is, and that which he does, is for himself, and it is his
own, no other man is capable of the comfort, or commodity of it, inasmuch as
in all Gods courts of justice, there is no Office of alienation, from one's
self, and of assignation to another, our own graces remain for ever
inseparable, to our selves, or, (as I may say) incommunicable from our selves;
if we have faith, it is our own, we have it to our selves, and we live by it,
it fares with our spiritualls, as with our naturalls, that as we cannot
breath, or eat, or evacuate, or live, for another, but the bensfit of all
these is our own only; so neither can we believe, or hope, or be humble, or
zealous for any but our selves alone: these treasures admit no transtation to
any, they cannot be conferred upon others, we are most sure to enjoy all the
happiness of our graces, in our own hearts only, without sharing any jot, or
whit thereof, with others.

Our Romish merchants, the cheaters, and cunnicatchers both ofmens consciences,
and purses, tell us that the works of supererogation which some have done, may
be cast upon others; they have a tricke^, to give one man a good little, to
another good works, and know which way to put this man's overplus, to that man's
penury: wherein, they are grown so honest, and such true men of late days,
that they tell us but, two lies at once to wit, 1. That some men have
superfluity of good works. 2. That they may be made over, to others who want.


Both which how abominable, and blasphemons they are, were easy to declare, if
it were mere to digress into a discourse of that kind. But we need not make
use of much wit to refute such senseless assertions; we will only (for this
present) send them with their fellow fools, Mat 25.9
to be answered by the wise virgins, of whom, when they begged some of their
oil [Give us of your eyle etc.] they were told, that there was no such
matter, [not soe] say they, it cannot, it may not be, we cannot give away our
grace, we cannot (noe though we would) part with any of that anointing which we
have received from God: you must even go where we had ours, [and buy for your
selves] as we have done.

Now had these fools been but so wise, as to have gone to Rome to buy, they
had been surely sped, (but indeed there is none to be begged there:) yet
before any fool ever go, I wish him to be wise in one thing, and that is
this, that, if he go to buy, he make as sure work for the others piety, as
the priest will make for his money: I hope they may be taught (at least) so
much wit, as not to give something. to get nothing.
and so to verify the proverb, that [a fool and his money, are soon parted.]

But we may not dwell upon the condemnation of such dotage; this one thing is
most true, that it was never the Lords purpose, to alter the property of any
man's graces, that there should be any possibility either, to get them for
another. or to give them to another.


This merchandise does not consist of any such mooveables, as may be shipped from
one port to another, or transported from one person, to another: noe man has
any power either buy from another or, to sell to another,
in this trade, wherein all our dealing (touching the attayning of any thing, or
parting with it) is only, and wholly with GOD himself, from whom, (and not
from any other) we receive every grace we have, and to whom, (and not to any
other) the fruit of it must return, for the greater furtherance of his glory
by us, and the better assurance of our glory, in heaven with him.

So now, sum up these three Items, and see what utall will rise up on it:
namely this, that if God be too good to be honored by any, but our selves.
that if these things, be too great to be trusted upon others. that if there be
noe communicating of any ma^s grace, to another.


Then must every man in his own person, be an actual trader in this commerce,
here the proverb has good place, [Every man for himself,] in these best
things, no man is for another.

And if thus it must needs be, that every man must be his own agent, what
fear, is there of (...) servants, when a man must be untrue, and untrusty to
his own heart, and state, himself, or he cannot be badly dealt withal, and if
any man should be so, who could pity or commiserate him that cannot be his
own friend, but will be unfaithful to his own soul.

It is memorable that the Lord says on either part by his holy Prophet: the
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon himself that. the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon himself: and that.


What we do, for evil, or for good, it returne's, and rest's upon our selves.

Seeing then we need not fear others, let us care for our selves to make our
election sure, to work out our own salvation; and seeing others cannot deal
for us, and that we cannot say (as in too many civil occurents we can) that
others have undone us, let it never be said we have undone our selves. Yea, let
us think it a happiness, and heartily thank our God for it, that he has
pleased thus to appoint, that none but our selves shall be trusted to do for us
in these best blessings: we are so much the more sure, and free of that fear,
and care, which oppresses the hearts of many in the matters of the world, least
they should be deceived, and overthrown by those, in whose hands, their
business lye's.

And this is the fourth thing, which is proper to this heavenly, but not to
your earthly, tradeing.

And all these four, flowing from the first rank of those inconveniences,
evils, and damages, which are ordinary in your trade, but not incident to
this, yours being full of them all, this being free from every one of them:
hence it is, most apparent that in these regards, this commerce does
exceedingly surpass yours, inasmuch as nothing is to be found in it, which may
put a man in any fear, of loss, or the least disadvantage whatsoever.

For why? we see. All is safe at sea, there is noe adventure, All is sure a
shore, there is no Bad Debts. All is current, there is no Bad Commodityes.
Nothing can miscarry, there are no Bad Servants.
These four are the diseases of temporal dealings all trade is subject to
them all, and sick of some of them, yea any one of them alone, is able to
decay, nay to destroy, all merchandising: how many, have sunk under the loss
of Adventures? and others by bad Debts? and have not bad wares, and bad
Servants broke the backs of others?

Behold, our merchandise is sound in all respects, and free from every of
these miserable maladyes, here is nothing adventured; nothing endangered;
nothing ill conditioned; nothing deceivable: all we send arive's safely, all we
sell is paid for honestly, all we deal for, is good commodity, all we deal
with, may be trusted for their fidelity.

Thus having freed this our celestial tradeing from all evils, in the
manifest and eminent exemption it has, from all and every of those
inconveniences; mustered in this first rank, wherein it partaketh not with
yours.

We are now (by due order) to set forward toward the second rank, and therein
to show, that as it has none of the evils yours has, so also, that it has
all the good things that yours can have; and further, that it exceeds yours
in the goodness of every one of them. Look what is good in yours, is far
better in this: you have nothing that is any way beneficial, but the same
benefit does exceed, and superabounde in this business.

And for our better evidence touching the full assurance of this truth, let us
take a veiw of all things that you account gaynefull and commodious, and see if
this trade do not exceedingly out-goe yours, in every one of those particulers
which you repute any way advantageous.

There are but three ways, or means, (known to me) whereby your proffit and
benefit come's in, namely, Sales: of commodity for money. Bartars: of
commodity, for commodity. Exchanges: of money, for money.


And in all these three, and in each of them, it is most easy to manifest how
this spiritual trade does overmatch your terrenall,

Let us begin with SALES, (and then with the other two in their order) and in
them, you shall soon perceive the peereles advantages, that these traders
have, beyond all that sell the richest merchandise under heaven: Your selling
come's nothing near this, and that you your selves would say, if you knew all.

Nay, if we instance but in a few, of many particulers, it will soon be seen,
where the odd's does lie, even in every particular incident to your Sales, in
any respect. For why? it is not in your power to sell.

either, when you will. or, what you will. or, to whom you will. or, for what
price you will.
You are free in no one of these, for, your time is stinted when you shall
sell; and the buyer will stint you what you shall sell; you cannot choose your
merchant to whom you will sell, nor pitch price at your own pleasure, how
much you will have.

But the celestial merchant is his own man in every one of these particulers,
he is admitted to make the best benefit he can of them all, and barred of none,

Let us ponder and take notice of them a-parte.

1. time of selling, we are to know, that all time, every opportunity, is both
most free, (and which is more) most fit, to buy and sell the best things.
none is exempted as not free, none is selected as not fit, it is mart-time (in
this merchandise) all the year long, yea, and every day of our life, is
shew-day; no man need be out of doings an hour to an end, no nor a moment,
but by his own default, either in want of providence to foresee his affairs,
or of diligence to follow and go through with them.

It pleases almighty God to bid us come and buy at all times, and all the
times of his calling us to buy, are also our seasons and opportunityes of sale;
for we can buy nothing of him, but we must sell something to him. Now that his
buying times are perpetual, without the least lymitation, or intermission, is
a thing abundantly witnessed in the book of God, both by Solomon, Pro. 23.
who speaks indefinitely without determination of any time, and therein,
bidd's us [Buy the truth] at all times: Js. 55.1.
and by the Prophet Isaiah; who make's open proclamrtion to all persons [Hoe
every one that thirsts etc: come buy etc.] and can we think that to be
restrained to any one time, which is open to all comers? And these
proclamations being jndefinite, and unlimited in the letter, cannot be bounded
in their sense to any particular opportunity, or set season, because it is a
mere jmpossibility to conceive, that all can come at once: he that has made
it open for all traders, has also made it open for all times, wherein any shall
come to buy of him, according to his prescription; to wit, while he does sell,
and offer's himself to be graciously found, of those by whom he is faithfully
sought.

His warehouse is never empty, his shop-windowes never down, he keeps no
holy days, (I mean for play-dayes) nay, the holiest times, are ever the
happiest for this commerce, and when least business of the earth is to be done,
(nay when none at all, [out of the case of most urgent necessity] may be meddled
withal) then is the only gainful season, of enriching our selves, with these
divine, and rare advantages. You have some dead times when there is nothing at
all to do; and some not very quick, when there is but little to do, and you
very often, (and too truly) complain of both; but here is none of either,
unless our dead and vnquickened hearts do make them such unto our selves; he,
(even our God) with whom we deal, has nothing which he does invite us to
buy, but the same will ever vent, and is vendible day by day: nothing of his is
subject to be either out of request, or out of fashion, or to lie vnproffitably
upon any man's hands that has the same.

Thus universal, and perpetual, are these times wherein the Lord would have us
buy; and the same are our times, and seasons of selling, unto the Lord. And so
regardfull is he of our good, that he set's us no time to begin, because, the
first day, and hour we can take, is not, nor can be too soon to set upon this
blessed and most beneficial business, wherein whatsoever does prosper with us,
does abide for ever by us.

He that has found this pearl, Mat. 13.44.
went incontinently to sell all he had (out of hand) to buy the feilde wherein
it was hyd, he knew it to be of such worth, that he part's with all he is
worth, to purchase it; and he was a true Merchant; cap. 19.12
for unto such a one is the kingdom of heaven compared. The young man (in the
same Gospel) was willed to do the same, but being not willing thereunto, he
kept his base earthly trash, and for want of the true treasure, he soon became
bankrupt, and lost the wealth of heaven, to gain the pelf of the world. Yea
our Savior Christ, Luke 12.33.
who knowe's how to enrich us absolutely, persuades all men to this practice,
to sell all, and provide them bags of such treasure as cannot fail.

According to which counsel of Christ, Act. 2.45
the new-converted Christians, began instantly in their temporalityes, to put
them away, for the purchase of these celestial riches, and were content (and
that willingly and of their own accord) to let all go, cap. 4.34.
laying down their whole estates (made into money) at the Apostles feet to
dispose as they pleased, for the common good. And as it was with these new, so
will it be with all true, Converts, they will never deem any thing too dear,
to obtain these incomparable commodityes, but let all go and that with all
expedition that may possibly be made, knowing that delays are most dangerous
in these dealings, and that many a man has been utterly undone for ever, by
careless neglect of the time he might have took.

Most true it is, that while this time lasts, no part thereof is inhibited,
but we may make use of every moment; howbeit, it is as true, that this time
will not last ever, and therefore, if we loose and let slip our opportunity,
and tarry till the Lord has shut up, we shall be sure to be shut out, and have
no entrance, and then we may go to buy with those fools, Mat. 15.10.
who came as wise as they went, and having once overstood this market, could
never after get admission to come where these happy things were to be had. But
during the days and means of grace, while the Lord offer's opportunity, (and
that is for an cleaven of twelve hours in the day) we may buy and sell with
him freely, without any such intermissions as men use to make; who (as was said
before) sometimes may not sell by order: sometimes will not, hoping the time
will be better. sometimes cannot sell, wanting a good customer.


But here is no authority to bar us, no bad time to hinder us, we cannot want
any thing to procure our eternal wealth, if we be watchful of our time, to
take it while it may be had. And let us take very special heed, that we do
not let it slip, because in the loss of it, we loose our selves. Seeing then,
no such casualtyes of time are incident to this trade, let us add this unto
the rest, and esteem it so much better, then that, whose seasons and
intermissions are in men's discretion and determination; and by how much the
times hereof are better, let us be more industrious to bestow them to the best.
And this is the first advantage in Sales,

2. As yon cannot sell when you will, what you will, neither all times, nor,
all things are common in your trade. For why?
Some commodityes you must want, as not being within the lymits of your
merchandising; Some you may want of those that are: it is unlawful to have any
of the former; and it is unusual to have all of the latter. Besides, all that
you have to sell must be good current, and well-conditioned, else it will not
sell, or if it do, (through your collusion) you do but deceive them that buy,
and show a mind that is naught, in putting that upon any man, which you know,
is not Good.

But our sales are far otherwise, for the greatest and best, are of the
things that are worst; he is the best merchant, who sell's the worst ware.

This (you will say) seeme's exceeding strange, wondered at, as a most
prodigious paradoxe; yet is it, as really true, as it is seemingly incredible,
and that we shall soon be persuaded of, if we remember our selves well, and
consider, that we cannot buy any thing that is Gods, but we must sell something
of our own, and what have we of our own, but that which is is stark naught,
even our sin and corruption.

To sell that which is not our own is no honesty, (besides, in this trade it
is an jmpossibility) and if we cannot, or may not sell ought else but what is
ours, naughtines is all we can do away. And this we sell, naught but this, is
in our power to part with.

The first father of us all, old Adam, sold, and jmbezeled away all our good,
even all the glorious (though mutable) graces, that he (and we in him) had from
God, and left both himself, and us, stripped bare and naked of those admirable
excellencyes, wherewith we were clothed in our creation; since that day, and
hour, we have had nothing of our own but evil, this only we posesse, and
this is that alone we sell.

Now least any man should think thus within himself, if this be all you have
to sell, who may be, or who will be our merchant buyer, to bargayne with us for
any such base stuff? we are to know, and understand, that the devil was not
more willing to bereave us of the best grace we had, in our blessed estate,
then the Lord is, to receive at our hands, (yea and to reward too, us for,) the
worst evil we have, if we will depart with it and do it away, with honest
hearts.


Did ever any evil person overlay him yet? can any man bring too much to him?
was he at any time clogged with the over-abundance of any jmpious person? or
has he turned away or refused, one, of all that came to unlade themselves of
the heaviest burdens of their most hellish jmpietyes, yea though they were
never so many in number, never so notorious, or monstrous in nature,


The power of the devil could never infuse that abomination into us, but the
most egregious, and grossest of all those evils, that ever inhabited our flesh
and blood, being brought before the Lord, and by us, unfeignedly bewailed in his
sight, was taken from us: the records of holy writ do tell us of some, that
were as bad as any might be, among those who might ever come to be good, who
were disburdened of all their heinous jmpietyes, and endued with many most
heavenly graces: if I should do more then name the parties, and begin tell you
(at large) their stories, it would be too tedious for this time; they that have
any accquaintance with the things that are first, and last written of Manasses,
of Mary Magdalen, of Paul, (and some others that might be instanced) can tell
you that this is an undoubted truth which we now avouch. The last of the three,
(even Paul) for his part did jngenuously confess himself the foulest sinner
of all those that Christ came to save, and therefore give's us a most special
Item, both of the general proposition, that [Christ came into the world to
save sinners] and also, of the particular aggravation and application of it,
in, and to himself [Of whom, I am the cheife] that is, among all sinners that
ever found grace at the hands of God, I am the greatest, and grossest, as I my
self, do judge of my self.

The man that bring's most corruption, is most welcome to this mart, and sure
to have a customer for it all, the Lord will take from him all he does, or can
bring, if he have an upright purpose of heart to part with it; yea let him come
as often as he can, and bring with him every time as much as he can, he shall
carry none back with him for want of vent, in case he do intend indeed to
leave it all behind him.

The forenamed Merchant who is so magnifyed in the gospel, is said to sell
all to buy that Pearl: lo, he sold all; what all? even all that he had; why,
what had he to sell of his own, (being a sinner) but sin? who bought it? why,
even he of whom he had the Pearl; and so with the sale of all his sins (how
many, or, how monstrous soever) he parted with them, and made purchase of this
invaluable gemme, and compassed it into his own posesion, to the everlasting
enriching of himself both in soul and body for ever.

Go thou and do likewise, carry all thy corruption to Jesus Christ, if thou
come unto him, he will not put thee away; take thy whole load with thee, and
cast all thy burden upon him, he has promised to ease and lighten thee, thou
shall neither be rejected, nor vpbrayded, for bringing so much.

No man is truly miserable, but he only has so much as he cannot bring it, he
who has a heart so sinful, that it will not suffer him to go to the Lord
Jesus to be unladen of his transgressions; his case is heavy; his state is
hellish, and lamentable. If once a man's sin be grown to that desperate power,
and measure; that it will overule his foul, that it shall not go to seek
means of freedom and release, from the bondage thereof, he is in woeful
taking, for why? the Devil who is so predominant in him, as to keep him from
coming to Christ; does keep such a sinner (whom he can so witholde) for
himself, and by making him incapable of the purchase of Christ, it is apparent
he purposes to make prey of him for himself.

But he that can come let him come, he shall return unladen of all his evils,
and carry sheanes for his weeds (even all good, for all his evil) with him.

And is not this a singular benefit of this trade above yours, that whereas you
must bring commodityes to fell, we may sell our jmpietyes; and whereas you
often receive bad for good, we are sure to ever receive good (yea the best) for
our bad.

3. As you can neither sell, when you will, what you will, so neither is it in
your power to sell to whom you will.
You must take, and (sometimes trust too,) such as come, it is noe way possible
for the merchant-seller to please himself, and make choice of every
merchantbuyer, to have only such as he would have: noe, sometimes good men come
not to buy, sometimes they are taken up by others, e're they come to us; and
you trade with such, now and then, as you take no such content in, but you
could even as willingly they should leave, as take your commodity.

But in the sales of this merchandise we have one who is in constant and
perpetual custom with us, who deale's most currantly, in taking of all we
bring, upon terms of admirable advantage: we cannot cloy him with often
coming, or with too much, as often as we come to fell; there is no need we
should fear, or care, to find sale, for he will have all that we have at all
times.

And that is our good God, he, and he alone it is, who is our buyer, we fell to
him, and to none but him, who is God to be blessed for ever, who will carry
away all that come's, and buy all that is brought to him.

And he that would wish any other to deal with, it were pity but he should
keep to himself, that, which he might fell to the Lord, and by retayning that,
(the sale whereof would so enrich him,) sell himself under the eternal curse
of this God, which is denounced as most due, to seize upon all such, as will
not depart from their jniquityes.

But most vain it were to wish for any other customer for our corruption; for
none but he will take it from us, if he ease us not of it, we must be for ever
burdened with it, and abide the misery, and mischeife of it.

For why? who do we think, we can deal with all, or who can we think, will
deal with us, in this case for our corruption?

The Devil will not buy any sin of us, he fell's it to us, and is so far
from diminishing any we have, that he endeavors to add more unto it, and to
increase that we have, if we have any good, he is ready to rob us of that, or
to truck with us (by some satanicall slight or other) that we may be deprived
thereof: but for sin, he is the sole founder and Author thereof, all we have
come's from him, and having, once fastened it upon us, he will none of it
again, upon any terms.

The world cannot take any evil from us (unless by pollution, and that make's
it more ours, though it become, in some sort, theirs,) if we deal with men, it
is easy to get more, but in no wise to lessen that we have already.

It is the almighty only, who is our merchant, to him we may go, and be sure
of sale for all we can bring: no other but he, none better then he, to deal
withal in this merchandise; he that knowe's not this, is miserably
blindefolded of the devil; and he that (knowing it,) does it not, is woefully
bewitched by him, to keep that within him, which will for ever destroy him,
before that God, who would, (had he unfeignedly sought it,) have eased him of
all his evil, and enriched him with all good in steed thereof.

4. You cannot sell for what you will, force a market, and make it as his list,
but must be content to take as the time will afford.
Sometimes good proffit; sometimes little, it may be none, now and then, but
some loss, such is the vnceartainty of your trading. All times do not yield
advantage.

But behold, the trade we now treat, and talk of, is more then a little
better, for all the bargains we make therein, are exceeding beneficial unto
us: and that will be easy to conceive, and believe, if we take notice of two or
three things.

1. It is impossible we should be absolute loosers, and have nothing at all,
for that we fell.

And that, because we have to do with him, who is the fullnes and infinitnes
of all things; from whom (he being so) it is simply impossible that nothing
should come.

2. If we had nothing for what we put off, and part withal, yet could we loose
nothing.

And that, because our sin and corruption is less, and worse then nothing; it
is a happiness to be rid of that which is evil, though nothing should come in
place thereof.

3. That which we have for it (be it much, or little) it cannot but be good.

And that because it come's from God, from whom as nothing cannot come, so
nothing but good can come from him, he being Goodness it self.

And so all we have is clear gain; no man that ever dealt with the Lord,
ever made, either a loosing bargain, or but a saving, neither of these can be,
(for the causes and considerations aforesaid:) the least that ever was, was
great advantage; who can think it to be otherwise, that see's what he does,
or vnderstand's, that he sell's his sin, and saue's his soul.


And what gain, yea, what unspeakable gain this is, he only can manifest that
feels the happiness of it in his own heart.

In this particular then of Sales, this trade is evermore a gaynfull trade; and
it cannot but be so, for (if you mark it) our text, make's merchandising, and
gayning all one thing, and take's it for granted that if a man trade he gains
without question, do not the words jmply it, when they run thus [ For the
merchandise thereof is better, etc. and the gain thereof etc.] lo, here is
nothing but merchandising and gayning, not a word of any (no not the least)
loss, to any trader. They who entertayne this course of spiritual commerce
may safely resolve on that which others presumptuously made account of; to wit,
of [going to such a place, and tarrying there, such a time, and buying and
selling and getting gain,] these reckoned (I say not without their host, but I
am sure I may say) without the Lord of hosts, whose sufferance, and
assistance, was never entertained into their thought as a condition, or
consideration needful to be taken with them: and therefore they were sherpely
taken up, and reprehended, Jam. 4.
because they did not, (as they ought) say, [if the Lord will.]

But to us, the Lord has revealed his will in this thing, and to encourage us
with the assurance of that in this heavenly traffike, which the best earthly
tradeing can have but in hope, he has told us, that if we do buy and sell,
we shall ceartainely get, and gain: for tradeing and gayning, are inseparable
companions in this business.

We never read of any in all Gods book but he gained; Psalm. 119.
they that were the greatest doers do tell us that their advantages were
better then [thousands of Gold and Silver] yea and beyond all treasure. And
they who have been happily experienced in these affairs have found that work
of God to be true in themselves, which his word has affirmed of others.

Thus we see in the first of these passages that we find in this second rank,
(to wit, our spiritual sales) how well we speed, that all we sell is for
gain, and for no small gain neither.

The which that we may the better understand, let us set upon the second
beneficial advantage in this commerce and that is that, which you call
BARTERING, when one commodity is done away for another.

And in this particular we are as far before you as in any other before
named; nay further benefit and greater riches does this way arise, then by any
of those which we have (hitherto) discovered.

And the apparent truth thereof, may plentifully appear unto all men, in the
due ponderation of one thing, which if it be well weighed, will sway with us,
and persuade us fully of the same. And that (in a word) is this.

That whereas in all civil barters which are made between man and man, one
good thing is set against another, and one commodity is exchanged for another:
In this blessed tradeing it is not so, but in the bartars between God and
man, the Lord give's us good for evil, and putt's his graces upon us, for the
jmpietyes we put of to him.

The world does not yield such traffike, it is not to be had among men, if any
merchant should do away a current, staple, and well-conditioned commodity, for
some baggage stuff, that were base, and not vendible, it would be jmputed to
him either for egregious folly, or gross injury, or both: all that should come
to know it, would account him exceeding sottish that should do it.

But behold, that which were wonderful folly or injury, with us to do, from
man to man; is the Lords doing between himself and us, and may most worthily
be accounted an admirable favor, and mercy, in his majesty, toward us
miserable transgressors; who (above all things) are bound to magnify his most
glorious name in this thing which is (and ought to be, according as it does
well deserve to be) marvelous in our eyes, and to be sought out, considered of,
and sought after, of all that love the Lord, especially, of all those, whom he
has loved in this kind.

For of this manner of merchandising, and of such a kind of commerce as this
is, it may well be said (as the jews spoke of that mighty miracle of opening
the man's eyes who was borne blind) [Since the world began, Joh. 9.
it was never heard] that any man has done such a thing, to give away good for
evil, yea, the best, for for the worst.

It is the Lord alone, who bring's all things out of nothing, in creation. all
good things out of evil, in regeneration. all light out of darkness. all mercy
out of misery: yea all grace and piety, out of sin and jmpurity.
it is his goodness, and his glory thus to do, and all that are good, cannot
but glorify him for thus doing.

When the Lord Jesus had reprooved, yea, and vpbrayded the Laodiceans for all
the evils that were in them, as their pride, presumption, selfe-conceitednes,
and luke warmenes in religion, he persuades them to part with these things, and
to work them to a greater willingness and forwardnes thereunto, he tell's them
what they may have of him, in lein of them; to wit, many and sundry excellent
things; eye salve to annoint their eyes: gold tried and refyned by the fire,
etc: even all things that might make them truly, and thoroughly happy

And upon the same ground, did our savior advise the young man that came so
forwardly to him, to enquire the next and nearest way to heaven; why (says
Christ) sell all, and give to the poor, (and because thou shall not think it
a loosing bargain, know, that instead of that thou put away here) thou
shall have treasure in heaven: lo here is treasure for trash, yea, heavenly
treasure for earthly trash.

Who but God would, (yea or could) give this, and make such blessed battars
with us? as to let us have and enjoy, gold for dross, yea the finest gold, for
the foulest dross; precious rubies, for base rubbish, things excellent and
jnvaluable, for those that are vile and exeecrable? It is he that does it, it
is we that receive it; we leave what is loath some, and have what is lovely; he
whose mercy is above the heavens has done thus unto us, and holy is his name,
who for his own names sake does endue us with holiness, yea, [he make's us
partakers of his own holynes] so soon as we furcease our hellishnes, if we
let go our dung, he let us us enjoy and posesse; those blessed and dearest
advantages, which Christ Jesus has bought with his blood.

Who can praise the Lord enough for this, or sufficiently advance his name, who
has wrought thus for the happiness of our hearts? who having nothing worse (then
that which is best) to give, for the worst we have; does not therefore refuse
to trade, and intermeddle with us; and so send us away empty, without any
thing; but is graciously pleased to entertain commerce with us, and to bestow
upon us his blessed graces, for our cursed jmpietyes, his sons robes, for our
own rags; the righteousness of Christ for this wretchedness of ours.

Oh dear, and welbeloved Christians, would God that we could spend some hours
in the heavenly meditation of this thing, and think of this happy merchandise
in this one respect added to all the rest. Did we but enter the serious
consideration hereof, what evil could be beloved of us? what sin would be dear
unto us? were it possible that any Jmpiety should have the least place in our
affections, if this were well pondered of us? who would give house-roome to
dyrt, that might have as much money as his house would hold, if he would but
cast the dyrt out of doors? were we persuaded of this, and posessed with it, as
we should be every evil would be abhorred of us, abominable to us, and well
worthy our greatest excecration, seeing so long as we keep it, it keeps out
those singular, and surpassing excellencyes aforesaid, and as soon as it is
voyded, we are presently filled with them.

Could any merchant, be excusable among men, that should refuse such a
beneficial bartar as this, as to have some rare commodity, for some ordinary
drug: he who should do it, would be thought a fool and a dolt, if he dealt
for himself, and no less, but (it may be a knave, which is more) if he were
entrusted to trade for some other: would any man think him fit, or worthy, for
any merchants business, that should neglect, and let go such a market, wherein
so much benefit might be made, by bartaring away a mean commodity, against a
good?

And are we not then condemned of our selves, (beloved) even out of our own
mouths, nay consciences, if in this heavenly trading we let slip such singular
advantage? and is not our condemnation so much the more just, by how much,
these kind of most commodious bartars are ordinary and common between God and
us, whenas among men, they are rare, and unusual, and not every day to be
found.

Common did I say? nay, they are continual, in this traffic, for there is no
other, neither (indeed) can be, for how should there? whenas it is undeniable,
and past all question, in all that have to do with the Lord in this blessed
business, that it is not more ceartaine, that he has nothing but good to
confer upon us, then it is, that we have nothing but evil to put away in
steed of the good, wherewith he does posesse us.

If there be any dealing between the Lord of heaven and us, it is, it must be,
it cannot but be, of good on his part to us, for evil on our part, toward him:
inasmuch as nothing else is to be had of neither.

They who have brought the worst, have carried away the best, as might be most
manifest in those forenamed examples of Manasses, of Mary Magdalen, of Paul,
and such others: which I speak not to encourage any man to be naught, [A good
heart will never make such bad use of any thing] but to comfort those who have
been so; and now, from their souls do desire to be better, that Satan may
not keep them away, and quash them with their conceit of being too vile, seeing
they who have come to the Lord, and with whom it has pleased his holy majesty
to entertayne this gracious commerce, if they have brought with them the
grossest vices, they have borne away, the greatest graces.

And this is not only to barter evil for good, but the worst evil for the
best good. So that the more wretched we come, the more rich we go: he who was
most ungodly, goes away most gracious.

So that if in respect of things that are evil, any man shall say as sometimes
Peter did touching things temporary and civil, [VVe have left all and followed
thee, what shall we have?] it may be truly answered to them, as by Christ it
was to him; that if he that foregoeth lawful things, shall receive such
abundant reward, much more shall they who do relinquish things sinful, find
that unspeakable favor and advantage before spoken; yea and (as it is added
there) besides, over and above all that can be conferred upon him, here on
earth, to make him truly gracious, he shall be sure, in the life to come to be
eternally glorious, with that God, who has not disdayned (out of his special
grace) to deal with him, upon the terms whereof we now treat.

And thus shall it be done to the man whom the Lord will honor, even to that
man, (who in thus doing) will honor the Lord, as we have said, in
relinquishing all his jmpiety, to do it away for holiness, Every such trader,
shall find abundant benefit on earth, and infinite blessedness in heaven. The
end of this course is endless comfort.

And shall we need to urge any other arguments, or by more powerful evidence
to persuade men, or to plead with them, to forsake and surcease all sin, whenas
(beforehand) they know they shall thus gain by giving it away. Of this I am
sure, an Elect sinner, needs no more, though it might be had; and (seeing more
cannot be enforced) he that is not prevayled upon by this, does thereby
proclayme himself no better no other, then a reprobate. Gods evidence are
prevayling with his elect; and he that rejects them, it is a most sure sign,
that God in great justice has rejected him.

Let us then rest persuaded, yea resolved herin, that in this business of
celestial trading, as we can fare no better, so we shall fare no worse, but
according to these words. It is not more experimentally true toevery man's
feeling, that our great and universal grandfather Adam, did undo us all;
when he so wretchedly made away his created and perfect grace, and fell into
sin, and so became eternally accursed; then it is unquestionably true to every
man's faith, that by this bartar (of which we speak) we shall be made men,
again, and that for ever, and ever: his copeing with the Devil was not so
ill, as this of ours, with the Lord, is good: believe it, this advantage does
equal, nay wonderfully exceed that damage.

Let no man fear it then, but every man (in the fear of God) fall to it, for
we may be (nay we shall be) worse offered if we refuse so great goodness as this,
then which, it is absolutely jmpossible, to be better offered. He that is wise
will ponder these things, and (upon deliberation of them) put himself
jmmediately upon their practice.

A man seeing he might have but a temporal advantage of this kind, (though
nothing near so good) yet would he in noe wise (for it were no wisdom to)
foreslow it, it should be the first match he would make least some other should
prevent him of it, or undermine him in it. Why then, by how much better, and
happyer this heavenly dealingis, by so much let our haste and expedition be
the greater, to attain the advantage thereof, that (through Christ) we may
purchase to our selves this rich portion.

It has been the manner of all Gods children to make great haste, to all good
things; to run and not leyter; to force themselves, and not linger, about them:
what they have once gone about to do, they have done quickly, and that upon
the considerations, whereof we have spoken before, in the time of this tradeing.

Let it be our care to do in like manner, and we shall find mercy in the same
measure, that is, abone measure, even that which is infinite, and boundles
blessedness.

And thus, in the second thing, of this second rank, to wit, in Bartars, you
see we are beyond you, and that so far, that none of yours, come near any of
ours.

We are now to pass on to the third, and last, of this range: wherein we shall
not be more behind, but (as in both the former) much beyond you also, and that
is in the point which you call EXCHANGE.

In which it is well known that you are subject to much vnceartainety, and (by
reason thereof) to some loss, by the rising of it in one place, and the falling
of it in another; as also by the vntrustines of some of them upon whom the
money is taken, and who are to discharge the bills at sight, or at time.

In both those, your damage sometimes may prove double, as (no doubt) but to
some it has done.

But now, that exchange which is in use in this celestial trading is ever
ceartaine, and assuredly gainefull. Ceartayne it is and undoubted, for there
can be no reason why any man should mistrust his money, never was any one of
his bills protested by any under heaven for default of non-payment; whosoever
has been to receive any thing, he (or whosoever shall be) is sure to have it
discharged in due time. The Lord is not behinde-hand with any man, he is debtor
to none, nay, so far is he from that, that he is much beforehand with every
man, and that may all men truly acknowledge, to the honor of his name, and
happiness of their own hearts.

And as it is thus ceartaine, so also is it as ceartainely beneficial, and
comodious; never did any receive a bill, but he got by it, and was much
benefited in the receipt of the same.

These two advantages do not evermore attend your exchanges, nay sometimes you
have but one of the two, and sometimes (it may be) neither of them. If the
exchange be beneficial, the man may prove naught, that should pay the bill; if
the man be sure, yet the exchange is variable, and may fall out worse then we
accounted; a little time may turn our gain into loss, and bring benefit to
damage, and when we reckoned so much was woonne, it is possible that a few
months may turn our figures, into ciphers, and bring all our profit we
thought to gain by our commodity, within the price we paid for it. These Bills
have been bad weapons to beat down many, some have been so beset with
them, that they have been forced to fly. It is jmpossible that any man should
so foresee times, as to know how to pass his bills with undoubted benefit and
advantage at all times.

But our traders are most sure, both of good payment, and of good proffit also.
Who can call either of these two into any question, that consider's that (which
in all the particulers before-going has been so often remembered, to wit)
that in this (as in the rest) we deal only, and wholly, with the Board our God,
who cannot fail us in any thing.

If we look upon his own promise, or upon his saints experience, how
plentifully will both these appear unto us? what child of God has ever
received by exchange from the Lord, but he has had both sure payment, and
great proffit?

Have they not evermore received good for evil, ( graces for gross jmpietyes)
at the first exchange they ever made? as we have said more then once already?
and when they have come again, have they not brought many wants, and gone back
with celestial endowments; and done away their lesser evils (even their
infirmityes) for more graces added to those they had before? And when yet
again they have come the third, fourth, tenth, hundredth, thousandth time, as
often as they would, or could, from time, to time, during all their days of
sanctification; have they not received more grace for less, a greater measure
for a meaner, and gotten those good things now to abound in them, which before
had only a being.

What may be the meaning of that of David when he says [they go from strength
to strength?] or of that of Solomon, who tell's us that [ the righteous shine
more and more as the sun to the perfect day?] Or of that which John has, where
he avouches that [of his fullnes we all receive grace for grace?] Or of that of
Paul, where he tell's the Romans, that, [the righteousness of God is revealed
from faith, to faith?] and the Corinthians, that [we are translated from glory
to glory?]

What (I say) may all these graduall speeches intend but to tell us that we
have more for less, more strength, more knowledge, more faith, more joy, more
grace (of all sorts of graces) then we had before, evermore a greature measure
for a smaller; and this not for some once, or so, or but seldom, now and
then, but continual, yea, perpetual, till we come to appear before the Lord,
at the the great day of his appearance when he shall come to judge the whole
world.

A child of God never come's into the presence of the Lord to employ any grace
he has received, but he receive's more to it: still more, and more, the
multiplication is continual, the augmentation ever abiding, more faith to
faith, till we come to receive the end of our faith, which is the salvation of
our souls: more grace till we pass to the end of grace, which is endless glory
with the Lord our God, who is the sountaine of grace.

Thus like a good stoek of money well managed, our graces are still bringing in
something upon us, and adding to that which we had attained before, he who is
still doing with them, and laying them out wisely, shall be sure daily to get
something by them; if we send them out with vprightines, they will (without
question) come home with proffit.

Two talents gain two other talents to them; five talents gain five more; the
church of Thiatyra had her happiness in this, that [her works were more at the
lost, then at the first.] Thus is it most true, that [to him that has shall be
given, and he shall have abundance,] as Christ faith.

In temporal exchanges, a man may fish all night, and forecast all day, too,
and catch nothing, nay, it may be, when he has done his best in both, he may
lose something, because of the mutability of times, and diversity of tradeing
scarcity or plenty of money, or commodity, may occasion the disappointment of
the wifest man's expectation.

But this business is never bad, much less worse, and worse; nay it is (and
will be) ever better and better; ever more mending and prospering, in all the
passages of the same, yielding not only better for worse, but more good for
that which was less.


He that makes over any thing, is most sure to receive more, it is not possible
a man should deal with the Lord, and have nothing added to his spiritual
estate, at any time. Nay, whereas exchanges are usually beneficial to you, but
at some times, (and those not the most neither,) inasmuch as you often meet
with with many miscarriages, the exchang here, is all-wayes such as cannot be
capable of any danger, of damage. It lies not in the hands of merchants, or
power of any man, to raise it, or pull it down; it is only in the Lord, the
most able and liberal paymaster that can be, to dispose and order it,
according to the good pleasure, and wisdom of his own will. All times are
proffitable, all seasons are gainful, to them that have to do with him, it
matters not for the time of the year, one part is not more quick, then
another, for there is no dead time at all, (no not a moment) in dealing with
the living God.

Neither can one time yield too much, or another too little, to vary it, but it
abides (evermore) most beneficial to every one that does conscienablely, and
wisely bestirre himself in it.

So that now we see, these exchanges do in all respects excelle yours.

And thus in all the three particulers of this second rank, this trade is in
better case then yours; and so we have made good two parts, of the three,
(whereof we spoke in our first division,) so that it is now without all
controversy, that both we are free from all the evils yours has. and also,
do more abound in good things then yours can do.


Whatsoever is jncommodious in yours, this has noe part at all with it;
whatsoever is proffitable in yours, this has more part in it then yours can
have. So that in these two ranks, you are below us, and we above you.

There now remains only the third, and last, and (indeed) the best of all
the three, and therewith we are to accquaint you for your more confortable and
resolved encouragement, to betake your selves to this blessed business, and not
to be wholly taken up by that other, which (compared with this) is not once
worth a meing.

The which, as it has (in some part) appeared to every man of ordinary
understanding, by those things that have been spoken in the two former ranks,
so will it most plentifully discover it self (for every one's plenary
satisfaction in this last, and best property, (or prerogative, rather) which we
have of purpose reserved till now.

And that is this, that this our heavenly merchandise is not only fully void of
all evils, and does overflow with all the good that yours has, at the best;
so now, it is in the third place to be noted, that over and above both the
things above mentioned, it has some things peculiar to it self, and not common
to your terrenall trading, or communicable with it in the least.

And that is in some singular (yea, I may well call them superlative)
excellencyes, wherein it infinitely overgoeth all earthly employments, and noe
commerce among men can receive them. So that this last rank is of such good
things as this has, and yours has not, but remain and are reserved, as
inseparable comforts, and benefits thereof, as being too superlative, for any
inferior occurents of the earth ever to reach unto.

I may well and truly say they are superlative, and every man may most worthily
account them so, who shall observe, and consider (as he ought,) either, that
which our text says in general ver. 15. that [all thou can desire are not
to be COMPARED to her,] to wit, to the things we now treat off: Or, the
particulers themselves that do so exceed all degrees of comparison with
terrenall tradeing, as that they are the sole excellencyes of this celestial
commerce.

And this their incomparable excellency, in their most royal prerogatives
above all terrestrial, trash, will abundantly appear, if we bring them both,
to the balance, and so son as they shall be laid together, it will be seen
how heavy these heavenly things are, how light, and slight, those of the world
will show themselves to be.

We have seen already, how short they come in those good things wherein yet,
they have some share, and carry some kind of consimilitude, but now they come
to be poyzed against those supernatural and most proper prerogatives, whereof
they have not only no part but in truth noe appearance, we cannot but jmagine
they will be found, as as nothing, yea less then nothing. as vanity, yea less
then vanity.
not worthy to be (comparatively) so much as named with these better things;
the least whereof, does so surpass the best of these.

And to say as the truth is, what proportion, or neerenes can be reasonably
conceived between the things of God and the world; of heaven add earth; of
corruption and incorruption; what is mortality to life, finite to infinite,
momentany to eternal inferior and fadeing, to that which is above, and
abides, for ever?

Reason cannot parallel these particulers, much less will religion permit it;
though our reason should (against all reason) be so presumptuous as to attempt
it.

But let us set our selves to enquire into the things themselves what they are
in particular, that we may show that to be true, which we say. To enter upon
all, is none of any purpose (neither indeed is it possible) to treat of them;
but some few we will entreat of, so far as may both breed some admiration
in us. and bring some consolation to us.
that both our consciences may be convinced, of them, and our affestions
enflamed after them, and we may with more extraordinary ferver of mind, and
spirit soundely follow them, the^ ever we have fondely persued the world.

1. First then, be it universally known, and well considered off, that the
whole business of this Merchandise, lies all in ONE PLACE, and with ONE PARTY,
and in ONE COMMODITY?
What a happiness is this? what a benefit? what a marvelous favor and
advantage; may it be matched (in all three respects?) nay, in any one of the
three, in all the earthly merchandise under heaven? Can any such place be
found, as in which a man may enclose all the has to do, not needing to stir
a broad elsewhere all the days of his life to do any thing?

If it could; can any such merchandise be found in that place, as would take
up a man's whole time, all his days and endeavors, and yield him benefit
enough, without intermedling with any other? Or, if that could be also; can yet
the third thing concur (unto both the former) that any one such party should
be found, who were so absolutely able to furnish all, that come to trade in
this place, with this commodity, that they should not have any cause, or
reason, to seek (in the least) to any other person, or persons whatsoever, for
any thing we have to do therein?

Nay we know the contrary in all earthly occurents that all places, party,
climates, and corners of the world, which may be sailed unto by sea, or
travailed unto by land, yea, and that all kinds of commodityes that can be
found any where, whither the four winds can carry a man; as also, that all
kinds of nations, peoples, tongues, and languages, as well Pagan, as
Christian, as well Savage, as civil, are dealt withal touching the trading
that their territoryes does yield: the places, the parties, the commodityes
are jnnumerable, which merchants (among men) do hunt after to attain
temporal wealth. And what puzle, perplexity, peril, pains, and expense this
is, all experienced men do know.

But now on the other side, in this celestial business, the benefit is not only
so abundant (as we have said) but it has this one advantage more (which
make's it even superabundant) that it is most easy to him that is a trader to
manage the same, without any such molestation, and turmoyle, as he must be put
into, in the ordering of this temporal pelf.

For why? you may easily apprehend the facility hereof, whenas it appears
that all that deal in it, have nothing to do with any but only with one
party, which is God. only with one commodity, that is Grace. only in one place,
that is heaven.
With whom have we to do, but God? for what, but Grace? from whence, but
heaven? It were not only vanity and folly, but foul jmpiety, to go
other-where, but to to that place; or to any other person; or for any other
benefit: for noe place, but heaven, no person but God, can afford this one
merchandise, whereby all are made men that deal with it.

Oh what ease is it to a man, to have all his business in one place, and with
one party, and in one commodity? who could desire a more comfortable course of
commerce, or a more excellent manner of managing of his business, then this?

This merchandise does not more exceed men's in all the excellencyes
before-spoken off, then it does in the easynes of the same; which, being addded
to all the incomparable qualityes it has already, does make it much more
admirable in excellency then it was before.

The business of this world, the Mammon of the earth how tedions, and difficult
is it to manage in all respects, what running, ryding, sailing, poasting by
sea, and land does it require? how much time does it devour and swallow up, to
get hither, and thither? no day, nor scarce the night, noe nor Gods day, but is
too often taken up in this business, we eat not sometimes, sometimes, we sleep
not, we serve not our selves, nay (which is the misery, and mischeife of all)
we scarce serve our God, having so much to do, such multiplicity of business,
and diversity of commodityes, and parties, as we deal withal; does even
confound us, that we are not our own men.

Some one man is free of many fellowships, and has trade in moct parts of the
world, and deals in so many particulers, that he has agents and factors in
most mart-townes; and is (like Martha) so encumbred with many things that he
knowe's not which way to turn him: here arive's a ship from the East Indies,
there is another outward bound for the West, some are expected from the
North-seas, others from the South; he has to do beyond the straight of
Magellan, and in those nearer straights of the Mediterranean; the gulf of
Persia, and of Venice, the Grand-Canaryes, and Molluccoes, all have some what
of his; no wind blowe's but he hopes for some good, from our place or other;
here he is merchant, there owner; and every where an ensurer; and thus, man
wraps himself into a labarynth and maze of fadeing merchandise, and become's a
kind of Vbiquitarie (as it were) in his business.

But behold and see, and consider well, here is one thing which is absolutely
needful, and infinitely gainful; and you need none of this trouble to
partake of the true treasure of the same; neither travail over any sea, or
over much land, to compass this commerce, and all the comfort of it, it is but
to go from our own house, to Gods. from our selves, to heaven in affection.
from our sin to grace by sanctification.
the kingdom of God, (all true and eternal comfort) is near, if it be not in
thy heart, and mouth, it is thine own fault, who have so block't up both, with
the baser business of the world, that these best things cannot enter into thee.

It is no wonder, that the scriptures do still lie at us (as they do) to
beat us from many things, to one; even from all other things whatsoever, to
this one; of whose excellency we have heard so many things already, and of
whose ease to compass it, we cannot doubt with any reason, seeing it is but one
thing that we have to look after.

At what time the Lord meant to make his people fully happy, in tying himself
to them in mercy, and them to himself in duty, that he, and they, might
mutually enjoy each other, in that [peace, which passes all understanding,]
and in that [joy, which is unspeakable and glorious;] he tell's them by his
Prophet, that they shall have [ One Heart, and One way.]

When the Apostle Paul was once resolved to set upon the best way, to most
happiness, he tell's the Philippians, what he himself did, and what he would
have both them, and all Christians to do. For my own part (says he) [this
one thing I do, I forget that which is behind, and follow hard toward, etc.]
And, for your parts, (says he, again) I would have [ you all mind one
thing,] and, [ walk after one rule;] that you may, [ with one mind, and one
mouth praise God.]

When David desired that whereby (if he might obtain it) he accounted himself
in most comfortable condition, he says, [One thing have I desired of the
Lord,] not that he desired nothing else, but, because this one thing,
comprehended all thing else, which might concur, to his hearts content.

And to speak as the truth is, all unity is excellent, it flowing from the
very nature of God who is indivisibly, infinitely, and inconceiably ONE, in
himself, that is to say, in his most pure, and perfect essence and being: and
as this unity or one-nes is a thing most glorious in him; so (from him) it is
a most gracious favor and singular fruit of his love to us, that he has
pleased to free us from that confused multiplicity in spiritual things, wherein
men are so miserably en wrapped, entangled, and toiled, in the persuit of those
present things they do, or desire, to enjoy in this earth; they are drowned in
many snares etc: says the Apostle.

But they who have to deal with this one God, are that one communion of
saints; that one body of Christ, that one spouse of his; into whom whosoever
is truly interressed, is unspeakably blessed: incorporation into him, (even
into this one Lord) brings eternal blessedness to all, who are incorporated
into him: inasmuch as all such have.

but one God to serve. but one heaven to seek. but one glory to gain.
And this consideration as it does marvelously advance and magnify this trade
above all trades in the earth: so does it (in like mannet) most justly shame,
all such as are so little (killed and experienced in the same, seeing that by
this admirable unity, it becomes so exceeding easy.

What? has the Lord made it but one in all respects, and reduced all those
infinite, and, innumerable duties, into so narrow a room and compass, and
made it so complete in excellency and advantage? and shall we be ignorant and
unseen in it, and noe-body at it? Is this one thing, our only good, by which
we are blessed for ever, and ever, and shall we be such sotts, and jdiots, as
not to understand our own good therein? Shall either Satan foe sednee us, or
the world so be witch us, as that we should neglect this one God, from whom
we have all good; and so give him cause, at his great and dreadful day, to
upbraid us before his own face, to our confusion, that in a world of variety,
and multiplicity, of base, earthy, corruptible, and temporary, trash, ( whole
worlds whereof, could never bring us any true good) we were so well
instructed, and experienced, that we could both say, and do much: and that, to
this our best, and most blessed business, wherein the Lord gayne's infinite
glory by us, we gain infinite comfort by him,) we should be such strangers; as
to have no skill in it, or accquaintaince with it, which might either enable
our selves, or (by us) encourage others, to bend their best endeavors toward
the same?

What flesh can stand under this accusation in the fearful presence of the
living God? who can answer it unto him? surely none; and if we let it alone
till that day, there is but one way for us, and that is this, that those who
are (then) convinced of it, must be sure to be eternally condemned for it.

Let us then (dear Christians) confider seasonably and seriously of it, even
while it is day, and we may work; before that blacknes of darkness come, wherein
none can work; that we may (while we have time) honor him, who el's (if we
overpasse our opportunity) will honor himself in our woe beyond all time. Let
us not think it a small kindness that all our comforts are so closely folded
together in this one particular.

What may we jmagine (think ye) was David reason to choose the last of the
three miserable and heavy punishments, that were propounded unto him; It was
(indeed) a wonderful, and a woeful straight he was put unto; the choice was
hard, between famine, sword, and pestilence, (the three lashes of Gods whip)
with one of those he must smart; and seeing all three cannot be avoided but one
must be endured, he resolves upon the pestilence, to undergo that; that one of
the three he chooses, why so? note his reason: because in this he should [fall
into the hands of God, not of men] this was it, in either of the other two, he
was to have to do with to wit, with God, and men too, we may jmagine, in case
of famine, how the people of the land would have flowed about him for bread; in
the sword, the enemy would have swarmed about him, and the people for blood; he
should have had his hands full, had he had to do with either of these, but
now, in the Pestilence, (which he did chose) do with none but the Lord alone,
all his business lay in one place, with one party, and in one particular, he had
nothing to do with any man, but with the Lord of heaven and none but he, in
this point; and was not this good husbandry to cast, and contrive his business
so near together?

Is not this written for our instruction and practice, that we should go, and
learn to do likewise? and if he did it (as the best) in case of such calamity
and bitterness; how much better would it become us, in this particular of our
comfort and advantage, to endeavor the same?

Set we our selves (then) toward this employment seeing it is so couched to
our hands; let us shame, and blame ourselves, that we are so weakly seen
into it.

It would be most gross in our eye, and that which we would not put up, or
endure, at our inferiors hands, that if we should (tendering their weakness,
and inability,) use all our understanding to contract their business as nearly,
and narrowly, as were possible, for their better, and easier dispatch of the
same; and so sum it up, and abridge it; that all they had do, were to go
but to one place, to speak with one man, and about one thing; and if herein
they should be so exceeding careless, as that we should (upon our enquiry)
find this our one and only business so neglected that it is either, ill done,
or, not done,
how righteously might we repreove, yea and punish, such insufferable
negligence. By themselves in this ease, may all me^ measure the Lord in the
other, how he will deal with those, whose delinquence were so egregious, that
his wisdom and love, should be so monstrously abused, that he entrusting us
but in this one matter, we should be found guilty of so foul neglect before
him. Either this will breed more diligence in us, damnation to us.

And this is the first peculiar and singular, benefit, of this last rank,
which this our heavenly merchandise has, and yours has not; that whereas
yours requires many things to be done, with many persons, in many places, and
cannot be brought into closer bounds; this is thus happily abstracted, into one
place, with one party, and all that is to be done, is to gain one commodity.

Now we are to set forward toward a second favor of the same kind, and it is
nothing inferior, but much about the former, and that is this:

That he with whom we trade, does GIVE us ALL we TRADE FOR, yea and ALL we
TRADE WITH.

The Stock we trade with; the Merchandise we trade for, yea and the Knowledge,
and understanding that any man has to use this stock, to attain that
merchandise, is all freely given us of the Lord.

He finds us (as it were) money to trade with; and commodity to trade for; and
give's us understanding to compass the one with the other, that we may prosper
in both.

It is most true, yea, it is too true, that of our selves we have nothing: the
more shame is it for us to say it, considering how we were once enriched, with
all fullnes, and fittnes, unto this business, and are now miserable and naked,
having no wit, to order our trade. no stock, to drive it. no advantage, to live
by it.
none of all this growe's in our nature now; we are bereft and become barren of
every of these, and cannot furnish ourselves, with one myte of money, or one
farthings worth of commodity, to begin with-all.

And as true is it also, that the Lord, who is Lord over all, and rich unto
all, that he has endowed us once again, with all these necessaryes, whereby
we may recover our selves in Jesus Christ, to be once more enriched (and
evermore, more and more increased) in our best estate: ooke what is any way
required to make us spiritual merchants, it is cast upon us by him, through
that inconceivable kindness wherewith he does, (in his son) affect us.

Your temporal trade does not partake in this prerogative, what man among men,
ever furnished any, with all these?

For stock to begin with all, parents lay up for their children and it is many
times given them; but they must serve some years, for their skill, that is not
freely conferred upon any; much less are those many, and several things that
must be bought and sold; it was never heard, that any merchant had as much
given him, both of native commodityes as he could export, or of forrayne, as he
could bring in; he that should have all by gift, that other men pay for, would
be the wealthyest, man among the sons of men.

Well our God does all this for us, the least whereof (or not much more) is done
by man, we are thoroughly furnished by him, with every thing, that is, or can be
required, to make us fully happy herein. His love yeelde's us all things that
belong thereunto in any respect.

What it is we trade for, we have heard before, even for grace, this we cannot
do, but by prayer, and endeavor and such other supernatural, and divine
assistance, as he is pleased to bestow upon us, these are the only ways, to win spiritual wealth, and to become mighty in the advantage, and abundance,
of these celestial affairs.

Now who can begin the world one whit, (in these things that do belong to the
world to come) so much, as to affect, or attempt any spiritual gain, by any
of the forenamed means; unless it be given him from above: the doctrine of
any inhoerent powers of grace, in our nature, is no better then a dream,
dotage, and delusion: we are told enough by Christ, who tell's us that [
without him we can do nothing,] no nor think any thing neither, as the
Apostle further avoucheth. If our being in nature be of God, and that, [ in him
(alone) we live and move;] our wel-being in grace, and our bestbeing in glory,
(with all that appertains unto both) must needs be of him also.

If we pawse a little on the particulers, of Prayer, and Endeavor, it will full
well appear in both, that the Lord God, out of the unsearchable riches of his
grace, does give us both grace to pray, and practice. and the grace, which is
gained by both. and the glory which is annexed to both.


For prayer, (which is a special help, in this heavenly business) can we pray
of our selves? is it in our power to put up one acceptable request unto the
Lord? he who says he can, speaks a lie and the truth is not in him: nay, he
make's God, (even the God of truth) a liar, who tell's us all to our teeth,
Romans ^.16.
that [we know not what to pray as we ^ught] but must be enabled by his spirit
thereunto. Note, that he says not simply that we cannot pray, as if we had no
possibility of speaking or uttering any desires, or requests before God; for
our very faculty and ability of speech, may be employed in words of prayer (
read, or said by rote,) as in other words: but this he says, we cannot pray
[as we ought:] Mat. 20. Iam. 4.
to pray as the mother of James and John, not knowing what we ask; or as they
who did ask, but not speed, because they prayed admisse, that we are too prone
to do; but to perform the duty of prayer, as God does command it of us, and
will accept it at our hands, that so by it (through Christ) we may obtain
what we pray for; this we cannot do but are utterly jmpotent unto it. God that
requires us to pray to him for that which he will give us, is pleased to give
us (first) ability to prayer unto him. So that, this first special help to
our spiritual trading is freely given us from him, with whom we trade.

Endavor is the second, by it I mean the practical carriage of our selves, in
those duties required to enrich us in this commerce. Duties must be added to
desires, performance on our part, toward God; to that, which we pray he would
perform to us. Now here unto, we are as far to seek as we were in the
other, nay further, for it being more, to do, then to desire, we who are little
able to the former (which is the lesser) are less fitted to perform the
latter, which is the greater. Our Lord Christ himself tell's us in plain
terms that [without him we can do nothing] and the apostle Paul assenteth
hereunto, when he affirms [all our sufficiency to be of God] and
acknowledges that [by the help of Christ he can do all things], but without
that his assistance, just nothing, at all: for it is of him that we have to
will, and to do, according to his good pleasure, as the same apostle faith
other where.

These two, are the principal, if not the only things that we can trade
withal, (as we have heard:) they are neither of them natural to us now, as
once, (when time was) they were, before sin seized upon us, and despoyled us of
all those noble abilities, wherewith we were fully furnished, to the most ready
performance of every gracious act: we must have them from him him again by
petition, who once freely gave them in our creation: they do foe necessarily
conduce to our welfare and wealth in this jmployment, that we can no more miss
them, then he that meane's to be a merchant can be without, m^nny, creddit, or
skill, in the trade he intends to manage.

And yet are not these things more needefully required to be in us, then they
are voluntarily given to us, of our good God, who proclaymeth himself unto us
(by his P^ophet) to be that God [that teaches us to proffit, and leads us in
the way which he would have us to g^e] and, when he has done so, even taught
us (as it were) how to get an everlasting living, he give's us all the proffitt
we do, or can g^t for our selves.

Now consider, and bethink your selves hereof, whether this kind of kindness,
have ever been heard off under heaven? has any man done thus to man as the
Lord does (in this particular) to all that undertake this heavenly trading? Or
if it were possible to produce some one rare, and admirable instance of
unwonted, and extraordinary love, liberality and beneficence, which (once) in
many ages might pass between some two, who were exceeding entyre: yet has it
ever appeared, or does any record in the whole world, tell us of any that has
thus repaired the state of some wilful bankrupt, and professed adversary, who
has not only robbed us in our state, but done his worst to defame, and abuse us,
in our creddit, and good name too, and besides both these, has further done us
all the judgnityes, and disgraces, that he could devise in any respect to heap
upon us, out of measure?.

The Lord our God has done no less, but infinitely more then this, for unto
him we have been much more jmpious and jniurious (in every regard) then it is
possible for one man to be to another, and yet he has thrown these admirable
mercyes thus abundantly, upon us: whenas our deserts were the dreadful and
dyrefull fruits of his infinite jndignation and justice. Such love as this has
no man, (nor can any man have it) the like unto it, is not extant in the earth.

Yet I make no question but some have met with most loving masters, which have
been as fathers to them, and, done as mueh as, (it may be much more then)
their fathers could do for them, God has pleased to respect, and reward, the
diligence and conscience, of some good servants, with much good from their
governors, But to be so surpassing in all kind of kindness, as. first, to
teach them their trade freely. then to give them stock to trade withal freely:
and to give them all the benefit, they gain by both.
who among mankind has done thus?

Yet with the Lord, this is ordinary, usual, yea perpetual and vinversall, to
give us all, we may get withal, and all we get, by all he gives us; he does
not share with us, either for half the profit, or for a third of it, or for
any thing at all, but does cast upon our selves the complete benefit, comfort,
and advantage, of all we gained by that which he gave us,

And this is the second advantage of this last rank: let us now set forward to
a third, which does as much excel the second, as the second did the first, and
that is this.

In all temporal trading there may be (and often there is) much more evil
then good; but in this spiritual: NOTHING is EVIL, ALL is GOOD.

Note this well, and upon due consideration of it, it will manifestly appear
to be as we say, in the point we have in hand, that this is the best and most
blessed trading in the world, seeing it is fully free from all manner of evil,
and absolutely full of all manner of good.

The best benefit, and greatest good, of the worlds Merchandise cannot go
beyond the body, the utmost bounds of it extend themselves but to our civil
state; there is nothing therein, that reaches further then the outside, in
things that are outward: and when a man has filld his purse, and double lyn'd
himself with land and money, he has all that can be enjoyed by it, or expected
from it: and admit he have as much of either, as his heart can desire; yet the
evils that accompany this abundance, do often equal and sometimes exceed
all the benefit that can come by them: and that.

either, in evil of sin, or, evil of punishment, or, in both.
For why? if we look upon the body, or owtward man, much business, great
dealings, are not managed, nor the proffit of them attained, with little
molestation, and turmoyle, but a man wearies, Habak. 2.13.
and wears himself away, and labor's in the very fire (as the Prophet says)
for mere vanity. And having been at much trouble, and pain to get them, his
care is not little, how to keep that he has got, between both, he make's
himself inserable, in wilful wanting, sometimes of meat, sometimes of sleep,
to obtain, and retain, that, which when he has his fill thereof, cannot help
him to a moment of rest, nor a morsel of bread, For all the wealth in the
world, if it were in one man's hands, it could neither fill his belly, nor
refresh his brain, but it leave's him, either to grow mad with waking, or dead
for huuger.

But it rests not here, the body has all the benefit of whatsoever the earth
can yield, but the soul shares with the body in the jncommodity, and
discomfort thereof. (Note this: that the evil of it goes, there, good of it
cannot come near) the soul (I say) must smart with the body, to catch, and to
keep these carnal things: the head must be troubled, mind distracted, heart
perplexed, with fears, and cares jnnumerable, and indeed jnsufferable; every
storm that blows, every knave that breaks, every market that falls,
affrights him, and putt's him into a bodily (yea, and into a ghostely) fear
too, least some loss shall befall himself. Even the inside, that cannot take
part in any of the advantage, must yet be anoyed with the damage of these
things. And so they draw misery, both upon soul and body.

But this misery is not all, (though the least of it be too much for all this
pelf): besides misery, these things do pull on jmpiety, (a thing infinitely
worse, then all sorrow can be), yea legions of evils come on with these
earthly advantages; as covetousnes in most men, jnjustice, in some;
profanation of the sabbath, in more then a good many, and jnsidelity (more or
less) in all.

Yea, and when a man has done all this evil, and endured all the former, all
cannot keep, that which is got, but it will be gone one way or other, and
leave a man (every way) unhappy, both in jmpiety before God. and in poverty
before men.


And throwing a thousand deadly darts of distress, into his heart who once
enjoyed, but could not keep them in his posession.

Now if we balance the best good that all earthly things can bring, against
the least of these evils, we shall have reason to believe that the benefit
will nothing near, defray the damage, no man shall ever be a saver that has
to do therein, for it will not quitt cost, or pay for half the charge. And no
wise man (I think) would have much to do in such affairs, wherein the
proffitt is but small, and momentany, and the loss so great and marveilous,
as we have said; nay the truth is, it is more then can be said.

But now, if on the other side we will compare the merchandise which we have in
have with this, in these particulers, it will appear vnmatchably to exceed
and surpass the same, in both kinds of the things before named; having all
excellence, without any jnconvnience.

This trade is good for the body, and the soul too, and it is hard to say for
whether of the two, it is better, inasmuch as it is that which brings both into
the best case wherein they can be in this world, or shall be in the world to come:
the present, and eternal happiness of both, hangs hereon.

Nay, if it seem good to the Lord to afflict us with any evil, (suppose it be
the loss of the worlds wealth, or of our bodyly health, or other calamity of
any kind we can conceive) the gain of this trading make's every evil, good,
every bitter thing sweet; it has a feasoning and sanctifying virtue, to bring
good out of evil, and more gain out of a little loss, then all losses can
countervayle, unto us. And not only is adversity made easyer, but our
prosperity (which without piety is most pernicious) is made happy to us also;
for it will keep us from being puffed up, in the height of our earthly
happiness, and so temper us between the two extremes whereupon millions of men
are wrac^kt, that we shall ride safely, without any danger on either hand.

For it will not, suffer us either to fall from the highest and steepest top of
abundance, and prosperity, nor yet suffer the deepest gulf of want and penury,
to finke and drown us. So that this one good it has, that it make's all other
things good to us.

And in it there is no evil, either in getting, or in keeping all we can
attain: we may most lawfully covet the most of it that can be gotten: and as
lawfully may we care how to keep all we can get, there is no sin or evil in
either of these. In the former there was, and is, (as we spoke even now,) and
[woe to him (says the Lord) that cove^eth an evil covetousnes] but to covet
spiritual things is not only not for bidden, but expressly, again, and again
commanded; as he may see that peruseth what the Apostle says to the
Corinthians, both in the twelfth, 1. Cor. 12.31. cap 14.1.
and fourteeneth chapter of his first epistle. In the former wealth, there may
be an excess, a man may have too much of the world, and surfett as soon on
riches, as on any thing, and therefore to avoid the peril of this plurisey, we
are commanded to be content with what we have, and to satisfy our selves with
such a measure of outward things as the wisdom of God shall please to put upon
us, be they more or less: but he that can enlarge his desires and endeavors
te crave, and to have, the greatest quantity of this wealth, that is
attaynable; he is the happiest man: no man need once to fear a superfluity,
because it is out of all humane possibility to have enough, that is to say so
much as we should have, of every grace which we once had in perfection, when we
were created, and now (at the best) can have but in jmperfection, since we were
corrupted: the most sanctified man is he, who has the most insatiable desire,
and most unweariable endeavor, after these advantages.

Again, the most, and best, that can come, by all the confluence and abundance
of temporal wealth, is only some reputation and place, among men; to be a man
of creddit and estimation, whose word, or hill, will pass currantly for great
sums upon the exchange; to be accounted square dealers, good men, sore
paymasters, this is the utmost honor the earths abundance can yield. And what
great good thing is this, when it is apparent to be as common among Pagans, as
Christians, and always as much, yea many times more, their honor, then ours.
All the riches under heaven cannot make God to give a man one good word, or to
entertain a kind thought of him, that has most. Is it any man's commendation,
in all the bible, that he was rich, and had much? diverse good men (who are
commended are reported to be so, but noe jot nor tittle of their praise does,
or can consistin this particular. And that is most plain to every man's eye,
and observation, who will take knowledge how the Lord speaks of th^se that
had nothing but wealth, to grace them before men; and of wealth it self
considered, as severed from saving grace before God, wealth has scarce one
good word in all Gods book; but I am sure it has many bad: the odious
epithites that are given it of God, are such as should work us to better
consideration of the danger of it.

Is it not called.

mammon of jniquity? treasure of wickedness? vnceartayne riches.?
Does not Christ compare them to thorns? the apostle to snares? are they not
said to, be deceitful, and unrighteous? may not the same man be wealthy, and
woeful too? is it not said [w^e be to you that are rich?] The Lord Jesus does
not speak of many rich men, but of th^se of whom he does speak, either
historically, or parabolically, what heavy things are concluded? Of one (to wit
he in the 12 of Luke) in what danger of hell his soul and body were, when his
barnes were to little to inn his corn: [Thou fool this night shall they take
away thy soule]. Of another, (to wit the glutton in the 15 of the same gospel)
that not a few great ones are in the belly of that gulf already, and laden
with the heaviest damnation? Of a third, (namely the young man, that was so
fair for heaven) what extreme difficulty of getting to heaven, does wealth
draw upon a man, nay, an absolute jmpossibility, where riches, and regeneration
are severed,

But now, on the other side, the divine commodities of this celestial
commerce, does get us a glorious name and state with the Lord, and he is
glorified by them in us: both we are honored by him, and so is he by us
through these things. Who are magnifyed or esteemed by the Lord, but such as in
whom Grace did abound, and who were rich in the endowments of the holy Ghost?
as Abraham for faith: Moses for meeknes: Job for patience: Samuel for
integrity: David for faithfullnes: and many others for many Graces: they that
were rich in these evcellencyes are the only renowned persons; the Lord has
left them a name that shall never dye, fame that cannot rott, all generations
to come shall call them blessed, and well they may, because now they are in
infinite blessedness with the Lord. This our merchandise is that only thing,
which makes a man both.

truly blessed on earth, and. fully blessed in heaven.
The Lord does esteem so preciously of these things and of those that have
them, that the best words that can be given are not too good: the things are
called Gods own, [My grace is sufficient for thee etc] [that we might be
partakers of his holynes] yea [of the divine or Godly nature] (not in the
incommunicable essence, but in the communicable effects. thereof): And they that
are endued with these things, are entitled as most natural, nearest, and
dearest to him; they are not only his friends, (as Abraham was both by the
Prophet, and by the Apostle said to be) but more, his childien; yea more then
that, his spouse: yea and more then that too, (and that which is most of all,)
his very members: and to be the least of these, is no mean honor; but to be
all these (as every one is, that is any of these) is glory, and happiness
unspeakable.

And this our honor and renown, accrewing to us, is peculiar to us also, and
not (as the former) common to the swyne of the world, whether carnal
christians, or cursed Pagans; all that are without (as the holy Ghost uses the
phrase) are without this honor, to be any thing in Gods esteem: whether they
be such as are without the christian world; and have not so much as the name
of a christian; or such as are without Christ, being within it; and have no
more but a Christian name.

Neither of the two, can communicate with us in the comforts of these things;
our wealth cannot make them rich, they cannot be partners, or partakers in it
at all, it is all our own, both wholly, and solely. Money they may have, silver
and gold grows as well in their mines, as ours; and for other rare riches
their clymates excel ours, we fetch much from them.

But piety, sincerity, sanctity, heavenly wisdom, saving grace, the true
treasure, they cannot have one dram or grain thereof. And the want of this
makes them as unhappy, as the abundance of the other: the having of these makes
heaven as easy to all saints, as the other made it either hard, or jmpossible
to any other.

Few, not many (says the apostle) mighty, or rich, are called, (meaning of the
other sort) but of these, not any but many, not only many, but all and but
every wise, holy righteous, and religious man, is called sanctified, and shall be
also glorified. The former (to wit all graces) they have in present posession,
the latter (to wit glory) they have, in most undoubted assured, and
unquestionable, reversion.

Now he that compares these things in this particular, will he not say, that
it is better tradeing where is so much good without any evil; then where is
some little good, with much evil? is it not best fishing where nothing but
wholesome fish comes to the net, then where a man may meet with many harmefull
things that will tear and spoil all?

Well, to conclude, though it cannot be denied but that some good (such as it
is) is in the worlds wealth, yet this may be avouched, thas few have sped well
that have had it, because the evell is more then the good, that comes by it.
But the benefit of this trade has redownded to all their happiness, who have
had the same: not a man ever sped ill, that had any part of it because there is
much good in the least of it, and noe evil (no not the least) in all of it,

And this is the third thing of this last rank: The fourth now follows, which
as it is the last, of all in order, so also is it the best of all in nature:
yea so good and so great it is, that it will make men wonder exceedingly at
it, so soon as they hear it; because though (in it self) it be as menifest,
as any of the former, yet it will seem marvelous to us at first sight, yea
almost incredible, as being not only diverse, from all the rest before named,
but quite contrary to the course of all temporal trading, And it is this.

That whereas in all manner of commerce among men, a man gett's no longer then
he live's and trades: this trade makes a man MOST HAPPY, when he has DONE
TRADING.

How many benefitts come unto us by it, while we follow it, has been formerly
declared at large, in all the particulers that we have (hitherto) prosecuted;
but the last, and best, (even the infinite, and everlasting benefit, that
come's by it) is found, and felt of us, when we have left it, that is, when our
time is come that we cannot live longer, in this present evil world to deal
in it.

The worlds merchandise does not enrich every one that trades, during all the
time he does follow it, many do their best and attain not much, but they
whom it does enrich, must get all they have while they are in trading, if any
man during life give it over, or, if it give over any man by death, there is no
more proffit to be expected, it can yield no benefit when it is not followed;

But the best of this our trade is brought to a man when he has done tradeing:
our best-being begins then, when we make an end of dealing: for why? after we
have done all we can, we shall receive endless glory, bliss, and faelicity,
with the Lord our God in the highest heavens.

A man that has been a merchant among men, and now is none, he cannot but
grow worse, and worse, because if he get nothing, he cannot avoid it but he
must spend of the stock, and so bring himself to a meaner estate, then he was
before: and if he dya a merchant, all is done that wherein he gaynes noe more,
the world (in regard of himself) does also dye with him.

But this trade, as it is happy to us (in some measure) while we use it, so
shall it be most happy to us (beyond measure), when once the time is come that
we can use it no more. It does every way (as we have heard) infinitely out
strip the worlds affairs, while we are in the world in dealing with it: but
after we have done with it in the world, it does infinitely out strip it self,
in those inconceiveable comforts and advantages whereunto it carries us in the
world to come.

All the time we were interessed into it here on earth, was but (as it were)
the time of our apprentiship yet it was a sweet service, both in regard of our
good master, we served to wit, God himself, and that good work he set us
about, even goodness it self: but now after the end of all our days, and
endeavors, we come (as it were) to be made free, and to be set at liberty in
perfect freedom peace, and felicity, when we chang mortality for life;
corruption for incorruption; grace for glory; and that little good which we have
done here, for the infinite we shall have there.

In the world many a man (who has done his best endeavor) dies without
riches: many others dye at once both rich, and wretched.
and have nothing to clog, and cloy their consciences more, then the pelf
which they have got, which (like some heavy weight) has lain so upon them,
that they could not mount to heaven unless in Balaams hopeles and unseasonable
desire, to dye well, when they have lived long and done ill. Death it self has
not been more miserably bitter to them, then the things they got in their life.

But where the benefit of all things else does leave us, there does the
advantage of this come unto us; much of it abides with us from the time we
began to be traders with the Lord, but the most, and best, goes with us out of
this world, (or rather) stays for us in that other world, till we come to
posesse and enjoy it there. The things we have spoken of, are incomparably
beyond those other in temporal tradeing; but these we speak of now, are
incomparable in respect of the future comforts for which, we shall exchange
those that are present with us.

I remember, it is said that the merchants of the great WHORE, (that is, those
who traded with her for her whoorish trash,) were the Kings, and great men of
the earth, and it is spoken by the Lord, to the great and just reproach of
themselves, that being so potent, they would prostitute themselves so basely
unto her: as also for the furthera^ce of her most righteous overthrow, and
final confusion, that she could and would besott, such potentates, with the
poisoned cup of her fornications.

But of these merchants of God, it shall be said, (yea it is already said, and
jrrevocably recorded too) that they shall be kings in heaven, every merchant of
wisdom shallbe called GREAT in the kingdom of heaven, and have glory there
with the king of kings, for ever and ever. The Lord Jesus has made it sure
already, by his blood; it is not more ceartayne that he is dead shamefully for
us, then that we shall live gloriously with his father through him; for by his
infamy, our honor was purchased, he dyed miserably, to the end we might live
blessedly, and was content to come much beneath himself, that we might be
marveilousy exalted, by his extreme abasement. It is he that has (of his own
goodness) made us, of natural men, gracious merchants: and he it is that will
make us, Princes of glory after we have been merchants in grace; proclayming
us, both to our selves, and others (by the proper and peculyar prerogatives of
his spirit) to be heirs apparent unto that kingdom, while we are in this body
here below; and afterward putting us into the actual, and eternal possession
of the same.

And what a rare, royal, and surpassing prerogative this is, every man may
apprehend: it is rare for the world cannot match it. royal, for it dignifyes a
man above the world. surpassing, for none (else) can come near it.


We were (as was said) happy, while we were getting this merchandise by Prayer,
and Endeavor, and such other good means as we have specifyed, but all this
was but the first fruits, the beginning and earnest pennyes of our comforts now
to come, which are full, infinite, everlasting, and incomprehensible, for
greatness, for goodness, for durablenes, and whatsoever else, may any way conduce,
to make a thing inconceivably comfortable both in it self, and unto us.

While we were here, we were but driving this trade, and during the time wherein
we were either selling our corruption. or, buying sanctification,
we now, and then, met with some adverse and opposite things, our graces could
not evermore work kindly, because they were many times encumbred, and
interrupted; Satan, the world, and our own corruption, were often in our way,
all, or some of these, did ever annoy us, doing daily their worst to make the
stream muddy, to embase these excellencyes, and to embitter our sweet
proceedings in these happy passages.

But now we shall be out of the devils, the world, and our own sins reach, all
their gunshot shall not come near us, but we shall for ever enjoy most
quietly, the fruit of that which we have gotten Christianly: Now shall we be
enriched, and honored by him, by whom we were employed, and set on work: now
shall we sit with our fellow Merchants in grace, and posessors of glory;
Abraham Isaac, and Jacob; all the rest, of the most blessed Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and whatsoever other Saints, do concure to make up that
numberless number, of those who are said to be, an [jnnumerable multitude of
just and perfect men]; and with them all, and all the residue of the mystical
members of the most sacred body of Christ, shall we see the face, and enjoy the
presence, of our lining God, our loving father, the king of kings and Lord of
Lords, and we shall behold him as he is, in the perefection of his essence. in
the glory of all his excellencyes. in the mystery of his persons.


Then, and there, shall we be in such a state, as we cannot now discover; [it
appears not what we shall be,] says John, that is, in particular perfection of
that estate, of the boundles and unlimited extent whereof, nature, and
mortality, is no way capable.

There shall we be as kings to reign with the Lord, the king of saints,
sitting upon thrones of glory, wearing crowns of jmmortality, with Jesus, the
purchaser of these perfections for us, who has given and granted to all saints
[ to fit upon his throne, as he sits upon his fathers throne.

What we have got here, shall be wholly taken up there, (I mean of those
remaining graces that shall abide, for faith, hope, patience, zeal, and such
like graces, as had their proper exercise, and principal jmployment, either
upon present evil, or good to come, and not yet posessed, shall cease) but all
those graces that go into glory with us, shall be jmployed in a most glorious
manner, upon the most glorious things that are there, as our wisdom, and
knowledge, and love, upon himself, his son, and spirit, those three blessed and
distinct persons, every of which is God to be blessed for ever, not thrice, nor
a thousand thousand times, blessed, but infinitely beyond all millions of
blessings and blessedness, that the created and finite heart of man comprehend in
the vttmost jmaginations thereof.

That one more glorious essence, of those three most glorious persons, and that
Trinall, and most sacred subsistence, shall then be the only objects, of our.

wisdom. to know them fully. love, to affect them perfectly. joy, to delight
in them everlastingly,
These while we were here among mysts of ignorance, were mysteries unto us, and
such secrets unto our clouded understandings as we could not clearly discern,
but we had some glymmering light, or weak guess, at them; such as the man
had, whose eyes were in part opened, [that saw men walking like trees] which
was a seeing very gross, and confused [ New we see (says the apostle) through
a glass darkely, and know but in part] But when we shall be translated from
hence, to that celestial state, and station, [ then, shall we see face to
face, and know us we are knowne] yea (says another apostle [ we shall see him,
(the Lord) as he is] both in the incomprehensible unity of his nature, and
inconceivable trinity of the persons: the several excellencyes of the former,
and their infinite acts: the distinct acts of the latter, and their divine
effects; the FATHERS eternal generation of the SON; the SONS eternal sonship,
or filiation, of the father; and the proceeding of the holy GHOST eternally
from the Father; and the Son, shall the shine openly unto us: and so shall the
power, the wisdom, the merey, the justice, and all that infinite variety of
ineffable goodness, whic has his residence in the glorious nature of that Being
of Beings; these shall we see with open face; yea (as we said even now) face to
face, the Lord will no more turn his backe-parts to us, but we shall have full
sight of all his glory, (unto the brightness whereof, the clearest luster of the
sun, is but as fogg, and darkness) our eyes, and understanding shall be free from
feeble jmpotency, and both made absolute, in perfect and jmmutable jmmortality,
to behold him, who has blessed us with these heavenly things in heaven.

The shadows of these things which we now read with astonishment, in the
book of God we shall then and there, receive and feel, with unutterable
ravishment, where the Lord is, and where we shall for ever be with him, in the
highest happiness that the heaven of heavens, has reserved for all the holy and
elect.

Our Lord Christ had a transfiguration on earth (upon mount Tabor) wherein his
glory was such (compared to his ordinary estate, which was very mean among
me^) as that Peter, upon sight of the same, so affected with it, that he could
not contain the manifestation of his apprehension, but must reveal his
over-joyed mind, in desiring to make his abode and dwelling there: yet Peter
was no partaker at all in it, but a mere spectator of it, he was graced and
chosen, to be one of those that might stand by to behold it, as a witness, but
neither he, (nor any of the rest who had the favor to be admitted thither)
were more then standers by. Now if the sight of such momentany glory as may be
seen upon a mountain here on earth, and wherein one has has no part himself,
but only beholds it in another, who does wholly enjoy the same, may so take
up a man beyond himself to make him so quickly forget, and so willingly
forgo, all other things? what shall we conceive that heavenly glory and
happiness will be unto us, and how shall we apprehend it, whenas it is greather
then can be manifested on the earth, and more glorious upon our whose soul and
body, then it was (threre) upon Christ's humanity; we our selves, not only
beholding his glory (which infinitely surpasses that which was seen here) but
the glory of the Father, and of the holy Ghost also, and made glorious
partakers of the same glory (not which Christ had here in the world, but of a
far better, even of that which, [he (as himself says) had with his father
before the world was? Our corruption that darken's us now, will not only not
suffer us to see, but does disable us utterly to discern the lease thought of
that honor and happiness, which (jndeede) is more then can be thought.

So that we who are true Christians, shall have a more glorious trensfignration
in heaven, then Christ himself had on earth, to be raised from merchandising in
grace, to be jnvested into matchles glory, with the Lord and king of glory.
Such honor have all his faints: even al who do their best endeavors to
honor him sincerely, in their bodies and souls, hearts and lives. This endless
joy, and, the full fruition of all those pleasures, which are in fullnes at his
right hand for evermore, shall be the end of our faith, and such other graces as
we have gotten, Here shall wese not Hench, and Elias talking with Jesus, but
Jesus himself talking with us, that is manifesting such gracious familiarity to
us, as a father would do to his dearest child: or a bridegroom to his
delightful and beloved bride: there shall we hear those most melodious
voices, which mort all tongnes cannot speak, nor mortal ears hear, unless
they be (as it were) jmmortalized for a feason, (as were the apostle Paul's) who
heard things not to be uttered here on the earth, when he was wrapped up into
the third heaven; and had some taste and appearance of that glory, which he
does now posesse in infinite fullnes.

And this is the last, and best thing of this third and last rank, wherein we
see, that this heavenly trade bring's us that blessedness, which cannot be
brought unto us, by the most gainefull business of the whole world.

Thus we have now (at length) made good that which we promised in the
beginning; to wit, the main point we propounded; that GODS MERCHANDISE is
better then MAN'S which I hope has abunda^tly appeared in every of those
particulers, which we have at large discovered to prove the same So, that now
we stand persuaded and convinced thereof, as of a divine and undeniable truth.

The main evidence, (as you may remember) did consist of three most noble
branches, every branch spreading it self into diverse admirable advantages,
which it cannot be amiss for us breifely, and in few words to recall to our
memory.

We have heard that the excellency of this trade above yours does consist as in
many, so especially in three things.

First, that it has NONE of the EVILS which are usual in your affairs, and
therein we have showed, that thereis.

No Adventure. No Bad Debts. No Bad Wares. No Bad Servants.
Secondly, that it has all the GOOD THINGS that yours has, with the advantage
of a better measure of them, then can be had in yours: and here we have showed,
that there are evermore.

Good Sales, Excellent Exchanges, and The Best Barters.
Thirdly, that it has some GOOD THINGS PROPER to it self, which are beyond all
possibility for your trade to partake in: and here we have showed, that, All
our business is in one place with one party. about one commodity,
All we trade with, and all we trade for, is freely given us. All is absolutely
good, without any evil, The best benefit of this trade come's when we have one
trading.


Every of these passages, one by one, (in their due order) have been plainly
discovered and handled in our hearing, to the end we might well and thoroughly
know the odds between a heavenly, and an earthly commerce, between a civil,
and a celestial course of traffike.

And now my Christian, beloved, and dear brethren after whose eternal
enriching, my soul does long, from the very heart root in Christ Jesus) seeing
foe it is, as we have seen, that there is A TRADE so surpassing this of yours
A trade that has.

Noe evil in it, whereas yours has much All good in it, that yours has, and
more: Yea, some Good things that yours cannot have:
What say your souls now to these things which we have said? bethink your
selves thoroughly, and call in all your jnmost thoughts to the most serious and
hearty consideration of what you have now heard, that you may make such an
answer, as suits with Christanity, and may.

both have approbation with God. and bring consolation to you.
I say, what say your, souls, consciences, minds, wills affections, and
hearts, here unto? summon them all, jointly, and severally to give answer, to
that God, who will either presently appose you (in merey) to make you so more
then ever you have done: or let you alone till heareafter (at his day of
appearance) in justice, to condemn you for ever and ever, for that which you
should have done.

If there be a better trade then that which you are bufied in? if a more, and
much more, yea and a so much more, beneficial business may be found, will you
not be affected toward it, and fall to it? were there but some odds of
advantage between our present temporal employment we follow, and some other,
that a friend had given us notice off, it would be censured for egregious
sillynes, yea for gross folly, in us, if we did not forthwith betake our
selves unto it, and lay by, that we have, to get better.

And shall others condemn us in this latter, and not we condemn our selves in
that former case, wherein we may be more happy, then any exchange of earthly
business under heaven can make us? when we shall not need wholly to cast aside
our civil callings, but abate something of our too quick, and eager edge after
them, and take this employment up into the best and sovereign place, setting
all other in the second and subordinate, under it. We need not let fall our
civil merchandise, to fall to this spiritual, it is enough to keep it down
that it be not predominant in us above the celestial, or equal to it, in our
estimation, affections, and actions, all earthly things must be much inferior
to heavenly, if they have their own places; yet may they sit with these best
things, though not near the best place, the merchandise of wisdom, and wealth
are not two contraryes expelling one another, they are not incompatible with
one another, but may dwell together, so that the world will be content to
abide, and keep her house, and residence, in the lower room, and not offer to
clymbe into the upper palace of these spiritual treasures; which being
heavenly in nature, have most reason, to be highest in their habitation, and
the other have as much reason to fit down lower, as being (at their very best)
but from below.

You then who have insight and understanding in the carriage of men's
merchandise, and do well know the mystery of this temporal trading; strive to
look a little further into this spiritual, which does full well deserve to be
looked after; the mystery whereof, as I have in some measure desired to
manifest unto you, so shall the Lord (if once you unfeignedly take it in hand)
reveal it more completely then I can do, and accquaint your hearts, with many
other excellent advantages and benefitts, then those which I have endeavored
to declare. And hereof you may be sure, for Christ Jesus has given his word
that [if any man will do the will of God, the same shall know it more entyrely
then others] the more sincere practice, the more sound knowledge. The Lord
thinks knowledge well bestowed, on such as bring it to obedience, and express
it therein; for thereby does arise double advantage, for. both he gayne's. and
we gain also.


He, glory in our practice; we, good by our knowledge: it is honorable to him,
and to us it is happy.

Begin then (brethren) to gather your thoughts together, and to call yours
wits about you, that you may be truly wise in this one thing, let you civil
calling be a provocation to this spiritual: endeavor to see that (as it were)
through this; make all the good of that, as the glass of this, which is so
much better, that the best of the earthly is scarce good enough, to be a
shadow, or representation, of the heavenly.

It was the course of our Lord Jesus Christ, to carry the eyes and ears of his
hearers, from natural, to divine things, he evermore made spiritual use of
all civil occurrents: and as this was Christ's manner of teaching, so will it
also be their order of learning, who have well learned Christ: and more
especially does it appertain unto you considering that you are pointed at in
particular, and the kindome of heaven is compared, (among many other things) to
your commerce, and merchandise: so that if you should not see this better,
through your own meaner estate, your blindness were the more justly blameable.

Strive then, and endeavor earnestly hereunto, that you may (as wise
Christians) answer the worthy expectation Jesus Christ has of you, that you
may not be civil merchants alone, (for Pagans can be so) but more especially
spiritual ones, which neither any Pagan (no, nor counterfeit Christian) can by
any means attain to be.

And think this trade worthy the following, not only for the foresaid
benefitts, but for some other sweet considerations ensuing, which I will in
few words set down, the more to enamour, and affect your hearts with the same,
that nothing may be omitted whereby you may be provoked, and put on, with all
alacrity and ex pedition, to entertain traffike with the living God, in this
enduring treasure.

In the first place then, (to woo you to attain this wealth) we must
remember, it is every one's Duty to be as rich as he can in this commerce, and
the richer he is, the better is it for himself, and for others also, Note what
I say, it is every man's duty to be as rich as he can, and the more rich any man
is the more does.

God gain by him: He gain from God: Others from him.
In the world this is not so, no man is bound by any law of God to be rich,
(though many break the most of Gods laws to make themselves see) every one is
to rest fatiffyed with that measure of estate, that the wisdom of God see's
mere to cast upon him, whether it be mighty, mean, or whatsoever: and but to
desire to be greater then the Lord would have us, is covetensnes, which is a
sin heavily accursed of God, as the root of all evil, and the rajne of all
them, upon whom the branches thereof do spread themselves.

But in this business, covetousones is a virtue, a thing commanded to us,
required of us, (as we have heard before) if a man can enlarge his heart like
hell, after the riches of heaven, and in regard of grace, have an appetite as
greedy as the grave, (which still crye's GJVE, GIVE) the more he would have,
and does crave, the happier man is he.

God would have all men rich that meddle in this business, yea rich in all the
particulers of it.

rich in knowledge. rich in faith. rich in obedience
Abounding in all things, which may make them rich in God. To this end how many
precepts does God give that men should be so? how many promises does he make
to harten those that would be so? how many prayers does the Apostle Paul, (in
all his epistles) put up, that those, Christians to whom he wrought, might be
so? there is nothing left (on Gods part) unattempted, to persuade men to
purchase, and store up these truest treasures. Most happy is he that has most;
for his abundance shall glorify God, further his own glory with God; and help
to enrich others with himself. The better any Christian thrive's, the better is
it for other Christians, in the same communion of saints, because grace is a
thing that cannot be engrossed, or made a Monopoly, but it is, and will be
common, and comfortable to others, with our selves, in the friut of the same,
whereof, the more any receives from us, the more do we ourselves gain from
God, who multiplye's it most, in their hearts who are found faithful
distributers of the same. No man can here undermine another, there is no
possibility of forestalling any man, but very much, of furthering all men with
the fruit of that which we our selves have received from the Lord.

And which is yet more (and much, to be noted) the very poorest of all those,
who are in any measure endued with saving grace, are reputed rich, and that,
both because, it is the nature of these things to enrich those that have them:
and because also, it is the nature of God (in the riches of his infinite grace)
to repute them rich (in his son Christ) who have received of his spirit, and by
faith, lay hold on those riches of his son, who therefore became poor, to
make us rich before his Father.

All the graces of Gods spirit are far beyond all pearls, and the most
precious things that can be had are but vile in respect of them, even as dung,
or trash, as we have heard. Now all men know, that a little portion of that
which is of great price, and valuation, will make a man rich, and he may well
be esteemed worth much, though he have no great quantity of that which is so
highly esteemed, especially, if lo it were, that whosoever had any one of
those prizeles pearls, should be interessed into that man's whole estate, which
had all the rest that were to be had: so is every Christian into Christ, we
having any measure given us of God, are made partakers of his fullnes, in whom
all the graces are beyond measure. So that (as was said) the nature of these
things is rich, inasmuch as the come from the Lord: and the Lord, from whom
they come, does (through his grace) account them rich, who have received them
according to his most wise dispensation.

It is not the quantity, or measure, but the nature, and quality, of Grace, by
which our estate spiritual, is measured of the Lord, our God.

Now then, sum up these passages together, to wit; FIRST, that it is most
lawful for all men to be as rich as they can: SECONDLY, that the richer any
man is, the happier he is, both before God, and in himself, and unto others
and, TIRDLY that every man that is (indeed) endued with any saving grace, is
reputed rich:
and then tell me whether these be not entising considerations, to tole on any
man, to take this trade in hand, and to do his best to follow it with his
whole heart.

Add here unto further, that a man, in this merchandise, if he be once a
trader, he can never fail, he that is once rich, cannot be beggerd; if God do
set up a man, he is past falling down, our spiritual stock cannot break.

You never read in all Gods book, nor never heard in the whole world, of any
(if you were rightly informed) that was undone, since the days of our first
father Adam, since his time, none has ever broke, of all that were ^ruly free
of the body of Jesus Christ: this corporation never had one Bankrupt, no not
one, of all those that ever traded in these true treasures: for these riches
have power to preserve themselves where they are once planted, and also to
preserve those in whom they are planted; there is virtue in them to sustain
those that have them, that nothing in heaven earth, or hell, no angel, man, or
devil, are able to bereave us of them; they are given us by him who gives us
(by his Christ) ability, to stand with them, and that against.

both the feyrcest. and the subtilest.
assaults, wherewith Satan, either jmmediately by himself, or by any m^anes of
his, shall attempt, by power, or by policy, to overturne us. The Lord does arm
us with strength against his force. with wisdom against his fraud.


That we may be able to stand fast and firm, in the evil day, and to accquit
ourselves as men, yea, as men of God, against the Devil, who is Gods enemy,
and ours.

They that teach otherwise, and tell the world that men may fall finally from
saving grace, are but Satan's jmposiors, to abase the stability of the Graces of
the holy Ghost; and to abuse the riches of our souls, making them as mutable,
and as mooveable, as those of our body; and concerning all such, as do say
they may be lost, I think it may be most safely said, that (of these men)
these true and never fading treasures, were never found he that does persuade
others that a man may fall for ever from it, was never yet made a partaker of
any whit, of the true preserving power of it.

Assuredly it is no small mischeife the devil does these men, in telling them
thus, and setting them on, to teach others so to believe; because he well
knowe's that (which their sillynes does not understand;) that, he that
believes, all the grace he can get, may be lost (and himself become a lost
child after he he has gotten it) can never so seek after saving grace, as
he may obtain it.

For why? it being not attaynable but by.

both, our most earnest, and affectionate desires. and, our most unfeigned, and
utmost endeavors
What man can have any heart, to address himself unto either of these, when he
knowe's before (hand, he shall get nothing, but that, which (when in both
kinds he has done his best) may come to nothing? This is no small jndignity
to God, and jnjury to us: jndignity to him, to deny him double honor. the
honor of his graces, in their just valuation. the honor of our services, in
their due affection
and jnjury to us it is also, in that it keeps us in-capable of those graces,
which should preserve us, inasmuch as we are so meanly peaswaded of them,
that they are not able to preserve us. The man that is not persuaded of the
power of Grace, shall never be partaker of the power of it: that heart that does
not think it can keep him, is not fit to keep it. God speaks better to us,
when he tell's us, that by grace we stand,] and that so strongly, that we can
never jrrecoverable fall. It is for the world, and for deceitful riches to
yield bankrupts and beggarly companions: it is for vain men in whom is no
constancy, or confidence, or conscience, to undo such as they deal withal:
it is for mortal and corruptible things, to fail, and leave us in poor
estate. The things of God are such as, the world can, neither have from him,
nor take from us.


We cannot have them from the world, therefore cannot the world have them from
us, for what they can^ not give, it lies not in their power to deprive any man
off.

Now who would not meddle in that business, wherein never man did miscarry? who
is not in love with that trade, that never yielded one bankrupt, but wherein
every man who tradeth prospers?

And unto this consideration, cast in yet, one more, and that is the honor
that followe's these merchants, (of which something was before spoken). In the
world many men toil much, and get no wealth; many do attain wealth, which
yet attain not honor; but here whosever trades grows rich; and none are
enriched, but the same are also honored, and that of God, who does prefer us
to some spiritual, and divine dignityes, while we are on earth, (making us
Kings over sin, satan, and the world,) but the most, and best honors, are
reserved for us on high, when we shall be preferred to those heavenly places, and
promotions; wherein, we shall be happy, as long, as the Lord himself does inhabit
in the heaven of heavens. This traffike ever brings riches; these riches ever
bring honor, and glory, partly, on earth. perfectly, in heaven.


Now all men love wealth: most men love honor: why then come ^ither, all you
that love either, and feed on both to your fill, for here you may be, nay, you
shall be, both rich, and honorable; these two are never parted in our heavealy
trade, but do ever go together, though in the worlds affairs, they are often
found a sunder.

Let us then, (for conclusion) of all collect all these things we have spoken
and heard: and upon consent given unto them, be it our care to address our
selves, with all spiritual jndustrey, and diligence hereunto, It were a foul,
yea a woeful shame to us, to know there were such a beneficial trade, and to
be nobody in it; and so much the rather, because if we be anybody we shall be
rich, and if we be rich, we shall be honorable.

both in Gods account, while we live. and in Gods kingdom, when we dye.
They alone shall be able to stand before the Lord at the last day, who have
gotten some of this wealth; all others whether infidells without the church, or
unfaithful Christians within it; shall hang down their heads, and be banished
from all hope of blessedness; and abandoned unto eternal malediction.

Among men he that has little money may have much honest, but with the Lord, it
cannot be so; he who has not this riches, is a wretched, and forlorn
creature for ever: and as Princes that are honorable, and mighty, do not, nor
will, receive either base vagabonds who have noe calling, noe business, or,
place of abode, or villainous and wilful bankrupts, who might have been more
honesty and upright; into their dominions, and make them the Peers, and
principal officers of their kingdom; but disdain and drive them away, with
contempt, and scorn: so, neither will, or can, the Lord, admit any spiritual
beggars or bankrupts, into his king-dome to make them anybody there; but with
infinite jndignation, he will send them from himself, into the kingdom of
darkness, there to be dammed for ever.

In the world it is (at the worst) but a CROSS not be rich; bu to be void of
these riches, is noe less then a CVRSE; the other cannot be attained by many,
do what they can: but these are never wanted, but only in them, by whom they
are neglected; which neglect is insufferable in the sight of the living God,
who will not endure to let the abuse of his kindness, patience, long suffering
and goodness (whereby they might have been enriched) to go vnavenged; but will
reward them to their face, who are foul in this fearful offense.

As ever (then), we hope to hold up our heads for ever, and ever, before the
God of Gods, and to be happy in his heavenly glory: so let us settle our
selves, (and that in our souls) hereunto, that we may appear before him
comfortably, at that day, and live from that time, in glory with him beyond all
time.

Let not this world totally take up our hearts, to rob and bereave us of a
better: [ Love not the world, nor the things of the world] that is
predominantly; it is Gods own counsel, and backed with no small reason, [ for
if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him] and it is also
Christ's counsel, that we [labour not for the things that perish] that is so
instantly, as we should do, for those that perish not: for if we do so love
the world, and so labor for it, as we should do for these better things, we
cannot so look after these as we ought: neither will the Lord look after us,
as we would, But if the best love, and labor, of our hearts, be after these
best things; we shall surely attain them, yea we shall attain him, and he
will also entertayne us, with that most worthy welcome [well done good and
faithful serva^t, enter into thy masters joy] which joy, because it is endless,
I will end in the mention of it, desiring, that all that has been spoken, may
affect us, aright toward it.

Glory be to God on high
ERRATA.
Page Lin. Error. Correction. 19. 29. incenes. nicenes. 22. 28. or. our. 24.
19. dronond. drowned. 34. 30. it. if 35. 24. by not be. be not by. 25.
challeagne. challenge. 37. 28. them then. 40. 12. bebts. debts. 41. 17. the is
those. 49. 14. in it. 69. 26. proydie provide. 75. 7. to ever. ever to. 79. 1.
sherply. sharply. 94. 5. of any. of my. 97. 8. our place. one place. 105. 16.
admisse. amiss, 111. 20. upon where. whereupon. words to be put in. 47. 6,
tend to their. 63. 16. either to buy. 101. 7 chose, he had to do. words to be
put out 110. 31. in have.


