A sermon no less fruitful then famous. made in the year of our lord god
M.CCC.lxxxviii. This Sermon was found hidden in a wall.
In these our later days most necessary to be known. Neither adding to nor
diminishynge fro. Save the old and rude english thereof mended here and there.

To the christen reader.
LO Christen reder, while the world not slu^bred, but routed. and snorted in
the deep and dead sleep of ygnorauncye, some lyuelye spirits were waking, and
ceased not to call upon the drousye mul^itude of men, and to stir them up
from the long dreams of sinful living, that ones at the last they would
crepe out of darkness, and come forth to the hot shynyng su^ne of gods
word, that both the fylthie mystes of their hearts might be driven away, and
also their heuye and dy^nge spirits recreated, refresshed, and quyckened. So
that no man can allege that in any age there wanted preachers of gods
word. For he that keeps Israel slepeth not, ne slo^breth. And though through
his secret counsel, he sendethe more laborers into his harueste at one time
then at another, yet he has ever some to wede, to reap to gether sheues
together in to the barnes of everlasting life. Read therefore diligently this
little sermon so long since written, and thou shalt perceive the same quick
spirit in the authoure thereof, that thou now merueilest at in other of our
time.

He sharply, ernestlye. and wyttely rebukes the sins of all sorts of men,
and speaks as one having auctorytye, and as the scrybes, and pharisees,
which with their leaded, and blunt darts could never touch the quycke,
though they have occupied, and worn the pulpettes so many years. The word
of God is lyuelye, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged
sword and cuteeth even unto the dyuision of the soul, and of the spirit, and
of the ioyntures, and mary. etc. wherefore ef^sones I exhort the to read this
little treatise diligently, ^ebr. 4.
and not only to reverence antiquity, and the lively spirit, and word of
God therein, but also to learn, both to acknowledge and more over to amend the
wyckednes of thy life.

Read rtionem uillicationis tuae Luce. xvi.
Christ the author and doctoure of all truth. in his gospel, math. 2
lykeneth the kyngedome of heaven, to a householder, saying on this wise. Like
is the kyngedome of heaven to a houssholdynge man, that went forth first in
the morning, to hyre workmen into his vyneyarde, so did he about the third
hour the syxte / the nynthe, and the eleue^th. And as he found men standing
idle, he said to them why stand ye here unoccupied, Go ye into my vyneyarde
and that, that is dewetye, I shall give you. And when the day was ended, he
called his steward, and bad that he should give every man a pennye.

Spiritually, this householder is our master and lord Christ the true
householder and head of his church here in earth: which calls men in
diverse hours of the day, that is in diverse ages of the world. As in the time
of nature, he called by insperation, Abell. Enoche, Noe, Abraham, and other
like.

In the time of the old law. he called Moses, Dauyd, Esaye, and Jeremy, with
the prophets. And in the time of grace he called the apostles, martyrs
confessors, and virgins. He called also some in chyldehode as Johan Baptiste.
Some in their youth as Johan the Euangelyste, some in myddle age as Peter and
Andrewe. Some in their later days. As Gamaliel, and Joseph of Brimathye. And
all those be called to labor in the Lords vyneyard that is his church. yea
and that sundry ways. For right as ye se, that in trymmynge of this materyall
vine, there be diverse laborers. For some cut away the branches that be
void. Some underset, and lay abroad the vine: yea, some pare away the old
earth, and lay new to the root, which offices, all be so necessary to the
vine. that if any of them fail, or want, it shall be either let, or utterly
destroy the grow ynge of the vine: For unless the vine be cut, she will wax
wild except she berayled up and laid abroad, wedes and nettels will soon
over grow her. And if the rote be not fatted with new and fresh donge for
feablenesse, she shall wax barreyne. No less needful in Christ's church be
these three off^c^rs, Preesthode, Knyghthod, and laborers. To priests or
preachers, it behooves to cut away the void branches of sin, with the
sword of gods word. To knights it falls to let wrongs, and the hastes to
be done, and to maintain Gods law, and them that be teachers thereof. yea
and to keep the land from insurrection, and inuadynge of, other lands, The
laborers must labor bodyly, and with sore sweat, get out of the earth
bodylye sustenaunce both for them self and for other, And all these estates
be so needful to the church, that none may well be without other. For if
Priests wanted, the people for defaulte of knowledge of Gods word, would wax
wild in vices, and so dye goostlye.

And were not knighthode, and men to rule the people, by law and hardness,
thieves and enemyr^ would so increase, that no man could iyue in peace.

And but for laborers, both priests and knights must be come artifie^rs,
plowmen and heardes, or else must for defaute of bodily sustinaunce, die And
therefore says the great clerk Auicenna. That every unreasonable beast, if
it have that, Auice^na
that nature and kind has ordained for it, as kind give it, is suffycyente
to live by him self, without any other of the same kind. As if there were
but one horse, or one sheep in the world, Comparatio.
yet if he had come and gr^sse, as nature and kind has ordained for such a
beast, he should live well enough. But if there were but one man in the world,
although he had all the good that is therein yet for defau^e he should dye,
or his life should be worse then if he were not. And the cause is thus, for
that thing that kind has ordained for man's sustenau^ce without other
preparynge, or altering then it has of kind accords not to him. As if a
man have corn as it comes from the earth yet it is no meat according to
him until it be by ma^s craft changed into bread And though he have flesh
or fysshe, yet while it is raw, and not by man's labor sodden, roasted broyled,
or baken it accords not to man's sustenau^ce. Eue^ so the wol that the sheep
bearethe must needs, by diverse crafts be altered, and changed, or it be able
to cloth any man And ^rewlye a man by him self should never do at those
thinges^ And therefore says this clerk, that it is needful, that some be
husband me^ some me^ of occupations, some merchants to fetch that. that one
land wants, from other, where as is pl^n^ye.

As surely this one thing should be a great cause, why every estate should
love other. And men of one craft should neither hate, neither despise men of
an other craft. For one of them is so needful to another, that oftentimes,
those crafts that seem most unhonest, might worste be forborne. And thus I
dare say, that he that is not labourynge in this world, either in praieng and
preaching, as behooves priests. for the health of the people, or in
defending the causes of the nedy, in sighting against tyrrauntes, and enemies
which is the office of knights or in laboring on the earth, that pertains
to the commons. when the day of reckoning shall come, that is the end of this
life, right as he lived here without labor or travail, so shall he want
there the reward of the penny, that is the endelesse joy of heaven. And as he
was living here, after no state, nor order, so shall he the^ be put into the
place, where is no order, but everlasting horroure and sorrow, that is hell.
wherefore every man se to what estate. Job, 10.
God has called him. and live therein by labor according to his degree. They
that be laboring men, or crafts men do it trewlye, 1. Cor. 7. 1. Pet. 3.
if thou be a servant, or a bondeman, be subject, and live in dread, to
displease thy master or lord for Christ's sake. If thou be a marchaunte.
dysceyue not thy brother, in chaffetyng. If thou be a knight or a Lord,
defend the pore and nedye man, 1. tes. 4.
from such as would harm him.

Thou being a judge or a justice go not to the right hand for favor, nor into
the lift hand to punyshe for hate, Thou that art a priest then. Pro ^. 2. Tim.
4.
Instruct praise, and reprove. Instruct the ignoraunte, praise the obediente,
and reprove the dysobedient, to god. Thus every man labor and travail after
his degree. For when the eueninge co^met^ (that is the end of this world) then
shall every man take reward good or bad, after as he has labored here.

These be the words, that I have take to entreat upon. And be thus much to
say in englysh. Come give a rekening of thy bal^wike. Christ the authoure of
pity, and lover of salvation of his people, in the process of the gospel
enfourmeth every man, that is his baylye, by the ensample of a baylye, that he
monysshethe to prepare him self to make his answer, and give a rekeninge of
such goods as he has received of gods hand when the day of so strayte a
reckoning shall come, that is, the day of dome, And so I at this time,
thorough the help of God, folowinge him that is master of so great
authority because I know nothing,
that should more draw a way man's unreasonable love, from the vain, and
transitory joy of this world,
then to have in mind, that dreadeful rekening so far as god permytteth, I
at this time, will show you how you shall dyspose you, to avoid then gods
ire: and vengeance, when there shall be so hard judgment, that we shall
account for every idle word, that we have spoken. For then shall be said
unto us And we shall have no power to go back.

Come give a reckoning of thy bailey wicke. Nota


But for further process of this first part of this sermon. know you there be
three baly wykes, that shall be called to this strayte reckoning. The first
shall aunsweare for him self and for other. And they be priests that have
ouersyghte or cure of man's soul. The second temporal lords that have the
governance of people And the third haylye shall account for him self or at
least have much less charge the^ the other. And that is every Christian man for
that has he receued of God. And every one of th^se shall answer to three
questyons. The questions.


The first Second Third.
The first questyon. How haste thou entered? The second How haste thou ruled,
The third, how have thou lived. And if thou can assoyle these three questions,
and dyscharge the of them. was there never earthly lord (without comparison)
that so rewarded his servants, as thy Lord will reward the. that is to say,
with life and joy everlasting. But on the other side, if thou now regarding
not thine own wel^h^ take no head of this rekeninge, if death take the
suddenly, so that thou pass hence in deadlye sin, and evil life, and have not
amended (as thou knoweste not, what shall befalle the. All the tongues that
ever were, or shall be, can not express, the sorrow, and woo, that thou shalt
suffer.

Therefore the desire of so great joy and the dread of so great pain though
the love of god were not in thine heart, should make the to think evermore.
that thou shalt give a reckenynge of the balywyke. Therefore as I said. The
first question, that shall be proponed to the first daily (that is a prelate,
or curate) is thus.

How have thou entered. Friend how entredeste thou hither, who brought the
into thy office, truth or symony. God or the devil, grace or money, the
flesh or the spirit, give now thy reckoning if thou can. if thou can not,
I council the without delay, to learn. For in case thou be called thus or it
be night, and the^ for the stand dombe for lack of knowledge and for
confusion, of thin own conscience, thou shalt fall into the sentence that here
ensues. Bynd his hands and fete and cast him into utter darkness where is
waylynge: and grentynge of teth, Therefore I counsel that thou advise the well,
how thou wylt au^swer to this questyon, how have thou entered whether by
calling, or by thine own procuringe for that thou would labor in gods
gospel. or for that thou would be rych^lye arrayed, answer to thine own
conscience now, as thou shall or it be long answer to god. Thou that have
taken the order of presthode on the whether thou be curate, or two, who styrred
the to take so high an estate upon they whether because thou would live in
gods contemplacion and study of gods word, to instruct the people, or
for to live a delycious life of other men's sweet, and thy self to labor
never a whytte.

And here might I ask a question, Question
why also set men their children to scole, whether for to get them great
auaunce me^tes, or to make them the better to know god and to serve him.
Solutio^
This their intention men may se openly, by the sciences that they put them
to. For they set them to the Canon, Civil or to the temporal law, not as to
be ministers of Justice, to defend the poor in right. etc,

But because they think, that these sciences shall, ^e means to make them
great men in the world. Questi^^
And why be there so few put to learn the word of God and to be preachers
thereof, but that there is no such gaynes as is in the other. ^olatio,
And so care they little on both parts, for godly living,

^
And truth it is, that saynt^ John Chrysostom says, parents be loving to the
bodies of their children, but the souls they regard not, they desire their
welfare in this world, but they pass not what they shall suffer in another.
Some ordeine great fees for the^ here. but none ordeyne they them to go^warde,
the loss of their bodies they will sore bewail but the health of their souls
they make no rekeni^g of. If they se them poor, they sorrow and syghe, but
though they se the^ sin, they make no manner of moon. And hereby they show
that they brought forth the bodies, but not the souls.

And now to speak again of prestes, if we take heed truly we shall perceive
great abhominatio^s that been scattered in the church now a days, Not^.
by and amongst priests, we shall well perce^ue I say that they come not
into Christ's fo^lde by Christ's calling for to profytte but by other means
and ways, to get them self worldly welthe. And this is cause of many
erroures among the people. And therefore it is written in the book, of mourning
where the Prophet speaks thus to god. The enymy has put his hand to all
things to him desyrable.

For that he has seen a certain people lawles entering into the sanctuarye,
of which thou had commanded that they should not enter that is to say:
into the church. The enemy is Sathanas, as his name so^ndeth, that has put
his hand to all that him lyketh. For what sin might the fend, by all his
craft or engyn, have sowed among men, that is not now a days used whenne
were they so great in half, as they be now. In what ple^tye is Pride, Envy,
wrath, and Couetyse. And likewise all other sins. And wherefore thinkeste
thou.

But for because there be lawles people, entered into the Temple, that neither
in them self keep the Law of God, nor can teach other. And to all such
says God by the Prophet Osee. For that thou have put away conning, ^ee. 4.
or knoweledge of gods will. I will put the away, that thou shalt use no
preesthode to me.

Perceive that God and hoholy scripture, expresselye here forbyddeth men to the
state of prestehode upon them, but if they have conynge that needs or
b^houeth them. Thou then that can no^her rule thy self, nor other, after the
law of God, beware how thou wylt answer God at this dreadful dome, when he
shall say to the Come give a reckoning of thy Baylywyke, The second question,
that any Prelate or Curate, must answer to, is this. How haste thou ruled,
that is to say, the souls of the subjects and the goods of poor men, give
thy account. First how thou haste governed gods flock committed to thy
Cure. As a hard, or as a hired man, that does all for his bodily hyer. As a
father, or as a wolf that eats the sheep and keeps them not. Say on and
tell me, say whom haste thou turned from their cursed living, by the devout
preaching and good ensample. whom haste thou taught the law of God, that was
before ignorant: There shall be hard a grievous accusyng of fatheries children
and a strey^ alledgynge of all the flock that thou have take of them thy
living, through their labor and sweet and do nothing therefore But let them
go astraye, wandrynge for pasture and water, and none gy^en them by the.

Dyrectly give thy reckoning, how haste thou ruled and spended the goods of
these pore me^ How shall thou trimble with horrible fear, ^r^au ^
then thinkeste thou, hear what saint Barnarde says, threttenynge Cle^kes,
and threttenyng ministers of the church. They be in the place of saints, and
they do wyckedly, in that they not holding them content with wages that are
sufficient to their necessaries, but the overplus, that nedye should be
sustained by, they be not ashamed to waste in the howses of their pride and
lechery witholdynge to them self wyckedlye, and cursedlye the lyuinges of pore
men, with double wyckenesse truly. First they do sin, for they rob other
men of their goods. Furthermore, for that they misuse holy things i^ their
vanities. And in their wyckednes. Every such baylye therefore beware, for to
the last fa^ thing thou shalt reken and give account. Thinkeste thou
then, that thou shalt not be disalowed of God, for that thou have myspended.
And in bringing up of young idle folowes nourysshed or taught as it were in a
schole, to blaspheme. God in all manner of points of evil lyuinge, in feadinge
of fat palfreys, of hou^^^s and hawks (and if so be that is worste of all)
on lecherous women. Here what is said of such. They have led their days in
vanity and in welthe and in a moment they be gone down i^to hell. Think not
therefore, but that ^hou shalt render streightlye the account of thy baly
wyke. The third question that he shall answer to, is this. How haste thou
lived, what light of holiness have thou given? showed to the people in thy
living. what myrrour haste thou been unto them. Now give thy reckoning, how
have thou lived as a good shepeh^rde, going before his flock with good
ensamples, or as a lewd person as a man or best, it is to wonder truly to se
how the life of priests is changed, They be clothed like lords and knights
they speak as vnhonestlye as any rybaulde or harlot, as couetously for gains
do they procure as any merchants. They ride like Princes. And all this that
thus is spente is of poor men's goods, and of Christ's heritage: Therefore
says a holy doctor the clay of Egypt is though stycking and meddled with
blood, and the slattes, were hard to be undone, for they were taken with the
fire of covetous, and with the layre or earth of lusts. In this point do
travail rich men, and in this watch they, lyeng awayt for pore men. In this
travail prelates that be blinded with to much shynynge of riches, that make
th^ym houses like churches in greatenes, and superfluous abundance of all
things, that with diverse payntures, color they their cha^bers, and with
diverse sylkes and clothinges in so^drye colors make their images gaye, but the
poor man for defaute of clothes beggeth, and with an emptye whom does cry at
the door. And shall I say so the says this doctoure. Often times these poor
men be robbed for to cloth stocks and stones. Esa, 22. Quid in hic aut quasi
quid hic,
To such speaks the Prophet Esai, who art thou here, or as who art thou here.
Here thou art occupieng the place of Peter, of Paul, of Thomas, or of
Martyne, but how as Judas was amongeste the apostles Simon Magus amongst the
disciples, as a candell, newly quenched, that fewmeth over all the house, instead of a light lantern, and as a smoke that blyndeth men's eyes instead of a
clear fire, if thou contrary thus the manner of living that Christ and his
apostles left to priests. Therefore says the Prophet Ieremye. Iere. ^^.
They have entered, and they have had, and and they have not be obedient with
falls title and corrupt inte^tio^. they have e^tred, they have had poor men's
goods, to their mysusynge. And they have not been obedyent to god in their
living. Therefore it is written, that they shall have the herdest dome. A hard
dome or judgment, Sap^. 6.
for that they have misentred, a harder judgment, for that they have
mysruled, the hardest judgment, for because they have so cursedly lived,
beyond all other, wherefore I counceyle the betymes thynk^ how thou will
make thy reckoning.

The second baly, that must answer for him self and for other, is he that
has the rule of any Realm, province, shyre or cou^treyes, as Kings.
Princes, Maires, Shireffes and Justices, and these shall also answer to three
questions, the first how have thou entered in thy office. w^^ther to profytte
the people to destroy fa^shed, and further truth, or for desire to obtain
thereby, worldly worship and richesse, if thou take such an office more for
thine own worldely profyt, then for to helye the commune welthe, thou art
none of the perfect members of the church, but art a tiraunt. And it is to
be feared lest there be many that desire such estate. Some that they may be
enhaficed with riches, and some that they might the rather oppress such as
they hate, and some be inhaunced in taking gifts, whereby they spare to
punysshe, those that have trespassed, and so make the^ perteyners of their
sins and for brib^s they work all things. And many such, when they be so
high in office, thynk not that they be poor men's sons brethren and
servants to the defense of the come^s but think them self to be of a higher
kind of nature, as they be auaunced to worldly, honor, which is but wind
and vanity, Ose. 8.
Of whom says god by the prophet. They have reigned, but not by me. They
have been princes but I know them not. So was Roboam king Salomons son. 2.
par. 10
when he was first king, auaunced in his h^rte, when the people of Israel
came to him and said, Thy father in hy^ last a days, put upon v^ a great
charge. We desire the that thou woldeste make it lyghter, and we will serve
the. The king axed council to the older wise men, which aduysed him to
answer them fair and that should be best. But he forsook these wise men's
cou^celles, and did after children that were his playfelowes, and said to
the people, when they came again. My least finger is bygger the^ my fathers
rygge bone. My father grieved you somewhat but I will add more.

The people herynge this, rebelled against him. And sythen^ the time, came
never the kingdom hole together again.

Wherefore it is good for rulers to take sobre council, and to eschew ear
crounders and always to have an eye of love to the comens, that they rule.

For know they well, be they never so high, that they shall come before a higher
judge to give a rekening, The second question. How haste thou ruled, that is
the people, and the office, that thou had to govern, thou that haste been
a judge in causes of poor me. How have thou kept this commandment of god.
that thou shall not take heed, to the person of the pore man, to be the harder
to him for his pouertye, nor thou shall have respect to the rich man's
countenance to spare or favor him, in wrong for his richrs. Oh Lord God,
Deu. 9.
what abusion is there among officers of both parts now a days, if a great
man pleat with a pore man to have ought, that he holds, every officer shall be
ready, to further all that he may the rich man in his cause that he may have
the end that he desires. But if a poor man pleat with a rich, then shall
there be so many delays, that though the poor man's right be open to all the
country for pure defaute of spendyng, he shall be constrained to let his cause
fall.

Shiriffes and baylyffes will return poor men's wryts with a tarde venit
except they feel money in their hands, And yet I hear say, of men that have
proved both courts, that the court that is called more spiritual or christen,
is more cursed. ^ro. 19.
Therefore it is truly said. Gifts they take out of men's bosoms, to subvert
the ways of right judgment. But in especial the words of christ be to be
feared. In what judgment ye judge other, ^at. 7.
your self shall receive the same As ye measure to other. etc. when ye shall
come to give your account. The third question, how haste thou lived thou that
iudgeste and punysheste other for trespassyng. It behooves the that punishest
other me^ for their trespasses to eschew and flee the wyckednes of the^. For
if thy self do unlawfully iudginge other thou condemnest thy self, since thou
doest^ that thing that thou damnest Paul says, Roma.
why teach thou not thy self that teach other why ^^ealest thou that
teach other men nor to steal. How shall that man take rule of other that
can not go before the^ in good living. And when any man stands before him in
judgment, he must take heed before what judge he shall stand him self, to
take his judgment after his deeds. But it is to be fered that many, fare, as
the two false priests, that would have damned to death holy Susan, ^usa^na.
for that she would not consent unto their lechery. Of the which it is
written, they turned away their eyes for that they would not se heaven, nor have
mind of right judgment. And so it fortuneth of that they which are more worthy
to be hanged, da^ne the^ that be less worthy. As Socrates the philosopher.
Socrates^
who on a time was demanded why he did laugh. ^alerius ^aximus ibro. 7.
For Ise, said he, great thieves lead a little thief to hangyng, I pray you
whether is he a greater thief, tha^ takes away a man's house, and his land
from him and his heirs for evermore, or he that for greeuede steals a sheep
or a calfe. And suppose you that sometime we have not such Judges, and me^ of
law the^ self very excorcione^s and bribours. And they judge other to death.
But I advise the, that iudgest other men to remember that thou shalt come into
judgment, and give a rekenyng of thy baylywyck. The 38 bailey
The third baylye, that shall be called to this dredful dome, shall be ^uery
christian man, that shall re^e^ to his lord god, for the goods that he has had
of his. And here I will speak but of this question that is, how have thou
governed the and thy goods, and how have thou entered here to thy gods. Beware
ye that have gotten any goods wrongfully, either taken by extorcion, by stelth
usury, or deceyte, Austen
woe shall be to you at this dredful day. For as saint Austen says, if he be
cast into the fire, that has not given of his own goods ryghteously gotten^
where thinkest^ thou, that he shall be cast, that has stole^ other men's goods^
And if he shall bren with the fend, that has not clothed the naked, where
iudgest thou that he shall brenne, that has made naked the^ that were clothed.

But two things, make me^ thus to live by rape of other men's goods, Moralli.
Grego. 8.
that is desire of honor and dread of poverty And what ve^geau^ce falls on
this sin of covetous, ye mayse by a figure of scripture when the angel said to
the prophet zachary, lift up thin eyes and se what is that tha^ goes out. And
the pphet asked what is that. The^ the a^gel said this is the pot going out,
^chary 6
that is the eye of the earth. And there was a wayghte of lead. And there was a
woman sitting in the myddest of the pot. And he took the gobbet of lead and
cast it into the pottes mouth. the woman's name was vnpie^ie. And the prophet
lift up his eyes, and se two weme^ like spirits in the air, with wings like
unto kytes or putto^kes, and they carried up the pot between heaven and earth
And the prophet asked the angel whither they would carye this pot. And he
said into the land of Samary. This pot is couetise. For as a pot has a wide
open mouth, Expos^tio
so covetousness gapeth evermore after worldly good, riches, and honor. And as
the lycoure in the pot profits not to the pot self, but them that draw
and drink thereof, so worldly good often profits not the keeper but other that
come after as it is written. He that has money shall have no fruit of it. And
this covetous is the eye of cauetous men, Eccl. 5.
for they be blind to se how they should come to heaven. But to win worldly
things they can se many ways like to oules and night crewes the better ^e by
night then by day. The payce of lead is the sin of obstinatio^, the woman
sitting in, the pot is vnpietie as the au^gel says that follows, and is
companion of avarice. A man through auerice does lose the pity that he should
have of the myschefe of his soul, since often men lose the life of their
soul by deadly sin, that they commit to get riches. And also they lose the
pity, that they should have to their bodies, putting them self so many great
parels and leoperdies of their bodies both by se and by land, and leseth
compassion toward other men, and all makes couetise. The pot is stopped with
this gobbet of led when vnpietie is closed thus by sin of obstination, by
covetousness that it may not go out of the kepers heart by repe^tau^ce ^. 10.
As Job says when he is fulfilled he shall be stopped. The ii. women that bare
up the pot, were pride and lust of flesh that i^ the scripture be called the
two daughters of the water leche, cryeng: Bring, bring, and they had wings.
The first woman that is pride, has two wings the first wynge be graces or
gifts spiritual, as connyng wysdom, council, and such other, for which
gifts often men were proud. The second wing^ is bodylye grace or gifts, as
strength beauty, au^cetry with such other, of which often me^ wax proud.
The wings of the second woman be fleshly desires, and they be glotony, and
sloth Of glotony speaks the holy doctor saint Gregory, Gregory
saying when the bellye is fulfilled, the pricks of lechery be stirred. Of
sloth says the great doctoure saint Austen, that Loath, while he was in
busynes dwelling amongst the shrowes in Sodom he was a good man. Augusti. de
o^flictu virtutis et viciorum
But when he was in the hyl idle, in dro^kennes, he lay by his own daughters.
And these women had wings like gleydes or put tockes, that with crieng voice
go seeking their meat, as Bartholomeus says. Bartholomeus de proprietatibus
rerum.
Thus fares the covetousness and fervent desire of fleshly men, as witnesses
saint Austen. we se says he that ravenous fysshes have some measure, for when
they ho^ger, they do rape and eat, Austen^
but when they be full they spare.

Only covetous men may not be fulfilled or satisfied, ever he takes, and
never has he enough neither dredeth he god or shame of men, neither spare he
father neither knows mother. with his brother accordethe he not, nor with his
friend keeps he troth, he oppresses widows and harmeth motherlesse
children, fre men he makes bond, and brings forth false witness, He
occupies dead men's goods, as though he never should dye. Augustinus.
what madness is this, says this doctor thus to lose life and grace, and
procure the souls dampnation, to win gold, and lose heaven And therefore
says the prophet, unhappiness shall compass them round about, Psalm. 54
travail and unrighteousness in the mids among them. Also Innocentius
speaking of the harm that comes of covetousness says. Innocentius.
Oh how many men has covetousness deceived and spylled. For covetousness of
reward of gifts that the king Balac promised Balaam he would have cursed the
people of god, N.22.
notwithstanding his own Ass reproved him i^ his own conscience, and all that
was in him reproved and hurt his fo^e at a wall. And yet was he overcome and
led away with couetousenes, which enforsed him what he might. Iosu. 7.
Ach an was stoned: for couetousenes made him stele gold and precious clothes
against gods commandment. ^ehesie was strike^ with misery, for that he sold
a m^^^ health, 4. Reg. 5
that came by the grace of god. Judas for covetousness sold Christ, and
afterward hanged him self: An any and Saphira his wife did dye suddenly,
Actu. 5.
for because they denied to Peter the price or su^me of money that they
received. Couetise is cause, that rich men eat poor men, even as beasts eat
grass keeping it under, this is daily seen. For if a rich man have a feld, and
in the myddest or on the outs side a poor man have but one acre, or if a rych
man have a hole street save one house that same poor brother of his owes he
never ceasethe till that he have gotten that on^ of the poor man's hand, other
by prayenge or entreatynge or pursuynge, Thus fares it by king Achab that by
the procurement of his false Queen I^sabel, slew the pore man naboth for that
he would not sell him his vyneyarde lyeng by his palayse, Ambro. de suo,
libello de Naboth
where upon says saint Ambrose. How far will ye rich men stretche out
your covetousness, will ye dwell alone upon the earth, and have no poor man with
you, why put you out your fellow in kind, and challenge to your self the
possession, that kind and nature has made common to al me^ both poor and
rich. The earth was made common, and will ye rych me^ challenge proper sight
therein Nature and kind knows no riches, for she brings forth al manner of
men pore. we be not gotten with rich clothes, nor borne with gold and silver.

Naked brings us nature and kind into this world both nedy of meat and
drink. Naked the earth takes us again, as naked even as she brings us
hither. And the sepulcher ca^ she not close with us our possessions and riches.
Kind makes no dyffere^ce between pore and rich, neither in coming hither
neither in goinge hence, al after one manner brings she forth, all after one
manner closes she the grave. Who so ever makes difference between pore and
rich, abide till they have lain a little space in the grave, and the^ open and
look among the dead bones, who was rich, and who was pore. Except it be as
thus that mo clothes be rotten with the rich then with the poor. And that
endamageth the^ that be alive, Job. 24
and profits not them that be dead. Thus says the holy doctor of such
extorcioners it is written, other men's feldes they repe, and of the vine of hi^
that has been oppressed, they pluck away the grapes. They leave me^ naked,
and pluck away their clothes, that they have not wherewith to cover the^ from
cold. And they lift up this pot, yt I spoke of before between heaven and
earth, for couetousenes of me^, nether has charity in earth to their
brethren, nor to god of heaven, and they bare this pot into the land of
Synear, that is to say into the land of stenche (that is) hell. For there is
stenche instead of sweet smelling. Beware that thou go not with this pot nor
with the woman theri^ i^ any case, take heed that thou not mary with her. For
then ye must be both one. This is that lecherous woman and full of fleshly
delytes, with whom kings and merchants have committed lechery here in earth,
and with her virtues they have been made rich, whose damnation is written in
the books of revelations of saint John by these words In one day shall her
plages come, Death sorrow, and hunger and fire shall brenne her.

For strong is God that will aue^ge him on her. The kings of the earth that
have done leche^y with her, and have lived in her delytes. when they shall se
the smoke of her brenning, shall stand a far of weping and way lynge, yea
cryenge alas, alas, that great city that was clothed with piss, purple and
brasel and ouergilt with gold and precious stones and pearl, for in one hour
all these great richesse shall be destroyed. The^ shall they say that shall be
damned with her. we have erred from the way of truth, and in the light of
ryghtwysenes has not shyned upon us, and the Su^ne of understanding has not
rise^ to us, we have been made weary in the way of wyckednes and of lusts and
have gone the hard ways, but the way of truth we know not, what has pride
profited us for the best of our riches, what has it brought unto us? All is
gone as a shadow of death and we can now show no manner of holiness to our
kynred. In our wyckednes we be wasted away. Think therefore I counsel the how
thou shalt give a reckoning of the bailey wyke when he shall say. Redderatione^
villicatio^is tue. The.ii. part of this sermon.

HEre should be asked how haste thou governed, thy wife, thy children and
servants haste thou brought the^ up aft^r the laws of god and continued the^
there in asmoch as lies in thy power but if thou have brough the^ up after an
other way, or suffered them to go at their own will. think not but thou must
give accomptes therefore, when shall be said, redderatione^ villicationis tue. But
and if thou will avoid all the strait and hard acco^ptes. I counsel the what
soever thou be, to fall and cleave unto the mercy and goodness of god through
Christ's demerites, with a lively faith and repenting her^e of thine
iniquities. And now therefore beware of thy life in time past. and amend, And
if thou do not, and that in time. who shall grant the pardone and release of
this thy accomptes.

IN this second part, with the help of god, I will show first, who shall call
us to this rekenyng. Secondarely before who^ we shall rek^. Finally what
punishment shall be to the that be found false seruan^tes and wicked and what
reward shall be given the^ that be found faithful and true servants. For the
fyrstlye shall know that there be two iugeme^tes, the first anon after the
departing of the body and the soul which is ap^^culer dome whereof speake^h
^uke i^ his gospel. The second dome shall be anon after the general
resurrection, and that shall be universal and of this speaks saint matthew To
the first shall every man be called one after another, Mat. 27.
as the world passes. To the.ii, shall we come all together to the twynkling
of an ey. To the i^ me^ shall be called by.iii. so^ners or sergeantes. The first
(...) sickness, the.ii. age, the.iii. death.

The first warns. The second chre^tene^h, and the third takes. This is a
kyndlye order but so^ time it falls vnkindlye. For some dye, that never wist
what was sicktnes, nor age, as children that be suddenly slain. And so me, yea
and the most part now adays that die. dey^ before their pure and natural age
of death^

Therefore I say, that the ^yrst, that calls us to this especial judgment, is
sycknes, and this is double, for some is sicknesth at follows all mankind,
for that every man has it. And some is sickness, that some men have but not al,
yea, the.i, sycknes is double, for some is within, in the myddest of the soul
and some is without in the feblenesse of the body, that needs must be
destroyed, in whom continuance of time, himself, is cause of corruption. As
the Philosopher says that there be feblenesse in sickness. Notetu^
Now may a man se here by that though a man shut out of his house, (that is his
heart) all manner of worldly and fleshlye thoughts yet with all that ever he ca^
do shall he ska^tly suffice to think onelys on God, the space of a pr^ n^
while. But some other thought of things that be passi^g, enters into the
soul and draws her from the contemplation. But Oh good god what a sickness
is this, and heavy burden, upon the sons of Ada^. That on the foul mucke
and dounge of the world, we can think long enough: but on the Lord whom
the soul should have most delectatio^ by, we can not think so little a space,
but that the cockle will enter among the wheat. Of this syckenes spoke, S.
Paul when he said, I se an other law in my me^bres, rebelli^ge against the law
of my spirit and taking me to the law of sine. So that it fares by us as it
does by a man that would look stedfastlye against the son and can not endure
long for nothing, and yet for no defaut that is in the son, for it is most
clear in him self, and so by reason best should be seen, but it for the
feblenesse of man's eyes. ^ene. 3.
Right so sythens Adam our first father was put out of Paradyse, all his
of spring have been thus sick, as the Prophet says. Our fathers have eaten
a bitter grape, and the teeth of their children be waxen an edge. ^^e. 18.
The second sickness, that is coming to al ma^kynd, comes of feebleness of
body, as hunger, thyrste, cold, heat, sorrow. werynes, and many other, as Job
says, Job. 14
and man that is borne of a woman lyui^g a little time, is filled with many
miseries. But there be other sycknesses that come to some men, but not to all,
as Leprye Palsye, feuers^ dropsyes blyndnes, and many other, as it is said to
the people of Israel, in scripture. But if thou keep commandments, that be
written in the book of life, Deutro
I shall encr^ace thy sorrows and the syckenes of thy seed, great syckenes and
long abydyng, most euyls, and always co^tinuinge. And ye shall understand,
that god sends such syckenes, otherwhyle to good me^, and so^times to
shrewes. To good men God does it for two causes, and that I said of syckenes,
I would it to be vnderst^e^d of al manner of tribulation. The first cause, for
that they should ever know, that they have no infectio^ of the^ self, but of
god only and to encrese in mekenes. ^ori^. 12:
Of this says Paul. Lest the greatness of revelation, lift or extol me up into
pride to me is given the prycke of my flesh thau^gel of Sathanas to smite me on
the neck wherefore I have thrice prayed god that if should go fro me, and he
au^swered unto me my grace is sufficient, for the virtue is fulfilled i^
sickness within thus says the gloss The fe^d axyng Job, to be tempted, was
hard, and not the apostle axyng his te^ptatio^ to be removed, god herd hi^ that
should be dampened, and he hard not him that he would save. Also god se^deth
saints oftentimes sycknes, and psecution, to give us sinful wretches,
e^sa^ple of patience, For if he should suffer his saints to have such
tribulation in this world, and thank hi^ thereof much more we wretches, that
god has send to, not a hundredth part of their sorrow, should bear it mekely.
Sithe^s we have deserved a thousa^de times so much as they have, wherefore as
we read of Thobi, Thobi. ^.
that on a day as he was weary of buryenge of pore men, the which should else
have been unburied, and have been eaten of hounds, and fowls, as the Carrien
of other unreasonable beasts, as he for wearynes was laid to rest (through
the sufferaunce of God) the swallows that bredde above in the house made
ordure and donged in his eyes, where by he wared blind. This is written, that
god suffered this temptacio^ to come to him, for an ensample of paciens to all
the^ that came after. And so was also the temptation of holy Job and though
Thoby from his chyldehode evermore did dread God, and keep his
commandments, yet was he not agreaued against god, though that the
myscheuous blyndnes fell to him, but vnmeueably dwelled in the dread of god,
thanki^g him all the days of his life.

Loo here scripture expresselye says that god suffered that holy man to have
this syckenes to give other that come after him, an ensample of patience. And
also sometime god sends syckenes and tribulation to wicked me^, and that for,
ii. causes, First for that they should love God, and leave their sin, as it
is written. Their sycknes are multiplied, and after they hasted to Godward. For
we se often me^ i^ sycknes know their God, that never would have turned to him
while they were hole. Also god sends sickness often to a gaste other me^,
lest they should follow their sin. As the sycknes of Antioche, Antioche
whom God smote with such a plage that worms scattered out of his body he
being alive. And the sli^ck was so great, and foul that his friends were weary
therewith and might not suffer it, yea at length he might not abide his own
stench and the^ began he to know him self, and said, it is ryghtful to be
subject to god, and a mortal man not to hold him equal with god. And the
storye says he asked mercy of god, of who^ he could none have, and he made a
vow to God, that he would make the City of Jerusalem free and the Iues as
free, as the me^ of Athenes, and that he would honor Gods Temple with
precious stones, and also array and multiplye the holy vessels, and find of
his own ^a^des the costs and expe^ses perteining to the sacrifice, and that
he would become a Jew, and go over all the land preaching gods law. And yet
god gave him no mercy for no there was there in hi^ contrition nor repe^tau^ce
that spronge of faith, but of odious pain. For what was in hi^ to forsake his
wickedness, when he was unable to do good or evil. And by this ve^geau^ce that
god took on this king, should me^ se what it is to be desobedie^t to god. Also
it is to be taken head, that when sycknes comes ever it shows that the
patie^t is mortal, and that he shall needs dye, and though he may escape this
sickness, yet can be not eschew death. And so he must needs come to the
reckoning. The second somuer.
The second Somner. that shall call to this peculyer judgment is age and
feebleness, Propreties of death.
whose propertye is, although hetary with the, he will not leave the, till he
has brought the to the endetthat is death. But there be many though they have
this so^ner with the^, yet they take no head, He seth how his heed horeth, his
back croketh, his breath stiketh, his teeth fallen his sight fails, his ears
ware heuye to here, what means all this, but that age so^pneth the to the do^e
but what more madness can be the^ a man being called and drawn to so dreadful
a rekeni^g where except he answer well, he forfaiteth both body and soul to
da^pnatio^ for ever, if he se a little mirth, by the way, he forgets who has
hi^ by the sleue. So does he that is strike^ with age and has so great
pleasure in this worlds wealth, that he forgets whether he is away. Here
fore says a holy doctor, that amongst all the abusio^s of the world most
is of an old man that is ostinate, for he thinks not of his out goinge of
this world nor of his passing into the life to come, he hears three
messengers of death but he believes the^ not, and the cause is, for the three
fold cord, that such an old man is bound with, is hard to break this cord is
costom, that is of the plattes, which be idle youth, dishonest speech, and
wicked deed. The which if they grow with a man from his childhode unto ma^s
age, they make a three fold cord to byndtholde man in custom of sin.
Herefore says Esaias, Esaye.
break the bonds of syn. Think therefore who souer that thou be, that art this
so^ned, thou can not escape, but yt thou must make thy rekeni^g The third
so^ner to his reckenynge is death, and his condition is that, the third somner.
diffinitio mortis,
come he first or come he last, he spares neither pore nor rych, aged nor young
nor he fears no threatnynge, he takethe heed to no prayer, nor of any gift,
nor grants any respite but without delay, he brings forth man to
judgment. Augustinus.
Therefore says D. Austen well ought every man to dread the day of death For I
what estate soever man's last day fi^deth hi^ when he goth out of this world i^
the same estate it brings hi^ to his judgment, Therefore says the wise man's
to his son, Son think on thy last day and thou shalt never sin. The
day of judgment.
Now remember that thou shall reke^ for thy baylywyke. I said also, that there
was an other day of judgment to the which all me^ shall come together i^ the
swynklyng of an eye, and this shall be universal. And like as to the other,
eueryma^ shall be called with three so^ners, so to this judgment all the world
shall be called with three general so^ners and right as other three messengers
show a man's end, so do these messe^gers til the^d of the world The first is
the worlds siknes The.ii. is his age, and feebleness, and the.iii. is his end.
The sickness of the world, thou shall know by charity warynge cold, and his
age and feebleness, thou shalt know thy tokens fulfilled, and his end thou
shalt know, by Antichrists pursuing. First I say thou shalt know the
worlds sickness, by charity waxi^g cold Clerks that do write on natural
things say, to know the worlds sickness.
that the body is sick, when that his kyndlye hea^ is to little, or when it is
to much. The^ sythens under stand as thus, that all men is as one body, whose
kyndlye or natural heart is charity, that is love to god, and love to thy
neighbor, unnatural or unkindly heat, is lust full love to other
creatures. when therefore thou see, that the love of me^ to godward, and to
their neyboures is, cold, little and fainte, and the love to worldly things is
great and fervent. Then know thou well, that unkindly heat is to great and
unkindly heat is to little. That this is a knowledge of this sickness. Mat. 23
I may prove by christ's auctorite, for he him self gave this as a sign
drawing to the end of the world, for that the wyckednes shall be plenteous,
charity shall wax cold, Therefore when you see charity thus little set by,
of ye world, and wickedne^ in^rease because the worldly things be most set by
and loved, know well. yt the world and his wealth passes and that this summer is
come. And thus says saynt^ Paul, wit thou well, that in the last days shall
come perilous times, ^. Tim. 3.
and there shall be men l^uynge them selves (that is to say) their bodies, and
all things belonging thereto, covetousness borne up with pride, vnobediente to
ye father and mother, fellows with out affection, with out peace, blamers,
vncontine^t, vnmylde, without benignity, traytoures, rebels swellyng,
lovers of lusts more the^ of god, having a likeness of pety, more then the
virtue thereof, and these flee you, when thou see the people of such fashion,
know thou well. that the first so^ner warns althe world, that the day of
rekeninge draws toward. The second so^ner that shall warm all the world, is
the age of the world, and this shows tokens fulfilled all ready, but I know
well, that we be not sufficient to know the times, that the father has put in
his own power, to show certainly, the day, the year, or the hour of
judgment. This knowledge was hedden from the v^ry Apostles of Christ, and
also from christ's ma^hode as to show it us. Nevertheless we may by authority
of scriptures, with reasons, and expositio^s of holy me^, well and openly show yt
this day of wrath is nygh. Lest any man say in his heart, as it is written of a
rich man a foul bellye seruer, that said I will gather all my fruits and my
goods, and I will say to my soul, soul you have much goods laid up in
store, Luke. ^^
for many years, take thine ease, eat and drink, and be merye. I shall show
you that this day is at hand, but how nygh I ca^ not say, nor will not. For if
Paul said now for a. M.ccc. year and more past, ^. Cor. 10
we be those to who^ thendes of the world be come much more may we say ye same
that be so much nere the end the^ he was Also. S John Chrysostom says.
Chrisotomus.
Thou see darkness over all and why do test thou that the day is at an end.
First on the valleys is darkness when the day draws downwarde when therefore
thou see the valleys dark, A propre ^imilitude^
why doutest you whether it be nere night or no. But if thou se the sun so
low yt darkness be upon the hills thou wylt say doutbles yt it is night Right
so if thou se in the seculer men, that darkness of sin begineth to have the
maystrye, it is a token that the world ends. But when thou seesle priests,
that be put in the top or susfrau^cye of spiritual dignity, and that should
be as hills amongst the cominalte of the people in perfytte living, that
darkness of syn has got the vpperhand of them, who doubts but yt the
world is at an end. Io achin^
Also Abbas Io achi^ in ye exposition of Jeremy says, that from the year of
our lord. M, CC. al times be to be suspected and we be past this suspect time
nyghe two hundred years. And maid yldegar, Maid yldegar
in ye book of her prophesies, if it be lefull to give them credit, in ye
third part the.xi, vision and seue^tye chapter, moves this reason. Right as
in the seven thousand years the world shall pass, and as in the syxth day
man was made and fourmed, Aduer^^^
so in six thousand years, he was brought again and reformed and as in the
seventh day, the world was full made, and god rested of his werkynge, so in
seventh thousand year,
the nu^bre of them yt shall be saved, shall be fulfilled, and then shall ye
saints holy rest in body and soul. If then it be so as it seems by this
maidens words, ye seven thousand years in passing, ^
of the world accord to ye seven days in maki^g of it. Let us se what it
wants, yt these seven thousand years be not fulfilled. For if we nu^bre the
years from the nativity of `Christe, ^
to the years from the beginning of the world, to Christ's coming following,
the mind of Austen Bid, Origene, Augusti^us
and the perfectest doctors teaching on this matter. It is passed now almoost
six thousand, and six hundredth years, as it is open in a book called
Speculu^ iudiciale. So it follows yt this day is more then half gone, if we
should give crede^ce to this maidens reason. Mat. 2^
But if we lean to the gospel of Matthew, we shall find yt the disciples axed
of Christ three questions. Fy^ste what time the city of Jerusalem should be
destroyed. The second, what tokens were of his coming to judgment. Third
what sign should be of the end of the world. And Christ ga^e no certain time of
these things when they should fall, but he gave the tokens, Nota.
by the which they might know when they drew near. To the first question of
the destructoin of Jerusalem, he said when the Romans come to beseige ye
city, the^ sone after it shall be destroyed. And as to the second and the
third, he gave them many tokens, as were these, that realm, shall rise against
realm, and people against people, and that there shulder the opening of seven
seals is declared the state of the church, from the time of Christ to be end
of the world. The.iiii. first Seals show the estate of the church, from the
time of christ to the time of Antichrists appearyng, and his foregoers, the
which is showed in the openi^g of the other seals: The opening of the first
seal, The y^st seal.
tells the state of the church in the time of preaching of Christ and his
apostles. For then the first beast that is a Lion, gave his ^oyce, that
betokens the preachers of Christ's resurrection, and his ascension. For then
went out a white horse and he that sat upon him had a bow is his hand, and
he went forth ouercomynge to overcome. Expositi
By this white horse we understand the clean life and conversation, that those
preachers had, and by the bow their true preaching, pryckyng sorrow or
repentance, in men's harte^ for their sins without flattering. They went out
of Iewrye that they came of, wynni^g and ouercoming some of the Jews, and made
them to leave the trust yt they had in tholde law, and to believe in Ies^
Christ and follow his teachinge and they went out to overcome the paynems,
showing to them that their images were no gods, but man's work vnmyghtie to
save the^ self, or any other drawyng the^ to ye believe of Jesus Christ God and
man. The.^^ seal.
In the opening of the second seal, there cried a calfe, which was a beast
wont to be slain, and offered to god in the old law. This shewethe the state
of the church in the time of marters that for their steadfast preachi^g
Expositio.
and for the truth of gods word shede their blood, and that is betokened
by the red horse that went out at the opening of this seal, and this e^tate
began at Nero the cursed Emperor, Nero. Constantin^ magnus.
and endured to the time of Constantyue the great that endowed the church. In
this time many of Christ's se^uau^tes, and namely the leaders of Christ's
flock were slain and of.xxii. Bishops of rome that were before the time of
Syluester, Syluester.
the first, I read but of four, but yt they were martyrs. And also in ye time
of Dioclesian the Emperor the persecution of Christen men was so great, that
in.xxx. days, were slain.xxii. thousand me^ and women in diverse cou^t^^is
for the law of God, The.iii. seal.
The openyng of the third seal, tells the state of the church in the time
^f heret^kes that is fygured by the black horse or false understanding of
scripture. Expositi
For then cried the third beast, that is a man, for at that time was it
needful for to preach the mysterye of Christ's incarnation and passion,
against the heretykes that take amysse these points. How christ took very
mankind of Mary, he being god as he was before, and his mother being maid
before and after. The.iiii. seal. Expositi
The opening of ye fourth seal tells ye state of ye church in the time of
hypocrites, that be tokened by the ^ale^ horse, yt be signs of penance
without forth, to blind the people. And he that sat upon the horse, his name
was death. For they flee goostly them that they led and teach to God by other
ways the^ by christ. And hell follows them, for hell receives those yt these
men deceive. At that time shall it be need that the fourth bea^te, that in the
Egle flies highest of all fowls, make his cry, to raise up the gospel, and
to praise gods law above al other, lest men's wit and their traditions,
tread down and ouergrow the law of god by enfourmynge of these hypocrites.
And this is ye last estate that is or shall be in the church before the coming
and clear appearing of the great membre of Antichrist. the fifth seal,
The openyng of the fyfte seal. shows the state of the church, that then
shall follow. And the desire that the folowers of gods law, shall^ have, after
the end of this world, to be delivered of this woo. The.6. seal. ^
The opening of the syxte seal. tells the state of the church, in the time
of Antichrists lymmes, which estate ye may know to be when ye se fulfylled^
that ^aynt John prophesyed to fall in the opening of this seal, where he
says. After this I se four angriles standing upon four corners of the earth
holding the four wyndes yt they blow not upon the earth upon the se, Note.
nor upon the trees. The.iiii. angels be the nombre of all the deuyls ministers
that in those days, to do their master pleasure, shall stop the four
wyndes, that be the four Gospels to be preached, and shall let the brethe of
the holy ghost to fall upon men, that they might mourn for their sin, to
amend their life, and also upon them that would increase in virtue, The
seventh seal.
and upon perfect men, what after this is to come? but that the mysterye of
the seventh seal be showed, yt he come in his own person, who^ Jesus Christ
shall sle^^ the breath of his mouth when the fend shall ^hewe the vttermoost
persecution that he and his servants can do to Christes^ subjects, and that
shall be ye.iii. warnyng, yt ye world shall have to come to this last judgment.
In all this matter. I have naught said of my self, but of other doctors that
be approved. I said also in my second principal that it was to be known,
before what judge we must reken, that is, god, him self, he that sees all our
deeds and all our thoughts from the beginning of our life to ^hend, and he
shall show there the hid things of our hertes, openi^ge to all the world
the righteousness of his judgment, so that by the power of God, every man's
deeds shall be showed to all the world. And so it seems by the words of
saint John in the Apocalypse where he see dead men great and little standing
in the figure of the throne: And books were opened. And another book was
ope^ed that was of life, the dead men were judged, after the things that were
written in the books after their own doings. These books be men's
conscience, that now be closed, Ex positio.
but then shall be opened to all the world to read therein, both their deeds and
thoughts. And the book of life, is Christ's living and doctrine, that is
hid now to them that shall be dampened, through their own malice, that
council men to follow the world rather then God. In the first book shall be
written all that we have done. In the other all that we should have done. And
then shall dead men be judged after those things that be written in the
books. And if the deeds that we have done, and be written in the books of our
conscience be according ^s the book of Christ's teaching and living the
which is the book of life, we shall be saved or else we shall be dampened for
the judgment shall be given after our works Look therefore now what is
written in the book of thy conscience while thou art here, and if thou find
any thing contrary to Christ's life and teaching, scrape it out with the
knyfe of repentance, and write it better, evermore thinking that thou shalt
give a rek^nyng. etc. Also I said principallye that it were good to know what
reward shall then be given to the wise servants and good, and what to false
and wicked servants, whereupon it is written, Nota.
that the Lord Jesus Christ shall come to judgment in the same body, that
he took of Marye the vyrgyne, and the wou^des that he suffered for our
redemption And all that ever shall be saved, taking again, their bodies
cleauynge to the heed Christ shall be rauysshed metynge him in the air (as
Saint Paul says) they that shall be dampened lyenge upon the earth, as in a
tonne of wine the dregs by death benethe, and the clear wine houeth above,
The^ shall Christ axe accomt of the deeds of mercy reprouyng falls Christen men,
for leaving them undone, rehersyng the deeds of mercy and other pains that
his true servants have suffered in following him. Then shall those, falls
servants go with the devil whom they have served, the earth swallowynge
them into the endless fire, and ryghtfull men shall go into everlasting life.
Then shall be fulfilled that is written i^ the book of the priuities. woe woe, woe
shall be unto them that dwell on earth, woe to the payn^^ that gave that worship to
deed images wrought with man's hand, and to other creatures, that he should
have given to god that him made, woe to the Jew that trusts to much to the
old law, then shall he se the son of Marye judging the world whom he
despised and crucified, woe to the false christen man^ that knew the will of God
and fulfilled it not. Also woo shall be for the sin of thought, to the that
haste shut out of thy heart, the famylye of God, that is mind of his
Passion, holy contemplatio^ of his goodness, and memory of his benefytes and
thanks therefore, and haste also excluded mekenes, petye, gentylnes, etc. And
haste made thine heart a house of swyne, and a den of thieves, by unclean
thoughts and delytes. As thou here haste shu^te God out of thy heart, so shall
he shut the out of heaven. Thou haste harbored the company of the fend, and
with him in hell thou shall ever abide, woe also shall be for the sin of
speech, for that thou couldeste not open thy mouth, for foul and stynkynge
sin, to praise God in the felowshyppe of saints.

Thou haste used thy speech vnhonestlye, with cursynge, fraud, deceyte,
lyenge, forswerynge, scoruynge, and backbytynge. For praysynge, co^menlye is
not in the mouth of sinners in the which if thou haddeste kept thy mouth
clean, thou should have song in heaven in the felowshyppe of angels this
blessed Song, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, dominus, deus onmipote^s, that is,
holy, holy, holy art thou Lord god almyghtye. Now crienge, and weeping, thou
shall in the company of deuyls. Cry, Ue, ve, ve, qua^te sunt ten^dre, that
is, woe, woe, woe, great be these darkness, woe also shall be for the sin of
works. Thou have ben proud, thy pride as Esaye says, shall be drawn with
the into hell. Thou haste ben brent with envy. Through envy of the devil,
death entered into the world, and they shall follow him that be on his side as
Solomon says. Salomo^
Or thou be styrred with wrath, and every man that bears wrath to his
brother is gyltye of judgment, as Christ says in the gospel of Mathewe:
Mat. 5.
Or thou have been slow, and therefore disease shall come to the as to a
wayfarynge man, and thy power shall be as of one unarmed man, says the book
of Proverbs. Prouer.
Or if thou have been lecherous, a glotton, or a covetous man, Know (says
Paul) that neither aduouterer, Paulus.
nor unclean person, that is a glotton or a covetous person shall ever have
enheritaunce in the kyngedome of heaven. But fire and brymstone and the spirit
of tempests, that is, the fend of hell shall be part of their pain. Nota.
when these dampened men be in this woo, they shall sing this rufull song,
written in the book of mourning. The joy of our hertes is gone: Our mirth is
turned to woo and sorrow. The crown of our head is fall from us. Alas for the
sin that we have done. But joy, joy and joy, shall be unto them that be
saved, joy in God, joy all among them selves. And joy one, of another that
be saved, Conclu^^on.
then are they happy. Oh how happy are they for that their trauayles ben
finyshed through christ, which brought them to so gracious an^ende. Then are
they happy for that they be escaped the perils of the world and the pain
hell. Oh how happy are they, for the endeles bliss that they have in the
sight of god. Cu^ honor and gloria in secula seculorum. Amen.

Printed at London by Richard Kel^.


