A PLEASANT COMEDY, Called WILY BEGVILDE.

The Chief Actors be these: A poor Scholar, a rich Fool, and a Knave at a
shifte.



First Edition.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for CLEMENT KNIGHT: and are to be sold at his
Shop, in Panles Churchyard, at the sign of the Holy Lamb. 1606.

Gripe: an Usurer. Ploddall: a Farmer. Sophos: a Scholar. Churms: a Lawyer.
Robin goodfellow. Fortunatus: Gripes Son. Lelia: Gripes daughter. Nurse. Peter
Ploddall: Ploddals son. Pegge: Nurses daughter. Will Cricket. Mother Midnight.
An old man. Syluanus. Clearke.
SPECTRVM. THE PROLOGVE.
What hoe, where are these paltrie Plaiers? still poaring in their papers and
never perfect? for shame come forth, your Audience stay so long, their eyes
wax dim with expectation.

Enter one of the Players. How now my honest Rogue; what play shall we have
here to night?

Play. Sir you may look upon the Title.


Prol. What, Spectrum once again? Why noble Cerberus, nothing but patch-pannell
stuff, old gally-mawfreies and cotten-candle eloquence? out you bawling
bandogge foxf^rd slave: you dried stockefish you, out of my sight.


Exit the Player. Well it is no matter: I Will set me down and see it, and for
fault of a better, I Will supply the plate of a scuruy Prologue.

Spectrum is a looking glass indeed,
Wherein a man a History may read,
Of base conceits and damned roguerie:
The very sink of hell-bred villeny.

Enter a Iuggler. Iuggler. Why how now humorous George? what as necholy as a
mantletree?

Will you see any tricks of Leigerdemaine, slight of hand, clenly conuayance,
or deceptio visus? what will you see Gentleman to drive you out of these dumps?


Prol. Out you soust gurnet, you Woolfist, be gone I say and bid the Players
dispatch and come away quickly, and tell their fiery Poet that before I have
done with him; I Will make him do penance upon a stage in a Calves skin.


Iuggler. O Lord sir ye are deceived in me, I am no t^ ^ecarrier, I am a
Iuggler.

I have the superficial skill of all the seven liberal sciences at my singers
end.

I Will show you a trick of the twelues, and turn him over ^he thumbes with a
trice.

I Will make him fly swifter then meditation.

I Will show you as many toies as there be minutes in a month, and as many
tricks as there be motes in the sun.


Prol. Prithee what tricks can thou do?


Iuggler. Marry sir I will show you a trick of cleanly conueiance.

Hei fortuna furim nunquam credo, With a cast of clean conueyance, come aloft
Jack for thy masters advantage (he is gone I warrant ye.)


Spectrum is conveyed away: and W^^y beguiled, stands in the place of it. Prol.
Mas an it is well done, now I see thou can d^e something, hold thee there is
twelve pence for thy labor*

Go to that barme-froth Poet and to him say,
He quite has lost the Title of his play,
His Calue skin jests from hence are clean exiled,
Thus once you see that Wily is beguiled.

Exit the Iuggler. Prol. Now kind Spectators, I dare boldly say,
You all are welcome to our Authors play:
Be still a while, and ere we go,
We Will make your eyes with laughter flow.
Let Momus mates judge how they list,
We fear not what they babble:
Nor any paltry Poets pen,
Amongst that rascal rabble.
But time forbids me further speech,
My tongue must stop her race:
My time is come, I must be dumb,
And give the Actors place.

Exit. WILY BEGVILDE.
Enter Gripe, solus. A Heavy purse makes a light heart: O the consideration of
this pouch, this pouch!

Why he that has money, has hearts ease and the world in a string.

O this red chink, and silver coin, it is the consolation of the World.

I can sit at home quietly in my chair, and send out my angels by sea, and by
land, and bid fly villanes and fetch in ten in the hundred, I and a better
penny too. Let me see, I have but two children in all the world to bestow my
goods upon, Fortunatus my son and Lelia my daughter. For my son, he follows
the wars, and that which he gets with swaggering, he spendes in swaggering: but
I Will curb him, his allowance whilst live shall be small, and so he shall be
sure not to spend much: And if I die I will leave him a portion, that (if he
will be a good husband and follow his fathers steps) shall maintain him like a
gentleman: and if he will not, let (...) follow his own humor til he be weary
of it, and so let him go: now for my daughter she is my only joy, and the staff
of my age, and I have bestowed good bringing up upon her (barlady): why she is
even modesty it self, it does me good to look on her. Now if I can harken out
some wealthy marriage for her, I have my only desire.

Mas, and well remembered, here is my neighbor Ploddall hard by, has but one
only son, and (let me see) I take it, his Lands are better than five thousand
pounds; now if I can make a match between his son and my daughter, and so
join his Land and my money together, O it will be a blessed union. Well I Will in,
and get a Scriuener, I Will write, to him about it presently: But stay here come
M. Churmes the Lawer, I Will desire him to do so much.


Enter Churms. Churms. Good morrow M. Gripe.


Gripe. O good morrow M. Churms.

What says my two debtors, that I lent 200. pound to? will they not pay use and
charges of suit?


Churms. Faith Sir I doubt they are bankrouts: I would you had your principal.


Gripe. Nay I Will have all, or I Will imprison their bodies: But M. Churms there is a
matter I would feign have you do, but you must be very secret.


Churms. O sir fear not that I Will warrant you.


Gripe. Why then this it is: my neighbor Ploddall hereby, you know is a man of
very fair Land, and he has but one son, upon whom he means to bestow all that
he has: Now I would make a match between my daughter Lelia and him; what
think you of it.


Churms. Marry I think twould be a good match, but the young man has had very
simple bringing up.


Gripe. (...) what care I for that? so he have lands and living enough, my
daughter has bringing up will serve them both. Now I would have you to write me
a Letter to goodman Ploddall concerning this matter, and I Will please you for
your pains.


Churms. I Will warrant you sir, I Will do it artificially.


Gripe. Do, good M. Churms, but be very secret, I have some business this
morning, and therefore I Will leave you a while, and if you will come to dinner to
me anon, you shall be very heartily welcome.


Exit Gripe. Churms. Thanks good sir I Will trouble you.

Now twere a good jest if I could cosen the old Churl of his daughter, and
get the wench for my self.

Sounds I am as proper a man, as Peter Ploddall: and though his father be as
good a man as mine, yet far fetched and dear bought is good for Ladies, and I
am sure I have been as far as Cales to fetch that I have.

I have been at Cambridge a Scholar, at Cales a Soldier, and now in the
Country a Lawyer, and the next degree shall be a Connicatcher:

For I Will go near to cosen old father share-penny of his daughter* I Will cast
about I Will warrant him;

I Will go dine with him, and write him his Letter,

And then I Will go seek out my kind companion Robin Goodfellow, and betwixt us
we will make her yield to any thing.

We Will ha the common law oath to hand, and the ciuilllawe oath the other:

We Will toss Lelia like a tennis ball.


Exit. Enter old Ploddall, and his son Peter, an old man Ploddals Tenant, and
Will Cricket his son. Ploddall. Ah Tenant, an ill husband (barlady): thrice at
thy house and never at home?

You know my mind, will you give ten shillings more rent?

I must discharge you else.


Old man. Alas Landlord, will you undo me? I ^it of a great rent already, and
am very poor.


Will. Cr. Very poor? yare a very Ass. Lord how my stomach wambles at that
same word (very poor)! Father, if you love your son William, never name that
same word very poor:

For I Will stand to it, that its pettilasseny to name very poor to a man that's
oath top of his marriage.


Oldman. Why son, art oath top of thy marriage, to whom I prithee?


Will. Marry to prittie Peg, mistress Lelias nurses daughter.

O it is the daprest wench that ever danced after a Taberand pipe.

For she will so heel it, and toe it, and trip it,

O her buttockes will quake like a custard.


P. Ploddall. Why William, when were you with her?


Will. O Peter does your mouth water at that?

Truly I was never with her, but I know I shall speed.

For the other day she looked on me and laughed, and that's a good sign (ye know):
and therefore old silver top, never talk of charging or discharging.

For I tell you I am my fathers heir: and if you discharge me, I Will discharge
my pestilence at you. For to let my house before my lease be out, is
cut-throatery: and to scrape for more rent is polepennery.

And so fare you well good Grandsire Usury: come father lets be gone.


Exeunt Will. and his Father. Ploddall. Well, I Will make the beggarly knaves to
pack for this:

I Will have it every cross, income and Rent too.

Enter Chr. with a Letr. But stay here comes one: O it is M. Churms.

I hope he brings me some good news.

M. Churms yare well met, I am even almost starved for money.

You must tak^ ^^^e damnable course with my Tenants: they will ^ay.


Churms* Faith ^ir, they are grown to be captious knaves.

But I Will move them with a Habeas corpus.


Ploddall. Do, good M. Churmes, or use any other villenous course shall please
you.

But (...) ^ewes abro^^?


Churms* ^^^th little news: but here is a Letter which M. Gripe desi^^^ me to
deliver you. And though it stand not with my reputation, to be a carrier of
Letters, yet not knowing how much it might concern you, I thought it better
something to abase my self, then you should be any ways hindered.


Ploddall. Thanks good sir, and I Will in and read it.


Exeunt Ploddall and his son. Manet Chu. Churms. Thus men of reach must look
to live,
I cry content, and murder where I kiss,
Gripe takes me for his faithful friend,
Imparts to me the secrets of his heart;
And Ploddall thinks I am as true a friend,
To every enterprise he takes in hand,
As ever breathed under the cope of heaven:
But damme me if they find it so,
All this makes for my avail,
I Will ha the wench my self, or else my wits shall fail.

Exit. Enter Lelia and Nurse gathering of Flowers. Lelia. See how the earth
(this fragrant spring) is clad,
And mantled round in sweet Nymph Floraes roabes.
Here grows the alluring Rose,
Sweet Marigolds, and the lovely Hyacinth:
Come Nurse, gather:
A crown of Roses shall adorn my head,
I Will pranke my self with flowers of the prime,
And thus I Will spend away my primerose time.

Nurse. Ruftie, tuftie, are you so frolic?
O that you knew as much as I do, twould cool you.

Lelia. Why what know thou Nurse? prithee tell me.


Nurse. Heavy news in faith mistress,

You must be matched and married to a husband* ha, ha, ha, ha, ^ husband in faith.


Lelia. A Husband, Nurse? why that's good ne^^^ (...) be a good one.


Nurse. A good one quotha? ha, ha, ha, ha: why Wo^an I heard your father say,
that he would marry you to Peter Ploddall, that Puckefist, that snudge snowte,
that Cole carrierly Clown. Lord, twould be as good as mea^e and drink to me,
to see how the fool would^ woo^ you.


Lelia. No, no, my Father did butiest: think (...) I can stoop so low to
take a brown* bread (...) a Clown that's brought up at the Cart*


Nurse. Cart quotha? I, heel cart you, for (...) tell how to court you.


Lelia. Ah Nurse, sweet Sophos is the man,
Whose love is locked in Lelias tender breast,
This heart has vowed, (if heavens do not deny,)
My love with his intoomb'd in earth shall lie.

Nurse. Peace Mistress, stand aside, here comes some body.


Enter Sophos. Sophos. Optatis non est spes vlla potiri:
Yet Phoebus send down thy tralucent beams,
Behold the earth that mournes in sad attire,
The flowers at Sophos presence gins to droope,
Whose trickling tears for Lelias loss
Do turn the Plains into a standing Poole:
Sweet Cynthia smile, cheer up the drouping Flowers,
Let Sophos once more see a sunshine day,
O let the sacred center of my heart,
I mean fair Lelia Natures fairest work,
Be once again the object to mine eyes.
O but I wish in vain, whilst her I wish to see,
Her Father he obscures her from my sight,
He pleades my want of wealth,
And says it is a bar in Venus Court.
How has fond fortune by her fatal doom,
Predestined me to live in hapless hopes,
Still turning false her fickle wavering wheel!
And Loves fair goddess, with her Circian cup,
Inchanteth so fond Cupids poisoned darts,
That love the only Loadstarre of my life,
Does draw my thoughts into a labyrinth,
But stay:
What do I see, what do mine eyes behold?
(O happy sight) it is fair Lelias face.
Hail heavens bright nymph the period of my grief,
Sole guidresse of my thoughts and author of my joy.

Lelia Sweet Sophos welcome to Lelia,
Fair Dido Carthaginians beauteous Queen,
Not half so joyful was when as the Trojan Prince,
Enaeas, landed on the sandy shores
Of Carthage confines as thy Lelia is,
To see her Sophos here arrived by chance.

Sophos. And blessed be chance that has conducted me, unto the place where I
might see my dear,

As dear to me as is the dearest life.


Nurse. Sir, you may see that Fortune is your friend.


Sophos. Yet Fortune favors fools.


Nurse. By that conclusion you should not be wi^e.


Lelia. Foul Fortune sometime smiles on virtue fair.


Sophos. It Is then to show her mutabilitie:
But since amidst ten thousand frowning threats
Of fickle fortunes thrice unconstant wheel,
She daines to show one little pleasing smile,
Lets do our best false Fortune to beguile,
And take advantage of her ever changing moodes.
See, see, how Tellus spangled mantle smiles,
And birds do chant their rural sugared notes
As ravished with our meetings sweet delights.
Since then there fits for love both time and place:
Let love and liking hand in hand embrace.

Nurse. Sir the next way to win her love, is to linger her leisure.

I measure my mistress by my lovely self, make a promise to a man, and keep
it, I have but one fault, I near made promise in my life, but I stick to it
tooth and nail: I Will pay it home in faith.

If I promise my love a kiss, I Will give him two: marry at first I will make
nice, and cry fie, fie, and that will make him come again and again,

I Will make him break his wind with come againes.


Sophos. But what says Lelia to her Sophos love?


Lelia. Ah Sophos, that fond blind boy,
That wrings these passions from my Sophos heart,
Has likewise wounded Lelia with his dart,
And force perforce I yield the fortress up:
Here Sophos take thy Lelias hand,
And with this hand receive a loyal heart.
High Jove that rules heavens bright Canopie,
Grant to our love, a wished felicity.

Sophos. As joys the weary Pilgrim by the way,
When Phoebus waves unto the western deep,
To sommon him to his desired rest:
Or as the poor distressed Mariner,
Long tossed by shipwreck on the foming waves,
At length beholds the long wished haven,
Although from far, his heart does dance for joy:
So Loves consent at length my mind has eased,
My troubled thoughts, by sweet content are pleased.

Lelia. My father recks not virtue,
But vows to wed me to a man of wealth,
And swears, his gold shall counterpoyse his worth;
But Lelia scorn's proud Mammon's golden mines,
And better likes of learnings sacred lore,
Then of fond Fortunes glistering mockeries:
But Sophos try thy wits, and use thy utmost skill
To please my father, and compass his good will.

Sophos. To what fair Lelia wills, does Sophos yield content,
Yet that's the troublous gulf my silly ship must pass:
But were that venture harder to atchieue
Then that of Jason for the golden fleece,
I would effect it for sweet Lelias sake,
Or leave my self as witness of my thoughts.

Nurse. How say you by that, mistress? heel do any thing for your sake.


Lelia. Thanks gentle love.
But least my father should suspect,
Whose jealous head with more than Argus eyes,
Does measure every gesture that I use,
I Will in and leave you here alone,
Adieu sweet friend until we meet again,
Come Nurse follow me.

Exeunt Lelia and Nurse. Sophos. Farewell my love, fair fortune be thy guide.
Now Sophos, now bethink thy self
How thou may win her fathers will to knit this happy knot.
Alas thy state is poor, thy friends are few,
And fear forbids to tell my fates to friend:
Well, I Will try my Fortunes;
And find out some convenient time,
When as her fathers leisure best shall serve
To confer with him about fair Lelias love.

Exit Sophos, Enter Gripe, old Ploddall, Churms and Will. Cricket. Gripe.
Neighbor Ploddall, and Master Churms, yare welcome to my house.

What news in the Country, neighbor? you are a good husband, you ha done
sowing barley I am sure.


Ploddall. Yes sir ant please you, a fornight since.


Gripe. Master Churms, what says my debtors? can you get any money of them yet?


Churms. Not yet sir, I doubt they are scarce able to pay, You must eene
forbear them a while, they will exclaim on you else.


Gripe. Let them exclaim and hang and starve and beg, let me ha my money.


Ploddall. Here Is this good fellow too, Master Churms, I must eene put him and
his father over into your hands, they will pay me no Rent.


Will. Cric. This good fellow quotha? I scorn that b^^^, broking, brabbling,
brauling, bastardly, bottlenos'd, b^^tlebrow'd, bean-bellied name.

Why, Robin Goodfellow is this same cogging, p^rifogging, crackeropes
Calue-skin companion:

Put me and my father over to him? old Silver top and you had not put me
before my father, I would ha --


Ploddall. What woulst ha done?


Will. I would have had a snatch at you, that I (...)


Churms. What art a dog?


Will. No: if I had been a dog, I would ha snapt of your nose ere this, and so
I should have cosend the D^ of a Marriebone.


Gripe. Come, come, let me end this controversy.

Prithee go thy ways in, and bid the boy bring a cup of Sack here for my
friends.


Will. Would you have a sack Sir?


Gripe. A way fool, a cup of Sack to drink.


Will. O I had thought you would have had a sack to have put this lawcracking
cogfoystin, in stead of a pair of stocks.


Gripe. Away fool, get thee in I say.


Will. Into the buttrie you mean?


Gripe. I prithee do.


Will. I Will make your hogshead of Sackrue that word.


Exit Will. Cricket. Gripe. Neighbor Ploddall, I sent a Letter to you, by
Master Churms, how like you of the motion?


Ploddall. Marry I like well of the motion: my son I tell you is eene all the
stay I have: and all my care is, to have him take one that has something: for
as the world goes now, if they have nothing they may beg.

But I doubt he is too simple for your daughter. For I have brought him up
hardly, with brown bread, fat bacon, puddinges and souce, and (barlady) we
think it good fare too.


Gripe. Tush man, I care not for that, you ha no more children: you will make him
your heir, and give hi^ ^our lands, will you not?


Ploddall. Yes, he is eene all I have, I have no body else to bestow it upon.


Gripe. You say well.


Enter Will. Cricket and a Boy with Wine and a napkin. Will. Nay here, you drink
before you bargain.


Gr. Mas, an it is a good motion: oy, fill some wine.

He fills the^ wine and gives them the napkin. ^ere Neighbor and M. Churms I
drink to you.


Both. We thank you Sir.


Will. Lawer wipe clean: do you remember?


Churms. Remember, why?


Will. Why since you know when.


Churms. Since when?


Will. Why since you were bumbasted, that your lubberly legs would not carry
your lob cock body;

When you made an infusion of your stinking excrements, in your stalking
implements:

O you were plaguey frayd, and fowly raide.


Gripe. Prithee peace Will. Neighbor Ploddall, what say you to this match:
shall it go forward?


Ploddall. Sir, that must be as our children like.

For my son, I think I can rule him:

Marry, I doubt your daughter will hardly like of him, for God wot he is very
simple.


Gripe. My daughters mine to command, have I not brought her up to this?
She shall have him: I Will rule the roste for that,
I Will give her pounds and crowns, gold and silver:
I Will way her down in pure angel gold,
Say man, is it a match?

Ploddall. Faith, I agree.


Churms. But Sir, if you give your daughter so large a dowry, you will have some
part of his land conveyed to her by iointure.


Gripe. Yes marry that I will:
And we will desire your help for conueiance.

Ploddall. I, good Master Churms, and you shall be very well contented for your
pains.


Will. I marry, that's it he looked for all this while.


Churms. Sir, I will do the best I can.


Will. But Landlord: I can tell you news in faith,

There is one Sophos, a brave genman, heel wipe your son Peter's nose, of
Mistress Lelia, I can tell you he loves her well.


Gripe. Nay, I trow:


Will. Yes I know, for I am sure I saw them close together at Pupnoddie, in her
Closet.


Gripe. But I am sure she loves not him.


Will. Nay, I dare take it on my death she loves him,

For he is a scholar: and ware scholars, they have tricks for love in faith, for
with a little Logic and pitome colloquium they will make a wench do any thing:

Landlord, pray ye be not angry with me, for speaking my conscience.

In good faith, your son Peter's a very Clown to him:

Why, he is as fine a man as a wench can see in a summers day.


Gripe. Well, that shall not serve his turn, I Will cross him, I warrant ye.
I am glad I know it: I have suspected it a great while.
Sophos? why, what is Sophos? a base fellow.
Indeed he has a good wit, and can speak well,
He Is a scholar forsooth: one that has more wit then money,
And I like not that: he may beg for all that.
Scholars? why what are scholars without money?

Ploddall. Faith, eene like puddings without suet.


Gripe. Come, Neighbor, send your son to my house,
For he shall be welcome to me:
And my daughter shall intertaine him kindly.
What? I can, and will rule Lelia.
Come lets in, I Will discharge Sophos from my house presently.

Exeunt Gripe and Ploddall and Churms. Will. A horn plague of this money,
For it causes many horns to bud:
And for money many men are hornd.
For when maids are forced to love where they like not,
It makes them lie where they should not.
I Will be hanged, if ere mistress Lelia will ha Peter Ploddall,
I swear by this button cap (do you mark)
And by the round, sound, and profound contents (do you understand)
Of this costly Codpeece, (being a good properman as ye
see) that I could get her as soon as he, my self:
And if I had not a months mind in another place,
I would have a fling at her that's flat:
But I must set a good holiday face ont,
And go a wooeing to prittie Pegge: well, I Will too her in faith
While it is in my mind* But stay, I Will see how I can woo before I go: they say,
Use makes perfectness:
Look you now, suppose this were Pegge,
Now I set my cap oath to side on this fashion (do ye see?) then say I,
Sweet honey, bonny, sugar candy, Pegge,
Whose face more fair, then Brocke my fathers Cow,
Whose eyes do shinelike bacon rin^,
Whose lips are blew of azure hew,
Whose crooked nose down to her chin does bow.
For you know I must begin to commend her beauty,
And then I will tell her plainly, that I am in love with her, over my high
shoes, and then I will tell her that I do nothing of nights but sleep and
think on her, and specially of mornings:

And that does make my stomach so rise, that I Will be swo^n, I can turn me
three or four bowls of porredgeoner i^ a morning before breakefast.


Enter Robin-Goodfellow. Robin Goodfellow. How now sir, what make you here,
with all that timber in your neck?


Will. Timber? Sounds, I think he be a witch,
How knew he this were Timber?
Mas I Will speak him fair, and get out ons company: for I am afraid on him.

Robin. Speak man, what art afraid? what make here?


Will. A poor fellow Sir, ha bin drinking two or three pots of ale at an
alehouse, and ha lost my way Sir*


Robin. O, nay then I see thou art a good fellow*

See thou not Master Churms the Lawer to day?


Will. No Sir, would you speak with him.


Robin. I marry would I.


Will. If I see him, I Will tell him you would speak with him.


Robin. Nay, prithee stay, who will thou tell him would speak with him?


Will. Marry you Sir.


Robin. I, who am I?


Will. Faith Sir I know not.


Robin. If thou see him, tell him Robin Goodfellow would speak with him.


Will. O* I will Sir.


Exit. Will. Cr. Robin. Mas, the fellow was afraid,
I play the Bugbeare wheresoere I come,
And make them al afraid,
But here comes Master Churms.

Enter Churms. Churms. Fellow Robin, God save you, I have been seeking for you
in every Alehouse, in the Town.


Robin. What, Master Churms? What Is the best news abroad? it is long since I see
you.


Churms. Faith little news: but yet I am glad I have met with you.

I have a matter to impart to you, wherein you may stand me in some stead, and
make a good benefit to yourselfe: if we can deal cunningly, twill be worth a
double fee to you, (by the Lord.)


Robin. A double fee? speakeman, what is it?
If it be to betray mine own father, I Will doot for half a fee:
And for cunning let me alone.

Churms. Why, then this it is.

Here is Master Gripe hard by, a Clyent of mine, a man of mighty wealth, who
has but one daughter, her Dowry is her weight in gold.

Now Sir, this old penny father would marry her, to one Peter Ploddall, rich
Ploddalls son and heir.

Whom though his father means to leave very rich,
Yet he is a very Idiot and Brown bread Clown:
And one I know the wench does deadly hate,
And though their friends have given their full consent,
And both agreed on this unequal match.
Yet I know that Lelia will never marry him:
But there is another rival, in her love, one Sophos,
And he is a Scholar,
One whom I think fair Lelia dearly loves,
But her Father hates him as he hates a toad,
For he is in want, and Gripe gapes after gold,
And still relies upon the old said Saw;
Si nihil attuleris etc.

Robin. And wherein can I do you good in this?


Churms. Marry thus Sir:

I am of late grown passing familiar with M. Gripe,

And for Ploddall he takes me for his second self;

Now Sir, I Will fit my self to the old crummy Churls humors, and make them
believe I Will persuade Lelia to marry Peter Ploddall, and so get free access to
the wench at my pleasure:

Now oath other side I Will fall in with the Scholar, and him I Will handle cunningly
too;

I Will tell him that Lelia has acquainted me with her love to him:

And for because her Father much suspects the same,
He mewes her up as men do mew their hawks,
And so restraines her from her Sophos sight.
I Will say, because she does repose more trust,
Of secrecy in me, then in another man,
In courtesy she has requested me,
To do her kindest greetings to her Love,

Robin. An excellent devise, in faith.


Churms. I Sir, and by this means, I Will make a very gull of my fine Diogenes.

I shall know his secrets even from the very bottom of his heart:

Nay more Sir, you shall see me deal so cunningly, that he shall make me an
instrument to compass his desire;

When God knows I mean nothing less.
Qui dissimular (...) nescit ^i^ere.

Robin. Why this will be sport alone,
But what would you have me do in this action?

Churmes. Marry as I play with to hand, play you with the other.
Fall you aboard with Peter Ploddall,
Make him believe you will work miracles,
And that you have a powder will make Lelia love him.
Nay what will he not believe, and take all that comes (you know my mind)

And so we will make a gull of the one, and a goose of the other.

And if we can invent any devise, to bring the scholar in disgrace with her:
I do not doubt but with your help to creep between the bark and the tree, and
get Lelia my self.


Robin. Tush man, I have a devise in my head already to do that:

But they say her brother Fortunatus loves him dearly.


Churms. Tuthees out of the Country,

He follows the drum and the flagge.

He may chance to be killed with a double Canon before he come home again:

But what is your devise?


Robin. Marry I Will do this;

I Will frame an Indictment against Sophos, in manner and form of a Rape, and the
next Law day you shall prefer it; that so Lelia may loath him,

Her Father still deadly hate him,
And the young Gallant her brother utterly forsake him.

Churms. But how shall we prove it?


Robin. Sounds we will hire some Strumpet or other to be sworn against him.


Churms. Now (by the substance of my soul) it is an excellent devise.

Well, lets in, I Will first try my cunning otherwise, and if all fail, we will
try this conclusion.


Exeunt. Enter Mother Midnight, Nurse and Pegge. Mother M. In Faith Marget you
must eene take your daughter Pegge home again,

For she will not be ruled by me.


Nurse. Why Mother? what will she not do?


Mother M. Faith she neither did nor does, nor will do any thing:

Send her tuth market with eggs: she will sell them and spend the money,

Set her to make a pudding, she will put in no suet,

She Will run out of nights a dancing, and come no more home till day peep:

Bid her come to bed, she will come when she list.
Ah it is a nastie shame to see her bringing up.

Nurse. Out you Rogue, you arrant etc.
What know not thy Granam?
I know her to be a teatie old fool,
She Is never well, grunting in a corner.

Mother M. Nay she will camp (I warrant ye) O she has a tongue.

But Marget eene take her home to your Mistress, and there keep her: for He
keep her no longer.


Nurse. Mother pray ye take some pains with her, and keep her a while longer;
and if she do not mend, I Will beat her black and blew, in faith I Will not fail you
Minion.


Mother M. Faith at thy request, I Will take her ho^^ (...) try her a week longer.


Nurse. Come on huswife please you Granam, and be^^ good wench, and you shall
ha my blessing.


Mother M. Come follow us good Wench.


Exeunt Moth. Mid. and Nurse: Manet Peg. Pegge. I, farewell, fair weather
after you.

Your blessing quotha? I Will not give a single halpennie fo^^*

Who would live under a Mothers nose and a (...) ^ong*

A Maid cannot love, or catch a lip clip, or (...) but heers such tittle
tattle, and do not so, and (...) and be not so fond, and do not kiss, and do
no^ (...) I cannot tell what,

And I must love an I hang fort:
A sweet thing is love She singes.
That rules both heart and mind,
There is no comfort in the World
To Women that are kind.
Well I Will not stay with her: stay quotha?
To be yold and iold at, and tumbled, and tumbled, and tossed
and tourn'd as I am by an old Hagge,
I will not, no I will not in faith.
Enter Will Cricket. But stay, I must put on my smirking looks and smiling
countenance.

For here comes one makes bominatio^ suit to be my sprus husband.


Will. Lord, that my heart would serve me to speak to her, now she talks of
her sprus'd husband.

Well I Will set a good face ont,

Now I Will clap me as close to her as Jones buttockes of a close stool, and come
over her with my rolling, rattling, rumbling eloquence.

Sweet Pegge, honny Pegge, fine Pegge, dainty Pegge, brave Pegge, kind Pegge,
comely Pegge, my nutting, my sweeting, my Love, my dove, my honnie, my bonnie,
my ducke, my dear and my deareling:

Grace me with thy pleasant eyes,
And love without delay:
And cast not with thy crabbedlookes
A properman away.

Pegge. Why William what is the matter?


Will What Is the matter quotha?

Faith I ha been in a fair taking, for you, a bots on you.

For the other day after I had seen you, presently my belly began to rumble:

What Is the matter, thought I?

With that I bethought my self, and the sweet comport^nance of that same
sweet round face of thine came into my mind:

Out went I, and I Will be sworn I was so near taken, that I was feign to cut
all my points.

And do hear Pegge?

If thou do not grant me thy good will in the way of marriage;

First and for most I Will run out of my clothes, and then out of my wits for
thee.


Pegge. Nay William I would be loath you should do so for me.


Will. Will you look merrily on me and love me then?


Pegge. Faith I care not greatly if I do.


Will. Care not greatly if I do? what an answers that?

If thou will say, I Pegge take thee William to my spruce husband.


Peg. Why so I will, but we must have more company for witnesses first.


Will. That needs not: heers good store of young men and maids here.


Pegge. Why then heers my hand.


Will. Faith that's honestly spoken: say after me.
I Pegge Pudding promise thee William Cricket,
That I Will hold thee for mine own sweet Lilly,
While I have an head in mine eye, and a face on my nose, a mouth in my tongue,
and all that a woman should have, from the crown of my foot, to the sole of
my head,
I Will claspe thee and clip thee, coll thee and kiss thee,
Till I be better then naught, and worse than nothing:
When thou art ready to sleep, I Will be ready to snort:
When thou art in health, I Will be in gladness:
When thou art sick, I Will be ready to die:
When thou art mad, I Will run out of my wits:
And thereupon I strike the good luck,
Well said in faith:
O I could find in my hose to pocket thee in my heart.
Come my heart of gold, lets have a dance at the making up of this match:
Strike up Tom Piper. They dance.
Come Pegge I Will take the pains to bring thee homeward,
And at twylight, look for me again.

Exeunt. Enter Robin Goodfellow, and P. Ploddall. Robin. Come hither my honest
friend: M. Churms told me you had a suit to me,

What Is the matter?


Peter. Pray ye Sir is your name Robin Goodfellow?


Robin. My name is Robin Goodfellow.


Peter. Marry Sir I hear yare a very cunning man Sir;

And sirreuerence of your worship Sir, Iam going a woeing to one M. Lelia a
Gentlewoman here hard by,

Pray ye Sir tell me how I should be have my self, to get her to my wife.

For Sir there is a Scholar about her:
Now if you can tell me, how I should wipe his nose of her,
I would bestow a fee of you.

Robin. Let me seet, and thou shall see what I Will say to thee. He gives him
money.
Well, follow my counsel and I Will warrant thee,
I Will give thee a love powder for thy wench,
And a kind of Nux vomica in a potion, shall make her come off in faith.

Peter. Shall I trouble you so far to take some pains with me?
I am loath to have the dodge*

Robin. Tush fear not the dodge;

I Will rather put on my flashing red nose, and my flaming face, and come wrapped in
a Calue skin and cry bo ho:

I Will fray the Scholar I warrant thee.
But first go to her, try what thou can do,
Perhaps she will love thee without any further a do,
But thou must tell her, thou have a good stock, some 100. or 200. a year,
and that will set her hard I warrant thee.

For bith Mas, I was once in good comfort to have cosend a Wench:

And wots thou what I told her?

I told her I had a hundred pound land a year, in a place where I have not
the breadth of my little finger.

I promised her to infeoffe her in 40. pounds a year of it: and I think of my
conscience, if I had had but as good a face as thine,

I should have made her have cursed the time that ever she see me.

And thus must thou do, crack, and lie, and face,

And thou shall triumph mightily.


Peter. I need not do so, for I may say and say true,
I have lands and living enough for a country fellow.

Robin. Barlady so had not I, I was feign to ouerreach as many times I do.

But now experience has taught me so much craft, that I excel in cunning.


Peter. Well Sir, then I Will be bold to trust your cunning,
And so I Will bid you farewell and go forward,
I Will too her, that's flat.

Robin. Do so: and let me hear how you speed.


Peter. That I will Sir.


Exit Peter. Robin. Well, a good beginning makes a good end,
Heers ten groats for doing nothing,
Icon M. Churmes thanks for this,
For this was his devise:
And therefore I Will go seek him out, and give him a quart of wine,
And know of him how he deals with the scholar.

Exit. Enter Churmes and Sophos. Churmes. Why? look you Sir, by the Lord I can
but wonder at her Father,
He knows you to be a Gentleman of good bringing up*
And though your wealth be not answerable to h^^*
Yet by heavens I think you are worthy to do ^ter then Lelia, yet I know she
loves you dearly.

Sophos. The great Tartarian Emperor Tamor Cham,
Ioyd not so much in his imperial Crown,
As Sophos joys in Lelias hop't-for love,
Whose looks would pierce an Adamantine heart,
And make the proud beholders stand at gaze,
To draw Loves picture from her glancing eye.

Chur. And I will stretch my wits unto the highest strain
To further Sophos in his wished desires.

Sophos. Thanks gentle Sir. Enter Gripe.
But truce a while, here comes her Father,
I must speak a word or two with him.

speaks to himself. Churms I heel give you your answer ( I warrant ye)


Sophos. God save you Sir.


Gripe. O Mr. Sophos: I have longd to speak with you a great while,
I hear, you seek my daughter Lelias love,
I hope you will not seek to dishonest me, nor disgrace my daughter.

Sophos. No Sir: a man may ask a yea,
A Woman may say nay,
She is in choice to take her choice:
Yet I must confess I love Lelia.

Gripe. Sir I must be plain with you: I like not of your love,

Lelias mine, I Will choose for Lelia,

And therefore I would wish you not to frequent my house any more,

Its better for you to ply your book, and seek for some preferment that way,
than to seek for a wife before you know how to maintain her.


Sophos. I am not rich, I am not very poor,
I neither want nor ever shall exceed,
The mean is my content, I live twixt two extremes.

Gripe. Well, well, I tell ye, I like not ye should come to my house, and
presume so proudly to match your poor pedigree with my daughter Lelia, and
therefore I charge you to get you off of my ground: and come no more at my
house:

I like not this learning without living, I.


Sophos. He needs must go that the devil drives.

Sic virtus sine Censu languet.


Exit Sophos. Gripe. O Ma. Churms, cry you mercy Sir, I saw not you:

I think I have sent the scholar away with a flea in his ear.

I trow heel come no more at my house.


Churms. No, for if he do you may indite him for coming of your ground.


Gripe. Well, now I Will home, and keep in my daughter,
She shall neither go to him, nor send to him,
I Will watch her (I Will warrant her,)
Before God Master Churms, it is the peeuishest girl, that ever I knew in my
life, she will not b^^^l'd I doubt.

Pray ye sir, do you endeavor to persuade her to take Peter Ploddall.


Churms. I warrant ye, I Will persuade her: fear not.


Exeunt. Enter Lelia and Nurse. Lelia. What sorrow seiseth on my heavy heart?
Consuming care possesses every part:
Heart-sad Eri^^^^ keeps his mansion Here,
Within the Closure of my woeful breast;
And black despair with Iron S^epter stands,
And guides my thoughts, down to his hateful Cell.
The wanton winds with (...) murmr bear
My pearcing plaints along the de^ert plains,
And woods and groves do echo forth my woes,
The earth below relents in Crystal tears,
When heavens above by some malignant cour^^
Of fatal stars are authors of my grief.
Fond Love, go hide thy shafts in Follies den,
And let the world forget thy Childish force,
Or else fly, fly, pearce Sophos tender breast,
That he may help to sympathize these plaints
That wring these tears from Lelias weeping eyes.

Nurse. Why, how now Mistress; what, is it love that makes you weep, and
toss and turn so a nights when you are in bed?

Saint Leonard grant you fall not love sick.


Lelia. I, that's the point, that pearceth to the quick,
Would Atropos would cut my vital thread
And so make lavish of my loathed life:
Or gentle heavens would smile with fair aspect,
And so give better fortunes to my love.
Why, is it not a plague to be a prisoner to mine own father?

Nurse. Yes, ants a shame for him to use you so too.

But be of good cheer Mistress: I Will go to Sophos every day I Will bring you
tidings and tokens too from him (I Will warrant ye,) and if he will send you a
kiss or two, I Will bring it, let me alone, I am good at a dead lift.

Marry, I cannot blame you for loving of Sophos.
Why, he is a man as one should picture him in wax.
But Mistress, out vpons, wipe your eyes.
For here comes another wooer.

Enter Peter Ploddall. Peter. Mistress Lelia, God speed you.


Lelia. That's more then we need at this time, for we are doing nothing.


Peter. I were as good say a good word as a bad.


Lelia. But its more wisdom to say nothing at all, then speak to no purpose.


Peter. My purpose is to wiue you.


Lelia. And mine, is n^^^r to wed you.


Peter. Belike, yare in love with some body else.


Nurse. No, but she is lustily promised:
Hear you: you with long rifle by your side, do you lack a wife?

Peter. Call you this a rifle? its a good back ^word.


Nurse. Why, then you with back sword, lets see your back.


Peter. Nay, I must speak with Mistress Lelia before I go.


Lelia. What would you with me?


Peter. Marry, I have heard very well of you, and so has my father too.
And he has sent me to you a woeing,
And if you have any mind of marriage,
I hope I shall maintain you as well as any husbandmans wife in the Country.

Nurse. Maintain her with what?


Peter. Marry, with my Lands and livings my father has promised me.


Lelia. I have heard much of your wealth: but I never, knew your manners before
now.


Peter. Faith, I have no Manors, but a prittie homestall, and we have great
store of Oxen, and Horses, and Carts, and Plowes, and household stuff
bomination:

And great flocks of sheep, and flocks of Geese, and Capons, and Hens, and
Duckes; O, we have a fine yard of Pullen.

And thank God: here is a fine weather for my fathers Lambs.


Lelia. I cannot live content in discontent.
For as no music can delight the ears,
Where all the parts of Discords are composed:
So wedlock bands will still consist in iarres,
Where in condition there is no sympathy.
Then rest your self contented with this answer,
I cannot love.

Peter. Its no matter what you say. For my father told me thus much before I
came, that you would be some^ nice at first: but he bad me like you nere the
worse for for I were the liker to speed.


Lilea. Then you were best leave of your suit till some other time: and when my
leisure serves me to love you, I Will send you word.


Peter. Will you? (...) I Will take my leave of you, and if I may hear from you,
I Will pay the messenger well for his pains.

But stay: Gods death, I had almost forgot my self.

Prayee let me kiss your hand ore I go.


Nurse. Faith Mistress, his mouth runs a water for a kiss: a little would
serve his turn belike.

Let him kiss your hand.


Lelia. I Will not stick for that.


He kisse^^ her hand. Peter. Mistress Lelia, God be with you.


Lelia. Farewell Peter. Exit Peter.
Thus Lucre, set in golden Chair of state,
When learning's bid, Stand by, and keeps a loofe:
This greedy humor fits my fathers vain,
Who gapes for nothing but for golden gain.

Enter Chur. Nurse. Mistress take heed you speak nothing that will bear
action, for here comes Master Churms the Pettifogger.


Churms. Mistress Lelia rest you merry,
What Is the reason you and your Nurse walk here all alone?

Lelia. Because, Sir, we desire no other company but our own.


Churms. Would I were then your own,
That I might keep you company.

Nurse. O Sir, you and he that is her own are far asunder.


Churms. But if she please, we may be nearer.


Lelia. That cannot be: mine own is nearer then my self.
And yet my self, alas, am not mine own:
Thoughts, fears, despaires, ten thousand dreadful dreams:
Those are mine own, and these do keep me company.

Churms. Before God, I must confess, your father is too cruel,
To keep you thus sequestered from the world,
To spend your prime of youth thus in obscurity,
And seek to wed you to an Idiot fool
That knows not how to use himself:
Could my deserts but answer my desires,
I swear by Sol fair Phoebus silver eye,
My heart would wish no higher to aspire,
Then to be graced with Lelias love.
By Jesus, I cannot play the dissembler,
And woo my love with courting ambages,
Like one whose love hangs on his smooth tongues end,
But in a word, I tell the sum of my desires,
I love fair Lelia.
By her my passions daily are increased,
And I must die, unless by Lelias love they be released.

Lelia. Why Master Churms, I had thought you had been my fathers great
Counselor in all these actions.


Churms. Nay, Damn me if I be:
By heavens, sweet Nymph I am not.

Nurse. Master Churms, you are one can do much with her father: and if you
love her as you say, persuade him to use her more kindly, and give her liberty
to take her choice, for these made marriages prove not well.


Churms. I protest I will.


Lelia. So Lelia shall accept thee as her friend:
Mean while, Nurse lets ^^:
My long absence I know, will make my father muse.

Exeunt Lelia and Nurse. Churms. So Lelia shall accept thee as her friend?
Who can but ruminate upon these words?
Would she had said, her love:
But it is no matter: first creep and then go,
Now her friend: the next degree is Lelias love.
Well, I Will persuade her father to let her have a little more liberty.
But soft: I Will none of that neither,
So the Scholar may chance cosen me.
Persuade him to keep her in still:
And before she will have Peter Ploddall, she will have any body, and so I shall be
sure that Sophos shall never come at her.
Why I Will warrant ye, she will be glad to run away with me at length.
Hang him, that has no shifts.
I promised Sophos, to further him in his suite:
But if I do, I Will be peckt to death with hens.
I swore to Gripe, I would persuade Lelia, to love Peter Ploddall.
But God forgive me, it was the furthest end of my thought.
Tut, what is an oath? every man for himself.
I Will shift for one, I warrant ye.

Exit. Enter Fortunatus, Solus. Fortu. Thus have I past the beating billows of
the sea,
By Ithacs rocks, and watery Neptunes bounds,
And wafted safe, from Mars his bloody fields
Where trumpets sound Tantara to the fight,
And here arrived for to repose my self,
Upon the borders of my native soil.
Now Fortunatus bend thy happy course,
Unto thy fathers house, to greet thy dearest friends.
And if that still thy aged sire survive
Thy presence will revive his drouping sprites,
And cause his withered cheeks be sprent with youthful blood,
Where death of late was portraid to the quick.
But soft, who comes here?

Stand aside. Enter Robin Goodfellow. Robin. I wonder I hear not of Master
Churms,
I would feign know how he speedes,
And what success he has in Lelias love:
Well, if he cosen the Scholar of her,
Twould make my worship laugh:
And if he have her, he may say god a mercy Robin Goodfellow.
O ware a good head as long as you live.
Why, Master Gripe he casts beyond the moon,
And Churms is the only man, he puts in trust with his daughter, and (I Will
warrant) the old Churl would take it upon his salvation, that he will persuade
her to marry Peter Ploddall:
But I Will make a fool of Peter Ploddall,
I Will look him ith face and pick his purse,
Whilst Churms cosen him of his wench,
And my old gandsir Holdfast of his daughter.
And if he can do so:
I Will teach him a trick to cosen him of his gold too.
Now for Sophos, let him wear the willow garland,
And play the melancholy Malecontent
And pluck his hat down in his sullen eyes,
And think on Lelia, in these desert groves:
It Is enough for him to have her, in his thoughts;
Although he nere embrace her in his arms.
But now, there is a fine devise comes in my head,
To scarre the Scholar:
You shall see, I Will make fine sport with him.
They say, that every day he keeps his walk
Amongst these woods and melancholy shades,
And on the bark of every senseless tree
In graves the tenor of his haples hope.
Now when he is at Venus altar at his Orisons;
I Will put me on my great carnation nose
And wrap me in a rowsing Calueskin suite,
And come like some Hob goblin or some devil,
Ascended from the griefly pit of hell:
And like a Scarbabe make him take his legs:
I Will play the devil, I warrant ye.

Exit Robin Good^ Fortunatus. And if you do: (by this hand) I Will play the
coniurer.
Blush Fortunatus, at thy base conceit,
To stand aloof, like one that's in a trance,
And with thine eyes behold that miscreant Imp^*
(Whose tongue more venom then the serpen^^ ^^ing
Before thy face thus taunt thy dearest friend^*
I, thine own father with reproachful terms,
Thy Sister Lelia, she is bought and sold,
And learned Sophos, thy thrice vowed friend,
Is made a stale by this base cursed Crew
And damned den of vagrant run agates.
But here in sight of sacred heavens I swear,
By all the sorrows of the Stygian souls,
By Mars his bloody blade and fair Bellonas bowers
I vow, these eyes shall nere behold my fathers face,
These feet shall never pass these desert plains:
But Pilgrim like I Will wander in these woods
Until I find out Sophos secret walks,
And sound the depth of all their plotted drifts,
Nor will I cease until these hands revenge
Th'iniurious wrong that's offered to my friend,
Upon the workers of this stratageme.

Exit. Enter Pegge, Sola. Pegge. In Faith, in faith, I cannot tell what to do,

I love, and I love, and I cannot tell who, Out upon this love.

For wat you what? I have suitors comes huddle, twoes upon twoes, and threes
upon threes, and what think you troubles me?

I must chat and kiss with all comers, or else noe bargain.


Enter Will Cricket, and kisses her. Will. A bargain in faith: ha my sweet honnie
sops how do thou?


Pegge. Well I thank you William, now I see y are a man of your word.


Will. A man of my word quotha? why I nere broke promise in my life that I kept.


Pegge. No William I know you did not,
But I had thought you had forgotten me.

Will. Do hear Pegge? if ere I forget thee,
I pray God I may never remember thee.

Pegge. Peace here comes my Granam Midnight.


Enter Mother Midnight. Mother M. What Pegge? what ho? what Pegge I say?
what Pegge my wench?
Why where art thou trow?

Pegge. Here Granam, at your elbow.


Moth. M. What make here this twatter light?
I think thart in a dream,
I think the fool haunts thee.

Will. Sounds, fool in your face: fool? O monstrous intitulation:

Fool? O disgrace to my person: sounds, fool not me, for I cannot brook such
a cold rasher I can tell you: give me but such an other word, and I Will be thy
tooth-drawer even of thy butter tooth, thou toothlesse trot thou.


Moth. M. Nay William pray ye be not angry, you must bear with old folks,

They be old and teastie, hot and hasty: set not your wit against mine
William,

For I thought you no harm by my troth.


Will. Well, your good words have something laid my collar.

But Granam shall I be so bold to come to your house now and then to keep
Pegge company?


Moth. M. I, and beshrowe thy good heart and thou do not.

Come, and we will have a piece of a barley bagpudding or something,

And thou shall be very heartily welcome that thou shall,

And Pegge shall bid thee welcome too: pray ye maid bid him welcome and make
much on him, for by my vay he is a good proper springold


Pegge. Granam: if you did but see him dance twoulde do your heart good:

Lord, twould make any body love him, to see how finely heel foot it.


Moth. M. William, prithee go home to my house with us, and taste a cup of
our beer, and learn to know the way, again another time.


Will. Come on Granam, I Will man you home in faith: Come Pegge.


Exeunt. Enter Gripe, old Ploddall, and his son Peter and Churmes the
Lawyer. Ploddal. Come hither Peter, hold up your head: where is your cap and leg
sir boy, ha?


Peter. By your leave master Gripe.


Gripe. Welcome Peter, give me thy hand: thart welcome; Barlady, this a good
proper tall fellow, Neighbor? call you him a boy?


Ploddall. A good prittie squat square springold Sir.


Gripe. Peter, you ha seen my daughter I am sure: how do you like her?

What says she to you?


Peter. Faith I like her well, and I have broken my mind to her, and she would
say neither I nor no;
But, thank God Sir, we parted good friends,
For she let me kiss her hand and bad Farewell Peter.
And therefore I think I am like enough to speed: how think you Master Churms?

Churms. Marry I think so too,
For she did show no token of any dislike of your motion, did she?

Peter. No not a whit Sir.


Churms. Why, then I warrant ye:
For we hold in our Law, that Idem est non apparere and non esse.

Gripe. Master Churms, I pray you do so much as call my daughter hither,
I will make her sure here to Peter Ploddall, and I Will desire you to be a
witness.

Churms. With all my heart Sir.


Exit Churms. Gripe. Before God, neighbor, this same Master Churms is a very
good Lawer: for I Will warrant, you cannot speak any thing, but he has law for it
advnguem,


Ploddall. Marry eene the more joy on him,
And he is one that I am very much beholding to:
But here comes your daughter.

Enter Churms, Lelia and Nurse. Lelia. Father did you send for me?


Gripe. I wench I did, come hither Lelia, give me thy hand.
Mr. Churms, I pray you bear witness,
I here give Lelia to P. Ploddall. She pluckes away her hand.
How now?

Nurse. She Will none she thanks you Sir.


Gripe. Will she not? why how now I say?
What? you pewling peevish thing, you untoward baggage?
Will you not be ruled by your Father?
Have I taken care to bring you up to this?
And will you do as you list?
Away I say, hang, starve, beg; be gone, pack I say: out of my sight,
Thou nere getst pennyworth of my goods, for this:
Think ont, I do not use to jest: Exeunt Lelia, and Nurse.
Be gone I say; I will not hear thee speak.

Churms. I pray you Sir patient your self: she is young.


Gripe. I hold my life this beggarly Scholar hankers about her still, makes
her so untoward:
But I Will home, I Will set her a harder task:
I Will keep her in, and look to her a little better then I ha done,
I Will make her have little mind of gadding, I warrant her.
Come Neighbor, send your son to my house, for he is welcome thither, and
shall be welcome, and I Will make Lelia bid him welcome too ere I ha done with her:

Come Peter follow us.


Exeunt all, but Churmes. Churms. Why this is excellent, better and better
still,
This is beyond expectation:
Why now this gear begins to work,
But beshrew my heart, I was afraid that Lelia would have yielded, when I saw
her father take her by the hand and call me for a witness, my heart began to
quake.

But to say the truth she had little reason to take a Cullian, lugloafe,
milkesop s^aue;

When she may have a Lawyer, a Gentleman, that stands upon his reputation in
the Country:

One whose diminutiue defecte of Law may compare with his little Learning.

Well: I see that Churmes must be the man must carry Lelia when alls done.


Enter Robin Goodfellow. Robin. How now Master Churmes, what news abroad? Me
think you look very spruce: yare very frolic now a late.


Churms. What fellow Robin, how goes the squares with you?

Yare waxen very proud alate, you will not know your old friends.


Robin. Faith I eene came to seek you, to bestow a quart of wine of you.


Churms. That's strange: you were nere wont to be so liberal.


Robin. Tush man, one good turn asks another: clear gains man, clear
gains:

Peter Ploddall shall pay for all: I have guld him once,

And I Will come over him again and again, I warrant ye.


Churms. Faith, Lelia has even given him the doff off here, and has made her
father almost stark mad.


Robin. O all the better: then I shall be sure of more of his custom.

But what success have you in your suit with her?


Churms. Faith all hitherto goes well,
I have made the motion to her,
But as yet we are grown to no conclusion:
But I am in very good hope.

Robin. But do you think you shall get her fathers good will?


Churmes. Tut, if I get the wench I care not for that:
That will come afterward:
And I Will be sure of something in the mean time.
For I have outlawed a great number of his debtors,
And I Will gather up what money I can amongst them,
And Gripe shall nere know of it neither.

Robin. I, and of those that are scarce able to pay,
Take the one half and forgive them the other, rather then sit out at all.

Churmes. Tush let me alone for that:
But sir I have brought the Scholar into a fools Paradise:
Why he has made me his spokesman to M. Lelia,
And Gods my Judge I nere so much as name him to her.

Robin. O bith Mas well remembered,
I Will tell you what I mean to do,
I Will attire my self fit for the same purpose,
Like to some hellish Hag or damned fiend,
And meet with Sophos wandering in the woods,
O I shall fray him terribly.

Churms. I would thou could scarre him out of his wits:
Then should I ha the wench cock sure,
I doubt no body but him.

Robin. Well, lets go drink together;
And then I Will go put on my devilish roabes,
I mean my Christmas Calves skin suit,
And then walk to the woods,
O I Will terrify him I warrantye.

Enter Sophos, solus. Sophos. Will heavens still smile at Sophos miseries,
And give no end to my incessant mones?
These Cipresse shades are witness of my woes,
The senseless trees do grieve at my laments,
The leauie branches drop sweet Myrrhas tears,
For love did scorn me in my mothers womb,
And sullen Saturn pregnant at my birth,
With all the fatal stars conspired in one,
To frame a hapless constellation,
Presaging Sophos lucklesse destiny.
Here, here, does Sophos turn (...) restless wheel,
And here lies wrapped in labyrinths of love.
Of his sweet Lelias love whose sole Id^^ still*
Prolongs the hapless date of Sophos hopeless life:
Ah, said I life? a life far worse then death.
Then death? I then ten thousand deaths.
I daily die, in that I live loves thrall,
They die thrice happy, that once die for all.
Here will I stay my weary wandering steps,
And lay me down upon this solid earth, He lies down.
The mother of despair and balefull thoughts,
I, this befits my melancholy moodes:
Now now me thinks I hear the pretty birds,
With warbling tunes record fair Lelias name,
Whose absence makes warm blood drop from my heart,
And forces watrie tears from these my weeping eyes,
Me thinks I hear the silver sounding streams,
With gentle murmur summon me to sleep,
Singing a sweet melodious lullabie:
Here will I take a nap and drown my hapless hopes,
In the Ocean seas of Never like to speed.

He falls in a slumber and Music soundes. Enter Syluanus. Syluanus. Thus has
Syluanus left his leauie bowers,
Drawn by the sound of Echoes sad reports,
That with shrill notes and high resounding voice,
Does pearce the very Cauerns of the earth,
And rings through hills and dales the sad laments
Of virtues loss and Sophos mournful plaints.
Now Morpheus, rowse thee from thy sable den,
Charm all his senses with a slumbering trance,
Whilst old Syluanus send a lovely train
Of Satyrs, Driades, and watrie Nymphs,
Out of their bowers to tune their silver strings*
And with sweet sounding music sing.
Some pleasing Madrigalles and Rowndelayes,
To comfort Sophos in his deep distress.

Exit Syluanus. Enter the Nymphs and Satyrs singing. THE SONG.
1
Satyrs sing, let sorrow keep her Cell,
Let warbling Echoes ring,
And sounding musickeyell
Through hills, through dales, ^ad grief and care to kill
In him ^ong since alas has grieved his fill.
2
Sleep no more, but wake and live content,
Thy grief the Nymphs deplore,
The Syluan gods lament
To hear, to see thy moan, thy loss thy love:
Thy plaints, to tears, the flinty rocks do moo^^.
3
Grieve not then, the Queen of Love is mi^^^,
She sweetly smiles on men*
When reasons most beguiled:
Her looks, her smiles, are kind, are sweet, are (...)
Awake therefore and sleep not still in care.
4
Love intends, to free thee from (...)
His Nymphs Syluanus sendes,
To bid thee live in joy,
In hope, in joy, sweet love delights (...)
Fair love her self will yield (...)
Exeunt the Nymphs and Satyrs. Sophos. What do I hear? what harmony is this*
With silver sound that glutteth Sophos ears*
And drives sad passions from his heavy heart,
Presaging some good future hap shall fall,
After these blustering blasts of discontent:
Thanks gentle Nymphs and Satyrs too adieu,
That thus compassionate a loyal lovers woe,
When heavens sit smiling at his dire mishaps.

Enter Fortunatus. Fortunatus. With weary steps I trace these desert groves
And search to find out Sophos secret walks,
My truest vowed friend and Lelias dearest love.
Soph. What voice is this sounds Lelias sacred name? He rises.
Is it some Satyr that has vew'd her late,
Ands grown in amour'd of her gorgeous hew?

Fortunatus. No Satyr Sophos; but thy ancient friend,
Whose dearest blood does rest at thy command.
Has sorrow lately blear'd thy watery eyes,
That thou forgetst the lasting league of love,
Long since was vowed betwixt thy self and me?
Look on me man: I am thy friend.
Sophos. O now I know thee, now thou nam'st my friend:
(...) no friend to whom I dare
unload the burden of my grief,
But only Fortunatus, he is my second self,
(...)

(...) How fares my friend? me thinks you look not well:
Your eyes are sunk, your cheeks look pale and wan,
What means this alteration?

Sophos. My mind sweet friend is like a mastlesse ship,
That's huld and tossed upon the surging seas,
By Boreas bitter blasts and Eoles whistling winds,
On Rocks and sands, far from the wished po^^
Whereon my silly ship desires to land,
Fair Lelias love that is the wished haven,
Wherein my wandering mind would take repose,
For want of which my restless thoughts are tossed:
For want of which, all Sophos joys are lost.

Fort. Does Sophos love my sister Lelia?


Sophos. She, she, it is whose love I wish to gain:
Nor need I wish, nor do I love in vain,
My love she does repay with equal meede:
It Is strange you will say that Sophos should not speed.

Fortunatus. Your love repaid with equal meede?
And yet you languish still in love? it is strange:
From whence proceeds your grief? unfold unto your friend*
A friend may yield relief.

Sophos. My want of wealth is author of my grief,
Your father says, my state is too, too low.
I am no hobbie bred; I may not soar so high, as Lelias love:
The lofty Egle will not catch at flies.
When I with Icarus would soar against the Sun
(...) the only fiery Phaeton denies my course,
(...) my waxen wings, when as I soar aloft:
(...) fair Lelia up from Sophos sight,
That not so much as paper pleades remorse:
Thrice three times Sol has slept in Thetis lap,
Since these mine eyes beheld sweet Lelias face.
What greater grief? what other Hell then this?
To be denied to come where my beloved is.

Fortunatus. Do you alone love Lelia?
Have you no riuals with you in your love?

Sophos. Yes, only one, and him your father backs,
It Is Peter Ploddall, rich Ploddalls son and heir,
One, whose base rusticke rude desert
Unworthy far to win so fair a prize,
Yet means your father for to mart a match,
For golden Lucre with this Corydon
And scorns at virtues lore: hence grows my g^

Fortunat. I ^it be true I hear, there is one Churms* beside,
Makes suit to win my sister to his bride.

Sophos. That cannot be: Churm^ it my vowed friend,
Whose tongue relates the tenor of my love*
To Lelias ears, I have no other (...)

Fortu. Well, trust him not: the Tiger hides his claws
When often he does pretend the greatest guiles.
But stay: here comes Lelias Nurse.

Enter Nurse. Sophos. Nurse, what news?
How fares my love?

Nurse. How fares she quotha? Marry she may fare how she will for you:
Neither come to her, nor send to her of a whole fortnight?

Now I swear by my maydenhead, if my husband should have served me so, when
he came a wooing to me: I would never have looked on him with a good face as
long as I had lived.

But he was as kind a wretch, as ever laid lips of a woman: He would ha come
through windows or doors, or walls, or any thing, but he would have come to me.

Marry, after we had been married a while, his kindness began to slake, for
I Will tell you what he did:

He made me believe, he would go to green goose fair, and I Will ^ee sworn he
took his legs and ran clean away:

And I am afraid you will prove eene such another kind piece to my Mistress:
for she sits at home in a corner weeping for you, and I Will be sworn she is ready
to die upward for you:

And her father oath the other side, he yoles at her, and ioles at her: and she
leads such a life for you it passes, and yoole neither come to her, nor send
to her:

Why, she thinks you have forgotten her.


Sophos. Nay, then let heavens in sorrow end my days
And fatal Fortune never cease to frown,
And heaven and earth, and all conspire to pull me down,
If black oblivion seize upon my heart
Once to estrange my thoughts from Lelias love.

Sophos, Fortunatus. Why Nurse, I am sure that Lelia hears from
Once a day at least by Churms the Lawyer,
Who is his only friend.

Nurse. What, young Master? God bless mine eye sight:
Now by my maydenhead yare welcome home,
I am sure my Mistress will be glad to see you.
But what said you of Master Churms?

Fortu. Marry, I say he is a well willer to my sister Lelia,
And a secret friend to Sophos.

Nurse. Marry the Devil he is: trust him and hang him. Why, he cannot speak
a good word on him to my old Master, and he does so ruffle before my
Mistress with his barbarian eloquence, and strut before her in a pair of
Polonian legs, as if he were gentleman Usher to the great Turk, or the
Devil of Dowgate:

And if my Mistress would be ruled by him, Sophos might go snick up: But he
has such a buttermilke face, that shoole never have him.


Sophos. Can fal^hood lurk in those enticing looks?
And deep dis^nce lie where truth appears?

Fortunatus. Injurious villain to betray his friend.


Nurse. Sir, do you know the Gentleman?


Fort. Faith not well.


Nurse. Why Sir, he looks like a red herring at a Noble man's table on Easter
day, and he speaks nothing but Almond butter and sugar Candy.


Fortu. That's excellent.


Sophos. This worlds the Chaos of confusion:
No world at all but Mass of open wrongs,
Wherein a man, as in a Map man see
The high road way from woe to misery.

Fort. Content your self, and leave these passions,
Now do I sound the depth of all their drifts,
The Devils devise and Churms his knauerie,
On whom this heart has vowed to be revenged.
I Will scatter them: the plots already in my head.
Nurse hye thee home, commend me to my sister:
Bid her this night send for Master Churms,
To him she must recount her many griefs,
Exclaim against her fathers hard constraint,
And so cunningly temporize with this cunning Cats^,
That he may think she loves him as her life.
Bid her tell him, that if by any means
He can convey her forth her fathers gate,
Unto a secret friend of hers;
The way to whom lies by this forest ^e.
That none but he shall have her to his bride.
For her departure let her point the time
To morrow night: when Vesper gins to shine,
Here will I be* when Lelia comes this way
Accompanied with her gentleman Usher,
Whose amorous thoughts do dream on naught but love;
And if this Bastinado hold,
I Will make him leave his wench with Sophos for a pawn:
Let me alone to use him in his kind,
This is the trap which for him I have laid,
Thus craft by cunning once shall be betrayed,
And for the Devil, I Will conjure him:
Good Nurse be gone: bid her not fail,
And for a token, bear to her this Ring
Which well she knows, for when I saw her last
It was her favor, and she gave it me.

Sophos. And bear her this from me:
And with this ring bid her receive my heart.
My heart? alas, my heart I cannot give,
How should I give her that which is her own?

Nurse. An your heart be hers, her heart is yours,
And so change is no robbery.
Well, I Will give her your tokens, and tell her what ye say.

Fortunatus. Do, good Nurse: but in any case let no^ my father know that I am
here, until we have effected all our purposes.


Nurse. I Will warrant you, I will not play with you,
As Master Churms does with Sophos,
I would ha my ears cut from my head first.

Exit Nurse. Fortunatus. Come Sophos, cheer up your selfeman,
Let hope expel these melancholy dumps*
Mean while, lets in,
Expecting how the events of this devise will fall,
Until to morrow at the appointed time,
When we will expect the coming of your love.
What, man, I Will work it through the fire,
But you shall have her.

Sophos. And I will study to deserve this love.


Exeunt. Enter William Cricket, Solus. Will. Look on me, and look of Master
Churms,
A good proper man:
Marry Master Churms has something a better pair of legs indeed:
But for a sweet face, a fine beard, comely corpse,
And a Carowsing Codpeece,
All England if it can
Show me such a man,
To win a wench by gis,
To clip, to coll, to kiss
As William Cricket is.
Why, look you now: If I had been such a great long, large,
Lobcockt, loseld lurden, as Master Churms is;
I Will warrant you, I should never have got Pegge, as long as
I had lived: for (do you mark) a wench will never love a man that has al his
substance in his legs.
But stay: here comes my Landlord,
I must go salute him.

Enter old Ploddall, and his son Peter. Ploddall. Come hither Peter, when
did thou see Robin Goodfellow? He Is the man must do the feate.


Peter. Faith father, I see him not this two days; but I Will seek him out: for
I know heel do the deed, and (...) were twenty Lelias.

For father he is a very cunning man: for, give him but ten groates, and heel
give me a powder, that will make Lelia come to bed to me:

And when I have her there: I Will use her well enough.


Ploddall. Will he so? Marry, I will give him vortie shillings, if he can do
it.


Peter. Nay, heel do more then that too,

For heel make himself like a devil; and fray the Scholar that hankers
about her, out ons wits.


Ploddall. Marry Jesus bless us: will he so?

Marry thou shall have vortie shillings to give him, and thy mother shall
bestow a hard cheese on him beside.


Will. Landlord, a pox on you, this good morn.


Ploddall. How now fool? what, do curse me?


Will. How now fool? how now Caterpiller?

Its a sign of Dearth, when such Vermin creep hedges so early of morning.


Peter Sir, Foul manners, do you know to whom you speak?


Will. Indeed Peter, I must confess I want some of your wooing manners, or
else I might have tournde my fair bush tail to you instead of your father:
and have given you the ill salutation this morning.


Ploddall. Let him alone Peter, I Will temper him well enough.
S^^^a, I hear say you must be married shortly,
I Will make you pay a sweet fine for your house, for this.
Ha? sir am not I your Landlord?

Will. Yes, for fault of a better, but you get neither sweet fine, nor sower
fine of me.


Ploddall. My masters, I pray you bear witnesse^

I do discharge him then.


Will. My masters, I pray you bear witness,
My Landlord has given me a general discharge,
I Will be married presently, my fines paid: I have a discharge for it.

He offers to go away. Ploddall. Nay prithee stay.


Will. No I Will not stay, I Will go call the clearke,
I Will be cried out upon ith Church presently,
What ho? What Clearke I say? where are you?

Enter Cleark. Clearke. Who calls me? what would you with me?

Marry Sir, I would have you to make proclamation, that if any manner of man,
oath Town, or oath Country, can lay any claim to Pegge Pudding, let him bring
word to the Crier, or else William Cricket will wipe his nose of her.


Clearke. You mean you would be asked ith Church?


Will. I that's it: a bots ont, I cannot hit of these marrying terms yet.

And I Will desire my Landlord here and his son, to be at the Celebrauation of
my marriage too:

In Faith Peter, you shall cramme your guts full of Cheesecakes and Custards there.

And sir Clearke, if thou will say Amen stoutly:
In Faith my powder beef slave,
I Will have a rumpe of beef for thee, shall make thy mouth (...) ^^de.

Clearke. When would you have it done?


Will. Marry eene as soon as may be: let me see:

I will be asked ith Church of Sunday at morning prayer, and again at Evening
prayer: and the next holiday that comes I will be asked ith forenoone, and
married ith afternoon: For (do you mark) I am none of these sneaking fellows
that will stand thrumming of Caps, and studying upon a matter, as long as
Hunkes with the great head has been about to show his little wit in the second
part of his paultrie poetry: but if I begin with wooing, I Will end with wedding.

And therefore good Clearke, let me have it done with all speed: for I promise
you, I am very sharp set.


Cleark. Faith you may be asked ith Church on Sunday at morning prayer, but Sir
John cannot tend to do it at Evening prayer: For there comes a Company of
Players tuth Town, on Sunday ith after noone; and Sir John is so good a
fellow, that I know heel scarce leave their company, to say Evening prayer.

For (though I say it) he is a very paineful man, and takes so great delight in
that faculty, that heel take as great pain about building of a Stage or so,
as the basestfellow among them.


Will. Nay, if he have so lawful an excuse, I am content to defer it one day
the longer:

And Landlord, I hope, you and your son Peter will make bold with us, and
trouble us.


Ploddall. Nay William, we would be loath to trouble you: but you shall have our
company there.


Will. Faith you shall be very heartily welcome, and we will have good merry
rogues there that will make you laugh till you burst.


Peter. Why William, what company do you mean to have?


Will. Marry, first and for most, there will be an honest Dutch Cobbler, that
will sing (I will noe meare to Burgaine go) the best that ever you heard.


Ploddall. What, must a Cobbler be your chief guest? Why he is a basefellow.


Will. A basefellow? you may be ashamed to say so,

For he is an honestfellow, and a goodfellow:

And he begins to carry the very badge of good fellowship upon his nose; that
I do not doubt, but in time he will prove as good a Copper companion as Robin
Goodfellowe himself.

I and he is a tallfellow, and a man of his hands too,

For I Will tell you what: tie him tuth Bull-Ring, and for a bagpudding, a Custard,
a Cheescake, a hogs cheek, or a Calves head, turn any man ith town to him;
and if he do not prove himself as tall a man as he, let blind Hugh bewitch
him, and turn his body, into a barrel of strong Ale, and let his nose be the
Spigat, his mouth the Fosset, and his tongue a Plugge for the bunge hole.

And then there will be Robin Goodfellow, as good a drunken rogue as lives: and
Tom Shoemaker; and I hope you will not deny that he is an honest man, for he was
Constable oath Town.

And a number of other honest rascals, which though they are grown bankroutes
and live by the reuersion of other men's tables:

Yet (thanks be to God) they have a penny amongst, at all times at their
need.


Ploddall. Nay, if Robin Goodfellow be there, you shall be sure to have our
company.
For he is one that we hear very well of;
And my son here has some occasion to use him:
And therefore if we may know when it is, we will make bold to trouble you.

Will. Yes I Will send you word.


Ploddall. Why then farewell, till we hear from you.


Exeunt Ploddall and his son. Will. Well Cleark, you will see this matter bravely
performed: let it be done as it should be.


Clearke. I Will warrant ye, fear it not.


Will. Why then go you to Sir Ihon, and I Will to my wench, and bid her give her
Maidenhead warning to prepare itself* for the destruction of it is at hand.


Exeunt. Enter Lelia, Sola. Lelia. How love and fortune both with eger mood,
Like greedy hounds do hunt my tired heart,
Roused forth the thickets of my wonted joys!
And Cupid winds his shrill note bugle horn,
For joy my silly heart so near is spent.
Desire that eager Curre pursues the chase,
And Fortune rides amain unto the fall:
Now sorrow sings, and mourning bears a part,
Playing harsh descant on my yielding heart.
Enter Nurse. Nurse, what news?


Nurse. Faith a whole sackefull of news:
You love Sophos and Sophos loves you;
And Peter Ploddall loves you, and you love not him,
And you love not Master Churmes, and he loves you,
And so heers love and no love,
And I love and I love not,
And I cannot tell what:
But of all, and of all, Master Churmes must be the man you must love.

Lelia. Nay, first I Will mount me on the winged wind,
And fly for succor to the farthest Inde.
Must I love Master Churmes?

Nurse, Faith you must and you must not.


Lelia. As how I pray thee?


Nurse. Marry I have commendations to you.


Lelia. From whom?


Nurse. From your brother Fortunatus.


Lelia. My brother Fortunatus?


Nurse. No: from Sophos.


Lelia. From my Love?


Nurse. No from neither.


Lelia. From neither?


Nurse. Yes from both.


Lelia. Prithee leave thy foolery, and let me know thy news.


Nurse. Your brother Fortunatus, and your love, to morrow night will meet you
by the forest side,

There to confer about I know not what:

But it is like, that Sophos will make you of his privy council, before you come
again.


Lelia. Is Fortunatus then returned from the wars?


Nurse. He is with Sophos every day,
But in any case you must not let your Father know,
For he has sworn he will not be discried,
Until he have effected your desires:
For he swaggers and swears out of all cry,
That he will venture all,
Both fame and blood, and limme and life,
But Lelia shall be Sophos wedded wife.

Lelia Alas Nurse, my fathers jealous brain
Does scarce allow me once a month to go,
Beyond the compass of his watchful eyes,
Nor once affords me any conference,
With any man except with Mr. Churms,
Whose crafty brain beguiles my father so,
That he reposeth trust in none but him:
And though he seeks for favor at my hands,
He takes his mark amiss and shootes awrie.
For I had rather see the devil himself,
Then Churms the Lawyer:
Therefore how I should meet them by the forest side,
I cannot possibly devise.

Nurse. And Master Churms must be the man must work the means,
You must this night send for him:
Make him believe you love him mightily,
Tell him you have a secret friend dwells far away beyond the Forest.
To whom if he can secretly convey you from your father,
Tell him you will love him, better then ever God loved him.
And when you come to the place appointed,
Let them alone to discharge the knave of clubs.
And that you must not fail,
Here receive this ring, which Fortunatus sent you for ^ ^oken,
That this is the plot that you must prosecute,
And this from Sophos as his true loves pledge.

Lelia. This ring my brother sent I know right well,
But this my true love pledge I more esteem
Then all the golden mines the solid earth contains:
And see, in happy time here comes M. Churms: Enter Chur.
Now love and fortune both conspire,
And sort their driftes to compass my desire.
M. Churms yare well met, I am glad to see you.

Churms. And I as glad to see fair Lelia,
As ever Paris was to see his dear,
For whom so many Troianes blood was spilt;
Nor think, I would do less then spend my dearest blood,
To gain fair Lelias love, although by loss of life.

Nurse. Faith mistress, he speaks like a gentleman:
Let me persuade you,
Be not hard hearted:
Sophos? why what is he?
If he had loved you but half so well, he would ha come through stone walls,
but he would have come to you ere this.


Lelia. I must confess, I once loved Sophos well,
But now I cannot love him, whom all the world knows to be a dissembler.

Churmes. Ere I would wrong my love with one days absence;
I would pass the boiling Hellespont,
As once Leander did for Heroes love,
Or undertake a greater task then that,
Ere I would be disloyal to my Love.
And if that Lelia give her free consent
That both our loves may sympathize in one,
My hand, my heart, my love, my life and all,
Shall ever tend on Lelias fair command.

Lelia. Mr. Churms, me thinks it is strange, you should make such a motion:
Say I should yield, and grant you love;
When most you did expect a sunneshine day,
My fathers will would mar your hoped for hay,
And when you thought to reap the fruits of love,
His hard constraint would blast it in the bloom.
For he so do^es on Peter Ploddals pelf,
That none but he forsooth must be the man,
And I will rather match my self,
Unto a groom of Plutoes griesly den,
Then unto such a silly golden ass.

Churms. Bravely resolved in faith.


Lelia. But to be short:
I have a secret friend that dwells from hence,
Some two days journey, that's the most,
And if you can, as (well I know) you may, convey me thither secretly:
For company I desire no other then your own,
Here take my hand:
That once performed my heart is next.

Churmes. If on th'aduenture all the dangers lay,
That Europe or the western world affords,
Were it to combat Cerberus himself,
Or scale the brazen walls of Plutoes court;
When as there is so fair a prize proposed,
If I shrink back or leave it vnperform'd,
Let the World canonize me for a Coward:
Appoint the time and leave the rest to me.

Lelia. When nights black mantle ouerspreads the sky,
And days bright lamp is drenched in the west,
To morrow night I think the fittest time,
That silent shade may give our safe conuoy,
Unto our wished hopes unseen of living eye.

Churms. And at that time I will not fail,
In that or ought may make for our avail.

Nurse. But what if Sophos should meet you by the forest fide:
And in counter you with his single rapier?

Churms. Sophos? a hop of my thumb, a wretch, a wretch.
Should Sophos meet us there accompanied with some Champion,
With whom twere any credit to encounter,
Were he as stout as Hercules himself,
Then would I buckle with them hand to hand:
And bandy blows as thick as hailestones fall,
And carry Lelia away in spite of all their force.
What? love will make Cowards fight:
Much more a man of my resolution.

Lelia. And on your resolution I Will depend,
Until to morrow at the appointed time, when I look for you:
till when I Will leave you, and go make preparation for our journey.

Exeunt Lelia and Nurse. Churms. Farewell fair love, until we meet again.

Why so: did I not tell you she would be glad to run away with me at length?

Why this falls out, even as a man would say, Thus I would have it.

But now I must go cast about for some money too,

Let me see: I have outlawed three or four of Gripes debtors.

And I have the bonds in mine own hands:

The sum that is due to him, is some two or three hundred pounds:

Well, I Will to them: if I can get but one half,

I Will deliver them their bonds, and leave the other half to their own
consciences; and so I shall be sure to get money to bear charges:

When all fails well fare a good wit.
But soft, no more of that:
Here comes Mr. Gripe,

Enter Gripe. Gripe. What Mr. Churms? what alone? how fares your body?


Churms. Faith Sir, reasonable well: I am eene walking here to take the fresh
air.


Gripe. It Is very wholesome this fair weather,
But M. Churms: how like you my daughter?
Can you do any good on her? will she be ruled yet?
How stands she affected to P. Ploddall?

Churms. O very well Sir: I have made her very conformable.
O let me alone to persuade a woman:
I hope you shall see her married within this week at most,
I mean to my self.

He speaks to himself. Gripe. Master Churmes. I am so exceedingly beholding
to you,
I cannot tell how I shall requite your kindness,
But ith mean time heers a brace of angels for you to drink, for your pains,
This news has eene lightened my heart,
O Sir, my neighbor Ploddall is very wealthy.
Come M. Churms, you shall go home with me,
We Will have good cheer and be merry for this, to night, in faith.

Churms. Well: let them laugh that win.


Exeunt. Enter Pegge and her Granam. Pegge. Granam, give me but two crowns of
red gold,
And I Will give you two pence of white silver,
If Robin the devil be not a water witch.

Moth. M. Marry, Jesus bless us: why prithee?


Pegge. Marry I Will tell you why.
Upon the morrow after the blessed new year,
I came trip, trip, trip, over the Market hill,
Holding up my petticote to the calves of my legs,
To show my fine colored stockins,
And how finely I could foot it in a pair of new corkt shoes, I had bought:
And there I spyed this Mounsier Muffe, lie gaping up into the skies,
To know how many Maids would be with child in the town all the year after:
O it is a base vexation slave,
How the country talks of the large ribd varlet!

Mother M. Marry out upon him: what a Friday faced slave it is!
I think in my conscience, his face never keeps Holiday*

Pegge. Why his face can never be at quiet,
He has such a choleric nose,
I durst hasworne by my maidenhead,
(God forgive me that I should take such an oath*
That if William had had such a nose, I would never halov'd him.

Enter Will. Cricket. Will. What a talking is here of noses and faces?

Come Pegge, we are toward marriage; let us talk of that may do us good:
Granam, what will you give us toward howse-keeping?


Moth. M. Why William, we are talking of Rob Goodfellow:
What think you of him?

Will. Marry I say he looks like a tankerd bearer,
That dwells in Petticoate lane, at the sign of the Mearemaide;
And I swear by the blood of my codpiece,
An I were a woman I would lug off his laue ears,
Or run him to death with a spit: and for his face,
I think it is pity there is not a law made,
That it should be fellonie to name it in any other places,
then in baudie houses:
But Granam what will you give us?

Moth. M. Marry I will give Pegge a pot and a pan,
Two platters, a dish and a spoone, a dog, and a cat:
I trow she will prove a good huswife,
And love her husband well too.

Will. If she love me I Will love her, in faith my sweet honny comb, I Will love thee,
(...)

We must be asked in Church next Sunday, and weel be married presently.


Pegge. In Faith William we will have a merry day ont.


Mother M. That we will in faith Pegge: we will have a whole noise of fiddlers
there:

Come Pegge lets hie us home, we will make a bag-pudding to supper*

And William shall go and sup with us.


Will. Come on in faith.


Exeunt. Enter Fortunatus and Sophos. Fort. Why how now Sophos, al a mort? still
languishing in love?
Will not the presense of thy friend prevail?
Nor hope expel these sullen fits?
Cannot mirth wring, if but a forged smile,
From those sad drouping looks of thine?
Rely on hope, whose hap will lead thee right,
To her, whom thou do call thy hearts delight;
Look cheerely man: the time is near at hand,
That Hymen mounted on a snow white coach,
Shall tend on Sophos and his lovely bride.

Sophos. It Is impossible: her Father, man, her father,
He Is al for Peter Ploddall.

Fortunatus. Should I but see that Ploddall offer love,
This sword should pearce the pesants breast,
And chase his soul from his accursed corpse
By an unwonted way unto the griesly lake.
But now the appointed time is near,
That Churms should come with his supposed love:
Then sit we down under these leauie shades They sit down.
And weight the time of Lelias wished approach.

Sophos. I: here I Will weight for Lelias wished approach,
More wished to me, then is a calm at seas,
To shipwrackt souls, when great God Neptune frowns.
Though sad despair has almost drowned my hopes;
Yet would I pass the burning vaults of Orke,
As erst did Hercules to fetch his love,
If I might meet my love upon the strond Enter Robin Goodfellow.
And but enjoy her love one minute of an hour.
But stay: what man, or devil, or hellish fiendcomes here,
Transformed in this ougly uncouth shape?

Fortunatus. O, peace a while: you shall see good sport anon.


Robin. Now I am clothed in this hellish shape,
If I could meet with Sophos in these woods,
O, he would take me for the Devil himself,
I should ha good laughing, beside the forty shillings (...)
Ploddall has given me: and if I get noe more I am sure of that.
But soft: now I must try my cunning, for here he sits.
The high commander of the damned souls
Great Dis the Duke of Devils and Prince of Limbo Lake,
High Regent of Acheron, Styx and Phloget^^
By strict command from Pluto, Hels great Monarch,
And fair Proserpina the Queen of Hell,
By full consent of all the damned Hagges
And all the fiends that keep the Stygian plains,
Has sent me here from depth of under ground,
To sommon thee to appear at Plutoes Court.

Fortunatus. A man or Devil? or what so ere thou art,
I Will try if blows will drive thee down to hell.
Belike thou art the Devils Paritor,
The basest officer that lives in Hell,
For, such thy words imports thee for to be:
It Is pity you should come so far without a fee.
And because I know money goes low with Sophos,
I Will pay you your fees: [ He beats him,] take that, and that, and that:

Robin. O good Sir, I beseech you, I Will do any thing;


Fortunatus. Then down to Hell, for sure thou art a Devil.


Robin. O hold your hands, I am not a Devil by my troth.


Fortunatus. Sounds, do thou cross me? I say thou art a Devil.


Beat him again. Robin. O Lord sir save my life: and I Will say as you say, or
any thing else you will ha me do.


Fortunatus. Then stand up and make a preachment of thy Pedigree, and how at
first thou learnd'st this devilish trade: up I say.


Beat him. Stands upon a stool. Robin. O I will Sit:
Although in some places, I bear the title of a scuruy gentleman:
By birth I am a boat writes son of Hull,
My father got me of a refused hagge,
Under the old ruins of Boobies barn,
Who as she lived, at length she likewise died,
And for her good deeds went unto the Devil.
But, Hell not wont to harbor such a guest,
Her fellow fiends do daiely make complaint
Unto grim Pluto, and his lovely Queen,
Of her unruly missebehauiour:
Entreating that a pasport might be drawn
For her to wander till the day of doom,
On earth again to vex the minds of men,
And swore she was the fittest fiend in Hell
To drive men to desperation.
To this intent her pasport straight was drawn,
And in a whirle wind forth of Hell she came;
Ore hills she hurles, and scowres along the plains:
The trees flew up bith roots, the earth did quake for fear,
The houses tumble down, she plays the Devil and all:
At length not finding any one so fit
To effect her devilish damned charge as I:
She comes to me, as to her only child,
And me her instrument on earth she made,
And by that means I learnd this devilish trade.

Sophos. O monstrous villane!


Fortunatus. But tell me: what is thy course of life, and how thou shiftest for
maintenance in the world?


Robin. Faith Sir, I am in a manner a promoter,
Or more fitly termed a promoting knave:
I creep into the presence of great men,
And under color of their friendships,
Effect such wonders in the world
That babes will curse me, that are yet unborn.
Of the best men, I raise a common fame,
And honest women rob of their good name:
Thus daily tumbling-in comes all my thrift.
That I get best is got but by a shift:
But the chief course of all my life,
Is to set discord betwixt man and wife.

Fortunatus. Out upon thee Canniball, He beat them.
Do thou think thou shall ever come to hea^^^*

Robin. I little hope for heaven or heaven (...)
But if in hell does any place remain,
Of more esteem then is another room,
I hope, as guerdon for my just desert,
To have it for my detestable acts.

Fort. Were not, thy tongue condemns thy guilty soul,
I could not think that on this living earth
Did breath a villane so audacious.
Go get thee gone, and come not in my walk. Beat him.
For if thou do, thou come unto thy woe.

Rob. The devil himself was never coniur'd so.


Exit Rob. Sophos. Sure he is no man, but an incarnate devil,
Whose ougly shape bewrayes his monstrous mind.

Fortunatus. And if he be a devil, I am sure he is gone:
But Churms the Lawyer will be here anon,
And with him comes my sister Le^^a:
It Is he I am sure you look for.

Sophos. Nay, she it is that I expect so long.


Fort. Then sit we down until we hear more news:
This but a prologue to our play ensewes. They sit down.
But see where Churms and Lelia comes along: Enter Churms and Lelia.
^lks as stately as the great Baboone.
Sounds, he looks as though his mother were a midwife.

Sophos. Now gentle Jove, great Monarke of the world,
Grant good success unto my wandering hopes.

Churms. Now Phoebus silver eye is drencht in western deep
And Luna gins to show her splendantraies,
And ^^ the harmless quiresters of wood
Do take reprose, save only Philomele:
Whose heavy tunes do evermore record,
With mornefullaies the losses of her love.
Thus far fair love we pass in secret sort,
Beyond the compass of thy fathers bounds,
Whilst he on down-soft bed securely sleeps
And not so much as dreams of our depart*
The dangers past, now think on naught but love,
I Will be thy dear, be thou my hearts delight:

Sophos. Nay first, I Will send thy soul to cole black night.


Churms. Thou promised love: now seal it with a kiss.


Fort. Nay soft Sir, your mark's at the fairest.
For wear her love, and seal it ^^^^ ^ kiss*
Upon the burnisht splendour (...) bl^^^^^*
Or it shall rip the intrailes of thy pesant heart.

Sophos. Nay, let me do it, that's my part.


Churms. You wrong me much to rob me of my love.


Sophos. Auant, base braggard: Lelias mine.


Churms. She lately promised love to me.


Fortunatus. Peace, Night-Rauen, peace, Ileende this controversy.
Come Lelia, stand between them both,
As equal Judge to end this strife:
Say which of these shall have thee to his wife*
I can devise no better way then this,
Now choose thy love: and greet him with (...)

Lelia. My choice is made: and here it is (...)


Sophos. See here the mirror of true (...)
Whose steadfast love deserves a Princes worth*

Lelia. Master Churms are you not well?
I must confess I would have chosen you,
But that I nere beheld your legs till now:
Trust me I never looked so low before.

Churms. I know you use to look aloft.


Lelia. Yet not so high as your crown.


Churms. What if you had?


Lelia. Faith I should ha spied but a Calves head.


Churms. Sounds, cosend of the wench and scoft at too*
It Is intolerable: and shall I loose her thus?
Howt mads me, that I brought not my sword and buckl^^ with me!

Fort. What, are you in your sword and buckler terms*
I Will put you out of that humor:
There Lelia sends you that by me, Beats him.
And that, to recompense your loves desire:
And that, as payment for your well earned hire.
Go get thee gone, and boast of Lelias love.

Churms. Where ere I go I Will leave with her my ^^^se,
And rail on you with speeches vilde*

Fortunatus. A crafty knave was never so beguiled.
Now Sophos hopes have had their luckie haps,
And he enioyes the presence of his love,
My vow's performed, and I am full revenged
Upon this Hell-bred brace of cursed Imps:
Now rests naught but my fathers free consent
To knit the knot that time can nere untwist.
And that, as this, I likewise will perform.
No sooner shall Auroraes pearled deaw,
Orespread the mantled earth with silver drops
And Phoebus bless the Orient with a blush,
To chase black night to her deformed Cell,
But I Will repair unto my fathers house,
And never cease with my enticing words,
To work his will to knit this Gordian knot,
Till when I Will leave you to your amorous chatte,
Dear friend a dieu, fair sister too farewell,
Betake your selves unto some secret place:
Until you hear from me how things fall out.

Exit Fortunatus Sophos. We both do wish a fortunate goodnight:


Lelia. And pray the Gods to guide thy steps aright.


Sophos. Now come fair Lelia, lets betake our selves
Unto a little Hermitage hereby:
And there to live obscured from the world
Till fates and Fortune call us thence away,
To see the sunshine of our Nuptial day.
See how the twinkling Stars do hide their borrowed shin
As half ashamed their luster so is stained,
By Lelias beauteous eyes that shine more bright,
Then twinkling Stars do in a winters night:
In such a night did Paris win his love.

Lelia. In such a night, Aenaeas proved unkind.


Sophos. In such a night did Troilus court his dear.


Lelia. In such a night, fair Phyllis was betrayed.


Sophos. I Will prove as true as ever Troylus was.


Lelia. And I as constant as Penelope.


Sophos. Then let us solace, and in loves delight,
And sweet imbracings spend the liue-long night.
And whilst love mounts her on her wanton wings,
Let Descant run on Musicks silver strings.

Exeunt. A S^NGE
1
Old Tithon must for sake his dear,
The Lark does chante her cheerful lay:
Aurora smiles with merry cheer,
To welcome in a happy day.
2
The beasts do skippe,
The sweet birds sing:
The wood Nymphs dance,
The Eccho^^ring.
3
The hollow caves with joy resounds:
And pleasure every where abounds:
The Graces linking hand in hand,
In love have knit a glorious band.
Enter Robin Goodfellow, old Ploddall, and his son Peter. Ploddall. Hear
you Master Goodfellow how have you sped?


Peter. Ha you played the Devil bravely, and scard the scholar out ons wits?


Robin. A pox of the Scholar.


Ploddall. Nay hark you: I sent you vortie shillings, and you shall have the
cheese I promised you too.


Robin. A plague of the vortie shillings, and the Cheese too.


Peter. Hear you, will you give me the powder you told me of?


Robin. How you vex me! powder quotha? Sounds I ha been powderd.


Ploddall. Son, I doubthee will prove a crafty knave, and cosen us of our money:

We Will go to Master Justice and complain on him, and get him whipped out oath
Country for a Connicatcher.


Peter. I, or have his ears naild to the Pillorie: Comes lets go.


Exeunt Ploddall and his son. Enter Churms. Churms. Fellow Robin, what news?
how goes the world?


Robin. Faith, the world goes I cannot tell how:

How speed you with your wench?


Churms. I would the wench were at the Devil:

A plague vpont I never say my prayers, and that makes me have such ill luck.


Robin. I think the scholar be haunted with some Demidiuel.


Churms. Why* did thou fray him?


Robin. Fray him? a vengeance ont* all our shifting knauerie's known:
We are counted very vagrants:
Sounds, I am afraid of every officer, for whipping.

Churms. We are horribly haunted: our behavior is so beastly, that we are
grown loathsome, our craft gets us naught but knocks.


Robin. What course shall we take now?


Churms. Faith ^ cannot tell^ lets eene run our Country, for here is no staying
for us.


Robin. Faith agreed: lets go into some place where we are not known, and
there set up the art of knauerie with the second edition.


Exeunt* Enter Gripe, Solus. Gripe. Every one tells me I look better then I was
wont,
My hearts lightened, my spirits are revived,
Why me thinks I am eene young again;
It joys my heart that this same peevish girl my daughter will be ruled at the
last yet:
But I shall never be able to make Mr. Churmes amends for the great pains he
has taken,

Enter Nurse. Nur. Master, now out vpons, well aday: we are al undone!


Gripe. Undone? what sudden accident has chanced?
Speak what is the matter?

Nurse. Alas that ever I was borne!
My Mistress and Mr. Churms are run away together.

Gripe. It Is not possible: nere tell me. I dare trust Master Churms with a
greater matter then that.


Nurse. Faith you must trust him whether you will or no, for he is gone.


Enter Will. Cricket. Will. M. Gripe, I was coming to desire that I might
have your absence at my wedding: for I hear say you are very liberal grown
alate.
For I spoke with three or four of your debtors this morning*
that ought you hundred pounds a piece:
And they told me, that you sent M. Churmes to them and took of some ten
pounds,
And of some twenty, and delivered them their bonds,
And bad them pay the rest when they were able.

Gripe. I am undone: I am robbed: my daughter* my money!
Which way are they gone?

Will. Faith Sir, its all to nothing but your daughter and
M. Churms are gone both one way:
Marry your money flies some one ways and some another:
And therefore it is but a folly to make hue and cry after it.

Gripe. Follow them: make hue and cry after them.
My daughter, my money, alls gone, what shall I do?

Will. Faith if you will be ruled by me,
I Will tell you what you ^^^ll do:
(Mark what I say) for I Will teach you the way to come to heaven, if you stumble
not:

Give all you have to the poor,

But one single penny, and with that penny buy you a good strong halter,

And when you ha done so: come to me and I Will tell you what you shall do with
it.


Gripe. Bring me my daughter: that Churms, that villane,
I Will tear him with my teeth.

Nurse. Master, nay pray you do not run mad:
I Will tell you good news:
My young Master Fortunatus is come home: and see where he comes.

Enter Fortunatus. Gripe. If thou had said Lelia, it had been something.


Fort. Thus Fortunatus greetes his Father,
And craves his blessing on his bended knee.

Gripe. I, heers my son: but Lelia she will not come.
Good Fortunatus rise: will thou shed tears,
And help thy father moan?
If so, say I: if not good son be gone.

Fort. What moves my father to these v^^^^th fits?


Will. Faith Sir, he is almost mad: I think he cannot tell you:

And therefore I presuming Sir, that my wit is something better than his, at
this time (do you mark Sir?)

Out of the profound circumambulation of my supernatural wit Sir (do you
understand?)

Will tell you the whole superfluity of the matter Sir:
Your sister Leli^ Sir you know is a woman,
As another woman is Sir.

Fort. Well, and what of that?


Will. Nay nothing Sir, but she fell in love with one Sophos a very proper
wise young man Sir:
Now Sir, your Father would not let her have him, Sir:
But would have married her to one Sir,
That would have fed her with nothing but barley bag puddings and fat bacon:
Now Sir to tell you the truth,
The fool ye know has fortune to land:
But M. Lelias mouth does not hang for that kind of diet.

Fort. And how then?


Will. Marry then there was a certain craking, cogging, pettifogging,
buttermilke slave Sir, one Churms Sir, that is the very quintessence of all the
knaves in the bunch; And if the best man of all his kin had been but so good as
a yeoman man's son:

He should have been a marked knave by letters patents,

And he Sir comes me sneaking, and cosens them both of their wench, and is run
away with her:

And Sir belike he has cosend your father here of a great deal of his money
too.


Nurse. Sir your father did trust him but too much;
But I always thought he would prove a crafty knave.

Gripe. My trusts betrayed, my joys exiled:
Grief kills his heart, my hopes beguiled,

Fort. Whtere golden gain does bleare a fathers eyes,
That precious pearl fetched from Pernassus mount,
Is counted refuse, worse then Bullen brass;
Both joys and hope hang of a silly twine,
That still is subject unto flitting time:
That tournes joy into grief, and hope to sad despair,
And ends his days in wretched worldly care.
Were I the richest Monarch under heaven,
And had one daughter thrice as fair,
As was the Grecian Menelaus wife,
Ere I would match her to an untaught swain,
Though one whose wealth exceeded Croesus store,
Her self should choose, and I applaud her choice,
Of one more poor then ever Sophos was,
Were his deserts but equal unto his.
If I might speak without offense;
You were to blame to hinder Lelias choice.
As she in Natures graces does excel:
So does Minerua grace him full as well.

Nurse. Now, by cock and pie, you never spoke a truer word in your life, he is
a very kind gentleman:

For last time he was at our house he gave me three pence.


Will. O nobly spoken: God send Pegge to prove as wise a woman as her Mother,
and then we shall be sure to have wise children.

Nay if he be so liberal: old Gransire you shall give him the good will of
your daughter.


Gripe. She is not mine: I have no daughter now.
That I should say I had, thence comes my grief:
My care of Lelia, past a fathers love,
My love of Lelia makes my loss the more.
My loss of Lelia drowns my heart in woe:
My hearts woe makes this life a living death:
Care, Love, Loss, Hearts-woe, living death,
Join all in one, to stop this vital breath.
Cursed be the time I gap't for golden gain,
I curse the time, I crossed her in her choice.
Her choice was virtuous, but my will was base,
I sought to grace her from the Indian Mines,
But she sought honor from the starrie Mount:
What frantic fit possessed my foolish brain?
What furious fancy fired so my heart,
To hate fair Virtue and to scorn desert?

Fortunatus. Then father give desert his due,
Let Natures graces and fair virtues gifts,
One sympathy and happy consort make,
Twixt Sophos and my sister Lelias love:
Conioyne their hands, whose hearts have long been one,
And so conclude a happy union.

Gripe. Now it is too late:
What Fates decree, can never be recalled:
Her lucklesse love is fallen to Churms his lot,
And he vsurps fair Lelias nuptial bed.

Fortunatus. That cannot be: fear of pursuit must needs* prolong his nuptial
rights.
But if you give your full consent,
That Sophos may enjoy his long wished love,
And have fair Lelia to his lovely bride,
I Will follow Churmes what ere betide.
I Will be as swifte as is the light foot Roe,
And overtake him ere his iournies end:
And bring fair Lelia back unto my friend.

Gripe. I, heers my hand* I do consent,
And think her happy in her happy choice,
Yet half foreiudge my hopes will be deceived.
But Fortunatus: I must needs commend,
Thy constant mind thou bear unto thy friend.
The after ages wondering at the same:
Shall sait's a deed deserving lasting fame.

Fort. Then rest you here til I return again,
I Will go to Sophos ere I go along:
And bring him here to keep you company.
Perhaps he has some skill in hidden arts,
Of Planets course, or secret magic spells,
To know where Lelia and that Fox lies hid,
Whose craft so cunningly conuaid her hence.

Exit Fortu. Gripe. I: here I Will rest an hour or twain,
Till Fortunatus do return again.

Will. Faith Sir, this same Churms is a very scuruy Lawer:

For once I put a case to him: and me thought his law was not worth a pudding.


Gripe. Why what was your case?


Will. Marry Sir, my case was a gooses case:
For my dog wirried my neighbors sow, and the sow died*

Nurse. And he sued you upon wilful murder?


VVil. No: but he went to law with me, and would make me either pay for his
sow, or hang my dog:

Now Sir to this same Retourner I went.


Nurse. To beg a pardon for your dog?


Will. No: but to have some o^ (...) for my money,
I gave him his fee, and promised him a goose beside, for h^^ counsel.
Now Sir his counsel was to deny all was asked me,
And to crave a longer time to answer,
Though I knew the case was plain;
So Sir I take his counsel: and always when he send to me for his goose, I
deny it, and crave a longer time to answer.


Nurse. And so the case was yours, and the goose was his:
And so it came to be a gooses case.

Will. True: but now we are talking of geese,
See where Pegge and my Granam Midnight comes.

Enter M. Midnight and Pegge. Moth. M. Come Pegge, bestirre your stumpes: make
thy self smugge, wench; thou must be married to morrow:
Lets go seek out thy sweet heart,
To prepare all things in readiness.

Pegge. Why Granam, look where he is.


Will. Ha my sweet Tralilly, I thought thou could spy me amongst a hundred
honest men.
A man may see that love will creep where it cannot go.
Ha my sweet and too sweet: shall I say the the other sweet?

Pegge. I, say it and spare not.


Will. Nay I will not say it, I will sing it.
Thou art mine own sweet heart*
From thee I Will never depart:
Thou art my Ciperlillie:
And I thy Trangdidowne dilly,
And sing hey ding a ding ding:
And do the the other thing*
And when it is done not miss,
To give my wench a kiss:
And then dance can thou not hit it?
Ho brave William Cricket*
How like you this Granam*

Mother M. Marry gods be^niso^ l^^^t oath thy good heart, fort:

Ha, that I were you^^ again!

(...) I was an old doer at these love songs when I was a (...)


Nurse. Now by the (...) the merriest woer in all Womanshire.


Pegge. Faith, I am none of those that love nothing but Tum dum diddle*

If he had not been a merry shauer, I would never have had him.


Will. But come my wimble less, let al these matters pass: And in a bouncing
brauation, lets talk of our copulation: What good cheer shall we have to
morrow?

Old Grandsir Thickskin, you that sit there as melancholy as a mantletree, what
will you give us toward this merry meeting?


Gripe. Marry, because you told me a merry gooses case:
I Will bestow a fat goose on ye: and God give you luck.

Mother M. Marry well said old master: eene God give them joy indeed, for by my
vay, they are a good sweet young couple.


Will. Granam stand out oath way, for here come gentlefolke will run ore ye else.


Enter Fortuna* Soph. and Lelia. Nurse. Master, here comes your son again*


Gripe. Is Fortunatus there?
Welcome Fortunatus* where is Sophos?

Fortunatus. Here Sophos is, as much ore-worne with love,
As you with grief for loss of Lelia.

Sophos. And ten times more if it be possible.
The love of Lelia is to me more dear,
Then is a kingdom or the richest crown
That ere adornd the temples of a king.

Gripe. Then welcome Sophos: thrice more welcome now
Then any man on earth to me or mine.
It is not now with me as late it was;
I lowrd at learning, and at virtue spurnd:
But now my heart and mind and all is tournd.
Were Lelia here* I soon would knit the knot
Twixt her and thee, that time could nere vnti^,
Till fatal sisters victory had won,
And that your glass of life were quite (...)

Will. Sounds, I think he be spur-blind. Why, Lelia stands hard by him.


Lelia. And Lelia here falls prostrate on her knee.
And craves a pardon for her late offense.

Gripe. What Lelia, my daughter? stand up wench:
Why now my joy is full:
My heart is lightened of all sad annoy:
Now farewell grief, and welcome home my joy.
Here Sophos, take thy Lelias hand:
Great God of heaven your hearts combine
In virtues lore to raise a happy line.

Sophos. Now Phaeton has checked his fiery steeds,
And quenched his burning beams that late were wont
To melt my waxen wings when as I soard aloft:
And lovely Venus smiles with fair aspect
Upon the Spring time of our sacred love;
Thou great commander of the circled Orbs,
Grant, that this league of lasting amity
May lie recorded by Eternity.

Lelia. Then wished content knit up our Nuptial right:
And future joys our former griefs requite.

Will. Nay an you be good at that, I Will tell you what we will do.

(...) I must be married to morrow; and if you will, we will go all tuth Church
together: and so save Sir John a labor.


All. Agreed.


Fortunatus. Then march along, and lets be gone,
To solemnize two marriages in one.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.
THE EPILOGVE.
GEntles, all compast in this circled round,
Whose kind aspects do patronize our sports:
To you I Will bend as low as to the earth,
In all the humble complements of courtesy.
But if there be, (as it is no doubt there is)
In all this round some Cinique censurers,
Whose only skill consists in finding faults,
That have like Midas mighty Asses ears,
Quick judgments that will strike at every stale,
And perhaps such as can make a large discourse
Out of Scoggins jests, or the hundred merry tales:
Marry if you go any further, it is beyond their reading;
To these I say, I scorn to lend a look,
And bid them vanish vapors, and so let them pass.
But to the other sort, that hear with love, and judge with favor,
To them we leave, to censure of our play:
And if they like our plays Catastrophe,
Then let them grace it with a Plaudite.
Exit. FINIS.

