A LETETR WRITTEN BY Captain EDWARD WIN, to the Right Honorable, Sir
George Caluert, Knight, his Majesty's Principal Secretary: From Feryland in
Newfoundland, the 26. of August. 1621.

Imprinted MDCXXI.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir George Caluert, Knight, his Majesty's principal
Secretary.
May it please your Honor,
Upon the 26. day of June, between 12. and 1. in the morning we did set sail
and departed from Plimmoth, and upon the 4. day of August, (Gods name be
praised for it) we safely arrived at Feryland. There happened nothing in our
ouer-bound passage worthy your Honors leisure of reading. Our passage was
somewhat tedious, the which happened by means of much Westerly winds, and not
without some foul weather.

The first land we made was that to the Westward of Cape de Raze, and the wind
at North-east, by reason whereof our ariuall aforesaid was prolonged by the
space of two days, in the interim of which time we trauersed to and again,
to make good that which might mainetaine that outwardnesse toward our wished
Harbor. Having the happiness of a clear sky al about, and both Coast and
Continent without any Rain, Fogge or Hazines, they being in these parts the
common attendants of Easterly winds. By this commodity I had the full view of
the Coast between (as we supposed) Cape Saint Mary's, Cape de Raze, and Cape
Ballard, and as far as Renouze, and as we hold along the same, I saw (in my
mean judgment) the beautifullest Coast and the pleasantest Sea Cant that ever
mine eyes beheld, for that spacious tract. It is a very Champion Country
without any Hill, appearing either within Land, or upon the Coast, representing
it self unto me like a pleasant Meadow, and the Seabanke all along of an equal
height, and that so indifferent, that out of a floating Boat one may easily
throw a quoit upon the level shore. Of the fertility of the soil I can say
nothing only that it is very probable that much or most part thereof may prove
very good with the help of man's industry, seeming to be void of woods, and the
endowments of Harbors and Roades for Shipping, Trepassey excepted.

Renouze is a place of great fishing, and about a league to the Northward of
the same is the Harbor of Fermoze, thence to Agnafort, another league, from
thence to Feryland about a mile, and to Cape Broyle another, including Capling
Bay between both, being ignorant as yet of that to the Northward of the same.
But from Renoze to Cape Broyle, for Woods and pleasant Harbors they are most
pleasant to behold, the Sea Cant whereof being uneven and hilly, yet not
extreme, but of height indifferent, the Inland more enclining toward a
Champion, and by general consent here, Feryland is as pleasant and as
profitable a Harbor as any in the Land. It is endowed with about 100. acres of
pasture land, and as much more of that which is wooddie: all which lying to the
Sea-boord of the beach, which seuers it so from the Maine, that it is almost an
Island. There is likewise about 200. acres more, lying close to the Harbor, the
which (with some labor) may be made good pasture land.

The Sea coast to the Northward of Renouze, is most capable and fittest for
Wood-land as now it is, but (most destroyed) from the bottom of the Harbors,
and so inwards, for arable and (most) pasture.

Both Sea and Land here swarm (as it were) with benefits and blessings of God
for man's use and relief.

The Land here is (without doubt) very fertile, for I have since my arrival
seen Wheat, Barley and Rye, growing here full eared and kerned, the which had
been accidentally shed out of Salt Mats among Stones and Grass. Therefore
ground of better choice, well manured and fitly prepared, will doubtless bring
forth plentiful increase, and wherefore there is no just doubt to be made: for
in reason where there is a Summer, there will be a Harvest.

Besides there are many other inuitements, which (as it were) becken unto your
Honors perseverance. First the commodity of the Salt, which for vent and making
here may fitly and necessarily be undertaken. Secondly Hemp and Flax for
cordage, and thread for necessary uses, as also for Nets and Lines for fishing,
Tar, Iron and Timber in some measure, and places to be had for boords and
building, and also for Masts, and yards for Shipping. So likewise Hops will
grow here a profitable Merchandise. Also here are two fishing seasons, the the
former for dry fish, and the latter for Cor-fish: wherewith (together with the
train of the whole) many Ships are employed to the Market and otherwise.

My want of leisure causes me to omit many things, which otherwise I might
have enlarged, this my service of writing.

By the consent and advise of some of the masters of this Harbor, I am become
an humble suter unto your Honor for the redress of such abuses, the which
(except a speedy redress may be had) will overthrow the whole.

1. And first that Stones or Ballast may not from henceforth be cast into the
Harbor, and the Beaches preserved. 2. Secondly, that no man neither burn nor
pull down Stages, Flakes, nor any part thereof. 3. Thirdly that the rinding of
Trees may be prohibited, but only such as shall be felled for necessary uses
and needful behoofes. Fourthly, that all such Woods and Timber Trees so
felled, may be cut close to to the ground. 5. Lastly, that no man may be
wronged in their Boats and traine-fats, or in any thing else whatsoever. And
therefore if this by your Honors favor and procurement may be had, a
prosperous and flourishing time will follow, and all things here will go on
well hereafter, the which God grant: And for the which, the said Masters humbly
pray that large penalties may (therein be specified, and first to be proclaimed
in Englund. Thus referring all unto your Honors wisdom and full consideration.
Our business, or rather your Honors now goes forward apace; the frame is in
hand, and almost ready for the rearing; the seller is already diged; al things
by Gods grace and blessed assistance shall be performed with all care and
diligence, whereof your Honor may be pleased to rest assured, as by the
success of my carfulness it shall plainly appear.

The 5. persons and provision from aboard the Benjamin, are safely arrived here
the 17. of August, but not without some danger, for I was enforced to send for
them in two shallops of fishing Botes from the Isles of Spear, 4. leagues from
this place.

The place whereon I have made choice to plant and build upon, is according to
the Letter A in this superficial draught here enclosed, it being the fittest
the warmest, and most commodious of all about the Harbor. And as soon as the
house and fortification is fitted and finished, I shall (God willing) prepare
and fence in a proportion of seed ground, and a Garden close by the house. It
may please your Honor not to send any Cattle the next year, because I cannot
prouid fodder for them so soon, before there be some quantity of Corn
growing, but it may please your Honor to send some Goats, a few tame Conies
for breed, as also Pigs, Geese, Ducks and Hens. I have some Hens already: some
Spades from London were necessary, if of the best making, also some good
Pickaxes, iron Croes, and a Smith, and also such as can brew and bake.

Meal and Malt would be sent rather then otherwise, being both better cheap,
and of less waste, yet referring all to your Honors pleasure therein, humbly
praying you would be pleased to proceed with all cheerefulnes, nothing doubting
of a good and profitable succsse, for here are are great hopes, and a large
Territory for to employ and receive many needy people in a blessed and a
profitable doing, even who may live here both wealthily and happily.

And withal it may likewise please your Honor, that after one year more we
shall be able to subsist of our selves by our own industry, with Master
Iennings his help and furtherance, and that with his profit and content.

I doubt not but that within the compass of a small time to make your Honor a
sauer.

If your Honor please, you may defer the sending of a salt Pan one year more.
Brigs and Owen has bin touched with the Scuruie, but are now well recovered
but all the rest of us are in perfect health, I thank God for it.

One Master Yawe, Master of a Ship of Barnstable (whose owner is called Master
Strange) he did spare me half his Stage; the which did stand me in great
steed to put my provision in at the first landing of them. Master Luxen, a
Master of another Ship of Barnstable, he showed me much courtesy, and
bestowed on me a Hen and 10. Chickens. Master Richard Martin, Master of the
Blessing of Dartmouth, he gave me a couple of young Pullets, kind
entertainment, and many good turns. Master Michael Waltham, Master of a Ship
of Weimouth, he went in person to the I Will of Spear, in a Boat of his own,
to help to fetch our men and provision from aboard the Benjamin, he has
besides done me many good Offices, and has sent me many presents of
Fresh-fish, and his Mate bestowed on me a good Hen.

My happiness of preuayling hitherto has been such, that all the Masters as
well as the common sort throughout this Harbor have used me kindly, and to say
truly, I have not discerned so much as a sour aspect upon me amongst them
all.

I have not been (and please your Honor) wanting in any thing, which by fair
persuasions might produce a good liking of your Honors proceedings: insomuch
that (I am persuaded) diverse will stay with me another year. Therefore I humbly
pray your Honor to entreat Master Iennings to send me 3. Pieces of Ordnance,
a full Saker, a Minion, and a lesser Piece for our defense, a Drum, and a
Ship Ancient.

And thus with my humble duty remembered, I most humbly cease to trouble your
Honor any further for this time, resting

Your Honors most humble and faithful servant, Edward Win.
Feryland, the 26. of August. 1621.
ANOTHER LETTER of the 28. of August, from the said Captain Win, unto Master
Secretary Caluert.
MAy it please your Honor,
Upon the 26. of this present I delivered unto one Master Henry Zeny, Master of
a Ship of Milbrooke, near Plimmoth, a Packet directed to Master Iennings,
wherein my Letters to your Hononr were enclosed: the Coppies whereof I have
likewise here enclosed, and have sent the same by one Master Busse, Master of
the Prosperous a Ship of Bristol, humbly praying your Honor, that I may be
furnished with all necessary Tools and provision of Victuals the next year,
and if your Honor may, with about the number of twenty persons more, whereof a
Surgeon, and a learned and a religious Minister: that then your Honor may be
pleased by Gods assistance, not to doubt of a good and a profitable success in
every respect, and a flourishing plantation, women would be necessary here
for many respects. Some two miles from this Harbor, direct West, there is a
pleasant Champion fit for the Farm, which I trust with your Honors leave, to
set forward another year. And thus with my humble duty remembered and
recommended unto your Honor and my good Lady, beseeching the Almighty to
bless you and yours, and so I rest.

Your Honors most humble faith full and obedient servant, Edward Win.
From Ferryland, the 28. of August 1621.

