ZACHEVS CONVERTED: OR, The Rich Publicans Repentance. Restitution.



In which, the Mysteries of the Doctrine of Conversion, are sweetly laid open
and applied for the establishing of the weakest.

Also Of Riches in their getting, keeping, expending; with diverse things about
alms and restitution, and many other material points and cases insisted upon.

By JOHN WILSON, late Preacher of Gods Word in Guilford.



Printed at London by T. Cotes, for Fulke Clifion, and are to be sold at his
shop upon new Fishstreete hill, 1631.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, the serious consideration of Gods eternal love to his, in
his Son Christ Jesus, together with all the blessed consequents which flow from
it, and are chained unto it, is able to swallow up the largest heart and
deepest thoughts, as the greatest rivers are swallowed up and lost in the Seas.

For think but a while of the vast and wonderful distance and difference
which is betwixt hell and heaven, of the different condition of a soul lost
and said, from what depth (...) Iphier.
of misery thou art drawn, unto what height of happiness exalted; and tell
me if thou stand not as a man astonished; thy spirit failing, and thy
tongue (...)eaving to the roof of thy mouth, when thon find thy self tied
unto the Lord in more bonds, than there be hairs on thy head, or dust on
which thy feet have trod. Which should mightily fire the hearts of all such as
have given their names unto Christ, to fill their hands with all advantages,
and to go forth to meet all opportunities, for the advancement of the
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, which should be more dear unto us than all
our worldly contentments a thousand times; yea more dear than the best blood
that warmes our hearts. And we are the rather to hasten and add wings unto
these our resolutions and endeavors, not only because our days are short and
uncertain, and decline apace to the evening shadow; as also that the most are
miserably be-nighted, and go hence fearfully guilty of neglect; of the good
they might have done or received this way. But especially in regard of the
condition of the places and times, where and wherein we live, we find the
kingdom of hell and darkness suffering violence; many running Qua ex^^sation^
purgamus qui d^^boli servis ^^ino^es sum^^, and Christo pr^ sanguin^^ pretio
vice^* noc in modicis rependimus? Cypr. de oper. and Eleem os.
with more than ordinary speed to destruction, and carrying with them as many
as they can: We may observe also the scorners chair highly exalted, the foot
of pride and insolency treading upon the face of piety and godliness, and hard
and cruel speeches every where uttered against the sincerest professors of the
truth; And lastly, how are many of Gods own people grown secure, remiss, and
spiritlesse: Many having ^^eir desires and endea^ours confined within a narrow
compass, reaching no farther than themselves, or some few about them; many
looking little further than the bounds and precin^^ of their own parishes; the
most little considering the straits and necessities of the times, the breaches
and losses which the Church of God sustaines, either amongst our selves, or in
foreign parts.

Unto these we may add the desires, breathings, and longings of many poor
hungry souls, who like the young Ravens, which are left of them which should
nourish them, Job 38. 41.
do cry unto God for meat. So that the present season does seem to cry aloud
unto every one, that bears good will to Sion, * to stir O si posse(...)
excitare homines and cumipsis pariter excitari, ut tales essemus amatores (...)
permanentis, quale^ sunt homines ^matores ^itae su^ienti^. Aug. de doct. Christ.
up all our strength, and to put forth our selves to our uttermost, that all
fit ways be taken, for the furtherance of the good of Gods Church and people.

Amongst other means this is not of the least nor lowest consequence the
printing and publishing of good and wholesome books, of sound and profitable
Treatises Not only because if there were not a continual supply of these,
many would read little; but also because that by these there might (...) some
help reached for(...) unto Quanto* propinquius sinemmundi di^bolus videt,
tanto erudelius ^ersecut^^nes exer^e^, ut qui se continuo damnandum consp(...),
(...) socios multiplice^, cum quibus gehexnae ignibus addicatur. Isid, de sum,
bon.
such as are either slenderly provided for, or altogether destitute of
preaching of the Word where they live. In regard also that Satan, in this last
age of the world, knowing his time is but short, does mightily *bestirre
himself, to find out such ways of frau^ and circumvention as may be most
prevalent and seasonable. What need is there then of the labors of Gods
faithful Watchmen, who standing in their Towers, discover his wiles, and
afford such relief as is most agreeable to the present times and distresses
of men? Moreover, many grow sluggish, drowsy, and lukewarm: Now the words of
the wise and their writings, are like goads and nails fastened in the spirits
of men, which might quicken them up unto their duties, and their lines being
spiritfull and sparkling, might set their hearts a burning within them, with a
holy zeal for God and his Glory.

Lastly, we being fallen * A^dentius ab illis defenditur (...)esis quam a nebis
opp^gnatur. Hieron. epist. ad Theoph. * Nusqua^ faci^^us profi(...) quam ^n
castris rebel um. Tersul. de praescript. advers. ^aereticos.
into those times wherein Popery increases, new errors are sprowting up, and
old heresies are called up out of their graves, and represented under the
deceiving shows of received truths. Such as are on the Lords side, may by such
means as these discover their hypocrisy, and secure those that love the
truth, from their delusions.

These, and such like reasons as these, have induced me (Christian Reader) to
take hold of this present opportunity, and to offer unto thy view this useful
Treatise of a Reverend Divine now with God. A faithful and a painful
labourer in the Lords Vineyard above the space of 30. years. A man he was one
of a thousand, an eminent light, mighty in the Scriptures, and a happy
interpreter of them; of a sound judgment, solid and dexterous in unfolding
difficult questions; besides his modesty, mildness, and meekness of spirit,
affablenesse in conversation wherein he excelled the most. A man retired and
drawn much up into himself, neither thinking great thoughts of himself, nor
seeking great things for himself; but seeking him, and conversing much with
him that is invisible; he attained a great measure of divine wisdom, and
heavenly mindedness: So that we that knew him looked on him, and judged much
of him to be in heaven already: Of whom it may be affirmed, as once of a
worthy Divine of Scotland, that he did even eat, and drink, and sleep
eternal life: Whom if thou did not know in his life time, yet now learn to
be acquainted with him in his labors; who will converse sweetly with thee in
thy bosom, speak to thy very heart, and counsel thee as from God.

Concerning the Treatise it self, I shall spare to speak much of it, because
it is so well able to speak for it self, as thou find so judge: Many
choice truths there are handled in it, many places of Scripture profitably
opened, many secret p^ssages about the Conversion of a sinner lively
discovered. Thou may take notice also of the several ways of dealing, in
bringing home lost creatures. Some he draggeth as by the hair of the head
painfully; others he leads as by the hand gently: of which, the subject of
this book is a notable example.

I had thought to have offered it unto thee by the hands of some other more
eminently gifted, and better known in the Church, on whose judgment thou
might with more safety have reposed thy self; but well knowing the worth of
it to be such, as will easily discover it self; and by reason of my interest
in the Author, and some trust reposed in me this way; I rather chose to let my
meandness appear, than not to discharge that debt of love which I owe to the
memory of my deceased friend.

The Lord bless these things unto thee, and teach thee to profit; and do thou
bless God for the labors of the dead and living, and let him beg a prayer
of thee, who being affectionately devoted to the good of thy soul, does rest,

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, H. Whitfield.
(...)ly in Surry. May this 13.
The principal Contents contained in this Book.
ZAcheus his description, conversion, and occasion thereof. Fol. 1 The cause of
it, and efficacy thereof. 2. and 3 Christ's office in seeking and saving. 4 His
sufferings and death voluntary. 5 From thence we have encouragement to come
unto him for salvation. 17 We ought to know this love of his. 19. 20 And to
frame our obedience accordingly. 21 Jericho of old cursed, yet yields some
heirs of blessing. 27 Likewise does Bethsaida, Tyrus and Sidon, and also
Samaria. 26. 27 The reason thereof. 29 It may minister comsort to those that
live in barren times and places. 32 The world, Behold, implies certainety, and
matter worthy (...)attention. 34 Which may both further our faith. 37* and also
correct our dull negligence. 38 The naming of the person ascertaines the
history. 40, 4^ The mentioning of his sin (being pardoned) is no stain unto
him. 42, 43 What the Publicans were. 44 Usual wiyes to get great riches. 45
Some great and rich ones, chosen, called, and saved. 47 Riches, how hindrances
of salvation. 48, etc Hurt in unlawful and base keeping of riches. 54 Evil
expense of riches, furthers damnation. 57, etc To what end God gives riches
unto men. 64 Riches further the godly in the exercise of grace. 68 Wicked men
not to be preferred for their wealth. 73 Zacheus his desire to see Christ, the
occasion of his conversion. 74 His desire respected and granted. 77 God begins
his good work in small things. 78 Works of the Spirit in men's hearts,
sometimes unknown to them. 81, etc We must observe secret motions unto good.
86 Zacheus in seeking to see Christ, neglected his worldly reputation. 89
Preventing grace. 93 The effects of it. 94 Our Conversion described by our
knowledge of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. 96 Impediments and lets sometime
from others, sometime from our selves. 98, 99 Satan a principal hinderer of
good things. 100 When a door is opened to do good, there are many
adversaries. 101, 102 We must not for all that think it strange nor be
discouraged. 103 Gracious affections or desires, not quelled by lets. 109 The
unsoundnesse of vanishing desires. 117 Comfort for those that pursue good and
holy desires. 120 The good success of Zacheus his desire. 125 Comfort for
those that linger after Christ in holy desires. 130 Christ bids himself to
Zacheus his house. 134 God sometimes gives above our desires. 135 The use we
should make thereof. 141 The doing of Gods works with speediness. 143
Encouragement for those who are weakened by Gods deferring to grant their
Prayers 147 God of his own goodness is pleased to proceed in his favors.
156 Consolation arising thereof, 165 Caveats to be used herein. 168, 169
Obedience in following the lively and powerful calling of Christ. 170 It is
not in man that wills and runs, though we must both will and run. 179,
181 The gracing of obedience is to be ready and without delay. 185 Ministers
duty in their heavers. 191 Men must not take delays in repentance. 194 Dangers
in delaying. 198, 199 Use thereof to young men. 201 Considerations about our
calling to Christ. 213 Where Christ comes there is joy. 218, 219 The causes
of this joy, and the benefits that come therewithal. 222, 223 It is to their
reproof that rifuse Christ offered. 228, 229 A double act of faith. 235
Against such as go on unheartfully in good things. 238 239 Heaviness and
grief blameable in Christians. 142, 143 Means to maintain true joy in the
Lord. 246, 247 Differences betwixt the joy of the godly and temporizers. 248,
249 As Zacheus received Christ into his heart and house, so ought we to
receive Christ in his members and servants. 153 Our backwardness to entertain
Christ in his members and servants, reprooved. 258. 259 Helps to further this
duty. 260, 261 We should not be curious, nor too inquisitive about those whom
we entertain to house. 267 Murmuring springs of mistaken grounds. 268 Good
men sometimes misliked for well doing. 272, 273 Herein we must content our
selves with Gods approbation, though we have not men's. 275 We must labor not
only that we give none offense, but also that we take none, to make us weak
or go back. 276 Sinners who they are, and so to be accounted. 281, 282 Who
are not to be holden for sinners. 290. 291 Wherein stands the dominion of
sin. 292. 293. Whether all fellowship with stnners, be sin in a godly man.
295. 296 Considerations to be had and used herein. 297 A wicked severity, or
carnal bitterness against sinners. 307, 308 True profession a testimony of
stable faith and unfeigned repentance. 309 Shame and fearfulness to profess,
reproved. Reproof of those that show no proof in their works, of repentance
and faith. 319 Liberality, alms, and bounty express and show our love to God
and men. 321 The fruits thereof. 323 Rules to be kept in giving. 331 In what
cases, Wives and inferiors may give. 336 Rules thereof. 338 A man must begin
with his own. 343 Prophets of God to be respected in been volence. 345 What
commends alms. 351 Reproof of the covetous and illiberall. 354 The manner of
Publicans sinning in their calling. 361 Some men come to impudency in sinning
for a little advantage. 363 We must not be too hasty to credit accusations
against our neighbors. 367 In true conversion we must forsake not only sin
in general, but even our special sins. 370 Which should move men to examine
well their conversion, whether it be true or false. 374 Those whom the devil
can hold no longer in the gross sins of the body, he leads to Popery and
superstition. 377 Repentance requires to have the man clean from secret sins.
379 Restitution of goods evil gotten, is a fruit of Repentance. 381
Restitution what it is. 384 Men should be content with a little, so it be
honest and ^u^^ gain. 387 Christ honored Zacheus and his house with his
testimony. 389 As Christ is author, so he is witness of his graces in men.
390 Bellarmine confuted about the certainty of salvation. 392 Men ought to get
certainty of their grace, and how it may be had. 398 Those that have not
assurance of their estate in grace, must seek and wait till God grant it. 401
We must take notice of the time when God does visit us with salvation. 404 It
is warrantable to keep some days of special thankfulness to the Lord. 407
Calling to grace, what it is. 414 We ought to make our calling sure. 415 Such
as know their calling must be thankful. 419 The faithful and godly with their
households are saved. P. 421 Men must strive to be placed in good and godly
families. P. 425 To be the child of Abraham what. 427 The fatherhood and
dignity of Abraham. 433 One faith and way to salvation. 434 We must prove our
selves Children of Abraham. 437 The end of Christ's coming into the world. 439
Reproof of selfe-conceited men. 443 Our calling justifies our actions. 447
Comfort in trouble, while we walk in our calling: but dangerous to meddle out
of ou^ callings. 453 Christ took all oportunities, to instruct and save
sinners. 437. 438 We seek not Christ till he look after us. 462. A note of
Gods Children to seek the Lord. 467 Our risings after falls, to be ascribed
unto Gods mercy. 470 It should stir up our hope, love, and care, to seek men
that are lost. 472. 473 Faith breeds love to God and his Children. 476 The
success may provoke to the duty. 477 Christ fulfilled the Law for us. 481 With
our sins he took the full punishment due to them. 491 Christ makes
intercession for us. 496 The works, prayers and praises of the faithful, like
sweet odours. 499 Our union with Christ. 501 Papists differ from us. 506 The
Gospel what: we are commanded to believe it. 509 We must be changed into the
image of Christ, from glory to glory. 511 Adoption belongs to glorification,
which is by degrees. 513. 514 The regenerate respect all the commandments
given them. 519. Grace freeth the godly from the reign of sins. 520 They are
safely preserved. 526 By faith men recover themselves after falls, and get
victory over Satan and sin. 531 By faith and prayer we must prevail in
inward combats and temptations. 532. 533. 534 We ought to ascribe unto Christ
the power and ability of our standing. 537 All other Saviors besides him, are
excluded. 541 Whether heathens may be saved by keeping the Law of nature. 543.
Papisme saves none, though some amongst Papists may be saved. 547 The matter
of our salvation. 551 The form of our justification. 555 We are bound to trust
and rejoice in Christ alone for our whole salvation. 156. 157 To Christ alone
belongs the honor of binding our consciences. 560 The condition in which
Christ finds us, is, To be lost. 562 We must take notice of this our miserable
condition. 567 Our love to men, specially the brethren and faithful. 571
Reasons to induce a sinner to come (out of his misery) unto Christ. 572 We must
abhor Satan's suggestions unto desperation. 554 A man may not despair of the
pardon of any sin that can be repented. 578 Howsoever some are children of
perdition (as we are all by nature) yet others are appointed to salvation by
Jesus Christ. 580 The uses to be made thereof. 581 The Apostle Paul ascrihes
all the good that was in him, or done by him, to Gods free grace. 583 To what
uses this should serve us. 583. 584
FINIS.
ZACHEUS HIS CONVERSION. Luke 19. 1, 2, to 10.
THese verses contain the Story of the conversion of Zacheus: In which he is
described and his condition; his description is, First, by his place of abode,
Jericho. Secondly, his office and dignity in it, He was the chief among the
Publicans. Thirdly, his condition, He was rich.

His conversion is noted of the occasion and the cause. Occasion. First, Jesus
passing through Jericho to go to Jerusalem. Secondly, his desire to see Jesus
who he was, which is amplified by his endeavor to obtain it: in which is
noted what hindered him, the preasse, and his low stature; and the help which
he used. First, he ran before. Secondly, he climed up into a Sycomore Tree to
see him, being to pass that way. The cause of his conversion, Christ, who
called him outwardly, and inwardly, to receive him into his house, and heart;
set forth by his looking up to him, calling him (by name) to come in have down
to him, to entertain him, declaring his purpose to abide that day at his
house. Which calling is further declared by the efficacy of it in his heart,
and the events following. The efficacy; First, in his coming down, and
receiving him, amplified; 1. by his readiness, he made haste. 2. his joy, and
cherefulnesse, he received him joyfully. Secondly, in his profession to Christ
of two acts, of two excellent virtues; First, of liberality, giving to the
poor, enlarged by the quantity, the half of his goods; Secondly, of justice
in possessing men again by restitution of that which he had taken from them
by false accusation, enlarged also by the measure fourefold. Both graced with a
sign of confidence and constancy, his standing forth, the events following;
First, in the multitude they all murmured at Christ for going in to a sinner to
be his guest; Secondly, in Christ, who testified of Zacheus that he also was
the son of Abraham, declared by the privilege of Abraham's Children, salvation
both to him and his house, with the circumstance of time, that day; Secondly,
Christ justified his fact of going to Zacheus though a sinner, by his Office in
two things, 1. seeking. 2. saving: declared further by the object: that which
is lost applied to Zacheus and his house, who were such before Christ sought
and saved them.

And Jesus entered and passed through Jericho. Jericho was in the way as Jesus
was to go to Jerusalem, to offer himself to the death appointed him there by
his Father, and foretold by the Prophets, which he in the Chapters before
signified to his Disciples; and in his way he meets with this opportunity at
Jericho and some other before mentioned. Whence by the way, we may observe:
That the sufferings, and death of Christ, obser. 1.
were voluntary, he was offered because he would: it was not at the will and
malice of his enemies, who yet doing what they could and what was sufficient*
to kill, made themselves guilty of his death. First, he could have hindered
his passion, in respect of the course of things, which may appear in that they
that sought to kill him, even when he provoked the^, were by his divine power
so bound, both hand and tongue, that they neither laid hands on him, nor said
any thing to him, because his hour was not come, Ioh. 7. 26. 30. He escaped
out of their hands, Luke 4. 29. 30. John 8. 59. His words wrought so in the
hearts of the officers when they were sent to fetch him, that they had no will
to bring him that spoke so as never man spoke, John 7. 45, 46. When the ^^ure
was come, and the power of darkness, at that word, I am he (meaning whom
they sought to take to death) they went backward, and fell to the ground, John
18. 6. He says to Peter that if he would be delivered, he could obtain of
his Father more than twelve Legions of Angels: and we Mat. 26. 53. 2. King. 19.
35.
read of one Angel that in a night s^ote an hundred fourscore and five
thousands, that became dead corpses. He says, Ioh. 10. 18. that his life was
so in his own power, that none could take it from him, if he would resist.

Secondly, he is said to power out his soul unto death, which is more than
simply to dye; it is from his heart, and of his own will to give himself to
death, Isay. 53. 12. which appears in his expression of a great desire to dye
for man's salvation Luke 12. So How am I straightened, till it be accomplished!
Which he expressed also in his desire to eat the last Passover with his
Disciples before his death, Luke. 22. 15. when he was upon the Cross, at his
time, of his own will, when he would conserve his bodily nature no longer in
vigor, he bowed his head and gave up the ghost, dyed sooner than they that
were crucified with him, and so soon, as Pilate not Mark 15. 44.
knowing the mystery, marveiled at it, as extraordinary; and the Centurion
obser^ing his yielding up the ghost instantly upon a loud cry, concluded that
surely he was the son of God. There was some thing divine in him, for when
men breath their last, commonly they utter either none or a very weak and low
voice.

Thirdly, he died in love and obedience to his Father, laid down his life, as
he had received commandment of his Father, John 10, 18. So his Father is said
to deliver him to death for us all, Romans 8, 32. First, ordaining his passion
for man's salvation. He is said to have been delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, Act. 2, 23. and Herod, Pilate, the gentiles
and people of Israel, are said to do what his hand and counsel determined
before to be done, Act. 4, 28. This way, in which God declared his wisdom, to
be just in the forgiving of sins, Romans 3, 25, 26. And to set forth his
bountifulness, love and mercy to man, in appointing a satisfier for him, was
ordained before the world unto our glory, 1 Cor. 2, 7. Secondly, and though as
God he delivered himself to death with the same will and action with his
Father, yet as man his Father inspired the willingness and love, of which he
yielded himself to leath; for it was repugnant to his natural will, whereby
he declared some desire to decline it, Abba, Father, Mark 14. 36.
^l things are possible to thee, take away this cup from me. Yet submitted
himself to his Fathers will nevertheless, Not what I will, but what thou will. God so made him for a little time inferior to the Angels for suffering
of death, Heb. 2. 9. and that the world might see how he loved his Father, and
as he commanded him so he did; even went to meet the Prince of John 14. 30,
31.
the world coming to him, having nothing in him; and in this respect he is
called Gods servant, the Chosen of God, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, to
restore the preserved of Israel: to be a light to the Gentiles, his salvation
to the end of the earth, Isaya^ 49. 6. In which service, he employed himself,
and took the form Phil. 2. 7, 9.
of a servant, assumed our nature to unity of person for the work of the
mediatorship, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the cross.
According to the will of his Father, fulfilling the ceremonial Law in his
sacrifice, and the moral in fulfilling all righteousness; by the which will
of God we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once for all, Heb. 10, 9, 10.

Fourthly, he died of his own love to man, Pro. 8, 31. Whose delights were
with the sons of men; he gave his life for his friends in the greatness of
his love, John, 15, 13. So his love is set before the gift of himself for us,
Gal. 2. 20. To wash us from our sins in his blood, to make us kings and
Priests to our God, Revel. 1. 5. As his Father loved him, and appointed him to
be the mediator, in whom whosoever were received into favor, should be
received, and no otherwise: so he loved us and gave himself a ransom for us,
that the Father might love us with the love wherewith he loved him, and that
love also be in us. John. 17, 23, 24, 26.

It was expedient that his death should be voluntary, First, for man's
justification, that as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one, many might be righteous: as we were sinners in Adam by
imputation of his disobedience before we had inherent sin, so in Christ by
faith we might be righteous, by imputation of his obedience, before we have
inherent righteousness: as sin reigned unto death even over the^ that sinned
not after the similitude of Adams transgression, so grace may reign through
righteousness, by Jesus Christ, unto eternal life, Romans 5, 14, 19, 21. Thus
was Adam the figure of Christ. Thus was Christ Gods righteous servant in his
obedience, righteous in himself, and the right ousnesse of them that
effectually know him, Esaias 53, 11.

Secondly, it was expedi ent for his sacrifice that his death should be in
obedience, not only for innocence not to need to offer for himself as the
priests of the Law did, Heb. 7, 26, 27. But because obedience with God is more
than all burnt offering and sacrifice; this being the obedience of such a
person, being the Son, he learned obedience in the things which he
suffered. The Lord of the Law willingly submitting himself to the Law, it did
greatly please God: His sacrifice was a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5, 2.
His father loved him because he laid down John 10. 17.
his life for his sheep, such as were given him of his Father.

Thirdly, it was meet also for his victory that his death should be in
obedience and voluntary, that as death and the Devil who had the power of it,
reigned by disobedience, so he by obedience might overcome and triumph, in his
Cross (where he showed obedience) he spoiled principalities Coloss. 2.
and powers, disarmed them, and made a show of them openly, and tryumphed over
them; so they have no more power to accuse them that are in Christ, or to
require them of Gods justice to punishment for their disobedience. Sin is put
out of authority, in the flesh of Christ, and the whole right of the Law
fullfilled in them that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans
8, 3, 4. Because Christ's obedience or righteousness which is real and
inherent in him, is so imputed to them as if they had done it themselves.

Which well known and Use.
digested, may be a great encouragement to come to Christ for salvation, seeing
he gave himself so willingly and with such great desire to death in obedience
to his Fathers will, to save the world by him; and salvaton being now preached
in his name, how can we say any thing to excuse our not receiving him and life
with him, he being straightened and pained with strong desire to shed his blood
for reconciliation between God and man, and he is now set forth unto us for
propitiation through faith in his blood: let us abhor flownesse of heart to
believe in him, and with all boldness embrace the benefit of Christ, Heb. 10,
22. Let him see in us the travel of his soul to his satisfaction, Esaias, 53.
11. The affluence of burdened sinners to him to find rest for their souls, is
the fruit of his passion; the satisfying of his desire in it, the prospering
of the good pleasure of God in his hand. Say with the Church, I am my beloveds,
seeing his desire is toward me, because he has so freely loved me when I
was wholly turned away from him, and was his enemy; as in desire to save me to
give himself for me, I resolve to yield up my self to him, Cant. 7, 10. This
is the pleasure of Christ and his Church, that their bed is green, Cant. 1,
16. that there is still an increase of faithful ones. And this faith by which
we look up to Christ for salvation, is the eye which so much does affect him,
as he is no more his own but theirs that so believe in him, Cant. 4. 9. If we
could weigh this well that Christ is so delighted with our faith, by which as
by our eye we behold him as sent of God to save us, how should it make us to
burn in desire to have this faith more and more, which is but one though it
have diverse degrees? Our faith in him is the end of the Gospel, as the end of
his passion, and the end of it the salvation of our souls, 1 Peter, 1, 9.

Let this love of his, whereby 2 Use.
he willingly met his death for our salvation, move us to labor to know this
love which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. which as his banner is lifted up to
gather his to him, allured by his love, Cant. 2. 4. and admiring it, to be
moved to burn in our love to him, as the Church is said to be sick of love,
and the coals thereof to be coals of fire which has a most vehement flame,
Cant. 8, 6. So possessed of the love of Christ that we be wholly to him, 2
Cor. 5, 14.

And so know this love not only as our motive to love him, but our pattern to
love such as he commends to our love: so is his commandment that we love one
another as he has loved us, John 13: His love to us is as his fathers to him,
purely gracious, as his father received not of him, but gave to him, so he
received not first of us to love us for our love, but when there was nothing to
incline him toward us to be considered in us, he loved us and gave us even
himself. Thus let our love be to others, not first because we receive of
them, but freely of goodness put into us by the Spirit of Christ, inclined to
p(...)cure their good.

Let it direct our obedience 3. Use.
unto God, unto Christ, that it be of a ready mind, though in difficult
things, and such as our nature rightly would decline, yet denying our selves,
we submit to him that is the Lord of our life and death, as he submitted to his
Father. As Peter stretching forth his hands to be bound and led to death by
others, in respect of his natural will, is said to be led whither he would
not, John 21. 18. yet of obedience and fear of God, choosing death for the
safety of Christ's cause, to glorify God by his confession of the truth: thus
is the obedience more glorious, being performed by grace against reluctation of
nature: Yet where Caut.
there is reluctation of corrupt nature, the excellency of obedience is less,
though grace get the victory; for to the performance of the Law it is required
that a man shall not lust, have no motion be it never so small contrary to
Gods Law. The perfection of that which is good, is when there is not so much as
concupiscence of sin in a man: if there be never so little a motion step
ping aside from the love of God, and from his obedience in love, it is
evidently a breach of the Law; our Savior had no manner of corruption in him
to wrestle or strive against the will of God. And passed through Ieri(...)
behold there was a man, etc.



Jericho was singularly subjected to the malediction of God, so as whosoever
should rebuild it (God having Josh. 6. 26.
destroyed it) should be judged with the death of his eldest son in laying
the foundation, and of his youngest in his hanging up the gates of it; which
curse took hold of one Hiel a 1 King. 16. 34.
Bethelite in the days of A^hab, who presuming to build it again, was
condemned of madness in provoking God, by the death of his progeny, his
eldest son Abiram at his laying the foundation of it: and his youngest son
Segub in his hanging up of the gates of it.

It was the first City that the Israelites took after their passage over
Ioden, and that by special miracle, in the falling down of the walls by the
blast of Ramshornes, and dejection of the hearts of the inhabitants: therefore
as a first fruits with the whole spoil of it, was co^s^^rated to the Lord.
Secondly, and the severitie used against it, might strike a terror into other
Cities that would not yield themselves. Thirdly, to be a memorial of Gods
power in making such a City for walls so defenced, by an easy and unlikelie
way to be a ruinous heap; with encouragement to his people to undertake hard
things at his appointment, and to excite their thankfulness for victory and
possession of all which they obtained.

That this cursed City Obs. 2,
yields some to be heirs of blessing, we may gather, that place is no let to
Gods calling, his election shall be executed in due time whersoever his people
be, they be neither all in one people, Revel. 7, 9. nor in one place, but
dispersed and scattered abroad, John 11, 52. but they are Gods Children by
predestination to the adoption in Christ, and the Lord that knows who be his
will weal them out by his calling and select them out of the world, how vile
soever the place of their aboade (...) Bethsaida was a wick(...) (...) and for
impenitencie and rebellion worse than Tyrus and Sdon which were infamous for
impiety, pride, luxury and other vices, Mat. 11, 21. Yet yielded three to
Christ's kingdom, and they also Apostles. Phillip whom Christ going forth into
Galilce called immediately to follow him, is said of be at Bethsaida, the John
12. 21
City of Andrew and Peter, John 1, 43, 44.

Samaria was justly hateful to the Jews, not as Gentiles and the dregs of
diverse nations, a mungrill people only, but for corruption of religion and
impious confusion: the Children of the Captivity having liberty to build the
house of God, would not admit them Ezra 4. 2, 3, 4, 5.
to build with them when they offered it, because they counted them Gentiles
and some Apostaticall corrupters of the true religion, that had nothing to do
in the work; and they declared themselves after to be enemies hindering the
work all they could. The woman whom Christ converted John 4. 9.
at the Well, said, not without some insulting and contempt, The Jews have no
dealing with the Samaritans: and some malicious Jews when they would bavespit
fire in the face of Christ, and knew not what to say bad enough, call him in
reproach as a detestable man Samaritan, John 8, 48.

Yet the City Sychar in (...) Country yielded many John 4. 40. 41.
believers to Christ, who showed their love to him, entreating him to tarry
with them, to whom he condescended for two days. And that one who of ten
Lepers that were healed, alone returned to give thanks, was a Samaritan, Luke
17, 16.

Paul upon his calling to Gal. 1. 17.
Christianity and Apostleship, began his work in Arabia, among a savage and
wild people, living by robbing of passengers, of whom in common reason there
was little hope, Ier. 3, 2.

First, Gods counsel that Reason 1.
he has taken of them cannot be disappointed, his decrees will bring forth;
Christ will bring his, and they shall hear his vovce John, 10, 16. he must
reign in the midst of his enemies, and takes away the malediction for sin to
make men that believe in him Children of blessing.

It is to the glory, both of 2.
the power of God in pulling them (as it were) out of hell; and his goodness
in such an excellent and memorable benefit, to exalt them to such dignity from
such depth of dishonor.

It may encourage the servants of God to be doing 1. Use.
his works in any place where he sends them, though he do not tell them as
he did Paul, what a multitude he has of his people Act. 18. 10.
(concerning election) that he will have called by their labors there. Yet
the (...) of peace will find out the sons of peace in what house so ever
they be, and the doctrine of peace shall be effectual in them by his
blessing that sends them; and where it is not received yet their peace shall
return to them, the peace of a good conscience in the faithful performance of
their duty Luke, 10, 5, 6.

It may stay prejudice, 2.
whereby men forestal themselves against the report of good persons, and stick
to acknowledge the truth by hard conceit of the place. This prejudice of the
vileness and ignoblenesse of place hindered the credit of Philips report of
Christ in the heart of Nathaniel, in that he said he was of Nazareth, whence
was that voice of doubt and diffidence, Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Nichodemus alleging the Law in Christ's defense as requiring an
orderly proceeding, is flou^ed with Galilec in contempt of the place, it was
not known that ever Galilee a Prophet, and can it yield the Messiah? Its poor
reasoning for such learned men, It is not known to have sent forth a Prophet,
therefore it cannot for ever; thus hurtful is prejudice of place.

It may be most effectual consolation to such as God has called in such
places, that neither the sins of the place where they lived, nor their own
(...) in which they lived, could hinder the love of God to show them mercy in
calling them: if God so loved them being enemies, what shall separate them from
his love being reconciled? Romans 5, 10. and 8. 39. They may be assured that
place shall not hinder their acceptance in their fearing God and working
righteousness, Act. 10, 35. Yea it adds some thing to the honor of
religiousnesse, that is maintained in most wicked places where Gods providence
assigns to men their habitations: Revel. 2, 13. I know where thou dwell,
even where Satan has his throne; where the government was for the Devil, the
governers car(...) by his impulsion to idolatry and all evil, there to keep
faith and good Conscience is praise, the goodness amplified by the infamy of
the place. As on the contrary it agg^avates wickedness that it is done in a
land of uprightness, Esaias 26, 10. In every place and in all things, all men
should do rightly; but among the Saints, and in a holy place where the Lords
presence, majesty and high hand is manifested in a special sort, to do
wickedly adds much to the sinfullnesse.

And behold, etc. This Verse 2.
Particle of demonstrating usually implies two things, 1. The certainty of the
matter as if our eyes saw it. (...) and worthy our attention: referred to the
story, it leads us to this observation, ^bser. 1.
that the work of God in the conversion of such a sinner is to be observed.
Verily all the works of the Lord Psalm. 111 2.
are great, and are to be sought out of all that have pleasure therein, are
known of them which are delighted in the consideration of them. Every thing
that he has done is beautiful and glorious, in all his works there shines
forth a marveilous brightness, compelling the minds of men that do behold
them to give him glory and honor, that gracious and merciful Lord has
appointed for us a solemn (...).
memory of his benefits. They array him with beauty and glory, they deck him
with excellency and sublimitie Job. 40, 5. In creation he is wonderful unto
astonishment, Psalm. 8, 1. Psalm. 139. 14. In providence past our finding out,
yet every thing beautiful in his time: but when we do look upon his work,
we do behold it only as it were a far off, as distance diminishes the
appearance of things, because our eyesight reaches not so far; which we
have experience of in the Sun, which to us seems as if it were not above two
foot broad, yet they which are acquainted with secrets of nature, show that it
is much greater tha^ the whole earth. But we should intend our ability to
look so far into (...) as to magnify them, (...) we are called upon to
remember this, Job, 36, 24 25. In the work of God bestowed upon sinners we are
to magnify the exceeding greatness of Gods power; as in raising the dead,
Ephe. 1, 19: his abundant grace and love; as the Churches glorified God for
Paul that preached the faith which he had destroyed.

It may be a help to faith, a cure of diffidence, armor against temptation,
to behold and wisely to consider Gods great love and mercy in receiving great
sinners, causeing them to come to him: there may be seen* that which was
impossible with men to be possible with God, and conceive hope we must by such
patterns (...) Gods long suffering, 1 Timothy 1. 16. In such great Cures God;
does like Physicians, who to invite the diseased to come to them with hope,
show some example of their art and skill in the perfect curation of some
desperately weak and sick. So God setts such sinners in healeing of them and
saving them before others to the end of the world, that beholding the rich
grace and abounding mercy bestowed upon them, they may not despair but hope
to find like mercy, seeing possibility of Cure, notwithstanding the
greatness and number of their sins with the greatest strength of corruption.
David healed says it shall embolden others to come unto God for safety,
taking the opportunity of time when he may be found Psalm. 32. 6.

Which may serve to Use.
correct our dullness and negligence in beholding the works of God, and
stirs us up to give our selves to observe the virtues of God in them, as his
wisdom, power, goodness, mercy etc. Psalm. 107, 42. Let them (...)t are of
upright* judgment behold and mark the testimonies of Gods providence, and take
great pleasure thereof: but contrariwise, let all the wicked being convicted
stop their mouth, verse, 43. Who is wise according to God, that he may with
understanding observe both dili(...) and deeply these great and excellent
matters which the Lord works? It is a complaint of the smallness of the
number of wise men, that with earnest consideration behold Gods works, and
shows withal that by reason of the excellency of them a man had need to
employ all the power of his body and mind to the comprehension thereof.

A man may in the converted from great sins, see such expressions of love and
thankefullnesse, such rare humility, such labors of Christ, that may humble
him, and shame him, to see how he is cast behind. See thou this woman?
Luke, 7. 44.

There was a man named Zacheus. This makes for the certainty of the story that
the name of the person is set down; it may be also for honor, as Christ is
said to call him by his name, Zacheus come down, for to day I must abide at
thine house, he speaks to him as familiarly known. It is said of Christ the
good shepherd, that he calls his own sheep by name John, 10. 3. which
declares his particular care of them. Some he mentions by name long before
they be, that it may be known he is the Lord; as he says to Cyrus, Esaias 45,
3. So he declared his divinity in naming Josiah long before he was in being,
to reform religion, 1 Kings 13, 2. and to exec(...) his judgment upon
idolaters, promising and threatening what pleases him, and in his own time
performing it: he calls some by name as choosing out of the number of other
men, and making them eximious of his mere grace, as he says to Moses, Exodus
33, 12, 17. It pleases him to honor some by leaving upon record their grace
and the works of it in divine story: thus Heb. 11, 2. by says our elders
obtained a good report, not only were they approved of God but testified of in
his word that they pleased him, and though this honor cannot now be looked
for, yet a blessed memorial is still a reward of a fruitful faith, Proverbs
10, 7. Their remembrance shall be acceptable, honorable and everlasting,
Psalm. 112, 6. Esaias, 65, 15.

But Zacheus his sin is Object.
mentioned in his story and so of others, is not the stain of that enough to
hinder the honor of his name?

God forgiving their Sol.
sins, takes away their rebuke; their sins are not mentioned with
imputation, their repentance and works testifying thereof, are so considered
with them that they are no more to their discredit in the hearts of good men
specially, but their conscience yields them approbation for their repentance
and fruits of it, and they are honorable Esaias 43. And if it were that all
men's deeds should be known to every one in the day of judgment both good
and evil, whether the judgment be vocal or mental; yet their faith and
repentance being known with their sins, would speak for them to the
conviction and confusion of unbeleevers and impenitent sinners.

Which was the chief among the Publicans. Publicans were such as served the
Romans, buying in great, and gathering the Emperors tribute of the Jews
subjected to him: they had diverse societies, and diverse Masters over them,
it seems Zacheus was chief of the society that met at Ieri(...).

It is not mentioned how he came to that greatness, but it seems he was of
witty invention to find out ways to obtain his own ends; wise after the
world, and such not straightened in their conscience, may (God permitting) raise
themselves to greater dignity and estate than plain and down right honest
men: As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit, therefore
are they become great, Ier. 5. 27. Antiochus a vile person, when they gave him
not the honor of the kingdom, obtained it by flatteries and working
deceitfully, became strong with a small people, to do that which his Fathers
and his Fathers Fathers had done, Dan. 11, 21, 23, 24. Frauds and illarts so
succeed sometimes by the providence of God, that the godly are astonished, and
some of them solicited to defection, till they go into the sanctuary of God,
and learn what is the end of such men that hold fast their sin.

It is certain that greatness and goodness are separable, iniquity may
serve a man's turn to lift him up, though it can give no firm and stable
settling, Prou. 12, 3. A man cannot be stablished by iniquity.

And he was rich. The mention of his riches in his calling, occasions this
note, that riches hinder not from coming to Christ, when God will put forth
his power to call men to him: though our Savior says that they are hardly
saved that are rich, and with men it is impossible, easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle, yet he says it is possible with God, conversion
is a work of his omnipotency, Ephesians. 1, 19, 20. above all faculty Dis^^nt
di^ites ^on in fa(...) crimen ^ar^re, sed in ijs qui (...) ^esciant
fac^^tatibu^. Amb.
of nature, and having such impediment of corruption and sin as no power but
almighty can remove, to which nothing can be too hard: he can make a Cammell
go through the eye of a necle, dilating the eye, or attenuating the body of
the cammell.

The Apostles negative, not many mighty or noble or wise after this world,
(...) mits an affirmative, some such are called, and implies that even of the
best rank in the world some should submit them selves to Christ, 1 Cor. 1, 26.
David says, The fat of the earth shall eat and worship, as well as the lean
and poor that are ready to dye, whose life was thought past recovery, Psalm.
22, 29. James calls not only the poor man to rejoice in God, exalting him by
his calling him to high dignity, but the rich man also whose mind the Lord
makes low and humble, Iam. (...), 9, 10.

Yet its true, that riches are by abuse through the corruption of man, occasion
of damnation to many: The Luke 6. ^24.
woe of our Savior to the rich, and the calling of them to weep and howl for
Iam. 5. 1.
their miseries to come upon them, declare it.

First, they become hinderers of their answer to God calling them. The
doctrine of Christ, that no Luke 16. 13. 14.
man could serve God and riches, though he said not, no man can serve God and
be rich, yet they that heard it and were covetous, derided, showing the common
judgment of covetous persons to be against Christ therein. Let ministers
study never so painefully, preach never so diligently, exhort never so
earnestly, unless God put forth his power, men's hearts will go after their
covetousness, Ezech. 33, 33. Some that seem half willing to accept of the
gracious invitation of God, and with the rich ruler, would do something to
obtain eternal life, yet have their desires to heaven overruled by the
desires of the world which are stronger in them, Mat. 19, 16, 22. Luke, 14, 18.
Mat. 22, 5. Indeed making light of the divine calling in respect of the things
present: and some having in some sort submitted themselves to the Gospel unto
a kind of disposition toward grace, a beginning of the work of the word in
them toward conversion, by deceitfullnesse of riches choke all, and it never
comes to any ripeness, Math. 13, 22.

Secondly, some in getting (...) seek death, Prou. 21, 6. Treasures gathered
by a deceitful tongue, are vanity tossed too and fro, of those that seek
death. Though death be not the intent of the agent, it is the end of the
action. When men will be rich they make haste to it, and cannot be innocent,
Prove. 28, 20. They fall into temptation, are overcome of it, and into a snare
wherein the Devil holds them fast, that no inferior power but the power of
Almighty God can get them out. And into many not only foolish but pernicious
lusts, not only keepeing no measure in desire nor respect of their person,
state and dignity; but so mad and furious is the lust, that they ru^^e
themselves both into temporal and eternal dangers, drowned in destruction and
perdition 1 Timothy 6, 9. it is a mother sin the root of all evil: they have
swarms of sins in them, as idolatry Ephesians. 5, 5. making sufficiency of things
his trust, and his joy, as the rich man that called his soul to ease and
pleasures Luke 12. 19.
because he had enough for many years. Job standing upon his integrity by
the grace of God, protests against confidence in the wedge of gold, and
rejoicing in the greatness of his substance, Job 31. 24, 25. and in serving
riches as his Lord, so as God has no service of him: his utmost scope is
riches, so it is the God he (...). James calls them (...)ulterers, and
adulteresses Iam. 4, 4. setting their love upon this world they break covenant
of wedlock with God, and set up another in their hearts so as they have not
the love of God in them 1 John, 2, 21. As a wife that does her husband some
service outwardly, but her heart is after other lovers, so is their service to
God without heart, which is exercised with covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2, 14.
even Sabbath day and all, Amos 8, 5. even in Sermon times Ezech, 33, 33, they
stick not at fraud, and overreaching, nor oppression, Iam. 5. 4. Hab. 2, 12:
To increase that which is not theirs, and to lade themselves with thick clay,
so greedy that for a small gain they will transgress, Prou. 28, 21. And hire
out their tongues for vile uses, even to slay souls that should not dye, and
give life to souls that should not live, Ezech. 13, 19. making merchandise of
the souls of men through Revel. 18. 13.
covetousness, 2, Pet. 2. 3. some err from the faith, leave the right which
they 1 Timothy 6. 10. 2. Pet. 2. 15.
have seen, to go astray, and pearce themselves through with many sorrows,
which rise from diffidence and distrustful thoughts of God, conscience of
sins, a most unwelcome and unsavourie foretast of their punishments in hell,
into which they do plunge themselves by deceit (...) ^ages, Jude verse. 11.
thus (...) seek death in getting them.

Thirdly, there is hurt to the possessors of riches in an unlawful and sordid
keepeing of them, Eccles. 5, 13. The curse of sparing more than is meet, that
is, when they spare that which they should give, either to the poor for
refreshing of their bowels, or to the preachers of the Gospel, to be helpers
to the truth; or to the magistrates in recompense of their ministering under God
for their wealth etc. is not only poverty but that with imputation of the
sin, so as they shall have judgment merciless Iam. 2, because they showed
no mercy. The Law stands in force against unjust persons. It is reckoned among
the sins that made the house of Jacob to fall, their Land was full of silver
and gold, and there was no end of their treasures, Esaias, 2, 7. Both because
they like the heathen had a damnable confidence in their abundance, and such
wicked covetousness, as their hearts were so set upon their riches that they
had no care of the poor or other good works whereunto they should have been
applied. James holds rich men in a terrible expectation of vengeance for the
hording up of their riches so as they corrupt, their garments are moth-eaten,
their silver and gold is cankered, the rust of them shall be a witness
against them and eat their flesh as it were fire: their consciences shall
torment them with the memory of their inhumanity, in keepeing by them
unprofitablie the creatures appointed by God unto man's use; and so they have
heaped treasure for the last day, provided unto the last day of their life how
long soever, neither sensible of Gods providence nor of the uncertaintie of
their life, they heap up wrath against the day of wrath, James, 5, 3.

Fourthly, riches also further the damnation of some in spending upon
inordinate lusts; some in a carnal zeal spend much upon false worship and
false worshippers, Ezech. 16, 17. Hos. 10, 1.

Some on fleshly lust, and life's pride, which is not only damnable but
damning, when men make it the scope, and utmost end of their life. 2 Peter. 2,
13. They shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it
pleasure to riot in the day time, Sporting themselves with their own
deceivings: Counting their felicity to be in pleasures of the senses, they
regard not the time and judgment after this life. As it is said of the rich
man, who being dead was in hell torments, that he in his life time had his
good things, purple and fine linen, and sumptuous fare every day. Luke, 16,
25. (...), remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. The
cause of his torment was not that he received good things in his life time, for
so Abraham that is brought in speaking to him, had done, but the force lies in
the pronoune thy. Things with him the only good, such as he made his full
receipt and whole portion, though he were a Jew the son of Abraham, had Moses
and the Prophets inviting him to the study of eternal life, he regarded it
not, this condemns him. The Apostle joins these two together, whose end is
damnation, whose God is their belly, Phil. 3. 19.
who mind earthly things. As our Savior concludes from the disposition and end
of that rich man who put his happiness in his abundance, Luke, 12, 21. So is
he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God. He
treasureth for himself who without any respect to God gets riches, as he that
said to his soul, Thou have eenough laid up for many years, respecting
himself only and staying upon his sufficiency in himself without God: he is
rich in God, who depending on the providence of God is given to such good
works as God prescribes, laying up a good foundation for time to come that he
may obtain eternal life.

Some abuse their wealth to pride* and rebellion against God. Ier. 2, 31. We
are Lords, we will come no more unto thee: And to try their strength in doing
hurt to men, the more in purse the greater in trya^nie, boasting themselves
that they can do mischief, trusting in the multitude of their riches, Psalm.
52, 1, 7. hyring men with feilds and 1 Samuel 22. 7.
vineyards to ungodly practices, or hindering them from godly courses, and so
draw to the earth such as seemed stars in heaven, and many to win the world
loose their souls, so as there can be no redemption for them. Thus may they be
called thorns because men are so hamperd in them that they cannot be gotten
out, and wicked riches are occasion of much wickedness; they that have them
speak roughly, and are wise in their own eyes, conceited of their own
courses too highly, but their woo is, they have rereceived their consolation.
But riches of themselves, of their nature damn not; as poverty of it self
saves not, First, for they are the Lords, 1 Chronicles. 29, 11. All in the Heavens
and in the earth is his, he has right unto and right in them, both property
and possession is his. These are many times severed in men; some have right to
a thing, but not possession and power over it, because kept out by a strong
hand of such as covet fiolds and take them by violence, who get power over, and
possession of that which they have no right to. But in God both right, title,
and just possession meet, and extend unto all things because he made all,
Psalm. 24, 1, 2. And it appears when men are so graceless as to derive his
title to others, be they Idols or men, he often strips them of them, Ezech.
16, 17 etc. Hos. 2, 8, 9. And when men unjustly either by fraud or force take
them from such as have them of him, he will pursue his right against the wrong
doer, and take vengeance upon the unjust person who has wronged not only man
but God, Prove.

Secondly, It is Gods blessing that makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it,
Prove. 10, 22. So far as he gives it, it is as if it were powered upon them
while they sleep, while Psalm. 127. 2.
they with rest of soul commit themselves to him. He gives power to gather
riches, Deuteronomy. 8.

He orders and disposes of the travel of the sinner, who gathers and
heapeth up to give to them that are Eccles. 2. 26.
good before God, Job 27, 17. Prou. 28, 8.

Thirdly, God has given grace and riches, riches as reward of the use of grace
to his glory. Godliness has the promise of this present life. Abraham very
rich by Gods blessing, in flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold etc. Genesis
24, 35, is also the Father of the faithful; they that dyed in faith are said
to be carried into his bosom, and to sit at table with him in the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 8, 11. Job matchless for wealth and greatness in all the East,
and for piety in all the earth in his time, Job 1, 3, 8. David after Gods own
heart, and full of riches at his death, 1 Chro. 29, 28. Solomon a penman of the
holy Ghost, therefore a holy man of God, 2 Peter 1, 21. a Prophet, therefore to
be seen in the Kingdom of Luke 13. 28.
God with all the Prophets, excelled all the Kings of the earth as in wisdom
so in riches, 2 Chro. 9, 22. Iehosaphat had riches in abundance, his heart
also was lift 2 Chro. 17. 5.
up in the ways of the Lord to do more boldly for the purity of Gods worship
than Asa his father, though a man of a perfect heart had done before him; so a
man excellently rich may also be excellently good.

Fourthly, riches (though they be no causes of heaven, it is neither the
lawful use of them, nor the end propounded to them yet) by a gracious use of
them may further a man's account in good fruits and labors of love, which God
will not Heb. 6. 10.
forget being done in his name, Philip. 4, 17. Therefore is our Saviors
exhortation, that with the riches of unrighteousness (so called because they
pass easily from the right owners to unjust possessors, as from the Master to
the Steward, and after to the Masters debtors, both which were usurpers) we
make our selves friends for the heavenly life when this fails. We need only
the friendship of God in Christ; but the good works done in God, will give
friendly Testimony to our consciences that we have not believed in vain, our
faith working by love: and shall of the free grace of God (whose gift eternal
life is by Jesus Christ) be reckoned unto our reward, as done to himself,
especially when we prefer the household of faith, and deal more plentifully
with them as belonging to Christ. So the rich in this world, rich in good
works, gladly distributing do lay up a good foundation against the time to
come; no cause of eternal life to them, which in opposition to uncertain
riches is called a good foundation, but a help to their assurance, and some
proppe to their hope of life, as an evidence of a true faith in Christ Jesus,
the end of which is salvation.

Riches in a good man further Divi^ia ut (...)dimenta improbi^, it^ b^^i^ sunt
adjumenta virtu^io. A^b.
the exercise and manifestation of grace: The crown of the wise is their
riches, they prove an ornament to the right users, get them honor in their
wise disposing of them, doing many good works by the means of them. Abraham's
and Lots hospitality had not been so famous, nor David's and his Princes
offering to the building of the Temple so liberally, 1 Cron. 29, 4, 7, 8. It
may be many other could say with David, I have set my affection to the house of
my God; but could not by such gifts express their affection, as he did, both
in that which he dedicated of the 2 Samuel 7. 11.
spoil of the nations which he subdued, and of his own proper goods over and
above, 1 Chronicles. 29, 3. The Centurions, one in building a Synagogue, the other in
giving much alms, declared their piety and Charity: and others that have
their praise in the Scriptures for feeding persecuted Prophets, as Obadia^; for
ministering to the maintenance of Preachers that otherwise preached freely to
the gentiles, and refreshed the Saints bowels, as Gaius: 3 John 6, 7.
this others could not show forth so, not having such ^vealth, though the
habitual ^race be in their hearts, as the grace of magnificence and
magnanimity, yet the want of ability unto their acts hinders the exercise of
the habit till God give it, and then they do great works. Abraham's meek and
gentle mind had not appeared so much in giving Lot his choice to go to which
hand he would for peace sake, if he had not been so rich; neither had Io^s
patience in great losses been so exemplary if he had not had great substance.

Wisdom is good with an inheritance, Eccles. 7. 11. It is more to have riches
with grace, than to have it with poverty: for though respect of persons is a
sin, and to esteem men after the flesh; yet among men, the wisdom of a
poor man is despised, and his words are not heard, Eccles. 9. 16. Wisdom
indeed makes a man's face to shine, but poverty as a cloud coming between,
obscures and darkens it.

When a rich man speaks gracious words, which he may more freely speak as he
thinks, he is more easily believed, and the things he commands, are sooner
put in execution; which appears in Jobs double condition. Job 29. 11. 22.
When his glory was fresh in him, the ear that heard him blessed him, and
after his words men spoke not again; they that heard were as it were altered
at his words, and hung upon his talk as upon an irrevocable judgment: but
being once dejected, he was despised; and when God let loose his cord, base
persons let loose the bridle before him, Job 30. 1. 11.

Which may be to stay rash censure of rich men, Use.
even because of their riches. Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the rich in thy
bedchamber: If he be wicked, yet God may suddenly change him, and then his
richs are an honor to him, and he an ornament to them; as Joseph of Arimathea
who was an Mark 15. 43.
honorable counselor, and rich, and a Disciple of Christ, Math. 27, 57. It is
said of Tyr^^ that her riches should be; (...), holiness to the Lord;
Secondly, for such as dwell before the Lord, resting upon him with sincere
confidence, and serving him with pure conscience; Thirdly, for food to eat
sufficiently and for durable clothing, Esaias 23. 18.

It is indeed a grievous sin dishonoring the most glorious Christian faith,
to prefer wealth so as to set up profane men for it, and to despite and
ignominiously to use poor men for their poverty though rich in faith. Yet when
a private rich man and a poor be both godly, the rich may be honored above
the poor without any injury, and ought to be; and the poor is to give place
to the rich as being able by Gods providence to do some good both to him and
to many, as some image of God in his sufficiency and liberality, who is set
before us in the Parable of a rich man Luke, 16, 1.

Verse 3. And he sought to see Jesus who he was. This is the occasion of
Zacheus his conversion, his earnest and unconquerable desire of seeing Jesus:
it is questioned whence his desire was, whether of himself or of the holy
Ghost; of vanity to satisfy curiosity, or serious with respect to Christ
both as a great Prophet and the Savior of the world? which may be answered
thus.

First, as there may be like words and deeds that proceed not from one and
the same principle, so may there be like desires. Mary's words and Zacharies
differed not much: How shall this be (says she) seeing I know not a man,
Whereby shall I know this? says he, for I am an old man, and my wife well
stricken in years: her inquiry was out of admiration, to learn, his out of
unbeleefe looking to nature, he measured the promise by common course. Abraham
laughed at such a promise, Sara laughed also; he out of the joy of his faith,
John 8, 56. She of unbeleefe, which yet she overcame, Heb. 11, 11. David did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord, Amaziah did so likewise, yet not
with like hear^, 2 King. 14. 3.
2 Chronicles. 25. 2. So for desires, Paul desires Salvation, Balaam desires
Salvation: Balaam of a pang of despair, Paul of love to be with the Lord. A
scorner seeks wisdom, Prou. 14, 6. a godly man seeks wisdom: He of
perverse affection, this of sincere intention to understand his own way, Verse
8. That he may possess his own heart, holding it firmly in the truth.

Herod desires to see Christ, but of curiosity of Luke 3. 8, 9, 11.
hearing and seeing something strange, to please a corrupt mind: but he was
not vouchsased either doctrine or miracle, not to see a spark of his heavenly
glory; and the flesh of his mind declared it self in his sending him to Pilate
mocked and despised. So certain Greeks desired to see Jesus, and sought to
Phillip that he would help them; he taking Andrew with him told Jesus. But
there is no mention of the Greeks made by him in his answer, but he applied
himself to call off his Disciples from vain expectation of earthly glory,
discoursing of his death and the fruit of it, of hating our lives in the case
of confession, John 12, 21 etc.

Secondly, now the desire of Zacheus* was greatly respected and succeeded unto
his Salvation: though nature may incline men to novelties, and to desire the
sight of such of whose excellent fame we have heard, yet the end of his desire
shows that it was of spiritual beginning, being blessed with such a change of
the whole man, there began to bud some seed of Salvation in him, he was
carried with a singular affection to Christ, which was by some impulsion of the
holy Ghost more than common as the issue declares, the Spirit of the Father
drawing him to the Son.

And we may observe in 1. Obs.
it, that God begins his good work in small things sometimes; he begun the
second Temple so as they that had seen the former despised it as nothing in
their eyes, altogether unlikely to come to any glorious accomplishment: yet of
these conte^ptible beginings he brought it forth to such glory as with joyful
shout they declared their gladness, and with hearty wellwishings desired that
as his grace not man's strength had finished it, so his favor would maintain
and defend it, Zach. 4, 6. 7, 10. The prophecy, Esaias 42, 3, applied to Christ,
shows how with wonderful meekness and tenderness he should bring forward
his kingdom out of small beginnings; notwithstanding the hostile opposition of
Satan and all his wicked instruments. Math. 12, 20. A bruised reed shall he
not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. A bruised reed, what
more frail? smoking flax, what more easily extinguished, Esaias 43, 17. They
are quenched as towe (says the Prophet) speaking of the host of the enemies
of God; he will as easily extinguish them for ever as we quench a little towe:
yet if men be not wicked, but have some beginnings of piety in them how weak
soever, he will not despise them, but cherish strengthen, and increase them
with marveilous in^ulgence and mercy: though like a reed half broken, and
smoking week almost gone out for want of oil, yet will he attemperate
himself to their infirmity, till he kindle in them light more full, and
supply them with solid strength. This appears in Zacheus, and in many, the
little sparkles of faith and hope in whom he excites of his immeasurable
goodness.

Certain workings there be in the hearts of men that are of the efficacy of
the Spirit, yet not well known to them to be so. The Apostle speaking of the
Spirits help in our infirmities Romans 8. 26, 27.
when we know not what to pray as we ought, says, that he himself makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered; not only for that
they are for a thing unutterable as heavenly glory, or that they cannot be
sufficiently spoken according to their proceeding from the holy Ghost, but
because breaking into them by the Spirits impulsion, they far pass the
capacity of our wits, and we scarce discern what our own hearts mean, our
affections being much oppressed with darkness: they be certain inarticulate
groans and breathings, which the searcher of the hearts knows with
approbation to be the inspirations of his own Spirit, disburdening us into
Gods lap or bosom.

Mary the sister of Lazarus anointing Jesus his feet with precious ointment,
is defended by him against the murmour and censure of Judas at the wast, as he
called it, that she had kept it against the day of his burying. It was not lost
but kept, she did that now which she could not do at his burial, God so
governing her mind that at this time she should pour it upon the Lord to
signify his death and burial to be at hand, and so was it done for funeral
service: it is not like that she had any further intent than to show her love
in the honoring of Christ, and to refresh his spirits by the sweet savor of
the ointment, as it is said ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, Prove. 27,
9. but the Spirit of God impelling her heart, burning in love to Christ with
desire to do thus, foresaw further, and directed the fact to this end which
Christ speaks of. So are men moved by the holy Ghost to something with further
scope than they presently understand. The Disciples of Christ, much people that
were Mat. 21.
come to the feast, and children, were carried to receive Christ coming to
Jerusalem with the joyful shout of a King, unwonted acclamations, and honor
given him, in spreading their garments in the way: By some others cutting down
branches from the trees and strewing them in the way, ascribing to him kingdom
and power of saving, Hosanna to the Son of David. First, pray to him for
salvation, Hosanna in the highest, In part out of the words of the Psalm 118,
25. Save now. Secondly, bless him, Blessed be the King that comes in the name
of the Lord. Thirdly, and his kingdom, Blessed be the kingdom of our father
David, that comes in the name of the Lord; with this gratulatory addition,
Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest places. It angered the Pharisees to
hear it, they disdained that he should receive Testimony of Children, willed
him to rebuke his Disciples; he defends both* the Children from Psalm. 8, 2.
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou perfected praise: and the
Disciples with necessity of their duty, which if they failed in, the stones
would immediately cry out, Luke 19, 36, 40. All this by secret instinct, they
were excited by internal ^fficacie of the Spirit, but the meaning of this was
unknown to the Disciples themselves till Jesus was glorified, John 12, 16. yet
in due time the fruit appeared. Thus God brings on his work.

To observe secret motions 1. Use.
unto good, though you perceive not where they shall end, yet attend Gods
worke^ out of small beginnings great works are brought forth by him who
passes on and goes by us when we cannot find him out, Job 9, 11. When one
that was before careless of Christ, hears such a description of him in which
is set forth his excellency, so as he is convinced they are the only holy
happy people that are joined to him, that their earnest love to him is not
without just cause, and so begin to inquire how he may meet with him, where
he may seek him; let him not despise it, let him think with himself, is not
God come to me with offer of himself? This light and motion seems more than
natural; it is a good step toward good when men begin to inquire after the
Lord Jesus, are desirous to know him, and how to have their desire satisfied,
Cant. 5, 9, and. 6, 1. Desire implies some measure of knowledge of the worth
of that which is desired, John 4, 10. and love of it so known: where more love
is there is more desire, which in a sert makes the desiring apt and ready to
the receiving of the desired, as it is (at least probably) said, That they in
whom love is more full to God, shall see him more perfectly, and so be more
blessed for the faculty of seeing God; not agreeing to the created
understanding according to the nature of it as it is now, but by the light of
glory, the more it partakes of that light the more perfectly it sees God; and
the more love a man has, the more he participates of that light, because
there is more desire which shall be satisfied. Love declared by obedience,
has promise of further revelation of Christ, and Communion with God, John 14,
21, 23. Zacheus of some love to Christ, as the sequel declares, desiring to
see him, and coming down at his bidding to receive him to his house, enjoyed
him in an excellent measure of his grace

Faith not being yet framed Quest.
in him, as it may seem, how could there be love in his heart to Christ, and
thence desire unto him? did he look for more in Jesus than the outward sight
of his person?

Sure he looked for more, Ans.
for it is not likely that he would with neglect of his reputation (being a
principal man for state and prioritie in his calling) and in the sight of a
great multitude, climb up like a boy into a tree without regard of the scorns
of men, only to see any Prince in the world. 2. Did Christ so regard any that
came merely to see him? 3. Would he with such speed and joy come down and
receive him to his house, and so profess works testifying repentance to
Christ, if there had not been more than a desire of an outward sight of him?

His affection to Christ in such fervencie may be ascribed to the knowledge
that he had gotten of Christ and himself: of himself* to be a great sinner,
whose sins God would not suffer always to go unpunished; of Christ, that he
was not only a great Prophet, but the Savior that should come into the world,
the Son of David, exercising mercy not only in miraculous cures of the
body, but in forgiving men (that had faith in him) their ^sinnes: with desire
of remission of his own sins he sought to see him of whom he had heard
such things, not altogether without some sparkles of grace, and seed of piety.

The Spirit of God works in us so sometimes, that we our selves seem to be
authors of the fact. Of himself it could not be, seeing it tended unto, and
ended in his blessed change from the state of sin to the state of grace, his
passing from damnation to salvation; it was some beginning of his rising out of
sin, which argues the work of God, in three respects. 1. In taking away the
deformity of the soul by the stain of sin, and restoring the comeliness
and beauty of grace. 2. In setting the will ordinately in subjection to God,
restoring the good of nature in beginnings which sin had corrupted and
destroyed, the whole nature remaining inordinate thereby. 3. In taking away the
guilt of sin, whereby man was subject to eternal damnation. All which and
every of them is Gods work, giving into the mind a light of grace, into the
will a new quality, whereby it is sweetly moved and readily to the obtaining of
the eternal good, drawing the will to him: and none but God against whom the
offense is committed, can remit the guilt and punishment of sin. There is
great difference between the ceasing from the act of some sin, and rising
out of sin, which is to repair man unto those things which he lost by
sinning. (...) ur (...) gratia praeven^em, in quantum ipsa^ voluntatem facit
bonam and ide^ prae^ venit, quia non est a li^ero arbitrio, sed infunditur ab
^^so Deo.


Preventing grace is not common to all, but it is proper and peculiar to the
elect in whom God works the will to spiritual and eternal good; it does not
expect man's will, neither does man's will call to it, but it prevents it by
preparing it that it wills good, and helps it being prepared that it may
perform it: it was a will before, but not a good and right will. Not only the
will of man is not sufficient if the grace of God be wanting; for so it might
be said on the other side, the grace of God suffices not if our will be not,
we must give the whole to God.

Preventing grace is faith Magist. sent. (...). 2. did. 20. D.
with love. The good will of man is prevented with that benefit of grace
whereby it is freed from servitude of sin, and prepared, and that benefit is
the faith of Christ: so the will is healed, the Spirit of God being author, and
so disposed that it actually wills and indevours what God commands.

Faith is in him which wills to believe, whose good will it prevents, not in
time, but in cause and nature. There is a beginning of faith, a good thought of
believing which is of God only, we being not sufficient of our selves unto it,
2 Cor. 3, 5. Which is not meant of any thought whatsoever, but of a thought of
believing or right living which affects the will. It signifies not simply to
apprehend something in our mind. But with deliberate judgment of reason and
affection of the will about the thing apprehended, as Philip. 4. 8. If there
be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things.

Our conversion is described by our knowledge of God, Gal. 4, 9. and first
receiving light, Heb. 10, 32. But it is such a knowledge of him as he gives in
the face of Jesus Christ, unto some measure of faith, drawing us to him to
seek reconciliation and remission sins, and is an effect of his knowledge of
us. As the Apostle adds by way of Correction, or rather are known of God: if
any man love God the same is known of him, as he says in another place;
received of him, Romans 14, 3. He is 1 Cor. 8. 3.
known with approbation, and drawn to God.

So it might be in Zacheus, such beginning of faith as is in a good thought,
in some knowledge of God in Christ with some love, and could not for the
preasse, because he was little of stature, Thus it falls out to men of good
desires sometime, that their hope is deferred and the satisfying of their
desires suspended some way or other. M^^tha and Mary desired the healing of
their sick brother, to prevent his death, sent to Jesus about it; he deferred
their desire till he was dead, buried and stunke, that he might work a
greater miracle in raising him from death to life, for Gods glory and the
confirmation of the faith of his Disciples; this may be one stay, more glory
to God, good to men, John 11, 4, 15. So was Iairus his desire of the healing of
his daughter, deferred, and he dissuaded from troubling Christ any further as
counting it hopeless, for now she was dead; only Christ excites his hope of
the life of his daughter, Luke 8, 42, 49, 50. Sometimes men of no ill meaning
do hinder the lawful and good desires of other a little from their present
fulfilling, as the two blind men desiring mercy of Christ to receive their
sight, were rebuked by the multitude that went before, because Math. 20. 30. 31.
they should hold their peace. They that brought their Children to Christ with
desire of his blessing, Mark 10. 3.
were a little stopped by his Disciples. Sometimes a man has impediments and
lets from himself, as Zacheus from his low stature that could not look over
the multitude that were about Christ: it may be his faith is not such as God
will have it before he receive what he desires, if it be of a good thing to
be done by himself. When he has a good will and desire, the flesh has
another will against it that he cannot perform his purpose and desire til he
get more strength. There is a remainder of Original sin that so besetts good
men that they cannot run the race of godliness as they desire, Heb. 12. 1.
till they cast it away that the comfort is most in this strife to do it, in
the willingness of the spirit, hindered by the flesh. Matthew, 26 Chapter,
verse 4. Satan is a great hinderer of good desires, as the Apostle says in his
own case, in desire to see the Thessalon^ans, from whom he was taken for a
short time, in presence not in heart: and indevouring it with great desire. He
would have come once again, but Satan hindered it, 1 Thessalonians. 2, 17, 18. How he
hindered ^s not expressed, whether by tempests of the air, or by the
tribulation of the persecuting tyrants, or lying in wait for him in the way to
kill him, or by sickness: but it is clear he hindered his good desire and
endeavor to come to them for confirmation of their faith. He assirmes the
decree of his will to it, and his preparation to accomplish it once and again;
and in that he was hindered, the inward act of the will the Devil cannot
discern or hinder so, as the outward act of the body, as to preach the
Gospel, etc. The Devil and his angels are noted to hold in their hands the
four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow upon the earth or the
sea or on any tree; which signifies the preaching of the Gospel hindered by
the Devils malice: So far as God will suffer, though the preachers desire to
make it abound.

When a great and effectual door is entered, there be commonly many
adversaries, wicked men fight under the banner of Satan and are his instruments
to hinder us when our studies and indevours tend to Gods Word. As Elimas sought
to turn away the Deputy from the faith when he called for Barnabas and Saul
with desire to hear the word of God; he withstood them, and Paul called him
the Child of the Devil, Act. 13, 7, 8, 10: Seeing in him an open contempt of
God in rising up against his word, and stopping the way to that prudent man
that he should not come to the knowledge of God, when he had solicited his
mind secretly not to rest in the deceits of that false prophet. Christ
inveighed against the Pharisees for shutting up the Kingdom of Heaven against
men, not suffering them that were entering to go in, Math. 23, 13. Having their
foot as it were on the threshold, they turned them back from hearing the
Doctrine of Salvation, which is as the gate of Heaven. It is easier work to
hinder the rising of the building, than to destroy that which is once settled
upon the foundation.

We are not therefore to Use.
think it strange, or to conceive the desire to be in vain because it meets
with lets, and is crossed at the first. In evil desires, it is good to take
notice of the crossing of them, with thanks to God, and to his instruments
that hindered them, and kept us from the evil deed, as David from shedding the
blood of Nabal and his household by the means of Abigail. 1 Samuel 25, 32, 33.
Who blessed God for sending her, blessed her advise, and her, that kept him
back. It had been good for Herod if he had made such use of his
disappointment of his intelligence by the wise men: which he looked for with a
wicked purpose against Christ, to know where he was, that he might destroy
him. But it is the misery of wicked men that they impute it not to Gods
providence, but rage at the instruments, not willing to be hindered. A wise man
fears and departs from evil, but the fool rages and is confident, Prove.
14, 16. He that is wary is stricken with some dread, when he is warned, and
breaks off his purpose when he perceives God is not pleased with it. As
Isaac purposing to have blessed Es(...), forgetting the oracle that the elder
should serve the younger, when he perceived how by divine providence he
blessed Jacob in the steed of the ^elder, he trembled very exceedingly.
Confounded with the shame of his error in purpose to bless Esau, he neither
pretends ignorance, nor is angry with Jacob for deceiving him by evil acts,
but acknowledging God to be the author of the blessing pronounced, gives him
glory, renounceth his affection, and retracts not what he has delivered, Genesis
27, 33. But a wicked man, what he has once attempted though foolish,
prosequutes it to the utmost that he can, as Balaam though he had the mind
of God expressly that he should not go with Balaakes princes to curse his
people, yet stays not but kindled the anger of God against him, in going, and
in giving wicked counsel cast himself away, Numb. 22, 12, 22. Though he
seemed willing to return if it displeased God, it was frivolous: Seeing if he
had feared God seriously and with pure af^ection, he would have renounced his
expedition naughtily taken in hand, and not have made doubt of a thing
manifestly witnessed: though God bid him go, he approved not his covetous
heart, but derided his pertinacious madness. But where the desire is of God,
though it have some lettes, it is not for that to be renounced, it is accepted
where God himself will not have it effected by him in whom he approves the
desire. As in David's case, purposing in his heart and desiring to build a house
for God, it is commended, 1 Kings 8, 18. But the work is reserved for Solomon
his son. He considers our mind and counsel which many times he allows,
and inspires things of their nature good, unto which he inclines our wills,
which yet he will not have us to bring into action: because they conduce not
to the order of his providence which he has before his eyes, and will by all
means have to stand fast. Yet are there not two wills in him, but one which
has diverse objects.

Some desires he disappoints for a time, as Paul's to have a prosperous journey
to Rome, to bestow among them some spiritual gift with fruit, Romans 1, 11, 13.
Which he often purposed and that of conscience of his duty, v. 14. yet was
let: whereby it appears that cross success in execution, proves not
infallible unlawfullnesse of intention.

And he ran before, and Verse 4.
climed into a Sycomore tree to see him, for he was to pass that way.

Wherefore he thus carnestly desired to see Christ, that he may be thought to
have forgotten what became his person, and after the manner of Children to hunt
after new sights, is before declared; it shows that his desire was settled in
him unto the obtaining of it. So it is with gracious 1. Obs.
affections, they are not quelled by lets. They rather increase by hindrances,
and grow more fervent by opposition. Elihu held with reverence of his elders
from speaking as he desired, and saw meet and needful unto Job, at length
Job. 32, 6. 18, 19.
shows the force of his desire, that it compelled him; his mind having been
as a caske full of new wine shut up which must needs have a vent. Such a
vehement pang had he in his mind, moved with such zeal when God touched him,
as if he should have burst, till he had discharged his conscience; so earnest
a will had he to maintain the truth. Hope differred, makes the soul sick,
Prove. 13, 12. The mind wanting the thing expected, greives that it cannot
enjoy what it desires: As the Church in her seeking Christ's presence declares
how strong her de sire is, that having no answer when she called, not finding
him whom she sought, she desires it may be told him that she is sick of
love; and this after she met with oppositions, the watchmen finding her, who
should have secured her from dangers; proved adversaries to her, yet gives she
not over, but in her seeking is more vehement; the sire kindled in her none can
qvench, but as lime is inflamed by water, and streams grow more furious by
obstacles, so her zeal more burning by disgraces in her seeking him. Cant. 5.
6, 7, 8. Jeremy when the word of the Lord was made a reproach to him, and a
derision daily, had a thought to speak no more in his name; but his word was
in his heart as a burning fire, shut up in his bones, and he could not stay,
Ier. 20. 8, 9. After all his thoughts which weakened his fortitude of mind, the
impulsion of the Spirit of God was so forcible in him, that he was carried with
more earnestness to proceed in the course of his office whereunto God called
him.

Bartimaeus desiring mercy of Christ for restoring his sight, being rebuked by
some that went before that he might hold his peace and not offend Christ with
clamorous importunity, like a provident beggar, as having far more high
matters to handle than attend a beggar asking a common alms, as they it seems
thought of him; he was the more stirred and cried so much the more, Thou Son
of David have mercy on me, Luke 18, 39. Or as Mark has it; he cried the more
a great deal, Mark* 10. ^8. Paul pulled away untimely (in respect of his
work) from among the Thessalonians, inforceth himself more abundantly to see
their face with great 1 Thessalonians. 2. 17. and 3. 10, 11.
desire, and beggs earnestly, exceedingly, night and day, that God himself
even our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, would direct his way unto them, to
add that which was lacking in their faith.

David mocked by Michal in his piety, a King, and a Prophet of God, adornes his
defense, that it was before the Lord, and was magnificently both to be thought
and spoken of; and professes yet to play before the Lord, and to be more
vile, and to be base in his own sight, 2 Samuel 6, 21, 22. And the same holy
man shows how his grace not only maintained it self against opposition: when
the wicked by bands and troops spoiled him, made a prey of him, he held fast
Gods doctrine and could not be drawn from the obedience of truth, but more,
his devotion was such as he resolved to rise at midnight to serve him with
praise of righteous judgments. Psalm. 119, 61, 62* And when wicked men
destroyed his law, overthrew the doctrine, he loved it so much the more as
more precious than the most fine gold, verse 126. 127.

It is thus in sinful nature that the lust increases by opposition. The
Sodomites by Lots exhortation to desist from their wicked enterprise, confirm
their resolution to do worse, and that to him, Genesis 19. 9, He came in to
sojourne (say they) and he will needs be a Judge. The Priests at Pilats motion
to release unto them Christ Jesus, cried out the more, Let him be crucified,
Math, 27. 23. Sin becomes out of measure sinful by the Commandment, Romans 7.
13. working death by that which is good.

So in grace, it not only holds in opposition, but is more intensive, for the
Spirit of God, the author of the goodness of the will, helps it, and
strengthens it to produce the good work where unto he has inclined it, that
it overcomes impediments. The calling of the elect, is the revealing of the
arm of God, the putting forth of the exceeding greatness of his power; they
become like firebrands that will not be blown out with the wind as candles,
but kindled more; as if fire in the water, should not only not go out
quenched, but still burn up higher and higher.

Which serves to discover 1. Use.
the unsoundnesse of vanishing desires, which are quelled with every little
cross or impediment and difficulty: yea sometimes when they be not real but
imagined; as Solomon writes of the slothful man as faining dangers, he says,
A Lion is without, I shall be slain in the streets. Though he speak not
such words, yet he hinders himself from that which he should do, by casting
dangers, imagining lets, having always one excuse or other, that though he
wish and desire all the day, yet his hands will fall to no work. His way is as
a hedge of thorns, Prove. 15. 19. his fears and griefs prick and stay him
like thorns and briars.

The desires and goodness of the temporary believers are two ways faulty, by
hypocrisy, it is but seeming to have, Luke 8. 18. and by vanishing away, Hos.
6. 4. Your goodness is as a morning Cloud, and as the early dew it goes away.
As in much heat sometime the morning Clouds give the husbandman hope of rain;
but the Sun rising they are dissolved or dissipated and frustrate his
expectation: so in some pang they show some probabilities of returning, but
their lusts waxing hot the hope is cut off. And as the morning dew seems to
moisten the earth but is consumed away by the sun; so their shows of piety,
frequenting the assemblies, instituting public prayers, etc. pass away
without effect.

As the rush grows not long without mire, nor the flag without water, morish
herbs that have their nourishment from it, though green and not cut down,
wither before any other: So are the path's of all that forget God, and the
hypocrites hope shall perish. They have not their sap from Christ, and what
freshness so ever they show, it must needs wither; and that discovers that
they were not rooted in God, who maintains the lot of his people against all
that fights against it, the fruition of the grace he has given them shall
remain safe unto them.

It may be for consolation use 2
to such as hold still their desire to good, and follow after it, though they
be differred, and increase in earnestness, as hunger and thirst after
righteousness: they are such as a man may allege to God, Psa. 119, 20. My
soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all times.
40. Behold I have longed for thy precepts. He offers his desires to be looked
upon. As Esaias 26, 8. The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the
remembrance of thee. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. It is an argument of a well
set and disposed heart when a man dare present it to the Lord, that he may
look upon the intentions and desires of it.

Desires without grace to confirm them and keep them in vigor, are but as a
false conception, which evanisheth and comes not to the birth. But such as be
deeply rooted, not light motions, but make the heart break to see how we can
not do as we desire in Gods matters; and this permanent, it is of grace. I
opened my mouth, and panted, because I loved thy commandments. This propension
of the soul, and vehement intension of spirit, where the soul vehemently
longs to feel that power and comfort which it knows to be in the word,
knowledge of the good constantly holding the desire to it, is that which God
looks for; the opening of our mouth wide as a man wearied in travail, opens
his mouth to take breath and swallow up the air.

As it is of corruption reigning, that a man is restless in his desire of
sinning, Prove. 4, 16. And it is abomination to him to depart from it, Prove.
13, 19. It is deadly grief to be hindered and pulled from sinful delights,
yea to think that he shall not accomplish his wicked desire; so it is of
grace reigning that a man cannot rest till he accomplish his desire of good,
his will is converted to it. It is the note of the godly that they follow after
righteousness, upon their knowledge of it. Esaias, 51, 1 7. It contains the
study of their minds, and indevours of their will with constant desire till
they obtain, which is not in this life: as lovers that have set their
affection on any, most studiously follow to obtain them, and they rest not but
in fruition thereof.

Affections settled on supernatural objects agreeable to the quality thereof,
argue spiritual and supernatural being. This proof the Apostle would take of
the resurrection of the soul the first resurrection, rising with Christ,
seeking and setting the affections on things that are above, thinking and
desiring, and following things concerning another life; spiritual things,
spiritually discerned and affected, and godliness as it is of God, and
conformes us to him. That we are in this world (concerning beginnings) as he
is, and the kingdom of heaven for his presence, to dwell with the Lord, to be
where Christ is, to behold his glory, and to be perfectly guided by his Spirit.

Our conversion begins in Gods work in us, infusing grace by way of seed, 1
John 3, 9. Which manifests it self by new disposition and inclination in us,
that our desiring spiritual things agreeable to their nature, is an action of
that life of God begun. The will first suffers Gods work upon it, and then
acts, aspires to conversion, constantly desires it: Inclines us still to seek
God, Ier. 31, 19. In which God confirms it; he prepares the heart, and
inclines his ear, Psalm. 10, 17.

And when Jesus came Verse. 5.
to the place, he looked up and said unto him, etc.

Here is the success of the desire of Zaccheus in that which he desired, and
in that which he (it may be) thought not of, Christ's looking up, speaking to
him by his name, offering himself to be his guest, such is the benignity and
goodness of Christ: whence observe, 1. Obs.
that seeking Christ, and good things in him by spiritual motion, shall not
be in vain. Good desires may be deferred but not denied always, the
expectation of the poor shall not perish Psalm. 9. 18.
for ever; though we have not our desires so soon as we conceive them, yet
if we cast not away our confidence, but wait and seek still, our hope shall
not frustrate us. The desire of the Prove. 10. 24, 28.
righteous shall be granted him, and his hope shall be gladness, his desire
is only good, obtains that which is good and only that. The Lord is good,
First, actually, out of his own favor and goodness he does good, to them
that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him, Lament. 3, 25. God has not
said in vain to the house of Israel, seek ye me. Therefore has he not Esaias
45. 19.
spoken it in secret, nor in a dark place of the earth, as the prophets of the
heathen gods, who spoke uncertainly and so obscurely and Esaias 8.
out of dark dens: but goodness and truth concur in him, goodness in
inviting us to seek him as willing to be found, and truth in not deceiving
and frustrating our hope when we do come to him: therefore shall we not fail
to find him because he will give us to seek him and search for him with all
our heart. Ier. 29. 13.

God has made himself a debtor by his promise to them that seek him, that
he will come to them and rain righteousness upon them, Hos. 10. 12. Under
righteousness we may comprehend all kind of goodness which he will give
from heaven, not sparingly but largely; therefore he calls it rayning
righteousness, not only that whereby he justifies us in Christ, receiving us
into favor, and regenerateth us, rendering unto man his righteousness, Job
33, 29: But the performance of all promises in due time concerning the present
life, or that which is to come. He called Bartimeus crying to him, and gave
his sight as he desired. The woman secretly seeking virtue from him to the
healing of her issue of blood, found it in her self. All that would make use
of Christ found him reedie to their good if they sought him aright, God is
faithful and of never failing compassions, in the experience of his servants
they are new every morning, Lam. 3, 23. He Esaias. 6. 4. 5.
both meets with testimonies of dear love, such as he sees coming toward
him to seek his presence, as the father of the prodigal met him with
wonderful expressions of a fathers affection in the happy return of a son
that seemed to be lost; and also calls them to Esaias 65. 1.
behold him, and to seek him that had no thought of it, who so prevented with
his grace, upon his call, desire and seek him, seeking find, him and finding
him enjoy him unto salvation with eternal glory.

Which serves abundantly for consolation to such as Use.
linger after Christ and his grace in holy desires; their hearts God has
touched, and they follow him as given of God to save them, they shall be
satisfied. When men have a right estimation of Christ, that they prefer him
before all things in the world; as he knows their love, he so esteems it,
and will give himself to be enjoyed of them, that they shall (as it were) lie
in his arms, and sweetly rest with him in gracious imbracements: as the Church
sick of love, as it were swounding by vehemency of her desire to Christ,
calling to the Pastors of the Church to refresh her spirits with the means
that they have in trust, to convey by them spiritual things into her soul;
finds her self on the sudden upheld by Christ, employing both his hands for
her relief and streng. thening. No sooner calling but he hears and answers,
and come to her help and comfort so willingly as nothing can stay his pace
toward her; he skips by the mountains and leapes by the hills; neither her
greater sins, nor lesser infirmities, can stay him, nor humane power can
hinder his access with celeritie. Cant. 2, 5, 6, 8. In his speed he is like
a Roe or young Heart; she sees him as at the door behind the wall, yet not
fully expressing and exhibiting himself in his presence to her, but he looks
forth at a window, and shows himself through the grates or lattesse; she
beholds him but imperfectly, yet with certainty, and with signification of
favor.

But to them that desire to see him in heaven, not satisfied with the sight of
him as it is now by faith, he will give them in due time their desire, they
shall see him as he is. They shall be where he is and behold his glory; the
shadows shall flee away; whatsoever hinders the full content in the sight of
him, as ignorance, unbeleefe, trouble of conscience, outward tribulations, the
day star shall arise in their hearts, and the day break, the time of
the other world beginning at our death, and more fully at our resurrection: the
morning of that day which shall never give place to night, when the righteous
shall have dominion over the wicked, and shall be ever with the Lord: when they
shall no more need the light of Prophets or Apostles, but by himself shall
they see God, giving a divine light into their understanding whereby they know
as they are known.

Yea and in the mean time they shall have a more John 14. 2.
pure and explicate knowledge of the mysteries of Christ; he will reveal
himself to them that love him, Romans 8. 26, 27.
and their requests of heart framed by the spirit in them with unexpressible
groanings, God will not frustrate: the inspirations of his own spirit please
him, for they are according to his will; the spirit makes them to pray as they
ought which of themselves they cannot, he helps their infirmities.

Z^ccheus, make haste, and come down, for to day (...) must abide at thine
house.

This is singular grace and favor, that the Lord of his own accord bids
himself to his house, who it is like durst not presume to request him, though
willing to entertain him: this is above that he desired, thus he vouchsafed to
honor him, whom he had by his Spirit secretly working, drawn to him. In
which we may observe 2. Obs.
that God is pleased to give above our desires many times when we offer our
selves to him. Whereof we have many examples. Thus happy was Zaccheus in his
endeavor to see Christ; he sees him, he hears him calling him by his name
as if he were familiarly known, and receives him to his house, and to abide
there, and all of his own accord; notable humanity of the Son of God, to come
to him wh^m the common sort did hate, and that unrequested.

Abraham's request to God was that Ishmael mighty live before him, and that
would content him; having a son borne to him he subsists in him, though God
promised him another son by Sara his wise, it may seem it was more than he
durst hope for, though he reject not Gods favor in the promise of a new
seed, but if it please him to extend his liberality no further but to
conserve the life of Ishmael which he has given, he desires no further.
Concerning Ishmael God hears him, and grants him not only life, but
multiplication of seed to make him a great nation, and his children to be of
great place, twelve Princes he should beget. Yet would he extend his goodness to
him further; as he promised, Sara shall bear him a son indeed, and with him
and his seed he would stablish Genesis 17. 18. 19, 20, 21.
his everlasting covenant.

Jacob in his journey to Padan Aram desired of God provision but necessary, and
protection in his way with a safe return to his fathers house; which he had,
and above his desire, God made him two bands, Genesis 28. 20. Genesis 32. 10.
21. David asked life, God gave him long life, even for ever and ever, Psalm.
21. 4. Not only heard him when fearful of death by the malice of his enemies
he prayed against it, but granted him over, and above to live till he was full
of days, nor that only but succession in his posterity unto eternity of his
kingdom, which was accomplished in Christ, who was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, as God promised him by Nathan: which mercy David
admiring prays that as the Lord had said so he would do, that with his
blessing it would please him to bless his house to continue for ever before
him, 2 Samuel 7.

Solomon asking an understanding heart to judge Gods people, to discern
between good and bad, not only obtaines it, but in an excellency to be
singular in it, so as none had before nor after him. And besides that which he
asked not, riches and honor, so as there should not be any of the Kings like
unto him all his days. 1 King. 3. 9, 12, 13.

The sick of the palsy sought his health of Christ, which he received and
unto that the forgiveness of his sins, Math. 9, 2, 6, 7.

The ruler sought to John 4. 47.
Christ for his sons life, and he had it, and with it faith in his own and
his household hearts, whereby they addicted themselves to 53.
him as his Disciples, under the hope of eternal life. The thief upon the
Cross prayed Christ to remember him in his Kingdom; he was heard, and by a
serious asseveration secured, that that very day he should pass from the
misery of the cross to the felicity of paradise, and there have fellowship
with him in eternal glory. Luke 23, 42, 43.

He is the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1, 3. As a most kind Father he powers out
manifold gifts and benefits upon men, of his mere mercy, and imparts unto
them, not light and slender, but strong and abundant consolation, that are his
friends, as the God of all consolation. He that is Lord over all is rich unto
all that call upon him, Romans 10, 12. Not only abounding with riches, but
pouring out plentifully unto those that depend upon him, he gives to all men
liberally and upbraideth not, Iam. 1, 5.

He gives even to wicked men (that set their faces against heaven) more than
heart could wish, Psalm. 73, 7. That their prosperous success exceeds the
conceivings of their mind, as if nets were laid to catch for them while they
sleep. His faithful are more regarded than infidels.

In our glorifying of God 1. Use.
therefore we are to say with the Apostle, Now unto him that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power
that works in us, as we find by experience in our selves, be glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen.

From hence reprove faithless fear, damping hope, upon conceit, partly of our
unworthiness, partly of the greatness of the things we ask, too great for
such as we be. We must not measure Gods ways by man's, whose ways are as
far above ours as the heavens are the earth. Esaias 55, 9. And yet even men
give according to their greatness, and consider what is fit for them to give
rather than what is fit for the other to receive. We may ask what God sees
meet for his glory to give, and not only what we feel ourselves to need, but
what our Father sees that we need, Math. 6, 8: without doubt or fear,
commending our selves to his love and wisdom. And this the Lord our maker
requires of us, that we commend the care of our necessities to his faith and
providence in terms of greatest encouragement, Esaias 45, 11. Ask me of things
to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye
me.

Make haste, etc. Whether he would have his prompt mind known, and the gift
of faith to appear with speed, or have his own work the time being come.
Observe, 2. Obser.
that when the time determined with the Lord for the manifesting of his goodness
to his people is come, he is willing to do it speedily. When the people with
earnest desire to hear the word followed Christ, to attend upon the
opportunity he Marl^. 3. 20, 21.
left his meat and went to teaching, and incurred among his kindred a
suspicio^ of madness. Though God defer his elect that cry unto him night and
day, yet when their time is come that he should judge for them, he will avenge
them speedily, Luke, 18, 7, 8. Speedily in respect of the wicked, who are
suddenly destroyed while they had no such thought and feared nothing yet,
though God suffer them with long patience: As the Israelites were brought out
of Egypt with a strong hand, and their oppressers overwhelmed, the same day
that God had promised, Exodus 12, 41. When the hour was come that was appointed
for the death of Christ, how does he hasten to it, as is to be gathered by
his speech to Judas with the soppe, discovering him to be the traitor: That
which thou do do quickly, meaning the betraying of him into the hands of
wicked men, which he was with full purpose rolling in his mind. Till then he
overruled the Devil to whom he now permitted him and left him to his own
malice. As if he should say, hasten thy self to the treason which irrevocably
thou art set to do, and thine own destruction, seeing thou will needs perish;
and me to the work that I am to finish by my death, which for man's redemption
and salvation I so greatly desire

He is good and does good, his own goodness moves him, Psalm. 119, 68. The
good pleasure of his goodness is that which impells him, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 11. The
propense and pleasing inclination of his will to the good of men, his
selfe-propension to diffuse his benefits, is the fountain of all that good we
receive, and it is the spiritual groundworke of our prayers. He delights in
exercising loving kindness, Ier. 9, 24. And mercy pleases him, Mich. 7, 18.
He will wait that he may be gracious unto his people, he will be exalted
that he may have mercy upon them, which turns unto the highness of his
name, and greatness of his glory; he is a God of judgment, in all things
propense unto moderation convenient for their salvation, Esaias 30, 18.

Which may serve to encourage Uses.
the weak, whose faith is sometimes shaken by misinterpreting Gods deferring
to hear their prayers, as if it were a denial, or that he regarded not their
state, which the Lord is pleased to take notice of, and to give help against.
Esaias 49. 15, 16, 17. But Sion said, the Lord has for saken me, and my Lord
has forgotten me. Unto which he answers, three things for encouragement,
First, that he neither has nor will, nor can forsake and forget her. Which he
illustrates by comparing and preferring his compassion toward them, to the
compassion of a mother to the Son of her womb. It is given to the mother
commonly to love more tenderly than the father, therefore he compares his love
with the mothers love, and not simply her love to the son of her womb, but
that suckes her breasts, toward whom, a mothers affection is not overcome with
labor or any kind of molestation, but with unremitted care she indures to give
it suck, to nourish it and foster it. And scarce is it to be expressed how she
is affected with the smiles, or afflicted with the cries of it, specially being
pressed with any danger: Whereby Solomon found out in his wisdom, the true
mother of the child, challenged by two women, when the true mother heard of the
dividing of it between them, her bowels yerned, and were hot upon her son:
and would in no wise have it slain, 1 King. 3. 25. 26.

Again, if the soul in temptation, except against this comfort and say:
Experience shows that some mothers do loose natural affection and regard not
the children of their womb, no not then when they are not long from their
birth: God answers to that, though created nature may defect, and turn
monstrous, yet the supreme and uncreated nature is so perfect that it cannot
change. And that is the first thing, which may specially comfort Godly, tender
mothers in such temptation about Gods leaving his care of them. If their
affection be such to their children, can Gods be less to them? They cannot
forget nor forsake theirs, and will they think that their affection is not
equalled by God, yea overmatched and exceeded, being infinite?

Secondly, a second thing is, that God will not forget his for this reason; he
will have them ever in his sight, as graven upon the palms of his hands, as
things in account, and precious are minded. As the gold finer sits by the fire
into which he has put his gold to melt, to take it out in due time, and Job
23. 10.
his eye is still upon it, he neglects it not, Malach. 3, 3. God withdrawes
not his Job 36. 7.
eyes from the righteous.

Thirdly, a third thing for their answer is, that the time of their relief
being come, their comfort shall be hasted in the departing of the instruments
of affliction, in the coming of such as shall build them up, with new access
of members of the Church, multiplication of Gods people, that the joy shall
exceed your sorrows.

It may silence such godless Use 2.
persons as would destroy the faith of Gods promises in the hearts of his
people, by his deferring so long the fulfilling of them. First, they misaccount
time, 2 Pet. 3. 8.
it is not long that God deferres, compared with eternity following: one day
and a thousand years are alike, and differ not concerning that which belongs
to proportion of infinite time; both in comparison of eternity, is but as a
point of time in comparison of time. The eternity of God coexisteth
indivisibily with any duration, and with the least part thereof, even a moment.
The parts of our duration which are passed, or which shall pass away, either
have been or shall be, but are not: Gods eternity is an interminable, whole,
and perfect possession of his life together. All things that have being may be
said to coexist with God in eternity or eternity with the^ by objective, though
not any real existence, as the objects of the knowledge, and power of God.
Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world, Act. 15,
18. By his eternal counsel he disposed all things in the best sort, and from
eternity there is with him the best reason of his counsels and doings. He
needs not time to discuss causes, to inquire after iniquities, and search out
sins; for his days are not as the days of man, or his years as man's days,
distributed into spaces of days and years, his life is not as man's.

Secondly, they falsely accuse God of slacknesse, as it is among men counted a
fault, which is a deferring of any thing beyond the due time appointed. God
has times and seasons in his own power, so as opportunity shall not slide
away from him, his promise which is for an appointed time, shall surely come
and not tarry, at the end shall speak and not lie: Hab. 2, 3.

Thirdly, let it provoke us to be followers of God in this: as he slackes not
to do good to his people in fit time, so let us observe opportunities and
seasons of doing good, and not let them slip, Eccles. 11, 6, but sow our seed
in the morning, and not let our hand rest in the evening; and work the works
of him that sent us, while it is day, John 9, 4. Waiting for occasions, as
Abraham in his tent door, being given to hospitality, who spying three men as
he thought coming in the way, ran to meet them and to invite them: a proof
of sound love to show kindness to unknown men, of whom he neither had nor
hoped for exchange of good turns. Integrity being more then, hospitality
might be used with less danger than now in so great persidiousnesse of men.

Grace makes a man pompt, and ready to gracious acts. The liberal man
devises liberal things (contrary to the churl) and by liberal things shall
be established, Esaias, 32, 8.

To day I must abide at thy house. He had taken up his heart, and now proceeds
to take up his house for his lodging: Thus of his own goodness God is pleased
to follow his own favors, as (...). Obs.
the Princes of this world sometimes do to their favorites till they make them
great, but there is a wide difference. Yet in both freely, and because they
have set their hearts upon them for good, they will honor them: God will
perfect his good work which he once begins in his toward their salvation and
fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness in them, as the Prophet says,
The Lord will perfect that which concerns me. He will proceed to declare
that he has care of my salvation, and what he has begun he will through
even unto the last act. Men by inconstancy carried another way, what they
unadvisedly entered upon, with levitie they relinquish: or are constreined by
infirmity to omit, what above their strength they attempted. But no such
thing can be fall God, whose gifts and calling are without repentance; he
neither faints, Esaias 40. 28.
nor is weary, he cannot change his nature nor put of his goodness wherewith
he is endued: he will not frustrate our hope in the middle of our course, but
they that wait upon him shall renew 31.
their strength. As he redeemeth our life from death, so he Crowns us Psa.
103. 4.
with loving knindnesse and tender mercies, and satisfies his people with his
goodness, Ierem. 31, 14. He causes their light to spring out in the
darkness, and their darkness, by increased light to be as the noone day; he
drops in his love by degrees till he make their peace full. He circumciseth
our hearts to love and desire him, and rewards that love which is his own
work, with new proof of his love: I love them that love me, and they that
seek me early shall find me, Proverbs 8. 17. His reloving is, that he gives
himself to be enjoyed of them which with love do seek him, to whom wisdom
is consubstantiall: or in communicating testimonies of good will, as imputing
or rendering unto them righteousness, being favorable to them, showing them
his face, unto their joy; pouring forth his Spirit more plentifully upon them,
leading them more perfectly in the ways of his commandments.

Increase of grace is given to them that rightly use the first grace by way of
reward, Psalm. 84, 11. To them that walk uprightly God gives grace. His
beneficence flows out daily unto them, having embraced them with his favor,
he cease not to enrich them with his gifts. To you that hear, shall more be
given, Mark 4, 24. He gives them grace more plentifully that receive with
profit the word which he sends unto them; having his words, and keeps them,
believing them, and submitting the mind and the heart to them, meditating and
transferring them to use, liberally communicating them to the benefit of
others; not having the treasure of heavenly wisdom negligently, as the
unprofitable servant had his Talent, but with diligence to good use, they shall
have more committed to their trust; for he that is faithful in that which is
least, is faithful also in much, Luke 16, 10. He that loves Christ and
keeps his Commandments, though 1 John 4. 7.
that love be of God, shall be loved of his Father, and he will love him,
and will manifest himself to him, and they will come to him, and make their
abode with him. The love which he promises, is not that wherewith he begins
to love us, but of which he begins to reward us with new access of his grace,
and within graving the Testimony of his Fatherly love in our hearts. The love
of the Trinity toward us is eternal, and explicated by every difference of
time. John 3, 16. God so loved Past.
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son; John 16, 27. The Father
himself loves you, because Present.
you have loved me, John 14, 21: He that loves me shall Future.
beloved of my Father. Shall perceive the grace of God to reside in him, which
shall be increased in new gifts: I will bless him, with increase of his
knowledge of me, to find in me more and more the comfort of his happiness, and
matter of his love to me, that by his own delight and desire he shall be
tied to me, he shall come nearer and nearer to me, and rejoice in the
sweetness of my familiarity: and we will come to him, unto an increase of
union, and make him shine and send forth beams of heavenly righteousness,
which the world will they nill they, shall take notice of; and we will make our
abode with him; not tarry with him a little time and then depart from him, but
for ever he shall have our presence, here and in heaven, thus good is the Lord.
He knows us, he makes us to know him; he loves us, he makes us to love
him; he covenants with us, he makes us to covenant with him; takes pleasure
in us, and makes us take pleasure in him; he lives in us and makes us live
in him: he walks and talks with us, and we walk and talk with him, and
all of his own good will to sill us with his fulness.

This proceeding from his beginning to the consummation of our salvation, is
grounded and assured upon his faithfulness, 1 Cor. 1, 9. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24. Two
blessings are specially promised to them whom God has called to the fellowship
of his Son; one confirmation unto the end, or as, 2 Thessalonians. 3, 3, preservation
from evil, unmoveably to persist in goodness notwithstanding temptation,
(...) John 5. 28.
that the evil one touch them not, v. 23, with any deadly wound. For he is in
them who has overcome the devil, the world, sin and death, greater than he
that is in the world, 1 John 4, 4. He shall not 1. Cor. 10. 13.
touch them with a qualitative touch, to alter their quality from good to
evil, that they should lose their gracious disposition, and prove perverse.

The other blessing is the fulfilling of their sanctification to the
blamelesnesse of their whole spirit, soul and body. Because he is faithful
in his promises, and constant in his gifts, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 23, 24.

Which is for abundant Use.
consolation to them whom he has drawn of his everlasting love, Ier. 31. 1.
Having loved his own that were in the world, he loved them unto the end, John
13, 1. Having found grace in his sight that he selects them from the world,
they shall have given them grace upon grace, till they be filled with all the
fulness of God. The Church is commended of her spiritual ornaments under
terms of rows of Jewels upon her cheeks, and Chains of gold about her
neck: and withal is promised that the whole Trinity shall give her further
increase of holiness, and all rich graces, that nothing shall be wanting to
her comeliness meet for so great a spouse, but her spiritual glory in all
parts and numbers shall be perfected, in similitude, borders of gold with
studdes of silver. God is in Cant 1. 10, 11.
covenant with the people whom he once receives, to rejoice over them, and
never to turn from after them to do them good; to be an everlasting Father,
following them with perpetual favor and liberal blessings, Ier. 32, 40, 41.
It is one chief use of benefits received, by experience to confirm our hope
to find God as we have found him in present, and in future necessites. Christ
remembers his Disciples of the miraculous feeding the five thousand with five
loaves, the four thousand with seven loaves, and a great deal left: to cure
their difference, or weakness of faith about provision for bread, Math. 16, 8,
9, 10.

David from former experience Psalm. 23. 1, 2, 6.
of Gods care of him, concludes in hope thus: Surely goodness shall follow me,
and mercy, all the days of my life. And I will dwell in the house of the Lord
for ever.

The Apostle teaches this, Romans 5. 10. If when we were enemies we were
reconciled by the death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be
saved by his life. I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and the 2 T^m.
4 17. 18.
Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me to his
heavenly kingdom.

But take heed of wronging Caution.
him in his love, not rendering according to the benefit, as Hezekiah is
someting blotted with it in his Chronicle, and David reproved for it; yet with
declaring the readiness of God to proceed in blessing his, with more and
greater blessings, 2 Samuel 12, 8. If that had been too little, I would moreover
have given unto thee such and such things.

2. Pray the Lord to rejoice in his works, Psalm. 104, 31. In which our state is
founded, as that speech of Job implies, Thou will have a desire to the work of
thine own hands, Job. 14, 15. For this David prays, Psalm. 138, 8, Forsake
not the work of thine own hands. Cry with the Church for new inspirations of
Gods Spirit to increase of pleasant fruits, to invite Christ to his garden
replenished with chief spices; and he will accept of such invitation, and
declare his good acceptance of such entertainment, and call you in due time to
come to him out of the miseries of this troublesome world, when he shall
satisfye all your desires, according to that loving call, Come with me from
Lebanon (my spouse) with me from Lebanon. Cant. 4. 8. Verse 6.


And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully.

In this ^acheus shows the effect of his calling: Obedience, in hasty coming
down, and in joyful receiving of Christ. Wherein we may observe that the Word
of Christ in calling men to him, is lively and of an attractive force, making
the will to answer and assent to his calling: There is an infallibility of
the effect, whose cause is not the study of the Disciple but the excellency
of the master, Psalm. 18, 44. At the hearing of the ear they shall obey me.
Esaias 52, 15. The King shall shut their mouths at him, for that which they had
not heard shall they consider. Understanding that the counsel of God is to
save the world by Jesus Christ, they shall without gainsaying submit themselves
unto him for their salvation. As it was in calling his Disciples, not only
poor fishermen, Simon and Andrew, James and John, forsook their nets and
followed him, but Matthew a rich man foosooke a gainefull trade, and betook
him self to him; which was neither levitie or stoliditie, so soon to be moved
away from their former condition and course of life. But divine force making
his word effectual to that for which he spoke it. That thereby they might
consider that their preaching of the Gospel should not be a dead sound, but
with spirit and power, for obedience of faith. He so persuades or allureth
Iapheth that he joins himself to Shems tents; sweetly reduces the Gentiles
to the Churches society, as the very station of felicity, Genesis 9, 27.

Whom he calls to be of his household, he causes to come, and join
themselves to him and his people, to the satisfying of them with the good
things of his house, Psalm. 65, 4. He breaks them off from the wild stalk,
and ingraffts them into the true vine. They are the called of Jesus Christ,
Romans 1, 6: That is, partakers of him by their calling. The Father teaches them
inwardly with their outward hearing, so as he that has heard and learned of
the Father, comes unto Christ, the Father draws him, John 6. 44, 45. Which
conteines illumination of the mind, a good d^scerning of the things of God, and
forming of the will to the obedience of Christ. The dead hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they which hear it live, John 5; 25. In which is implied a
double grace in the secret virtue and power of the word. First, That the dead
should hear, which is beside nature. Secondly, be called again to life from
which they were fallen. To hear is to believe and assent with the heart, John
10, 16. Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring,
and they shall hear my voice. They shall believe with the heart unto an
ingeneration of a new principle of spiritual life, and excitation to elicite
acts of this life.

It is not always, or in all persons that this word of Caution. Esaias 42. 10.
Act. 18. 6.
Christ is thus effectual; some open the ear but hear not: some when they
hear, resist and blaspheme, hate him, and increase their sin, John 15, 22.
So as he is to their ruin, Luke 2, 34. He is a stone to stumble at, a rock of
offense to them that are disobedient, 1 Pet. 2, 8. Whereunto also they were
appointed.

But in them whom he calls of his purpose, it is thus effectual, so as it is
refused of no hard heart, because he softens it: he takes away the stony
heart, and gives them an heart of flesh; to whom all things work together for
good, whom he calls so as he justifies and glorifieth them: Romans 8, 28, 30.
According to his election of them, the election obtain it, Romans 11, 7. Gods
purpose is his will predestinating men to life.

So then, when men are moved but ineffectually by Use. 2.
the word of Christ, when they show some signs of flexiblenesse upon making
means to them, but persist not in a tractable spirit, they seem to come part
of the way by some work of conscience within them, but are soon drawn back
again: the revocation of Satan being more effectual with them, than the
vocation of God, it is a sign that they are not called yet according to God
purpose but with a more common calling, that is accompanied with that grace
which proceeds from election; otherwise their calling would make them blessed
men, Revel. 19, 9. Blessed are they that are called to the marriage Supper of
the Lamb; for confirmation of their hope therein, it is commanded to be
underwritten, These are the true sayings of God.

2 The efficacy of grace depends not on the will of man, but Gods will, making
his words that he speaks, spirit and life, giveing his Spirit with the word
so as it is quickening. 2 Cor. 3, 6: The letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life. The letter is dead and ineffectuall in it self, not giving any power to
fulfill it, and so it kills as it accuses men of guiltiness of
unrighteousness, and condemns them.

The Spirit by the Word begets* faith in the hearts of the elect, whereby they
possess Christ to justification of life, and regeneration, and cheerful
obedience unto the doctrine delivered. The Apostle instanceth in the conversion
of the, Corinthians, which in an elegant metaphore he compares to a letter of
commendation of his Ministry, in which he notes the subject in which that
work is received, their hearts* a. the adjunct adhere^t, the Churches
acknowledging it, seen and read of all men. 3. the principal efficient cause,
Christ with his Spirit. 4. the instrument, himself. 2, Cox, 3, 3. Ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us, written not
with ^inke, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but
in fleshy tables of the heart. The whole effect is ascribed to the Spirit of
Christ, according to the covenant, I will make you a new heart, and a new
spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, Ezech. 36, 26, 27.

If it depended on the will of man to make the grace effectual or
ineffectuall, it would follow; that I owe to God no more in my conversion and
obedience to his word than the praise of a power to convert, but to my self
the praise that I actually do convert and obey. So when the Apostle says, It
is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God which shows
mercy; with the like supplement the speech might be converted, it is not of
God showing mercy, that is, altogether, but of man's internal act of willing,
and external of running, conversing with study and diligence. Which must
needs offend godly ears.

So when he says, who made thee to differ from an other man? It might be
answered, mine own will; another man had as much given him of God as I, equal
help of grace; but he would not bring his ability into act, which I did. But
this excludes all boasting, that the will and the deed is only and wholly of
God, who has wrought all our works in us.

Grace is opposed to the fault in us, which is both actual and habitual
deformity in the will; therefore is grace both habit and act in the will: it
ministers spiritual virtue, it gives an effectiue principle of supernatural
operation.

In sum, if efficacy of grace depend on man's will, then there is no other
efficacy of the grace of God in the faithful to well doing, than there is of
a temptation of the Devil in sinners to evil doing, if as the efficacy of
the temptation depends rather of the will of the sinner than of the Devil
temping, so efficacy of grace rather on the will of the well doer than of God
exciting to good. Which is against the glory of his grace, which is to be
maintained in all the good he works in us or by us. That which I am, says
the Apostle, I am by the grace of God; I labored more abundantly than they
all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was in me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. He means
not to give only part or the principal part to the grace of God, and to take
the rest to himself only helped by grace: but by correction gives the whole
effect to grace, having made himself improperly the author of the work. What
good soever we do, it is by the direction and impulsion of the holy Ghost:
we speak, but when it is godly, it is the Spirit of the Father Mat. 10. 20.
which speaks in us. We pray, but praying as we ought, it is the work of
the Spirit making requests for us according to the will of God. We work good
willingly and gladly, but it is God which works in us both to will and to 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
do, and fulfills in us the work of faith with power. Not only the degree
and quantity of it to be more, which is the work of Gods power, but all
actions of all virtues which it works by love; our indevours are none unto
good if God excite them not, even when we are in grace. He put the care of
the Corinthians in the heart of Titus, and made him accept the exhortation, to
finish among them the same grace which he had begun in them, about their
ministration to the Saints, 2 Cor. 8, 6, 16, 17. And being excited, are in
vain unless God assist and confirm the will to produce the act; it is Gods
unspeakeable gift, and thanks for ever be given unto him, 2 Cor. 9, 15. It
cannot be explicated in words according to the dignity of it.

And he made haste and came down. This is the gracing of obedience, that it
is Ve^u^ obediens moram ^^scit, n^^ (...) (...), oculos parat visui, cor
^ussio^i, ^ures ^^ditui, ma(...) operi ^e^itiner^, and sese totum re^ colligit
i^^^s (...) (...) ^ussionem Domini imple^^. Bernar. 3. Genesis 17.
ready and without delay: thus is the obedience of the faithful commended, as
Abraham's, in leaving his own Country at Gods calling, readily following him,
though he knew not whither he went, without serupulous inquisition, no place
yet designed him, not knowing so much as where to lodge at night, Heb. 11, 8:
In circumcising his family all the males the same day that God commanded him,
though they were many: In his early rising to go where God appointed him to
sacrifice his son Isaac. First, against the use of the faithful who had
learned to sacrifice cattle not men, this was unwontted. Secondly, against
nature, to kill his own Child, his only begotten son: for though Ishmael
was also his son, yet First, he was abdicated out of the family of Abraham
by divine commandment, and so in a sort none of his child, but as it were dead
in account. Secondly, he was not by her who in full right, was his wife, but
by his maid abondwoman, who though she be called his wife, yet improperly,
that he was but his base borne son, not in lawful copulation. Thirdly,
against the Commandment written in his heart. Thou shall not kill. Fourthly
against the promise, Genesis 21, 12. In Isaac shall thy seed be called; the
posterity propagated by Isaac only to be reckoned for the seed, in which
hee^ would perform the promises* made to him; which circumstance might
directly fight against faith, whereby he believed to receive the blessing in
the life of Isaac. All which notwithstanding, he obeyed spedily, Genesis 21, 3.
Abraham rose up early in the same morning, etc. He was not long in resolving,
neither desired respite, but presently addresseth himself to this work.

Joseph warned in a dream to go into Egypt* with Jesus and his mother, to
disappoint Herod's bloody purpose Mat. 2. 14.
to take away his life; he took them by night and departed into Egypt. Paul
when God called him to preach the Gospel among the heathen, immediately, he
consulted not with flesh and blood, but resting in Gods authority he buckled
himself to the work, Gal. 1, 16. And when he knew certainly that, God called
him into Macedonia to preach the Gospel, he forthwith prepared to go, Act.
16, 10. The Iailor when God converted him, took Paul and Sylas into his house
and washed their wounds, and set meat before them the same hour of the night,
and was baptized straightway, with all that were in his house, verse 33.

It is required in every duty, that it be done with forwardness: Our preaching
1 Timothy 3. 2.
requires a double aptness, one for conveying ^itly unto the understanding of
others, the knowledge which God has given unto us; a grace and faculty of
communicating our doctrine with apt expression for instruction and edification
of others. Secondly, a willing propension, to take all opportunities: Meekness
and long suffering, devouring indignities so long as there may be hope, 2 Timothy
2, 24. 25. B^th ways doctrine, 1, Pet. 5, 2.

Hearing requires drawing near to it, Eccles. 5, 1. Swiftness to hear, James
1, 19. Desire to hear, 1 Pet. 2, 2. In giving alms ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6, 18. Not differring the poor of their
desires; Job 31, 16. not bidding them come again to morrow, if we have it now
to give them, Prove. 3. 28. In believing in Christ, God requires the present
time, now therefore be wise, kiss the Son least he be angry, Psalm. 2,
10. In repentance: Now therefore says the Lord, turn ye unto me, Joel 2, 20.
First seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, Math. 6, 33. Now
consider this ye that forget God, Psalm. 50, 22. As says the holy Ghost, which
is added, for more reverence and quicker yielding to the exhortation, To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; Heb. 3, 7.

Ministers are to remember their hearers of this duty, to be ready to every
good work, Titus 3, 1: Being made meet for their Lords use, by
sanctification, and prepared to every good work, they should have propension
of will and a ready mind to do good things to Gods glory, to be presidents of
good works continually given thereunto. The writing of the law in their heart,
is a delivering of them into the form of the doctrine, bringing the
commandment and their heart together, they agree presently with pleasure and
delight Psalm. 40, 8.

This readiness argues reverence of the Commandment and of Gods authority,
as obedience is set forth by fearing the commandment, Prove. 13, 13. Ezra* 10,
3. The fear of God is as the root, and the keeping of the Commandments as the
fruit, Eccles. 12, 13. The more reverence, the readier obedience, Heb. 11, 7.

It glorifieth the word of the Lord, showing it is lively and mighty by the
Spirit going with it, Act. 13, 48. As when Christ commanding the devil to go
forth of the possessed, he went out; the people amazed at it, spoke among
themselves saying, What a word is this: what new doctrine is this? they refer
the glory to the doctrine in the powerful effect of it, they saw something in
it more than humane, so call it new. Thus when the Lord commands an adusterer
to be chaste, and a drunkard to be sober, a niggard to be liberal, the
profane to be holy; and it is as he commands forthwith: it is the glory of his
word, causing that to stand sorth which was not. As the kingdom of the Messiah
is prophesied of, the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the
deaf shall be unstopped, then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the
tongue of the dumb sing, Esaias 35, 5, 6: And a high way shall be there, and a
way, and it shall be called the way of holiness. The unclean shall not pass,
over it, but it shall be for those: the wayfaring men, though fools shall not
err therein, v. 8.

For (...)xhortation to sinners, to be abrupt in their Use. 1.
repentance and not to take days for returning; fools to forsake their way
readily, to walk in the way of understanding: they have made haste to sin,
good reason they should have to come to the Lord for life and godliness, and
all that perteines thereunto. David professes that upon consideration of his
ways he turned his feet unto Gods testimonies, he made haste, and delaied not
to keep his Commandments. His subjoyning a negation of the contrary,
answerable to that which he affirmed, notes his earnestness overcomming all
impediments and difficulties, true zeal burning up his corruptions.

1. A man must either turn to God, or be turned into hell; if he repent no^
he perishes, and his torment shall be answerable to his sins, the
impenitent are said to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2, 5.
So the fire will burn sorer, as it is said of the hypocrites in heart. They
increase or heap up wrath, because they cry not when God blinds them, Job 36.
13. Sinning of maliciousnes and rooted stubbornness, they do as it were kindle
the fire more and more, which shall burn them; as the fire will be hotter by
heaping on more wood, so by adding sin to sin and binding them together,
they augment the curse which shall consume them.

God says enough to interrupt their presumption, if they had any heart; as
that he will not be merciful to them, his anger and jealosie shall smoke
against them, and separate them unto evil, according to all the curses of the
covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20, 21. That he will set their sins in order before
their eyes, Psalm. 50, 21. These things have thou done. These things thou have
not done, Math, 25. Both sins of omission, duties not performed, and of
commission, evil works, they shall (will they, nill they) read the catalogue
of them in a distinct order, and in the full pitch and degree of evil, and
perceive by experience that the Lord has not forgotten any of their works,
Amos 8, 7. They are sealed up among his treasures, Deuteronomy. 32, 34: Which he will
in due time bring to light.

He propounds himself to them as a God of anger, at whose presence the earth
is burnt up, the hills melt, the mountains quake, that there is no standing
before his indignation, Nahum, 1, 2. etc. Can thine heart endure, or thy hand
be strong in the day that I have to deal with thee? He takes upon him in
their punishment to be as some wild beast, Lion or Bear robbed of her
whelps, tearing in pieces, without any possibility of deliverance, Psalm. 50.
22. Hos. 13, 8.

2. Speedy repentance has more certainty: First, because he that deferres
knows not whether his soul shall not be required before the next day, Luke
12, 20. James 4, 14. Boast not thy self of to morrow, thou know not what a
day may bring forth, Prove. 27, 1. There is no altering of a man's state when he
is dead, he receives the proper things of his body, according to that which
he has done in the body, 2 Cor. 5, 10. The night comes when none can work,
John, 9, 4. The sentence of the judge is unalterable, the door once shut there
is no opening of it. And if a man live long, it is not certain that God will
not reject him for receiving the gracious offer of reconciliation in vain; The
branch that brings not fruit in the vine is cut off, John 15, 2. He is in
danger of the curse as the ground that drinks in the rain that often falls
upon it, and brings forth thorns and briers, Heb. 6, 8. It falls out in the
just judgment of God, that they who would not repent and believe, afterward
cannot, not only by natural inabilitie, but by spiritual plague of blinding
and hardening, John 12: and tradition to Satan, Their Sun goes down at
noone, the hour of vengeance is come.

2. If it be long differred till a man's death bed; it will be some doubt
whether it be not extorted, and of mere self love, and only to serve a man's
own turn; it will want time to try the truth by the perseverance of it. But
when a man timely and speedily upon the discovering of his sin, or
understanding his duty yields up himself to God, when temptation, and
opportunity, and ability to sin and all concurres; it is likely that his
repentance and obedience is of conscience toward God, for the lothsomenesse of
sin, and the love of the pureness of Gods Law, which is in his own heart
made certain by the time remaining in his life, which he spends in the doing
of Gods will; whereas some repent their repentance and return with the dog
to his vomit, a fool to his folly, the devil reenters and strengthens
himself in his possession.

It may be an exhortation Use. 2.
to young men, to take the yoke of God upon them in their youth whenever God
will be pleased to call upon them, not to delay, but in haste to Gods service
follow him. Who can tell whether God will call again? and should it not seem
enough in our eyes, that God whose enemies we are by nature, whom we provoke
by sinful deeds so greatly, should once call us from hell to heaven, from a
state of wrath to a state of friendship and tender love, to the adoption of
sons, heirs of God, and coheires with Christ? Is it meet to deliberate and
take time to answer such a gracious calling? Bartime^s* being told that Christ
called him, threw away his cloak, arose and came to him. Mark 10. 50.
Cornelius. commanded to send sor Peter to the end he might hear of him words
whereby he and his house should be saved; at the depernure of the Angel that
brought the message, sent to Ioppa for him, Act. 10, 7, 8. We count it
unreasonable in a man whom we have moved in matter of his own great good,
that he neglects it, and are ready to resolve that he shall never be moved in
it more for us.

It is good (says Jeremy) that a man bear the yoke in his youth; Lam. 3; 27.
That corrupt nature be corrected betimes before sin grow strong by habit*
and it is a great benefit to be accustomed to good from his youth; it will
both continue, and be more easy in his age having been continually exercised
in it, Prove. 22, 6. It will make his old age comfortable and full of blessing:
He that gathers in summer is a child of wisdom, Prove. 10, 5. He has made his
provision in the fit season and shall be wise in his latter end. It is a great
ease in age to be free from the heart bitings that are in remembrance of the
unprofitablenesse, or rebellions of the youth. Job complains that God makes
him to possess the sins of his youth, Job 13, 26. Sins pardoned and not
remembered any more with God, may return with fearful vision, and make a man
forget a while what he has received from God, in apprehensions of his,
majesty and holiness, or in times of great afflictions, or after falls into
some foul sin that brings others to remembrance. Psalm. 25, 7. Remember not
the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions (says David) with some
conscience of guiltiness though heee had received forgiveness; he does not
therefore mention the sins, which he committed when he was a young man, as
not being couscious to himself of any new fault, but with this consideration
that he began not now of late to sin, but long ago even from his youth he
had heaped sin upon sin, and so is bound in a greater guiltiness.

Youth is an age of lusts, the affections are then most boiling: to Timothee a
godly young man does Paul give warning of the lusts of youth to avoid them, 2 Timothy 2, 22. Solomon notes youth of rebellion in sin, as if whatsoever be
said to the contrary, the young man will sow his wild oats; Walk in the
ways of his own heart, and sight of his eyes: against which he opposes the
remembrance of the judgment to come when all must be accounted for unto God,
even every moment of time, how it has been spent, every idle word: and the
condition of the judge considered, to be bowed no way from right judgment,
not by fear of any, for he is Almighty; nor by mercy for he is most just;
not by error, for he is most wise: and the many witnesses thought fellows in
sin, the conscience of the sinner opened as a book wherein all has been
written which has been dono. The devils which have prevailed in temptation,
and then accuse, requiring them of the justice of God unto punishment: the
judge himself opening his book of eternal memory, reciting all thoughts and
indevors, and by a divine force reducing unto every man's memory his works, so
with marveilous celeritie, all and singular be judged at once and together;
and then the stabilitie of the sentence not to be revoked for the evidence of
the fact, and the efficacy of the judge, with the diffidence of all help.
There is no power of resisting, no place of repenting, no time of defending, no
faculty of flying, no possibility of hiding, no security of appearing, no
utilitie of satisfaction.

That man's nature in youth does cast up the greatest froth, and then lusts be
most violent, it may appear in that David showing the power of the word for
the ordering of a man's ways, instanceth in that age as needing the greatest
power and strongest bridle: the excellency of the word is it that can frame
even a young man to Gods liking in his ways, if he take heed unto it.

It is a great honor to be religious from ones youth. Obadiahs praise stood in
it, that he feared God greatly, and from his youth, I King 18, 3, 12. Samuel,
Josiah, Timothee, have their honor in the Scripture in this, that they did
timely take the yoke of Gods doctrine upon them and continued therein. Age is a
Crown of glory when it is found in the way of righteousness, Prove. 16, 31.
specially when it is given for a reward of timely and constant obedience:
having laid the foundation of a durable estimation when they were young;
whereas a sinner of an hundred years old shall dye accursed, Esaias 65, 20. And
his bones are full of the sin of his youth, and they shall lie down with him
in the dust, Job 20, 11. They have been soked, and steeped in naughtiness so
as they never turn back again to take hold of the way of life, and dye
execrable. The resemblance may be thus, As some filthy disease and rottenness
eats into the inward marrow of the bones, that there remains nothing sound in
the man: so the sin that a man does in his youth, so pierces into, and
settles in his soul, that he is altogether filthy, and the guiltiness of his
evil led life, like a venomed arrow or a deadly dart in his conscience, and
torments him in and after his death with other horrible punishments that in the
vengeance of God follow his evil deeds.

The glory of young men is their strength, though sometime they want that
wisdom which old men helped by experience, yet have they courage of mind and
strength of body to do acts of great fame and renown to put things in
execution. But in this is the excellency of their strength that when
corruption has the strength of their natural faculties, and the Devil
applies his strength to their corruption, by the power of grace in them they
overcome their sinful flesh, and the devils suggestion. 1 John 2; 14. I write
to you young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you,
and ye have overcome the wicked one by the ingraffed word: they abide in the
keeping of GODS Commandments with notable victories over themselves and the
Devil, by Christ that loves them.

The acts of virtue in that age are more excellent in that they have the
strength of body and spirit, full of spirits, and full of Spirit. As in E(...)
whose youth made stay for his turn to speak after his elders, yet in his time
with wonderful force of Spirit impelled, he speaks so as the elder men hold
their peace in fear, Job. 32, 15, 18.

It may call us to considerration Use.
how the Lord has been with his word in calling us, to make us presently cast
away every weight, to remove all bars, and set our souls open for all sins
to go out, and Christ to come in and possess and rule us as his will is. If
we find it so, to magnify him in the efficacy of his grace, and to comfort
our souls that the Lord has touched our hearts, that we go willingly after
him, and flee as doves to their windows, and flow as waters to their place.

If we stick still, consider what it is that may cause the withholding of
the grace that makes men ready even to admiration. As when Eliah had cast his
mantle upon Elisha when he was plowing, who ran after him to desire him to
suffer him to kiss his father and his mother, and he would follow him, asks
what he has done to him, 1 King 19, 19, 20. A wonder to see such a sudden
commutation in Elisha that by such a touch he was moved straight way to follow
him, that he durst not with out his leave return to bid his friends ^a^^well.
If any man think that repentance is accepted at any time, and so never be
troubled that the calling yet works not effectually on him; the theife on the
cross found mercy to repent, and to be received into heaven with Christ that
very day: let him consider that it was one of the wonders at Christ's death,
witnessing against his enemies that he was approved of God: Why should it give
hope to such as wilfully defer their repentance that it may be ordinary? Who
will look for an Ass to speak to the reproof of their masters madness,
because Balaams Ass did so to him once?

Inqui^^ (...)there these thoughts o^ (...)ntance* be any better than carnal.
To serve a man's turn of God, is not to be evil because God is good, and to
abuse his merciful nature. If repentance were certain, yet it is nothing to
have been all a man's time or the most part of it unprofitable, and barren, as
dead while he lives? Is it no grief to a man that thinks to be glorified
of God, that he has in this life brought no glory to God? though the thing
is true indeed, God has assured it, that in the day that a wicked man turns
from his wickedness he shall not fall thereby, but he shall save his soul
alive.

Some I gra^nt are not so ready in (...) the commandment given unto them as
others, but Christ suffers them not to delay to their destruction. There was a
man whom Christ called to follow him, who entreated to stay with his father
till he were dead, whom he would not suffer to do so, but to attend upon the
quickening of dead souls in preaching the Gospel.

And it cannot be denied but the best men have their lets; original
Corruption so besetts us that we cannot as we would run the race set before
us: worldly ease, pleasure, Profits, will hold us down as burdens upon us. But
if we outwrestle the temptations, cast away every weight, we shall do (...)
purposing if God (...) to run after him; when he makes our hearts larger.

But to be* so long in deliberating, that the worst motion carries men away,
and they hold sin against the light of their mind, and strengthen their
resolution to withstand persuasions to conversion is full of danger: open
therefore whilst Christ knocks, least he cease and go away in displeasure,
and lock up your heart so as it shall not be opened.

And received him joyfully. Upon the apprehension of the good will of Christ in
offering himself to abide at his house, (a sweet allegory of Christ's
habitation in the hea(...) of the faithful) he* (...) full of joy, with all
his heart glad of such a guest. Whence we may gather, that faith receiving
Christ brings divine consolation with it, where Christ comes there is joy. So
in the prophecy of his coming, Zach. 9, 9: and in the accomplishment, Luke
19, 37. The whole multitude began to rejoice and to praise God with a loud
voice. When the people in Samaria gave heed to Philip preaching Christ unto
them, there was great joy in that City, which was the fruit of their faith; as
of the Eunuchs, who went on his way rejoicing, Act. 8, 8, 39: And the Iaylers
who rejoiced, believing in Go^* ^ct. 16, 34. Peter joy(...) (...)th faith as
the fruit of it, joy unspeakeable; either because the matter of it is such and
so great as passes faculty of humane speech to express it, not possible for
man to utter, 2 Cor. 12, 4. Or for the greatness of the contentment, so as no
words can declare it to another what he feels within, as he said before,
Wherein ye greatly rejoice. The stranger medles not with his joy; and full of
glory, no affliction can destroy it, nothing can frustrate it: it ends not in
shame as reprobates joy, it is stable and solid, and is a certain
participation of the Lords joy which shall be in the state of glory, 1 Pet. 1,
6, 8* All faculty fails for the commendation of it, and it self is the fruit
of the Spirit of glory which fails not, but is everlasting joy, gloriously
given of Christ. It is one of the marks of a Christian, to put his whole
confidence for fullness of felicity in Christ alone, so as to rejoice in him,
rejoicing in nothing but in his cross, Gal. 6, 14. In which is the fulness
of our redemption. Philip 3, 3. We which rejoice in Christ Jesus, and put no
confidence in the flesh, ascribe our whole salvation and whatsoever goodgift of
virtue or piety, whatsoever a Christian as such rightly glories in, unto his
only merit. Both just and great cause of joy there is in their ^eceiving of
Christ; Abraham that saw his day but a far off yet rejoiced to see it, John
8, 56. And all the faithful before his coming made him their consolation,
Luke 2, 25.

First, the incomparable excellency in himself is cause of great joy to them
that receive him, he is from heaven and above all, such a bridegroom is
worthily the joy of the bride, John 3, 29, 31. As his excellency above all
other makes him desired being known, it draws hearts to him, when the Church
described him, and concludes her description thus: He is altogether lovely,
adorning her description with a redoubled exclamation to the daughters of
Jerusalem: This is my beloved, and this is my friend. They not only justify
her passions of love for him, but are themselves in love with him, and inquire
after him, with her to join themselves to him; so holds it them to him with
delight, who have him, counting him their full felicity. We will rejoice and
be glad in thee, we will remember thy love more than wine. Nothing is there
in the world that seems not vile to them in comparison of him, Canticles 1, 4.

2. The benefits which they receive with Christ are all matters of great joy.
They have him as the first effect of their election, the gift of the love of
God wherewith he loved them from the beginning: of this they have abundantly
to rejoice that their names are written in heaven, Luke 10, 20.

Secondly, the reconciliation and peace which they have with God. So as he is
now their God, and all his attributes for their benefit, that they have all
parts and numbers of felicity having him, and which is Romans 5. 11.
the highest degree of all glorying, they glory in God.

Thirdly, having Christ, they have an everlasting righteousness, the
righteousness of God, who being favorable unto man, will render unto him his
righteousness, and grant him to be arraied in fine ^innen, clean and white,
for the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints. Revel. 19, 8: Thus is the
bride made ready to meet her beloved, unto the solemnity of their marriage,
and most joyful imbracements.

Fourthly, they receive Ioh. 1, 12.
dignity to be the sons of God, a benefit evidencing the love of God beyond
all that our thoughts are able to comprehend; therefore the Apostle propounds
it with admiration: Behold what manner of love, the Father has bestowed upon
us, that we should be called the Sons of God. 1 John 3, 1. Behold, sometime
im plieth experiment with pleasure, with joyfullnesse and alacritie^ of mind,
it calls upon us to apply our mind to weigh and look duly into the greatness
of the benefit, that being perpensive we might come to a right prizing and
valuation of the blessings it contains, to conceive some singular sweetness
of Gods favor, affected therewith unto rejoicing, we may study to walk
worthy of God.

They have the nature of God, borne nor of blood nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1, 13.

They have access to God, a singular privilege, adduction into his presence
by one Spirit; Ephesians. 2, 18* Who makes requests for them according to the will
of God, Romans 8, 27.

The sons of God are led by the Spirit of God, who works their works in
them, and produces their pleasant fruits, exciting and confirming their will
for good; quickening, and comforting them, preserving and increasing the life
of God in them, causing strength to grow in their souls to victory over the
world, their standing in grace after all assaults; and so is the Spirit of
glory resting upon them, 1 Pet. 4: The earnest of salvation with eternal glory.

They have interest in God for his special providence, as David claims, I am
thine save me, Psalm 119, 94. The Church, Esaias 63, 16. Doubtless thou art
our Father, thou O Lord art our Father. 19. We are thine. So his eye is over
them, Psalm. 33, 18. He withdraw es not his eyes from them, Job 36, 7. He that
touches them touches the apple of his eye; he loves them with the same love
wherewith he loves his own Son Jesus Christ, John 17, 26.

They have their right unto and dominion over all things restored; all is
theirs with Christ, whom God has appointed heir of all things, and they
coheires, to inherit all things with him, Romans 8, 17. 1 Cor. 3, 22. Revel. 21,
7. This is no small part of the joy of their faith, that whether they be
things present or things to come, all are theirs.

Seeing Christ received by faith brings such matter Use.
of joy, it is to their reproof who have him and his blessing constantly
offered, yet receive him not. 1, It is indignity offered to Christ, whom they
refuse. 2. It is the wronging of their own souls, Prove. 8, 36. He that
sins against me, wrongeth his own soul; all they that hate me, love death.

Infidelity is two ways considered, First of mere negation, as in them who
never heard of Christ, called infidels, of not having the faith, which is a
punishment rather than a sin. Such are damned for their sins, because no
sin can be pardoned but by faith in Christ; but not for not believing in him
of whom they have not heard, John 15, 22. Romans 10, 14.

Of contrariety of faith, when men reject Christ, will not receive him, the
will standing in opposition to the hindering of the minds assent to the truth,
resisting both interior instinct and exterior preaching, whereby Christ with
his saving power is offered: This has the reason of sin and condemns men,
makes them guilty of the body and 1 Cor. 11.
blood of Christ, in an unworthy rejecting of him. John 1, 11. He came unto
his own, and his own received him not, John 5, 40. Ye will not come to me
that ye might have life. 43. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me
not.

Some profanely set light by him and his grace, as Esa(...) despised his
birthright in comparison of a morsel of meat, Heb. 12, 16. And they that were
called to the marriage Supper of the kings son, set light by it, for their
worldly advantages, Luke 14, 18: with one consent making excuse: and when they
fear that his presence will be any loss in their temporal state, they
wilfully reject him, as the Gadarens for the loss of their hoggs, and show a
notable unthankefullnesse, offering vile indignity to Christ, in preferring
and redeeming base things with a wilful loss of him and his salvation.

So they wrong their own souls, as the rich man that had his whole and full
portion in good things in his life time, and cast away his soul, Luke 16, 25.
Some love darkness so as the light is hateful to them, because it discovers
the evil of their works, which they are not willing to accuse themselves of,
and come to the sovereign remedy of their souls to be healed. This is
condemnation, the j^st cause of their perishing; not that they are in
darkness, ignorant of the way of salvation, nor that they are in sins, for
Christ helps both; he is the light of the world, that whosoever believes in
him shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life; and he
came into the world to save sinners. But that the light being come into the
world, they love darkness rather than light, and the cause is that their
deeds be evil. They have an evil conscience and will not be cured, they
worthily perish without pity: the love of their vices keeps them from
embracing the fountain of virtue. They are withheld by a most wicked cause
from yiedling themselves to so gracious a remedy: As they justly are damned,
that had the truth which saves, but loved it not, having pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians 2, 10, 1^.

In not receiving Christ they are grievous unto God, who has given this record
of his Son, that he has given eternal life unto the world, and that life
is in his Son: and whosoever has his Son has life. They that receive not
Christ upon this record of God, give no credit to him and so blaspheame him to
be a liar, 1 John 5, 10: Fearing least they should be deceived in resting
upon his promise. To derogate faith from the Gospel in which Gods truth and
faithfulness is chiefly set forth, when men spoil him of the honor of his
truth, what leave they remaining to him? Light of nature teaches that God is
the prime verity, truth it self, and so is to be believed in whatsoever he
avoucheth to be true; whatsoever he testifies of his Son, all that have
notice of it are bound to credit.

God has testified that Object.
Christ is the life of the world, that there is not salvation in any other:
this record I am bound to believe with an historical faith; but where has he
said that he is my life? that requires an inward testimony, which till I have
received, I seem not to wrong God. I must first have his record, before I be
guilty of not receiving it.

There is a double act of Answer.
faith, direct, which is my receiving Christ that I may be saved, committing
my soul to him to deliver me from death and to restore me to my lost
happiness, which is called faith of adherence. This I am bound unto by the
exterior record which in the Gospel God has given of his Son: and the
Apostle to incite men to faith, takes his argument from the dishonor which is
done to God in not resting on his record, to the receiving of his Son unto
life.

The holy Ghost convinces the world of sin in the ministry of the Gospel,
because they believe not in Christ, John 16, 9. Not only that all the world
out of Christ are in their sins, but that this is a sin (which they had not
before they heard him preached to be the Savior of the word) that they
believe not in him for justification from their sins, John, 15, 22. There is
also an act reflexe, which is called faith of evidence, which is, to be
assured of my salvation upon the inward testimony of God in my self, the
evidence of his grace in me; that I do indeed believe and am converted from
sin to holiness; that I have the witness of the water and blood in me, of
regeneration and justification by Christ: we know that we have passed from
death to life, because we love the brethren, 1 John 3, 14. I have written
these things to you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may
know that ye have eternal life, 1 John, 5, 13.

The first act of faith is without experience before it, but the word which we
have received as the word of God, works in us that believe, and so we have
experience, to an increase of our faith.

It is to their reproof that though they subject their hearts to the
Commandment of hearing Christ, and believing in him, and labor to work the
work of God in believing in him whom he has sent; yet sensible of their
unbeleeve, and fearing least it may hinder the good which they desire, do go
on unchearefully.

They consider not, that God requires their joy in the knowledge of him to be
the Lord which exercises loving kindness^ in the earth and does therein
delight, Ier. 9, 24. And how mercy pleases him where men Mich. 7, 24. Esaias
30, 18.
will give place to it, waiting that he may have mercy on them, his pleasure
being in them that wait on his mercy, Psalm. 147, 11. And how he cherishes
the least beginnings of faith when it is as a smoking flax, or bruised reed,
Math. 12, 20. and how readily Christ apprehends us when we though weakly lay
hold on him.

They observe not the change wrought in them, and the spirituallnesse of their
actions now in comparison of that they were before they received this seed
which God gives life unto. The new creature is but as an infant in them, in
the understanding of this, and the great consequence of it in the evidencing of
Christ in them, otherwise it is joyful. They mark not how that little faith
is militant, and gives not quiet settling to unbeleefe in the heart, but
dislikes and mournes for it, when the arguments and appearances against their
faith are such as they can scarce clear and answer. But joy is sown for the
upright in heart: the mourners in Syon shall be comforted.

Only let such as seek the Lord be exhorted to rejoice, Psalm. 105, 3. Be
joyful all ye that are upright in heart, Psalm. 32, 11. Taste the sweetness
of the Gospel, the savor of it is quickening, 2 Cor. 2, 14, 16. To rejoice in
Christ is a duty, Philip. 4. It is also a promise, John 16; 24. It is the end
of the Gospel that in the blessed fellowship with the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ, and all the faithful, our joy might be full, 1 John 1, 3, 4.
The Apostles care was even in the greatest persecutions to finish his course
with joy, Act. 20, 24. Intimating that no heaviness should hinder the
cheerful living, and dying to the Lord, of them who have consecrated
themselves to him. The believers are said to walk in the consolation of the
holy Ghost, Act. 9, 31. It is their privilege above the world that they have
in Christ's stead the Spirit to be their comforter, John 14, 16* 17. They have
the Father, the God of all consolation, who has given us that believe
everlasting consolation, 2 Cor. 1. 3, with good hope by grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
And the Son they have, whose consolations are answerable to their
tribulations for him 2 Cor. 1. 5.

Heaviness may be irregular even in godly men subject to passions: our
Savior reproves his Disciples for suffering sorrow to fill their hearts for
that which if they had well considered it, should have been their joy, John
16, 6, 7. He blamed something the sorrow of his mother when she found him not
in the company, because ignorantly, and ere she was aware, she set her self
against God, Knew ye not that I must go about my Fathers business?

It may be disagreeing with the season, which in the occasions it offerres
calls to joy, Neh. 8, 9, 11, 12.

It may be blameable that it is not governed by judgment; the thought of
foolishness is sin, and that foolishness that comes out of our heart
desiles us, Mark 7. 22. Grief and thought taking is reproved from the
unprofitablenesse of it. It belongs to prudence to order the affections so as
they stir not without good reason.

It may be blameable for the hurt of it to the body; a merry heart does good
like a medicine, but a broken spirit dries up the bones. An heavy heart
draws back the spirits, and consumes the moisture: and to the soul,
heaviness in the heart of a man makes it stoop, depresseth it as it were out
of his place, Prove. 12, 25. By the sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken,
Prove. ^5. 13, A man enjoyes not himself, the spirits are so dulled as a man
has not perfect use of his senses. Christ's Disciples failed of their duty
about inquiring of the state of Christ foretelling his departing from them,
None of you asks me whither I go, but sorrow has filled your hearts, John
16. when Moses brought a comfortable message to the people of Israel,
concerning their deliverance, they hearkened not to him for anguish of spirit,
Exodus 6, 9. It is required in Gods service, that as it is with reverence in
respect of Gods majesty, so with rejoicing in his favor, it is with more
strength of spirit: The joy of the Lord is your strength, Neh. 8, 10. Recollect
the heart therefore to it self from the evils that provoke it to passion,
reproach it for offering indignity to Christ in such dejection; Why art thou
cast down O my soul: why art thou disquieted within me? O trust in God, I
shall yet give him thanks for the help of his countenance; should not our
whole life be the keeping of a feast to the Lord in sincerity and truth in
remembrance(...) of that great deliverance by Christ our passover sacrificed
for us? 1 Cor. 5, 7, 8.

To exhort them that have received Christ with joy, to maintain their joy. The
cause remains still, and it is a note of the house of Christ to hold fast the
confidence and rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, Hebrwes 3, 6. God has
given everlasting consolation through grace, and the Commandment is, Rejoice
in the Lord always.

1. Digest well the promises, they quicken. 2. Forget not the consolation,
whether against miserable or sinful infirmities. 3. Remember the words of
Christ spoken to this very purpose, that his joy might remain in us, John 15,
11. 4. Draw waters with joy out of the wells of salvation, constantly
exercising faith in Christ; and draw benefits out of him as a never failing
fountain, with such refreshings as the thirsty receive water. 5. Take heed to
the conscience that it be not offended with sin fighting against the light
and peace of it: wounded it interrupts the joy, but kept clean, it is a
continual seast.

For warning to such as Use 4.
receive the word of Christ with joy. To take heed of deceit, least the cause
of their Joy be not Christ received, but some fantastical apprehension. As
some receive Christ and perceive not with joy that they have recceived him. As
a sick man receives nourishment by his meat, but feels it no^ by reason of
his malady; so some that taste the word to be good, receive not Christ: the
Gospel has a sweet savor, but it is with the perishing of some that regard
not to receive the good of the Gospel.

The joy of Christ received, and the joy of the temporizer differ in kind: That
is, the joy of the Lord it comes from heaven, wrought by the holy Ghost Nehem.
8, 10, Romans 14* 17. 1* These. 1, 6. As God is love, so is he joy, ioying in
himself, the Father ioying in his Son, Prove. 8, 30. The godly nature being
communicated to them that receive Christ, they have this godly joy, the holy
Ghost sanctifying and governing their joy: the joy of the temporizer, is
carnal, of his own moving, not by the Spirit: he has ^ot the new creation,
it is therefore but a fruit of the flesh, which may appear in their
destitution of grace in other things, which shows them to be natural not
having the Spirit.

They differ in the matter or object of the joy. The true receiver of Christ,
joys in him and the benefits by him, as he knows he has them present or in
hope. Philip. 3, 3. We rejoice in Christ Jesus, Philip, 2, 1. If there be any
consolation in Christ: consolation of being in Christ. My beloved is mine and I
am his, that is the joy.

They rejoice that by Christ Gods love is turned toward them, and that God is
theirs: they glory in God, Psalm 44, 8. Romans 5, 11. They delight themselves in
him as their full felicity, it is the true sauce that gives a good taste to
the benefits which God bestows upon them, which they take as so many records
of their salvation, testimonies that the Lord is their God, which is their
exceeding joy, Psalm. 43, 4. In whom they encourage themselves in all
distresses, 1 Samuel 30, 6.

The joy of the temporizer is partly of his new knowledge of the great things
of the Gospel, or conceit of liberty from the fearful effect of sin, of
self-love desiring not to perish, but to dye the death of the righteous. The
savor of the Gospel is sweet to him, and delights him; but he is never
perfumed as the faithful that come out of the world unto Christ, as with
mirrhe and incense, and all the powders of the Merchant; which ascends like
pillars of smoke, Cant. 3, 6.

They differ in effects, the faithful rejoicing in Christ, whom they receive
of God as the gift of his love unto them unto salvation, love him again for
his love, 1 John. 4, 19. And receiving him as the pledge of all promises in
whom they have their certain fulfilling, they trust in GOD, their faith and
their hope is in him, 1. Pet. 1. 21. and rejoicing in him as their redeemer,
that gave himself for them, they are so wholly possessed of his love, that they
live no more to themselves, but to him, 2, Cor* 5. 14. As the Apostle says, To
me, to live is Christ, Philip. 1. 21. The joy of the temporizer either turns
to pride, looseness or some perverse effect.

And received him joyfully, As he received Christ into his heart, so into his
house with chearfullnesse; which may be for our instruction, to receive Christ
in his members and in his servants willingly and gladly, loving Christ in
strangers, specially being such for religion, we must use hospitality
toward them without grudging, 1 Pet. 4, 9.

The Apostle requires that Christians be given to hospitality, that they
follow it, Romans 12, 13. Which requires study and diligence in exercising it.
Heb. 13, 2, in saying, Be not forgetful to lodge strangers, it implies a
mindfullnesse of the duty, so as not to become more remiss in the accustoming
a man's self to it.

1. Though this be sometimes a part of magnificence and is the work of rich
men, yet it is most a fruit of love, and mercy, which is to be done with
cherfulness, Romans 12, 8.

2. Christ is received in the least of his brethren, and counts it done to him,
Math. 25, 35. I was a stranger, and ye took me in, verse 40. In as much as
ye did to one of the least of these my brethren ye have done it to me.

3. Cherfulness in their intertainement rejoices their hearts, quiets
their affections. Philem. 7. The bowels of the Saints are refreshed by the
brother, when they are in fear either to want or to be cast upon unbeleevers,
or sadly suspect they shall be counted a burden, and find such fellowshipe of
the Spirit, such compassion and mercy: the comfort of the love they perceive,
and voluntary subjection to the Gospel of God does refresh them greatly, which
love they make known before the Churches, 3 John, 6. As he that eats the meat
of him that has an evil eye, though he bid him eat and drink yet because
his heart is not with him, has no pleasure in his sweet morsels, but is more
greived at his churlishness than comforted with his provision.

God rewards this cheerful harboring of his servants in this world and that
which is to come; as Abraham, Lot, the widow of Sarephath, 1 King. 17, 16, 23.
The Shunamite. 2 King. 4, Thus he promises, if thou bring the poor that are
cast out, into thine house, the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward: to
bring them in is more than to take them in upon entreaty, Esaias, 58, 7.

The smallest gift given of love, a cup of water, of cold water to the least
of those that belong to Christ, to a Disciple, in that name, shall be
rewarded, Mark 9, 41. Which is not simply affirmed but with an asseveration
for more assurance: and this excellent virtue of hospitality has greater
promises according to the quality of persons, which in Christian love
received, are entreated respectively for their calling and cause for which they
are strangers. There being danger in receiving them that are cast out for
religion as if they were rebels, Act. 17, 6, 7, it is likely the greater
danger may be in receiving the teachers; therefore our Savior gives the
greater encouragement, saying, he that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward: to receive him in the name of a Prophet
is to receive him as a Prophet and because he is one, so honoring Christ in
his servants, and specially in them that are specially near him in place and
employed about his kingdom, not only shall he receive a Prophets reward
actively, that which the Prophet gives, as the knowledge of the truth, the
opening of secrets of Gods kingdom; but passively, the reward which God gives
with respect to the dignity of the person on whom the benefit is conferred: or
as a furtherer of the Prophets work, a help to the truth which he preaches,
giving such reward as he gives the Prophet: as if he had the office of the
Prophet and executed it, as 1 Samuel 30. 24: As his part is that goes down to
the battle, so shall his part be that tarieth by the stuff.

It serves to reprove the hartlesnesse of Christians to Use.
to this duty of receiving CHRIST to their houses, in such as perteine to him;
some as above other men they exclude them from their love, so from their
dwelling, no lovers at all of them that are good; some of fear to be
persecuted with them, because iniquity shall abound Man. 24, 12.
the love of many shall wax cold: so held with corrupt self love that they
dare not help Christians in their trouble least they should be counted like
them, this is in a degree to forsake the cause of Christ, and to be ashamed of
him. They had need be prayed for, as the Apostle forsaken in his first
answering at Rome prays for them that failed him, 2 Timothy 4, 16.
God preserves some in safety when others are in trouble, that the one may
succor the other. Pov, 24, 12. If thou say, behold, we knew not of it, shall
not he who pondereth the hearts understand it, and he who preserves thy
soul does not he know it? etc.

To move to this duty, it may help that we have examples commended of the
practice of it, Gaius the host of Paul, and of the whole Church, Romans 16, 23.
This is a singular commendation that he received Christians coming from every
place, to his house and table. Phebe he gives a great praise of for her
hospitality to him and many other, and in thankefullnesse requires the Saints
at Rome to assist her in whatsoever business she has need of them, as a
thing becoming them, Romans 16, 2. It is the praise of Lidia that she
constrained Paul and Silas to tarry in her house, and of the Iailour that
setting aside the fear of the governers, he brought them into his house and
washed their wounds and set meat before them, Act. 16, 15, 34. And of that old
Disciple Mnas^n whose love unto this work to lodge Christ's servants was still
fresh, Act. 21, 16.

2. Our houses with our selves and all that we have we owe to the Lord,
therefore should they be open to him, it was enough to say, The Lord has
need, Luke 19, 31. If in his, he need our house, how can we deny him? let him
have it with all willingness.

We know not what may come to pass in the earth, Eccles. 11, 2. The wise man
reasons for giving to the poor thus: give a portion to seven and also to
eight, for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. Give
liberally, give to many: it is said of the just he disperceth abroad, and is
as he that sows, that casts his seed at his right hand, and at his left;
the reason, the uncertaintie of things, death may come and then the seed time
is past, a man cannot help whom he would: or it may be he that is able now may
want, and he that wants now may be able to help him that in his need has
been helpefull to him. God orders it so that he that waters shall have
rain, and with what measure men mete unto others it shall be measured unto
them again, Luke 6. 38. We have here no stable or fixed seat, we are or
should be prepared to leave our houses and all we have in case of confession,
therefore to receive the^ have already done it.

It is perpetual infamy to Di^^rephes that himself received not the
brethren, and more, that he suffered not those that would. It must be true
hospitality, not to keep open house with a table plentiful furnished for any
how vile so ever, which is expreslie forbidden, 2 John 10. If there come any to
you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid
him God speed. Not heresies only but heretics that spread their heresies are
to be rejected; we must have no fellowship with their unfruitful works of
darkness, not only not invite them, but if they offer themselves decline
them: Depart from the foolish man in Romans 16. 17.
whom thou perceivest not the lips of knowledge: hear no more the instruction
that causes to err from the words of knowledge. We must put a difference
indeed between an heretic convinced, that sins being condemned of
himself, and one that yet may be won. But receive none such to house in
favor of his heresy: That is to be partaker of his evil deeds; nor
converse with him, salute him not, with danger of being seduced: evil words,
or evil conversings corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15, 33. Or with scandal to
the weak.

But if he be in extreme want, we must consider that he cease not to be
our neighbor, therefore we may for his releife receive him to house, or
exercise other works of mercy to him, taking heed still of sin, of
appearance of sin, and of the danger of it. We must abhor to be
partakers of his evil deed, in doing any thing to further false doctrine, or
hinder the doctrine of Christ.

Bid him, not God speed, may seem to be against civilitie, but it is a
discountenancing of false doctrine, as the Prophet did the Idolatry of
Iehoram, of whom he says, he would not have looked toward him; and a
preserving of a man's self. For salutation may breed familiar speaking
together, and that may prove contagious, and bidding him God speed, implies a
well wishing to him in his business, and so consent and cooperation in some
sort; and so indaungering as to fellowship in sin, so in his punishment: As
he that receives a true preacher of Christ in that name, furthers his good
work, and is partaker of his reward.

Not that such diligent choice should be made of them we receive to house,
that none but true, godly, good Christians should be received. There is
certain reward to them that receive a righteous man in the name of a righteous
man: so though he be an hypocrite yea a reprobate, if he come in the name of
a Disciple of Christ and in that name be loved and entertained. We are to do
good unto all, even men that are evil, are to be allured by benefits, and
recalled to a better course. The office of hospitality is not fulfilled in
communicating our meat, drink, house, and things pertaining to the refreshing
of the body, but in mutual edification, sweet words, that it may be
understood that the beneficence is done to the honor of Christ.

v. 7. And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, that he was gone to
be g^est with a man that is a sinner.

This is the event which this work of so great mercy and love had among the
multitude, they murmured, enlarged by the universalitie, they did all so,
declared by the cause a mistaken ground, that it agrees not with holiness for
an holy man to be upon any occasion, a guest to a sinner. An other mistaking
there was, that counted Zacheus a sinner, who was now returned to innocence.

To murmr is so to dissemble the voice, as also to let loose the bridle to a
petulant tongue, to oppose ones self to some body, yet not openly to set upon
him, but to condemn secretly what the murmurer reproves not to his face,
commonly whom he bites with a poyson-full tongue: or it is an inordinate
affection, arising of impatience in adversities, or of an evil interpretation
of other men's works or deeds.

This is the event of well doing, of good actions; in some, they are grudged
at, meet with evil constructions, are evil thought of, and evil spoken of.
This event befell the actions of him who did all things well, and nothing
amiss. Luke 5, 30. Why do ye^ ^ate and drink with Publicans and Sinners?
Math. 9, 1^. Why eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners? It carried a
show of ingenuitie and simplicity, but with a heart of gall against Christ,
condemning his doing as unworthy of his person and office. Luke 15, 2. When the
Publicans and Sinners came to hear him, the Pharisees and Scribes murmured
saying: This man receives sinners, and eats with them. Malicious hypocrites
misliked and spa^e evil of what Christ spoke or did, how true and profitable
soever. He kept company with them to lead them from their sins to
righteousness, and it was so plain that it could not be denied; but being
envious they misconstrued and misliked that which was well done. Simon the
Pharisee though no proud contemner of Christ, nor sworn and violent enemy to
his doctrine, yet ignorant of the office of Christ that he was sent with the
grace of reconciliation to save that which is lost, he is offended that a
sinner is gently received, who in his opinion was to be expulsed the company;
and thinks in himself that Christ is not so much as a Prophet, because he
knew not (as he thought) what manner of woman it was.

To suffer as evil doers even for works of grace, is incident to gracious
men, 2 Timothy 1, 12. David's enemies were moved against him because he followed
goodness: only hurt him for that cause that he would live godly, Psalm. 38,
20. His benefits toward them could not overcome their malice, but they
requited him with injury. The Apostle puts the case: Who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3, 13. He that
studies beneficence and bestows himself in demeriting others, one would
think should so^^en iron minds, and Experience teaches that they that govern
their tongue, love peace, hurt none, but apply themselves to do good to all as
they can, are less obnoxious to the injuries of wicked men: but when the
quarrel is religion, then humanity is laid aside, and they that will live
according to the doctrine of Christ godly, shall suffer for righteousness.

Not only evil men that are murmurers of destinate malice, but even good men
of some weakness either in judgment, as they of the circumcision that
contended with Peter about his carrying the Gospel to the Gentiles, and eating
with them; or of some envy may mislike some good actions, as Iosuah misliked
and would have had it forbidden that Eld^d and Medad prophesied in the Host,
Numb. 11, 28, 29. It may be that some man of an evil mind may grudge at a
good work under a fair pretense, and deceive some well meaning men and lead
them into some murmuring. As is thought of Judas, out of covetousness grudging
at the cost in the ointment powered upon Christ, as wast, which might have
helped many poor people if it had been fold and given to them; that others of
the Disciples were so drawn to mislike it and murmr, Mark 14, 4, 5. Math.
26, with John 12, 5, 8. Some murmurers are said to speak evil of things they
know not, a mad boldness not fearing to condemn things that exceed their
capacity: It is of prostitute ignorance arising of an evil disposition to
show some pride and petulancy, to speak evil of things they understand not,
assenting to the conclusion without knowledge of the true cause.

In doing our duty we Use.
must be content with Gods approbation, it is enough that we are allowed of God
though we desire also to manifest our selves in the consciences of men: our
resolution must be to show our selves the servants of Christ in good and in
evil report; when men speak well of us, and when they dispraise us, we have
one Lord to whom we stand or fall; if we do of faith what we do particular
and universal, we please God, and have a good conscience, and the fruit of our
righteousness is peace, the effect thereof quietness and assurance for ever,
Esaias 32, 17. Neither shun nor cease to do good though men of ignorance or
ill affection be offended.

We must labor to be without offense, not only to give none, but to take
none to make us weak, fall, or go back. Two things help to this, light, and
love, He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is none
occasion of stumbling in him, 1 John, 2, 10. To love ones brother is to be of
a mind well affected toward him, showing it in benevolence, and beneficence,
according to his power, and that for Christ's sake, which arises of the light
of faith. In whose mind the true light (Christ apprehended by faith) does
shine: the Law concerning brotherly love is written in his heart by the Spirit,
which is a testimony not only of his being but abiding in the light,
persevering in it. And this light and knowledge of Gods Commandments so guides
him, that he goes on his journey to heaven which he has undertaken with
expedition, without offense or hinderance: and love in his heart carries him
with respect to the whole law, that the Apostle says, he that loves another
has fulfilled the Law, whatsoever Commandment there is, it is comprehended in
this saying, namely: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Love works
no ill to his neighbor, Romans 13, 8, 9, 10. Charity behaves not it self
unseemely, seeks not her own, thinks not evil, etc. 1 Cor. 13, 5.

And it is to be observed that he does not say, there is no scandal to him,
but there is no scandal in him. Though many scandalls are offered of the world
to him that loves his brother: none peirceth into his mind, or is so in his
mind whereby he is hindered from leading his life freindly and peaceably with
his neighbor.

He so far offends not, and is not offended as he has light abiding in him
and walks in it: but because he is but in part taken out of the darkness,
and his love is not perfect; therefore in respect of the remainder of ignorance
and self-love unsanctified, he offends and takes offense, stumbles in many
things: but as his knowledge increases and his holy love, so he is more pure
and without offense: for which the Apostle prayed for the Philippians, that
their love might abound still more and more in knowledge and in all judgment,
that they might be sincere and without offense till the day of Christ; that
they might hold on a constant course in their purify without stumbling: this
is one great part of their felicity that love Gods Law; nothing shall offend
them, Psalm. 119, 165. Most great tranquillity, and true security.

That he was gone to be a guest with one that is a sinner.

This is that which offends them, his fellowship with a sinner. It is to be
inquired 1. who is a sinner or in their account such. 2. whether it be a sin
to have fellowship with them?

A sinner in their account was one of prostituted wickedness, living, and
taken in notorious and manifest sins, for which they were excommunicate out
of the Synagogue; and the Scripture says some thing to this purpose: in
degrees of sins it seems more to be a sinner than to be ungodly, 1 Timothy 1,
9. 1 Pet. 4, 18. Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? Psalm. 1, 1.
Blessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stood in the way of sinners; of the Sodomits it is said they were sinners
before the Lord exceedingly, Genesis 13, 13. They feared not in the sight of the
Lord and before his face to design any wickedness though never so vile;
therefore they that sin with impudency are said to declare their sins like
Sodom Esaias 3, 9.

So they began to be called sinners which fell, not of ignorance or
weakness, but did evil of destinate malice, without all reverence of God. 2.
Who offended not in some lesser error or fault, but lived in heinous
wickednesses. 3. Who fell not once into such sin, but by frequent acts
acquired an habit, exercised in evil, it was as their certain kind of life.
4. When they committed their sins not in secret, but so manifestly and
notoriously as men of ordinary honesty abhorred them.

Hence by little and little followed that Pharisaicall persuasion, that they
which were not desiled with such notorious sins, were just even in the sight
of God; of which men Christ says, he came not to call the righteous, Math. 9,
13. Such as in a lofty and proud mind with trust of carnal works, thought
themselves righteous, and despised others, Luke 18, 9.

And so was there a distinction of hypocrite and sinner; the hypocrite having
some seeming righteousness, precious with men, but so desiled with a filthy
heart, that GOD who knows it abhorres it, Luke 16, 15.

But a sinner taken generally is every one that is not in Christ. So as he is
still guilty in his conscience, his sins are imputed and are upon his own
score, as his debts not discharged,

There is sin remaining and sin removed or transient. John 9. 41.
It is remaining when men do not come to Christ. The Spirit convinces the
world of sin because they believe not in him; that they are yet in their
sins, because that which unites men to Chrst, faith in him they have not, and
so remaining divided and separate from him, sin reigns in them. John 16. 9.
Sin transient not only in respect of act, but concerning guilt and
punishment is, when men know their sin, and betake themselves to Christ that
they may be justified in him, they have forgiveness of all trespasses, so as
they are not the faults and sins of that man, God has received in Christ a
full satisfaction, and counts himself to have no wrong by him, puts away his
anger and loves him freely. He is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the world, John 1, 29. Whatsoever alienated God from man he takes away by
the Sacrifice of his death.

A sinner is he who is not sanctified; a Saint and a sinner stand in
opposition, a good man and a sinner, Eccles. 9, 2. a sinner is but flesh, Genesis
6, 3. John 3, 6. And in the flesh there dwells no good thing, they that are
in the flesh cannot please God: nature is wholly corrupted, so as men are by
nature children of wrath; not by nature created in the first man, but as he
corrupted it and is now conceived in the carnal generation, in our first birth
we bring with us such a nature as is altogether sin, Psalm. 51, 5. I^ sin
did my mother warm me.

But he is no sinner which is borne anew, though he have sin in him, he is
just and good, compared with them that are in the flesh; and by inchoation he
is a new creature; old things are passed away, he has the godly nature, the
seed of God abides in him: he is in the number of Saints to whom the kingdom
of God is given, whose king is the Lord, Revel, 15, 3, Thou king of Saints.

A sinner is he that co^mits sins ungodly, such are called ungodly sinners,
Jude 15.

To commit sins ungodly is not to commit sin of infirmity, which befalles
the Saints on earth, in whose hearts is Gods Law: but either deceived by
ignorance, or when the temptation is so strong that the will is over-caried,
and the affection in the corruption of it violent against their regenerate will
and affection, they do that which they would not, but hate.

But it is to sin out of the full maliciousnes of the will; the heart destitute
of al godly fear to sin, the heart works iniquity, Esaias 32, 6. As it was in
Judas his sin so committed as could not agree to any that had his heart endued
with heavenly grace, there fore he is excepted in the testimony that Christ
gives of cleanesse to his Disciples: You are clean but not all, for he knew
who should betray him. Peter Christ knew would deny him three times, yet he is
pronounced clean: He wrought no such thing in his heart, his purpose and love
to Christ was against it; and so in the rest of the Disciples that were to fly
from him and leave him alone, they were over-taken with temptation, the corrupt
fear of man prevailing against the fear of God, which was true but weak in
them.

To him our Savior saying, That which thou do, do quickly, discovered the
study and meditation of a persidious mind, most intensively rolling and
laboring of a wicked treason against his good Lord, John 13, 27.

He sins ungodly that neither does good nor loves it, has no heart to
internal piety and justice; loves sin when he forbeares to do it: is
alienated from righteousness, is the servant of sin, Romans 6, 20, And of
corruption, 2 Pet. 2, 19. Addicting himself to sin, making it his Lord,
subjecting himself with all his heart, to fulfill the lusts of it, yiedling
his members as servants to uncleanesse and to iniquity, unto iniquity, to do
the works of unrighteousness.

He is not a sinner that purges himself in a study of purity, 1 John 3, 3.
It is opposed to the committing of sin, v. 4. That effectually resists sin
with a double war, defensive to preserve himself from the hurt of it, 1 John
5, 18: And invasive to overthrow the kingdom of it altogether and bring it to
nothing, that the body of sin may be destroyed: that walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit. Every man's life is a certain way, unto which is
fixed a (...)certain scope and end; when all things are of the flesh and are
referred to the flesh, the flesh the rule and scope of life with those things
that belong to it. One may be said to walk after the flesh, though he do some
things by occasion which seem to pertain to the Spirit.

But in whose mind and intention the Spirit has vigor, that this purpose and
course or institution of life depends thereupon, he may be said to walk after
the Spirit, though sometimes some things are incident which seem to resemble
the disposition of the flesh rather than of the Spirit; yea sometime the flesh
appear more than the Spirit, when the mind in a kind of general motion of the
true faith ^ends unto God, in particular causes there is somewhat which hinders
the light of it, and he too much more than is meet is indulgent to his
affections, and addicted to his own wit, 1 ^or. 3, 3.

It is one thing to walk in sin, it is another to fall into sin, when his
walk is in the light of knowledge and faith; as it is one thing to fall into
the mire, another to through ones self into it and with pleasure to wallow in
it: in that there is a hard necessity of sinning through frailty, in this
there is a certain and destinate will.

The dominion of sin stands in assent and works, but then the assent is not
only antecedent but consequent; the work not broken off but continued, where
consent is given by infirmity, which repentance forthwith breaks off: sin
reigns not, when that which is done is by and by condemned, and that it may
be done no more, suit is made with godly prayer; and the mind called to reason
hates it self and its deed, greatly desiring to be unburdened of the burden
of infirmity. The reign of sin is which addicts the whole man unto the
service of it. But where the Spirit of God works and succeeds, not always to
the preventing of sin that it be not done, yet to saving repentance after it
is done, makes to profit still more to a will of not sinning: not excusing a
man's self that he sins with the flesh not with the spirit, but greatly
accusing himself, and lamenting that the flesh is not subject to the spirit.
Not by compulsion of judgment, which may be in sinners who see better things
and approve them; the Devil himself is not ignorant that virtue is better
than vice, yet loves vice more than virtue; but where it is of propension, of
will and study to be better. Not the horror of punishment but the loathing of
sin which is not their pleasure but their burden, there sin has no
dominion though in the conflict a man carry away sore wounds.

To the second, their quarrel, because he went to be a guest with a sinner:
whether all fellowship with sinnors Q.
be sin to a godly man?

It is not sin absolutely A.
for a godly man to have fellowship with sinners: by the example of our Savior
who resorted to the feasts and dinners of sinners, to take opportunity of
converting or convincing them; as when he called Matthew, and he made a great
feast for him, he refused not the fellowship of Publicanes at table, Luke 5,
29. So when Simon the Pharisee bid him to dinner, desired him that he would
eat with him, he went into his house and sat down to meat, Luke 7, 36. He
went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the Sabbath
day, Luke 14, 1. This was the wonderful love and humanity of Christ, that
though they were the enemies of the truth, yet to the end that he might win
them, he thus condescends to(...)e taking all occasion to bless and do good.

The Apostle leaves it free to a Christian to go to an infidels house to feast
if he be called and invited of him, 1 Cor. 10. 27. The fellowship of the
table is a simbole of love and friendship, and conserves humanity: only he
makes it so one of those things that are lawful, as it is by circumstances to
be deliberated of for expedience and edification; whether it be safer to avoid
danger and scandal, to tarry at home; or whether there may not be hoped for
some fruit of going, and that without offense.

1. There must be consideration of the party, whether he be well grounded in
knowledge, confirmed in faith and godliness, or ignorant and weak: if they be
strong and able to maintain the doctrine of truth and convince the falsehood,
and they be left free without being compelled to any of their unlawful ways,
they may use the fellowship of sinners.

2. They must look to their motive or impulsive cause, that it be love to
their salvation and Christ's kingdom, and to their end which is the same in
forbearing their society, and their using of it that they may come to
repentance.

3. They must teach those sinners with whom they are so conversant, and be
working upon them for faith in Christ Jesus and repentance toward God, not
leaving off so long as they have fellowship with them. Our Savior enjoined one
whom he had cast many Devils out of (though he prayed him that he might be
with him) to go home to his friends and tell them how great things the Lord
had done for him, etc. And he did it with fruit, all men did marvel not with
such an admiration as uses to hold some, of things which they approve not, but
admiration with praise; and it is likely either a fruit of faith or some
beginning of it, he published the name of Jesus, the Gospel concerning him, and
that confirmed by such a miracle in himself, which was the wonderful mercy
of God that being so unworthily rejected of the Gadarens, though he forsook
them himself according to their desert, yet he sent them one more acceptable
than himself among them, who prevailed with such an ungodly people. All men
have not one hour appointed them to believe, some fruit comes at length.

4. It is most convenient that they show themselves freindly, gentle, loving,
well deserving of them with whom they so converse; it much availes to receive
the truth when it is persuaded he loves. And therefore they must not have
their conversation with them for their own gain and profit: but with respect
merely of winning them to Christ. When it appears there is no hope of that, if
they show themselves obstinate in their evil, and give just cause of despair
of their amendment, then we are to forsake them and have no fellowship with
them further than necessity of life enforces, either if they be extreme
sick and cannot be helped but by our travail, or if we our selves were in
such necessity as we were not able to get things needful for our sustentation
by any other means than among them: also for buying and selling things
necessary for life, in such things as civil states and conditions do require.

5. During their conversing with sinners they must have a great care of their
life that it to be holy and just, practicing such virtues as in their light
are commendable, Philip. 4, 8. It is said of the Christian wife that she may
win an infidel husband by her conversation. They hold out the word of life
Phil. 2. 15, 16.
and shine in the beams of Gods holiness, as lights in the world, in the
midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, blameless and harmless, sincere and
as the Sons of God, without rebuke.

And they must have no fellowship with their unfruitful works of darkness,
Ephesians. 5, 11. Seeing they are light in the Lord, it is not meet either for them
or him in whom they are made light, to communicate in the works of darkness,
either in deed or word or heart. 2 Cor. 6, 14. What fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousuesse, what communion has light with
darkness? v. 17. Wherefore come out from among them and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.
Against this communicating in evil David prays, Psalm. 141, 4. Incline not my
heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men that work
iniquity; let me not eat of their delicates, neither by fear of danger
overcome, nor by their delicates entised, let me do any thing that may offend
thee. Such fellowship is forbidden whereby we are infected, or the wicked
confirmed in their wickedness, the weak offended, or the name of God
blasphemed. To the first, Prove. 13, 20. He that keeps company with fools,
shall be broken or shall be the worse: evil communications corrupt good
manners, 1 Cor. 15, 33. To the second: That when they would have ^^red Babel,
and she would ^ot be cured, they must forsake her. An Heretic after once or
twice admonition, sufficiently convicted, avoid: a brother abiding obstinate
and and impenitent after all means of cure, count as the Jews counted the
heathens and Publicans, but that as a medicine to one in whom it may be
supposed there is life; that they may have their flesh that so did oppress the
spiritual life, destroyed, that the spirit may be saved, that they may learn
not to do such things. It is a real rebuke, with such a one, no, not to eat,
1 Cor. 5, 11. This is the judging of them that are within, not despising them
but providing for our own health and salvation: a little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump. To the third the Apostle requires charity in the use of our
liberty, and that all be to edification. Weak brethren may be persuaded
that it is lawful for the^ to do the same thing, to use familiarity with the
wicked, whereby they come either to be abated in their zeal, or corrupted in
their mind or life; consideration must be had of them. To the fourth our rule
is, Let all be done to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10, 31. If by our conversing
with the wicked, the glory of God be not advanced but inda^ngered, the Gospel
evil spoken of, we must abstain. But where these dangers are not, it is
good. And the work of a man's wisdom, the fruit of the righteous and a chief
fruit, to win souls, as the fruit of the tree of life was the chief of all
the fruit of the garden.

It is true, a vile person is to be contemned, Psalm. 15, 4. The wicked is
abomination to the just, Prove. 29, 27. But a difference must be put between
the sin and the person, the war must be with their sin: their persons
capable of salvation must be loved, as that which is of God in them; only that
hated which is of the Devil, which God hates, their sin. David professing
his not sitting with vain persons, not going in with dissemblers, notes his
freedom from participation of their counsel, and society of their works,
such fellowship he abhorred, against which he opposes his walking in the
truth, setting Gods goodness before him, living in the faith of God, and
committing all events to his providence.

There is a severitie against sinners that is of false righteousness, not
zeal but carnal bitterness, whereby hypocrites look at others sins not to
amend them, not declaring Gods ways unto them that they might be converted to
him, but to condemn them, as so many masters; yet are they not washed from
their filthiness: They receive not those whom God has received, that have
repented their sins, and are returned to righteousness; as this multitude
condemned Zaccheus as a sinner, who had obtained mercy to believe in Christ,
and gave notable testimony of true conversion. Simon condemned Mary whose
defense Christ took upon him. The elder brother of the prodigal, envied the
favor showed to his brother returned, and notwithstanding his repentance still
reprocheth him with forgiven sins: but Christians must be gentle, showing
all Tit. 3. 2, 3.
meekness to all men; that which they are, we were. The love and mercy
which made us that which we were not, may make them that which yet they are
not. A man of estimation for true wisdom, must show out of a good
conversation his works in meekness of wisdom, Iam. 3, 13.

Verse 8. Zaccheus stood and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man by false
accus^tion, I restore him foure^old.

This profession made to the Lord (which honor Zaccheus gives to Christ,
behold Lord) and before them which were present, not hindered by the murmuring
multitude, is a testimony of the stable faith and unfeigned repentance of
Zaccheus, as our Savior infers from it in the next verse. He professes
works contrary to his former course of life, faith working by love carries
him in thankfulness for the love and mercy which he has received, to give
one half of h^s goods to the poor. And not only forsakes his fraud and
oppression, but promises satisfaction for the wrong he has done, and that
abundantly four fold. From whence we may gather that the inward Change in the
soul will show forth it self in word and deed; faith and repentance though
inward graces, yet declare themselves in such fruits as bear witness of them.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things. Mat.
12, 35. A^ the man is so does he devise, speak, and work: having received a
new form as I may say, he works according to that form; the Spirit that he
has received impells him, and is in him so as it flows forth as rivers of
water, John 7, 38, 39, From the habits of grace and interior acts proceed
exterior works, the righteousness inherent declares it self in working
righteousness, 1 John 3, 7. For good speech, Salomom says that the words of
the pure are Prove. 15. 26.
pleasant words, both acceptable to the Lord as a clean sacrifice, and
profitable to the hearers, ministering grace to them. The tongue of the just is
as choice silver, pure and precious and in^iching many, Prove. 10, 20. They have
springs of wholesome words within them, the law of God is in their heart, and
thence their mouth speaks wisdom, and their tongue talks of judgment;
their heart teaches their mouth, and adds learning to their lips, Prove. 16.
23. That their lips drop honey combs, honey and milk is under their
tongue, Cant. 4, 11. Sweet words, wholesome and nourishing, their lips feed
many, Prove. 10, 21. Their wholesome tongue is a tree of life, Prove. 15.
which both gives and increases Spiritual life: the faith in their heart, in
love to God and men, to bring glory to God, and to edify men, opens their
mouths in confession, Romans 10, 10. 2 Cor. 4, 13. Though in some for a time,
humane fear prevails so, and the love of their credit with the side they
took part with before, that they declare not themselves presently, till grace
get the victory: As in Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea; and as some conceive of
those rulers that believed in Christ, but for fear of the censure of casting
out of the Synagogue did not confess him, John 12, 42. And as their speech so
their deeds declare their inward grace, they are lively branches of the true
vine, and there is a blessing in them; they bring forth fruit meet for the
branches of such a vine by the sap of grace and life which Christ putts into
them, John 15, 5. As they are resembled by trees planted by the rivers of
water, they bring forth fruit as trees of righteousness, the planting of the
Lord that he may be glorified, Psalm. 1, 3. Ier. 17, 8. And as they are
considered in their marriage to Christ by his virtue, they bring forth fruit
unto God, Romans 7, 4. They are created unto good works, sanctified and
prepared, they are apted and made meet for the Lords use, and do works of
honor in the great house of the Lord whereby they declare themselves to be
vessels of honor. Christ compares his Church, in the several members of it
(which he calls the Churches plants) to an Orchard of Pomegranates and
pleasant fruits with all the chief spices, Cant. 4, 13, 14. The Church tells
Christ, that at their gates are all manner of pleasant fruits new and old
which she has laid up for him, Cant. 7, 13. The wisdom from above is full of
good fruits, Iam. 317. It is an effectual wisdom, not suffering them to be
unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ: They show their grace in the negative
commandment and in the positive; in the negative, sin no more: as by Gods
mercy and truth their iniquity is purged, so by the fear of the Lord they
depart from evil, Pov. 16, 6. Their love in the Lord stirs up an hatred of
evil in them, as it is foul and vile, against the holiness of the Law of God
which is their delight, their Romans 7, 15, 22.
hope of their similitude to Christ makes them purge themselves and study
purity; and to keep their evidence fair whereby they have some assurance of
Salvation, they buffet their body and bring it in subjection, 1 Cor. 9, 27.
For the positive Commandment, they are noted of this, they follow after
righteousness, Esaias 51, 1.
and out of disposition and inclination to good, they are said to devise good,
Prove. 14, 22. As the liberal Esaias 32. 8.
man devises liberal things.

The Law is not only in their minds but in their wills, and their will not
altogether ineffectuall; God that gives to will gives also to do of his good
pleasure, that as the Apostle speaks of Demetrius, they have a good report of
the truth it self, 3 John 12. The evidence of the thing it self testifies the
workeing of righteousness so as is worthy praise amongst men.

It serves to reprove that Use.
shame and fearefullnesse whereby we shun to be known to be that toward God
which we are indeed. Zaccheus professed before the Lord that he was now
another man; though Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea secreted their grace for
fear of the Jews the great enemies of Christ, yet they grew bold and showed
their love to Christ in an honorable burial of his dead body. It is prophesied
of the converted in Egypt that they should speak the language Esaias 19, 19.
of Canaan, profess their change from serving Idols to serve the living and
true God, and set up an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt,
embrace his doctrine and worship him after his will: and more generally in the
kingdom of Christ it is said of them on whom God powers out his Spirit, that
they shall say I am the Lords, call themselves by the name of Jacob, and
subscribe with their hearts unto the Lord, Esaias 44, 5. We must pray for the
Spirit of power, of love and a sound mind, which God gives, 2 Timothy 1, 7.

2. It convinces them of vanity in their profession of faith and repentance,
that show no proof thereof in works. James writes against such a barren
profession: as words make not a liberal man, neither can they make a faithful
man: faith if it have no works is dead being alone, James 2, 17. Works are
the breath of faith, which testify of the life of it. The faith which joins
us to God, 1 Thessalonians. 1, 3. by Christ is an effectual faith, it is working by
love, Gal. 5, 6. And they are joined together, faith in the Lord Jesus, and
love to the Saints, which shows it self in works and labors.

Paul* prayed for Philemon, that the communication of his faith, may become
effectual: though faith have her seat in the heart, yet by fruits through
love it is communicated to others. The communicating of his faith is meant of
the offices which faith commands, as of benignity to the needy and afflicted
Saints, that by such communicating of it self it might increase or be made
more evident, and every good grace in him and his may be known and
acknowledged; that by experience men may see how rich they are in Christ, the
virtue of the Spirit so bewraying it self in his dwelling in them.

Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor: His love is
bountiful, giving half he has to the needy.

This is one way to express and exercise love toward God and men,
liberality, benevolence, alms deeds to the poor, having received mercy
moving to show mercy: This specially is the repentance of covetousness, to
turn liberal and merciful. Therefore our Savior says to the Scribes and
Pharisees; But rather give alms of such things as you have, and all things
shall be clean unto you, Luke 11; 41. It is opposed to their ravening, and
extortion and briberie, evil ways to fill their platters with: this giving of
their own is a witness of the inward repentance, being an act of Charity it
argues faith in Christ and remission of sins.

Generally, that which is required of a man is his goodness, Prove. 19. 22. His
beneficence specially becomes him, to bind many to him with benefits. It should
be his study as to live religiously toward God, so in doing good unto men,
and then may he seem to have attained the end of his condition, when he is as
a God to man, when he profits him. It is one property of a good man, that he
is merciful and his light shines in darkness, Psalm. 112, 4. His prosperity
which in the Scripture is often noted by light, does so abound, that he does
graciously* and mercifully and righteously power out of his blessings unto
these that are in darkness, that are pressed with calamities.

It is much to Gods honor, Prove. 14, 31. As he that oppresses the poor
^eproveth him that made him, so he that shows mercy to him honors him;
doing good to the servants that are in misery, ^ee declares how he esteems
and loves their heavenly Lord. He chooses to be honored and served by
mercy and kindness showed to his, and reckons it done to him. He that gives
to the poor lends to the Lord, that bestows it freely, respecting his wants
that is needy with a merciful, pitiful, and bountiful heart for the Lords
sake, he honors him, and God counts it as if he were gratified and had a
good turn done to him.

It not only releiveth the poores necessity, but also abundantly causes many
to give thanks to God: a grace administered to the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor.
8, 10. The Christians that receive it, glorify God for their professed
subjection to the Gospel of Christ, that in Christ's name do so liberally
distribute unto them, 2 Cor. 9, 12, 13. It were sufficient to move to it, that
it is an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to
God, Philip. 4, 18. Heb. 13, 16. But as a thing accepted of God, when it is
done to his name, a work of love, it has present fruit, and future reward, so
that he that has mercy on the poor happy is he, Prove. 14, 21. He that has
a bountiful eye shall be blessed: for he gives of his bread to the poor.

For temporal reward: There is that scatters and is more increased Prove. 11,
24. The liberal foul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be
watered also himself. Springs and wells though they be much drawn, yet they
abound with water. The liberal person shall stand by his liberality, Esaias 32,
8. He that gives to the poor shall not lack, Prove. 28, 27. The Lord will
recompense him what he has laid out, Prove. 19, 17. He that ministers seed to
the sower shall minister bread for their food, and multiply their seed sown,
and increase the fruits of their righteousness, 2 Cor. 9, 10. The God of those
poor servants of his shall supply all their need, Philip. 4, 19.

2. In spiritual graces God many times rewards this mercy and liberality,
Luke 16, 11, 12. If ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who
will commit to your trust the true riches: If ye have not been faithful in
that which is another man's, who will give you that which is your own? On the
contrary, it appears that they that dwell in heaven and free and at liberty,
count nothing of this world theirs, but as stewards to the Lord faithfully
dispense their goods according to his mind, shall be blessed, and trusted with
spiritual riches true treasure, his own because the fruition is everlasting.
Cornelius his alms with his prayers came up, for a memorial before the Lord,
his reward was to have Christ revealed unto him by Peter; whom when he heard,
the holy Ghost fell upon him, Act. 10. Men get assurance of a gracious estate,
for ministering to the Saints of love, is opposed to that from which reprobates
fall, Heb. 6, 9, 10. 1 King. 18, 13, Obadiah alleged to Eliah as proof of his
true fear of God, that he preserved the persecuted Prophets, and fed them
with bread and water. If we love the brethren in deed and truth, we know that
we are of the truth, 1 John 3, 19. It furthers our assurance of eternal life.
The merciful are blessed for they shall find mercy, Math. 5, 7. Mercy
rejoices against condemnation, Iam. 2, 13. A godly man moved with compassion,
with respect to Gods Commandment, lifts up his head, and overcomes the fear
of being condemned in judgment, because God has put this grace of mercy in
his heart whereby he is carried both in softness to his brethren, not hard
and rough to them; and to releeve those that stand in need of his help, the
ground is Gods promise to the merciful. The Apostle calls it laying up a good
foundation against the time to come, that we may inherit eternal life, 1 Timothy
6, 19. Three things are implied. 1. That there is eternal life to be obtained.
2. That the foundation of eternity is to be laid here. 3. That the state of
the next life follows the state of this, as the upper building follows the
foundation. Christ is the only foundation, but good works are by Gods promise
as testimonies of our being in Christ, a strengthening to our hope. God has
promised reward in heaven to them that show mercy to his poor; he that is
merciful rewards his own soul, Prove. 11, 17. It is to make friends for
another world, that may receive us at our death into everlasting habitations,
Luke 16, 9. The good will give freindly testimony to the conscience that such
have not believed in vain, and God counting done to himself, crowns the
work: Christ promises a Prophets reward to him that receives a Prophet, a
righteous man's reward to him that receives him in the name of a righteous man,
and him his reward that receives and refreshes as he may, though but with a
cup of cold water in that name that he belongs to Christ, a Disciple, Math.
10, 41.

The Apostle puts a case Object.
of giving all a man's goods to the poor, and it shall prosit him nothing.

The Apostle gives the Answ.
reason, because it is not in him an act of love, he has no love. A man
living in reigning sin destitute of grace, can look for no reward, he is in
the flesh, and cannot please God.

Other rules there be to be observed in giving, as Est modus in dando, quid,
^ur, cui, quomodo, quando.
a just possession as in the example of Zacheus, his ill gotten goods he
restored, and gave half his own. Prove. 5, 16. Let thy fountains flow forth,
and the rives of waters in the streets. Not only take part of thy goods thy
self, but distribute them liberally to those that want. The Apostle requires
of him that stole to steal no more: but to labor with his hands the things
that are good, that of his honest labor he may have to give him that wants,
Ephesians. 4, 28. He that has this worlds goods (says the Apostle John) and sees
his brother have need, and shutts up his compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in him? So the goods must lawfully be possessed, and it must be an
act of love to God and to our brethren, 1 John 3, 17. The goods that are
unlawfully withheld from the owner, must be restored, as follows in the text.

There be three sorts of ill gotten goods. 1. When the injustice is only his
that has gotten them, as in oppressing, usurie, theft, rapine, defrauding,
overreaching, etc. when the right and dominion is not transferred from the
owner; of such, men may not give alms, but restore them as an act of justice
in putting a man in possession of his own. When by diligent inquisition it
appears that neither the parties wronged, nor any of their kindred is alive;
it must be given to the maintenance of the Ministry and Gods worship, or to
the use of the poor, such as are in Gods steed, Numb. 5, 8.

2. Sometimes the injustice is in both, that he that has acquired the goods
cannot retain them, they are gotten against justice, nor he of whom they have
been gotten can require them, he gave them against justice, as in bribes to
pervert judgment or such cases as this, alms is to be given.

3. Something is unlawfully gotten where the acquisition it self is not simply
unlawful, but that is unlawful by which it is acquired, as when a woman hires
out her self to be a whore and takes the wages of a harlot, she comes by Gods
mercy to repentance, and would show mercy as she has received mercy, she
gives of that which was her reward unto the poor, it is not unlawful. The Law
forbad to bring for offerings in any vow the price of an whore, Deuteronomy. 23, 18.
He would have the sanctity of his house and altar held in high reverence, and
not polluted wish any impure oblation. He forbad also to bring the price of a
dog, in any vow, as an impure creature and abject and vile; but the service
of the tabernacle is ceased, the ceremonial worship is at an end. This is
mercy to the poor, to whom if for Gods sake a man give the price of his dog
he offends not, it is of his own he gives.

2. We must consider a just right to give, either concerning dominion, or
dispensation by consent of him that has the dominion, either open, or secret,
general or particular: thus wives, Children, servants, as they have the
dispensation committed to them, may give of his goods that has the dominion.

Or if they be allowed a certain sum for other use absolutely, as the wife
for necessaries, the son to maintain himself at the University or
otherwise, a servant for his charge in a journey, sparing something of this
absolute allowance they may as of their own give of it to the poor.

It is said of diverse godly women that followed Christ that they ministered to
him of their substance; it was theirs, Luke 8, 3. In a case of preservation of
the owner and the family, it may be lawful for the wife to give of the
common goods without the owners knowledge, privity or consent, as in the ^^ct
of Abigail, 1 ^^m. 25, 18. Though her fact was something extraordinary, as
specially stirred up of God to it: yet the ground holds, that goods preserve
life, and the common goods be for the common good of the family, where the
father of the family is unfit or negligent to that he should do, the wife as
joined with him in government is the next to look to it. (...)

When the wife or a Child has a stock, and has consent of the superior to
employ it for their own benefit (except he fall into such want as requires
their help) they may give of it to the poor, it is their own.

In the case of extreme want, when life is in danger, it is lawful for the
wife to give of the common goods to preserve life, without tarying for the
consent of him that has the dominion; in such a case some judge that in the
law of nature there is a community of goods.

A Second rule.
Ordinate discretion, when a man by true discretion proceeds in a right order
of giving. Psalm. 112, 5, A good man will order his affairs by discretion. Some
there is that is destroyed for lack of judgment, though he have a good
stock and fruitful ground, yet wastes all and comes behind hand by
indiscretion, not ordering things aright.

Herein a man is to consider his ability to give, not to ease others and
burden himself, 2 Cor. 8, 12. He must keep his cisterne and his well to
drink of himself, and disperse his fountains abroad, Prove. 5, 15, 16. The
Disciples every man according to his ability determined to send relief to the
brethren that dwelt in Judea, Act. 11, 29.

He must consider what is fit for him his family and so provide, 1 Timothy 5, 8,
not only for necessity of nature, but decency of state: and think of time
to come, what charge in just probability he may have, and lay up for them, so
covetousness determine not the measure.

A man may possess abundance, if God give it, and lay up for occasional uses,
for Church and common wealth. Prove. 21, 20. There is a treasure to be desired,
and oil in the dwelling or storehouse of the wise, but a foolish man devoureth
it. Prove. 24, 3, 4. By wisdom an house is builded, and by understanding it is
established: and by knowledge the chambers, or inward rooms shall be filled
with all precious and pleasant riches. Prove. 13, 22. A good man leaves an
inheritance to his Childrens Children.

He must measure his gift as according to his ability, so according to their
need to whom he gives: as it is common. Then he may give according to the
dignity of his proper state, and not give so much as to hinder it, laying
apart something as God has blessed him for the use of the poor, 1 Cor. 16, 2.
In extraordinary want, then give more than ordinary, even so far liberality
is to be extended as to the diminishing of the patrimony: as our Savior
says, Sell that which ye have, and give alms, Luke 12, 33. Meaning of their
abundance, as they practiced, Act. 2, 45, and 4, 39. Among whom there is
special mention made of Ioses who by the Apostles was surnamed Barnabas, the
son of Consolation, because he so comforted the Saints bowels, Act. 4, 36.
Or it may, being a Levite, that he was endued with a special faculty.

There is common need or want, great want when though they live and draw
breath yet are in grievous want of necessaries: And there is extreme want when
a man has not to preserve his life; here specially must we if we cannot
otherwise, give of the stock it self. They that are before spoken of, are not
supposed to sell all their lands and houses, but as there was need.

A man must begin with his own: if the parents be in poverty, or the
Grandfather or Grandmother, and the children and nephews be of ability, they
must learn first to show piety at home and to requite their parents, which is
good and acceptable before God, 1 Timothy 5, 4. Our Savior blames the Pharisees
much, that by their tradition they had rejected the Commandment of God, of
honoring father and mother, which he draws to the releeving of them in their
wants, Mark 7, 9, 10, 12. Ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or
his mother.

And this is to be extended to all of his blood, though there be others that
be better than they, yet are we to prefer them in observation and
preservation: if the ability will extend to more, then exercise* beneficence
toward neighbors, such are of us. The Saints are to be preferred besore
sinners: as we can we must do good unto all, but specially to the household
of faith, ^al 6, 10. Though every man that needs our help be our neighbor
whom God offers to* us by his providence, Luke 10, 36, 37, yet specially to the
fa(...)ily of God, the faithful, Saints by calling, Psalm. 16, 2, 3. Because of
the spiritual nativitie, they are begotten of God, 1 John 5, 1. They are the
members and brethren of Christ, Math. 25, 44. God loves them above other men,
Deuteronomy. 33, 3. Yea he loved the people; all his Saints are in thy hand. Psalm.
73, 1. He is good to them that are of a pure heart.

Prophets that bring the doctrine of faith (other things being alike,) are to
have the specialtie of our 1* These. 5. 13.
benevolence and beneficence for their work sake, their place in Gods house so
near to him; and to be preferred before ordinary Disciples; thus for the
order of charity: to which we must add this, we are to prefer in our
giving such as have been in our need beneficial unto us. The Apostle, says
that our abundance should supply the present wants of the faithful, that their
abundance (things changing) may supply our wants: as Solomon says, thou
know not what evil shall be upon the earth; it may be thy case to want,
and his whom thou have relieved to be of abililitie to relieve thee, Eccles.
11, 2.

A Third rule.
There must be sincere intention in giving, that we do nothing of ambition,
but purely respect God to please him, and count it enough that we have him the
witness of our heart: this is set out by a metaphorical speech: Let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand does; do it so uprightly, as if the left
hand (which is joined in the work many times with the right) had eyes and
could see, we should hide from it what we do. It is not blamed that our alms
be seen, but that we would have them known, no nor to will to have them
known, if it be not for getting man's praise; if it be willing for Gods glory,
it is that which Christ wills, Math. 5, 16. That men may see your good
works, and gloxifie your Father which is in heaven: That they may esteem ye
heavenly doctrine, be converted to the faith, and praise the Lord? Otherwise a
man must take no notice what he has given, how much, to whom, how often, lest
he be lifted up in pride and prefer himself to other men. The Apostle gives
the rule, Romans 12, 8. He that gives, let him do it with simplicity, with
ingenuitie, like a faithful man, as Paul says of Philemon: It must be done
to Christ in his, to the name of God, Heb. 6. 10.

A Fourth rule.
A right principle it requires, it must be out of compassion, and that not
natural but sanctified by the holy Ghost; an act of supernatural love, moved
by the love of God to us: the love of Christ possessing us. 1 John 3, 17. Who
so has this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? There is no
beneficence pleases God but that which proceeds from compassion, or bowels of
mercy, and that also from the love of Christ who laid down his life for us;
that in case we should lay down our life for our brethren to declare our love,
how much more impart of our substance to his need?

Though in giving we always consider not this, yet it must be an act of that
grace of liberality whereby we are so disposed, and Esaias 32. 8.
inclined to this as we devise of liberal things.

So we are commanded to power out our souls to the hungry, Esaias 58.

A Fifth rule.
It must be done in faith, both that the work of this kind is such as
pleases God, Heb. 13, 16. It is given as a motive, for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased. 2. And that God accepts our persons, and will receive an
offering at our hands, 1 Pet. 2, 5, Revel. 8, 4. And of the promise that we
shall not lose our reward, Heb. 11, 6. He that comes to God must believe that
God is a rewarder of all that seek him diligently.

A Sixth rule.
That it be done in humility, to the glory of the Lord, honoring him with
our substance, acknowledging him to be the owner of all that we have, 1 Chronicles.
29, 9. Thankful to him that he has made us givers, which is a more blessed
thing than to receive: and for that he gives us an heart to be willing,
praying to keep it in our hearts, that of our selves are soon weary of
welldoing.

Que. What specially commends alms?

If the question be what specially commends alms, it may be answered, it is
commended in diverse considerations, other things being agreeable: Bounty when
a man gives more large alms (half my goods) this is commended in Dorcas
fulness of good works and alms deed, Acts 9, 36, 39. The widows showed
forth the coats and garments that she had made while she was with them. Act.
10. 2. Cornelius is praised for his much alms to the people.

A second thing that commends alms is the grace of the person; it is joined
with the alms of Cornelius in his commendation, that he was a devout man, one
that feared God with all his household, that prayed God continually, and
fasted: in sum that he excelled in virtues. The Macedonians are commended as
for their liberality and that rich out of extreme poverty, so for the
abounding of their joy in much afflictions, and for giving themselves to God
and the Apostles by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8. Notes of piety exceeding the
Apostles expectation. He looked for such an affection as is common to
Christians, they went beyond it. Without this grace of the person, quantity
commends little before God, he may be nothing profited if he give all away.

A third thing commending alms is promptness and fervor of actual will, as
the widow is praised in offering her two mites; all her living, before them
that offered more for proportion Arithemeticall than she, but in proportion
Geometrical offered more than they, because all she had, willing if she had
been as able to have offered more than they offered. And this in comparison
with the other two seems to commend the alms for greatness. Thus the
willingness of the Macedonians is made exemplary in the forwardness of their
will: I speak because of the forwardness of others. If there be first a
willing mind, God loves a cherefull giver. Liberalitas non cumul^ patrimonij,
sed largitatis affectu definitur. Amb de viduis.

Which reproves the covetous and illiberall, that Use.
give not of their goods to the poor. 1. They obtain a name of niggard even
from Gods people, they want both their good opinion and their good report,
Esaias* 32, 34. Gods people being taught of God shall with simplicity and
plainness speak that they truly understand, they no more speak honorably
of the wicked man in his wicked way; they shall call things as they be, a
niggard shall no more be called liberal.

2. They have a sin sticking to them which is reckoned among the sins of
unrighteousness, wherewith they were filled whom God gave up to a reprobate
sense, Romans 1, 30. Merciless, one of Sodoms sins, Ezekiel. 16.

3. They are under a fearful sentence for diverse judgments. 1. Coming to
poverty, Prover. 11. 24. He that spares more than is meet, surely comes to
poverty. 2. In his distress to have hearts shut against him, that he shall
find little or no help: let none have pity on him, on his fatherless
Children, because he remembered not to show mercy, P^al. 109, 12, 16. With
what measure ye mete shall men mete to you again, Luke 6, 38. Solomon exhorts
to liberality because we know not what evil may fall out upon the earth,
Eccles. 11, 2. If we come into distress, others may be hard to us as we
have been. God pays men home many times in the like as they have done to
others, as in other things, Job. 31, 9, 10. Eccles. 7, 23, 24. Prove. 24, 10,
11, 12.

4. His prayer unto God when he ^rieth, shall not be heard, Pro. 21, 13.
Whereby it appears that its no certain sign neither of a good life nor of a
good death that a man calls upon God, unless he calls upon God at all times,
and his prayer have the company of true virtues.

5. In few words he shall have many curses, Prove. 28, 27. And that woeful one
at last to have judgment without mercy, Iam. 2, 13. Whereas none can stand in
judgment without mercy, mercy tryumpheth.

To propound woe to them Vs^ 2.
that not only relieve not, but oppress the poor* The Lord has a
controversy with the land, because there is no mercy in it, Hos. 4. but
specially when it is as Solomon speaks of the mercies of the wicked, that they
be cruel, Prove. 12, 10. Amos 2, 6, 7. For three transgressions of Israel and
for four, I will not turn to it, because they sold the righteous for silver,
and the poor for shoes; they gape over the head of the poor in the dust of
the earth. They lie down upon clothes laid to pledge by every altar, Amos 5,
11. And ye take from them burdens of wheat, 12. I know your manifold
transgressions and your mighty sins; ye afflict the just, ye take rewards, and
oppress the poor in the gate; One punishment among the rest is for this and
other sins, mortality, that but the tenth part shall escape. v. 3. The City
which went forth by a thousand shall leave an hundred, and that which went
forth by an hundredth shall leave ten to the house of Israel. So Amos 6, 9.
Because they pamper themselves excessively, and none is sorry for the
afflictions of Joseph: If there remain ten men in one house, they shall dye,
and scarce any be left to bury the dead, but some shall burn them to ashes
within the house to carry them out more easily, v. 10. Amos 8, 3. There shall
be many dead bodies, they shall cast them forth with silence: The cause v. 4,
5, 7.

It may be for exhortation for them that neither oppress Use 3.
nor make the eyes of the poor to fail, but relieve them, to look to the
Rules in their giving, that they give not of unjust possessions; God hates
briberie for a burnt offering, Esaias* 61. God reproves wicked men for offering
him a part of their robberies and oppressions, thinking that therefore he will
dispense with them: he that judges them that share with thieves whether
private men, as Proverb. or Judges, Esaias* 1, Proverb. 1.
23, will not himself endure to be made a partaker of their iniquity: And so
for the rule of discretion and* sincere intention, etc. Here may be placed
that which is before, what is it of which alms are specially commended?

And if I have defrauded any man by forged cavillation, or false accusation. In
this is noted the manner of the sinning which publicans used in their calling,
in receiving tribute: which was, to pretend in their preying upon the people,
and their thefts, the commodity of the common wealth; and if any opposed them
in their defrauding and rapine, then would they impudently accuse them of wrong
to themselves and the common wealth. So when the Publicans coming to John's
Baptism, asked him what they should do; he answers, require no more than
that which is appointed unto you; implying that the sin of their calling was to
require more, and calumniate such as refused: The word (...), If I have played
the sycophant, is thought by some to be borrowed from the Athenians, among
whom he was called syco phant that told of them that had brought Figgs out of
other Countries as Attica; because the Figtree was among them in great account,
and it was forbidden to bring Figs from other places. Hereupon they began to
be called sycophants, that for a little money did draw men before judgment
seats for small cause, and sometimes for no cause but pretended, falsely
accusing the innocent. So Scapula on the wood (...). Others think it to have
begun, by the means of a Grecians servant, who having brought Figgs into his
house, one of his servants eat them up, and the master missing them inquired
who had them; he that was guilty accused his fellow that was innocent: to
find it out he made both drink luke warm water and vomit, and so the guile
and false accusation of that guilty person was discovered; from thence
deceivers and false accusers were called Sycophants.

From whence we may see unto what impudency in sinning for a little advantage
some men come to defraud and to lie and to be false accusers of men against
knowledge and conscience; it is noted by Solomon that some will make it but a
jest to be false witnesses to face out a matter impudently, knowing that they
lie falsely. Prove. 19, 28, A wicked witness mockes at judgment, making no
more account of right and truth, of Magistrates placed for justice, or of God
himself punishing false witnesses, than they do of things to be laughed at.
Iesabell makes no question but to find with ease witnesses that will
impudently lie against the very life of Naboth for a reward, 1 Kings 21. And
governors knowing the fraud and falsehood, to receive the testimony of such
rakehells and proceed to sentencing of innocent Naboth to death, and so sent
word to Iesabel what success her plot had, tryumphing in their thoughts after
their sinful gratifying of a wicked woman, that the villainy was so freely
carried. The high Priests knew well how to get men falsely to accuse our Savior
with a wet finger, they would not stick at it to set their tongues to sale for
a price: to help their friends, and benefit themselves.

Solomon speaks of riches gotten by a deceitful tongue, Prove. 21, 6. This
gain by deceit and lies is to a naughty heart wonderful pleasant, Prove. 10,
17. The more unlawful the better liked. It is as natural to men to lie and
deceive, as for nettles to grow with sowing or setting. All men are liars,
Psalm. 116, Romans 3. David was much troubled with cruel witnesses that charged
him falsely. Let it admonish men to nourish tenderness of conscience, shame and
bashfullnesse to sin: take heed of impudency, outfacing, outlooking
conscience, that secretly bites and barks when they resolve to sin. 2. Take
heed of inordinate desire of gain, it will make a man transgress in great
matters for a little and base price, Prove. 28, 21. Ezech. 13, 18, For handfulls
of barley and pieces of bread, to slay souls that should not dye, and give life
to souls that should not live. Hate such gain as brings the curse into the
house with it; it is vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death, Prove.
21, 6. Take he^d of getting by false accusation, by playing the Sycophant. That
charge which John Baptist gave to the soldiers, give to your selve; Accuse no
manfalsely, Luke 3, 14. It is set down among the sin of the latter time
proceeding from self-love, false accusing, 2 Timothy 3, 3. false accusers.

Seeing there be such as will accuse others falsely, and as Solomon faith,
inventeth slander, it must warn us not to be hasty to credit accusations
against any of our neighbors, but shut our ears to Sycophants, turn them
away with a frowning countenance, Prove. 25, 23. that he may learn not
willingly to speak that which he perceives is not willingly heard. It is one
note of a Citizen of the holy City, not to take up an evil report against his
neighbor; not only not devise it nor to utter it, but not to give ear to it.
Specially let magistrates take heed that they be not abused by Sycophants, to
trouble innocent men. Putiphar was abused by his wife so, and put his faithful
servant Joseph in prison: David falsely accused to Saul, was persecuted by him.
1 Samuel 24, 10, Wherefore give thou ear to men's words that say, behold David
seeks evil against thee? David himself though he had vowed otherwise in
the general, Psalm. 101, 5, against such persons as privilie slander their
neighbor, yet he harkened to that pickthanke Sheba, gave away Mephibosheths
lands to him, (...) Sam. 16, 4. Not but it may be lawful in cases to receive
informations against offenders. 1. When it may profit them unto reclaiming and
amendment, 2. When it is expedient for him that hears, to be told when there
is danger of injury. Gedaliah was to blame not to make use of that intimation
of Ishmaels purpose to kill him. 3. Necessary for him that speaks when
silence would make him accessarie to the thing concealed, ^ro^. 29, 24, He that
hears cursing and declares it not, Leuit. 5, 1.

I restore, if I have taken any thing from any man.

He forsakes his special sin upon conversion; so is it in repentance, that
as genorally there is a turning away from all sin: the will that was turned
away from God and his Law, Romans 8, 7, is now turned again thereunto. So from
the special sin, whether the sin of a man's calling as it is here, or some
other that reigns in the soul above other. As the Pharisees great sin was
rapine and covetousness, and our Savior exhorting them to repentance, bids
them sell that which they have and give alms, which should testify their
conversion: Give alms of that you have, and all shall be clean to you. Not
that alms is infallibly a sign of grace, but repenting and being changed from
covetousness to liberality, they would be turned also from all other sins
in will, if they considered the danger of that sin: and seeing the remedy in
Christ to believe in him unto forgiveness, the Spirit of Christ would purify
their hearts by faith, and all should be clean to them. Showing mercy in due
order, first to their own souls in believing in the Lord Jesus, and repenting
toward God their sins, and so proceeding to be merciful to others in
releeving them with their goods, they became clean and all clean to them,
Luke 11, 41.

The work of the Spirit is first in killing the root of every sin, that
nature corrupt has not that force unto any known sin that it had: and
gives new nature and holy disposition to all righteousness and inclination to
Gods Law. But in special it breaks the power of the master sin, as it is
in renewed repentance, one special sin is forsaken and men dwell upon the
undoing of it: yet it renewes the repentance of other sins. So in repentance
(...) S(...) ^1.
imtiall when a man first setts his feet into Gods way, some one sin that he
has been specially a slave to. 1. Which he has specially lusted after. 2.
Whereby he has been specially foiled. 3. Which God setts specially on his
conscience, upon which his thoughts specially attended: for which he specially
has striven, as Herod strive for incest, adding to other, and above all,
putting John in prison for reproving him for it; it lay upon his conscience
above other sins, as that speech full of fear testifies, This is John whom
I have beheaded.

He that is entered into his rest has ceased from his own works as God did
from his, Heb. 4, 10. He that has suffered in the flesh cease from sin, 1
Pet. 4, 1, 2: To live no more after the lusts of men but after the will of God.
There is such repugnancie between our lusts and Gods will, Gods governing of
us by his word and Spirit, and our ^arnall dispositions and affects, that he
works not in us but in our rest, and ceasing from sin: and this from the
example and virtue of Christ.

It may move men to examination of their conversion, Use.
whether as all sin so specially they are turned against their special sin.

If as for all, even sin of nature, Psalm. 51, they in pentientiall exercise
are humbled for their most reigning and raging sin: thus we find some of
Gods Servants to have some one thing trouble them above all the rest. As Paul's
blasphemy and persecution of the Church. 2. If old customed sins plead and
prevail nnto some acts, whether the hatred, grief, strife with care be not
more stirred; whether prayers for confirming grace be not earnest specially
against it. Whether in matter of rejoicing it do not make a man see specially
and confess his unworthiness of any good from God.

The act of the special Quest.
sin is ceased, is that enough to prove conversion, and that a man may
conclude I am the Child of Abraham?

There may be a changeing of a man's ways, that is Ans.
but to change with the Devils changing of his temptations, and that either
when he perceives a man's conscience holds him specially against some special
sin, which it may be some sickness or other affliction has made him vow
against: or his constitution or age, according to which men are subject to
sin in some particular more than another, fitts not for the former sin. So
a man may leave one master sin, and take another to serve in special manner,
as to forsake sins of spirit, as error, and to be held of sins of the
flesh. 2 Pet. 2, 18. In speaking swelling words of vanity, they beguile with
wantonness through the lusts of the flesh, such as were clean escaped from
them that are wrapped in error. And so on the other side, such as the Devil
cannot hold longer under the gross sins of the body, he leads them in
superstitions and great sins of the mind, 2 Timothy Thus is popery the Devils
advantage by Gods just judgment, to make it the refuge of the unconscio^able,
specially monied men that can buy the abundance of other men's merits to supply
their wants, and serve the Pope, as Luther professed he did of a kind of
conscience, such as he made to himself by the Devils motion.

2. There may be an external reformation in many things, the acts of sin
cease for a time, corruption driven up into corner, but yet possesses the
soul and holds the man still in his uncleanesse: his will is not converted
unto God. Goodness is rather of the will than act, and so actions generally.
David's will to build Gods house was accepted, Herod's will to kill Christ made
him a murderer, though he did not in act follow his will to execution. Luke 13,
Herod will kill thee. He cannot, A prophet cannot perish out of Jerusalem.

Zaccheus his will was turned so as to suspect where he knew not he had
sinned, with order for satisfaction; repentance will not suffer unknown sin,
but desires to have the man clean from secret sins.

The harlot is delivered of her great belly, the act is ceased; the whorehunter
breaks off, the filthy lucre, unhonest gain is in the chest, the treasures of
wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the act of unjust getting is
ceased: the drunkenness of the drunkard is slept out, he for shame cease to
do as he has done, and so of other sinners. Sin remains, and has an
existence till the will be turned to all the Law of God; and the sinner
remains separated from God as well after the act as in the act: after sin
there remains a stain, which is not only a defacing of former beauty of the
soul, but an actual ordination to sin, and disabilitie to that which is
good and pure. The will is quiet and rests in separation from God even after
the act ceased, and is still in sin. Sin is in one either by act or guilt*
action, either inward or outward, inward in the will, guilt remains though the
deed cease, till the will be on Gods side: as legally he that touched any thing
unclean he was unclean till he was washed, not only in the act of touching
but after. So in sin the soul remains unclean as it was in the act, it is
as far from God by dissimilitude which is in life and cleanness of it, as it
was in the act, Lomb. Sent. lib. 4. did. 18, lit. 1.

I restore. Restitution of goods evil gotten is a fruit of true repentance,
commanded, Numb. 5, 6, 7, 8, either to the party, his kindred, or if none of
them can be found, to the Priest. L^v. 5, 15, 16. If any man transgress
through ignorance by taking away things consecrated to the Lord, he shall
restore that wherein he has offended, and shall put the fist part more
thereto, and give it to the Priest, etc. As in tithes, offerings, vows: when a
man by flattering himself becomes ignorant of his duty, it is put as a
condition without which the wrong is not forgiven: but restitution made, and
repentance testified in walking in all the statutes of life, without committing
iniquity, life is assured.

Michah when he heard his mothers curse against him that had stolen her
eleven hundred shekles of silver, consesseth his theft and restores the silver;
His fingers were false, but his heart was tender: conscience will hold some
from facing sin, whom it restraines not from committing it, Judges 17. Samuel
offers restitution to any that charge him to have taken bribes of them, to
hire him to do justice. 1 Samuel 12, 3. Behold here I am; Bear record of me
before the Lord, and before his Anointed, whose ox, whose ass have I taken,
whom have I wronged? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received any
bribe to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will restore it you? The Prophets cry
out against the keeping of goods gotten by rapine and fraud in men's houses.
Ier. 5, 27, As a cage is full of birds, so is their house full of deceit, that
is, of prey gotten by ill means, whereby they are become great and waxen rich.
Michah. 6, 10. Are yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked?
How can your sins be pardoned when you repent not, but keep still your
evil gotten goods, treasures heaped up by wickedness? whereas the law
commands restitution of such to the owners.

Restitution is an act of special justice, whereby a man is possessed of that
(...) is his own. When the Apostle Romans 13.
says owe nothing to any man but love, he intends that we should give to
every man his due. A man that Use 1.
knows this doctrine of restitution, and against his light and conscience
keeps goods wrongfully, cannot justify his repentance, either in the sight of
God or his own soul: unless he have spent all and cannot make restitution,
then his will and love of the duty will be accepted. 2 Cor. 8, If there be
first a willing mind it is accepted according to that a man has. God
requires not of him that is willing, what he has not. Master Bradford that
holy man and martire, hearing a Sermon of Master Latimers wherein restitution
was urged, was struck in the heart for one dash of a pen which he had made
without the knowledge of his Master, and could never be quiet till by the
advice of Master Latimer restitution was made: for which he did willingly
forgo all the private and certain patrimony which he had on earth. The sin
is not remitted unless the value taken away be restored: repentance is but
fained. Levit. 6, 5, God required that in that day in which a man sought the
forgiveness of withholding from a man, that which was his or, robbed of him,
he should restore it. I(...)d as though he sought not reconciliation with
God, yet when his conscience was opened to see his sin in the ugliness of
it, abhorred the unjust gain of his sin, and carried it back to the Priests
of whom he had it, and whether they would or no, left it among them. The
theeft remains so long as the unjust gain is kept willingly, and no thief
enters into the kingdom of God. As it was with Judas, so proves it many times
with other men, their covetousness does them no good; they desire that which
when they have, their conscience dare not use; there is more desolation than
consolation in it.

What if restitution imply Quest.
some worldly danger or disgrace?

That which was unjustly Ans.
taken may be sent by another, and his name concealed; he that is of a
faithful heart concealeth secrets.

It may be for exhortation, Use 2.
to move men to be content with honest and just gain, though they grow not so
rich as others, that are not so straightened in their conscience. A little with
the fear of the Lord is better than great treasure, and trouble therewith,
Prove. 15, 16. It is both more profit^ble, for their riches are precious, Prove.
12, 27. A little box full of pearls is more precious than a house full of
straw. God blesses it, and Deuteronomy. 28.
makes it serve for use more, he maintains it, and so it is more stable,
Psalm. 37, 16, 17, Prove. 16. 8.

Fourefold. The quantity of fourefold declares his just will: The law required
not in all cases so much. Exodus 22, 3, He should make full restitution, Levit.
5, v. 4. If the theeft be found with him alone, he shall restore the double,
in a matter of trespass or any lost thing which another man challenges to be
his, whom the judges condemn he shall pay the double to his neighbor. That
judicial law binds us but only concerning equity, and sometimes it may be
needful to restore not only the principal but something for the damage, in
wanting his own while it was in our hands. There must be a will of doing him
right that he be no looser by us; or if it be judged, we are to restore as
the judge gives sentence, unless the party will remit.

Then Jesus said to him: This day is salvation, etc.

Christ honored this Publican both with his presence at his house as his
guest, and with his testimony of his gracious estate, that he was the Child of
Abraham, and so the blessing of Abraham was come upon him, salvation came to
his house that day.

Christ gives testimony of the grace which he works in men. As he is the
author, so is a witness of it to him in whom it is; he testified of the
Centurion that his faith was not only true but matchless even in Israel,
Math. 8, 10. Of the palsy man's faith and theires that brought him, Math. 9, 2.
Of the Cananitish woman's faith and degree, Math. 15. 28. Of the woman's says
healed of her issue of blood by touching the hemme of his garment, Mark 5, 34.
Of Mary he witnessed both faith and much love, Luke 7, 47, 48, 50. He
testified after his Ascension by the gifts of the holy Ghost given to them that
bel^eved in him, that their faith was not vain in him. As he spoke by his
mouth, Mark 16, 17, so he performed by his power. Act. 10, 44. When they
believed, God knowing their hearts bare them witness, in giving unto them the
holy Ghost as he did unto us, Acts. 15, 7, 8. Gal. 3, 2, He testifies of
men's faith ordinarily to the end of the world by the Spirit of adoption: giving
the Godly nature, dwelling in the believer, and testifying of his presence by
gracious operations, whereby he knows that he is the Child of God, Romans 8.
16* Sealed to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 1, 13, 14. and 4. 30. The effect of
which testimony is to free the soul from fear, and freely to call God Father,
Romans 8, 15, 16. To know that we are in Christ, and Christ in us, John 14, 20.

Which may convince the Papists of false doctrine in teaching that a man by
ordinary way cannot be infallibly certain of his being in grace. Is not the
testimony of Jesus sufficient to be rested upon?

Bellarmine has four positions concerning this point all false. 1. That such
infallible certainty of our standing in grace or of our being righteous,
cannot be had. 2. That no man is bound to have it if it might be had. 3. That
it is not expedient that ordinarily it be had, 4. That it is not in deed had
but of a few, unto whom God in a special sort reveals their justification,
Bell. de justif. l. 3, c. 8.

1. The reasoning out of Object.
which a man concludes the certainty of his own justice is this. The word of
God witnesses that all which are truly converted and seriously repent their
sins, obtain grace. But my true conversion is evident to me, and my
repentance; therefore I know with certainty of faith that I have found favor
and grace.

The assumption, faith Bellermine, is not only false but impossible, unless
revelation be present.

That which God promises Sol.
may be had, for he is true and cannot lie; but he promises this certainty
of our grace. John 14, 20, Ye shall know that you are in me and I in you.
Bellarmine putts it off with this answer, that we shall know that Christ is
the head of the Church, and so Christ is in his Church, and the Church in
Christ. But the scope is consolation to particular souls that believe in
Christ, but see him not because he is in heaven. What comfort to me that I
know Christ to be the head of the whole Church? do not the Devils know that?
what peculiar favor is this that even reprobates partake? Revel. 2, 17, I will
give him a white stone, and a new name in it, that none know but he that
receives it. Ergo he knows it.

2. That which God gives ordinarily to believers may be had: But he gives
this certainty of their standing in grace. Romans 5, 5. He shedds his love
abroad in their hearts by the holy Ghost* they feel it with certainty and
truly acknowledge it, Rom, 8, 16. Gal. 4. 6, God certifieth or makes their
hearts certain of their grace, even because they are in grace: So certain
that they are made holylie secure from that which they feared by the spirit of
bondage. And they make their hearts quiet before God, and have boldness before
him, certain of his favor to hear their prayers, 1 John 3, 19, 21.

Bellarmine objects; though Object.
by the Spirit moving us we pray, and call God Father, yet we are not
infallibly certain that it is the Spirit, but by conjectures which may deceive
us.

The use of witnesses among men is to end the controversy Sol.
by their testimony; and shall God give testimony to less purpose than man's?
Christ says of his, that though the world know not the Spirit, yet they know
him because he dwells in them.

Bellarmine. There is no Object.
more implied but that they are certain, that if they know God by faith, they
know not but by his aid.

It is given as a reason why Sol.
they know him, because he dwells in them. They are sure it is the Spirit of
truth, by his sensible operation in them; therefore they feel such holy force
in them as they are sure they are not deceived in their persuasion of the
Spirit of truth given unto them.

3. That which God commands us to have may be had; by their own confession,
his commaundemens are made possibile by his Spirit. We say so for some measure,
though not for perfection, Ezech. 36. 27. The ministry of the Gospel is a
ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. In some degree inabling us to that which is
commanded, 2 Timothy 1, 7. but God has commanded us to make our calling and
election certain, 2 Pet. 1, 10. Ergo to prove our selves whether we be meet
to receive the Lords Supper, which cannot be without 1 Cor. 11.
certainty of our grace. 2 Cor. 13, 5, Prove your selves whether you be in
the faith; know ye not your own selves that Jesus Christ is in you?

2. A man is bound to get certainetie of his grace, knowing it may be had, 1.
By necessity of precept. Heb. 6, 11. Show the same diligence to the full
assurance of hope unto the end. Heb. 10, 19, 22, Seeing we may be bold to
enter into the holy place, let us draw near with full assurance of faith, in a
true heart: let us keep the profession of our hope without wavering, for he
is faithful that has promised. 2. By evident reproof of doubt and fear
disquieting the heart. Esaias 51, 12, Who art thou that thou should fear,
etc. Mark 4, 40. 3 It where great injury to God, a hateful
unthankefullnesse, to be careless of receiving such mercy or stirring up our
selves to get it, when we know God gives it, Esaias 56, 2. 1 John 5, 9, 10.
John 14, 11, Believe me, at least believe me for the work sake. I am bound
to believe God testifying to my heart that I am in grace, and to rest in his
testimony, not to neglect it.

I am more bound when by his works he proves his authority to command me.
My sin is greater if I do not. John 15, Else they should not have had sin.
Works within are great witnesses.

3. It is expedient, it is of great profit to a man to know that he is in
grace, 1. To justify the ministry under which he has gotten life, 2 Cor.
3, 2. and 2 Cor. 5, 11, and 13, 5. 2 To work love to God, for love known, 1
John 4, 10, 16. 3. To do God free service without servile fear as our duty
is: Psalm. 2. With fear that has rejoicing in assurance of his favor, and so
without fear, Luke 1, 74.

For inforcements (by love) to give our selves to God, Romans 6. Romans 12, 1. To
dye to our selves, 2 Cor. 5. Gal. 6. whereby I am crucified to the world, and
the world to me: By Christ.

4. For sufferings for Christ, knowing what his sufferings for us has made us
to be possessed or in hope of, after we suffered a little, Romans 5. Heb. 10,
34.

5. For putting on graces meet for such as are so much above others bound to
God, and therefore to do as becomes them. Exhortations have their ground from
hence, that they are and know themselves to be in such a state, Coloss. 3, 12.
1 Thessalonians. 5, 8.

4. It is granted to most of them that are in grace (to all before their spirit
be called for to return to him that gave it) to know that they shall be
saved. The sending of the Angels to bring them to heaven, implies some
certificate of it from God to their souls: as at Christ's coming the just know
their sentence and are filled with joy at the immediate signs of the judges
coming before they hear it. John writes generally signs to know that we
have eternal life, 1 John 5.

It may provoke such as Use.
know not yet their gracious estate, to seek and wait till God come to them
and manifest himself, as Christ's promise is to them that love him, John 14,
21. God denying this knowledge, supplyeth it by giving other grace for good to
his, though he show himself an enemy, to trust in him against sense, to give
him glory of truth in that he has said and done.

He brings forth the grace of esteeming and desiring the knowledge of his love
by deferring the sense of it.

This day. Who knows what a day may bring forth? Conversion though an
admirable work, a supernatural change, yet is it quickly done when God will
put forth his power unto it.

This day. As Christ our Savior bare witness of the grace of Zacheus, and the
day in which he received it, so we are in a special sort, as we can take
notice to Gods praise, both of our grace and the time when it pleased God to
come to us with salvation, or any special good. God appointed days of
remembrance of his benefits three times in a year: which he called his
feasts, Levit. 23.

He is pleased to make some days memorable by so^e special work in them:
That they are singularly days that the Lord has made; as in the creation God
would have his works distinctly set down, upon such a day such things made
that we might more distinctly meditate them to his glory, Genesis 1. So he would
set certain days to the delivering or conferring some special good upon his
Church, and keep his day without failing, and such a day was to be remembered
for ever, Exodus 12, 41, 42. and 13, 3, 9. Psalm. 118, 24. The day in which God
set David in his kingdom, and delivered his Church, he calls a day that the
Lord has made, wherein they will rejoice and be glad. The scripture makes
mention of evil days and good days, evil when the Devil in a special sort
is permitted and ordered to tempt Gods servants, either with inward or outward
darting at them to wound them, if he can to kill them flesh and soul.
Dangerous and fearful to the weak servant of God, but he armed with the
whole armor of God, and resisting in the Lords might, standing with victory,
it is a day to be remembered, as that Father confesses there was opportunity,
there wanted temptation; there was temptation, there wanted opportunity; there
was both opportunity and temptation, and the Lord delivered me. Such days
are to be remembered to Gods praise. There be days set by the enemies of Gods
Church, sometime to destroy and root it out that their names be no more in
remembrance the Lord discovers their lot and their plot, and turns all upon
their own head that the net has caught themselves, they fall into the pit
they dug, the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands, the follows
Higgaion, Selah. A double noting, Psalm, 9. as greatly to be meditated.

As in that particular between Haman the Jews adversary, and M^rdechai and
the people, the day determined for their destroying utterly, was turned unto a
day of their deliverance, and destruction of their adversaries by that God who
turns kings hearts which way he will, as men turn the course of rivers and
streams, Ester 8. 17.

It may warrant and encourage Use 1.
unto the keeping of some days in a special thankefullnesse to the Lord for
some special benefits received thereon. As Herod kept his birth day without
Mark 6.
blame but by the abuse: They kept the feast of the dedication of the Temple,
at which our Savior was, as it seems, John 10, 22, 23. with approbation. The
Sabbath we keep, seems therefore to be changed from that seventh which
was for remembrance of finishing Gods work increation, to our seventh in
remembrance of restoring of all things by Jesus Christ, and is therefore called
the Lords day, Revel. 1. Not only as author of our keeping that day, but
referred to the remembrance of his work.

Mordecai by decree established the keeping of the memory of the Jews
deliverance every year two set days together, the 14, and 15. of the Month
Adar, (...)ster 9, 21, 22.

If days of deliverance and birth and benefits, specially concerning our
temporal, life be so warrantably observed and remembered, then days of our
spiritual and eternal delivera^ce and new birth unto a life that lasts for
ever, much more. Always ought we to be thankful, but specially remembering
the day in which salvation came to us; if men and women keep their wedding day
yearly, why not the day of their espousing to Christ?

The Apostle reproves Object.
such observation of days as in themselves more holy or by institution under
the Law, than other days: And so to observe days either by the Churches
precept, or by voluntary taking up to observe, is reproveable: for though in
respect of institution and use the Saboth is more holy than other days, yet
not in the nature of the day, for then it could not have been changed. As the
water in baptism by institution and use is holyer than other water, so the
bread and wine in the Sacrament, but not by any inherent holiness.

2. He condemns the keeping of such days above other Coloss. 2, 16.
as worship of God, of necessity in conscience, as if the not keeping bound to
sin. When none but God can give such Laws as the breach of them blots the
conscience: where is no Law is no trasgression, where the Church and governers
appoint, or men take them up to observe, they bind but as historical helps,
and are free without scandal and contempt.

3. He finds fault with the keeping of them as against faith, shadows of
Christ and his benefits for which they were instituted, Coloss. 2, 16. Christ
being come as the body of those shadows, the shadows must cease: But to keep
days in memory of benefits past, and to stir up to duties thereby for time
to come, is not against religion.

It reproves such as forget both benefits and days Use.
wherein the Lord wrought them for them. Psalm. 78, 42; They remembered not his
hand nor the day wherein he delivered them from the enemy: we are so apt to
forget benefits that we had need use al lawful helps to put us in mind of
them: consider the charge, Deuteronomy. 8, 10. 11: and David charging his memory,
Psalm. 103, 1.

Is salvation come: The day of calling and salvation is one, the same day that
a man is called he is saved. 2 Cor. 6, 2: Behold, this is the accepted time,
behold this is the day of salvation: the day of acceptance in Christ is the
day of salvation to him that is so accepted. Adoption comprehends all our
blessing, even the glory of the life to come. Romans 8, We wait for the adoption;
the redemption of our bodies. But in our calling, receiving Christ we receive
this dignity of adoption, John 1, 12. Calling is the revealing of Gods grace
and his will to save us by Christ Jesus in our minds and heart, so as we
consent to God calling, and follow after him for that life in his Son and
cleave to him for it. Coming to Christ and receiving of Christ are coupled
together, and the contrary not coming, not having life, but abiding in death,
1 John 5, 12. John 5, 40.

Calling is Gods work, inabling a man to perform the condition of the
covenant, which is to believe in Christ, and so makes partaker of Christ that
he is of his body, partaker of the promise and an inheriter also, Ephesians. 2, 6.
He that believes has everlasting life, is passed from death to life, John 5,
24. Calling effectual is the first revelation of predestination to life,
accompanied with justification, and glorification, Romans 8, 30. Justification is
unto life, Romans 5, 18. Regeneration is Glorification or Salvation begun.
Titus 3, 5, 7. He saved us and called us, 2 Timothy 1, 9. He saved us calling us;
we are called to his kingdom and glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2, 12. To obtain salvation
or the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 13, 14. To high things,
Phil. 3. The calling is therefore called heavenly Heb. 3, 1. Not only as from
heaven, but unto heaven. Come up hither, and then they ascend in the sight of
others, Revel. 11. We are called in hope of heaven, Coloss. 1, 4, 5. And by
hope we are saved, Romans 8, 24.

If calling and saving in Use.
respect of beginning and certain accomplishment, be contemporarie, then be
exhorted to make your calling sure, that you may be sure of your salvation with
it, 2* Pet 1, 10. Try your selves by these signs. 1. An echo like answering
to the Lord revealing his grace and will to save you by Christ, Psalm. 27, 6, 7.
Hos. 2. ult. Zach, 13, 9. Esaias 44, 5. God speaks first in the heart; then the
heart answers again to the Lord, and a man is ready to underwrite to the
Lord; if he say thou art mine, I have given my Son for thee as proof of it:
The heart will say, I am thine, with admiration of thy love receive I thy Son
given to me.

This will further by strife against unbeleefe, and the love of God, and a
careful applying of our souls as given to God to do his will, appear, though
we yet feel not our faith. Unbelief and other sins have no quiet settling,
no dominion over us; we labor to cast them out, and linger after the Lord, as
having our hearts touched by him, to receive him as our King to save us, as they
followed Saul whose hearts the Lord had touched, 1 Samuel 10, 26. As Elisha at
plough, after Eliah had cast his mantle upon him, as a sign of Gods calling
him to be a Prophet, could not but follow, and durst not so much as go home
without his leave.

2. A standing up from the world, unto new works whereunto. God called us, we
forsake the worlds fashion and manner of life, we can be no longer of one
mind and heart with them. Be they Heretics, civil men without religion or
professing religion without power; God in calling selects us from the world, we
cannot count them our dear companions, our hearts and ways do so disagree,
that we are abomination or matter of pity one to another. We are as, first
fruits to God.

3. A Spirit sitting us for that unto which we be called, by which we savor
things of the spirit, aspire to heavenly righteousness, not satisfied with
measure but to be filled with the fullnes of God, and following apprehend that
for which we are apprehended, we meditate now high things, a crown, a
kingdom, heavenly inheritance; lower things are too mean to hold us to them.

Be thankful you that Use z.
know your calling, 1 Timothy 1. I thank him. The promise is to them that the
Lord calls, be they near or far off; Act. 2, 39. That when you hear the
promises, you ought to praise the Lord, that made you true heirs of them, that
you may say Salvation belongs to me for the promise belongs to me in that I am
called. Praise God for the fellowship with Christ Jesus his Son to that he
has called you, 1 Cor. 1. 8. This calling is a special character of Gods
love, the first special evidence of it. Worldlings falsely conclude special
love from common blessings, against which Solomon opposes, Eccles. 9, 1. And
our Savior, Math. 5, 44. And the Rhemists note is good there, that outward
prosperity is certain either of a better man or better religion; but
effectual calling is an infallible evidence of Gods love from election to
salvation. Be studiously thankful for this which the Apostle puts the Romans
in mind, that among the Gentiles to whom he was an Apostle, they also were the
called of Jesus Christ, though by nature Gentiles, sinners vile, yet by calling
highly advanced to the dignity of Gods Children. Romans 1, 6.


Work out your salvation, Use 3.
follow till ye apprehend it, be diligent in adding graces, follow hard
toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 3, 12. 1 Timothy 6, 12. Nothing can give us more courage to strive to
eternal life, to fight for it, than this that we know God has called us to
obtain it, for we gather from thence that our labor shall not be in vain,
but God will be with us and prosper us, reach us his hand.

To this house. Gods mercy is such, that calling the Master of the family, the
household have salvation come near to them. Luke 10, 5, 6. Into what house
soever ye come, say peace to this house; if the Son of peace be there, your
peace shall rest on him. The son of peace one that favors the Gospel of
peace, or is worthy of the prosperity wished to the house; as Math. 10, 11.
Inquire who is worthy in it, and there abide: not yt there is inherent dignity
in any man living, but the elect in Christ are counted worthy. Thus gets he
the blessing into his house not only for himself but to his; thus many times
God joins the household in faith with the householder, John 4, 53. Act. 10, 2,
and 16, 15, 33, 34. Acts 18, 8. The Apostle Paul speaks of Baptising not only
some particulers as Crispus and Gaius, but the household of Stephanas, 1 Cor.
1. 14. 16. He saluteth Philemon and the Church in his house, Philem. verse 1,
2. So Aquila and Priscilla with the Church in their house, Romans 16, 3, 5. And
sends salutations from them to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16, 19. Aquila and
Priscilla with the Church that is in their house salute you greatly in the
Lord; the Church understand their household whether godly children, servants,
kinsfolks, which living together in one house do together worship the Lord, and
privately exercise all offices of piety, that it may well be called a private
Church.

God blesses the indevours of the Master of the family, that they submit at
last to outward duties, as Abraham found all his males subject to Gods
commandment that day in which God commanded it.

It may be, they are not always internally and from their hearts obedient.
C^in was for outward sacrifice subject and conformed as Abel was: so Cham, for
form of religion as Shem and Iap^et. It seems neither Lot in Sodom, nor Noc
had their servants in obedience to God, because Noc had none in the Arc, nor
Lot brought any out of Sodom, yet it is like they had servants, at least,
Genes. 19. The husband may believe and the wife remain an infidel, the wife
may believe and the husband continue in insidelitie, yet there is hope which
must move endeavor to win the contrary minded, 1 Cor. 7, 16. 1 Pet. 3, 2.

Let us exhort men to strive Use
to place themselves in families, where the Master is the Son of peace: it
may be better for body and soul, the household partaking in the blessing of
peace with him. As they that live in a visible Church, though yet they be not
sound at heart, yet for the time partake of diverse blessings for the faithfuls
sake among whom they live. Yet it is not safe to trust in being in such places
for fellowship of persons, unless they be in fellowship of faith; two in a
house shall be divided, yea two in a bed, one taken and another left. Every man
must live by his own faith.

It is dangerous to be willingly under a wicked governer, or one of his
house; for as the creature is subject to vanity for the sin of man, Romans 8.
And the creatures except the fishes perished in the flood with man that by his
sin abused them, Genesis 6. So it is not safe being a wicked man's beast, Exodus

Yet there may be Christians in a family where the family is not Christ's, Paul
Romans 16, 10.
salutes them of Aristobulus, but not him as it seems, as remainiug still in
infidelity: and they which are called in the household under an infidel
husband or Master, are not easily to forsake their place, but to honor their
Master in the superiority in which Gods providence has placed him over them,
1 Timothy 6. There were Saints in Neroes house.

2. Let believing governers of families set themselves with hope about the
reducing of them that be under the^ to the Lord, God does much for their sakes
specially toward such as belong to Gods Election in his house, 1 John 5, 16.
The covenant of God includes his with him, 1 Cor. 7.

In so much as he also is become the Child of Abraham. To be the Child of
Abraham is to be freely elected, Romans 9, 8. To walk in the steps of the faith
of Abraham, Romans 4, 12. To do the works of Abraham, John 8, 39. Whereof is
rightly collected the expectation of salvation, Romans 8 29.

That Salvation and being the Child of Abraham Obser.
put one the other; none but the Child of Abraham saved, none the Child of
Abraham but is saved. The blessing that comes upon men in Christ is called
the blessing of Abraham, Gal. 3, 14. The promise is made to Abraham and his
seed, Gal. 3, 16. He says not seeds, as speaking of many, but seed, as
speaking of one which is Christ. The blessing of Abraham is righteousness, and
everlasting life, which proceeds of the redemption by Christ from the curse of
the Law, he being made a curse for us. So as now malediction, sin, hell, have
no authority over us; Christ redeemed us and for us bare the curse due to all
our sins.

Christ is the storehouse of the blessing of Abraham, the promise of which
blessing was made to Abraham and his seed, that is Christ^ Heavenly
blessedness in the blessed seed. And all both Jews and Gentiles by faith
implanted into him and becoming one with him, are the seed, Gal. 3, 29, and
heirs of all the promised blessings.

Abraham is called the father of all that believe, either Jews or Gentiles,
Romans 4, 11, 12. Faith was imputed to him when he was uncircumcised for
righteousness, and after he was justified he received the sign of
circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had when
he was uncircumcised, that he should be the father of all them that believe,
not being circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also: and
the father of the circumcision, not unto them only which are of the
circumcision, but unto them also that walk in the stepps of the faith, of our
father* Abraham, which he had when he was uncircumcised, verse 16, 17. All
the seed have the promise assured according to grace, not only the Jews that
are of the Law, but the Gentiles that are of the faith of Abraham the father of
us all, according to the Oracle, A father of many nations have I madethee. He
is the father of all the faithful, not effectually to beget them and to work
their faith and conversion, so God only is their Father begetting them by his
Spirit.

But analogically and by proportion, that as fathers do transmit to their
natural Children inheritance, and other rights of theirs; so he for the grace
of the covenant given to him, should as a father transmit to the believers the
righteousness and blessedness promised and given to him. That which is proper
to Christ is spoken of him.

In him shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed Genesis 18, 18. In thy seed
(that is, Christ, as Paul interprets) shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed; Genesis 22, 18. So he is called the heir of the world, Romans 4, 13. Act.
7: Of Canaan a type of heaven, and as the best part of the earth, as a type of
the whole world to be possessed of Abraham and his seed, specially the head of
that seed Christ. This inheritance of heaven and earth he receives from God
through the righteousness of faith, and transmitts it to all his Children in
all the Nations of the earth, that is, such as believe unto righteousness, and
so are adopted Children and heirs of heaven and earth, Psalm. 37, 20. 1 Cor. 3,
21. So in death the faithful were gathered into the bosom of Abraham their
father, and sit with him in the kingdom of heaven the Church gathered out of
the universal, as his Children for number, like the stars of heaven.

In this is set forth the Use.
dignity and felicity of Abraham, in his paternitie, that all the Nations of
the world believing should be his Children: whereby appears that all have not
equal honor and felicity, that have says equally precious. Abraham and all
the faithful are equally just by imputation of the righteousness of Christ
unto them. But they are not in this honor with him to have the place of
paternitie to all the faithful.

The Pope usurpes, in calling himself the head of all the faithful: it was
never given him of God, it is his misery that so many flatter him in his
unjust usurpation.

It implies that there is Use 2.
but one faith and way of salvation under the Law and Gospel, Heb. 13, 8. Acts
15, 11. Heb. 6, 12, and 11. By faith they obtained testimony yt they were
righteous: and stand as so many witnesses, that only by beleving in Christ,
resting the soul wholly on his obedience for our whole felicity, is the way to
life from that promise, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.
By what faith Abraham was saved, his seed are saved. There is one says both
for that which is believed, common faith once given to Saints, Titus 1, 4.
Jude. v. 3. And in respect of that kind of faith by which we do believe,
though for number there be so many faiths as there be believers, yet for kind
Abraham's faith and all that have savingly believed, is one and the same for
ever; not in degree, his measure was strength in faith, most believers now are
weak in faith.

Papists are to prove their right in claiming to be children of Abraham, seeing
they have not nor teach (twice damnable teaching, contrary to the faith of
Abraham) applying Christ the blessed seed to himself, laughing in joy of his
felicity, of which his Son was called Isaac; and Christ in whom he
believed, testifyeth that he saw his day with rejoicing, though a far off,
yet with gladness, in respect of his own salvation in him. To that purpose
Christ urges his example to the Jews that would not believe their own
salvation in him: you will not come to me that you might have life, John 5.
They make two other claims to heaven, merit of person, in Children, or such as
newly converted are taken away by death, that working is prevented; and merit
of works, both concurring augments (they say) glory, and the latter confirms
the former that it is not lost: a strange voice not heard of Gods people, that
will not go after a stranger because they know not his voice. They blaspheame
imputed righteousness.

It follows, that to have Use 3.
comfortable assurance of salvation, we must prove our s^lves Children of
Abraham; that proved the other is sure: that is,

1. By being of faith, to rest on Christ's merit inherent in his own person,
without any work done out of grace, or in grace, of ours, trusted in as any
part of cause to salvation. As God preached the Gospel to Abraham and he
believed, Gal. 3, 7, 8, 9. Romans 4, 1, 2, 5. To be borne by virtue of the
promise as Isaac, Gal. 4. Romans 9. 2 By being in Christ by faith, Gal. 3, 29.
If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs by promise. Which is to
be known by having the Spirit of Christ in us, to do the works of Abraham,
John 8. 39. Michah 2, 7. James 2, 22. By the illumination of the Spirit,
anointing and healing our minds to discern difference of things true or false
good or evil, 1 John 2, 20, 27. To preserve us from evil ways and evil men,
Prove. 2. 2, By regeneration in giving and increasing the godly nature. 3. By
governing or leading, Romans 8, 14. 4 By consolation, John 14. The comforter. 5
By confirmation, giving a constancy in the work of righteousness, to work
righteousness at all times, Ps. 106.

Verse 10. The Son of man is come, to seek and save that which was lost.
This is a defense of the action of Christ in his going in to Zacheus: he came
for lost sinners, Zaccheus and his household are such. Ergo he offends not, he
does nothing against his office in going in to him.

Though we may not Obser.
for a passive scandal, (which is, 1. By ignorance of some, 2. By malice in
others) forbear the duties enjoined us by the Lord, as appears, Math. 15:

Yet as occasion is, we are to give a reason of our doing, in general for
holding and professing truth contrary to the worlds opinion; as why we are not
as the Pagans, as the Jews, as the Papists, as profane men in the number of
them that are in profession of true religion. 1 Pet. 3, 15, Be ready to give
a reason of the hope that is in you.

Our Savior submitts himself to this order, Mat. 9, 11, 12. Why eats your
Master with Publicans and S^ners? his defense is, it is the calling of
Physicians, to be with the sick that have need of him. 2. Mercy is preferred
to Sacrifice. 3. I am come to call sinners to repentance, verse 13. So Luke 15,
By three parables he justifies his mercy to sinners, by their diligence that
seek things lost which they would recover, and that graduallie, 1. The woman
her groat lost out of ten, the sheepeheard his sheep out of an hundred: the
father and the fathers joyful receiving of a dead and lost son.

His answer and defense of the woman's fact that so shed precious ointment upon
him, which might have been* useful to the poor, and on him seemed to be
waste: 1. She has wrought a good work upon me. 2. The poor ye shall have
always with you, me ye shall not have always. 3. She did it to bury me.

Of his and his Disciples not fasting, he gives answer to them that take
exception. 1. The state suits not to the exercise, it is a time of rejoicing as
in a marriage feast. 2. The exercise is such as exceeds their strength. As old
garments cannot abide the strength of new cloth sowed to them, as old bottels
cannot hold out to the strength of new wine, it falls out to the worse, Matthew
9. 14. 17.

Of his admitting of Mary to touch him in that manner as she did, seeing she
had the account of a notorious sinners, 1. she loved much, her many sins were
forgiven; she showed more devotion than he that found fault with her, Luke 7.

Our duty is not only Reason.
to please God manifesting our selves to him, but to manifest our selves to the
consciences of men, 2 Cor. 5, 11.

2. The just defense either gives satisfaction to them that are offended of
ignorance and weakness by a preposterous zeal, as Peter's defense of his
going to Cornelius, Act. 11, 18. Or shames the malicious adversaries, Luke 13,
17. And getts glory to God, Mark 2, 10, 12, 13.

For reproof of such as Use.
standing upon their own judgment, or their own greatness, are so careless
in hearing that men are offended at their doings, as that they contemn them
and respect not their satisfaction; if either of these might have dispensed in
this case, Christ above all might have stood upon them.

He that calls himself, and is called by flatterrers Christ's vicar, is neither
like Christ or Peter. He is of another spirit. If he draw thousands to hell
no man must say what do thou. He must be judge of all, and judged of none.
Yet they grant now that he may be reproved by inferiors, so it be with
reverence, and in modesty. Bellarmine de conciliorum authorit, lib, 2, c, 19.
Licet ^nim eum servata reverentia admonere and modeste corripere. So the
Rhemists annot. on Galat. 2, 11. The inferior though not of office and
jurisdiction, yet by the law of brotherly love, and fraternall correption, may
reprehend his superior: If it be a good Priest, or any virtuous person, he may
admonish the Pope of his faults, and he ought to take it in good part when it
comes of zeal and love, as from Cyprian, Hierome, Augustine, Barnard: but if
it be from Wickleife, Luther, Calvin, Beza, that do it of malice; he is not to
be reprehended, but take their raylings patiently: but our Savior reprehended
as malicious adversaries, as the Pharirises were, yet gives a reason of his
fact which they reprehended.

It is one thing of which Job protests his integrity, that he did not
contemn the judgment of his servant nor of his maid when they did contend
with him, I^^ 31, 13. Because fellow creatures, and to be judged impartial, if
inferiors may reprove their superiors with some preface of honor, with
submission and acknowledgement of their place and dignity above the^,
otherwise shutting up their mouths, if respect of Gods honor and their
brethrens edification did not constrain them: it may be well yielded to an
inferior to satisfye in a matter at which he is offended, specially if the
offense be of ignorance and infirmity.

For the Son of man is come to seek and save etc. Our Savior defending his
going in to the house of Zacheus, by the end of his coming into the world, of
his calling to the mediatorship between God and man: It may teach us that our
calling, binding us to the things we do, justifies our actions done by that
obligation, and may answer for us against them that accuse us. Thus Moses
accused for taking too much upon him, abusing the people, making himself Lord
and ruler over them, he cleares himself by the Lords testimony of calling him
and A^ron to be above the Congregation of the Lord, Numb. 16.

Esaias calling for diligent attention to his prophecy of the deliverance of the
Israelites from the captivity of Babylon, and of the evil that should come
upon the Caldeans, such none of their diviners nor gods could foretell: and the
man that God had loved, so as to choose him to the kingdom for this work, he
justifies his requiring of such attention, because he speaks not of
himself, but the Lord and his spirit sent him, Isay 48, 16. God sent him, and
inspired him by his Spirit to speak such things so as they might rest in them.
Jeremy quarrelled about his prophecy against Ier^salem and the Temple: and
threatened with death for it by the Priests, and the Prophets, gives this for
his defense, The Lord has sent me to Prophecy against this house and against
this City, all the things they had heard, Ier. 26, 12, 15. Upon which by the
means of Ahikam, he was not put to death. Though the contention was great by
reason of the malice of the Priests and false Prophets, yet that godly man
sloutly maintained the cause of God and forsook it not till he had delivered
him: it is said therefore that the hand of Ahikam, that is, his great help was
with Jeremy that they should not give him into the hands of the people to put
him to death, v. 24.

Amos complained of to the king for speaking words that the land could not
bear, and flatteringly persuaded to go to Judah and prophecy, but not at
Bethel because the Kings chapel and the Court was there, answers for
himself, that the Lord sent him to prophecy to his people Israel, when he
was no Prophet nor Prophets son, but an heardman and a gatherer of wild
Figs: and therefore adds a special Prophecy against Amaziah that opposed
him. 1. Concerning his wife, to be a whore in the City. 2. His sons and
daughters to dye by the sword. 3. His lands to be divided by line. 4. And
himself to dye in a polluted land, Amos 7, 10, 17. Paul cried out on for his
profession and defense of Christian Religion, justifies and defends his
cause by declaring Gods extraordinary calling of him to the faith, when he went
earnestly on in a clean contrary way, Act, 22, 1. etc, Act. 26. 1, 9. etc.

All men should rest in Gods authority, he gives and appoints us our
callings, and commands us to walk in them; he gives all the skill and
ability that any man has for his calling, 1 Cor. 7, 17. Therefore when we
accommodate our actions to the rule of our calling, and with diligence perform
the offices that by virtue thereof we owe to any man; any man that judges it
meet to obey God, and walk with him, may easily excuse us, and satisfy
themselves.

It may admonish men to keep themselves within Use. 1.
the compass and limits of their calling, either general or personal and
particular, Romans 12, 4, 6, 8. That it may be said it appertains unto us, Luke
12, 14. Man who made me a judge or a divider over you? Lest we in curre blame
of curiosity. John 21, 22, What is that to thee? Of busy bodies in other men's
matters, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 11. 1 Timothy 5, 13. 1 Pet. 4, 15. Or into danger out of
which we hardly can tell how to deliver our selves, Prove. 26, 17.

If we walk in our calling and trouble befall us, yet our conscience will
comfort us.

But if meddling out of our calling we meet with knockes, we have the blame
laid upon us even by our consciences, and by men of common light. We have no
assurance to be in safety. 2 Samuel 6, 7, Vzzah was smitten of God in such a
case even with death, and many of Beth^hemesh, even 50000. and 70. Because they
looked into the Arc, 1 Samuel 6, 19. Which was not lawful but for A^ron and his
sons, who must appoint others what to do, Numb. 4, 19. 20. Vzziah smote he
with leprosy for meddling with the Priests office, 2 Chronicles. 26, 16, 18. It
pertains not to thee Vzziah to burn Incense etc. Thou shall have no honor
of the Lord God. While he was wroth with the Priests, the Leprosy rose in his
forehead, and he remained a leper, and dwelt in his house apart unto the day
of his death.

The sons of Sceva who took upon them to adjure evil spirits by naming over
them that had them the name of the Lord Jesus, were forced to flee away naked
and wounded, with this rebuke from the evil spirit by the man: Jesus I
acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are you. The man was carried by the
Devil in him (by Gods permission) to use such strength, as seven young men
were overcome to their great shame and hurt; and it fell out to much advantage
of the Gospel as appears in the chapter.

The Son of man. 9. Why so called? Dverse judge diversely. Some, that he
would be so called that he might show that he was that Messiah which the
Prophets foretold should take the nature of man, whom Daniel called the Son
of man, Dan. 7, 13. Theodoret in Dan. 7. Others that it is as if he called
himself the Son of Adam, as drawing his kind from Adam by the virgin, not
having any man to his father, Nazianzen. Others to declare the great benefit of
his incarnation for us. Aug de consens. Euang. l. 2. c. 1. Commendans nobis
quid misericorditer dignatus sit esse pro nobis. Or because he was also the
Son of God, he would hereby distinguish the natures one from another.
Others, to signify that he was indeed See (...)donat. i^ Mat. 8; 20.
as he showed conversing among men very man, 9. Why Ezechiel only (in
particular) in the old, and Christ in the new testament be so called.

Come. What. The coming is thus, sent of the Fathers love to be the mediator,
to reconcile God and man, he took man's nature into unity of person of the
Son of God, to perform the office of the mediator to bring man again to
God.

To seek. This is the first end of Christ's coming to seek that which is
lost, Ezech. 34, 11, 12, 16. He justifies his compassion and humanity to
Publicans and Sinners by the practice of men, that having an hundred sheep,
leave all to seek one that is lost, wandered from the flock; and a woman
seeking one g^oat, with diligence, though she have nine left: And the joy of a
father, at the return and finding of his lost son Luke 15.

This seeking for lost souls, is truly noted in Christ's going about all their
Cities and towns, preaching and teaching the Gospel of the kingdom, Math. 9,
35. In taking opportunities as they fell out, to inform men in the truth, not
contemning the vilest, as the woman of Samaria that lived a whore, with one
that was not her husband his Disciples marveiled at it, whether at his
humility therein as some think, or by reason of the baseness of the woman
which was blameable, considering themselves from what and whereunto his favor
had taken and exalted them: but by occasion he makes his end known. That is,
out of great desire, and great sweetness and delight, to take all
opportunities of conversion of men, and that by two similitudes, one by their
desiring him to take meat, to which he answers, he has meat already that
they knew not of, and declares what he meant: they not understanding, inquire
about some bringing him meat, still minding meat for his body wc they saw to be
needful for strength to go on with his work; he declares, it is the
opportunity present of doing his Fathers will. And the sauce to that meat is
gathering of the scattered Children of God. He waited for the issue of his
conference with the woman, in her bringing of the Samaritans, which was, they
believed, in a double degree, by her report, to teachabl^es, by their hearing
him, to setlednesse.

The other similitude is from harvest, that (something obscured by some
interpreters) yet tends to the same thing. Some as if it were proverbially,
(you) that is, it is usually said) there are four months to the harvest, as
if haste needed not: otherwise why does our Lord say, you say, yet four
months to the harvest; Here present occasion requires diligence, the regions
are white unto the harvest, yet that seems more to be his meaning, as harvest
admits not stay, but when it is ripe put in the sickle, in another sense, but
agreeing, about ripeness, and then putting in the sickle.

He is said to see men before he call them, as he saw Matthew, at the receipt
of custom, Math. 9, 9. Nathaniel under the Figtree before Philip spoke a word
to him of Christ, John 1. 48.

His seeing in this kind is not occasional, but of purpose, seeking the
particulars of the election. You have not chosen me: But I have chosen you,
etc. John 15. He seeks the elect, by the scriptures, by his ministers, by
internal motion, either of An^gels or immediate of the Spirit, by benefits,
long suffering, by rebuke. By corrections: so he sought Manasseh. So the
prodigal is noted to be brought home. Thus Job 33, He opens the ear by
corrections, thus he seeks men unto conversion, the co^verted to repentance.

Because he is sent to this; That nothing given him should be lost.

To admonish us of our natural state, to take true notice of it. We though
extremely miserable, were not carried with any care of our own freedom, we
sought not God, Psalm. 14, 2. We went astray every one, after his own way,
Esaias 53, 6. We have turned every one to his own way: of this more, in that,
he came to the lost.

We sought not Christ till he looked after us to recover us from our state of
loss, Esaias 65, 1. We thought not of returning to God so much as by dream. We
are therefore to give all the praise of our illumination to see our misery and
remedy of it; and of the inclination of our wills to desire to be healed, unto
the Lord preventing us with his grace. We were as the clay in the potters
hands, and could do nothing, no not will any thing* about our forming and
fashioning; no more in our regeneration than in our creation.

Our hearts naturally are stony, having no aptness to be formed, rebellious,
hard, till God change them and make the stone flesh: that we have now
inclination to heavenly things, things spiritual, it is a supernatural change
in the will, that inclined us only to things of the flesh. Inclination to
things of the Spirit, is the work of Gods grace: who sought us and changed us
into new creatures, as if a stone or Lead should have an inclination to fly
upward.

We were dead, therefore could no more seek our own quickening than a dead
body can seek restitution to life. This is in a sort confessed of the learned
Papists: That a man without the work of Gods Spirit, cannot do or will any
thing in these things that belong to Piety and Salvation, not any way by the
strength of nature prepare himself to receive grace.

Therefore when a man has a will to believe, to be converted, to be healed in
Soul, to be free from rebellious motions that come from the carnal part, to
serve God without let, without contrary* lusts from the will of the flesh, it
is a plain sign of Gods grace in him: we do indeed feel our disposition and
desire to believe and be converted before we know that we be converted. Yet
the will is healed in order of nature before it desire freedom from spiritual
bondage. It is the comfort of a regenerate man that he would do good, Romans 7.
Some natural or morrall good a man without grace may will, but not spiritual
to be agreeable to the spirituallnesse of the Law. Though a man cannot follow
the guidance of the spirit without feeling and hindrance of the flesh, yet
there be a lusting of the Spirit against the desires of the flesh, hindering
the fulfilling of them, the man is in grace. Luther when he was a Monk, vexed
with these thoughts, this or that sin thou have committed; thou art infected
with envy, impatience, and such other sins; all thy good works are
unprofitable; confesses if he had understood that place of Saint Paul, the
flesh lusts against the spirit, etc. He should have said as he did after he
received light. Martino, thou shall not utterly* (...). (...).
be without sin, for thou have flesh, thou shall therefore feel the battle.
Despair not, but resist strongly, fulfill not the lust of the flesh, and thus
doing thou art not under the Law.

It is the note of Gods Children, that they seek the Lord, and feeling such
indevoure in themselves, they may, they must rejoice, Psalm. 105, 3. Let the
heart of them that seek the Lord rejoice.

The Papists between those works which we do by natural strength, and those
that we do by grace infused and inherent in us, teach a third kind of works
which neither come from any power of ours merely, nor yet from any
supernatural grace in us inherent, but by external aid of the Spirit by
which they seek their justification. They put erroniously faith and love
actually to go before justification, which are together with it for time, and
love is from Gods love, made known in some sort to us. If God should lift us
up to love him before he justify us, he should by making us love him,
prepare us to be loved of him; whereas John says not that we loved him, but
that he loved us first. We do long after rather than feel our justification,
desire but scarce perceive, unto rest of soul, grace to dwell in us
manifestly. Sometime we are in fear, sometime believe and hope, and are in
repentant sorrow, by which we are led to the more manifest perceiving of that
which is wrought in us, and to a further measure of peace which we do desire,
Lam. 3, 21.

Though the will carried up to Godward, embracing him, and drawing to him as
unto the chief good, his favor, his countenance above all earthly things:
Uniting a man's self to him by a fervent act of his will, his will beginning to
be made one with Gods will, resolved and desiring to do it without partiality
or reservation: be a true note of a gracious estate. Yet there is a conviction
of judgment, by which a man sees what is meet for him to do, as to arise
out of his sin, and with force of his conscience he purposes; it may be
voweth against some particulars; but his will is not renewed, and so he has
no spiritual inclination to the good he sees; or aversion from the sin he
is convinced of; it is therefore but temporary, it fades away like the
morning dew.

It may move us likewise Use. 2
to ascribe our rising from our falls to his seeking of us, who otherwise do so
dote upon the temptation as that we have no mind to seek God to pull us out.
Spiritus gratiae in eo qui recepit semper est in eo qui recepit, sed non
perpetno operans, Cant. 5. Which may appear in David, in Solomon, in Peter who
repented not till Christ looked back upon him, and it was not without some
inward work in his heart.

Vt quis possit a peccato resurgere, requiritur gratia excitans quae non semper
adest, gratiam excitantem non semper haberi experientia ipsa testatur. Bell. de
gratia and lib. arbitr. l. 2, c. 7.

Sometime there is a will of rising out of falls but not power, as Psalm. 119,
176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep, O seek thy servant, for I do not
not forget thy word. Ambros: Quaere me, quid ego te requiro, quaere me, inveni
me, suscipe me, por^a me, po^es invenire quae (...) requiris: dignare
suscipere, quae invereris: impone humeris quae susceperis: non est tibi pium
onus fastidio, non tibi oneri est vectum justitia, veni ergo Domine, quia etsi
erravi, tamen mandata tua non sum oblitus, spem medicinae reservo, etc. Admonet
nos deus facere quod possimus and petere quod non possumus. Aug. de natura and
gratia. Quando homo non potest si vult, propter voluntatem impossibilitas non
imputatur: si autem non vult propter impossibilitatem, voluntas non excusatur.

To stir up to seek him with hope, now found of Use. 3.
Christ, who sought them when they asked not after him. If he sought us when
we neither knew him nor sought him: as John 4, If thou had known etc. Now
we seek him, we may be bold, we shall not seek him in vain, he is good to
the soul that seeks him, Lam. 3, 25. I have not said in vain to the house of
Jacob, Secke ye me. Ye shall seek me and find me, because ye shall seek me
with all your hearts, Ier. 29, 11, 13. If when we were enemies, Christ
reconciled us to God, much more being reconciled shall he save us from wrath.
He gives by his Spirit to us to seek by requests of God such things as we
need, for which same he in heaven makes intercession for us.

To stir up our love and Use 4.
care in seekeing men that are lost or fallen, in common duty of charity, or
special charge and office. The first implied in that speech, Cant. 8, 8, 9,
10. The Church of the Jews speaks to Christ for the Gentiles yet uncalled,
who destitute of the word and ministry, not having the true doctrine whereby
to nourish others, as a virgin that has no breasts, not yet mariageable, so
unfit yet to receive Christ, desiring that they may be brought to the
acknowledgement of Christ, asks what shall be done for them in that day of
their calling to him, when there shall be treaty of their marriage to him. The
Church joins her self to Christ in this care of doing something for the
calling of the Gentiles, because though the power be his, and he be the author
of all heavenly blessings, yet he uses the faithful in this work as his
instruments.

The answer of Christ implies his good liking of that care for the Gentiles
calling according to the Prophecies: If she be a wall, if she be constant and
continue firm in expectation of her promises and the profession of that truth
which shall be revealed, we will build upon her a silver palace, we will
build upon him a silver palace, beautify and strengthen her with further
grace, make her a costly palace fit to entertain my spirit; and if she be a
door, we will keep her in with boordes of Cedar: if she give free passage and
good entrance to my word and grace, we will make her sure and safe from
corruption, and reserve her to immortality. Christ joins the Church still
with him in this as an instrument voluntary. Ezech 18. Return and cause one
another to return. Hos. 6. Come let us return to the Lord. Zach. 8, 21. They
that dwell in one City shall goo to another, saying, Up, let us go and pray
before the Lord of hosts and seek him, I will go also: like that Esaias 2, 2, 3.
Come, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, etc. Joshua 22, 19. If
the land of your possession be unclean, come over unto the Land of the
possession of the Lord, where the Lords tabernacle dwells, and take
possession among us, but rebel not against the Lord, etc.

This is the nature of faith to breed love to God and those that belong to him,
even such as they never saw, that were long before them and shall be long after
them. This love brings forth desire and endeavor to procure their salvation.

We pray, thy kingdom come, our endeavor must prove the truth of our desire.

The success may provoke to the duty, Psalm. 51. I will teach thy ways to the
wicked, and sinners shall be converted to thee: a man shall have joy of the
answer of his lips, Prove. 15, 23. It is to such a fruit as a righteous man
has not a greater. Prou. 11, 30.

Let him know it, he saves a soul from death, and covers a multitude of
sins. Iam. 5.

Seek them then by prayer, stand before God and speak good for them; we love
little, if we will not speak a good word for a man. The fearful condition of
the world is noted, in that, Christ loved them not so much as to pray for their
salvation, John 17. Thus Paul sought Israel of God: Christ those that crucified
him of ignorance.

2. By teaching and admonishing them of the error of their way, Ezra 7, 25.

3. By doing good unto them and conversing honestly and with winning behavior
before them. Waiting for God to succeed all.

If we must do thus of charity, when we also have charge to do so, public or
private, how should we not apply our selves to seek men's souls wherewith we
are charged? how shall we free our selves from guiltiness of their blood that
perish without our endeavor to save them? When a man has done that which
appertained to him, and they will not return but dye, he has delivered his
own soul. How woeful is their case that seek not to recover the fallen, but
draw them into sin?

And to save. Consider we the action to save, 2. The property he has in it,
he came to it as appointed of his Father; The state of the persons to whom he
performs this, lost.

To save: he was appointed, Esaias 49, 6, He is called the Salvation of God;
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation; Luke 2. He has his name Jesus of that:
He Mat. 1. 21.
shall save his people from their sins; he says of himself that he came to
save men's lives, not to destroy them, Luke 9, 56. Not to condemn the world,
but to save the world, John 12. He came to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1, 15. God
has lift him up to be a Prince and a Savior, Act. 5, 31.

Q. How does he save us?

A. By his merit and spirit; merit of his life, and of his death, fulfilling
the Law for us, expiating all our sins by the Sacrifice of himself, making
intercession for us.

Not only was he without sin, as John 8, 46. 2. Cor. 5, 21. 1 Pet. 2, 22,
23. Heb. 4, 5. That he needed not to offer as the high Priests under the Law
for his own sins, Heb. 7, 27.

Neither did he fulfill the Law perfectly, only for himself, and so is called
that holy thing in respect of nature, sanctified from the conception, Luke 1.
The holy Child, Act. 2, 27. Holy one, Act. 13, 35. And the just, 3, 14. But he
fulfilled the Law for us: as many as he came to save, Romans 8; 3, 4. Romans 10,
4. As Adams disobedience, is imputed to all his progeny, so the obedience of
Christ is to all that are in him as their root. Romans 5, 19. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners: So by the obedience of one, many are made
righteous. We may be said in a sort to be justified by the righteousness of
the Law, but inherent in Christ, imputed to us.

Justification by faith imports two things, the not imputing of sin,
imputation of righteousness, which is called the righteousness of God, not
only by Gods appointing it, or by his accepting it, but by his working of it
in Christ, his obedience being the perfect, full, entire obedience of his
person, God and man, not only of his nature humane to be a holy and a just
m^n, whence it comes to be meritorious. The Apostle teaching that we are
justified by faith, says that in so teaching he establishes the Law. Even by
that Doctrine because the righteousness which it requires for matter, is
performed by Christ, and offered to God as our righteousness, and imputed of
God to us: it requiring unto life, do this, man by faith finds it in Christ.
If it be thought absurd that we are justified and made righteous by legal
righteousness, it may be answered, that legal and evangelicall righteousness
do not differ in matter, but in the efficient and manner. The Law required it
of our own performance, the Gospel teaching it to be sufficient that it is
performed by Christ for us, and apprehended of us by faith.

Daniel 9, 24. The benefits of Christ are noted to be two. One in respect of
sin and evil: 2. In respect, of righteousness. The first in 3. Degrees, 1.
Confirmation of the godly against defection, to finish the transgression.
Cohibendo defectionem illam, continebit and confirmabit bonos ne deficiant a
Deo. 2. To seal up, or to make an end of sins. To cover sins, so as God
will not behold them. He sees none in Jacob, Numb. 23. To make reconciliation
for iniquity, to give a full satisfaction, and to put away wrath. That God
shall freely love us and graciously receiveus. 1. Reprimitur regna^s peccatum,
sordes, vestigia reliqua teguntur. Quoad reatum prorsus auseruntur. The second
benefit is the righteousness of Gods people for ever: everlasting
righteousness. Ea loco ^peccati aboliti succedens, fide primum apprehenditur a
nobis, ac deinde imputatur nobis a deo pro justitianostra.

Gal. 4, 4. Christ is said to be made under the Law: legi autem factus est
obnoxious, quia cum liber esset, sponte sua, in nostri gratiam, e^us jugum
subijt, omnemque justitiam accuratissime adimplevit.

Christus ergo filius Dei, qui immunis iure suisset ab omni subjectione, legi
fuit subiectus, cur? nostro nomine, ut libertate^ nobis acquireret; quemadmodum
enim qui liber erat, captivum se vadem constituendo, redimit: and induendo
vincula, alteri exuit, ita Christus, legi servandae obnoxious esse voluit, ut
nobis immunitatem acquireret, alioqui frustra i^gum legis subijsset, nam sua
certe causa non fecit: non ita exempti ut nullam amplius obedientiam debeamus,
etc.

Although he be Lord of the Law, and therefore the Law has no authority or
power over him, for he is the Son of God; but of his own accord he made
himself subject to the Law, and in perfect innocence, suffered all tyranny:
he did not only live civilly under the Law, but suffered the terrors, so as
no man upon earth ever felt the like.

Primum magna legis sanctitas, quod nihil in ea mandatum cui deus ipse in carne
manifestatus non velit esse conformis. Deinde quamuis filius sit dominus
Sabbathi (atque ita totius legis) tamen ad perfectam and internam and
exterternam obedientiam qualem lex requirebat, se obligat.

And this may not seem strange that he which is Lord of the Law, should be
subject to the Law: for he must be considered as our pledge and surety,
representing the persons of all the elect, and so is subject not by nature but
by voluntary abasement, by condition of will. That according to the tenor of
the law we might have right to life, do all these things and live.

As Christ was borne of a woman not for his own sake, but ours, so was he
made under the Law. As he became a servant for our sake, so in that respect
he became under the Law of a servant, and his subjection to the Law was a part
of his humiliation, Phil. 2.

He yielded himself also to those Laws that were prescribed to Gods people
by occasion of sin, in conforming whereunto they professed themselves
sinners. He was circumcised, Luke 2, 21. Offered, v. 24. performed other
ceremonial observances, John 7, 2^ 10. Was baptized, Math. 3. received the
Sacrament of his own body and blood; and all that he might fulfill all
righteousness, Math. 3, 10. By which we are led into the next point,
expiating all our sins. Unto which he did not only take our nature and
miserable infirmity, and was content to abase himself in this life to endure
sundry years, many indignities and contumelies, but with it he took our
sins upon him. Not the punishment only as a sacrifice for sin, to give
satisfaction, but became a sinner, not by nature or any act of his, who knew no
sin but by imputation, translating the sins of the Elect from them to him,
according to his Fathers counsel, and his own undertaking: he having no sin
of his own he could not as man be bound to these kinds of Laws prescribed to
Gods people by occasion of sin, in conforming whereunto they professed
themselves sinners; which Christ conforming himself unto, did profess
himself also to be, and the chief, though not by inherence (he was without
sin) yet by Gods laying the sins of the Elect upon him, and his taking them
upon himself, so as the guilt of them was upon him, and did bind to
satisfaction, as a surety that takes the debt upon him, that was not his
before, is bound, as Paul to Philemon* for the debt of Onesimus. That he stood
guilty of our sins, appears in the type, the escape goat, Levit. 16, 21,
22. So in the prophecy, Esaias 53, 6. God has laid upon him the inquities of us
all, 11. He shall bear their iniquities; 12, He bare the sins of many, 2
Cor. 5, 21. He made him to be sin, etc.

Sin here is to be understood Object.
of the sacrifice or punishment of sin.

Not only so, but Christus Sol.
quasi peccator occisus est ut peccatores justificarentur. Amb. He suffered as
a sinner that sinners might be justified: he took our sins in his body to
the tree, that we dying to sin, might live to God, 1 Pet. 2, 24.

3. With our sins he, took the full punishment due to them, to satisfy
Gods justice, and to reconcile God and man, that God might be just in
forgiveness of sins. Romans 3.


He gave himself a ranson, a full price, answerable to all that punishment
which our sins came unto. Both in soul and body, 1 Timothy 2, 6. He himself,
gave himself whole, a full and equal price for us. He is called a surety of
a better Testament, Heb. 7, 22. Sureties are to deliver them for whom they
become sureties, by payment of the whole debt, as it is required. If it be
goods, take his bed from under him, Prove. 22. 27. Philem. v. 18, 19. If it be
liberty, the surety becomes bondsman for him whom he freeth, Genesis 44, 33.
Life for life, 1 King. 20, 39, 40, 42. So Christ becoming our surety must give
body for body, and soul for soul, in stead of our bodies and souls: he
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that which the unjust should have
suffered.

He redeemed us, becoming a curse for us.

Christ saves by his intercession; we shall be saved by his life in glory,
Romans 5, 10. He is able to save perfectly, or unto the end, such as come unto
God by him, seeing he lives ever to make intercession for them, Heb. 7, 25.
The life and kingdom, and glory of Christ are destinated to this end as their
scope, the salvation of the believers; not only by his kingly power but by
execution of his preistly office in glory, making requests for us: thus the
Apostle comforts the Elect of God, believing in Christ, Romans 8, 33. 34. Against
fear of condemnation, yea of accusation, to secure them of salvation. And to
lay the comfort down in the best force of it, whereas the direct opposition is
of accusation, and Christ's patronage or intercession; of condemnation and Gods
justification: but he makes a traiection, willing to fence Gods Children from
the top to the bottom, and to arm them with such confidence as may chase
away to the furthest, anxieties and fears. He gathers more emphatically (that
they are not obnoxious to any accusation of guiltiness that may hurt them
before God) by Gods justifying of them: then by Christ's intercession, for the
way to judgment is shut up aforehand, when the judge has pronounced them just
and guiltless, clearing them from all faults that any would lay to their
charge. And so in the second opposition. It is not to be feared that they
should be condemned for whom Christ by his death has satisfied divine justice
and expiated their sins, to prevent that judgment of God, and by his
intercession not only abolished death, but brings their sins to be
forgotten, so as never to come into account.

How does Christ make intercession now for us, being in heavenly glory? in his
humiliation he prayed for us, John 17, 20. For all which shall believe in him
through the word of the Apostles; does he so now?

Being our high Priest, it is his office still to pray for us, as it were by
name, whereof the high Priest under the Law was a type, who going in to the
most holy place, had by appointment, the names of the Children of Israel, in
the names of the tribes (under the heads were all contained:) So answering to
the type, Christ is entered into the true holy place, into the very heavens,
within the veil, Heb. 6, 20, and 9, 24. Not in his own name only, but in the
name of every particular believer. Exodus 28, 12, He shall bear the names of
the Children of Israel before the Lord upon his shoulders for a remembrance,
that he might remember them to Godward: and for this there were two Onix
stones set and imbossed in gold, and in either stone six names graven,
according to the names of the Children of Israel. He had also in his Breast*
plate four rows of stones, three in every row with the names of the twelve
tribes, to bear them upon his heart when he goes into the holy place.

I do not say I will pray Object.
for you.

Christ's intercession, considered Sol.
whether as vocal.

The praying of Christ in heaven may be understood this presenting his humane
nature assumed unto unity of person with the Son of God, unto his father for
that end to save his. A body have thou ordained me; By Heb. 9, 24.
the which will we are saved, by the offering of the body of Christ.

2. Setting his merit of obedience to the Law, and cross in the sight of God,
for remembering him of them, whom he has reconciled. Though God suffers not
oblivion of those whom he has justified, yet thus Christ mediates for them
still by presenting to God his sacrifice, his obedience for them, with the
everlasting vigor and merit of it, 1 John 2, 2.

3. As God declaring his will, as man desiring of God, that as his sacrifice is
of a sweet savor, so they that believe in him may be such, by the merit of it
in his acceptance he delights in them, his love and pleasure is in them.

4. And as the incense and sweet perfume ascended and gave a sweet smell, so
the works and specially the prayers and praises of the faithful, through the
odor of his sacrifice and the intercession of Christ, are sweet to God. Thy
voice is sweet Cant. 4. How much better is the savor of thine ointments than
all spices? Thy lips drop honey combs, and thy plants are as an Orchard of
Pomegranets and sweet fruits, and with all the chief spices in themselves
they are not so sweet: but in Christ who obtaines by his intecession pardon of
the corrupt mixture, as the high Priest, having on his forehead a plate of pure
gold with this graven in it, Holiness to the Lord, that he might bear the
iniquity of the offerings which the Children of Israel should offer in all
their holy offerings, to make them acceptable before the Lord, Exodus 28, 36. 38.

2. As Christ saves by his merit, so he saves by his Spirit, and efficacy,
application of his merit. It is required that unto the enjoying of benefits
purchased by Christ, we be first partakers of and possessed of himself. Here
is the comfort of a soul that the testimony of God is within it, so as it can
truly say, my beloved is mine. We must be in Christ before he be to us that
which he is made of God, 1 Cor. 1, 30. He is the Savior of his body, Ephesians.
5: As the woman is first possessed of the person of her husband, and thereby
becomes partaker of his dignity and riches. The promise of blessedness is
made to Abraham's seed, not seeds: That is Christ, Gal. 3, 16. We must be parts
of Christ as the seed, before we be blessed v. 29.

Unto this (...)ion with Christ, there be certain joints and bands, Coloss.
2, 19. As the members of the body are tied to the head. These bands by which
the Elect are tied to Christ, are the Spirit and faith. Children that cannot
actually believe, are united to him as to their head by an unspeakeable way, by
his Spirit; so as they are of his body, of his flesh, and bones, one spirit
with him, Ephesians. 5, 30. 1 Cor. 12, 13.

They that are of years, and capable of faith are knit unto him by the Spirit
and faith.

To both Christ is given of God. Who is the gif^ of God in two respects. 1. As
he was sent into the world to work our redemption: so God loved the world,
that he gave his Son, John 3. and Romans 8. He gave him for us all to death.
Secondly, particularly unto union with us, that is, in our calling: by the
first our redemption was wrought, by the second we enjoy him and all things
with him, Romans 8, 32.

And this gift of Christ is the cause why God first (before we seek it)
gives us faith. By his merit, and on his behalf, it is given us to believe in
him, as also to suffer for his name, Philip. 1. And because we cannot believe
unless we be chosen to it, faith is of Gods Elect; the Election being in
Christ. For execution of the decree, says is given to them that are given him,
as the hand to take hold of him, as the mouth to take him in to dwell in us for
life and nourishment: faith is not of all; only his sheep believe in him,
John 10. And in Gods gracious acceptance of our faith, not for the grace it
self, it is in this life imperfect; but as it is relative, so faith is imputed
for righteousness, and righteousness is imputed without works, Romans 4, 5, 9,
11. Imputation, is three fold. 1. Acceptance of a thing as sufficient, though
insufficient in it self: so some falsely define our justifycation to be
nothing else, but Gods gracious acceptance of our faith in Christ, though in
it self unperfect, for our perfect righteousness. It is certain God receives
no righteousness from us, unto our justification in whole or in part, but
gives righteousness unto us, and imputes it for our own, as if we had
wrought it our selves.

2. For accounting that righteousness which in it self is perfect, and
reckoning it to us as ours, though not done by us.

3. When the righteousness so perfect in it self wrought by Christ, not by
us, is so reckoned ours, as if we had done it our selves, one shall say,
Surely in the Lord, I have righteousness, etc.

It is questioned between us and the Papists, not whether by faith: but by
what faith we are saved. By faith ye are saved, is the express word of God,
Ephesians. 2.

Justification is unto life, Romans 5. Therefore that faith which justifies, is
lively, dead faith does not justify.

They profess to differ from us in the question of faith: In the object,
subject, act.

The object they make to be only the whole word of God. Which we deny not,
but th^s faith the Devils have, which gives no peace but leaves them
trembling at their own damnation, which is set down in the word of God.

1. The object of faith is the whole truth propounded in the Scriptures, called
faith of the truth. King Agrippa beleevest thou the Scriptures? I know thou
beleevest.

That Christ is. He that comes to God, must believe that God is, so that
Christ is. The Jews believe not this, but count that Jesus the Son of Mary,
who is the Christ of God, to have been a deceiver, and look for the Messiah
to come.

The things spoken of Christ in the Scriptures: all that John spoke of this man
was true, John 10. The Turks believe that Christ is and that he was for his
time a great Prophet, but not all things the which Christ has spoken, written
of him. John 14. Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me.

To rest, and stay on Christ for the benefits brought by him. This is the faith
that is given on the behalf of Christ. The faith of Gods Elect peculiar to the
sheep of Christ, it is called receiving of Christ, John 1, 12. We teach that
the proper object of justifying faith is Christ: with promise of mercy in him,
as forgiveness of sins, reconciliation, etc. Gal. 2, 16. Even we I say have
believed in Christ that we might be justified by the faith of Christ: that,
say the Papists, is as by a disposition to justification, but that is false;
for that putts a space between justification and faith, but they are together
in time, contemporarie; every one as soon as he believes is just.

Paul opposing in the point of justification, believing and doing, faith and
work, therefore it does justify not as it is a work, but as an instrument to
receive Christ, and in him righteousness unto justification of life,
imputation of righteousness without works. The Israelites stung of fiery
Serpents were cured without doing any thing but looking upon the brazen
Serpent; and so with faith of the promise of God were healed: so we fixing our
eye of faith upon Christ, and the promise of special mercy in him are
justified, and saved, John 3, 16.

We are commanded to believe the Gospel; the Gospel is the tidings of good
things that betyde us in Christ, as forgiveness of sins, the favor of God,
restoring to heaven; adoption to be the children and heirs of God, and these
without our labor or works, only of the free grace of God. Theophylact,
Math. Evangelium secundum Matthaeum. Evangelium de eo quod nunciet nobis res
prosp^ras and been se habentes. Eoc est, bona: nempe remissionem peccatorum:
justitiam, reditum in coelos, adoptionem in filios dei: nunciat autem quod
facile et gratis haec accepimus, neque nostro labor assequnti sumus hac ^ona,
neque ex nostris acceperimus bonis operibus, sed gratia et misericordia dei
talia bona consiquutisumus.

Thus the object of faith is the special mercy of God to me in Christ, in
whom I receive these good things.

2. Christ saves that which was lost, by Sanctification of the Spirit: unto
this they were Elected in Christ, Ephesians. 1, 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1, 2.
And this is glorifycation, and salvation begun; whom he justified, them he
glorified. 2 Cor. 3, 18. We all behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord
with open face, and are transformed into that image from glory to glory as by
the Spirit of the Lord. The Apostle notes three things, great benefits, which
all we the whole body of believers do receive by the Gospel, as the Spirit
makes it quickening to us. 1. The revelation of God, 2 Cor. 4, 6. The light of
the knowledge of the glory of God. 2. Transformation into the image of God, by
glorious sanctification, whereby they become like unto God the Spirit of glory
which is the Spirit of God, rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4, 14. Called peculiarly
the glory, Esaias 4, 2, 3, 5. Upon all the glory shall be a defense: set forth in
earthly similitudes, Psalm. 45, 9. A vesture of gold, Esaias 54, 11, 12, 13. v. 8.
Iuory palaces, beauty for Christ to be pleased and delighted in, ornament much
set by of God, 1 Pet. 3. God is infinitely glorious in holiness, they are
partakers of his nature, by Christ, not essentially as the natural son, but
by similitude, 2 Pet. 1, 4.

Adoption gives them the dignity of the Children of God, heirs with Christ.
Adoption belongs to glorification, Christ gives the glory that his Father gave
him, John 17. Unto them the effectual knowledge of Christ renews a man
according to the image of God in the truth of holiness and righteousness, so
as he is the glory of God, as he is his image. Some excelling in holiness,
are in a special sort called the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8, 23. In whose
persons the glory of Christ shines forth as in some image.

3. There is a proceeding in this glorification from one degree of glory to
another, which in respect of the soul, is made perfect in death, 12, 23. This
increase in glory is set forth by outward things, Cant. 1. 8. When the Churches
spiritual ornament is set forth by rows of stones and chains of gold, she is
promised to be made still more glorious, v. 10. We will make thee borders of
gold with studds of silver. Richly decked already, she shall be more
glorious by the holy Trinity, till she attain the perfection of glory.

In regeneration we live in the Spirit that life which Gal. 5.
is eternal, 1 John 3, 15. So as never to dye, John 11, 26. We are partakers
of the first resurrection, raised to a glorious and immortal life, the life by
Jesus manifest in our mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4. Which life Christ came for, that
we might have it, and that we might have it more abundantly; John 10, 10. We
are saved by the renewing of the holy Ghost.

The exercise of this sanctification is partly in repentance, which is unto
Salvation; as Christ came to save sinners, so to call sinners to repentance.
Repentance and life are coupled together, Act 11. Whom God would not have
perish, he will have come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3, 9.

Seeing whom Christ saves Use.
he sanctifies, it should move us to examine our selves about sanctification,
which is salvation or glo rification begun. It is of that necessity that all the unsanctified are excluded, Math. 18, 3. John 3, 3, 5. Heb. 12, 14, Revel.
21, 27. The inheritance is appropriated unto Saints, the Scripture thrusts it
into their bosom, and pinnes it as it were on their sleeves, Act. 20, 32, and
26, 18. Ephesians. 1, 18 Coloss. 1, 12.

There is no sanctification singular, but in union with Christ: Who as the head
gives life, and influence of grace only to his body, Ephesians. 1; 22. Heb. 2, 11.
Titus 3, 6. Whatsoever civil virtues a man have, as the yongman that Christ
looked upon and loved. What temporary reformation, or common sanctification so
called, in respect of some materials or dispositions, not brought forward to
sanctification singular, being not by spiritual union with Christ, is no
degree of Salvation. Therefore to know true sactification con sider the
singularity of it. Math. 5, 20. Except your righteousness exceed, etc. 47.
What singular thing do you? 48. Ye shall therefore be perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect. By imitation of God suffer not this one virtue of loving
your enemies to be wanting in you. This perfection is the singularity of
sanctification. Not that any man attaines to absolute perfection in this life,
Philip. 3. I am not already perfect. We have sin, we do sin all in many
things; but there is in the sanctified, a perfection of sincerity, their heart
is good and honest, which God calls perfect, 2 Chronicles. 15, 17. The heart is
whole with God not divided, spoken in comparison of hypocrites, whose heart is
not whole, Psalm. 78, with the Lord: they are double minded, Iam. 1 and 4. They
are true in their heart, have their conversation in simplicity and godly
pureness.

2. Perfection of integrity; they have the seeds of all virtues in them
though yet they are not grown up.

They have the perfect nature of Christians though they be but babes in Christ,
1 Cor. 3. They have a new man in them. Newness of Spirit in which they serve
God, Romans 7. The spirit, soul, and body, sanctified in measure.

They respect all the commandments given to them, Psalm. 119: Toward all
persons, God, their neighbor, themselves.

They have compleatnesse in their actions, they have the needful parts of a
good work, and right matter, a right principle out of which they work, says
purifying the heart, working by love; a right end Gods glory, the edification
of men, etc, They hold on, and contend toward perfection in degrees, Job. 17.

It is not thus with the Hipocrites.

2. Consider their difference in sinning; the Godly sin not, they cannot
sin, 1 John 3, 9. Grace freeth them from the reign of sin that they serve
it not; it gives an inclination and disposition to the will that it resists
the will of the flesh as contrary: so in their sinning, they are rather
patients than agents: they work none iniquity. Romans 7. Leads me captive to
the Law of sin. It is not then I that do it, but sin dwelling in me,
which appears in their striving, mourning, complaining of sin in them,
purging or purifying of themselves constantly, desirous to be freed utterly
from sin.

Temptation is* said to take them, 1 Cor. 10, 13. And to be but humane, not
sought out of affection, but taking advantage of humane infirmity. Humanum
quiddam non nihil ipsos esse passos dicit. Galat. 6, 1. If a man be preoccupate
in any offense. Ex subito motu passionis, ignorantia seu infirmitate. He
speaks of sins into which a man falls not wilfully or of set purpose, but of
infirmity, beguiled by the Devil or the flesh, the deceitfullnesse of sin,
like men to sin, is of two sorts, by surreption, or disease.

By constitution, and habit, which bring forth actions corrupting, loosing
that common Sanctification which they had, by their common calling into out
ward covenant with God, and became holy in profession before others that were
not so called. Which aggravates their sin above theirs that were never called
by Gods Name. Deuteronomy. 32. Three things Moses charge them with, 1. Corrupting
themselves, 2. Contracting spotte, 3. Habit or constitution, perverseness,
sinning of full will, frowardness: wicked men are noted of their frowardness,
they sin of full enmity and maliciousness of will.

Consider, a kind of force in the Spirit sanctifying to do known good: The
Spirit within me compels me, Job 32.

Ier. 20. It was as fire shut up in my bones, I was weary with forbearing, I
could not stay. Down goes the power of the flesh, the door is open for Christ
to come in, and the grace within will not be shut up, but breaks forth unto
the works of righteousness. 2 Cor. 5. The love of Christ constrains us. For
we thus judge, etc. Psalm. 116. What shall I render? All his benefits are upon
me. Psalm. 56, 12. Think upon me O God.

As wickedness proceeds from the wicked, so righteousness from the
righteous; such are noted of the working of righteousness, it will declare it
self in a man's life if he have any sanctification in him. ^f we live in the
Spirit let us walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.

2. Let such as the Lord has sanctified rejoice and be thankful: they are
entered already on some part of salvation, which assures them fulness from
Gods faithfulness.

3. Christ saves by his Spirit in leading, preserving the sanctified unto
salvation: he keeps them, that they cannot loose it. Deuteronomy. 33, 3. All thy
Saints are in thy hands. This effect of Gods special love to his Saints,
distinguished from hypocrites by this work of grace, they are his Disciples,
and humbly and attentively hear his words, notes that after God has received
people into favor he takes them into sure custody for Salvation; they are all
in his hands, and who can pull them out? none, as Christ says, John 10. I will
give them Eternal life, no man shall pull them out of my hands. 1 Samuel 2, 9.
He keeps the feet of his Saints, Prove. 2. 7, 8. He is a shield to them
that walk uprightly, and he preserves the ways of his Saints. He watches
over them to keep them from sin as well as from any other danger: he does
not so keep always as not to be tempted, no nor that they should not fall
into temptation, but either he preserves them from temptation, when they have
opportunity; or if there be temptation, that they shall want opportunity, or
if there be both opportunity and temptation, he so shines into their minds
by divine, and bows their hearts to his commandment, that they stand; or if
they fall, he rescues them from the power and guiltiness of their sin and
from the rage of the Devil, that the evil shall not fasten upon them to
destroy their grace or deprive them of salvation. 1 Cor. 10, 13. That they may
be able to bear it. 2 Cor. 12, 7. His grace shall be sufficient for them, 1
John 5, 18. They are said to be reserved to Jesus Christ, Iud. 2. Being called
and sanctified they are kept as a special portion, treasure, and possession
unto Jesus Christ the true heir of the world: conserved in Christ, because our
safety is not in our hands, either our deliverance from evil or perseve ring
in good, but our King, the author and finisher of our faith, Christ Jesus given
us of God the Father, to whom is given all power in heaven and in earth, and
all judgment, Math. 28. John 5. keeps in the purchased salvation, most
powerfully, and loses not one of them whom his Father gave him, John 6.

It lies on Gods faithfulness to keep them from evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3, 3. To
confirm, and perfect them, God has promised it, Ier. 32. 40. Ezech. 36. 27.
Christ has prayed for it, Luke 22, 32. John 17. 11. Holy Father keep them in
thy name. I pray not that thou take them out of the world, but that thou keep
them from evil: hereof the Spirit works persuasion, as in ^^ul, Romans 8. 2 Timothy
4, 18. He will deliver me from every evil work, and preserve me to his
heavenly kingdom: the weak in faith shall be established, because God is
able to make them stand, Romans 14.

This ability is used unto faith to keep it that it fail not, that the work
of faith may be fulfilled with power as the Apostle prays, 2 Thessalonians. 1.

And by faith we stand, 2 Cor. 1, 24. This is the effect and nature of faith
to make us stand. It keeps us, as a town is kept from enemies by garrison
lying in it. 1 Pet. 1, 5, Which are kept by the power of God through faith. It
is victorious; it overcomes the world. 1 John 5, 4. This is the victory which
has overcome the world, even our faith: to note the certainty of the victory
it is delivered, not in the present nor future tense, you do or shall
overcome, but in the preterperfect tense, you have overcome. 1 John 4, 4.
Little Children ye are of God, and have overcome them. It is said to quench
the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6, 16. Though his darts be not only
sharp and peircing, but also fiery, faith shall both blunt them and
extinguish them. He seems to allude to the ancient custom among soldiers
poisoning their darts and cast them at the enemy, who wounded with them were
so inflamed as to be hardly cured: so the temptations of the Devil as fire
inflame the heart, but faith beats them back, and quenches them: we are
commanded to resist the ^ames 4, 7.
Devil and he will fly from us. That is our encouragement to resist him
steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5, 9. implying that in a steadfast faith, there is
strength to overco^e him, R^vel. 12, 11. Because faith possesses us of Christ,
(...) keeps us in the possession thereof, it rests upon God by (...) ^^ans of
Jesus Christ, so (...) ^b^ai^e and do things impossible to nature* If thou
casst believe all thing are possible. Gods people have prevailed by faith with
Christ, to put forth his power to their cure of diseases incureable to man. and
unto their obtaining of great blessings, above the course of nature, as
appears, Heb. 11, 11, 33, 34, 35, etc. And doing things above all natural
strength.

When the faithful have been overthrown by Satan in sin, by faith they
have obtained strength to recover themselves, and gotten victory over Satan
and sin, have overcome their own guiltiness and fear of Gods deserved
wrath, so that their sins have been so far from separating their hearts
from Christ, that they have drawn nearer to him, Cant. 7. 10, 11, 12. As in
David Psalm* 73: Peter; they perceive that their sins have not removed Gods
favor from them.

Gods Children when they are compelled to wrestle with God himself as with
their enemy, yet stand fast by faith and say, as Job. 13, 15. Though he stay
me yet I will trust in him; the power of God is exceeding great in believers,
in so much that they are stronger than the Devil himself, than all powers and
principalities of darkness, Math. 16. Ephesians. 6. They are insuperable,
invincible, more than conquerours. It is called the good fight of faith, not
only because it is for a good cause, and from a good author, but it has a
good issue. It is victorious. What Angels by nature could not do in heaven,
nor Adam in Paradise, a poor weak servant of Christ is made able to do by him
that loved him, the weakness of God is stronger than men and Angels.

Faith is mighty by the word of God, which is mighty in operation, Heb. 4.
12. The power of God to salvation, Romans 1. graffed in us is able to save our
Souls, Iam. 1. By this young men redress their ways and overcome the wicked
one, 1 John 2. 14. It is prevails by love which is strong as death, which
overcommeth all.

And by prayer is this continuance in goodness unto the end obtained; as we
are taught by our Savior in the petition, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil* Math. 6. watch and pray, least ye enter into temptation,
Math. 26. Christ gives his Spirit to make requests for the Saints according to
the will of God, and what he in heaven intercedes for, they by his Spirit
request of God in his name, and it is given them abundantly. Christ tells his
Disciples that they had asked John 16.
nothing in his Name, but requires them to be more in their requests, assuring
them they shall receive unto the fullness of their joy. He knew the necessity
and the utilitie of prayer, and how slow and dull the Disciples were to it:
then when he was with them they had such satisfaction in his presence; he
excites them therefore to this duty. They and the godly did pray in the name of
the M^ssiah, for the Spirit indicted or dictated no other prayer than in the
name of the mediator: but they asked obscurely, as the knowledge of Christ was
then but obscure; and ordinarily they did ask nothing so as after Christ's
manifestation and more plentiful giving of the Spirit. Satis n^ta est sermonis
forma, qua fieri aliquid tum demum dicitur, quando magis ^t evidentius fit,
quam antea fiebat aut quando aliquo novo modo incipit fieri sicut dominus
loquitur Ioh. 16.

Maiore fiducia, ex multo clariore agni^ione. Frequentius atque ardentius
orabant, quam antehac, dam ad huc rudes, et ex corporali prasentia Christi
securiores erant. Ac longiores in precibus.

They sin that teach that Vs^.
Christ gives life, justice to some, that extinguish it, fall from it: They are
of two sorts, some teach and some hold that reprobates have true justice. From
which they fall totallie and finally, that a man may be the Child of God, yet
not inherit.

It is for consolation to the believers, such as God has brought to Christ:
his power is engaged for their continuing in grace unto salvation; not only
that they cannot loose grace finally, but that they shall at no time by any
power of hell have grace so shaken out of them as that there should not be left
that which accompanies Salvation.

Get of God, pray for his Use. 3.
glorious power, strive to feel it.

Ascribe to Christ the power of standing steadfast in grace.

The Son of man is come to seek and save etc.

The propriety of this work of saving the lost, is in Christ, not
communicated to any other, Revel. 7, 10. This may appear in Gods appointing
him and sending him to save those that he did appoint and give to him, that
he might give them eternal life. He is Gods Elect for that purpose Esaias 42.
His servant on whom he will stay, or whom he will establish. This his enemies
confessed to be true of the Messiah. Luke 23, 45. Let him save himself if he
be that Christ the chosen of God. The Father is said to seal him to this John
6, 27. Wherein is declared his authority from the Father to give the food that
lasts to eternal life: this way God ordained before the world to our glory, 1
Cor. 2. He has predestined him, 1 Pet. 1. raised up for us, Luke 1. 69.
prepared, Luke 2, 30.

2. In his sufficiency for this work, Esaias 63, 1. sufficient to save, or
almighty to save. I speak in righteousness and am sufficient to save: this is
in fulness of grace and truth, John 1. Being very God, v. 14. The fulness
of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily, Coloss. 2, 9. So as we are complete in
him, v. 10. That believers need nothing out of Christ unto their justification
and Salvation, they have fulness in him, and need nothing out of him to piece
up their felicity, he is able to save perfectly such as come unto God by him
Heb. 7, 25. He is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, Sanctification
and redemption, that they which rejoice might rejoice in the Lord. Coloss. 3,
11. Christ is all and in all things. All-sufficient to true happiness. It
pleased the Father that in him all fulness should dwell. What we can desire
for our perfection, or God require for his satisfaction, it is full in Christ.
He is said to be not only a Savior but the salvation of God, ascribing all
that belongs to salvation unto him, Esaias 49, 6, Luke 1, 69, and 2 30. In whole
and in part. The author of eternal Salvation, Heb. 5, 9. And the finisher of
it, Heb. 12, 2. If any other cause of salvation be added, it must be to supply
the want of the sufficiency of Christ for this, which is blasphe^ie to ^^firme.

All other Saviors in whole or in part besides him, are excluded, Esaias 43, 11.
I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior: as there is but one
God, so is there but one Savior; who can be a Savior that is not God? Esaias
63, 3. Christ in his answer to the 2. Question of the Church, Wherefore is
thine apparel red, and thy garments like him that treads in the wine
press? takes it wholly to him self to deliver the Church like a mighty
conqueror from all her enemies. I have trodden the wine press alone, and of
all people there was none with me, etc. The Church nor any member of it could
do any thing to their own Salvation and deliverance from their enemies; but
Christ did it alone, and so mightily that none of the Churches enemies could
withstand him: I will tread down the people in my wrath, and make them drunken
in mine indignation, and will bring down their strength to the earth, Luke 1,
71. He condemned sin in his flesh, he cancelleth the Law, Coloss. 2, 14. And
takes it out of the way, nayling it to his cross. He tryumphed over the
Devil and all the hellish principalities, Coloss. 2, 15. 1 Cor. 15, 24. Heb.
2, 14. And destroyed death for ever, did abolish it, Hos. 19, 14. 1 Cor. 15, 55.

He is the way, the truth and the life, so as there is no other way to come to
the Father but by him, John 14. There is not salvation in any other, neither is
any other name under heaven given among men, by which they must be saved, Act.
4, 12. By himself he purged our sins, Heb 1, 3.

It serves for confu^ing of Use 1.
that opinion m^r^ full of pity than truth, that hea thens may be saved by
keeping the Law of nature our of the acknowledgement of the true God. It
appears that all the light of the heathens whereby they know God in some sort
and put a Romans 1. 20.
difference between honest and unhonest things, their natural conscience
accusing, Romans 2. 15.
excusing, according to their judgment in particulars, will not be to save
them, but to leave them without excuse. Vt constricti convictique teneantur
proprie damnationis, q. d. eos ne mutire quidem ausuros ad desensionem suam.
Tremel. Not only noting the consecution, but why God would have that light to
shine in darkness that men should have nothing to pretend. Ber. Vt nullam
possint adserre defensionem in iudicium Dei, quin iure sint da^nabiles, Calv.
God left not himself without a witness, yet suffered the gentiles to walk in
their own ways, Act. 14. Wincked and regarded not those times of ignorance.
But now Christ is revealed, calls all men unto repentance every where, Acts.
17.

The heathens are in the prayers of the Church left comparatively to the wrath
of God, as a people not so much as in outward covenant with God, Ier. 10, 25.
Power out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, upon the
families that call not upon thy name, Psalm. 79, 6, 7. The Prophet gathers by
that, that God calls them not to be of his household but letts them remain
strangers, that they are under his wrath, and so desires him to put a
difference between his own people and them that worship him not. The heathen
are said to be without God and without hope, Ephesians. 2, Not under mercy, 1
Pet. 2, 10. They are children of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2. And the of God
wrath abides upon them, John 3, 36. They live under the covenant of works, and
so under the curse for breaches of the Law.

We may gather hence the woeful condition of the Jews, that have stumbled at
the stumbling stone, they are enemies for the Gospel sake, because they refuse
Christ Jesus, Romans 11. They dye in their sins, John 8. without pity and
mercy.

And so of the Turks, of Hos. 2, 4.
whom we cannot conceive better than a company of damnable creatures, for any
thing we know, left to perish everlastingly; they waiting on lying vanities
forsake their own mercy, they worship they know not what, millions of men
going to hell in death, because not receiving Christ the only Savior, the
Salvation of God. In a word in no religion but the Christian, in no Christian
religion but the reformed is salvation to be found.

Papisme saves none though some among Papists may be saved, Bulling. in Apoc.
7, 10, Such as hold the foundation and overturne it not. 2. Such as err of
simplicity, not of special vengeance for not loving the truth. 3. Such as are
from their hearts obedient to the truth they see, and are desirous to
understand: teachable, ready to embrace the truth in Christ Jesus being
revealed, unfeinedly repenting their unknown errors.

But otherwise as papisme is that Apostasy spoken of by Paul, the head of
which defection is the man of sin; it saves none, it leads into perdition,
the head of that apostasy is called the child of perdition.

And it is a deceiveable unrighteousness among such as perish, their
damnation, who in the just judgeme^t of God are delivered up to believe such
lies, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved,
2 Thessalonians. 2.

Papisme overthrows the fundamental doctrine of Christian religion,
therefore it saves not. 1. In the point of justification. Whittak. de
ecclesia, Q. 6. Page 459. They have not that way of justification which the
Lord has set down in his word. They err in the efficient, matter and form:
And as there being one way to a City, they that have not that way cannot come
into the City, so there being but one way for justifying of a sinner, if they
have not that, they are not justified, and so not saved. Justification is
before glorification, Romans 8, 30.

For the efficient cause the Scriptures put God, of his love, grace, and
mercy, John 3, 16. It is God that justifies, Romans 3. 24. Titus 2, 11. Ephesians.
2, 4, 5. The Papists teach that God justifies, but inclined and commoved
thereunto by works of preparation done by us, merit of congruitie.

2. The Scripture ascribes the efficacy of grace unto our calling and
justification, to God determinating the will by infusion of grace to will
conversion which it willed not before.

The Papists deny physical determination and affirm that God only by moral
persuasion excites the will and gives sufficient grace to convert, but leaves
it in the power of the will to choose or to put away and make ineffectuall that
grace: In quo insignem dei gratiae iniuriam faciunt et uni^um nostrae salutis
principiu^ ^ollunt. Whittak.


Concerning the matter of our justification, the scripture puts only the
obedience of Christ unto the death, Romans 5, 19. Romans 8, 3, 4. The obedience of
the Law and the obedience of the cross, Romans 10, 4. for full satisfaction and
righteousness. The Papists though they grant Christ to be in himself most
just, and that he fulfilled the Law, and satisfied God most perfectly: yet
they deny this obedience to be our justice. They teach besides Christ's
satisfaction, other satisfaction, either in their own persons by penal
works, or by indulgence, a remitting thereof for the satisfaction of others,
made theirs by bargain and sale. The foundation of which indulgence they make
the treasure of the Church, of the superfluous works and satisfactions of the
Saints. They for this consider in the works of the just a double valor, one
of merit which they say cannot be applied to another, a second, of
satisfaction which is in some more than they need for themselves, either having
no actual sin, as they say of the Virgin Mary, and as some of them count
piously believed that she had not original sin, yet suffered much for God.
Luke 2. A sword also shall pierce thine heart. John Baptist filled with the
Spirit from the womb and lived innocently, yet put himself to great ansteritie
of life, under hard penance. They suppose that such need not for their own
satisfaction, therefore as superfluous to him, it is laid up in the treasury
of the Church for such as want where with to satisfy God for their venial
sins, and the temporal punishment of mortal sins. Thus they add to
Christ, helps to save from sin and punishment, on false ground. (...). There
is no more reason why one man's satisfaction may with God pay another man's debt,
than his merit of works procure for another man reward; neither of them can
properly be found in any sinful man as every mere man is. 2. It is blasphemy
to say, that godly men's sufferings are superfluous, more than their sins
require. They have their fruit, 1. In righteousness, 2. In glory, Heb. 12.
Romans 8, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 15, ult. It were against justice in God. The best
cannot answer one of a thousand.

All whatsoever they can do or suffer for God according to his will, is their
duty, Luke 17. And therefore can neither merit reward nor satisfy debt, much
less be superfluous and above that they need for their own use, Math. 25, 9.
Virtus proximi mei vix sufficient illi ad defensionem, tantum abest ut et mihi.
Theophylact.

2. They make the matter of positive righteousness wherein we stand just
before God, to be inherent in our persons, which because it is ever imperfect
in this life and not without mixture of sin, never satisfying the Law: we are
necessarily under the curse if we trust to it to save us, Gal. 3, 10. Gal. 5,
4. Ye are abolished from Christ whosoever will be justified by the Law, etc.

The form of justification the Scripture puts in Gods gracious imputation of
the obedience of Christ to us upon our faith in him, Romans 4, 5, 9, 23. So faith
is said to be imputed to righteousness, righteousness imputed without
works, 2 Cor. 5, 19, 21. The scripture putts our justification in not imputing
our sins.

Papists make the infusion of righteousness the form of justification, and
merit of person, and works by Gods commutative justice; deriding the true
faith as a fantastical apprehension, imputed justice, a new no justice, or a
putative justice.

2. The Papists hold not Christ the head, because they make other mediators, as
Angels and Saints, which they trust in and worship, Coloss. 2, 18, 19. 3 They
have another Priesthood than Christ's, and another sacrifice propitiatory and
impetratorie.

Seeing salvation of the Use.
lost is only the work of Christ, done by himself, we are bound to trust
and rejoice in him alone for our whole salvation. Gal. 6, 14, God forbid I
should rejoice in any thing save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
word, save, is exceptive, he will glory in that, and exclusive, in nothing
else. Christ cru cified is the treasure of the Coloss. 2.
Church for all spiritual blessings, of all wisdom and knowledge, of the
love and favor of God, Ephesians. 1; 6: Of honor and holiness^; he has made us
kings and Priests to our God, Apac. 1, 6; of liberty, Luke 1, 74, John 8; 32,
36. Of pleasures and comfort, we are complete in him. Philip. 3, 3: We
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and put no confidence in the flesh that is, in any
created thing out of Christ. But rest in him alone for our whole felicity with
confident glorying.

The evidence of the truth of this is, that hereby the world is crucified to
us, and we to the world; by the world understanding that which is opposed to
the kingdom of Christ and the new creature, for which new creature in us, the
world cannot but hate us: By the power of the Spirit dead to the world. Phil.
3, We worship God in the spirit, our spirit sanctified and governed by the
Spirit of Christ, with internal and external actions after his word.

Let it move us to love him Use 3.
with our whole heart, that by himself purged our sins, saved us being lost,
and no other with him: think it not enough to magnify him above other
beloveds, but omnifie him not only as a friend, a child, a wife, our life, but
united all, more than all these. He did in his love that passes knowledge, all
that purchased thy happiness, he suffered all, finished all for thee.

Let this be seen in our not enduring of such teachers and doctrine as
obscure this love of Christ, joining helps with him for our salvation: Philip*
3, 2, As enemies of the cross of Christ, v. 18. It is noted that the faithful
stand on Christ's Rev. 17. 14.
side for him. 2, In our due esteeming of the sincere ministers of Christ, that
teach him faithfully as the only redeemer, not only from greater but from all
lesser sins. Ye received me as an Angel of God, as Christ Jesus; if need had
been, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, Gal. 4: Have them in singular
love for their work, 1 Thessalonians. 5. It is their great praise to seek the things
of Christ. 3. In our valewing and respect of men, of Christ in them, 2 Cor. 5,
16, we know no man after the flesh.

Whatsoever we do in word or deed, do all in the name of Use 4.
Christ, Coloss. 3, Philip. 1. To me to live is Christ.

1. Give him the honor of binding our consciences by his Commandments, and no
earthly creature; as Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Traditious not after
Christ are in that name blamed, that they are after the commandments and
doctrines of men, not after Christ, Coloss. 2, 8, 22: Not imposed or warranted
by Christ, not ascribing all to Christ, as the Prophet, Priest, or King of the
Church.

2. Do all by his virtue: fruits of righteousness are by him, Philip. 1, 11.
Our sufficiency for doing or suffering is by his grace and power, Romans 8, 37.
Philip 4, 13. I am able to do all things by the help of Christ which
strengthens me. All virtues are but natural qualities, dead shapes if they
be not done in and by his grace, he must be the root, they must favor of his
sap, or they have nothing to make them truly good.

3. In his mediation seek acceptance in all with assurance. Spiritual
sacrifices acceptable by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2, 5*

4. All to his glory, it is some men's praise they are the glory of Christ, 2
Cor. 8, 23, Paul was all in his desire to magnify Christ, whether by life or
death.

That which was lost. This is the condition in which Christ finds them whom he
comes unto to seek them and save, they were lost. The Jews Gods own
confederate people, Children of the kingdom, and concerning external
adoption, heirs of life, yet are called lost sheep, Math. 10, 6. Go ye
rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Math. 15, 24. I am not sent
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; If they were lost, then the
Gentiles without God, without Christ, without hope. Math. 18, 11, The Son of
man is come to save that which was lost.

1. We were lost in Adam, we in him made a defection from God by hearkening
and consenting to the Devils suggestion out of unbeleefe, nnthankefullnesse,
ambition: Aiming at a higher state than that which God made man in; we lost
both holiness, and happiness, innocence and life, and so by nature are
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. Death went over all inasmuch as all had sinned; by
the offense of one the fault came upon all men unto condemnation, Romans 5, 12,
18. The Devil is therefore said to be a murderer from the beginning, John 8,
44.

2. There is no power in our nature to recover our selves from this loss and
destruction into which we are plunged, nor in any creature. We were of no
strength, Romans 5.

3. We left to that way of our selves, lose our selves more and more, Esaias 53,
6. That if Christ did not seek us and save us, we should perish for ever
without regard, Job 4, 20, and dye before we were so wise as to think with
any fruit of death, v. 21. Holden in the cords of our own sin, go astray
through our great folly, and dye for lack of instruction, Prove. 5, 22, 23. And
this aggravated by the time of our going astray from the womb, Psalm. 58, 3.
The wicked are strangers from the womb, from the belly they err and speak
lies: so ^remellius reads that, Psalm. 119, 67* Quum nondum loquerer ego
errabam: declaring that we are sinners from the womb. I have called thee a
transgressor from the womb, Esaias 48, 8. For I knew thou would grievously
transgress.

We err (as is said of Egypt) they have caused Egypt to err in every work
thereof: in things that we do not, yet should do; in things that we do, and
should not do. Deceived Titus 3, 3, either by that great deceiver the Devil,
1 Timothy 2, 14. The woman was deceived and was in the transgression, 2, Tim. 2,
26. Revel. 20, 8. And shall go out to deceive the people which are in the
four quarters of the earth. 10. The Devil that deceived them was cast into a
lake of fire and brimstone. Or by instruments of his that are first deceived
and then deceive others, 2 Timothy 3, 13. Or by our own heart, Ier. 17, 9.
Sinful ways are from a naughtic heart, concupiscence drawing away and
intising: carnal reasons, vain excuses, deceiveable hopes; our hearts join
themselves to swarms of temptations and lusts, so sin deceives us and kills
us.

Sometimes God in a fearful kind of justice sends efficacy of error, and so
causes us to err from his ways, Esaias 19, 14. The Lord has mingled among
them the spirit of errors. Esaias 63, 17. Because we delighted to wander and
would not refrain our feet, therefore will the Lord have no delight in us, but
remember our sins, Jeremy 14, 10.

To take notice of this Use 1.
miserable condition of nature, considering our selves whether as yet we have
obtained mercy unto deliverance, or remain yet in this fearful and woeful
state of men lost: living separated from God the fountain of life.

1. Whether whatsoever weakness in judgment or affection be in us, yet we
be teachable or tractable. Or whether we refuse it and hate it as evil because
we place our felicity in our sins, and hate to be advised and reclamed.
Prove. 10, 17. He that regards instruction is in the way of life, but he that
refuses correction goes out of the way: he that is found, out of habitual
disposition follows on to know the Lord Hos. 8, 3.

2 Whether we have our hearts drawn away constantly from all inward attendance
on God in his worship public or private, Ier. 12, 2. Esaias 29, 13, Ezech. 33.
31: Or we delight to draw ^ecre to God, we worship him in spirit, our soul
sanctified, and governed by Gods Spirit; we worship him with our trust because
he has revealed himself reconciled in Christ; with our faith and hope in him
by the means of Christ Jesus, with a reverence of his precepts, promises,
threatenings, least we should sin against them, walk unworthy of them, and
incur Gods displeasure, whose wrath is pacified toward us in Christ: with
hearty prayer accepted in his Beloved, brought into his presence as lovely and
desirable. Christ that would not pray for the world, whom he purposed not to
give himself for to save them, will not give his Spirit into the hearts of any
such to make requests unto God for them.

3. Whether we seek delight in all our temptations, afflictions, infirmities
against all curse of the Law and dangers of judgment, to shelter our selves
under Christ and taste such sweetness of his fruits, that we are so taken up
with him as to write of him, to speak of him, to exalt him as the only stay of
souls, for salvation, is our contentment; and we cannot bear them that
trouble men's consciences by adding any thing as cause of salvation with him, as
before Cant. 2 Esaias 28. Gal. Or seek we other shelter, make we falsehood our
refuge and lie hid under vanity, and taste nothing but earthly things? Finding
no savor in the fruit of Christ or things of the Spirit?

4. Is our love to men (in Christ) and specially to those in whom the life of
Christ is, the brethren? We follow with brotherly kindness such as preach him,
and profess him as before?

Or are wicked men, swine and wild beasts our dearest and most delightful
companions, and that also withwilling neglect and shunning the society of such
as have the virtue of Christ in them?

This being the case of all that Christ saves, that they are lost, it sets out
the riches Use
of the free grace of God as the cause of the happiness of the elect, and also
serves greatly to encourage men that feel themselves lost to trust in Christ,
that came not to save the righteous, but to call sinners to repentance. Be
informed of the arguments that may induce a sinner (that he might be helped out
of his misery) to come to Christ. 1. Before God require any service of us, he
would have us believe that in Christ he is our God and Father. This he
prefaceth before the Commandments, I am the Lord thy God. And in the prayer
delivered by our Savior we are taught in praying to be persuaded of his
Fatherly good will to us, and this of his own mercy and truth, not in respect
of any thing had or hoped for in us; or else were grace no grace, Romans 11. You
that feel that you are lost in your selves, give the first service to God,
obey him in coming to Christ, receiving him as the gift of free and eternal
love. This is the work of God, the chief that he commands, to believe in
him whom he has sent to seek and save that which was lost. If the Devil
would have us do as the servants of Iairus, Mark 5, 35, give our selves for
lost without hope of recovering, as they say concerning his daughter about
whose cure he came to Christ; Thy daughter is dead, why diseasest thou the
Master any further? So he suggest, thy soul is dead, lost. Abhor the
suggestion of ceasing to rest upon him for cure, as if thy cause were
hopeless: consider, Christ incourageth him against their discouragement, and
deferres not; as soon as he heard the word spoken, he said to the ruler of
the Synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe, and she shall be saved, Luke 8,
50. Death it self shall give place to the higher power of Christ, he is the
life and quickens whom he will. Faith in him for power and good will to save
us from perdition, to be a remedy against all evils that undo our souls,
is the only instrument. Christ calls therefore for this confident dependence
on him how desperate soever our case may seem to our selves or others; believe
only, there wants nothing else on our part for our cure. Be confident my
son, thy sins be forgiven thee. As Satan labors to loosen our faith, so
we must be diligent to fasten it, by thinking on the promises free and
certain by the merit of Christ's blood; the goodness and faithfulness of God
in his oath, Heb. 6. Christ has this peculiar above all the Priests of the
Law, he is made Priest by an oath, Psalm. 110, 4. To declare the immutabilitie
of Gods counsel to forgive all their sins whom he invites to him, having
appointed with an oath a patron for them which shall by his sacrifice and
intercession get them favor with him. They that shut the gate of hope against
themselves, what else do they than accuse God of lying yea for swearing?
Whosoever is weary and laden with a heavy sense of his sins and guiltiness,
whereby he even faints with fear of damnation, despairing of himself, he is
called of Christ to come to him; which is a matter of great confidence, as they
urge to blind Bartimeus, Mark. 10, 49. Be of good comfort, arise he calls
thee. He does with his call, assure them rest and refreshing of soul.

There is no difference, for all have sinned and are sallen short of the glory
of God, all are lost: The difference in degrees of sin makes no difference
impossibility to be justified, believing in Christ, Romans 3. Men of civil life,
brought up in the bosom of the Church, renounce their advantages (in the eyes
of men) that in Gods eyes they may find favor by having the righteousness of
God* not their own: We which are Jews by nature, not sinners of the
Gentiles, know that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ: even we I say, have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
might be justisied by the says of Christ, and not by the works of the Law,
Gal. 2. 15, 16. Philip. 3.

There is no sin that can be repented, that a man may Acts 13. 38. 39.
despair of pardon of, Mark. 3. 28. All sins shall be forgiven unto men, and
blasphemies. Consider all sorts of sinners 1 Cor. 6. 10. 9.
that have bell(...)ed upon this ground, th(...) ^od has concluded all und^^
sin, that he might have mercy on all: That Christ Jesus came th^^ the world
might be saved by him; and such chief sinners are made patterns to others. It
appears that grace being off^red, there is no other let, but the refusal of
grace: What could I have done more that I have not done? Esaias 5. For God
beseeches us to receive it, willing to confer it, 2 Cor. 5. Christ will put
none away that come to him, John 6. 37. Doubt you of the sufficiency of Christ's
sacrifice to obtain peace with God for you, because your sins be so many and
great? It is sufficient for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2. Or fear
yo(...) God will not pardon y(...) destroy you? Hearken to him avouching the
contrary, 2 Pet. 3. 9. Yea swearing for confirmation of your faith, As I live I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Ezech 33. 10. 11.

Seeing all are lost, even Use 3*
the elect as well as the reprobate, Romans 3. 23, There is no difference, for
all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: only this odds there is;
some are children of perdition by eternal judgment John 17. 12. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
3. Romans 9.
of God, Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, for whom Christ would not so
much as pray: they were not given him to save, but appointed to wrath,
forewritten 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Jude v. 4.
to condemnation, children of the curse, 2 Pet. 2. 14.

But others, though they were by nature (...)ildren of wrath as well as othe^s,
yet they were not appointed to wrath, but to obtain salvation by the means of
Christ Jesus, to whom they shall every one of them come, and not one of them be
lost, John 6. 37. 39. It should move men to recount with themselves often what
they were, and that for diverse uses.

1. That well instructed in the particulars of our misery, Use 1.
and that doctrine one time after another laid upon our hearts, we may run to
Christ still with singular affection, 1. Pet. 2. 2. 3. 4. It is noted the
constant act of believers to come to Christ their living foundation.

2. To keep themselves Vs^ 2.
humble and abased in themselves, because of all that they have done,
remembering their ways and works that were not good, Ezech. 16. 63. and 20.
43. You shall judge your selves worthy to be cut off. Eze. 6. 9. They that
seriously repent, they do not slightly acknowledge their faults, but recount
with themselves how many ways, how long, and with what pertinacy they have
provoked the Lords anger; and stir up themselves to a detestation of their
former led life, and become ab hominable to themselves. The Lord would have us
so taste his goodness in pardoning and purging us, as that our sins truly
displease us, and we remember them with bitterness.

The Apostle abasing himself because of his former life, ascribes all the good
in him, or done by him, to Gods free grace, 1 Cor. 15. 9, 10. And puts other
Christians in mind of that which they were when God called them, 1 Cor. 12. 1,
2. Ye know you were Gentiles, and were carried away unto the dumble Idols as
ye were led: that they might magnify the compassions of God, in their change,
and not to use their gifts to ostentation, but to the praise of Christ, 1 Timothy
1. 12, 14. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12.

I^ serves to s^irre us forward Vse^.
to righteousness, and to be as earnestly carried to that as ever we were to
sin, Romans 6. 19. 2 Pe^. 1. It is sufficient to have spent the time past, etc.
To preserve from Apostasy, 2.
and to hold us to God, with study if it could be, to make him amends by
standing full in all his will for the injury we have done him.

It helps to faith in God 3.
for the continuance of his good w^l and pardoning our sins of weakness,
seeing when we we^e enemies, he r(...)d us of his great love and abundant
mercy, Romans 5. 9, 10.

It helps to condole and be compassionate toward sinners, consideing the Lords
compassion toward us to pull us out of that woe.

FJNJS.

