A COMMENTARY upon the most Divine Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans.
CONTAINING For Matter, the degeneration of our Nature by Adams Fall; and the
restoration thereof, by the Grace of CHRIST. Together with the perfection of
Faith, and the imbecility of Works, in the cause of Justification of elect
sinners before GOD.

For form and manner of handling, it has The COHERENCE and METHOD, The SVMME
and SCOPE, The INTERPRETATIONS and DOCTRINES, The REASONS and USES, of most
Texts.

All which, are set down very Familiarly and Compendiously, in form of a
Dialogue, between TLMOTHEVS and SILAS, By Thomas Wilson, one of the six
Preachers in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury.

Our beloved Brother Paul according to the Wisdom given him of God, has
written unto you, which the unlearned and unstable pervert to their own
destruction.

2. Pet. 3, 15. What Epistle of Paul is not more sweet then Honey?

AUGUST. The sublimity of Paul's mind went beyond the Heavens.

Chrysostom. This Epistle, is a Catechism for Christians, and a perfect body of
Apostolical Doctrine.

Paraeus. LONDON Printed by W. Iaggard, dwelling in Barbican, 1614.

The Authors Epistle, to the Christian and Courteous Reader.
THe counsel of the Heathen Poet, for the maturity of public writings,
(Nonum prematur in annum) has not been of me altogether neglected: for I
begun the exposition of this pairelesse Epistle some seven years sithence at
least, (after I had served three whole Apprentiships in the Ministry of the
glorious Gospel of God.) According to the Greek Proverb, (...), Our latter
thoughts be wiser then our first, I went over it again by Catechizing
Questions and Answers in my Charge, when I had once finished it by Lectures or
Sermons. All this while, I had not a piece of a purpose to publish it (being
resolved it should serve as Seed, for that portion of the Lords field, and
Husbandry committed to my care and trust,) partly because diverse learned
Commentaries of Modern Writers, both foreign and domestical, and some of
them in our Mother Tongue were already extant upon this Epistle, but
especia'ly, for that Iiudged my self far insufficient for such an enterprise.

As there was small reason after such burning lamps, to erect my obscure
light, so I saw great reason to esteem my work very unworthy the public view
of this lettered and judicious Age. Yea, though sundry of my fellowhelpers in
the Lord (who by occasion of their business in our City, were partakers of
part of these Labors) both by word and writing, out of other Diocesses,
solicited me both earnestly and often: For all this, I suffered it to lie by
me, rudely drawn out in Papers, for mine own private use. At last (being
much moved thereunto by three several Letters, I was willing to part from my
Coppie, with express charge to him who received it, (a Friend in London) upon
good Reasons rendered, that it should only be surueyed by some skillful
Ministers, to have their opinion and advice about the fitness of the
publication, cre it came unto the authorized Licenser: for two eyes see more
then one. And in matters of this kind (it is well known to some) I have not
trusted my self: Every man in his ownc cause is party, and therefore partial.
Lookers on, often see more then the Actors do. But being prevented, it was put
into the Examiners hand, before I had set too my last hand. Afterward, it was
by my friend, sent down to me to be polished and perfected. Perceiving how
heavens providence had brought it thus upon the stage, that it might both see
and give light, what was I that I should resist it? Where it may be marked,
that where God leads the way, there it is safe following and coming after. I
yielded the more willingly, considering the motion and opinion of many
Judicious friends (touching the fruitfulness of it) did call it out; also, for
that my other weak endeavors in this kind, namely my Dictionary of the
Scriptures, found gracious acceptance and entertainment, of this present work
I have the more reason to hope well, not only because of the excellency and
variety of the matters handled, and namely, in the many and maine differences
between the ancient faith of the Romans to whom Paul wrote, and the new
vpstart opinions of our seduced Romanists, against whom we preach and write:
but also for the unusual and not unprofitable manner of teaching by
Interpretations, Doctrines, Reasons, and Uses: a form wherein never any
Comment on this Epistle was set forth before. As Jacob when his Sons were to
travail into Egypt for Corn, prayed for them, saying, The God almighty give
you mercy before the man; so to this Treatise being to travail into many
places, I wish that it may find favor in their eyes that shall read it. To
which purpose (gentle Reader whosoever thou be) suffer me to advertise thee of
some fevv things, whereof I think it requisite thou should take notice,
somewhat to excuse such faults, as in such a world of matter I could not but
run into, being a man, and more subject to err, then inumerable other men.

1. First, thou have here but an Epitome and abridgement of longer discourses;
for the points of doctrine were largely followed and furnished in my Sermons,
which in this Dialogue are contracted. Wherein if you meet with some
tautologies and super fluities, or with dislocations, some things not set in the
right place, or claudications and defects; impute it I pray thee to the
multitude of businesses, being 3. times at least every week in the public use
of my Ministry, whilst I did peruse and prepare this to the Press.

2 Whereas some Doctrines are but lightly touched and left bare without any
amplification, it is either because they were more obvious and casie; or else
are enlarged in some part of the Book, or because the volume would have swollen
too much, if I had dilated all alike. Look for these terms, Coherence,
Scope, Sum, Parts, Interpretation, Doctrines, etc. but sometime pointed in the
Margent, yet mostly noted in the body of the Book, as will be of any heedfull
Reader, easily observed.

3. Howsoever this whole Book seem, and indeed is bigger then at first was
thought of, (the Epistle being exceeding rich in Doctrines, whereof thou have
scarce the gleanings,) yet the particular Dialogues, will be deemed rather too
compendious; Matters being rather pointed at with the finger, then explicated
to the full; not so much the truth spoken out, as an hint given what might be
spoken, leaving good grounds of Meditation, to such as have the gift and Art of
Meditating.

4. These things were preached in a popular Auditory (for the most part,) where
care was had to utter high things, in homely plain words; therefore the
learned are to bear with it, if they always find not the sublimity of the
style, to answer the Majesty of the matter. I had rather speak five words to
edification, then a thousand to vain ostentation. And because I did not enjoy
the constitution of body in equal tenor, during the handling of this Epistle,
the Reader therefore may not look for equal exactness of style and stuff, in
every part of this Book.

5. I had a care to accommodate my self, as for manner, so for matter to my
Auditory, and in that regard have pressed some points further then some other,
and passed by or lightly passed over more pertinent to the text, to drive home
some others more fitting to the times and persons, where and with whom I do
live. Howbeit this thou shall find vniuer sally through the whole Book, that
both the natural sense of words and phrases, and the Analysis or artificial
disposition of the Text, with Sum, Scope, and Coherence of every Sentence, is
constantly and faithfully (I trust) delivered. But for as much as there was an
Ocean of hard and dark some, both things to be entreated, and Texts to be
interpreted, wherein I met with great diversity of Opinions among Expositors,
so as it was difficult (if not imposible) for such an one as I am, to hit the
mark in every passage of this Epistle; therefore in my best humbleness and
reverence, I submit my Spirit unto the Prophets, being not only desirous, but
beseeching the Learned Teachers and guides of our English, Church in love to
show me my faylings, whereof I fear they shall find not a few, not slight ones.
Concluding with the Poet: Si quid nouisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non, his vtere mecum.
What righter things thou know, impart;
Or what I bring thee, take in good part.


Thine in the Lord, Tho. Wilson.

THE EPISTLE OF the Apostle PAVLE to the Romans, Explained and Opened
Familiarly, in Form of a Dialogue, between TIMOTHEVS and SILAS.
Wherein ye have for the most part 7. things performed on every Text. 1. The
Scope. 2. Sum. 3. Method. 4. Interpretation. with their 5. Doctrines. 6.
Reasons. 7. And Uses, of every Text.
DIAL. I.
Timotheus. WHat was the chief Argument and Occasion of Writing this Epistle?


Silas. A Difference and dissension between the Jews and Gentiles, which was
abused by the malice of Satan, and was likely to have much hindered the course
of the Gospel, yea, to have stifled and choakt it in the very Cradle and
beginnings. For, the Jews which did believe, did think thorough the
suggestion of some false Apostles, Acts 15. that the Legal Ceremonies were to
be still observed, as necessary to Salvation, that unless men were
circumcised, and kept the Law, they could not be justified and saved by Christ.
Whereas the believing Gentiles did know by the Doctrine of the Gospel, their
exemption from Moses Law, being taught, that in the death and passion of our
Lord, all Legal rites were fully determined; and that Faith alone in Christ,
was sufficient to Justification before God. Heereuppon, arose no small discord
between Jews and Gentiles, which were mixed together; the Jews bearing
themselves insolently because of their privileges, despised the Gentiles as
enemies of Moses Law; and the Gentiles insulting over the Jews, as rejected
of God, for the contempt of Christ. To compound this dissension, Paul the
Apostle framed this Epistle; First, showing that neither Gentiles by their
natural Works, or Jews by their Legal deeds, could be Justified: for
so much as the one violated and brake the Law of nature; and the other, the Law
of Moses: therefore, both the one and the other, were to be Justified thorough
Christ alone, apprehended by a true and lively Faith. After this general
Doctrine, reaching unto the ninth Chapter, there he does in more particular
sort, repress both the insolency of the Jews, by proving, that the promises
were given, and became effectual only to the true Israel, even to such as
were of the faith of Abraham, to all the Elect of God which believe in Christ,
and not to the carnal seed which came of Abraham, only according to the
flesh. Then in the 11. Chapter, converting him to the Gentiles, he persuades
them unto humility, that they should modestly behave themselves toward the
Jews, for so much as diverse of them were daily called to the Faith, and toward
the second coming of Christ, God would graffe in again the whole Nation, and
make them the Members of the Christian Church. When the fullness (or body) of
the Gentiles should enter into the same, then the blindness of the Jews
should cease, it being neither total nor final, but only in part, and for a
time. In the 14. Chapter again, Paul sets upon Jews and Gentiles,
exhorting them both, with many and weighty reasons, unto Brotherly love and
peace, not to be divided one from another, or to judge and contemn one
another, about Days and Meats, and such things as were of a middle nature. The
rest of the Epistle, is spent in exhortations to Morrall Good-workes, both
special in respect of a Calling, and general belonging to all Christians,
Chap. 12. and part of the 13. where political duties be urged, both of the
Maiestrate, and of the Subject. Finally, after diverse salutations, and familiar
matters, he does very gravely conclude the Epistle, with admonition to take
heed of false Teachers, with giving of Thanks and praises of God.


Tim. What is the scope of this Epistle?


Silas To teach the way of obtaining true Righteousness, which is not by
works, but by a lively faith in Christ Jesus.


Tim. Are there any more matters handled in this Epistle?


Silas. Yea, sundry and most weighty, as namely; about Original Corruption,
Sanctification, Spiritual Combat, the use of the Law, of the remnants of
sin, the benefits of afflictions, the Constancy of Believers, Election,
Reprobation, Reiection, Provocation of the Jews; Morrall, Ecclesiastical, and
Political duties, Christian Liberty, familiar matters.


Tim. What Reasons may move us to love and Study this Epistle?


Sil. 1. The worthiness and variety of the Matter, 2. the Method and order of
writing, being very exact, 3. the Dignity of the Instrument or Penman, being
an Apostle, that had seen visions and Reuclations. 4. the Majesty and Wisdom
of the Author, being the God of Wisdom and Majesty.


Tim. Into what Parts may this Epistle be divided?


Into two parts, 1. the Title and Inscription, [ The Epistle, etc.] 2. the
Treatise [ Paul an Apostle, etc.] The Treatise has a preface, ad Verse 16.
wherein Paul Saluteth the Romans, wishing them good things, and describes
the person of Christ: also testifies his pur pose of visiting them: after the
Preface, is a Doctrionall institution unto Chap. 12. and another exhortatorie
unto the end of the Epistle.


Tim. What Significations be there of this word [Epistle?]


Sil. It has two; the one, improper and borrowed; the other, proper and
natural: by the improper signification, signifies any thing that represents
the mind of another. Thus the Scriptures be Gods Epistles: also the
Corinthians are called Paul's Epistles, because their conversion by his
preaching (as an Epistle of recommendation) did commend him for a true Minister
of Christ, 2. Cor. 3, 2. Secondly, in a proper signification, it imports a
Letter sent from one to another, to certify their mind, so is the word used
here.


Tim. What means this word [Apostle?]


Silas Generally by it, is meant any messenger, as Phil. 2, 25. more
especially, one selected of Christ to carry the message of salvation into the
whole world, whereof there were twelve, to whom Mathias was added in Judas
room.


Tim. What be the notes of an Apostle?


Silas. Four; first, to be immediately called by Christ, Gal. 3, 1. Math. 1,
2. Secondly, to be sent with Commission, to preach unto all nations. Thirdly
to have seen Christ in the flesh. 1 Cor. 1, 2. Fourthly, to have a privilege
to be kept from error in their Doctrine, John 16, 13. to which may be added the
fifth to have the power of doing miracles. Luke 9, 1, 2.


Tim. Who was this Paul?


Silas. A Pharisie by profession, a Jew by birth, a most wicked persecuter for
his practice.


Tim. How was he changed?


Silas. By the mighty power of Christ, who from heaven suddenly altered him, and
of a persecutor made him a Preacher. From whence we may learn, that none
despair, though they be yet in their sins: or being called, have grievously
fallen. For Paul sinned fearfully before his Calling, and Peter after, yet
were! Acts 9, 1, 2, 3.
both pardoned upon their returning to God.


Tim. Why did Paul write to the Romans?


Silas. First, because they were many of them his Countrymen, according to the
flesh, the Jews then dwelling at Rome in great Companies, Acts. 28. Secondly,
because by writing to them, he gave an instruction common to all, within the
Jurisdiction of the Romans, which was exceeding large, the Romain Empire
being then in flourishing estate, and as it were the Queen and Mistress of the
world.


Tim. Why was this Epistle set before the rest of Paul his Epistles?


Silas. Neither for that it was in time written before all other, nor yet for
the great dignity of the Romain nation, being then Lords almost of the whole
earth, nor for the excellency of the Romain Church, which consisting of
Gentiles, was inferior unto the Church of the Jews, who were the Olive tree,
others being wild Olives, nor yet for the length of this Epistle, as some have
imagined, but for the exceeding worth and use of the matter handled therein.
For, besides the maine Article of Justification by faith, defined, debated, and
determined, there be other questions and points of Christian faith, of gteat
moment and profit: as about the fall of Man, the force of Original corruption,
the restoration of man by Christ, of the sweet and manifold fruits of
Justifying faith, also of Sanctification; of the Cross and comfort to them
which bear it; of predestination; of the vocation of Gentiles; of the breaking
off, and graffing in again the Jews; of Good-workes; of Maiestracy, of
Charity, of the use of things indifferent, of the diversity of Gifts, and
functions in the Church: so as this Epistle was upon good respect set before
the rest, as the Key to open the way to understand the other; and as a
Catechism or Introduction to our most holy Religion: also the most exact and
accurat Method of this Epistle, did deserve it should be prefixed. For, after
the (...) he defines Justification, declaring what it is, Romans 1, 16. (and
that is held most artificial Method, which begins with definition) Also he
expresses To. 3, 24, 25, 26.
the several causes thereof Efficient. 1. Gods grace, 2. Material, Christ
Jesus dead and raised to life, 3. the Formal, our belief of the Gospel, 4.
the Final or end remote; the praise of Gods righteousness; the nearest end, our
salvation.

Moreover, he amplifieth our free Justification by the contrary, that we
cannot be justified either by works of Nature, or of the Law, Cha. 2, 3.
therefore by grace and faith, after the pattern of Abraham, Chapter 4. then by the
principal and immediate effects of justifying faith: both inward peace of
Conscience, access unto the gracious God, joy, hope, patience in tribulation,
experience, sense of Gods Love in the heart, Chapter 5. and outward Holiness of
life, dying to sin, and living unto righteousness, Cha. 6. by the contrary
operation of the Law, which is to reveal Sin and Wrath, Cha. 7. whereas the
Gospel freeth from condemnation, Chapter 8. by the cause [ Election,] by the
Subject [ Gentiles called, and Jews to be called] Chapter 11 by Testimonies, Chapter
10. by Examples, David and Abraham, Chapter 4. And as this Article of
Justification, so other points are treated of in a very perfect order; a has
been partly touched, and shall more perticulerly appear hereafter.


Tim. Of what kind is this Epistle?


Silas It is mixed: partly Didascalicall, teaching and instructing the mind in
the truth of the Gospel; partly deliberatiue or paraeniticall, exhorting unto
Duties of all sorts, and constancy in the faith: partly Consolatory,
comforting against the fear of condemnation and affliction of the Cross;
partly, Reprehensorie, rebuking the Jews for their infidelity and contumacie
against God, and the Gentiles for their immodestie, security, and pride, and
both for their debate and carnal aemulation; partly, Gratulatorie, giving
thanks for their obedience to the Gospel; and Laudatorie, praising their
zeal; and Petitoric, praying for Grace to them, and to himself.


Tim. Show us now the scope and mark whereat this Epistle aimed?


Sil. The scope is double: the first, is remote and further off, being common
to all the Church, in all ages, as the more plentiful instruction of all the
Saints in the mystery of salvation: and secondly, the quenching of the flames
of contention, raised between the two people, Jews and Gentiles, and to set a
firm peace, which is the nearest end.


CHAP. I.
DIAL. II.
Tim. What is the sum of this whole first Chapter, and what are the chief
Parts thereof?


Sil. Having in the beginning, by an Artificial and elaborate Exordium,
insinuated himself into the minds of the Romans, to make them attent,
docible, and beneuolous receivers of his Doctrine, ad ver. 14. toward the
middle of the Chapter, he lays forth the maine question, to wit; that al
people both Jews and Gentiles, are no otherwise to be justified and saved, then
by the Gospel being believed on, which touching the Gentiles, he does
demo^stratiuely prove from verse 18. to the end of the Chapter: the reason is,
because being transgressors by manisold and gricuous sins, both against God,
through impiety, and men through unrighteousness, monstrous and unnatural, they
were worthy of aeternall damnation, so far off was it, that their works
could Justify and give them life eternal. For the maine points of this
Chapter, they be four.

1. A salutation, to verse 8.

2. The exodium or Praeface, making way and entrance to the matter, to verse 17.

3. The principal Thesis or proposition, touching righteousness before God,
by the faith of Christ, verse 17.

4. The confirmation or proof, from verse 18. to the conclusion of the
Chapter: this is the effect of the argument, brought for probation. Gentiles
and Jews are to be justified, either by Faith or by Works of the Law. But
neither the one, or the other, be justified by Works, both being sinners:
which touching the Gentiles, is cleared in Chapter 2. and concerning the Jews in
Chapter 3. ver. 21. therefore Justification of both, is only by belief in Christ.
Which conclusion is found, Chapter 3. verse 22, etc.


Verse 1, 2, 3. Salutation. 1 Paula Sernant of Jesus Christ, called to be an
Apostle, put apart to Preach the Gospel of God.

2 Which he has Promised before, by his Prophets in the Holy Scriptures.

3 Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of
David, according to the Flesh, etc.


Tim. What things were noted in this Salutation?


Si. Three things: first, the person Saluting: secondly, the persons Saluted:
thirdly, the thing which he wished unto them, and prayed for.


Tim. What do ye note in the Person Saluting, how is he described?


Silas First, his Office, both by the particular, that he was an Apostle or
Ambassador; and general, that he was a servant of Jesus Christ, that is a
Minister or seruitor of Christ, in publishing his will, by preaching the
Gospel, and not only a servant (as other Christians) by common profession:
secondly, by the Doctrine which he taught, whereof he enters into
commendation.


Tim. Whence had he this Office?


Silas Not by men, nor of men, but immediately by the calling of Jesus Christ,
Acts 9, 12, 3, 4.


Tim. Wherefore does he speak of his Calling?


Silas. First, in respect of false Apostles, who charged him to be an intruder:
secondly, to show that he had authority to teach, and that they were bound to
obey, because he brought a Divine doctrine, and did not offer to teach them by
intrusion and usurpation, but by a just, lawful, and divine vocation.


Tim. How came he by such a Calling from Christ?


Silas. Not by his own merits, either foreseen or present, as Origin thought,
but by the eternal decree of God, who set him apart for that service of
preaching Paul was separate. 1. to eternal life. 2. to the knowledge of both to
believe as a Christian. 3. to preach it as an A ostle.
the Doctrine of salvation, as it is here said put apart to Preach, to wit;
to the Gentiles, Acts 23. which was both from the instant of his birth, Gal. 2,
15. and at the time of his calling to the Apostleship, and from everlasting, by
an eternal election, as Chrysostom and after Peter Martyr affirms. From
whence we learn, that our Callings, guists, and fruits of them, depends upon
Gods election, that all flesh may be humbled before God, ascribing to
themselves none, but all praise to God, and free grace from every thing, which
is in them, or done by them, or to them.

Furthermore, in that by the will and Council of God his vocation was assigned
for Paul, and he sanctified and put apart for it (as Jeremy was, Chap. 1. 5.)
long before any manifestation thereof to themselves, or to the world, let us
hereby be warned, neither rashly to rush into a calling, running before we
be sent of God, centrary to the practice of Aaron and Christ. Heb. 5. 4. nor
being sent and called, withdraw our selves from our appointed function, least
we be found to fight against God, whiles we would appear to men to be
shamefast. For such an infirmity sake, God was angry with Moses. Exodus 3. and
punished Jonas Chap. 1. Paul commended for the contrary virtue, his readiness
to obey his calling. gal. 1. 16. 17. Also John the Baptist. John 1. 7.


Tim. By what Arguments or Reasons is the Doctrine of the Gospel commended to
us in this place?


Silas. First, by the Effects, It is a Doctrine of Joy and Comfort, for so much
the word [ Gospell] signifies; as ye would say, a good spell, or word of good
tidings. Luke 2. 10. Secondly, by the Efficient cause, It is revealed from
Heaven of God himself, and teaches the Grace of God; therefore called the
Gospel of God. Thirdly, by the Antiquity, it was first published and promised
by the Prophets. Gal. 3. 13. Fourthly, by the Subject and Matter which it
handles, and that is; the Son of God Incarnate and made Man: also, Savior
and Redeemer for man's eternal Salvation. Lastly, by a proper End (which is) to
engender the obedience of Faith in the Name of Christ, Verse 5.


Tim. What does this admonish us of?


Silas. First, of the never sufficiently loved and praised goodness of God,
who would commit to us such a doctrine; for Quality, so comfortable; for
Authority, so divine; for Continuance so ancient; for Matter and subject, so
very excellent and glorious. Secondly, of our own duty toward this Doctrine
of the Gospel.


Tim. What is our Christian duty toward the word of the Gospel?


Silas. First, in our Judgments, to approve it and esteem it above Pearls,
and most precious and profitable Prou. 3.
things. Secondly, in our minds to mark and heed Psalm. 119. 10. 11, etc.
it well. Thirdly, in our hearts to believe it. Fourthly, in our affections to
love it, and put our chief delight in it. Fifthly, in our memories to keep it,
and treasure it. Sixthly, with our ears to hearken to it. Seventhly, with our
mouths to consesse it, and speak good of it. Lastly, to submit our whole man
to the obedience and practice of of it, in all sincerity and constancy.


Tim. What other thing does it admonish us of?


Silas. Of their error, which charge it with nouelty or flexiblenesse,
according to the wills of men, and circumstances Nouelty a note of error
Antiquity of verity.
of time; for it is always one and the same, like God the Author; and it is
very ancient, it is no vpstart Doctrine, as ancient as man's fall; and that is
most true which was first, as that is false which was latter.


Tim. What learn we by this, that we have that accomplished and most clearly
manifested to us, which was only promised to the people of the Jews by the
Prophets?


Silas. That as God has showed forth toward us the more excellent Grace, so
our contempt and unthankfulness (if we endeavor not to walk worthy of that
grace) will cost us dear, by pulling heavier Judgments from Heaven upon us.
Woe to thee Corazin. Mat. 11. 21 etc. Also learn, that the Gospel promised to
the Fathers by the Prophets, and performed by Christ at his coming, is one in
substance.


Tim. What do ye call the Prophets?


Silas. Men called of God to the Ministry of the old By Prophets here be meant
such as preached to the people, as Nathan, though they did write no prophecy.
Church, and furnished with special graces, both for Interpreting the will of
God set down before by Moses in his Books, and also to foretell the will of
God touching future events; and namely, touching the exhibiting of the Messiah,
and of the good things to be enjoyed by his sufferings. 1 Pet. 1, 11.


Tim. What does this admonish us of, that the promises of Christ are hid in the
Scriptures of the Prophets?


Silas. That there is a great correspondency and agreement for truth and matter
of Doctrine, between the Old and the New Testament, though great odds in the
measure of revelation. Hence it is said of one, that the Old Testament is the
hiding of the New, and the New, is the opening of the Old.


Tim. What should this consent serve unto?


Silas. It serves to confirm us in this persuasion, that the Scriptures are
divine, and no human thing or invention of man; as also it confuteth the
Manichees and Marcionites, which utterly reject the Old Testament.


Tim. What do ye call Scriptures? Scriptures.



Silas. Every thing that is written is Scripture, in a large and general
sense: but this word [ Scripture] by an excellency, is given peculiarly to
those Books which contain the word of God, and were written by Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, for the perpetual instruction of the Church. 2 Timothy 3, 16.
This does put us in mind of Gods great goodness, that would have his Word Use.
put in writing, and so wonderously to preserve those Books in all Ages for
his Church sake, without loss of one jot or tittle, notwithstanding, great
means to suppress and extinguish them.


Tim. By what reasons can ye prove unto us, that these Books which are called
Scriptures be the very word of God, rather then any other writings?


Silas. There be heercof sundry Arguments, which may persuade all men, and
some which will, and do persuade Gods Children. First (that which was touched
before) the great Hermony and constant consent of one part of this Book with
another, in such a huge variety of infinite matter, yet no repugnancy;
howsoever some diversity may be found. Secondly, the Majesty of the matter in
great simplicity of words. Thirdly, the efficacy, power, and virtue thereof,
working in the hearts of sinners for their conversion, which no other Writing
in the world, does or can effect: for man's natures in their reasons and wills
being corrupt, are as contrary to the Doctrine taught in these Books, as
darkness to light; Heaven to Hell; yet are they by the mighty efficacy hid in
them, reconciled to them; so as they willingly yield, approve, and honor them:
also the power of them makes even the wicked to fear and tremble, as in
Foelix. Fourthlie, the events Foelix.
of Prophesies so many hundred, yea, so many thousand years fore-shewed. (As
the Seed of the Woman promised to Adam, the bondage of Jacob in Egypt, the
Captivity of Babylon, the Birth of Josiah and of Cirus; revealing of
Antichrist; and innumerable such like) and made before, yet accordingly
fulfilled in their due time, does bewray them to be from that all seeing
verity. Fifthly, the Penmen of the Scripture (as Moses, David, Job, Matthew,
Paul) discovering their own corruptions and infirmities, even to their own
great prejudice, and crack of their own estimation in the world, and so
impartially reporting the foul blemishes of their own people and Countrymen,
does testify that they were governed by the holy Spirit of truth, in the
penning of them. Sixtlie, there be sundry examples and stories in the Bible, to
which even the Heathen and Pagan; yea, and Jewish Writers (being enemies to
Christ) do give testimony to the truth of them; as in Josephus and others: and
the witness of an enemy, it is of no small credit and force. Seuenthlie, the
strange preseruations of these Books, notwithstanding the strange malice of
the Devil, and the mischievous policies and practices of his most wicked
Instruments to suppress and extingnish them, yet that they should be so kept,
as to remain entire without loss of any Book, nay, of any Jot or Tittle (as
very Iudiciously learned men do think) this divine protection does argue, that
their Authority is divine. Add unto all this, the constant Testimony which so
many worthy Martirs by their death and blood have given to this truth. Lastly,
every one of Gods Children have the witness of his own Spirit, the Author of
the Scriptures to testify in the consciences of them, that they are inspired
of God, and do contain a divine infallible truth.


Tim. Whereunto must this help and profit us?


Silas. To arm our minds against that dangerous temptation of doubting the
truth of Scriptures, whether they be of God. Secondly, to draw more reverence
toward those Books and Writings with more study in them, then toward al
other writings whatsoever, being the Book of Books, therefore by an
excellency called the Bible.


Tim. Why are the Scriptures called Holy? Holy.



Silas. First, because they proceed from the Spirit which is Holy. Luke 1. 6,
7. Secondly, they teach a truth which also is Holy, even the truth which is
according to godliness. Titus 1, 1. Thirdly, they be Instruments whereby the
Elect are sanctified and made Holy. Ioh. 17. 17. Sanctify them with thy truth,
thy word is truth. Lastly, they were written to diverse most holy Ends; as to
Ends and Uses of the Scripture.
teach, to convince, to correct, to instruct in righteousness. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Also to give comfort. Romans 15. 4.


Tim. What learn ye by this?


Silas. First, that they have a sacred authority in themselves, containing a
divine Doctrine, and do not depend on Church or Pope. Secondly, that the
Scriptures are to be preached, read, and heard with holy affection. Moses is
commanded to put off his shoes, because the ground is holy. Exodus 3. 5.
Thirdly, they are never to be mentioned but with great reverence and honorable
Titles. Lastly, seeing they are Holy, therefore to apply them to vain and
light, or to profane and wicked uses (as in Charms, Enchantments, in lefts
and meriments, in plays and interludes) is a grievous sin, even an horrible
profanation of Gods name.


Tim. What does the third verse contain?


Silas. A description of our Redeemer and Savior, who is the matter and
substance, the end and scope of holy Scriptures, which teach us nothing else
save Christ, This puts a difference between the Gospel and Law.
as their maine subject; and lead to nothing but unto Christ Jesus, as their
furthest mark. This discerns the Gospel, not only from other profane
Writings, but even from Moses Law, which has the same Author, not the same
Subject.


Tim. How is he described?


Silas. First, by his Person, which is but one (concerning his Son.)
Secondly, by his Titles, which are three. First, Jesus. Secondly, Christ.
Thirdly, our Lord. Thirdly, by his two Natures, which are distinctlie set down
with their proofs: the human first, (which was of the Seed of David) then
the Divine, Verse 4. (declared mightily to be the Son of God.)


Tim. What is the Sum then of this Scripture?


Silas. That Jesus Christ the Savior of the World, is both true God and true
Man in the unity of person; there is in Christ one thing and another thing,
that is diverse Natures, but yet not one person and another person, for the
person is but one, the Son of God made Man, by assuming the Manhood into the
fellowship of his person.


Tim. The Manhood of Christ then, has no subsistence out of the person of the
Son of God?


Silas. No, none, being considered apart, but wholly subsisteth in the person
of the Son, to which it is inseparably and wonderfully united.


Tim. What is to be observed touching this union of Natures in one person?


Silas. That our Savior has his denomination some times according to one
Nature; as here he is called the Son of God. Sometimes according to the
other, being named the Son of Man, or the Man Christ. 1. Tim. 2, 5. Secondly,
from the unity of person it comes to pass, that that which is proper to the
one Nature, is attributed to Christ, denominated or named after the other; as
here the Son of God is said to be made of the Seed of David, which is a
property of his human Nature, and yet affirmed of his Divine, for this Union
sake, because the person is one. See the like Acts 20, 28. 1 Cor. 2, 8. Ephe.
4, 10. in all which, that which is peculiar to the Manhood, is affirmed of
Christ as God, by reason the persou is one.


Tim. But these Natures which are so straightly linked in one person, they are
not confounded, but remain diverse in themselves, their properties and actions?


Silas. It is true, they do so. The Manhood is not the Godhead, though the Man
Christ be also God: nor the Godhead is not the Manhood, though the Son of God
be also very Man; neither is the Godhead Mortal, finite, nor did it hunger,
was weary, or suffer, or dye, or rise again, or ascend, or pray; nor the
Manhood is Immortal, Incomprehensible, Invisible, present in every place,
etc. but the Natures with their properties and works, remain still distinct
one from the otheres howsoever they be conjoined most nearly in the person of
our Redeemer. This is a great Mystery. 1. Tim. 3, 16.


Tim. Wherefore was this union of Natures in one person needful?


Silas. For two purposes: both to effect the work of Reconciliation with God
for Sinners, and to maintain and continue it, to enter them into Gods favor,
and to keep them in it for ever.


Tim. Express this somewhat more fully?


Silas. The Son of God united to himself our Nature, that once in earth he
might work righteousness in it, and suffer death, and so make and merit
atonement for Sinners, and this human Nature he keeps always united to his
Godhead, that he may appear for us in Heaven through his continual
intercession, to preserve this atonement that it be not interrupted by our
daily sins; hence called our eternal High Priest. Heb. 9.


Tim. Now tell us how our Saniour is called the Son of God? Son of God.



Silas. There be Sons of God of diverse sorts. First, by Creation, as Adam.
Luke 3, 38. the Angels. Job 1, 6. Secondly, by Adoption: thus the Members of
Christ are Sons by Grace of Adoption. Romans 8, 14. If Sons, then Heirs.
Thirdly, by grace of Personal union, thus the Man Christ is the Son of God,
being knit to the person of the Son. Luke 1. That holy thing which is borne
of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Fourthlie, by Generation: thus the
second person in the Trinity, is the Eternal Son of God, by Eternal and
inconceivable Generation, being begotten from all Eternity of the substance of
his Father: hereof called his only begotten Son. John 1. 13. and that Son
of the Everlasting God. Math. 16, 16. by an excellency, because he alone is in
a peculiar manner, God with his Father Coeternall, Coequall in the substance
and glory of the Godhead, before all Worlds; and the Head of our Adoption and
sonship: this dignity being given to the faithful to be Son of God, by
believing in the Name of this Son. John 1, 12. Gal. 3, 26.


Tim. What be the Titles given to our Redeemer?


Silas. Three: first, is of his benefits [ Jesus:] the second, of his Office [
Christ:] the third is of his Soueraignety over his Church, and all the World [
Lord.]


Tim. Why is he called Jesus? Jesus



Silas. Because he saves his people from their finnes.


Tim. This (...) is the Name of his benefits?


Silas. It is so: for Salvation contains the whole mass of his benefits,
which concern Eternal life, whereof Justification and Sanctification be two
chief ones.


Tim. But ye can reduce his benefits to a few heads?


Silas. Yea, unto two. First, Justification, which is a saving and absoluing
the Believers from guilt and condemnation of sin, that they be accounted Just
by Imputation of Christ's righteousness. Secondly, Sanctification, which is a
saving or enfreeing them from the bondage and power of sin, that they may
walk in holiness.


Tim. What signifies Christ? Christ.



Silas. One anointed or consecrated with material Oil, to some Office.


Tim. How does this agree to Jesus?


Silas. To signify how he was consecrated by the authority of his Father, and
the spiritual Oil of heavenly graces to his Office of Mediator-ship, that he
might work the salvation of his Church.


Tim. How many be his Offices?


Silas. Three: first, Prophet, to teach his Church. Secondly, Priest, to offer
Sacrifice, and to make intercession for his Church. Lastly, King, to rule, to
protect, and to enrich his Church.


Tim. Why is he called Lord?


Silas. Because of Dominion and Sovereignty, which he holds under his Father
over all things creaced. Lord.



Tim. Why is he called Our Lord?


Silas. He is Our Lord by right, first of Creation, being made by him:
Secondly, of Redemption, being bought by him: Thirdly, of Preservation, being
kept and vpheld by him. Heb. 1, 3. From whence we are admonished: first, that
Christ only has interest in us, not Satan, nor the World. Secondly, that he
lovingly and mightily cares for, and defends his Church and every Member of
it. Thirdly, we are to rely upon his protection, and to render unto him due
homage, loyalty, and subjection, as to our lawful and gracious Lord. Psalm.
110, 1, 2.


Tim. How many Natures be there in Christ? Seed of David



Silas. Two, Human and Divine, he is proved to be a true Man because he came
of the Seed of David, that is of David's loins; to (...), of the Virgin; who
was of the Lineage, Stock, Family, and Kindred of David: first, for so it was
promised: secondly, that it might appear he came of a King: thirdly, to show
that he disdaineth not Sinners; for David was a great Sinner.


Tim. Wherefore is it said, rather he was made, then borne or begotten; also,
what signifies [Flesh.]


Silas. Because the term [ Mads] does better express the admirable
conception of Christ of a Virgin, without the help of man. 2. to show that he
did exist Gal. 4, 4.
before his (...), and thereby (remaining still what he was) was made that
which before he was not. Christ being the Son of God eternally, existing by
Incarnation, was not changed into Man, but assuming John 1, 14.
the human nature into the communion of his person. To the same (...) that
which is added (according to the Flesh) where Flesh signifies the substance of
Christ his (...) Nature (not as corrupt) Christ had his humainity from David,
not his (...)
but (...) it is weak (...) and moreover, (...) his divine nature (...) his
human. (...) like (...) for distinction sake. See 1 Timothy 3, 16. Romans 9 5. 1
Pet. 3, 18.


Tim. Why must he be a true Man?


Silas. First, to suffer death for sin. Heb. 2, 6. Secondly, to work
righteousness in our Nature. Thirdly, to appear always in Gods sight for us.
Heb. 9, 24. Fourthly, to pity and succor us when we are tempted. Heb. 8, 2.


Silas. What comfort comes to us by his being Man?


Silas. That God has infinitely set his love upon us, whose nature he would
have his Son to assume. Also, we are (...) that he pittieth us in our (...),
himself having been (...) and had experience of all the infirmities and
miseries of our Nature. Heb. 2. and 4.


Tim. What Instructions take we from hence?


Silas. That we ought to be humble in our conversation, seeing Christ so
humbled himself, as being God, to become a servant, and to dye, Phil. 2, 6,
7, 8. Secondly, that we never doubt of Gods love toward us, whereof such a
pledge is given us in the incarnation of his son, John 3, 16. Romans 5, 8.
Thirdly, that we study and strive to return al love to him, who so loved us;
and by love to serve one another, as Christ through love became man, to serve
his fathers will for our good. Romans 15, 1, 2, 3. Ephe. 5, 2.


DIALOGVE. III.
Verse 4, 5, 6. 4 And declared mightily to be the Son of God, touching the
spirit of Sanctification, by the Resurrection from the dead.

5 By whom we have received Grace and Apostleshippe, that Obedience might be
given unto the Faith for his name, among all the Gentiles.

6 Among whom, ye be also the Called of Jesus Christ.


Tim. What is the (...) of this fourth Verse?


Silas. That Jesus Christ is God Omnipotent, of the same power and Majesty with
his father: so declared Ioh. 5, 26. and 2, 19.
to the world by his glorious resurrection, which was a work of Divine power.


Tim. What is meant by the spirit?


Silas His divine Nature, as the flesh against which it is set, signifies his
human nature. See Spirit used in like sense, 1 Timothy 3. 16, 1 Pet. 3, 18. Heb.
9, 14.


Tim. Why does he put [Sanctification] to spirit?


Silas To express the work of his Divinity, sanctifying his manhood, with all
graces above measure, and quickening that flesh which he assumed, unto a life
which is no more subject to death. Thus both Chrysostom and (...) expound it
of Christ's own rising.


Tim. By how many ways did he manifest himself to be the Son of God?


Silas By these seven ways: The first is, his Divine and effectual Doctrine,
for no mere man could teach as he taught: also, by his most innocent Life.
Secondly, by his powerful Miracles, which were evidences of his Godhead,
being done by his proper power. Thirdly, by his foretelling things to come.
Fourthly, by his knowledge of man's thoughts. Math: 9, 4. Fifthly, by ordaining
of the Sacraments of his Church. Math: 26 and 20. Sixthly, by institution of
Ministers, Ephesians 4, 10, 11
for the teaching and ruling his Church, Mat. Acts 26, 8.
10, and 28. Seauenthly, by raising himself from the dead, which is a work
sarre passing human power; Romans 4, 17.
and therefore fitly brought here to prove his Divinity.


Tim. But Elisha and Paul raised the dead, and wrought other Miracles, yet
were but men?


Silas True, this was by a borrowed power even in Christ's name, but Christ did
raise himself, which is more then to raise others, as Prophets did, and shall
raise others by his own proper power (which argues him to be more then a man)
not as an instrument, but as a principal Efficient.


Tim. For what reasons was it needful for him to be a Son of God.
very God, that should be our Savior?


Silas For these Reasons: First, that he might give full merit to the dooinges
and sufferings of his manhood, for a mere creature cannot merit of the Creator
God. Secondly, that in his sufferinges, which of it self he might support his
man-hoode, could not bear such a weight of wrath as fell upon him. Thirdly,
that he might give his spirit to the elect to sanctify them, for the spirit
being God, none but God could give him. Fourthly, that he might raise up
himself from the dead, and all his members with him, at the last and great
day. Fifthly, that he might be a maintainer of that salvation which he has
purchased, and a Protector of his people for ever: therefore, his members trust
in him, and call upon him, which were a grievous sin, if he were but a mere
man: for cursed is he, that makes Flesh his arm.


Tim. What Use is to be made of this truth?


Silas First, it serves to stir up our thankfulness toward God, who has
given us such a mighty Redeemer, Luke 1, 32. Secondly, it should cause us to
put our whole affiance in him against all dangers and enemies, bodily and
spiritual. Psalm: 2. verse last. Lastly, to be obedient to his voice, speaking
to us in his word, seeing he is that mighty God able to punnish all
disobedience. Acts 3, 13. Heb. 2, 2. and 4.


Tim. What is meant by the Apostleship?


Silas The gift or faculty of that calling, to be an Apostle: and secondly, to
be able to teach the church: Apostleship.
both which, he had immediately from Christ.


Tim. Why is it called Grace?


Sil. Because it is freely given him, not only without, but against all desert
and merit, from the mere Ephel. 3, 8.
goodwill and favor of God, at the time of his conversion 1. Cor. 15, 8.
by grace, and together with it.


Tim. Of whom did he receive this Grace?


Sil. Of Christ immediately, who both called and furnished him with authority
and gifts, even then when he went about to persecute and oppress the Church,
that he might be to the praise of his glorious grace.


Tim. To what end did he receive it?


Silas To a twofold end and purpose: First, it is in respect of men, to draw
them by the inward work of the spirit (joined to his preaching) to believe and
obey the Gospel of Christ. Secondly, in respect of Christ, that his name may
be glorified, by the calling and submission of many souls to his Doctrine,
acknowledging him for their Savior and GOD, who before served dumb Idols as
they were led.


Tim. Toward whom did Paul exercise his Apostleship?


Silas Especially toward the Gentiles; amongst whom, Christ was mighty by
his Ministry: as by Peter, he was mighty amongst the Jews. Gal. 2. 7.


Tim. What do ye learn out of all this?


Silas That the gift and function of the Ministry, are Christ's free gift:
secondly, that the use of them, is to be referred unto the honor of Christ; by
winning men to believe and acknowledge him for they Savior, by calling upon
his name, and being called after his name [ Christians] of Christ: thirdly,
that Christ is a common Savior of Jews and Gentiles which believe, so as the
difference of nations is taken away, Acts 10, 31, 32.


Tim. What are we to learn for our instruction and aedification out of the 6.
Verse?


Sil. These four things: first, that Paul does wisely draw the Romans with
compass and rank of them to whom his commission (as an Apostle) did
appertain: both to put from himself the suspicion of a curious busy body,
and to make them more willing to receive him, being sent to them with authority
to be their Instructor. Also to humble the pride of the Romans, being ranged
in the number of other Believers, howsoever they were Lords of the world. In
naming the [ Called of Christ] he gives to wit, that they belonged to
Christ, and his grace belonged to them; and teaches how they belonged to
Christ, and became (namely) by an effectual and special calling, drawing them
to the faith of Christ, freely and firmly.


DIALOGVE. IIII.
Verse 7. 7 To all that be at Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints, Grace
be with you, and peace from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.


Tim. WHat does this Text contain?


Silas. The other parts of Paul's Salutation, to wit; persons saluted: and his
wish or prayer. In the wish or prayer of the Apostle, consider three things:
first, to whom. Secondly, what. Thirdly, from whom he wishes. Concerning the
persons he saluteth and wishes good things, not universally to every one;
Emperor, Consuls, Tribunes, etc. These were not members of the Church, and
would have despised Paul his Prayer: but to all ye beloved of God, which
believed in Jesus Christ. And note, that his Prayer is common to all those
which professed Christ, were they chief men or private, were they learned or
unlearned, Romans, Grecians, or Jews (for the Church at Rome now consisted of
many Strangers, and not only of Citizens and homeborne) withal respect of
person; as God the giver of these graces, is free from acception of persons,
both to comfort the means only, in that they were not passed over: also, to
humble the great and mighty, in that they were sorted with the needy and
little ones. Moreover, Paul's examples warns all; namely, Ministers, that they
be ready according to their gifts and opportunities, to pray for, instruct,
exhort, and comfort every one under their charge, all being alike dear to
Christ, and alike account must be rendered for all.


Tim. How be the persons Saluted set forth?


Silas. First, by their Place (which be at Rome.) Secondly, by their three
Titles, (1. beloved of God. 2. called. 3. Saints.)


Tim. What learn we from the Place?


Silas. That Gods grace was not tied to Places, Persons, or Times, but is
freely given without respect of Country, etc. For they who now be at Rome, are
degenerated, and enjoy not that grace of God.


Tim. What be the Tules given to the Romans?


Silas. 1. beloved of God: 2. Saints: and 3. called.


Tim. What signifies this, to be beloved of God?


Silas. Thus much; not to be lovers of God actiuely, but passiuely; to be right
dear to God, of great account and price in his sight, even as it were his
chief delight, being loved both by praedestination, and by present
Justification, without any merit.


Tim. What does this commend to us?


Silas. The great worthiness and dignity of a true Christian, that the great
God sets his love upon him to take pleasure in him; which is more, then if all
the Princes of the Earth should join and conspire together, to love one man.
Secondly, that they be happy Men which be Gods Children, for they have God
loving and favorable, in whose favor is life, and upon whose love depends all
felicity, both earthly and heavenly; they cannot be miserable whom God loves;
and they cannot but be miserable whom God hates. Thirdly, that the love and
free good will of God, is the root of all other benefits: namely, calling,
Sanctification, and Remission of sins are derived from hence, that God loving
us, we loved not him, but he loved us first. 1 John 4, 10. Also, God so loved
the World, that he gave his Son. John. 3, 16. Fourthly, this should provoke his
Children to return dilection and love to God, of whom they are beloved.
Fifthly, godly persons ought to be very dear unto us, and of great reckoning,
sithence God our Father loves them. We should love where he loves, and deal
well by them whom he will honor so much. 1 John 5, 1. Sixthly, that all injuries
done to the Saints, cannot but provoke God to indignation; as it would grieve
us to see any abused whom we love.


Tim. What is meant by Saints?


Silas. Such, as being separated from the World, are consecrated to Christ, and
have his Spirit given them to work holiness in them: so as Saints be persons
sanctified by the Spirit, to live holily and justly. From hence we learn, two
things: First, that such as still abide in their sins, and wallow in the mire
of a profane life, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, they are no believers,
nor beloved of God; for all Believers are Saints, that is; they are holy
persons, loving and practicing holiness. Secondly, that they shall never be
Saints in Heaven, who first be not Saints in Earth, Saints in Via inchoatiuely,
ere they be Saints in Patria, perfectly.


Tim. What means this, that it is said they were called to be Saints?


Silas. That by an effectual vocation God Almighty (as it were) by speaking
the word, did make them to be such indeed and truth, as they were called and
named to be; to wit, Saints, or holy: and that according to his gracious good
will and pleasure, as was employed in the Word ( Beloved) to show, that our
Christian vocation flows from his mercy.

This is moreover well to be observed, that Paul having said of himself, in
verse 1. that he was [ Called to be an Apostle] and now twice, in verse 6. and
7. says of the Romans, that they were [ The Called of Christ, and called to
be Saints] that the word [ Calling or Vocation] is used in a double sense,
either in a more strict meaning; for a Calling to a Function or Office, either
civil; as to be a Magistrate, a Captain, etc. or Ecclesiastical,
immediately, as to be a Prophet, an Apostle, etc. or mediate, called by the
Church, as were Doctors and Pastors: or else in a more large signification, for
calling into the common society of the Christian Church; and this is either
unto the knowledge and profession of Christ, as of Hipocrites, by a general
and external calling, when the word sounds in the ear, to the enlightening
of the mind, and some slight or slender change of the heart; or, it is unto the
faith of Christ and unto salvation through him, when both mind and heart are
mightily persuaded by the Spirit, to obey the Caller, by believing his
promises, and indeuouring to do things commanded. This is an internal and
effectual calling, which Paul here ascribes unto all the Roman Christians;
not that there were amongst them no counterfeits and unbelievers, but because
by Law and Judgment of Charity, we are bound to esteem all such for truly
called and Saints, who outwardly profess themselves to be so, and do not by
their conversation declare and evident the contrary, leaving to God the
judgment of certainty. Now, whereas he writes of these Romans: that they
were called to be Saints, or holy; we are further to learn a difference
between Nature and Grace; that first we are by Nature unclean and vnpure,
destitute of personal holiness: though not without foederall holiness, being
the seed of faithful parents, men are not therefore called of God, because
they are holy, but therefore they be Holy: because they are called of his
Grace. Moreover, covertly the Apostle herein takes away the difference
between Jews and Gentiles, that the Jews may not boast, as if all holiness
were in their kindred, and were tied only to their stock (as they foolishly
dream) for the Gentiles are called to the same glorious condition of
holiness. Touching Saints, the word notes not any absolute perfection where
there is no want: for no doubt but both Romans, Corinthians, and others, who
Paul honors with the Title of [ Saints] were sundry ways faulty; but such
as be consecrate to God, and besides the


11 For I long to see you, that I may bestow amongst you some spiritual
gifts, that ye might be established.


Tim. WHat does this Scripture contain?


Silas. Paul having ended his Salutation, uses now an Exordium or Preface;
wherein, he endeuoreth to win and draw the good will of the Romans toward
him, to cause them more readily to hearken unto and embrace his Doctrine,
performing (and that very pathetically) the part of a Christian Orator, by
great art to get and gain their benevolence and attention.


Tim. What Art does be use for this purpose?


Silas. First, he insinuates his great love and good will which he bears
them, until verse. 16. Secondly, he lays before them the worth and
excellency of his Doctrine, in verse. 16.


Tim. By what arguments does Paul demonstrate and prove his love toward them?


Silas. Three ways. First, by his rejoicing and giving thanks for their great
measure of faith in the Gospel. Secondly, by his earnest and constant prayer
unto God, for their spiritual prosperity. Thirdly, by his great care to come
unto them, not for any earthly benefit or commodity to himself, but to do
them good, by instructing them in the Gospel.


Tim. Now expound the words and tell us here, what is meant by the whole World?


Silas. The Churches which be in the world professing the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, by a (...), of the whole for the part, the world put for the Christian
Churches, which were then in the world, or in many parts in the world; like
unto that which is written in 1. These. 1. 8. In every place your faith to God
ward is spread abroad, etc. Now, by [ Faith] is meant the fame and report of
their Faith, witnessed and uttered by their confession of Christ. Romans 10. and
other fruits of a lively Faith. Like to that, (...). 16, 19. where obedience
(that is) their Faith, which made them obedient, and wherein consists the
chief obedience of a Christian, is said to have come abroad, that is; the
rumor of it. A (...) of the subject for the adiunct. For Faith is a secret
thing, and lies hid in the heart, known only to God; yet by signs
manifested to men: who by the fruits are led to see the root, and to commend it.


Tim. What means he hereby, that he gives thanks to God?


Silas. That he was glad, and with joy praised God for their conversion to the
Gospel, and that it was grown so famous, as that their Conquests over many
Nations was not so renowned, as their zeal and feruency for Christian Religion
was. From whence we learn, that it is the duty of every faithful Man, to
rejoice for the well-doing of others, when they thrive and prosper in
godliness. The Reasons of this duty be these following. First, because we are
members one of another, and therefore ought to suffer together, and to rejoice
together. 1 Cor. 12, 26. Secondly, the well-doing, and spiritual prosperity
of other Christians, redowndeth to us, who have an interest in all their
gifts, as touching the use and profit of them, though not for the propriety of
them; for every Saint is the possessor of his own graces, yet in the fruition
and benefits, there is a communion, according to that which we profess in our
Creed, concerning the Communion of Saints. Wherein we have just and great
matter of rejoicing and thanksgiving. Thirdly, to rejoice at the welfare and
the well-doing of the Brethren, is a Testimony, that we have Christ his
Spirit, which is a Spirit of Charity, chasing Envy out of the heart, and in
stead thereof, planting brotherly love. Gal. 5, 22. 1 Cor 14, 4. This doctrine,
serves to reprove the envious and malicious, which either little regard and
rejoice not at all; or which is worse, do repine and (...) at the good estate,
and good works of others; carping at them, crossing and hindering their good
courses and endeavors: as Saul envied David, the Jews Christ, and the false
Apostles Paul. Secondly, it ministers comfort to the godly, when they do
feel their hearts stirred up to cheerful thankfulness toward God, for such
as they see to be blessed with spiritual blessings in heavenly things. Ephe.
1, 4.


Tim. Why does he give thanks to God [through Christ?]


Silas. First, because all graces come to us, through him our Mediator. John.
1, 14, 16. Secondly, because all thanks are accepted for him. 1. Peter. 2, 5.
Thirdly, all ability to be thankful is given of him: for he with the father
and the spiritis Author of every grace. Now the same way which God takes in
bestowing his graces, we are bound to follow it in returning thanks, that is;
by Christ our High Priest.


Tim. Why says he [My God?]


Silas. He spoke this, as the Saints do out of a private feeling; hot to
exclude others, but to express his faith and peculiar affiance, which he has
in Gods goodness; confessing, that God is his in special, who was a common
God to all the faithful.


Tim. Is it enough to have a general faith?


Silas. It is not sufficient, but every one must privately apply to himself
the mercies and promises of God, General and Historical: faith is common to
Hypocrites and believers.


Tim. What does this teach us, that it is said their faith published, why he
names their faith, rather then any grace of theirs?


Silas. To teach us, that Faith is the Queen and Mother of all other virtues.
Secondly, that God honors them with good Fame and renown, which honor him,
by placing their Faith in his promises. Thirdly, that the power of God in
spreading abroad the Gospel, is very mighty in so short a time, to carry it
so far, notwithstanding all oppositions.


Tim. What learn we, that he [Called God to witnesse]


Silas That it is lawful to swear in private matters, so we observe these
conditions. First, that the matter be true and known to us so to be. Secondly,
that God only be called upon, as a witness of the truth. Thirdly, that the
matter be of weight and importance, not slight and triuiall. Fourthly, that
there be such necessity, that without it we cannot be believed, it being a
thing very requisite for the good of others, that credit should be given to
our words, as it did very much behooue the Romans to think well of Paul,
whom they had never seen, and to believe him. From hence, are taxed three
sorts of men: First, such as are common swearers upon every light occasion,
as profane worldlings do. Secondly, for such as resuse to take an Oath before
a Ruler, for the Ceremony of kissing the Book, or laying their hand upon it
(as the Brownists do) which is a mere Circumstance, and a very indifferent
thing, being void both of superstition and scandal, like unto the gesture of
the Angel in the Revelation, lifting up his hand when he did swear: which
Custom is used in AEthyopsa unto this day, when they take an Oath: as Abraham's
servant put his hand under his Masters thigh, when he did swear, Genesis 24, 9.
Thirdly, such as are too scrupulous of an Oath, when there is just cause to
take it: as the Anabaptists, who deny unto the Christians, lawful use of
Magistrates, Laws, and Oaths (contrary to these evident Testimonies of
Scripture: as Deuteronomy. (...). 10, 12. Psalm 110, 4. Heb. 6, 17. Gen 21, 20 and
(...), 35. 1. Sem. 24, 23. 2. Cor. 11, 21. Gal. 1, 2. Esaias 19, 18. and 43. 23.
besides many other.


Tim. Of what Spirit does Daul speak when he says (who I serve in my spirit)
tell us also how God will be served? wherein his service consists, and for what
reasons we are to perform service to his (...)?


Sil. This Particle [ My] shows, that he speaks not of God his spirit, but of
his own spirit, and fervent affection, 2. Tim. 1, 3. and it teaches us in
what manner God is to be served (1. Religiously worshipped) not in show and
ostentation; not in hypocrisy; not coldly and perfunctorily; not
constrainedly, and by compulsion; not in body only, but in soul also: with
Readynesse, 2. Cheerfulness, 3. sincerity, 4. feruency and innocence of
heart; for these are things wherein Gods service consists. His internal
worship stands in Faith, Hope, Love of God, fear of his name, Confidence,
peace, joy in the Holy Ghost, patience in suffering, and obedience in doing his
will; Prayer for his protection and benefits, and thankfulness of heart, for
his mercies of all sorts. His external service, is placed in public prayer,
reading and hearing his word with reverence and attention, Communicating in the
Holy Mysteries, praises, singing of Psalms, etc. All which parts of his
service, we are bound to perform upon these Reasons. First, because we were
created of God, out of nothing. Secondly, because by the blood of his son,
we were redeemed out of hell. Thirdly, out of many dangers of body and soul,
we have been preserved. Fourthly, with many and manifold good things, we have
been all our life long, plentifully and graciously blessed. Fifthly, God has
given us both commandment by his authority, and freedom with happy liberty,
that we may serve him. And lastly, promises to us, not only felicity on
earth, but in heaven, so we will serve him: for Godliness has the promises both
of this life, and of that which is to come.


Tim. For whom must we pray?


Sil. For others, as well as for our selves; especially for the Pastor, and the
people one for another.


Tim. What things hinder Prayer?


Silas. Four things: first, our unworthiness compared with Gods Majesty:
secondly, our insufficiency to pray, being destitute of meetnesse and gifts
therein: thirdly, hardness of the work, being one of the hardest works of a
Christian: fourthly, opinion; that God will hear us without asking, and that
prayer is needless. This hinders some.


Tim. What things hinder perseverance in Prayer?


Silas Differring the profit and fruit of our prayers, so long as men wax
weary of calling, because GOD hears not.


Tim. What Remedies against these Lets?


Silas. First, consideration of Christ's merits and worthiness, in trust
whereof, our Prayers be offered up. Secondly, Gods acceptance of our upright
desites and endeavors, notwithstanding imperfections. Thirdly, his commandment
laying the duty upon us. Fourthly, his promise of hearing us. Fifthly,
experience of the Saints, who notwithstanding all Lets, have both prayed and
obtained: and why may not other the Children of God, hope to find the like
favor, having the like encouragements?


Tim. We have seen Paul's Prayers were constant without ceasings, what do ye
learn here that he [Made mention of the Romans always in his Prayers?]


Silas. Even thus much: First, that it is the duty of a Minister of the word,
when he prays for himself and others, not to forget his flock whom he
feeds, but to remember them in all his prayers: because teaching by Prayer,
becomes successful and effectual. Secondly, it may be meet that the flock
should know this Love and Care of their Pastor, for them to enkindle the
respect of him the more: and especially, to gain their hearts to receive his
instructions. Lastly, that if the success of our Prayers appear not straight
way, yet we ought to persevere, as in Luke 18, 1. 1. These. 5, 17.


Tim. What was the matter of Paul's Prayer?


Silas. He expresses one part of his prayer, which was, He besought God that
he might have a prosperous journey by the will of God, to come to them.


Tim. What Branches has thu Prayer?


Sil. Two: First, that all hindrances removed, he might have opportunity of
a journey to Rome. Secondly, that this journey might be made prosperous both
for safe coming to them, and for doing good when he comes.


Tim. What should this teach us, that [Hee beggeth this of God, and refers
all to his will?]


Silas That Gods Children should in all things hang upon Gods providence,
submitting their will for iournying, or for staying at home; and for all other
matters, and for the good success of all things unto his good pleasure, I am.
4. 15. Secondly, they in their Iournies, and all other lawful works that they
take in hand, must begin with Prayer to God. For God directs all things as he
will, and he knows best what is good and meet for his Children. Also, this is
a service and honor which they owe to God, to do all things by calling upon
his name. Colos. 3. and distinguishing them from the Wicked, who do not call
upon God. Psalm. 14. This condemns the impiety and rashness of many, who as
if they were Lords of their own actions, do not rest upon Gods will
revealed; nor upon his secret will, for events of their counsels.


DIALOGVE. VI.
Verse 11, 12, 13, 14. Por I long to see you, that I might bestow you some
Spiritual gift, that ye might be established, that I might have consolation
together with you, and each with others Faith, yours and mine. I would that ye
should not be ignorant etc.


Tim. WHat does this Text contain?


Silas. Three things. First, the next proof of Paul's love in his purpose to
travail unto them for their good. Secondly, by an answer unto an objection; [
Yea, but why did ye not come all this while?] To which he answers [ I have
bin Let hitherto.] Thirdly, a reason of his purpose (to wit) because he was a
Debtor to them, as being their Apostle, and having recceiued gifts for their
instruction.


Tim. What was the end of Paul's purpose, to Travail unto Rome?


Silas. To confirm them in the faith.


Tim. In what Respects did they lack confirmation or strength?


Silas. In five Respects. First, because their Faith was weak: for, we all
know in part, and believe in part. 1. Cor. 13, 9. Secondly, their enemy Satan
was crafty and strong. Thirdly, the assaults against their faith, both many
and manifold, Fourthly, dangerous it was to be overcome. Fifthly, very many
seeming strong, have bin overthrown by Satan. From whence we may Learn, that
they which have been comfirmed by the comforts and exhortations of the word,
have still need to receive spiritual strength, to arm them against new
encounters.


Tim. Whence had they this strength? Or by what means is it attained?


Sil. From the ordinance of Christ in the Ministry of the word, and from
public Prayer to Christ, to bless his own appointment: as also from earnest
private prayer and conference with the godly. From diligent Reading and
Meditation.


Tim. By what similitude may this be expressed?


Silas Of Rain, which refreshes the thirsty land: and of Meat, which
cheareth the faint bodies through Gods blessing upon them: so the rain and
food of Heavenly Doctrine, by the blessing of God, refreshes the Christian
soul, being made faint and weary with sins and temptations.


Tim. What Use is to be made of this point?


Silas First, that as we desire to be inwardly strengthened, we should give ear
unto exhortation. Secondly, that exhortations must be given with a sanctified
mind, that only our Neighbors profit be sought with Gods glory: all corrupt
respects whatsoever being abandoned. Lastly, that we do constantly and humbly
use all the former good means, ordained to be means of our confirmation.


Tim. But wherefore does the Apostle say, [That he would take comfort from the
Romans, as well as give Consolation unto them?


Silas To show, that the strongest may be edified and helped even by the
weakest: and not only to declare the great modesty of the Apostle, who Wrote
(as he thought) feeling a want and weakness in himself, both in knowledge.
1. Cor. 13. and in the gifts of regeneration, Romans 7, 15.


Tim. What Reasons of this?


Silas. First, God does not give his gifts all to one, but so as one Christian
shall need another help. Secondly, he will try and exercise the humility of
the most perfect. Thirdly, he will thereby norish love among his Children,
whiles one stands another in such sted. Fourthly, he will get himself glory,
by doing his own work by the feeblest means. Lastly, he will allow, that
absolute perfection is not to be found out of heaven.


Tim. What use is to be made of this truth?


Silas. First, it comfort them of the least gifts, seeing God can and does
use them, to strengthen men of the best gifts, and strongest Christians.
Secondly, it serves to admonish the stronger, to suffer exhortations and
council from their Inferiors: as Moses did from Iethro, Apollos from Aquila,
David from Abigaile. Lastly, it reproves such, as scorn the council and help
of such as be their inferiors in place and gifts.


Tim. What other thing may be taught from this Twelfe Verse?


Silas. The Nature of Faith, which is to communicate and impart it self to
others, by the work of love. Faith works by love. Gala. 5, 6.


Tim. By what Similitude was this set forth?


Silas. Of Leaven, of Fire, of the Sun, and of God the Author of it; all
which, do communicate their properties to others: and so does Faith delight to
express its inward force and virtue.


Tim. What does follow hereof?


Sil. That such as do not endeavor to strengthen others, according to their
gifts and calling, it is a token that there is no Faith in them, but that
which is dead, and like a withered Tree and dried womb, which be unable to
bring forth fruit.


Tim. How may the Faith of Paul profit the Romans?


Silas. Two ways: first by his faith he obtained increase of such spiritual
gifts as he bestowed on them, even as their own faith made them fit to
receive those gifts. Secondly, his faith stirred him up to refer and use
those gifts he had, to the good of others, and to Gods glory.


Tim. What good came to him hereby?


Sil. In comforting and enstructing others, he comforted and enstructed
himself; even as Iron (...) Iron, and one hand washes another: otherwise,
then it is with the stone, which whers the knife, but it self remains blunt
and dull; whereas Christians by teaching others, do teach themselves.


Tim. How was this further declared?


Silas. By a dissimilitude between earthly and heavenly goods, as thus: Our
earthly goods being given out, we have the less, but heavenly blessings
increase and multiply toward our selves, by the use of them toward others.
For, the faithful by mutual exhortations, do profit in the faith; and it is
known, that Ministers comforting the sick, are comforted again by them.


Tim. How might the Faith of the Romans profit Paul?


Silas. In provoking them to pray for him, and for the success of his
Ministry: and also, in moving them to Minister to him consolations, both
inward and outward; according as his occasions required: all which, be the
fruits of (...) faith.


Tim. What was taught from these words, [I would have ye know? etc.]


Silas. That it is fit and requisite, the people should know how well and
heartily their Pastor loves them, for it will breed love in them toward him;
or else, make them excuselesse. Also, it breeds a boldness in them, to
resort to him upon just occasions, as his wisdom and Gravity will cause them
to come reverently.


Tim. Wherein did Paul's love further appear?


Sil. In a purpose to come to them for their spiritual good; of which purpose
he was let, either by Satan, or by Gods special direction, or by incident
occasions of the Church. When Paul would have come to Thessalenica, he says:
That Satan was the let that he could not come. 1. These. 2, 18. Satan's
impediments which he casts in the way of Teachers, to hinder them in their
course be: partly by raising up Schisms and Heresies, as in the Church of
Corinth and Galatia; partly, by stirring up persecutions and adversities, as he
got James and Peter cast in prison at Jerusalem. Acts. 12. and Antipas to be
slain at Smirna (...). 2, 13. And Paul himself, complains of a grievous
persecution which he suffered in Asia, being tempted beyond his strength, and
brought into despair of his life. 2. Cor. 1, 8. Sometime Paul was let by
God himself, who by manifest Oracles called him back from his intended
enterprises. Acts. 16, 6. Where Paul purposing to preach the word in Asia, was
commanded in a vision, to go into Matedonia. verse, 9, 10. Thirdly, the
necessities of the Churches increasing every day more and more, occasioned the
alteration of his purpose. Paul seems to give this reason of his not coming
to the Romans when he had decreed it: That the estate of the Churches where he
remained, required his longer presence and help, for their better profiting in
the Gospel, Romans 15, 22. His employment in other Churches deferred his coming
to Rome, though he much and long desired it. Whence let us learn, that God
according to his uncontrollable wisdom does order and direct the course of
the Ministry to who^ he pleases: sometime causing the rain of Doctrine, to
fall upon one City or Country, and sometime on another: as he sees it meet
for the commodity of his Children, and for his own name and honor. Also
observe, that God uses to cross the purposes of his Servants and Saints being
in snew good and holy, bringing to pass his own decrees, at a further time;
and after a far other manner and way then men had determined. When God would
prefer Joseph, it was disliked of his Father and Brethren, yet God brought it
to pass by another means then they dreamed. Paul purposed to come to Rome to
establish them, but he must do it at such a time, and in such a fashion as God
would: for after many troubles suffered at Jerusalem, he was sent bound to
Rome, and God turned Paul to preach to the Macedonians, whereas he had meant to
teach in Asia; yet Paul sinned not herein, that his will was not agreeable to
Gods secret will, for it is sin to a man to transgress his revealed will.
Hence it is, that a Christian with a good mind, may will that which God wills
not; as a good Child, with a good affection, may wish his fathers life, whom
the Lord will have to dye; again, a man may wish with an evil mind, that
which God wills well; as a wicked Child may euilly desire his fathers death,
which God justly purposes. Finally, note that Satan casts innumerable
hindrances in the way of Gods Ministers, to stop the edification of the
Church, which should provoke all the Servants of Christ, with greater feruency
to pray for the free passage and good success of the Gospel; that the word of
God (mauger Satan and his instruments) may run and be glorified: and if
their prayers be not heard, yet to wait upon God with patience, and to continue
constant; considering, that Paul did not at the first obtain what he earnestly
and often craved touching his repair to Rome: but at length, if they persevere,
God will grant that which shall be expedient for his Church.


Tim. What is furthermore to be learned from hence, that man cannot do what so
ever he purposes?


Silas. That all things in the world are justly, wisely, and powerfully
ordained and ordered by Gods providence: more especially, God disposes of all
men's purposes, as it is written; Man purposes, God disposes, and the ways of
man are not in himself. Jeremy 10, 23. This teaches all men patience, prayer,
and thankfulness, to commend all their purposes to Gods providence; and to
bless him in all events. Secondly, it reprooueth such, as attribute all things
to Nature or Fortune; as A thists and profane worldlings do. Thirdly, it
comfort Gods Children, to know that their heavenly father looks to all
things, so as nothing falls out in the world, but by his decree and will.


Tim. What do ye call the fruit here spoken off.


Sil. First, the conversion of some, who yet are in vnbeleese, and sin.
Secondly, the confirmation of such as be converted. Thirdly, the increasing and
bringing to perfection, such as be converted and confirmed. This is the
threefold fruit of the Ministry. John. 15, 16.


Tim. What do ye learn hereby, that he terms strengthening (such as be
converted) a fruit?


Sil. Sundry very profitable Lessons. First, that the It is a certain token of
a faithful Minister, when he can account the profit of the hearers, to be
(...) and vantage.
Gospel is fruitful (wheresoever it is preached) either for conversion, or
for confirmation, or for growth and profiting. Secondly, that the people
converted by it, are as an acceptable fruit to God: and to their Teachers, as
delightful to them, as good fruit is to the Husbandman: or as the good state
and disposition of the flock, is to a good Shepherd. Thirdly, Ministers are
to be glad, and to account it as precious fruit, when any be converted by them
to Christ. This is a remaining fruit, and most excellent. John. 15, 5, 8, 16.


Tim. What was taught from these words [as amongst other Gentiles?]


Sil. First, in that Paul provoke the Romans to the Paul, his presence and
preaching, was fruitful to other Gentiles, and he wished and hoped it to be
toward the Romans.
obedience of the Gospel, by the example of other Gentiles, we learn; that
great is the force of good examples, to move to good; as of evil examples, to
move to evil. The first reason hereof, is, because we are like Apes, apt to
imitate others: and secondly, examples affect our senses as well as our minds.
Furthermore we learn, that where the Gospel is truly preached, it is never
preached without fruit to life; because, wheresoever the Gospel is preached,
there God has a people, which must serve to a double use: first, to encourage
Ministers to teach: and second ly, to encourage the people to live under
teaching Pastors.


Tim. What Learn we hence, that Paul reckoned himself [A Debtor to the wise
and unwise: For, there were Men of both sorts among the Graecians and
Barbarians] which here signifies al people save the Jews?


Silas That the Doctrine of the gospel, is not too light, nor too hard for the
simplest: wherein appears the facility and excellency of the Gospel,
propounding life to all sorts. Secondly, that the wisest of the world, may be
glad to become Scholars of the gospel, which is worthy the serching of the most
learned. For it is no disgrace Divinity here in, excels Phylosophye, which
is not made for all men, and the Law of Moses given into one Nation only.
with Mary to sit at Christ's feet, no nor for Paul himself. Thirdly, that
every Minister by virtue of his Calling, is a debtor to his people, and owes
them diligent feeding. Fourthly, that a man who has any Calling or gift, it
makes him a Debtor to others, according to his measure of Grace, and compass
of his Calling, when opportunity serves him to be readic to do others good, as
an honest Debtor is ready to satisfy his Creditors when he gets wherewith.

There is first a Debt of money borrowed, which is a civil Debt. Romans 13, 3.
Secondly, of Nature, to those of our own household, 1 Timothy 5, 8. Thirdly, of
Charity to all men, masmuch as they be men; even to our enemies. Esaias 58, 7.
Luke 6, 27. Fourthly, Debt of a Vocation or Calling, which the Apostle here
has respect unto, according to that which is written. 1 Cor. 9, 17. These
three last, has allusion to the first, the Apostle speaking by Similitu de (as
his manner is) to show; that as Worldly, so Christian Debtors ought to be
willing to discharge the Debt, both to their Brethren, and unto God, especially
that great Creditor, of whom men do receive all that they have.


Tim. What does this 15. Verse contain?


Silas. A profession of the Apostles readiness, to declare and preach Jesus
Christ to such Christians as dwelt at Rome, so it might seem good unto God to
have it so. For he was prepated for his part, according to his Office.


Tim. What learn ye hereby?


Silas First, that it came not of Paul his own purpose that he did preach to
the Romans; but of GOD, whose Calling must be expected. Secondly, a lesson not
only for Ministers of the Word, but for all others; that what is in ones power
to do for others good (and namely, for them to whom we are more especially
indebted) we should not fail to do it, and that to the utmost of our power,
with a cheerful and prompt mind, according to that council given us in
Ecclesiastes, Whatsoever is in thy hand to do, see thou do it with all
diligence, Eccles. 9, 10 Lastly, let us learn by Paul's example, First, to
overcome any discouragements whatsoever, by the consideration of our Calling.
Secondly, the goodness of the things we have in hand. Thirdly, the hope of
great gain and success by our labors.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of
God unto Salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to
the Grecian.


Tim. WHat is the sum of thu Scripture?


Silas. That we ought to glory in the Gospel, because thereby God is truly
powerful to save all that believe it. Here does end the holy Apostles (...);
and his Tract of Justification by Faith, begins at the 16. verse: where he
enters upon the Treatise by a Prolepsis, making answer to a secret
Objection. For Paul having written in the latter end of the 15. verse, [I hat
he was ready to preach the Gospel at Rome,] it might be objected unto him,
the Gospel is every where spoken against, the Precepts thereof be scorned, and
thy self accounted little less then mad, which think to teach the wise
more wised ome by the Gospel? To which the Apostle answers, ptofessing, that
[ He is not ashamed of the Gospell] though it seem never so contemptible and
base unto the world. Whereof, he rendereth two reasons: One, because it is
not his own Gospel, but of Christ as Author; and concerning (no frivolous or
fruitless matter) Christ, as Matter and Subject. The second (from the Fort and
(...) thereof) because it is a most healthful and powerful Organe or
Instrument of (...) to save believers. So as this Text consists of two parts:
First, a profession, [ I am not ashamed:] Secondly, a Reason [ For.] And
whereas he says [ He is not ashamed it is a Liptote or Meiosis, because more
is meant, then is spoken. For, it is as if he had said, I am so far from
being ashamed, and I do glory and rejoice in it so, as I esteem nothing so
honorable: Insinuating to the Romans, that they ought likewise so to do, as
he their Apostle did: according to that which he spoke plainly (and without any
figure) unto the Galathians, Chap. 6, 14. Now when he terms the Gospel (1.
the Doctrine of free Justification by Christ) [the power of God] he means not
of his Creating power, or his revenging power unto destruction; but of a power
joined with favor and love for salvation; not of his Essential power, but of
his Organicall Ministerial power; or (by a (...)) of the declaration of his
power, when it is manifested in the preaching of the Gospel, to make it
effectual. For, by the Gospel, God mightily moves the hearts of the elect
(when the hour of their conversion comes) infusing the Holy Ghost, which
stirs up the unbelieving heart, and makes it able to believe, whereby
righteousness and salvation is obtained through Christ.


Tim. What is the profession made in this present Verse?


Si. That Paul is not ashamed of the Gospel howsoever: for in all Ages since
the Gospel did first come abroad, many have bin ashamed of it; and from the
shame which accompanies it, have they forsaken it, or coldly professed it. Yet
Paul professes, that for no cause would he be ashamed thereof. A Confession
worthy of such an Apostle.


Tim. How many ways may we be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ?


Silas Two ways especially. First, if we be ashamed of the Doctrine or duties
of the Gospel; or secondly, of the Preachers and professors of it.


Tim. What things usually make men ashamed of the Gospel?


Sil. Four things. First, the strangeness of the Doctrine, being above
natural reason. Secondly, the simplicity and meannesse of the Gospel, being
without earthly pomp and glory. Thirdly, the troubles and crosses of such as
are the Disciples and hearers of the Gospel. Fourthly, the plainness of the
Gospel, being void of humane wisdom, and excellency of words. From whence
we may observe, that great is the corruption of man's heart, which is not ashamed
of things shameful; and yet do shame at things, wherein they ought to glory.


Tim. What reasons should preserve us from being ashamed of the Gospel?


Sil. Five: First, the example of Paul such an Apostle which had abid much
shame for the Gospel, and yet saw no cause to be ashamed of it. Secondly, the
Nature of the Gospel, being a gladsome and joyful message. Thirdly, the
subject of the Gospel, which is Christ: of whom, if we be ashamed before men,
he will be ashamed of us before God. Fourthly, because it is the Instrument of
Gods power, to beget Faith. Fifthly, the effect of the Gospel, which is
salvation, the greatest of all benefits; or rather it has all safety in it,
comprehending deliverances of all sorts, both Temperall and Spiritual. For,
whereas there be sundry and many kinds of saluations or safeties; as of our
goods and persons, by good laws and just Magistrates; against sicknesle and
diseases, by Physicians and wholesome medecines, from violence and injuries of
enemies; by valiant Captains and Soldiers, from extremity of weather; by
builders of houses or Masons, from cold, by Garments: as all these enemies,
dangers, effects, and (...), came by sin, and be effects of transgression, so
our deliverance and safety from them, is a fruit of Christ his redemption, and
of that faith which embraces it: but here is chiefly meant, that salvation
which is spiritual, and is of the soul, from sin and eternal death,
whereof there be two parts; the first part, is deliverance from guilt and
punishment of sin, by remission; the second, is blessedness and eternal
life in the possession of Gods favor and love, whereof there be three degrees.
First, in this life, at the time of regeneration, when sin being pardoned
through Faith, and the soul renewed by the HolyGhost, it begins to live
that life which is eternal. The second at death, when the Soul severed from
the body, is received into Abraham's bosom, to rest in heaven, with the Spuits
of just men. The third, at the day of Resurrection, when the whole man shall be
glorified with Christ everlastingly. This is that Salvation, whereunto the
Gospel brings the embracers of it. Moreover, whereas it is preached to some
unto destruction, it happens by the infidelity of men. For the Gospel of it
own Nature, and by the counsel of God, is appointed to be cause of
Salvation. Wherein it diftereth from the Law, whose effect is to reveal wrath
for sin, not to justify and save sinners, propounding life indeed, but it is
unto the perfect keepers: whereas the Gospel offers and performs Salvation
to the believer, even to every believer, without difference of Nationes and so
the promises of the Gospel are universal, both in respect of al believers
which receive it; and also, because no Age, Sex Nation, Estate or condition, is
excluded from perticipation of Christ, and life eternal, so they believe.
Lastly in the tenth Chapter of this Epistle, verse, 13, 14, 15. Paul frames
the Ladder (as I may so speak) by which, the Gospel causes men to ascend,
and climb unto the mark of eternal Salvation in Heaven; whereof, the first
step is sending of Teachers to preach the Gospel. The second, is preaching.
The third, is hearing of the Gospel preached. The fourth, Faith by hearing.
The fifth, Confession and Invocation of God. The sixth and last, is Salvation it
self.


Tim. What reasons may move men to believe?


Silas. First, the commandment of God. Mark. 1, 15. Secondly, the promises,
even of eternal life, and of all other good things, be made to Faith. Thirdly,
examples of good men in Scripture, who have (...). Fourthly, the danger of
unbelief, which is eternal death, besides manifold temporary miseries.
Fifthly, the profit of believing. Sixthly, the truth of God the promiser, who
cannot lie or deceive. Seauenthly, his almighty power; being most able to keep
his promises. Lastly, we believe men which are less faithful then God, by
many thousand degrees: and if we believe the witness of men, how much more
ought we to receive the testimony and record of God? 1. John. 5, 9. By these
reasons, we must fight against all motions of unbelief, and enforce our selves
to use all good means to preserve and increase Faith.


DIAL. VIII.
Verse 17. For by it the righteousness of God, is revealed from Faith to Faith.


Tim. What Coherence and dependence has this Verse with the next before? How
are they knit together?


Silas. It contains a proof, or rendereth a reason of that which he had
said touching the Gospel, by the proper effect whereof (to wit; that by Faith
we should be Justified;) he now confirms the Gospel, to be [ The power of God
to Salvation:] for we are certainly saucd by that whereby we are Justified.
This Text then, does well and fitly serve to a double purpose and end. First,
it is brought in, as a reason of the definition of the Gospel, set down in
verse 16. For, if by the Doctrine of the Gospel be plainly and effectually
showed and taught, the only right way of attaining righteousness before God,
(which neither Law, nor Philosophy, nor any other learning can teach) then is
the Gospel the mighty Instrument used of God, to save believers. Secondly, it
briefly puts forth the whole state and proposition of the disputation,
following to the end of the 11. Chapter, to wit; That by Faith alone (without
Works) elect sinners be Justified, before the judgment of God. Which is
proved by a testimony of Habakuk.


Tim. What is the sum of this Scripture?


Silas That the Gospel does open the way how to come unto perfect
righteousness, such as shall make an Elect sinner, stand unblameable at the
tribunal of God.


Tim. What is the drift?


Silas. To prove that salvation is had by the Faith of the Gospel, because
perfect Justice and salvation cannot be divided: therefore from whence Justice
does come to us, from thence also eternal life in heaven does proceed and
flow.


Tim. What is here meant by righteousness?


Silas The integrity of human Nature, being conformed wholly to the will and
Image of God: this integrity is only to be found in Christ inherently, and such
as he will impute it unto of favor and mercy. By the righteousness of God in
this place, we may neither understand his essential righteousness, whereby he
is just and righteous in himself; loving Innocence, hating Iniquity. Psalm.
11, 7. and 45, 7. nor yet his Distributive Judiciary righteousness, whereby he
rewards the Good, and in severity of Judgment is revenged on the Wicked. Romans
1 23. 2. These. 1. 5. for these are not, or can be communicated to men by
Faith: neither yet by Righteousness is meant, that habit of Justice and
Charity, infused of God into our minds, whereby we are made apt to do
good-workes. For this is manifested by the Law, and stands in working, not in
believing. Romans 3, 20, 21. But whither we understand the perfect Justice of
Christ in his Nature, actions, and sufferings, satisfying fully Gods wrath for
sin, with the communicating and application thereof, to elect sinners by
Faith; or the Mercy, grace, and clemency of God, declaring it self in freely
pardoning sinners, justifying them also, renewing their hearts withal, that
they may love the Law, and abhor vice. Lastly, giving them pure and sincere
actions and manners, which be the necessary fruits and companions of
forgiveness of sins and imputed Justice, it skilleth not much. For, in many
places, the word [ Righteousness,] signifies the goodness and mercy of God,
remitting sins, and delivering from the punnishment thereof, for the merit of
Christ, as Psalm. 31, 2. and 35, 4. and 1. Sam. 12, 7. and often elsewhere; and
may so be taken here. Howbeit, the best Interpretation, is to expound it of
the full obedience of Christ to death, imputed to faithful persons for
remission of sins, and perfect Justice before God: which is therefore called
[ The Righteousness of God] because it is his mere guifte, and comes not by
works, or any humain strengths. Romans 9, 30. Secondly, it alone satisfies the
most rigorous exact Justice of God; and makes sinners just, not before men, but
in the sight of God.


Tim. Why is this Righteousness called [Righteousnes of God] show this more
distinctly?


Silas First, because it is his gift. Secondly, because he gives it to show
himself righteous and true of his word. Thirdly, it is that righteousness
alone, which he in his most strict and exact (...) approoueth, and will Crown.
Lastly, because his righteousness is opposite unto the righteousness of
Works. Romans 10, 3.


Tim. How, or in what manner and respect is this Revealed by the Gospel?


Silas. First, it is there contained, taught, and read of. Secondly, it is
unknown to the Gontiles. Thirdly, the prophesies of the Prophets, do but
obscurely shadow it, and not plainly teach it as the gospel does. Fourthly,
the gospel (as an Instrument) both opens it, and gives it to us which
believe. From whence we may learn, that the gospel ought to be most precious
unto us, seeing we have such a treasure by it; and therefore, al they are most
wretched, who either neglect, or despise the gospel.


Tim. How may (...) declare our precious reckoning, which we do make of the
Gospel?


Silas. First, by our continual and hearty thankfulness to God for it.
Secondly, by our study to know it soundly and distinctly. Thirdly and chiefly,
by our belief and practice of it. Fourthly, by our daily and earnest prayer to
God, for increase in the knowledge and obedience of the gospel.


Tim. What other things (...) we here in this Text?


Silas. That naturally we are ignorant of the gospel, because we cannot know
it, without revelation from heaven. We are not borne believers.


Tim. Tell us now, what Faith is that which is the Justifying Faith, and
whereunto the Righteousness revealed in the Gospel, is imputed and applied?


Sil. Not that Historical Faith, which is but a bare knowledge: nor the
Miraculous Faith, by which, wonders are done: nor the Temporary Faith of
Hypocrites, which vanishes in time of affliction, Math. 13. but that Faith
which has application of the things believed, joined with the true knowledge
and assurance of understanding, whence comes confidence and boldness.


Tim. How many things are comprehended in this Faith?


Silas. Five things: First, apprehension in laying hold on Christ. Secondly,
approbation in esteeming Christ above all, or more then all. Thirdly,
expetition, in desiring him before all. Fourthly, Oblectation, delighting in
him more then all. Lastly, Expectation, looking for the full inioying of his
presence and glory.


Tim. What means he to say [From Faith to Faith?]


Sil. Not from one Faith to another, but from one degree of Faith to another:
from weaker faith to stronger, from a lesser Faith to a greater. Whereas this
phrase [ From Faith to Faith] by diverse Interpreters is diversely expounded: as
from an unformed Faith, to a formed, which is Popish: from the Faith of the
Preacher, to the Faith of the hearer: (Thus Augustine, but amiss) for a man's
own faith justifies: therefore, from faith of Parents, to faith of posterity,
is amiss: also, from the faith of the old Testament, to the faith of the new
(as Chrysostom thought) not well, nor fitly: from the Faith of one Article, to
the Faith of another (as Anselme writes:) from the faith of things present, to
the faith of things to come, as the resurrection, etc: From the faith of God
promising, to the faith of man believing, as Ambrose and Martyr think; yet the
fittest and best exposition is of the measure of one and the same faith: from
faith beginning, to Faith increasing toward perfection; Faith, so much the more
it grows, so much the more it makes men sure of their Justification: there
be the like phrases to this, elsewhere, in holy Scripture, as Psalm. 84, 8.
from strength to strength, and 2. Cor. 3, 16. from glory to glory, first, from
one degree of strength and glory to another; so here, from an infirm Faith,
to a firm Faith. Therefore the meaning of this form of speech, is, as if it
should be said, that this righteousness of God is gotten not by the works of
the Law, but by the Faith of the Gospel alone; for degrees of Faith alter not
the kind of Faith; a weak and a strong Faith be but one Faith, which without
deed does justify; according to that which is afterward written for
explication of this Text, in Chap. 3. verse. 22.


Tim. What do ye call the weak Faith?


Sil. An earnest and constant desire to know Christ, and to make application of
his mercies to our selves.


Tim. What is the highest degree of Faith?


Sil. To be fully persuaded of a man's own Adoption, and of his own Salvation,
as Abraham and Paul. Romans 4, 21, and 8, 38, 39.


Tim. Who are hereby admonished?


Sil. Such as presume of full Faith, when they have none at all. Secondly, such
as think they have none, because they have so little, and mingled with many
imperfections. Presumption and distrust, are the extremes of a true Faith.


Tim. What be the fruits whereby a weak Faith may be known?


Sil. These: First, daily exercise of private prayer. Secondly, true love of
the word, and of Gods Children because they be so. Thirdly, true sorrow for
sin, and earnest endeavor to mortify our lusts. (...), diligence in the
duties of our particular calling. Lastly, patience in adversity. Also, the
fruits of a strong Faith be these. First, to cleave to God, in great dangers;
as Stephen and Paul did. Secondly, to suffer joyfully the (...) of goods and
life for Christ and his word, as Antipas and Hebrews did. Heb. 10, 34. (...).
2, 13. Thirdly, to believe the promises when all means fight against us, as
David and Abraham did. Romans 4, 3, 4, 5. Fourthly, great contempt of the world.
Fifthly, great (...) and confidence in prayer. Romans 8, 15. Sixthly, burning love
of the Brethren. 1. John. 3, 14. Seauenthly, bountiful; releeuing the poor
members of Christ Jesus, even to the empairing Acts 2, 45, and 4, 34.
of our own substance. 2. Cor. 8, 3. for Christ his sake, if need and cause
so require.


DIAL. IX.
Verse. 17. As it is written, The just shall live by Faith.


Tim. WHat is the drift of these words?


Silas. To prove by authority of Scripture, that whosoever belieueth the
Gospel, shall be Habak. 2, 4.
accounted righteous, and so be saved. This sentence of Habakuk, is also an
illustration, as if Paul should say; This Doctrine, by Faith to be justified,
agrees with the Prophets, and is neither new or absurd.


Tim. What may we note in this Text.


Silas. Two things: First, the manner how this authority is brought in [ As it
is written.] Secondly, the authority it self [ The just shall live by Faith.]


Tim. What was observed in the manner of alleging this authority?


Silas. These few things: First, that Saint Paul cites not so much the verse,
as the Book of Scripture wherein it is written. Secondly, that he contenteth
himself, to prove Doctrine by authority of Scripture. Thirdly, that he cites
but one Testimony. Fourthly, that the Doctrine of free pardon and imputed
righteousness, is hard to be persuaded unto men, yet has witness from the
Prophets. It has ever seemed to humane reason very repugnant, and a thing
unlikely to be true; that a wicked liver, a perjured person, a common liar, a
railer, an oppressor, an unchaste liver, a blood-sucker, or such like; only by
believing the Gospel, should suddenly become just, and be accounted righteous
and unblameable. Against which Doctrine, the Papists to this day like Dogs do
bark, railing at it, and the Preachers of it, saying; that it overthrows all
Laws and Discipline, and takes away out of men's society, all use of
punnishments and rewards, laying open a gappe to all wickedness, (if it should
be preached,) that without righteous works, without any habit or actions of
justice, only by Faith in Christ, sinners may be justified with God.
Therefore, out of good discretion, to stop the mouths of calumnious
slanderers, and to put humane reason to silence, Paul cites this place of the
Prophet, least he be thought to have brought in a Doctrine full of nouelty and
absurdity; it being received long before in the Jewish Church, by authority of
prophetical Oracle, which is three times alleged in the new Testament.
First, Here. Secondly, Gal. 3, 11. Thirdly, Heb. 10, (...). to illustrate this
Doctrine of justice and life eternal, to be had by faith alone; and howsoever
the Prophet who first used these words, might aim (in part) at the refreshing
and comforting of the godly in those troublous times, under Nebuchadnezar, when
their captivity was sharp, and their deliverance long deferred; yet because
temporal deliverance were Tipes of eternal, and depended upon Christ, it is
not to be doubted, but Paul has rightly applied it to the spiritual
deliverance, by the Messiah to come, through Faith. Whereby the elect (both
under Law and Gospel) were safe, and made pertakers as well of Justification
and remission of sins presently, as of life eternal in the Heavens. Which
concord, in this great truth of righteousness by Papists must blame the
Prophets and Apostles, and not us.
Faith, between the Prophets and Apostles, it is implied not obscurely, by
this Particle [ As] and whereas Paul ascribes unto holy Scripture, the
authority to prove the question in hand; whether Faith or works do justify
before God; we may note further in what estimation we ought to have the
written word; namely, to account it the perfect rule of al divine truth:
acording to which, we ought to examine and judge of al controversies in matter
of Faith and Religion; for it is the wont of this blessed Apostle when he will
confirm any Christian Doctrine, or determine any doubt or question, which may
arise about it, still to run unto Scriptures for probation; which shows the
Scriptures alone to be a sufficient directory, and a competent Judge of all
controversies in Religion.


Tim. What did we observe in the authority it self?


Sil. The reading and the Interpretation. The reading stands thus, [ The just
by Faith shall liue] this is the better reading; or thus, [ The just shall live
by Faith] this is the worse, as though we were first just, and afterward should
live by Faith. Also, the word [ His] is in the Prophet, [ The just shall live
by his own Faith;] but it is left out by Paul because it is sufficient
(without the pronowne) to prove his purpose, that [ The just by Faith shall
live.]


Tim. What is the Interpretation of these words as they were first used of the
Prophet Habakkuk?


Sil. To show the duty of just men in dangerous times; namely, by Faith to
wait and rest upon God, if they would live and be preserved; when other which
had confidence in themselves were destroyed.


Tim. What is the meaning as Paul sciteth it?


Sil. To teach thus much: that such as embrace righteousness by Faith, shall
be saved from Sin, Hell, and Satan, and live eternally in Heaven; as well as
be delivered here in earth, from temporal dangers.


Tim. What Doctrines were gathered here?


Sil. These three chiefly: First, that none shall live but the just. Secondly,
none just but by Faith. Thirdly, every one is justified by his own Faith.


Tim. Why shall none live save the just?


Sil. Because God has not promised life but to such as are just: as it is
written [ Do this and live.] Secondly, he threatens death to sin, and to
all unrighteousness; therefore, all unjust persons are certain to perish;
which shows the necessity of seeking and getting perfect justice by believing
the gospel.


Tim. Why is none Just save by Faith?


Silas. Because all men (even the best) do lack righteousness of their own;
therefore, they must seek it elsewhere in Christ, by Faith. Romans 10, 3, 4, 5.
Phil. 3, 7, 8, 9.


Tim. How is it declared, that none is Justified but by his own Faith?


Silas As none sees but with his own eye, or takes hold of a thing but with
his own hand, or eats but with his own mouth, or walks but with his own
feet; so none sees Christ to be his Savior, or takes hold of his merits,
or feeds on him, or walks and comes to him, any otherwise then by his own
Faith, which is the eye, hand, and mouth of the soul.


Tim. What other things learned we from this Text?


Silas That we have many notable benefits by Faith, to wit; Salvation,
Righteousness, and Life, who of all other be most principal. Secondly, that
to live by faith, it is to exercise Patience, Hope, Wisdom, Love, Obedience
out of a lively Faith; by which, a Christian is made able to move himself to
all good duties: unto which, by power of Nature, we can by no means attain.


Tim. Is there any further thing to be observed in this Text for our
instruction?


Silas. Yea, it commends unto us the difference between the Law and the
Gospel, how the righteousness of the one is distinguished from the other: For
the righteousness of the Law requires works, and the fulfilling of the
Commandments. Leuit. 18, 5. Galath. 3, 12. But the Gospel says [ The Just by
Faith shall live.] The righteousness of the Law, is a perfect obedience; the
righteousness of the Gospel; is an imputation thereof to the Elect Sinner, at
what time he believes. Romans 4, 24. The Righteousness of the gospel God
gives to us, but the righteousness of the Law, men do give it to God. There is
good use of this difference, and is to be held constantly, because it freeth
the trobled Conscience from snares and perplexities, when he shall perceive,
that though he lack good Works, and be full of wicked manners, yet unto the
forgiveness of sins, and absolution before God, it is enough only to believe
in Christ, according to the gospel. Secondly, it takes from man, al cause of
rejoicing and glorying in himself, that he may glory only in this; That he
knows God to be merciful, to pardon his sin, and accept him for righteous,
when by his sinful Works, and transgressions of the Law, he deserved death.
Ier. 9, 23.


DIAL. X.
Verse 18. For the Wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, which withold the truth in
unrighteousness.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text, and how does it depend upon, and sort
with the former Verse?


Silas. The drift and purpose, is to confirm the maine and grand proposition,
that sinners are Justified and saved by the Faith of the gospel. The argument
is from the contrary; Sinners are not Justified by their Works, therefore by
Faith. For, in the cause of Justification, faith and works have the condition
of contraries. Rom 11 6. Now, touching things which be immediately contrary
the maxim and rule is; that when the one is denied, the other is affirmed; and
what is taken from the one, is given to the other; it does then necessarily
follow, that righteousness must be had by Faith, seeing it cannot be had by
works. And why not by works? Was it not the common and generally received
opinion, both amongst Philosophers, and the Jews themselves; that Works were
the cause of righteousness? To this secret Objection, the Apostle answers,
by a reason taken from the contrary effects, as thus; Men cannot be righteous
by their Works, because their works: were wicked and unjust, and therefore
punished of God which he proves by a distribution of Gentiles, unto Chap. 2.
Verse 17. and thenceforward of the Jews, till Chap. 3. verse 22.


Tim. How many things are noted in this Text?


Silas Three: First, that the Gentiles had knowledge of God and good things,
naturally ingrafted in them, signified by the word [ Truth.] Secondly, that
they violated the Law of nature in respect of duties to God and Men, by
ungodliness and unrighteousness. Thirdly, that they were punished of God
mightily, [ Wrath from Heaven.]


Tim. Begin with that part ye named last, because it is first mentioned in the
Text. What is meant by [Wrath] is there any such passion of anger and wrath in
God?


Tim. In holy Scriptures [ Wrath and Anger] be otherwise attributed unto men,
then unto God. For, it is in men properly, as it is a perturbation of the mind
inflaming or stirring up to Revenge. Wrath, in his proper acception, is an
appetite or desire of revenge, for some contempt or hurt, done or supposed to
be done to our selves or others, whom we affect. When men see themselves
neglected or wronged, straight way they are moved to take vengeance on the
party: thus it is in Men; the truth whereof, appears in Came, Esau, Achab,
etc. whereas in God, wrath is (no affection) but a just act of God, punishing
wickedness, or the punishments themselves of war, famine, pestilence,
sickness, etc. inslicted for iniquity; so it is used in this Text. For it is
here set against righteousness of God, spoken of verse 17, which (as we have
said) signifies both his merciful goodness, freely bestowing Justice and
life eternal upon believers: and also, Justice or life, given and bestowed
graciously. Therefore, by wrath, we must understand both his indignation,
revenging impiety; and the Revenge or pains themselves, according to the
Hebrew phrase. Now, this wrath is said to be [ Reuealed] that is; to be
declared by examples, and by experience testified. For howsoever sundry ways
Gods wrath be Revealed against sin (as by the light of nature) every man's
Conscience, naturally accusing and tormenting him for evil doing. Romans 2.
Secondly, by the Gospel, whose voice is not only Consolatory, speaking pardon
and life unto believing offenders, but Comminatorie, This is by accident, and
not of the Essence and Na ture of the Gospel.
threatening death eternal to impenitent persons and unbelievers, as Mat. 3, 10.
Luke 13, 3. Ioh. 3, 18, 36. Thirdly, by the Law, whose office is to reveal
wrath, and the curse against every transgression. Deuteronomy. 27. v. last. Romans 4,
15. yet our present text, would be taken of that daily experience, which
witnesses, that God is wrathfullie displeased with the world for sin: and
even at that time when the Apostle wrote, there were grievous miseries of
sword, plague, and famine abroad in the world. Also, it is plain by the verses
following, that Paul speaks of such judgments as God had executed upon all
men, for contempt of his Majesty, especially of spiritual punishments in
hardening men's hearts, and giving them up to vile lusts, and a Reprobate mind,
Verse 24, 28.


Tim. What Learn we from hence?


Sil. Seeing sin provoke Divine wrath, it is necessary to take heed of it.
Secondly, that this wrath appears most in spiritual Judgments, because they
not only are tokens of wrath, but deserve more wrath; they are punnishments for
sins past, and increase of more sin.


Tim. What, think ye, that the Children of God, have their parts in Spiritual
Judgments?


Silas. Yea: as appears in the example of Adam, David, Solomon, and of many
in our days, which have fallen into some fits of despair also, have had the
sin punnished by Sin, as Paul affirms here of the Idolatrous Gentiles.


Tim. In what sense may it be said, that this wrath of God was revealed [From
Heaven?]


Sil. Howsoever men very learned, and not a few have drawn the sense of these
words unto the Heavens themselves, which be instruments of wrath against such
as contemn their maker, as Ambrose: some to the evil spirits which are above
in the air, to vex (by Gods appointment) wicked livers, as Origin: some to
the second coming of Christ from Heaven to judge the world, as Theophylact:
others refer this to the universality and large extent of his judgments,
which were and shall be upon all men under Heaven that do wickedly; and on
others to the evident declaration of his judgment from Heaven, as from an high
and eminent place, that they might be most apparent and vngainsayable, as
Martyr, Beza, Faius do think: yet the best and fittest sense is (by a (...)) to
expound Heaven for God, as Luke 20, 5, and 15, 18. and to oppose it unto the
fancy and opinion of Atheists, Epicures, and other profane men, which ascribe
the punishmens that happen unto men, unto chance and misfortune, or to the
malice of men, or unto the malignity of the stars and Elements, or other
inferior causes, passing by the justice of God, and denying his providence in
the government of the world; against which, Paul affirms here that the evils
which be, are scourges sent from God, who though he may use ordinary and
natural means for the plaguing of men, yet himself is author and ruler; as
it is every where in Scripture testified of him, that no evil comes but from
him, as in Amos; that he creates darkness, in Esaias; that he sends the
sword, etc. in Leuit. that he rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, on Sodom,
in Gene, that he drowned Pharaoh, in Exodus Finally, it is God which delivers
up to uncleanness and a Reprobate mind, in this Chapter, verse, 24, 28. The
Doctrine hence is this, that punnishments come from God as effects of his
Justice against sin. The duties whereunto it should provoke men be; First, to
beware of murmuring, in time of calamity; for this is to fight Gyant-like
against God. Secondly, to be patient, and contented, because it is Gods doing
for just ends: this is to submit unto God. Thirdly, to sue and seek, first and
principally unto God for removing calamities, as Israelites in Judges,
Nininuites in Jonas did.


Tim. What may we learn from this, that wrath is said to be revealed against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men?


Sil. Two things: First, by the order of words we learn, that the breach of the
first Table, is more grievous then the breach of the second Table. Secondly,
seeing it is against all, therefore there is no sin how little soever, that
can escape punishment. Thirdly, by using the abstract rather then the contrete,
we learn; that Gods anger is not against men themselves, but against their
wicked deeds principally.


Tim. Whereof did this admonish us?


Sil. To make conscience of small sins. Secondly, it reproves such as think
themselves safe, because they have no great sins; whereas vengeance is due to
every disobedience.


Tim. What is here meant by Truth?


Sil. The remainder of light, which since the fall of Adam is in every man's
Conscience, to show him what God is; most good, bounteous, just, and mighty:
how he is to be worshipped, by loving and fearing him above all; and what is
right, and what is wrong; what good, and what evil; for these things even
natural light does teach every man.


Tim. What is the nature of this truth?


Sil. It delights and desires to express it self, that is; it would come
forth and appear in our works, it abhors to be smothered and imprisoned by
wicked affections.


Tim. Who do withold the truth in unrighteousness?


Sil. Such as by force suppress or keep it back, as if they would imprison
it, least it come abroad, when it is not only not followed and obeyed, but
resisted: and the quite contrary to the direction of truth is done, then it is
as it were fettered in the Gives and Manacles of our lusts which keep it back.


Tim. Takes the truth any hurt thereby?


Sil. None at all, but the hurt is to our selves, even great vexation and
unquietness of mind. Secondly, a greater inclination and pronesse to all
manner of evil; this may be declared and illustrated by the similitude of
prisoners, kept in prison against their will: also, by the example of such
Gentiles, Jews, and Christians, as knowing what they ought to do, yet did
against their knowledge. Romans 1, 32. Romans 2, 17, 21. Phil. 3, 18.


Tim. What counsel was given here?


Silas. That all men endeavor to take part with the known truth against their
affections; and endeavor to do according to that truth which they know. For
first, if men will not have truth to guide them, they shall have their corrupt
filthy lusts to be their guides. Secondly, if men keep truth in Prison by
their disobedience; themselves at last shall be cast into the prison of
darkness, whence they shall never come out, where the fire never goes out,
and the worm never dies.


DIALOGVE. XI.
Verse. 19, 20. For as much as that, which may be known of God, is manifest in
them: for God has showed it unto them.

For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are
seen by the Creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the
intent that they should be without (...).


Tim. WHat coherence and agreement has this Text with the former, and how does
Paul proceeds?


Sil. This verse with the rest that follow to the end of the first Chapter, do
by a very plain and distinct order, more fully explicate and declare the
matters briefly and concisely set down in the 18, verse; as first, what that
truth is which the Heathens did unjustly detain, viz: the principles of Nature
imprinted within them, both of God and of moral duties; and how they came by
this natural light, in this verse and next. Secondly, how by unjust detaining
that truth, they proved impious to God by unthankfulness and Idolatry, and
injurious toward themselves and their Neighbors, from verse 20, till 32. in
which verse, lastly is taught what that wrath and punnishment is, which is from
God in Heaven, revealed and sent upon such wickedness of men. Now the first
word or Particle of this present Text [ Because] or, [ For] bewraieth this
verse, to depend upon the former, as a reason thereof taken from the effect. He
had said, the Gentiles violently oppressed truth, and as a Iaylor his Prisoner,
so they kept in the same, which yet desired to burst out into actions as the
Sun out of the Clouds: this he proves thus, because such as had a certain
light and knowledge to lead them to God in some sort to know him, and to
discern between good and evil in common life, could not commit such
impieties toward God, such uncleannesses against themselves, and such Injustice
to their Neighbors, but that they must be judged guilty of unrighteous
detention and suppression of the truth. If happily any would allege for the
Heathens in their defense, that they wholly wanted the knowledge of the truth,
and so are untruly charged for withholding it; for answer to this secret
objection he affirms; that the Gentiles had the knowledge of God, both by
light of Nature, verse. 19. and by the view of Gods works v. 20.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Sil. To show what truth that is which the Gentiles detained in
unrighteousness: it was a certain knowledge of God, which they learned by
natural instinct, and by the works of Creation, and that they are justly
charged for with holding the same knowledge.


Tim. How many things may be considered in this Text?


Sil. Five things, First, that the Heathen had the knowledge of God: that etc.
Secondly, that they had it from God, for God showed it them. Thirdly, what
things they knew touching God his eternal divine power. Fourthly, out of what
books they learned it, not Scriptures but Creatures, from his works not from
his word. Lastly, what was the event of their knowledge.


Tim. Did the Gentiles know all that was to be known of God?


Sil. No, but knew so much as they were capable to know, according to such
means as they had, yet the Philosophers and wise men knew much of God, which
they did not reveal to the common people. There are some things to be known
of God, which are incomprehensible simply, and cannot be known of Gods
regenerated Children, much less of Philosophers; as his perfect divine essence,
and most glorious majesty, which dwells in a light that none has access or
aproach unto. 1, Tim. 6, 16. Also the reasons of his will and counsel touching
the government of the world, and especially of mankind, for they ought not to
be searched, nor can be traced and found. Romans 11. 33. And other things there
be, which though they be comprehensible, yet are not known without revelation
of the word and spirit (which Heathens lacked) as the Doctrine of the Trinity,
of Christ his Incarnation, free Justification by Faith, Remission of Sins by
a crucified Christ, Resurrection, etc. By that therefore which may be known,
is meant that which by ir-bred principles of truth, remaining in man after the
fall, as some sparkles and firebrarnds after a great fire; and by strength of
natural reason, as also by sight of the creature, the Gentiles could attain
unto, viz. that there was a God, and he insensible and spiritual, and for
properties most mighty, most just, most wise and good, which things they saw
God the first cause could not be without, seeing men, which were his effect
and work, had such qualities in them. Whereas this knowledge is said here to be
manifest (in them) it is expounded by Chap. 2, verse. 15. written in their
hearts, neither in the Creatures, nor in the Philosophers, nor among them, nor
to them, but in themselves, even within their hearts: by which it is plain,
that he now speaks not of the Jews, which had their knowledge of God from the
word, but of the Gentiles and of those inward notions and principles which be
natural; whereof some be contemplative, showing them of God that he is, and
what one he is: and some practicke, teaching them the difference between that
is godly and wicked, just and wrong, honest and dishonest, morally good and
evil. Hence outwardly did arise the seeds of Arts, Sciences and Disciplines,
and within a conscience, iudgeing of a man's own deeds, whether good or ill;
and admonishing of the divine judgment, approouing and rewarding what is well
done, abhorring and revenging evil actions; as Chap. 2. 15. This justifies
that saying of Augustine, that by Adams fall all supernatural things (such as
enabled to please God, and concerned eternal life) are quite lost; whereas man's
natural guiftes are but only wounded and impairied, not wholly extinct, so much
abiding as is sufficient to free him from excuse, not to bring him to eternal
life; that must be done by the Grace which Christ has brought in the
Revelation of the Gospel as before, Verse 15. 16. 17.


Tim. Who gave them this knowledge?


Sil. God himself, who is the Author of true knowledge, as it is written, God
showed it them: this witnesses to us, that beside natural light of mind, God
did concur withal, continually helping nature, and the weakness of natural
discourse, giving strength to natural faculties and powers (much maimed by
original corruption;) that they might do their office the better, in
collecting and concluding effects by consideration of causes. Hence it came,
that amongst the Heathens there were such worthy men, as Plato, Aristotle,
Socrates, Seneca, Pliny, Plautus, Plotinus, and Paracelsus, besides other more
which have diued so deep into the secrets of nature, and have written so many
true things very learnedly, both of Celestial creatures, and humainc duties;
even because God was present by efficacy to stir up those instructions and
principles which himself had first engraven in Man's nature. If any be
desirous to know what the means are, by which God showed and manifested in
them what might be known of him; it was neither inquisition and search of the
written word, nor illumination of the spirit, nor human instruction, nor
Angelical Revelation, nor miraculous operations, or divine visions, for these
were the privileges of his Church and people; but the means were mere
natural, as principles ingrafted, discourse of reason assisted with a divine
concurrence, and observation of the Creatures, by which (being visible) well
marked and duly considred, their minds were erected (as by a ladder) to think
upon the nature and properties of God, which were insensible and invisible. For
God being an essence separated from matter, and not subject to senses, must be
perceived of men by some outward signs of words (as to the Jews,) of
Creatures as to the Gentiles; who by the beholding and experience of things
created, have their knowledge of the Creator more and more polished and
increased. The Doctrine and lesson which from all this Doctrine.
we are to learn, it is, that whatsoever knowledge of God or duties the
Gentiles got, they were beholding to God for it: who though he used certain
Organs and Instruments both within man and without him, to engender this
knowledge, yet this honor still remains to God, that he be the Author and
giver of it, and hence is entitled a God of Knowledge, which serves to
reprove such of wicked unthankfulness, las forgetting God, do ascribe their
great knowledge in divine, natural and human things unto their own
industry, or to the second causes which were used for this is to rob God of his
glory. Withal it must admonish us, that fithence God delights in means and
works by them, (albeit he is not tied to them) that therefore howsoever it is
our sin to set them in Gods room, by trusting in them, or referring all
praise to them: yet it is our duty not to neglect them when we have them at
hand, least we be found to tempt God.

Now I pray you pass forward unto the 20. verse, which seems (as I conceive
it) to be joined to the 19. by a Preoccuption; For it might be objected, that
God being invisible, is insensible also, and therefore could not be known,
because nothing comes to the understanding but by the senses; to which the
Apostle replyeth, first by concession, that indeed God is not to be seen and
perceived by sense: and then by a secret correction, that (notwithstanding)
beside that inward manifestation of himself by natural instinct, or imprinted
light, he has outwardly by the things created, revealed himself, and what
may be known of him.


Tim. You say aright, for now he carries us forward to another new external
kind and way of knowing God, touching whom, tell me what things did the
Gentiles know by this exterior way.


Silas. His eternal Power and Godhead, that is, his Eternity, Power, Deity,
under which be meant his properties, which they learned of the great Book of
the Creatures, out of which they might learn many things. First, that they had
a maker. Secondly, that this maker being before the things made, is Eternal,
without beginning or ending, also of a spiritual Essence. Thirdly, that he
must needs be Almighty, which made all things out of nothing, and sustained
such a mass of Creatures. Fourthly, the order, variety and distinction of his
Creatures declare his marvelous wisdom. Lastly, this shows his great
goodness, that he made them all for our good and benefit. And finally, that he
was a most excellent worke-man, a rewarder of good and evil.


Tim. Whether ought this knowledge to lead the Gentiles and whereunto should it
have moved them?


Silas. To praise God, and to love him, to depend upon him, and to seek to
please him, as also to serve him with willingness.


Tim. What event had this knowledge in the Gentiles?


Sil. It made them excuselesse (that is) it took from them excuse of
ignorance, which they could not plead for themselves. That this must be the
exposition of these words (so as they are without excuse) appears not only
by the testimony of sundry learned men; as of Peter Martyr, auouching that God
revealed himself to Heathens, not to this end, on Gods part to take away
excuse but the same happened thorough their own default, that they had no other
use of their knowledge: So faith Pareus this came eorum culpa,; so Gualter,
Gentium vitie by their own fault; so Chrysostom, by a consequent and event
upon abuse of their knowledge, not as a proper directly intended end: but also
by strength of reason for the end properly, principally and by it self, why
God by those two Books of Nature and Creatures did manifest himself so far
as he did to men, was his own Glory and man's Happiness subordinate thereunto;
that men acknowledging and glorifying him whom they knew might be blessed, as
Ver, 21. does not obscurely insinuate. In that it sell out otherwise, this was
accidentally through Sin, blotting out and defacing Gods Image, the
remainders whereof (being withalperuerted) are weaker then to lead men to
their ends, strong to remove excuse of ignorance.


Tim. But they might allege want of strength to do that they knew.


Sil. They could not do so, because they thought virtue was in their own
power. Secondly, they had power given them in their creation, which they lost
by their own falt. Thirdly, they did not so much to the glorifying of god, as
they were able to do even in their corrupt estate, for the which God might
justly condemn them.


Tim. What may this teach us?


Sil. First, that God loves to clear his Justice, from murmuring and
complaints. Secondly, that if Christians do not use their knowledge well, they
are much more without all excuse and defense, because they have a better and a
greater knowledge; for unto the law of nature they have joined the Law of
Moses, and the Doctrine of the Gospel: where GOD gives much, there he
requires much, and asks much of them, to whom he commits much.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 21. Because that when they knew God, they did not glorify him as GOD,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their thoughts, and their foolish
heart was full of darkness.


Tim. ERe we deal with the drift and interpretation of this Text, speak
something of the connection, with that which goes before, and of the Apostles
method.


Sil. The Apostle renders a reason why the Gentiles were without excuse; as if
he should say, they have no place of defense for ignorance, because they had a
knowledge of God, yet they honored him not as was comely, but offered unto him
rather a doubble injury. For, first they denied unto him his due worship,
which consists in glorifying, God and giving him thanks, in both which they
failed. Secondly, they violated and hurt his Majesty, by putting upon him false
worships, and by their wicked manners, whereof a Bead-roll and Catalogue is
afterward rehearsed.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text, which we have now in hand?


Silas. To accuse and convict the Gentiles of unthankfulness and contempt of
Gods worship, that is; of ungodliness, which did appear in this: that they
did not glorify God, according to that knowledge they had of him; nor were
thankful unto him, according to that goodness which he had bestowed on them.


Tim. Seeing we find of wicked men recorded in Scripture, that they know not
God, Ps. 95, 10. and in this Chap: v. 28. How isit to be taken, that here Paul
says [They knew God?]


Silas. There is a contemplative, bare, and cold knowledge, which not changing
the mind, nor appearing in actions, makes men never the better; and this
knowledge the ungodly have. But Scripture denies unto them that effectual
knowledge, which moves and stirs the heart to Godward, to put confidence
in him, and to be governed by his will, delighting to express it self in
good works. This only deserves the name of knowledge; and not that other,
which is idle and dead, separate from study and care, to give unto God his
glory, by submitting to his pleasure.


Tim. What think you to be meant by the glorifying of God, and by
Thanksgiving, is there any difference between these two: be they not all one,
and what may they import, if they be diverse?


Silas. Some take them to be one: and the former to be opened by the latter.
But the distinctiue particle [ Neither] shows them to be distinct things, one
from the other. By [ Glorifying] is understood an inward reverent opinion of
God, to think honorably of his Nature, properties, Mercy, Wisdom, Justice,
etc. of his works and benefits; also, to render unto him, the worship due to
him. Thansgiuing comprehends a due acknowledgement of his benefits, with a
grateful mention Psalm. 34. 1, 2, 3
of them: also, with desire that others should take notice of them, to
magnify and praise his name with us. Now, the Gentiles are here to be
blamed, that they did neither the one nor the other. God being the end and
mark whereunto all things tend, and the beginning or fountain, from whom all
good things flow; (whereof the Heathens were not ignorant) yet by their
knowledge, they were provoked and brought neither to glorisy him, nor to praise
and thank him.


Tim. What instruction may we take from hence to our Edification?


Silas See the answer in the other Book in the last line of the Page.


Tim. What may be our instruction from hence?


Silas. That the knowledge which we have of God and his properties, should lead
us to glorify him, whereof the reasons be, because else it were in vain and
frustrate, and we were better to be without it, then not to have the right use
of it.


Tim. By what comparison may this instruction be declared and (...) forth?


Silas As our knowledge we have of men, does serve us to some use, to help us
to content and please them; so the knowledge we have of God, should lead us,
and further us to the honoring of him. For, the knowledge we have of his
wisdom, should work in us obedience and patience, and reverence. His
goodness being known to us, should engender in us Prayer, Love, Confidence,
and Thankfulness. Also, his power and truth, should provoke us to trust in
him, and to depend upon him. Also, upon the knowledge of his Justice, we should
be moved to fear him. His holiness should drive us from sin, to live in
purity and uprightness, as we may resemble God, and be like him.


Tim. Are not these things better known to Christians, then to the poor
Heathens?


Silas. They are so: for the wisdom, power, and goodness of God, more
appears in the work of Redemption, then in the Creation: and the Scripture
does more clearly reveal God, and our duty, then the book of the Creatures
could do.


Tim. What follows of this?


Silas. That we are so much the more bound to glorify God; and the more to be
blamed and punished if we do not. For God ought to be worshipped of us more
carefully, the more excellent knowledge we have of him.


Tim. What is the other fault that the Heathen are charged here withal?


Silas The sin of unthankfulness, which is odious to God and man. This their
unthankfulness did appear in that they did attribute unto Fortune and Destiny,
unto Stars, to their own wisdom, forgetting that God did guide and rule all
things by his most wise and just providence.


Tim. How many ways may men show themselves unthankful?


Silas Very many ways: First, by utter forgetfulness of God, the fountain of
all good. Secondly, if men do remember him, yet fail to mention and praise
Gods goodness. Thirdly, if they mention it of self-love, that it might be
thought that they are great with God. Fourthly, if in words men do praise him,
and in works dishonor him. Lastly, if they part his honor between him and
his creatures, as these Gentiles did.


Tim. Wherein consists true Thankfulness?


Silas. In these three things. First, in joy of heart, rejoicing at the feeling
of Gods goodness. Secondly, in profession of his holy name before men,
provoking them to extol him. Thirdly, in an earnest desire and care to please
God, by doing his will.


Tim. What Reasons are there to move us unto Thankfulness?


Sil. First, it is commanded of God. Psalm. 50. Secondly, it is a part of his
service. 1 Timothy 2. 2. Thirdly, it tends to his honor, to be acknowledged
disposer of the world Fourthly, it is due to him, and without wrong cannot be
kept from him. Fifthly, it joins men with Angels, whose work in heaven, is to
praise and thank God. Sixthly, it is a duty that continues in heaven in the
next life after this. Lastly, it is the recompense that God looks for at our
hands for all his mercies, as it were our rent, charge, or homage, Psalm. 116,
12.


Tim. What may be the meaning of the latter words of this Verse [That they
became vain in their Imaginations, (...) had their foolish heart darkened?]


Silas. The Greek word, Englished [ Imaginations] signifies more then
thoughts; even Reasonings, disputations, discourses done with weying and
poising things: whereunto the Heathen Philosophers, attributing much, thorough
the pride and conceit of their own witty and subtle inventions and
disceptations, they fell into strange opinions and inventions concerning God:
Some utterly denying a God; others, doubting of it; others, 1. Cor. 8, 5.
coining a plurality of Gods, whom some would have to be Corporeal, others
incorporcall: the Romans crecting and numbering most lewd and abominable men
(as Romulus, Simon Magus, etc.) into the register and rank of Gods: the
Egyptians doing worse then they, accepting Beasts; as Oxen, Cats, Rats, Geese,
Birds, Crocodiles, yca Onions and Leekes for Gods, putting to death, such as
killed any of these: withal, they ascribed to God corrupt worship, thinking to
appease him, by gorgeous Sacrifices, dcuised by themselves; by dainty
banqucts, sumptuous plays, and goodly spectacles; robbing See Acts 14, 11,
12, 13.
him of his providence, withdrawing from him the government of sublunary and
inferior bodies, as being 1. Cor, 10, 20, 21.
too base for God to meddle with; appointing representations of him,
unbeseeming his Majesty and glory: pretending, they must come to God by Images,
as to kings by Courtiers. In all which, the Apostle says, they proved Vaine]
both because they were deceived of their opinion, neither obtained the end they
aimed at. For, whereas they thought (by such their deep and wise inventions)
to have procured Gods favor also, to enjoy his blessings, and escape
calamities, and to gain unto themselves an opinion of great wisdom, they met
with the quite contrary. For, they offended God, purchased many temporal
plagues, and spiritual too; and at last, were wrapped in cternall destruction,
because (like fools which had their understandings darkened, they preferred
their own vanities before truth, shadows before substance, Idolles before the
true God; like Children, which set more by a Rattle or a toy, then by Treasure,
Gold, and Silver, and such precious things From which we may learn, what
issue and success may be looked for, of all humane inventions in Gods
service, and what they will prove at length, who frame their opinions and
worship of God, not according to that truth seated in the heart by God, and
shining in his works, or after the prescript of his word. All such will not
only be frustrate of their expectation, and find that all their glorious
wisdom, is but mere blindness, foolishness, and darkness: but will
incur the high displeasure of Almighty God, and pull on their own heads, his
heame vengeance, as these Idolatrous Gentiles did. An happy thing were it for
Papists, and all other superstitious persons, which forsaking the sure
directions of God, follow their own perverse reasonings, and thrust upon God
Will-worships and good intentions (as they be called) to take warning in time
by the harms which came unto the Heathens, for their rash godless presumption
in this kind, whereof more shall be said in the subsequent Verses.


DIALOGVE XIII.
Verse 22, 23, 24. When they professed themselves to be wise, they became
fools: for they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude
of the Image of a corruptible man, and of Birds, and of foure-footed beasts,
and of creeping things: wherefore also God gave them up to their hearts lust,
unto uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves.


Tim. HOw is this Text tied and linked in with the last? by what orderly steps
does Paul go forward,


Sil. Here is a new Anticipation, or fore-stalling of a privy objection: the
objection not expressed, but understood is this. O Paul why do you accuse the
Heathenish people of foolishnes and darkness of mind; do you not know that
they took themselves to be wise, and had a same among men for great wisdom,
yea and had the name (their teachers I mean) of Philosophers, that is persons
studious, and lovers of wisdom? The Romans had their Cato, and diverse
others renowned for great wisdom: Act. 7, 22.
and Greece had her seven wisemen. In Egypt were men learned in all wisdom;
and do we not read of wise men which came out of the East from amongst
Heathens, to enquire where the king of the Jews should be borne? To this
objection the Apostle answers, first granting indeed that in their own
opinion, and by profession to the world, they were esteemed for wonderful wise
men; yet indeed and very truth they were fools: because by leaving and
leaping out of the bounds of that knowledge which God had imprinted in their
mind, and manifested in his works; and following their own witty inventions
and sharp conceits, they fell from that worship of GOD whereunto their
engraven light, and the sight of the Creature called them, unto most gross and
abominable Idolatry; not only making such their Gods as were but Creatures,
yea the basest Creatures, even creeping things had divine honor given them:
but changing (what lay in them) the true Immortal and Spiritual God, and his
glorious Majesty into earthly corruptible and contemptible shows and
similitudes, which they adored religiously, forsaking the right spiritual
worship of the only true God, and so became fools or rather mad in their
folly, because they would maintain it by pretext of reason.


Tim. Upon what pretenses and appearance of reason did the wisest of the
Heathens maintain their heathenish Idolatry, in making Creatures Gods, and
woorshipping God by Images, also making pictures and shapes of God: what had
they to say? what did they profess to be the ground and motive of such
superstition?


Sil. Their pretexts and excuses devised out of humane wit (wandering from
light of nature) were sundry; not much unlike (and some the very same) with
these which our Papists straggling from the light of the word, now do use in
the very like case for defense of their abominable Idolles; and which sometime
the Israelites did plead for Fxod. 32.
themselves, when they declined from Gods love and service, Ezekiel 8. 10.
to such their own inventions. As first, that God being a Spirit separate from
sense, therefore the people whose understandings were gross, must have God
visible by some shape. Again, that they were not so foolish as to think the
Images to be God, but only tokens and remembrances, and helps whereby to come
to God: that as men come to Emperors by under-officers, so access to God must
be by Saints, and inserior Gods; which excuses and such like, are answered by
Athanasius, Ambrose, and Augustine.


Tim. Now let me know of you, in what respect the true God is called
incorruptible; seeing men's Souls and Angels be so too, and how his glory can
be said to be changed, seeing it is immutable as himself is? For me thinks it
does well follow, that God being incorruptible cannot change; and as himself
is, so is his glory exempted from change, why then does Paul say, they changed
it?


Sil. The Angels and men's Souls be incorruptible, that is, free from
corruption, alteration and change; not originally by themselves, but by the
will of God, who himself is such of himself, most necessarily and
everlastingly exempt from change and mutation: yea and his glory also
absolutely considered, is such as shall abide the same for ever, though heaven
and earth pass away, it shall not alter: but his glory being relatiuely
considered in respect of men as it is to be honored and worshipped of his
reasonable Creatures, it may be and is often changed by the lewd impiety of
wicked Idolaters, who corrupt his glory two ways; both by making unto them
Gods, which by nature are not so, giving divine honor and service to things
Created: and secondly by representation of God in visible shapes and Images,
adoring him in and by such pictures and shows as men fancy of him; and after
both these sorts did the Gentiles dishonor God, worshipping for Gods such as
had not divinity in them, also by framing similitudes of God to which they
attributed divine honor by erecting unto them Temples and Altars, also offering
sacrifices and prayers unto the figures of men, beasts, and creeping creatures,
so foolish they were and without understanding.


Tim. What be the instructions of this Text which we are to consider of?


Silas. First, such as in appointing Gods service do lcanc to their own
reason and wit, they prove ridiculous and foolish, because in the ordering of
Gods worship, Gods word only must be the rule; when men leave the word, they
leave wisdom and choose folly. Secondly, that all wicked men are fools,
because in the ordering of their lives they leave the word and follow their
own lusts. Thirdly, that even the godly are so far forth fools, as they
depart from the word of God which now to Christians is the square of Gods
service, as the Law of Nature was unto the Insidels.


Tim. What other sins does the Apostle charge the Gentiles withal?


Silas. With the sin of Idolatry, which appears in these two things. First,
they made similitudes and likenesses of God. Secondly, they worshipped those
Images.


Tim. But they will say, they worship God, and not the Images?


Silas But the Apostle says, they worship the Creatures and not the Creator.


Tim. They will say they wrong not God, because still they mind to worship him?


Sil. That is not so, for they turned his glory into a base similitude, as of
creeping things, which is a great dishonor to him. Secondly, they changed the
truth into a lie, as if the incorruptible and invisible God were like a mortal
and corruptible Creature, which is a lie. Thirdly, they forsake the Creator, as
verse 25.


Tim. You thinks then that God is not worshipped at all if any other be
worshipped with him?


Sil. It is true, or if he be worshipped any otherwise then himself has
commanded; for as there is none to be religiously served save God alone, Math.
4. 10. so this God will be worshipped after his own appointment.


Tim. Do not they also forsake God which are spiritual Idolaters, setting
their hearts upon the Creature, as Riches, pleasures, etc?


Sil. They do so, for God alone will be feared and loved above all, and trusted
in alone, as the first commandment enioyneth us.


Tim. What was the punishment of this their Idolatry?


Sil. The giving of them up to unclean and unnatural lusts.


Tim. What is meant by giving up men?


Sil. Not an idle and bare permission, severed from Gods will, or a putting of
sin into men, but a withdrawing of his grace, or for saking the Creatures and
delivering them up (as a just Judge) to be ruled by Satan and their own
lusts; this is the greatest and most grievous punishment that can befall a man
in this life, because it is the increasing of sin, and has new prouocations
of Gods anger.


Tim. How many kinds be there of giving up?


Silas. Two; One in part only, and for a time, into which the children of God
may fall, as appears in Manasses, David, Solomon, and Peter: the other,
wholly and for ever, which the Reprobates fall into, as appears in Came, Esau,
and Judas.


Tim. What was our instruction here?


Silas. To fear God greatly, seeing he can thus horribly and dreadfully
punnish offenders, which disobcy his will: and if this be well thought upon, it
will make sin far more hateful to us.


Tim. What were they given up unto?


Silas. Unto all kind of sin: but namely, unto unchaste and unclean lusts,
touching generation: they were assaulted with an whole army of burning and
unconquerable desires, which were both effects and punishments of their
Idolatry: from whence as Rivers they did flow.


Tim. What did we learn from this?


Silas To abhor and abandon such filthy lusts, not only because they defile
our bodies, which are the members of Christ, the Temples of the Holyghost,
bought with a great price; and are also sins against the body, 1 Cor. 6, 18.
but because they are the punishment of Idolatry. This is the Cockatrice which
hatcheth such a pestiferous brood, as the punishment of unclean lusts.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 25. Which turned the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped the
Creature, for saking the Creator, who is to be blessed for ever, Amen.


Tim. WHat is the Apostles method here, how does he proceed in this matter?


Silas. As before in 23, 24, so now again he opens the Fountain of that
impurity in defiling themselves, and Injustice toward their Neighbor, to wit;
their impiety toward God, and profanation of his worship, which was the very
Root and Mother of such abominable Children and branches, as filthy lusts and
unjust actions be: that which he called the changing of his glory, in verse 23,
now he terms the turning of his truth, that is, those true principles
touching Gods eternal power and Godhead, engrafted in their minds; and that
which before he named the Image or likeness of a corruptible man, is here
named (falsity or a lie) because it represents him falsely, and ascribes to him
a lying kind of worship: for God will not be either pourtraied by an Image, or
served in an Image, or by or before one. All such worship howsoever it be by
Idolaters intended and directed unto God, yet it is not so accepted of God,
neither indeed is it given to him at all, but unto Idols, as Paul teaches, 1.
Cor. 10, 19, 20. therefore it is better translated (they served the Creature)
passing by, or forsaking the Creator; then thus (more then the Creator) but if
we read it more or rather) then it is like to that in John 3, 19. and Luke 10,
14. thus ye have both the connection of this Text with the former, and the
interpretation of the phrases therein in some part.


Tim. What is the drift of this Verse, at what mark does it aim?


First to prove (as he did before, verse 23.) that the Gentiles, howsoever
they knew the Law of Nature, touching the worship of the true God, yet did
violate and transgress it by their gross Idolatry. Secondly, to lay out the
Justice of God, in bringing upon them, that heavy punishment, mentioned verse
24. whereof their gross Idolatry was the true and proper cause.


Tim. Tell us now what is the sum of this Verse?


Silas. It is a lively description of Idolatry, which is a changing of the true
God into a lie, and worshipping of the Creature, to the contempt of the Creator.


Tim. What is meant by the truth of God?


Sil. The God who is true, as before, verse 20. the glory of God, being put
for the God who is full of glory and Majesty: so here the [Truth of God] is
put for the most true God, and such true notions as men have naturally in them
concerning the nature of God.


Tim. How is the true God defaced by an Image made of him?


Silas. First, because when God is represented by an Image, something is
attributed and given to him, which he is not; as that he should be visible,
finite, incomprehensible, mortal, corruptible, earthly. Secondly, that is
denied him, and taken away from him, which in truth is his own, namely; his
eternity, immensity, inuisiblenesse, immortality. So every Image of God, is a
false and lying representation.


Tim. Wherefore is an Image called a Lie by our Apostle?


Sil. First, because from Idolles was taken away that which they were, for they
were no more counted wood and stone, though in truth they still were so.
Secondly, that was yielded to them by Idolators, which they were not; as
namely, the likeness of God, to wit; of the power and nature of God.


Tim. What do ye further note in this Verse?


Silas. That there be two degrees of Idolatry. First, to make Images of the
Deity. Secondly, to serve and give them worship, by outward gestures of
kneeling, lifting up hands, praying before them, offering Incense, etc.


Tim. When it is said [they worshipped the Creature above the Creator] is it
meant they worshipped both Images and God, but Images more then God?


Sil. No, they did not so much as give the second place to God, but wholly
neglected him, being wholly addicted to the worship of the Creature.


Tim. Is this true in all Idolaters which worship Images?


Silas. It is so: for whatsoever they pretend, yet God is not worshipped at
all, where he is not worshipped aright and alone: therefore, is Idoll-seruice
termed in Deuteronomy. 22, 17. and 1. Cor. 19. Diuell-seruice.


Tim. What learn we from the end of the sentence, wherein he says of God, he
is to be praised for ever?


Sil. Thus much, that Idolaters have no good success of their enterprise with
their practice: for, howsoever they seek to rob God of his glory, and to
change his truth for a lie, yet he remains God, to be praised and blessed for
ever: for all that men can do, is not able to alter Gods glory or truth, he
abides always one and the same, like himself, God, worthy to be blessed for
ever. Romans 9, 5.


DIAL. XV.
Verses 26, 27. For this cause, God gave them up to vile affections: for even
their Women did change their natural use into that which is against Nature:
and likewise also the men, left the natural use of women, and burned in lust
one toward another.


Tim. VV Hat does this Text contain in it, for drift, order, and matter?


Sil. The Apostle, to the end he may better clear and free from exception and
reproach, the Justice of God, in punishing the Gentiles, and more thoroughly
beat down and tame their pride and ouer-weening (a maine stop and enemy to
the Justifying grace of Christ) he now so touches their punishment, as that
their shameful uncleanness (not to be named but with detestation) is withal
more particularly and fully laid out, yet with much modesty, most foul and
dishonest things being uttered in seemly and honest terms. In which, he
describes their more then beastly impurity; First, by the moving and
meritorious cause thereof, in the first term of the text [ For this cause,]
that is; for their Idolatry sake, because they changed the most glorious God,
contumcliously into an Idol. Secondly, the chief agent or working cause is
mentioned (GOD delivered them.) This God does not as an evil author intising
to sin, but as a righteous judge punishing most justly sin by sin,
Idolatry with impurity and uncleanness: as a Judge does commit and give up a
malefactor to be tormented by the Executioner, so God delivers Idoll-seruers
to be tormented by Satan and their own lusts.


Tim. Before ye go any further in vnbowelling and ripping up the members of the
Text, declare yet more distinctly what belongs to this (delivering up) and how
God can do it, and yet not be partaker of Sin?


Sil. This speech of [ Delivering vp] our Apostle seems to have taken it out
of the Psalm 81. 12. where God says thus, My people have not hearkened etc.
therefore I have delivered them up unto the frowardness of their hearts, that
they might walk after their own counsels. This [ Delivering vp] comprehends
the sour actions, whereof the first is, that God with-draweth his grace, both
light of knowledge, God blinds men says August when he does not ealighten
them, and hardens when he does not sosten.
and government of his spirit; which being removed, the sinner must needs fall
into wickedness, as a staff falls when the hand is removed which vpheld it;
and as the earth is covered with darkness when the light of the Sun is gone
from it; or as a Ship must sink when Mariners are all gone out of it. In this
action God is just, for it is a righteous thing with God, to forsake such as
first willingly depart from him, and to take his grace from such as do contemn
2 Chro. 15. 2.
it, and hate to be led by it. The next action of God in giving up a Sinner,
is, that beside forsaking him, he also stirs up his lusts, and enclineth
them unto evil, against which, David prays in 119. Psalm: Lord incline not
my heart unto Covetousness. And of this Solomon says, God turns the hearts
of Kings whither he will, as the rivers of water: also in the Psalm it is
written, God turned the hearts of the Egyptians, that they should hate his
people Israel; unto which may be added, sundry such like sentences out of Esaias
63. Joshua 11. 2. Chron. 25. Ezekiel. 14. Whence Augustine (...), that beside
suffering, and forsaking, God delivers by a certain incitation; that though
he put the motion of Sin into no man's heart, yet he inciteth, inclines and
disposes it whither he will; as one that has power, not only over the
bodies, but over the minds of men also. God, says Augustine, works in the
hearts of men, to incline their wills whither soever it pleases him, either to
good things, according to his mercy, or to evil things, according to his
Justice; and that by his judgment, being sometime open, and sometime secret,
but always just. His third action is, offering and presenting occasions of
sinning, to such as be already destitute of his grace: whereunto pertains
that in the Psalm, that their Table should be a trappe and stumbling block.
Psalm. 69. 22.
And who knows not that false Prophets were a snare to Achab, and occasions
of his error? 1, Kings. 18. And that the adversities which happened to the
Egyptians in their own Land, and to the Israelites in the wilderness, were
occasions to the one of more hardening, and to the other of blasphemy and
infidelity? These occasions happen, both inwardly by motions and thoughts
suggested to the mind, and outwardly by troubles, pleasures, plenty, etc.
Which when they light upon a good heart guided by Gods grace, turn to their
good, and further them to amendment of life; but if they happen upon a wicked
mind, they are occasion of greater and more sin, unto which yet by inbred
corruption they are prone enough. The last action of God in this judgment of
[Deliuering] is the putting over an ungodly person, which refuses to be ruled
by God, unto the regiment and power of Satan, and their own vile passions, to
be more and more defiled and alienated from God: that as they like best to be
led by them, so they should be given up to their own devises which they love;
which falling unto them from God, as a punishment, and all execution of
punishment has the condition of goodness and justice in it; and seeing all
men that so are punished, do first by their iniquities deserve to be
delivered; and finally are not compelled, but do evil freely by their own
consent; therefore God so effects this punishment of giving up to
uncleanness, as he is in no wise author of the uncleanness, as it is a
sin: for he is a God who wills no iniquity, no unrighteousness shall dwell
with him: and as he extremely hates sin, being contrary to his most holy
nature and pure Law, so he will extremely and eternally punish it: wherein he
could not be just, were he the author of sin, or (...) and tempter to it, or
approuer of it as it is a fault and desection.


Tim. What is the Doctrine of this place, with the reasons and uses?


Sil. That in the unclean actions of the wicked, God is more then a sufferer,
even a just auenger, and so by his will and power, wills and effects their
wicked works as his righteous judgments. Reason hereof, both testimony of
Scriptures affirming of God that he dehuereth, gives up, sends the spirit
of slumber, hardneth, makes obstinate, turns the hearts, deceives men,
makes the cares of men heavy, their hearts fat, etc. Which import more then
permission, even an action of God, not instilling and droppiag in sin, but
inflicting it as a recompense of former sins, as it is said in the end of
this verse and Chapter 11, 9. Also if we shall shut out God from disposing the
works of wicked men, we should deprive him of more then the one halse of the
government of mankind, and rob him to his great dishonor, both of his
providence and omnipotency; if we make him but an idle beholder and looker on,
and a bare sufferer, as if something might be done which he would not have
done, or could not hinder, then where is his Almightinesle? And how truly is
it written, that none can resist his will? and he works all things after the
counsel of his will, and does whatsoever pleases him in heaven and earth? for
by this Doctrine of naked and idle permission, something should be done, which
God is not pleased nor willing to have done. The use of this point (for this
present,) is not only to discover and convict the error of such as for
preposterous defense of Gods justice to the wrong, and prejudice of his power
and providence, do obtrude and thrust upon God a (...) and naked permission
and desertion; but also to desire and exhort al Christians unfeignedly and
greatly to fear the offense of such a God as has not only our fame, goods,
bodies, liberties, wives, children open to the stroke of his justice; but the
necks of our souls bare and naked to the Axe of his vengeance to smite the^
spiritually, with greater measure of sinful filthiness, of all Gods
judgments the most horrible, when the mind which should govern the whole
man, and all our actions, become subject to most cruel and vile lusts, which
be the more grievous tormentours, the nearer and more inward that they be;
sithence also such as God hates unto destruction, them he finally and wholly
gives over to such guides as Satan and devilish affections, to be governed
by. No stronger bridle from Rom, 11. 7.
sin then this consideration.


Tim. It is now fit time to slide into our Text and to consider the thing it
self whereunto they were delivered, what is it called and what is meant by it?


Sil. The thing is affections vile or shameful, and dishonorable affections;
which imports not only burning and flames of lusts and whatsoever is
sordide, vnhonestand loathsome to chaste ears meant before by uncleanness,
and lusts of their own hearts, Verse 24. But most filthy acts, both actiuely
which they committed toward others, and passiuely which they suffered
themselves from others. And as their punishment is generally expressed in this
word, so more particularly in the next, which declare the monstrous impurity of
both sexes, both Women and Men in the act of generation, going against natural
course ordained of GOD, for propagation and increase of mankind.


Tim. What do ye call the natural use of man and woman?


Silas. The use of their bodies for generation, which is according to the order
that God has set in Nature. This order is; that our kind should be continued
by generation, and the order has three parts First, that man be joined to a
woman. Secondly, that one man be joined to one woman. I hirdly, that one man
and one woman be lawfully joined.


Tim. What things are required to this lawful joining?


Sil. Some things are convenient only, as paritie and likeness of age, of
qualities, of estate. Other things are necessary also, as these five things.
First, that the parties married, be without degrees forbidden in Scripture,
Leuit. 18. Secondly, that there be a betroathing some distance before the
marriage. Math. 1, 17. Deuteronomy. 22, 23, 24. Thirdly, that the parties be of one
religion, both worshippers of the true God. Deuteronomy. 7, 3, 4, 5, etc. 1 Cor. 7,
39. Fourthly, consent of Parents, or of such as are in stead of Parents. 1 Cor.
7, 38. Lastly, consent of parties, their mutual liking and agreement. Genesis 2,
23. and Genesis 24, 57, 58.


Tim. What Lusts are against this order?


Sil. Some are inordinate only, some also unnatural and beastly.


Tim. What sins do ye refer to inordinate lusts?


Silas. Fornication, Whoredom, Adultery, Incest, Rape or forcing, Polygamie,
or having more wives then one at once: this was the sin of the Fathers; for it
was against Gods ordinance, yet it was their secret sin, because in those
times, it was not noted as a falt, or so judged to be.


Tim. What sins refer ye to unnatural lusts?


Silas. Buggerie, which is an uncleanness with beasts: Sodomitry, which is an
uncleanness between them of one sex.


Tim. Why is it called Sodomitry?


Silas. Because the Sodomites are the first we read to have committed this
sin: also, they were outrageous in the committing of it. Genesis 19, 4. 5, 6, 7,
etc.


Tim. When be said [they received such recompense as was meet] what was this
to say?


Silas. That God did punish! dolaters, to show his justice; and he did it with
a fit punishment to show his wisdom. This place plainly proves, that in sin
there Acts 17.
is something which God works, and not suffers only. Sin has three
things in it: First, a motion or action, James 1, 4.
on, which as it is such, is of God, in whom we all move, and live, and have
our being. Secondly, the naughtines of the action, (...), this is from our
selves and Satan, not from God: as a Waggoner, when he strikes a lame horse is
cause of his moving, but not of his halting, which comes from imperfection
in the beast. The third thing is Anti-iustice, the recompense or retribution
for former offenses; this is from God as Author: for it is just Esaias. 3, 10, 11
with God, to render to men after their works, good 2 These. 1, 6, 7.
to them which do good, and evil to such as do evil: and here we have the end
wherefore God delivers to vacleane and vile lusts, that by order of Justice
he may repay sinners their due.


Tim. If there be a divine Justice, then it must needs be ill with wicked
men, and well with good?


Silas True, it must be so, for so Justice requires, which gives to every man
his due: but because this does not always appear to be so, this proves that
there is a judgment to come. 2 These. 1, 4, 5, 6.


Tim. What learn we by this?


Silas. That it behooves all men to fear sin, especially not to lie in any
sin, because there is a most wise and just God to reckon with us.


Tim. What are we taught by the fitness and meetenesse of this punishment?


Silas That there is infinite wisdom in God, to allot pain and judgment
answerable and like to their sin. This should serve to increase the fear of
offending God, who knows how to fit sinners their payment, correspondent to
their fault; and to proportion the punishment to the sin, drowning Pharaoh in
Water, who caused the Israelitish Children to be drowned: and striking that
hand of Jeroboam, where with he would have stricken the Lords Prophet. And
worthily giving up these Idolatrous Heathens, to dishonor their own selves with
most base lusts and deeds, because they had dishonored God, by giving his
Godhead and worship, to most base ignominious creatures.


DIAL. XVI.
Verses 28, 29. For, as they regarded not to acknowledge God, even so God
delivered them up to a Reprobate mind, to do these things which are not
convenient: being full of all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. Generally to convict their guiltiness, and to show what need they had
of the grace of Christ, but especially to lay forth the equity of Gods
judgment against Idolaters. The equity of God, is this; that as they did not
judge it right, to render unto God his known worst ip, so God in his Justice
took all Judgment from them, that they should not know what was convenient
and good for themselves, nor equal and rightful toward their neighbor, as
henceforth he shows at large.


Tim. What is meant hereby [That they did not acknovvledge God?]


Sil. Two things: First, that they had not God before their eyes. Secondly,
that they thought God had nothing to do with their matters: for they neglected
God and ran into his displeasure, being led to do evil, by forgetting God to
be witness and judge of all men. Moreover, that they neglected God, yea, and
derided the true knowledge of God, preferring their own inventions; and so
their sin was not of simple ignorance, but of wilful blindness.


Tim. What lesson was given us here?


Sil. That it is a good means to preserve us in well doing, if we consider
that Gods eye is ever upon us, to note and observe us and our doings; and that
it is a grievous fault to scorn the true knowledge of God.


Tim. What is here meant by a Reprobate mind?


Sil. Not persons rejected, and reprobate of God, for diverse of these were
elect ones; but such a mind as is destiture of judgment and void of common
reason, taking evil for good, and good for evil; also passiuely a mind
reproved and disallowed both of God and all good men.


Tim. Do ye not think some elect to be sometimes of a Reprobate mind?


Sil. Yes surely, before their calling, as Paul, Manasses, and the These upon
the Cross, and they spoken of 1 Cor, 6, 11. also diverse Reprobates were never
given up to a Reprobate mind, but contrariwise, some of them have had a Civil
mind, guiding their actions according to reason, together with great show of
godliness for a time; as Iehu, 1 Kings. 10, 29. and Demas, 2 Timothy 4, 10. and
Judas, Math. 26.


Tim. What should this teach us?


Sil. Charity, to hope well of all. Secondly, patience to bear with all men,
in the spirit of lenity so long as there is any cause of hope. Thirdly,
wisdom to discern of men's minds by their works and actions.


Tim. What difference do ye put between a Reprobate mind, a Civil mind, and a
Religious mind?


Sil. The Reprobate mind, does neither fear God nor reverence man, and
regards neither right nor wrong: The Civil mind regards man, but does not
reverence God: The Religious mind, both fears God, and reuerenceth man,
doing good, and avoiding evil, of Conscience toward the commandments of God.


Tim. What learned we from the particular rehearsal of those sins and
transgressions whereunto they were given up by the revenging hand of Gods
justice, flinging them (as it were) from an high Rock into a deep downfall
and pit of vices?


Silas. Three things: First, how corrupt and miserable man's nature is without
Christ, being a very sink and Sea, rather of most ugly loathsome sins and
vices. Secondly, we learn how many enemies we have to fight against, even so
many as there be corrupt lusts. Thirdly, how much we are beholding to Christ
for pardon of sin, and grace of new birth, whereby so foul and inumerable
vices are covered and cured. Fourthly, we may learn to detest all appearance
of Idolatry, which God does so severely punish, by giving up to such filthy
sins, as so many Tormentors.


Tim. What was noted hereby, that they are said to be full of all
unrighteousness, the first effect and fruit of their reprobate mind?


Sil. That corruption is spread into and over the whole nature of all men
before their conversion. Secondly, that our life is thereby stuffed and
ouer-laden, or fraught with vices of all sorts, which arise and spring out of
that Fountain of natural corruption.


Tim. What is meant by unrighteousness?


Sil. Not a peculiar vice, but that which contains the breach of all duties
to our neighbor, as 1 Cor. 6. 9. as also in the 16. verse of this Chapter, it
imports al those lewd manners whereby they hurt their Neighbors in their
persons, or substance, or name, contrary to the rule of natural Justice.


Tim. What is called Fornication, the first kind and part of Injustice?


Sil. The uncleanness of unmarried persons touching Unrighteousness set out
by the parts.
generation: under it is meant all uncleanness that way, whereby they did
defile the chastity and bed of others, against the seventh commandment.


Tim. What be the stirrers up, and nourishers of this vice?


Sil. Pride in apparel, Belly cheer, corrupt talk, unchaste company, wanton
dancing, unclean touching, love songs, light and lascivious plays, idleness,
etc.


Tim. What be the remedies of this vice?


Sil. Labor in our calling, prayer, moderation in diet, fasting, marriage,
meditation of Gods will, and temporal judgments upon his Children, and upon
the wicked both temporal and cternall.


Tim. What meditations do ye mean?


Sil. Such as these be: First, that it is a sin which polluteth the Temple of
the Holy Ghost. Secondly, it makes 1 Cor. 6, 12, 13, 14, etc.
the members of an Harlot. Thirdly, it robs Christ of that right he has in
the body. Fourthly, it is a sin against the body. Fifthly, it has provoked
Gods vengeance in this world. Sixthly, it deserves Hell fire, 1. Cor. 6, 9.


Tim. What does wickedness signify?


Sil. The pleasure, study, and settled purpose, endeavor and labor which an
evil man takes, that he may hurt another; examples hereof, we have in the
Jews, who took great pains to hurt Christ: Also, in the false Prophets,
which took great pains and labor to deceive simple souls.


Tim. What Reasons may move us to avoid this wickedness?


Sil. Because it makes men like the Devil that wicked one, who goes about
taking great labor and pains to destroy men: and for this cause, he is called
that wicked one, and that evil one in Scripture, even in regard of his
excessive pains which he puts himself unto, that he may annoy and hurt men.


Tim. What call you Covetousness?


Silas A greedy desire of having more, though it be with wrong to others, the
love of money, a will to be rich. 1 Timothy 6, 9, 10.


Tim. By what similitude may the Nature of a covetous man be declared?


Sil. Of Fire, consuming all fuel: of the Grave, devouring carcasses, of the
Horse-leech, still sucking and drawing, never satisfied. Prou. 30, 15. This
Vice comprehends all sorts of thefts and cunning tricks, to coozen others of
their goods against the eight Commandment.


Tim. What be the effects of Covetousness?


Sil. First, it choaketh the word. Math. 13, 22. Secondly, it benummeth the
Conscience. Thirdly, it makes goods our God. Col. 3, 5. Fourthly, it is the
root of all evil. 1 Timothy 6, 10.


Tim. What remedy for it?


Silas. 1. Prayer. 2. Meditation. First, that God cares for our lives. Mat. 6,
23, 24, 25, 26. Secondly, that we came naked into the world, and shall go
naked out of it. Job 1, 21. Thirdly, that our lives consist not in riches. Luke
16.
Fourthly, that it makes us slaves to our own servants. Psalm. 9, 6, 7. Lastly,
that it banisheth the love of God, and fear of God, out of our hearts.


Tim. What is it that ye call Maliciousnes?


Silas. The word which the Apostle uses, either signifies that vice whereby
men wax weary of well-doing, called sluggishnesse: or else that habit of
naughtiness, whereby one is disposed in all things to do viciously and lewdly.
A general inclination to all evil and vicious manner, being opposite to
virtue, which is an habit or disposition to all good and honest actions.


DIALOGVE XVII.
Verse 29. Full of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, taking all things in evil
part, Whisperers, Backbiters, Haters of God.


Tim. WHat do ye call Envy?


Silas. That vice, whereby men vex and grieve for the good of others, as Cain
envied Abel, because his Sacrifice was far better, Saul David, because he
was more loved and honored of the people; the Jews Christ, because many
flocked to hear him, and see his Miracles.


Tim. For what causes are we to suppress and strive against this affection of
envy?


Silas Because it is a devilish vice, making men like to Satan, who envied
our first parents happiness. Secondly, it is injurious to God himself, and
not only to our neighbor, of whose good we ought to rejoice, and not to envy.


Tim. How does envy any injury to God?


Silas First, it does rise up against the authority of his word, forbidding it.
Secondly, it also controlleth his wisdom in the distribution of his gifts;
for, it misliketh that others should have what we want, yet they have naught
but what God will.


Tim. For what other causes must we labor to bridle envy?


Sil. It is against Charity, which rejoices in the good of others, as in our
own. Also, it is an unreasonable affection, because it breeds continual
matter of disquietnesse: for the envious man is never at rest, there will
always be somewhat to repine at. Secondly, it makes us to repine for that
which is ours, touching use, as all other men's gifts be ours for use; as the
cye sees for the whole body, so it is amongst Christians. Thirdly, envious
men do that to others, which they would not have done to themselves. Lastly,
Envy leads to Cruelty, as Cain to the murdering of Abel, Saul to the
killing of David, the Pharisees to the crucifying of Christ.


Tim. What is the duty contrary to this?


Silas. To rejoice for the good of others, as though it were our own good, as
Paul did. Phil. 1, 3, 4. Colos. 1, 3. 1 These. 1, 2.


Tim. What is the next vice?


Silas. Murder: by a Synechdoche all kinds of murder be understood.


Tim. Why is murder placed in the middle between envy and debate?


Silas. To teach what be the ordinary occasions and grounds whence murder
arises, and so to warn men as they would fly murder, to avoid those vices
of envy and strife. For Envy as the Mother, brings forth murder as her
daughter, as in Cains example, Genesis 4.


Tim. What call ye murder?


Silas. It is an unlawful taking away of life from any reasonable creature.
For Beasts may be killed for use, and malefactors for example: so that it is
done by the Magistrate, and justly or legally.


Tim. By what Reasons do ye show the hatefulness of this sin?


Silas. First, it is against the Commandment [ Thou shall not kill.] Secondly,
it takes away precious life, which cannot be restored. Thirdly, it defaceth
Gods Image. Genesis 9, 6. Fourthly, it iniureth the Commonwealth, in spoiling it
of a member. Fifthly, it procures horror of Conscience, as to Cain, Genesis 4,
13. Sixthly, the dishonor of Gods name, as in David, 2 Samuel 12, 14 Seventhly,
loss of goods, body, and soul. Genesis 9, 5. Revel. 2, 18. Eighthly, it spotteth
a man's race and posterity. Lastly, it brings infamy upon his name, and
dishonors him in the eyes and estimation of men.


Tim. How many kinds of murder be there?


Silas. Two: it is either of ones own self, or of others; and that is either
in purpose, or in act, by giving counsel; by writing, as David; by striking,
as Ioab; by withholding necessaries of life, by not rescuing others.


Tim. What be the common causes of selfe-murther?


Silas Three: First, despair of Gods mercy, as in Judas, Mat. 27, 4.
Secondly, fear of worldly pnnishment or shame, as in Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17,
23. Thirdly, penury or want of worldly goods, as in some poor people; which
are plunged in remediless, or extreme penury.


Tim. What things do occasion the murder of others?


Sil. Covetousness; as in the murder of Naboth, 1. Kin. 21, 2, 13.; envy in
killing, as Abel, Genesis 4, 8. Wrath and revenge, as in killing Abner, 2, Sam. 3,
27.


Tim. What do ye call debate, a sin against the sixth commandment?


Sill. It is strife when persons of contrary desires and opinions, run into
differences, and fall out into variance and dissension, it both occasioneth and
also does follow upon murder committed.


Tim. In what things is debate exercised?


Sil. Either in matters of religion, or about worldly affairs, and that either
out of love to gain, or upon vainglory.


Tim. What reasons have ye to keep men from debate and contention?


Silas. First, it is a fruit of the flesh. Gal. 5, 20. Secondly, it is the
breach of Charity. Thirdly, it disgraceth our profession. 1, Cor. 6. 2, 3, 4.
Fourthly, it is a sport to Satan, who delights himself in setting us together
by the cares. Fifthly, it is an offense to God. Sixthly, it is a scandal to his
Church, 1, Cor. 11, 12. Seauenthly, the end of it is very fearful, whereas
peace is both pleasant and profitable. Lastly, it makes us unlike to Christ
and good men, who seek and pursue peace: and like to Satan and wicked men,
who delight in strife and war. Therefore the best way is, either not to open
the flood-gate of debate, or being opened to stop betimes, for none knows
what will be in the end; as in deseases, so debates stay them in the beginning.


Tim. What do ye call deceit?


Sil. That vice whereby men subtly and cunningly hide their meanings by some
colorable words or deeds, that they may hurt and entrap others: as Cain when
he had led Abel into the field; and Judas when he betrayed Christ with a kiss,
and generally when one thing is pretended, and another thing is done, more
specially when men undermine the life and safety of another.


Tim. What reasons be there to keep us from deceit?


Sil. First, it is a member of the old man. Secondly, it is a breach of the law
of God which commands simplicity, and forbids guile. Thirdly, it wounds
the conscience. Fourthly, it hurts our credit, for it is a reproach to be
counted crafty and deceitful, a Fox like Herod. Fistly, it does make us
odious and mistrustfull to all that knows us. Sixthly, it is a mark of Satan's
child (O thou child of the Devil full of all subtilty, Acts. 13, 10.) Lastly,
to these meditations we must join prayer and watchfulness over our hearts,
which be deceitful above measure.


Tim. What is the duty contrary to this?


Sil. In all things to speak as we think, and to use simple plainness in
our words and deeds: yet in some cases truth may be wholly kept in, or uttered
in part without deceit, if there be just occasion, and may be done without hurt
to Gods glory, or damage to our neighbor.


Tim. What is meant by taking things in evil part or malignity?


Sil. When those things which are well done, and cannot be taken ill, or so
done as they may favorably be well taken, are peeuishly wrested to an ill
construction and meaning: these five last rehearsed sins, are against the sixth
precept, being against the life of our neighbor secretly or openly.


Tim. Is it not therefore that some translate this word (evil conditioned?)


Sil. Very true, because such men as consirue things in ill part, are not
content with any man's conditions, they mislike and carp at every thing and
person: examples we have of David's brethren, who took that ill which he
meant well, when he offered combat to Goliath: also many of the Jews took
Christ's doctrine and miracles in ill part, as if he had done them of vain
glory, or by the help of the Devil.


Tim. Do not Gods children offend this way?


Sil. They do so, as is to be leene in Ely, who took the good actions of Anna
in evil part, attributing that to drink, which she did of devotion.


Tim. What think ye of these dealings?


Sil. They go against charity which takes all things in good part so far as
truth and reason will give leave.


Tim. Can ye give us example of such charitable taking things?


Sil. Yea, often in our Savior, who took well the act of such as brought
Children unto him, and still construed to the best, the doings of his weak
Disciples: and of the woman that powered the box of ointment on his head Mat.
26, 10. 11.


Tim. What is the difference between whisperers and backbiters, and also
wherein do they agree?


Sil. They differ in this, that the former do secretly and closely hurt the
credit of his neighbor by rounding in the ear: the latter sort do it more
openly. 2. The backe-biter spares no man's fame, but whisperers set strife
only among friends. Also they agree in very many things. First, they both
wound the name of their neighbor. Secondly, they do it in his absence, and
behind his back. Thirdly, they both have the Devil on their tongue.
Fourthly, they both report false things, or speak truth to an evil end.
Lastly, they both use cunning in broching their tales under these and sueh like
vailes: I am sorry to hear such a thing, I am loath to speak of it, and I
pray you say nothing of it, and I wish well to the party, etc.


Tim Which of them is the worst?


Sil. The whisperer, because he does all under a hand so as he is not known,
he stingeth more secretly, and so as one can provide no preservation against
his poison.


Tim. What reasons should move Christians to eschew those vices of whispering
and back biting?


Sil. First, they are against the word that says, Thou shall not go about
as a talebearer amongst my people. Leui. 19, 16. Secondly, they do to others
what they would not have done to themselves. Thirdly, of these vices aryseth
much discord and debate, as it is written, Without wood fire is quenched, and
without a talebearer strife cease.


Tim What is the duty of a Christian in this behalf?


Sil. Not to speak evil of others behind their back, but to tell them
plainly their saults in love and wisdom, for this will not breed displeasure
(as some think) but rather it will get favor at the last, so it be done in
love and wisdom, with due observation of circumstances, and consideration of
a man's own calling and guists.


Tim. But unto Tale-bearers what is to be done?


Sil. They are to be driven away with an angry look, as the East wind drives
away the rain: they therefore do sin much which receive tales with a
delight to hear other men's sins: for if there were no receivers of tales
there would be no bringers of tales; the one has the Devil in his care, the
other has the Devil on his tongue. Lastly, such shall enter into heaven as
receive not false reports against their neighbor. Psalm. 15, 3.


Tim. But what think ye, are all complaints to be accounted whisperings and
back-bitings?


Sil. No, if these conditions be observed, First, that the party complained
off, be first duly admonished. Secondly, if the complaint be put to such as
have power to redress the fault. Thirdly, if the complayner secke nothing but
the amendment of the party. Lastly if he grieve that hec has cause to
complain, and pray for his conversion, doing all in love; these two last vices
are forbidden in the ninth commandment.


Tim. What is the next vice?


Sil. Haters of God, such as be hated of God and be haters of him; such be al
back-byters and whisperers, persons which deserve the hatred of God.


Tim. Are there any which be haters of God?


Sil. There be such, as this place and other more do mention, God does not
deserve any hatred of them, but rather has in him all causes of love, both
goodness and beauty: but it comes to pass, that men hate God through that
natural corruption which they derived from Adam; for whilst man bare Gods
Image, he loved him and was loved of him, but when he put on Satan's Image and
was unlike to God, then began he to hate God, and was hated of God.


Tim. Are there not degrees of hating of God?


Sil. True, there be so: First, some do it and know it not. Secondly, there
are some that hate him and know it. Thirdly, there are some which are secret
haters of God. Fourthly, there are some which are open haters of God.


Tim. By what marks may it be known that men hate God?


Sil. By these especially: First, by seldom praying, or coldness in prayer.
Secondly, by neglecting to praise him, or doing it without delight. Thirdly, by
hating or hurting his Children. Fourthly, by being loath to think, or speak,
or hear of God, as Atheists. Fifthly, by ordinary disobedience to his word.
Sixthly, by not procuring the good, or by seeking the hinderance of his Gospel,
being enemies to Religion. Lastly, by murmuring and repining under his
correcting hand.


DIAL. XIX.
Verse 30. Doers of wrong, proud boasters, inuenters of evil things,
disobedient to Parents.


Tim. WHo be meant by doers of wrong?


Silas. Such as be contumelious, or despitefull reproachers of others, in an
insolent manner, insulting petulantly over others.


Tim. How many ways may wrong be offered and done?


Sil. Sundry and many ways: First, wrong may be done in thought, word, and
deed, also to souls, bodies, goods, or name, also by doing evil that we
should not do, and leaving undo e some good that we should do: also, by fraud
and violence: Moreover, wrong may be done in our particular callings, when the
duties thereof be not well done; as also in private affairs, and in place of
judgment: this is vilest.


Tim. What reasons may keep us from doing of wrong?


Silas. First, that we may be like God, who does no wrong to any, and show our
selves his Children. Secondly, that we may be unlike Satan, whose plotting and
practice is continually how to do some wrong. Thirdly, we would have no wrong
done to our selves. Fourthly, it is directly against Gods word. Fifthly, it
dopriueth men of Heaven: 1. Cor 6, 9. unrighteous persons shall not inherit
Heaven. Sixthly, it brings judgment even in this life, as in Iesabels example,
whereas the contrary, that is, to deal justly, procures many blessings as in
the example of Job. Lastly, it hurts our name and wounds our Conscience,
and it is a cause that wrong is done to our selves: for with what measure we
meat to others, that shall be meat to us again, Mat. 7, 2.


Tim. What is pride?


Sil. An high conceit of our own excellency, cyther arrogating to us what we
have not and are not, or being too high minded for that we have.


Tim. What is the matter of Pride?


Sil. The gifts of body and mind supposed, or in truth possessed.


Tim. What be the remedies of this vice?


Sil. First, to consider the danger which is great and certain as it is
written, God resists the proud, 1. Pet. 5, 5. And pride goes before a fall,
Prouer. 16, 18. Secondly, to remember Christ's example, as Phil. 2, 5. Let the
same mind be in you, which was in Christ. Thirdly, to think what promises be
made to the virtue of humility, 1. Pet 5, 5. God gives grace to the humble.
Fourthly, to think whereof we are made, and whither we must go; for dust we
are, and to dust we must return, Genesis 3, 19. Lastly, how unfit we are to any
good, and that all the good we have or do, it is given us, 1 Cor. 4, 7.
Finally, pride in the mind is the same, that a swelling is in the body.


Tim. What call ye boasting?


Sil. To glory or insult in any thing, whereas many proud men boast of that
that they have; the boaster is one who brags of that which he has not.


Tim. How many kinds be there of boasting?


Sil. One necessary, urged by importunity of evil men, such as Paul used 2,
Cor. 11, 16. Secondly Christian boasting, which is a holy confidence in Christ's
merits. Thirdly, a vain and foolish boasting, which is a boasting of things we
think we have done, or which others have done by our means: or of wickedness
this is the worst boasting.


Tim. What reasons against this foolish boasting?


Sil. First it breaks a rule of the word, even that rule which bids us to
be modest and lowly. Secondly, it is a sign of a vain and ambitious heart.
Thirdly, it makes us resemble the Devil. Math. 4, 9.


Tim. What do ye call inuenters of evil things?


Sil. Such as are not content with the evils that be already in use and
practice, do study to find out new evils; as the proud man he inuenteth new
fashions, the covetous man he inuenteth more ways of gain; the opressor,
inuenteth new cruelties and torments; the Epicure inuents new devices, new
pleasures and delicates. Such were Tiberius, Sardanapalus, Phalaris, who
rewarded such as found new delights and new torments.


Tim. What Reasons against this vice?


Silas. The evils which men do invent, do commonly hurt the inuenters. Psalm.
7, 15. They shall fall into the pit which they dug for others.


Tim. Wherein does disobedience to Parents show it self?


Silas. First, in their impatient bearing of corrections. Secondly, in an
unwillingness to obey things commanded well and justly.


Tim. In what things chiefly, are Children to show obedience to parents?


Silas. In two things: First, in choice of their Calling or Trade of life.
Secondly, in their marriage and choice of their yoke fellow. This may appear
by the example of our first Parents, whose marriage God their Father made.
Secondly, by the example of Isaac, Jacob, Sampson, who were ruled by their
Parents in their matches. Thirdly, by 1. Cor. 7. Fourthly, Children are more in
power of their Parents, then their other goods. Fifthly, by the Law of Vows,
Number. 30, 4, 5. for if a promise made of a Child to God, is of no force when
parents dissent, much more may parents break the promise which their children
shall make of themselves to other men. Lastly, Marriages made without consent
of Parents are against the Law of Nature, and of the Lord, and are commonly
accursed of God.


Tim. For what reasons is disobedience to parents, to be loathed of all
Christians?


Silas First, it is against the fifth commandment, which says, honor them,
Ephesians. 6, 1. Secondly, it is against the Instruments of our life, education,
and learning. Thirdly, it is against the^ which bear the image of Gods
authority. Fourthly, it brings many curses, as short life to disobedient
Children. He that despises his Mother (says the Wise man) the Ravens shall
pick out his eyes, Prou. 30, 17. Also Absolon came to a fearful end, being a
disobedient Child.


DIAL. XX.
Verse 30. Without understanding, Couenant-breakers, without natural
affection, such as can never be appeased, Merciless.


Tim. WHat do ye mean by those that are without understanding?


Sil. Such as have understanding, and cannot use it; but deal as men void of
reason and counsel, unadvisedly and headstrongly, following their passions.
These men break the rule of the word, which charge us to walk wisely.
Secondly, they are unlike unto God, who does all his things by wisdom and
counsel. Thirdly, they purchase much woe to themselves, thorough their foolish
and rash dealing. Fourthly, they disgrace their persons, their actions, and
oftentimes their profession through foolishness.


Tim. What Lesson was then given here?


Sil. That we undertake nothing without good and due deliberation; Establish
thy thoughts by counsel, says Solomon in his Book of Proverbs.


Tim. Who are these Couenant-breakers?


Sil. They who will abide by no Covenants, Leagues, or promises, further then
it is to serve their turn. These men they are unlike to God, who is faithful
in all his promises. Secondly, they shall never come into the lords Tabernacle,
Psalm. 15, 1. Thirdly, they are enemies to humane society, the band whereof is
fidelity and truth. Fourthly, they bring forth a fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5,
20. and break the Law in a maine point, Math. 23, 23. under these be meant,
all which deny things committed to their trust, or deceive trust put in them.


Tim. How many manner of Covenants be there?


Silas. Two: Religious and Civil. Of civil Covenants there be two sorts: First,
public; for public duties in respect of a place. Secondly, for private
duties in respect of private Callings.


Tim. How else divide ye covenants?


Sil. National between Countries, personal betwixt particular persons.


Tim. What do ye call natural affections?


Sil. Such as be amongst them of one blood and kindred, as between parents and
children, husbands and wives, kindred, country, heathens, yea Christians also
void of these.


Tim. What does it differ from humane and Christian affection?


Sil. Humane affection is that whereby we embrace all men as men: natural
affection is that whereby we embrace them which are near unto us by blood:
Christian affection, is that whereby we love good men, because they belong to
Christ.


Tim. Who are they that can never be appeased?


Sil. Such as being once offended, will never be reconciled again: also such
as can agree with none, nor brook the conditions of others: these men they are
contrary to God, who is ready to be appeased. Secondly, they make God their
enemy, who hates such as are enemies to peace, yea rejects all their
service done to him as abominable. See Math. 5. 23. 24. 25.


Tim. Who are merciless men?


Sil. Such as cannot pity any man, but are cruel, fierce, hard-hearted.


Tim. What reasons to drive us from mercilesnes?


Sil. First, it is against Gods commandment and nature. Secondly, it makes
men also to be merciless to us, because we cannot pity them that are in
misery; the Heathers were full of cruelties, as also the Turks in their wars,
shedding the blood of men, women and children without all pity; casting men to
beasts, and causing men to kill one another at sword playing.

Concerning the forenamed sins which are 23. in number, we are generally to
observe these few and short notes. First, that he first sets down one word
(vnrighteousnesle,) which comprehends them that follow, as kinds and parts of
unrighteousness. Secondly, that they are here to be considered not simply as
sins, or causes of sins, but as effects and punishments springing from the
root of Idolatry. Thirdly, that he names not all the branches of injustice to
men, (see more Gal. 5. 19. 20. Col. 2, 8.) but the most principal and such as
then reigned most amongst the Heathens. Fourthly, that though an imputation be
here laid upon all the Heathen, who are universally blamed without exception,
because few among them lived ciuilly, and all were by nature given to them; yet
no doubt all were not alike guilty; and further howsoever all these sins were
not found in every one, yet all were guilty of some one or more of them.
Moreover, he does accuse the Romans directly to be faulty in these
transgressions, but indirectly framing his speech under the persons of others,
to decline envy; letting them rather see in the mirror of other men's lives,
what themselves were by nature, then plainly charging them to do such things.
Lastly, there is a great difference between godly Christians and profane
Heathens, in respect of these vices; which howsoever Gods regenerate children
may fall into some of them, of frailty and by strength of temptation; yet they
are not given wholly, and for ever over unto any of them, nor be full fraught
with them.


DIAL. XXI.
Verse 31. Which men, though they know the Law of God, how that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, not only do them, but favor them
that do them.


Tim. WHat is the purpose of this Text?


Sil. To she we the wickedness of men's hearts, how far it goes where it is not
restrained, that is, not only to do great evils, but to like and praise them
who are evil doers; wherein he does more amplify their guiltines, because
they were not only committers of evil, but sauourers thereof.


Tim. What is meant by the judgment of God, and how did the Gentiles know it?
whence (...) they their knowledge of it?


Sil. By judgment or righteousness of God, the moral law often commandments
is not understood, because this was never given but to the Jews; and that
which he speaks of death, declares that it must be expounded of the
iudiciarie or coectiue and correcting power of God, whereby he does repay good
to them which do good, and evil to them who do evil, life to the righteous,
death to the sinners. This judiciary law is called judgment or justice,
because by the immutable order of justice, it is requisite that rewards and
pains be repaied to men as recompense of their works. It is termed the
judgment of God, because it does not belong to God as a contingent effect of
his free will, which he may do, or not do as he will; but as a natural
attribute is in God, and by him unchangeably expressed and executed, 2. These.
1, 6, 7. Whereas the Gentiles are said to know this judgment, the meaning is;
that they well understood the law and judgment of God, to allot death to them
which did such crimes, and that unto such crimes death did so firmly and
necessarily cleave by Gods judgment, as whether God did inflict, or for some
time spared, yet the doers of such things were worthy of death, that is, some
kind of punishment tending to destruction: even of Hels destruction, the
Gentiles were not altogether ignorant, as by Virgil and other Poets may be
collected. This justice of God the Heathens knew, by light of Nature. Secondly,
by witness of their own Conscience, and by experience in the daily examples
of divine revenge. Hence Draco appointed death to the breakers of his laws,
and Gentiles judged Adulterers unto death, Genesis 38, 24. Also the Barbarians,
Acts, 28, 4, bewray murderers worthy to dye in their judgment.


Tim. What death are they worthy of, which do such things against the Law of
God, imprinted first in man's mind, then written in Tables of Stone?


Silas. Both natural death, violent death, and death eternal; this eternal
death stands in a separation from God and in a sense of paine-full torments
in body and soul: it is to be suffered in Hell, a Prison, a Lake, a place of
darkness, a depth, in the company of the Devil, wicked Angels, and Reprobate
men, and for ever without end, infinitely without measure.


Tim. How is this pain and smart of this death shaddowed out in Scripture?


Silas. By the similitude of fire and Brimstone; the effects of this pain be,
weeping, howling, and gnashing of teeth: this pain shall endure as long as God
endures, even everlastingly.


Tim. What use is to be made of this description?


Sil. First, it should humble us much, to think that we deserve such an unhappy
condition. Secondly, it should make us fly from sin, that has pulled it
upon us. Thirdly, it should stir up a love to (...) Christ, that has
himself suffered the pains of this death, to free us from it. Fourthly, it
should move in us great pity toward such as do lie in sin, and be in the
Highway unto this death. Lastly, it should breed great carfulness to keep
others from sinning.


Tim. What sins are chiefly to be avoided of us Christians?


Sil. Sins against our knowledge, because they give greatest wounds to our
conscience, and so most trouble the peace of our own hearts. Secondly, they
draw after them the greatest downfall in this world, which is the sin
against the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, they procure greatest wrath and punishment
after this life. Lastly, they have in them slat contempt and Rebellion against
God.


Tim. May not Gods Children sin after their knowledge?


Sil. They may and do, as appears by David's prayer, Psalm. 19, 13. and
practice, Psalm. 51. Also, by the example of Adam, Manasses, Solomon, and Peter:
but in these sins, the godly differ much from the wicked; for the godly fall
into these sins seldom, with a strife of heart against them in the doing, and
great grief of heart afterward; as also, increase of care and watchfulness
against new temptation: but none of these things be in the wicked, but the
quite contrary: for, they run headlongly and wilfully into evil, and are
without remorse, and returning to God.


Tim. What is it to favor those that do evil?


Sil. To consent unto their wicked deeds with approbation: this may be done
many ways, as by praising, by counselling and persuasions, by hiring and
rewarding, by defending, by dispensing, by pardoning, or procuring pardons, by
concealing and hiding, and by pleading for them: also by silence, and not
reproouing, or not punishing all these worthy of death.


Tim. How may their fault be set out, which favor evil doers?


Sil. By the example of Arch-rebels, which will maintain all that rise up
against their Prince. This is an high pitch and degree of sin: and in a very
dangerous case they stand, who be risen to this height of iniquity, especially
in this light of the Gospel.


CHAP. II.
DIALOGVE I.
Verse 1. Thou therefore art inexcusable (O Man) whatsoever thou art that
iudgest: for in that same wherein thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy
self, for thou that iudgest, do even the self same things.


Tim. WHat is the purpose of this Text?


Silas. The general purpose, is to show the guiltiness of the Gentiles, but
especially to discover and reprove a close kind of sinners, who took
themselves to be righteous and without fault, because they reproved others, and
could not themselves be blamed of the world; these sinners the Apostle tells
them, that it is little help to them, that the world cannot judge them, seeing
they are judged of their own Conscience, and of God. The text has a reproof
in the first words. Secondly, a reason in the rest.


Tim. This indeed is the commonly receined opinion, that the Apostle having in
the latter end of the former Chapter reproved and convicted open and bold
offenders, does now in the beginning of this Chapter blame another kind of
trespassers amongst the Gentiles, which were more polliticke, and sinned with
more cuning, neither doing openly nor allowing such gross crimes as were
mentioned before, but taxing and condemning them both morally by precepts, as
did Cato, Socrates, etc. and ciutlly by their laws, as Solon, Lycurgus, Draco
etc. Yet in secret and privately did the same things. Some also there be which
think that Paul having reprehended such as abused their contemplatine
knowledge, and contrary there unto bad run into foul Idolatry against the
first Table, now taxes such as abuse their practicke knowledge, trespassing
against their neighbors, contrary to the known rules of common equity; but
what do you think of the connection of this Chapter with the former?


Sil. The first Particle of this Text [ Therefore] does well clear it to me,
that this whole sentence is inferred and depends upon the former words in the
last verse of the precedent Chapter, so as he does not take up a reprehension
of a new sort of sinners, but goes on still to convict the same transgrcssors,
but with a new (...). Hitherto he has reasoned from the effect of evil works
done by the Gentiles against God and men, to wit; the wrath and punishment of
God revealed and executed upon them, whereof it follows strongly that the
Heathen by their works deserving damnation, could not thereby challenge
Justification. Here he argues and concludes the same thing from a Testimony
or judgment of every man's own Conscience, not from that particular moral
judgment of some learned Philosophers, as Scneca, Plato, etc. or that civil
judgment of certain Law-giuers, condemning to punishments, vices which
themselves did; but from the universal judgment which is in all men naturally,
and binds all. Sithence all men do condemn themselves, yea even for such
things as they blame in others, yet themselves do them: it followcth that every
one without all excuse, is guilty in the judgment of GOD, and therefore cannot
be justified by their works.

The sum of this first verse is thus much: ye acknowlodge, and account them
which do such evils (as before spoken off) worthy of death: yet you your
selves do know that either in whole or in part, privately or publicly ye do
such things; therefore in your own judgment you are condemned whatsoever ye
do pretend for your excuse. Paul by an Apostrophe directs his speech unto
one man, to show thereby that it is the condition and case of every one: for
there is none living but must approve that judgment of GOD in Verse 23. and
which does not many things against it even by the witness of his own
conscience. The parts then of this Chapter, be principally these two. First, by
a new reason he proves that Heathen men cannot be justified by their works,
Verse 1, 2. Secondly, he remoueth and answers both the general pretenses
and excuses of all men, Verse 3, unto Ver. 12. and the spcial allegations,
first of the Getiles, from ve. 12. until 17. Secondly, of the Jews from Ver.
17. to the end of the Chapter.


Tim. Does the Apostle speak against all judging of others?


Sil. Nothing less, for there is great use of both public judgment, and
private: the use of public judging is the preservation of humane (...), which
consists in the defense of good men, and punishing evil men by the sword of
the magistrate. Also the use of private judging is to reclaim tractable
sinners, and to make obstinate sinners Reason.
inexcusable.


Tim. What things may stay us from the hard judging of others, when they have
fallen?


Silas. These Meditations. First, that happily we have done the same offense,
or else we may do it hereafter, Gal. 6, 1. or if we do it not, it is because
we are not tempted to it. Also, that some other way we have offended as
grievously, or may hereafter. Also, all hasty, uncharitable, and curious
ludgements, are for bidden by our Savior Christ, in Math. 7, 1.


Tim. How does the Apostle mean, that those that condemn others, do the same
things?


Tim. The meaning may be this: First, that they did transgress the Law of
God, as others did, though not always in such crimes. Secondly, they did those
things secretly in the motion of their mind, which others did outwardly in the
action of their life.


Tim. What was the instruction from hence?


Sil. That it is the note of an Hypocrite, to bear with his own faults, and
to be sharp against others. This is proved by Mat. 7, 34. and 23. also by the
example of the Pharisees.


Tim. Whence comes this?


Silas. First, from blindness, that they discern not their own sins.
Secondly, from malice, which they bear to other men's persons. Thirdly, from
curiosity in prying too near into others faults: for by this policy, Satan
keeps them from reforming themselves, by bufying them too much in censuring
of others: therefore, in the reproving of sin, we are thus to proceed; to
begin with our selves, and to be more severe with our own sins, then with
other men's.


Tim. What Reasons of this duty?


Silas First, from the commandment of the word; the righteous man first
accuses himself. Secondly, because every man knows himself, and ought to
have more care of himself. Thirdly, our selves being rectified and amended,
then in our admonition toward others, we shall deal more wisely and
charitably, with hope also of better success toward our Neighbor, and more
comfort to our selves.


Tim. Do you take it to be utterly unlawful for any man to judge or censure
another of that Vice, whereof he himself is culpable?


Sil. If he which censureth, or gives sentence against another, for that
wherein he is commonly known to be faulty, then he does give offense unto
others, and cause them to think him an Hypocrite. Howbeit, if he be a
public person, he offends neither against his office, nor the Laws which
require sentence against malefactors: if he be a private man, he offends not
against his Brother whom he has justly blamed, save by being a scandal to
him, and being an occasion to him, to continue still in his sin, because he
sees his reproouer do such things which he would not do, if he thought them
evil.


Tim. What further instruction may this first verse affoorde unto us?


Silas. Namely this; That all men are held guilty before God, even by force of
selfe-iudgement, or inbred conscience. The reason is, every man does
something, which he knows to be evil, and to deserve Gods vengeance: either
he commits some outward and odious fault, for which not himself alone, but
the world can censure him: or howsoever he so suppress his passions of wrath,
envy, revenge, hatred, covetousness, ambition, pride, etc. as they do not
break out as pussles and botches in his face and hands, yet they boil within,
and like sparkles out of a furnace, so there rise up out of the corrupt and
unclean soul, many noisome lusts and desires, whereof they cannot be
ignorant in whom they be. Socrates one of the best mannered Philosophers could
say, that by nature he was incontinent, though by Philosophy he brideled that
affection from running into action. The use of this instruction is twofold.
First, it stops the mouth of all Iusticiaries which seek to establish a
righteousness by their own works, as if they could stand just before God,
and by their own deeds; whereas every man has his own heart to condemn him
(and therefore, God much more to judge him) as guilty of doing one thing
amiss, or other, or many things rather. Whereas an absolute freedom from all
faults is required in him who will be pronounced righteous by his own doings.
Secondly, here is an admonition for all men, but chiefly for such as have
authority to govern and judge other, that they be very careful to avoid
(what may be) to become selfe-condemners and Iudgers, by failing in such
matters, as by their place and office, they are driven to sentence and punish
in their inferiors. For it is a thing full of dishonestie and scandal, when a
man may worthily have it replied unto him; Physician heal thy self.


DIAL. II.
Verse 2, 3. But we know, that the judgment of God is according to truth
against them which commit such things: and think thou this (O Man) that
condemnest them which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall
escape the judgment of God?


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Sil. To reprove those which stood upon men's judgments, and neglected Gods
judgment, that is; they thought all well, so long as men thought well of them,
not regarding what GOD judged of them, which was chiefly and asore all to be
thought on.


Tim. How fitly does this Text agree with the former? Also in what sense is
Gods judgment affirmed to be according to truth? And how do we know thus much?


Silas. This verse was a proof of that which was written in the first verse:
for there he said, that men which condemned themselves, are without excuse;
but are so guilty, as they cannot escape: the reason hereof is now rendered,
because the judgment of God is according to truth; and therefore, though men
would blind themselves, putting out their own eyes, yet that cannot be done;
and were it done, it cannot help, for God will find them out. By judgment is
meant, both Gods government of things and persons in this world, namely, his
judiciary power, in inflicting pain; and also the action of the last and great
day, when God will give recompense to every man, as his works be. This
Judgment is said to be (according to truth) not so much for that he judges
not after outward shows and appearances, but searches the hearts, 1. Sam. 16,
7. as because it is a righteous impartial judgment, looking not to persons, as
corrupt men do in their judgment, but to the quality of the offense. This we
are said to know, both because it is certain, and the certainty hereof
evidently appears to al men generally and obscurely by light of nature,
imprinted in all men's minds, whereof before Chap. 1. verse 19, 20. and this is
meant here: and more specially and clearly by the witness of the word, often
auouching God to be righteous in his judgment, and holy in his ways, Psalm.
99. and 76. and 145. Paul abhorring with detestation, the least thought of any
injustice in God, Romans 3, 5. and chap. 9, 14.


Tim. What does the Apostle teach here, touching the Judgment of God?


Sil. Two things: First, that his judgment is true, equal, and just:
Secondly, that it is certain and unavoidable.


Tim. What learned we from the former?


Sil. That God does judge otherwise then men do judge, now herein is the
difference: that men do judge 1. Part.
according to outward appearance; for men do judge according to that they do
hear and see, because they know not the heart, and cannot tell with what mind
every thing is done: for this is the cause that men are so soon and much
deceived: as it may appear, first, in that men take some to be good which be
otherwise, as in Isaac, who thought well of Esaues and Paul who thought well of
Demas; and the eleven Apostles, who had a good conceit of Judah. Also men are
deceived in judging some men evil which be good: example hereof, we have in
David toward Mephibosheth, Sedekiah toward Jeremy: Therefore in these cases,
men are to judge well of all men, so long as they have no cause to the
contrary, especially so long as they see good in them, which may give hope.
Secondly, so to seek the good opinion of men, as we do not rest in it.
Thirdly, if any of us be deceived in others, to remember we are no gods.


Tim. Now tell us how God does judge.


Sil. God judges all persons and things, truly as they are, because he most
perfectly sees and knows all things, even the very secrets of man's heart.


Tim. What should this work in us?


Silas. These things; First, that with great care we approve our lives unto God
in all uprightness. And secondly, that governors labor to be like unto God,
endeavoring what lies in them, to judge truly of persons and things. Thirdly,
that we reverence all Gods judgments, though they seem strange to us. For
the godless men, yea through weakness of judgment or strength of temptation, the
godly too do think, and are ready to speak hardly of Gods government, either
as if there were no divine providence, or as if it were not equal; pains and
afflictions being the portion of good men most commonly, and evil men well
rewarded with good things, as if they were good men. This stumbled even Job,
Jeremy, David: but all our carnal thoughts, must here strike sail and give
place to this Oracle of God, that his judgments now and hereafter, will be
found just, and justly executed. Which truth, as it ought to stop our mouths,
and to awake our security, that we perish not by hope of impunity, so it
affoords undoubted comfort against confusions and apparent oppression. 2. These.
2, 7.


Tim. Why is the judgment of God unavoidable?


Sil. First, because of his omnipotency, whereby he can draw all men besore
him. Secondly, because of his decree whereby it is established. Lastly, we
cannot avoid the judgment of our own conscience, much less GODS judgment.


Tim. What use was made of this truth?


Sil. It should move all men to amend themselves, seeing all men must come to
account. Secondly, it should work in Rulers a great care of their actions,
seeing they also can not escape the judgment of God.


DIALOGVE. III.
Verse 4, 5. Or dispisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience
and long sufferance; not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance? but thou after thy hardness and heart that cannot repent, heapest up
and treasurest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the
declaration of the just judgment of God.


Tim. FIrst speak something to the method and disposition of the Text, how
does it agree with the former, and of what parts does it consist?


Sil. The blessed Apostle does now bend himself against the vain excuses and
pretexts by which those self condemners do deceive themselves. The first is
the hope of impunity, by the lenity of God, giving good things out of his
bounty or kindness, bearing with the abuse of his benefits out of his
patience, and forbearing a great while to punish, out of his long sufferance;
therefore say sinners, he will neuet punish. Hereuppon as wanton Children or
dissolute Scholars. which espy the gentleness of their governors; or as Birds
which mark the lcar-crow, not to move or hurt, wax bold and fearelesse. So
these sinners imagine of God, that he will ever spare, because he presently
strikes not, they want only contemn him and his kindness. The parts of the
Text be two: the one concerns the general goodness of God toward evil men,
set down in three words. The second is, a reprehensicn of the abuse of his
goodness, which that it might pierce deeper and move more, is set down by an
interogation, and an Apostophe. Do thou?


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Sil. To check such as being evil, yet thought themselves Scope.
righteous and in Gods favor, because they were not punished of God, but
prospeted: unto these men the Apostle says, that their prosperity and fredome
from punishment was a token of Gods bounty, patience, and long sufferance, but
not of their virtue and goodness.


Tim. What is meant here by bountifulness?


Sil. The kindness whereby God is inclined to do good Interpretation.
even to all manner of men; or a profitable and beneficial kindness. As in
Luke 6, 35.


Tim. What is signified by patience and long sufferance?


Sil. Patience is that virtue whereby God forbeareth punishment, and by long
sufferance is meant, that whereby God bears a long time with the wicked; long
keeping back and refrayning his wrath before he punish them; notwithstanding
they still go on to heap sin unto sin.


Tim. What is meant by the riches of his bounty and patience?


Sil. The plentiful and large abundance of these things according to the
phrases of Scripture; as rich grace for abundant grace, and, dwell richly, that
is, abundantly. Col. 3, 10. Romans 9, 13. Ephesians. 1. 7. and 2, 5.


Tim. What is it to despise these things?


Sil. To make no use of them for amendment of life; for to suffer a thing to ly
by us without any use, argues a neglect of it, that it is not esteemed.


Tim. What were the lessons gathered from hence?


Silas Sundry, and in order these which follow: First, Instructions.
that we must be like to God in these properties: bountiful, patient and long
suffering, as he is. Col. 3, 12. Secondly, that outward blessings belong to the
wicked, as well as to the good: For his Rain falls, and his Psalm. 77. 1, 3.
Sun shines upon the good and bad, Matthew 5, 45. Thirdly, that the godly are
not to fret, when they see the ungodly prosper: for it is a checking of Gods
bounty and patience. Fourthly, that manic are never the better for the
benefits that God gives them, but rather the worse, being hardened by
kindness. Lastly, that it is a dangerous estate to be free from crofses and
full of wealth; for such shall fall into impenitencie, and hardness of heart.


Tim. What would Paul have us to understand by that speech [not knowing?]


Silas Therein he does both vpbraide and refute the brutishness and stupiditie
of these sinners, that whereas the blessings of God, so many, so long
continued, so The end of Gods bounty.
great, ought to have even drawn and haled them unto such a kind and
bounteous giver; so blockish and foolish they were, as they were not only no
whit stirred therewith toward God, as they did the more neglect, nay contemn
him, and yet did promise to themselves, impunity and safety. This was
senseless and beastly ignorance and wickedness. Whence we learn, both how out
of measure wicked man's heart is, being without Gods grace; how unable to move
it self to God, though God reach out unto them the hand of his benigoity: and
also in what perilous condition they do live, which have store of good things,
and are without the spirit of Repentance, they are worse then Beasts.


Tim. In what sense is it said, that the bounty and kindness of God leads
men to repentance?


Sil. That Gods benefits in all reason, should move men to amendment, and men
are to make such an account, that Gods kindness inuiteth them unto repentance.
When he gives benefits, he gives means of repentance, but the grace of
repentance he bestows on his elect.


Tim. What lesson was given here?


Silas. That every good blessing of God is as it were Right use of Gods
kindness.
a Sermon of repentance: also, the more benefits we have, the more cause we
have to love and please God by doing his will.


Tim. What do ye call an hard heart?


Silas. Such a one, as will not be softened and moved Abuse of Gods bounty and
kindness.
by benefits and instructions, nor broken with threatenings and corrections, the
which in Scripture is set forth by the similitude of a stone, Ezekiel, 11, 19,
also of an iron sinew, and of a fat brawny heart, Psalm. 119. which dulleth
all the senses, and makes them unfit to do their Offices. Man's heart is
naturally hard, but this hardness is increased much by our own perverseness
and obstinacy.


Tim. By what degrees do men fall into hardness of heart?


Silas. First, by wicked thoughts and lusts. Secondly, Of hardness of heart.
by yielding unto them with consent of the heart. Thirdly, the putting them or
bringing of them into action. Fourthly, the often practice of sinful actions.
Fifthly, an obstinacy to continue in evil customs, from whence comes
hardness of heart, James, 1, 14, 15.


Tim. What be the causes of an hard heart?


Sil. The first cause is God himself, as Judge, not as Causes of it.
Author: God hardened Pharaohs heart, Exodus 9, 12. Secondly Satan, Satan
entered into Judas. Luke. 22, 3. Thirdly, man himself: Pharaoh hardened his own
heart. Exodus 8, 15. Fourthly, Impunity, or freedom from punishment. Fifthly,
the prosperity of the wicked, as means and authors: this had almost prevailed
to harden David's heart, Psalm. 73, 13, 14, 15.


Tim. What be the kinds of an hard heart?


Silas. Two: First, that which is felt and perceived. The kinds of it.
Secondly, the other not felt nor perceived.


Tim. What is the hardness of heart which is felt and perceived?


Sil. When the heart though it feel no present ease, yet it is grieved for
sin, and desires to be partaker of joy, and uses the means, as in David,
Psalm. 51.


Tim. What is the hardness which is not perceived?


Sil. When men do either carelessly live in sin without desire of using the
means to come out, as they in the first of the Proverbs, verse 21, hated
knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord. Or else, when men do
purposely resist the spirit of God in the use of means as the Jews, Acts, 7,
51, Yeresist the Holy Ghost.


Tim. What be the remedies of an hard heart?


Silas Those which follow: First, admonition, private and public. Secondly,
corrections being blessed, which must be asked of God. Thirdly, meditation of
Gods unspeakable kindness. Fourthly, prayer and hearty consession of sin to
God, and all this done in truth and constantly.


Tim. What do these words contain, thou heapest and treasurest unto thy self
wrath against the day of wrath (and of the declaration of the just judgment of
God?)


Sil. A severe commination or threatening of a most heavy vengeance at the last,
unto such as abuse the great kindness and lenity of God, and are not bettered,
but made worse rather, by his bounty and patience.


Tim. How is this vengeance declared and set forth?


Silas. Three ways: First, by a similitude taken from humane and earthly
affairs of men in this world, who having plentiful riches, do treasure and
lay up in store that which afterward they will use in convenient time: even so
wicked men which in time of Gods patience bearing with them, do increase their
unthankfulness and other sins, though they feel nothing for the present,
yet afterward they shall feel it far more grievously, their vengeance
coming upon them as a Treasure heaped up in more full measure, it being the
manner of God to recompense the delay in punishing with the weight of
punishment; see the like phrase of Treasuring vengeance, in Deuteronomy, 32, 34.


Tim. What should this teach?


Sil. That they are in worst case of all others, whom God does most bless and
bear with, except they (...). Secondly, that all men should fear to abuse
and provoke Gods patience, not presuming of safety because of it, but by it
taking occasion of speedy turning to God, least there come an after-clappe, yea
a most woeful reckoning in the end.


Tim. How else was this vengeance set forth?


Sil. By the cause, in this word (to thy self) which signifies, that
themselves brought all the mischief upon their own heads.


Tim. What use of this?


Sil. It clears God from all cruelty, seeing the cause of man's ruin is in
himself: as it is written, O Israel thy destruction is of thy self. Hosea 13,
9. Secondly, it teaches all men to have great care and heed to their own
hearts, because all their woe springs of themselves. Above all things keep
thy heart. Pro. 4. 23.


Tim. How else was this vengeance declared and set forth in our Text?


Sil. By the circumstance of time, when it shall be rendered, namely at the
great and last day.


Tim. What should this teach?


Sil. That howsoever even in this life God do often inflict vengeance upon
impenitent hardened sinners, yet there is much reserved to the day of judgment.


Tim. How is this day expressed?


Sil. By these terms, first (wrath) which imports the heaviness of the
vengeance coming from Gods hot indignation and fury. The second term is
(revelation) whereby we are admonished, that the things now hid and kept close
here, shall be there opened and made most manifest to our selves and all
others: see the 16. verse of this Chapter. The third term is Justice, to
teach, that in that fearful judgment, God will proceed by right, without
doing the least wrong to any; for how should the Judge of the world do
unjustly? Gods bounty and kindness, takes place in blessing and forbearing,
but if these be abused, then his Justice shows it self in punishing.


Tim. What is to be learned from hence?


Silas. That in all the course of our life, and in every particular action
thereof, the mind ought to look to this Judgment, that so we may be made
watchful, and learn to walk with God, as thorough his mercy in Christ, we
may be counted worthy to escape the vengeance to come.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 6. For God will reward every one according to his Works.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this Scripture?


Silas To lay forth the equity of Gods Distributive Justice, because he does
not take vengeance, but upon precedent cause, given from men's evil works. It
is Justice to give to every one that which is his. But God does so, giving to
good men good things, and evil things to evil men: therefore he is just.


Tim. What things were considered in this Scripture?


Sil. Four things: First the person of the Judge [ God.] Secondly, the
certainty of a judgment [ He will reward.] Thirdly, the persons to be judged
[ Every one.] Lastly, the measure of this Judgment [ According to his works.]


Tim. What note ye from the person of the Judge?


Silas. His infinite Wisdom, his Power, and Justice, whereby he infinitely
knows, and hates perfectly, and is able also to punish all sin most
extremely. For, he is Omnipotent, and the searcher of the hearts and Reins.


Tim. What Use was made hereof?


Silas. That having such a Judge, we ought always to live in fear,
especially, seeing we are in his presence ever under his eye, who neither can
be hindered nor deceived by any, nor yet will err in judgment.


Tim. How was the certainty of a Judgment proved?


Sil. First, by the testimony of Scripture, Mat. 25, 31, 2 Cor. 5, 10. Romans 14,
10. Acts 17, 31. Secondly, by this reason, that God will give good things to
good men, and evil things to evil men. 2 These. 1, 6, 7. which he does not
in this world, and therefore, there is a Judgment after this life?


Tim. What use was made hereof?


Sil. First, it moves the sinner to repentance, Acts 17, 30. Secondly, it
moves the righteous to watchfulness. Romans 14, 9, 10 11.
Watch therefore, Math. 24, 42. Thirdly, it teaches all men Charity, not to
Judge others, seeing one is Judge of al. And fourthly patience in adversity,
because God will one day (...) all matters.


Tim. Who are the persons to be judged?


Silas. Every one, of what age, sex, or estate soever. All persons, and every
one, without any exemption or exception, must appear and be judged.


Tim. What learned we from this?


Silas. First, it must teach humility to the mighty, seeing they are to be
judged, as well as the mean. Secondly, it does comfort abject Christians which
are patient, because they shall never be forgotten in that day.


Tim. What is the rule and measure of this judgment?


Sil. Men's works, by which is meant not only deeds and words, but also
thoughts and counsels of the heart, Eccl. 12, verse last.


Tim. What was learned from hence?


Sil. What a great care is to be had of our thoughts, seeing we must be
countable for them.


Tim. But will it not follow of this, that we may merit by our Works?


Silas. No verily: for the Apostle proves here the quite contrary, because
none can bring the works of the Law perfect; therefore none can look to be
justified before God by his works. Again, it is not written, God will Judge
[For,] but according to our works. Moreover, they cannot merit, because they
are not our own. Fourthly, because they are a debt due to God, the creature
owes all to the Creator, but he is Debtor to none. Lastly, there is no
proportion between them and the reward; the one being finite, the other
infinite, both in time and measure: but howsoever good works cannot be an
even rule of merit with God, as they be with men, yet they are a manifest rule
of equity. For it is good reason that it go well or ill with us, as we have
done either good or evil.


Tim. But evil works merit eternal death?


Silas True, because they are our own, and be perfect, so be not our good
works, for they are wrought in us by Gods Spirit, and be imperfect.


Tim. But it will destroy al care of good works, if we deny the merit of them?


Silas. Not so, but the quite contrary: for where there is in any an opinion of
merit, there can be no good works done, because in such persons all things
are done of selse-loue, with respect to their own welfare, and not out of love
to Gods glory: and such works as Note this.
are done out of self-love to merit withal, cannot be good; for though the
substance of the work be good, yet the manner and end of it is naught, and
thus are no good works done in all Popery.


Tim. What then be the conditions of a good work?


Silas. These three: First, that they come from faith, Romans 14, 23. Secondly,
that they be commanded of God in his word. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Thirdly, that they be
referred to Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10, 31.


Tim. For what causes are they to be done?


Silas That God may be glorified, Math. 5, 16. our salvation assured, 2 Pet. 1,
10. our neighbors edified; our faith testified, James 2, 14. our Charity
exercised, James 2, 17. the needy comforted, Phile. 3. the mouth of the wicked
stopped, 1 Pet. 2, 12. the weak strengthened, the strong confirmed, and more
rejoiced.


DIALOGVE V.
Verse 7. That is, those that by patience in well doing seek eternal life, to
them he will render glory, honor, and immortality.


Tim. THere is some difference in reading this text, show what it is, whereupon
it arises, and which reading you do follow?


Sil. There be indeed differing readings of this text: for some read it thus:
To such as by continuance in weldoing seek eternal life, God shall render
glory, and honor, and immortality. Others thus: to them which by patience in
well-doing, seek glory, honor, immortality [ He will render] eternal life;
and (indeed) thus the words stand in the Original, if ye understand the
word [ Render] out of the sixth verse, to supply the sense. But others read
thus: To them which by patience seek eternal life, God [ Will render] the
glory of good works, honor, and immortality.

The cause of this difference, is twofold: First, because some do join the
word [ Render] which is supplied, unto glory, etc. Others, unto eternal life.
Secondly, some do couple [ good workes] with Patience or continuance: others,
pull it thence, and put it after glory; whereas they are severed one from the
other, in verse 10. and so ought to be here. Howsoever, for substance of
matter, it much mattereth not, what reading we choose, because the drift and
intent of them all is one; to teach us who they be, to whom the reward of
everlasting life shall be rendered; namely, to such as by patience continue in
goodness: yet I do follow, the first reading, as carrying a plain sense,
agreeable to the scope of Paul, though with some transposition of the words;
and having diverse good interpreters, as guides unto me of this my choice. The
words do contain two marks of such as shall inherit eternal glory and
honor. One is, that they patiently persevere in doing good: the second is, that
they seek eternal life; this is the butte and end of their desires, not
worldly things, as riches, honor, pleasure; but that life which lasts for
ever and ever, even so long as God himself (who is this life) does last and
endure: of these two marks let us deal with the latter, though it be not
first named in the Text.


Tim. What do ye mean by eternal life, and what is it to seek it?


Silas. By life, is meant the happiness of the Saints in heaven, and it is
called eternal, because there shall be no end of it: also to seek it, is to
feel a want of it, and with great care to desire it, and labor to obtain it.
Seek it for Place, in the assembly of the Saints; for Time, while it may be
found; for Manner, heartily and earnestly.


Tim. What Lesson may be gathered from hence?


Sil. That this is the mark of a godly man, to desire and study above all
things, how to be saved in the day of judgment. This indeed is the desire of
the wicked, every one has a desire to be saved, but in diverse things their
desires do differ from the desires of the godly. First the desire of the godly
is constant, so is not the desire of the wicked, who desire it by fits.
Secondly, the godly desires salvation, that God may be glorified in his
mercies, which comes of grace: the wicked seek their own welfare, because they
would be happy, which comes of nature. Thirdly, the wicked so desire salvation,
as they do not mind the way thither, which is well-doing, or a just and godly
life: the godly in his desires, is lead as well to the way and means, as to
the end and scope.


Tim. Then there is a necessity to do good works, or to line well, seeing this
is the way which conducteth to happiness?


Sil. True, there is so; because God commands them, and appointed them as
the course wherein his children must run toward heaven: but these good
works cannot be done without many difficulties and perils; and therefore, we
have need of patience and perseverance, which is the second mark of him that
shall be heir of heaven.


Tim. What call ye patience?


Sil. It is the grace of God, whereby we are strengthened to endure troubles
for well-doing unto the end.


Tim. Is it requisite that they that seek eternal life, continue to the end in
well-doing?


Silas. It is so, and for many just reasons: as first, that God is constant in
his love toward us, therefore our love and service to him ought to be
constant. Second, is Christ's example, who kept on his course in wel-dooing,
through many afflictions, Heb. 12, 2. Thirdly, eternal life is promised only to
such as continue to the end, Math. 10, 22. Fourthly, eternal death is
threatened unto such as faint and give over, before they have run to the end.
Fifthly, the wicked are constant in il-doing. Sixthly many godly persons have
abid with patience in weldoing, whose steps we must tread in, Heb. 6, 12. to
these may be added Gods commandment.


Tim. Which are the especial things that discourage men in well-doing?


Silas. First, loss of goods. Secondly, danger of life. Thirdly, reuilings and
slanders raised by Satan and wicked men. Lastly, the great labor and pains
that belongs to well-doing.


Tim. How shall Christians arm themselves against these binderances?


Silas By considering these few, and such like things: First, that it is better
to loose the world then to loose our souls. Math. 16. 26. Secondly, that such
as will loose their lives for Christ's sake, shall save it. Thirdly, that it is
a blessed thing to be reviled for righteousness sake. Lastly, that the pains
about godliness will be recompensed by the fruit which follows, and there is
more labor a great deal in committing sin, then in doing good works.


Tim. What is the fruit and reward of godliness, or of a godly life?


Sil. Glory, honor, immortality.


Tim. What do we learn from these words?


Sil. That the godly how infamous soever they be in the world, yet they are
glorious with God, and honorable in his sight; for they shall be placed on his
right hand, and set upon thrones. Secondly, that their glory is immortal and
never withering. Thirdly, that their estate is full of manifold glory, which
the Apostle would teach, by the heaping of sundry words here, as if there were
not words enough to express their happiness: seeing therefore the end of well
doing will be such, we ought with patience to abide and continue in well doing.


Tim. But how shall glory be rendered unto Infants according to their works
which they have not, being unable to do the^? or how can they which repent at
the last hour, have their reward according to patience, and continuance in
well doing, seeing they do not persevere?


Sil. For Infants which be glorified, they are saved by the free election of
GOD, by grace of the covenant, and also by Christ, into whom they are
ingrafted by faith, which would be fruitful in good works, if they did live
till they were men: for true justifying faith can never be without good works,
in such as for years and strength are apt and able to do them, no more then
the Sunue without light, or a good tree without good fruit. Touching such as
be converted at the eleauenth hour, in the hour and moment of death, as the
These upon the Cross was, I say of them that for the time they live after
their conversion their faith will be working, for it is operative and cannot be
idle, because it is lively, and life is active, as was seen in that repentant
These, whose faith brast forth by confession of sin, reprehension of his
neighbor, petition to God, glorification of Christ, and Apology for his
innocence: yea if such as take the life of faith, when they be to leave the
life of nature, might be suffered to continue in this world, they would also
continue in good works. Lastly, Paul speaks here of such as were of full age,
and also might do good works being spared to live, that by well living they
might honor God, and be at length for evermore honored with him.


DIAL. VI.
Verse 8. 9. 10. But unto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth,
and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that does evil: of the Jew
first, and also of the Groecian: but unto every one that does good, shall be
glory, honor, and peace, to the Jew first, and also to the Groecian.


Tim. WHat is the coherence, drift, sum and parts of this Text?


Sil, For coherence, either here is mentioned the other part of distributive
justice, the punishment due to wicked workers, and the reward also of good
works repeated the more to excite and allure men with hope thereof to be
constant in well doing: or else the persons to whom recompense shall be given of
the just judge, as they have been set forth by their qualities, so now by
their nation they are described, either Jews or Grecians; that is, all the
Gentiles which were not subject to Moses law. The drift is to show God to be
righteous in his judgment, because he renders to every one, the due belonging
to the^, whither it be well or ill. The sum is, that howsoever happily there be
not retribution made to every person here in this world, according to their
doing, because the good are often oppressed, and oppressors not only go scot
free, but prosper: yet certainly there will come a day wherein this confusion
and troubled face of things shall be redressed and righted; when every one
shall have as they have done. For the parts, first, there is a description of
the pains due to evil persons, in four words; whereof two (indignation and
wrath) do contain the cause of their punishment; Gods hot displeasure kindled
by sin: the other two tribulation and anguish, note the extreme affliction
of the ungodly, begun here, continued and perfected in hell; elsewhere signified
by death, destruction, gnawing worm, gnashing of teeth, darkness, chains,
(...), etc. Secondly, the reward of the godly is parted into three members;
glory, honor, peace, which is the most quiet and peaceable possession of all
good things in heaven.


Tim. What do ye note in the division of people, into Jews and Graecians?


Sil. Scripture usually divides nations into Jews and Gentiles, or Jews and
Greeks; because the Hebrews held all people beside themselves to be Greeks,
and these accounting all beside themselves to be barbarous; hence the Greeks
are subdivided into Greeks and Barbarians. See Romans 1. 14. 16. Romans 10. 12.
Jews are first named because of their prerogative to be Gods people: also
they excelled others in the knowledge of God; and therefore were more severely
to be punished for their disobeying the truth. Hence it is, that as they were
first for the order and pre-eminence of estate; so they are first placed here
in the order of punishment, for abusing so great dignity and understanding.
Also it is to be observed that here the Apostle begins to wrap the Jews
in the self same reproof with the Gentiles, because he intends directly
and more specially to reprehend them, unto whom therefore easily by little and
little he slideth, turning his speech by name to them alone hereafter at the
verse 17. When he says, Behold thou art called a Jew etc. And in that he would
not spare his own kindred but named them first, he shows himself impartial.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 11. For there is no respect of persons with God.


Tim. HOw is this Text and the verses following joined with the former, and
what is the sum and scope of them?


Sil. He confirms by this sentence, that which before he said of the equal
conditiou of the Jew and Gentile, whom he had matched in punishment; whereas
they seemed to be unequal, for the Jew had the law of Moses (as a great light)
to guide them, so had not the Gentiles, but the small and dim light of
nature: therefore it seems a respect of person to condemn them to equal
pains, which were not equal in the means to keep them from sinning. The
Apostle answers, that howsoever the cause might be unequal, yet God in
distributing pain, was not moved with respect of person: he did not look
unto the country or kindred of the Jew, or of the Gentiles, when he inflicted
punishment upon them: but notwithstanding the difference of country, God did
alike punish the Gentiles which had no written law, and the Jew which had a
law written by Moses; because whosoever does transgress, whither it be
without a law or with a law, they are worthy of death. Having then hitherto
from the 3. verse answered the general pretext of all men, now he bends
himself to take away the more special excuses and shifts (as bucklers against
Gods judgments:) first of the Gentiles, until verse 17, and then of the Jews
to the end of the Chapter.


Tim. How are the persons of evil men described and set forth?


Sil. By these two properties: First they are contentious, such as wilfully
defend errors and strife without cause. Secondly, they obey not the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, which is all one with that which is written in Chap. 1.
ver. 18. and Chap. 2, 4.


Tim. In what causes do contentions appear and break forth?


Sil. In causes civil and religious, in matters of the world, and of God.


Tim. What be the original and first grounds of contention?


Sil. Pride, busy meddling, covetousness, ambition.


Tim. What reasons to dissuade from contention?


Sil. First, it is a fruit of the flesh, Gala. 5. 20. Secondly, it is against
the will of God. Thirdly, it is against nature, reason, and religion. Fourthly,
it brings forth fearful events.


Tim. What may be noted in the other part of this description?


Sil. That there be two Lords, truth and unrighteousness; now of necessity we
must obey one of these two Lords, because there be no other Lords, but Christ
or Satan, truth or unrighteousness.


Tim. Which of these Lords is it best to be servant unto?


Sil. Unto Christ and his truth, because this service brings liberty, wealth,
pleasure, safety, dignity and honor. Prou. 3. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.


Tim. How may we know whether we serve truth or lust?


Sil. First, we are servants unto that which we are obedient unto. Secondly,
our service is known by our love and care; what we like best and take most
care and pains to please, that is our lord.


Tim. But are Gods children wholly freed from unrighteousness?


Sil. No surely, but they are not servants to it; it still abides in them, but
it reigns not over them: it has force and might to draw them aside from the
truth of reason and of faith, but without dominion over them.


Tim. Which lord do the wicked serve?


Sil. Unrighteousness and lust, by which service they gain shame, bitter
grief, horror of conscience, danger of this life, and far more in the life
to come.


Tim. What remains for them in the life to come?


Sil. Tribluation, anguish, wrath and indignation.


Tim. What did we learn out of these words?


Sil. That evil men after they are dead must suffer for sin. Secondly, that
the pains which they must suffer are extreme. Thirdly, that their pains shall
be both very great and sundry or of diverse sorts, as the change of the words
does imply. Lastly, this should serve to keep men from sinning against God:
also to stir up men after they have sinned, unto serious repentance.


Tim. How many things consider we in this Text?


Silas. Three things: First, what is meant by persons and respecting of
persons. Secondly, in what things it may appear that God does not respect
persons. Thirdly, how far forth we are to respect persons without sinning.


Tim. What is meant by persons?


Sil. The outward qualities, as riches, poverty, birth, country, friends: some
of these qualities are of our own election as to be a Captain, a Souldior, a
Magistrate, a Minister. Some put upon us by God, as Country, birth, riches, and
poverty. The meaning then of these words is this, that God is not moved with
any of these qualities to love or to hate, to refuse or to receive any to
favor, no nor yet with any gifts either natural, as wit, memory,
understanding, or gotten by labor, as Learning, Arts, experience.


Tim. But was is not a respecting of persons when all men being alike in Adam,
he chose some to salvation, and refused others?


Sil. It was not for these reasons: First, persons in this phrase of Scripture,
does not signify men and women. Secondly, Gods decree was before either there
were men or women, that is; before they had any being. Thirdly, there must
needs be a rejecting of some, where some be elected. Fourthly, that which moved
him to make this difference, was not any condition or qualities in the parties,
but his good pleasure. Fifthly, the elect are not saved but by the merits of
Christ: the others are not condemned but by the desert of their sins: add
hereunto that God is not tied unto any law, and therefore cannot wrong any or
offend against equity.


Tim. In what things may it appear that God respects no persons?


Sil. In these two things: First, in bestowing his spiritual gifts and
graces, which he gives to poor and mean ones as well as to great and rich
ones, as his effectual calling, faith, repentance. Secondly, in inflicting his
judgments for sin, which he punishes in great and rich ones, as well as in
poor and mean ones.


Tim. What use are we to make hereof?


Sil. That we ought to be like unto God herein, not to respect persons but to
judge according to the cause.


Tim. In how many things are not we to respect persons?


Silas. In four things: First, the Minister in delivering Doctrine, Math. 22,
Thou teach truly and respectest no man's person. Secondly, the Magistrate in
administering justice, Deuteronomy. 16, 19. Thirdly, all Christians in their censure
and judgment of actions good and evil. Fourthly, in having the precious faith
without respect of persons, James, 2, 1.


Tim. But there is some case wherein it is good to respect persons?


Sil. True, as in giving reverence to every man according to his estate and
gifts; examples hereof we have in Abraham toward the Hittites, in Joseph
toward Pharao, in Solomon toward his mother: the reason whereof, is the
authority and guists of our betters, to whom civil reverence is due.


DIALOGVE VIII.
Verse 12. For as many as have finned without the Law, shall perish without the
Law, and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law.


Tim. What is the purpose of the blessed Apostle in this present Text, and how
proceeds he?


Sil. The same as before, to prove the judgment of God in punishing sinners to
be just, and himself to be no accepter of persons, because howsoever the Jews
and Gentiles be vne quall in knowledge, yet he will indifferently punish both,
both being sinners. And here Paul draws near to the particular objections
of Jews and Gentiles, preventing them in that they would plead and lay in
against this equity of Gods distributive Justice: which the Jews thought it
should not take hold on them, because God had graced and adorned them with the
benefit and privilege of the Law, by having whereof they looked not to be
condemned but justified: the Gentiles seeing they wanted the Law, deemed it
hard to be condemned; whereunto he says in this verse, that it shall no whit
help the Jews that they had the Law, north Gentiles that they lacked it; for
notwithstanding this difference both were worthy to perish, seeing both had in
them sin the proper cause of damnation. This is the drift and sum of this
verse, and thus Paul proceeds.


Tim. But why says be of the Gentiles that they are without a Law, as having
no Law?


Silas. This is spoken in comparison: the Gentiles had not the Law so plainly
delivered in writing as the Jews had, yet were they not without a Law, which
he proves afterward by two manner of ways, in the verses 14, 15. the one
external doing some good things, the other internal, the testimony of
Conscience.


Tim. How can they be said to sin, seeing sin it the transgression of the
Law which they were without?


Sil. They did sin by breaking such a Law as was given them, though they
wanted Moses Law. Also they were finners against the Law of Creation, which
when Adam did break, he wrapped himself and all his posterity (even Infants) in
damnation.


Tim. What means he when he says they shall perish?


Silas. That their ignorance of Moses Law should not excuse them from guilt
and punishment of sin", because they shall be judged by that Law of Nature,
against which they sinned.


Tim. What instructions are to be received from hence?


Sil. Two: First, that God gives not the knoledge of his will to all alike.
For the Jews had more knowledge, and the Gentiles had less. Secondly, that
ignorance of Gods word will excuse no man; it will not absolve the Gentiles
from condemnation, because they knew not Moses Law.


Tim. What Reasons to dissuade Christians from Ignorance?


Silas It is a sin, being contrary to the Law. Secondly, it is the cause of
many sins; men do both err and sin, for that they know not the Scriptures.
Thirdly, it is a part of Satan's kingdom, yea the strength thereof. Fourthly,
it makes men like Beasts, like devils.


Tim. What means to obtain knowledge?


Sil. Prayer, Meditation, Reading, Hearing, Conference.


Tim. What is the meaning of that he says [As many as sin in the Law?]


Silas. That is, such as had, and did know the Law of Moses, and yet sinned
against it, should receive sentence of death from it.


Tim. What things may we learn from hence?


Sil. Three very profitable Lessons: First, the law of Moses is not able to
keep from sinning, and to justify such as haueit; for the Law was given to
other purposes. Romans 3, 20.
First, to give knowledge of sin. Secondly, to reveal Romans 4, 15.
the wrath of God against sinners. Thirdly, to be a Schoolemaister unto Christ,
Gal. 3, 24.


Tim. What was the second instruction?


Silas That many which know the Law of God, after their knowledge do still live
in sin, which is a very fearful thing.


Tim. What Reasons have we to live according to our knowledge?


Silas. Very many and great. First, so it is commanded John 13, 17.
in sundry places. Secondly, the end of our knowledge, James 1, 22.
is practice. Thirdly, knowledge without practice, it is John 14, 23.
not only vain, but very hurtful. Fourthly, if we practice Romans 2, 4, 5.
that we know, we are like to Christ and the Saints. Fifthly, we are unlike to
the Reprobates and wicked me^. Sixthly, all Gods benefits and corrections call
upon christians to be obedient to our knowledge. Lastly, it is a token of the
child of God, to be a keeper of the word, 1 John 2, 4, 5.


Tim. What is the third Lesson?


Silas That the Law should judge them that are breakers of it: this should
admonish us, that we do with great reverence and care observe and keep it,
because they that do sin against the Law, it will be a severe Judge against
them.


DIALOGVE IX.
Verse 13, 14. For in the sight of God, the hearers of the Law shall not be
justified, but the doers of the same. For, when the Centiles which have not the
Law, do by Nature the things contained in the Law, they having not a Law, are
a Law unto themselves.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To answer more distinctly the objection which the Gentiles or Jews
might make for themselves. The Jew he might object, that seeing he had the law
of Moses, there was wrong done to him, to match him with the Gentiles, in the
case of sin and damnation. Unto which the Apostle answered; that they being
breakers of the Law, could have no benefit of salvation from the Law, which
saves none but the perfect keepers of it. There is a perfect keeping of the
Law, either by Christ his obedience, imputed to the believer: of this Paul
speaks not yet, till the third and fourth Chapters: or else, suppose any man
by his own strength could fulfill the Law, then should he thereby be
justified; of this, the Apostle here in this place, is to be understood.
Moreover, there is a double Justification; one, in opinion, when men think and
presume they be just, as the Lawyer did that questioned with Christ, Luke 10.
and the Pharisees, Luke 16, 15. Ye are they which justify your selves. The
other, is in truth before God, which the Apostle means here, and says; that
if any in their deeds could answer the perfection of the Law, thereby he
should be absolved and pronounced just, even in Gods sight, which is the true
meaning of the word (Justified) both here and elsewhere, as appears by the
opposition between Perishing and Justifying; as also between condemning and
Justifying, Romans 8, 33. and especially, by that place, in Acts Chapt. 13, 39.
From all things from which ye could not be Justified etc. where the word can
have no other sense, but [ Absolved.] Note further, there is a legal
Justification, and an Evangelical. The latter, is by Christ thorough Faith:
the former, by keeping the law perfectly. For the end of the Law is not
knowledge, but practice to make the creature wholly conformable to the Creator,
therefore it must justify the performer. Of this Justification Legal, Paul
now entreats.


Tim What was the lesson taught from hence?


Silas That the Law absolueth a man, gives righteousness and eternal life to
them, which by their own strength, do perfectly keep the Law, and not to them
which only know and profess it.


Tim. What belongs to the perfect keeping of the Law?


Sil. Three things: First, that all be fulfilled, without failing in one jot.
Secondly, that it be kept all our life long, even to, and even in the last
gasp. Thirdly, that it be kept in perfect manner, with perfect love of God and
our neighbor.


Tim. Does the Law reward with life eternal, those which thus keep it?


Silas It does so, by reason of the covenant which God has made, Do this and
live, Leuit. 18, 5.


Tim. Can any person thus perfectly do the Law?


Sil. None save Adam in his innocence, and the man Christ, all other men
(without exception) break it. The reason whereof, is, because all men being
borne in sin, cannot but in every thing transgress the Law, till they be
sanctified; and after they be sanctified, they can keep the Law, but not
perfectly, because their new birth is imperfect in this life, sin still
striving against grace; whereof it follows, that none can challenge at all
life eternal, by the Law or the works thereof, as they be done by us.


Tim. What is the Objection of the Gentiles?


Sil. They might allege, that they had wrong done them to be condemned, seeing
they wanted the Law of Moses. Unto which objection the Apostle does answer,
that though they lacked Moses law, yet they were not altogether without a Law;
First, because that they did such things as Moses Law required to be done.
Secondly, because their thoughts excusing them in their welldoing, and accusing
them in evil doing, did witness they had a Law, even the Law of Nature,
though not the Law of Moses?


Tim. What is it to do such things as be contained in the Law?


Silas. First, that in matter of Religion, to think there is a God, and that he
ought to be worshipped Secondly, in matters of manners to do good things, as
to relieve the poor, to help the helpless, to speak truth, etc. Thirdly, in
matters of policy, to punish vices forbidden, and to do good things commanded,
by good laws to restrain from evil, and to constrain to good.


Tim. Did the Gentiles all this?


Sil. They did so, as it is manifestly known by their Books and Stories, which
witnesses of many, that they both taught and practiced honesty.


Tim. What lets that they pleased not God?


Silas. Because they did not this out of faith. Secondly, that they did not
refer their doings to Gods glory, but to the pleasing of themselves. Thirdly,
they lacked a pure heart, which is the fountain of al well-doing.


Tim. What is meant thereby, That they are a Law to themselves?


Sil. That they see in themselves by the light of reason, what they should do,
and what they should not do. Their inward conscience, is instead of a Law
commanding virtue, forbidding vice, telling them that God must be honored,
Parents obeyed, their neighbor not hindered.


DIAL. X.
Verse 15. Their Conscience bearing them witness, and their thoughts accusing
one another, or excusing.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this Scripture?


Silas To prove by the internal testimony of their Conscience, that the
Gentiles were not without a Law, as he had before confirmed it by an external
way of their doing some good things.


Tim. What things are to be noted here touching the Conscience?


Silas Two things: First, the Office of the conscience. Secondly, the effects
or actions of the same.


Tim. What is the office of the Conscience?


Silas. To bear witness, therefore it is called [ Conscience] because it
knows with another: it does bear witness first of our estate, wherein our
persons stand with God, that is; whether we are in the favor of God or no, as
Romans 8, 16. The spirit does witness unto our spirits, that we are the sons
of God, Also by the example of Paul, To, 8, 15. and 2 Cor. 5, 5. and of Cain,
Genesis 4.


Tim. But David thought himself cast out of Gods favor, when he was not,
Psalm. 77, 7. So did Job.


Sil. It is true, in time and pang of some grievous temptation, or if the
conscience be feared; also when it is asleep or benumbed, it does fail in
giving testimony of our persons. Secondly, it does bear witness of our life
and actions.


Tim. What is the testimony that the Conscience gives of men's actions?


Sil. Before they are done, it witnesses and admonishes us; or when we shall
do them how good or evil they be. After they are done, it tells us what we have
done, that is; when we are about to do or say any thing, the conscience tells
whether it is good or evil, whether we please or displease God in it. Example
we have hereof in David, who when he was shut up in the Cave with Saul,
David's Conscience told him aforehand, that he should do ill to do violence to
Saul, Sam. 23, 6. Also Joseph's Conscience told him before hand, that he should
do ill to consent to his Mistress, Genesis 39, 9. Also Rebeccahs Conscience did
witness, that it was a good work to preserve her two sons, Genesis 27, 42.


Tim. Does not the Conscience err sometime in giving testimony touching
actions?


Sil. Yes it does, because it is defiled with ignorance and superstition.
Therefore in this case the erring conscience ought to be reformed by the word,
but til it be reformed, it must be followed and obeyed, as appears by Romans
14, 21. 1 Cor. 8, 10.


Tim. What witness does the Conscience hear after the action done?


Silas It certifieth us and witnesses to us what is done, and what is not
done; the reason of this is because there is in the Conscience a power
observing and remembering all that passes from us in thought, word, or deed, as
may appear by the example of Joseph's brethren, also of Judas, and of every
man's experience.


Tim. What be the effects and works of the Conscience?


Sil. To excuse us when we have done well, whereupon arises joy: and to
accuse us when we have done ill, whereupon arises grief and fear; it
accuses us in all things done against Conscience, because it strikes us with
terror and sorrow, but in honest actions which agree with nature it does excuse
us.


Tim. What may be the meaning of that he says, our thoughts accusing or
excusing one another?


Sil. It is not so to be understood, as though the thoughts themselves were at
civil war, striving together one against another, about one and the same
fact or deed: some thoughts accusing it, and on the contrary some other
thoughts excusing it; nor yet it is to be applied unto diverse persons, as that
some thoughts should accuse unbelievers and wicked men which are to be
punished; and other thoughts should excuse believers and godly men who are to
be saved: but it must be meant of the change and turns which our thoughts have
in accusing or excusing our own deeds and words, as they shall fall out to be
well or ill spoken or done, so our thoughts do either acquit them or condemn
them. And this testimony which the Conscience of men bears by accusing or
excusing, according as the things committed are good or evil, it pleases God
to keep and maintain it in every man's heart for two special purposes, not
only that there might be a constant difference between men and beasts, but
also for to be an aid and help unto men, the better to search out our Creator,
to conserve humane society, to leave the unrighteous without all apology and
excuse in the day of the Lords judgment; and namely, to take away all pretense
from Pagans and such as be without the Church, to whom their very Conscience
shall be sufficient to bear witness against them unto their condemnation,
though they never had either Law or Gospel.


Tim. What are we to learn from all this?


Sil. That it behooves us to hearken to the direction of the Conscience.
Secondly, to labor to have our Conscience well rectified. Thirdly, to be much
occupied in purging and cleansing the Conscience, that it may do his Office
well and kindly; this must be by often and narrow search, and unfeigned
confession and forsaking of known sins.


DIAL. XI.
Verse 16. At that day when God shall judge the secrets of men's hearts
according to my Gospel.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To cite all men, both Jews and Gentiles before Gods tribunal seat,
as guilty of his judgment: it concludes his tract touching the righteous
judgment of God in taking revenge of the wicked.


Tim What be the parts of this Text?


Sil. Four; First, that there is a day appointed for he judging of all flesh.
Secondly, the Judge, who is both Sovereign (God) and Deputy (Christ Jesus.)
Thirdly, the things that shall be judged, (the secrets of men.) Lastly, that
this Doctrine is a part and principle of the Gospel, and as certain and sure
as that Paul taught it in the Doctrine which he delivered in his Sermons and
Epistles.


Tim. What may we learn concerning the day of judgment?


Sil. Two things: First, that it is so certain that it will come, that nothing
is or can be more certain; the reasons hereof are these: first, Gods decree
which has appointed it by an unchangeable will. Secondly, the truth of
Scripture, revealing it in most plain and innumerable places. Thirdly, the
evidence of reason demonstrating it, as above, and the fear of our Conscience
for secret sins conuincing us of it.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. Fourfold: First, the summoning of the wicked to repentance, Acts. 17,
30. Secondly, the confirming such in their duties as have repented, 2. Cor. 5,
11. Thirdly, it teaches patience, because there will at length undoubtedly be
an end when the good shall be rewarded. Lastly, Charity toward our brethren,
Romans 14, 13.


Tim. What was the next thing?


Silas. That this day is uncertain to us when it will come, as appears by
the testimony of the Scripture, as Math. 24, where the uncertainty of this day
is set forth by these and such like similitudes, as of a These in the night,
of travail falling upon a woman, of a householder coming from a marriage. God
would have this day unknown to us, to warn all to be watchful, that is; to
live so carefully every day as we would do upon our judgment day, because
every day may be that day for ought we know.


Tim. What hinders the coming of that day?


Silas. Only the accomplishment of the elect, which may be done in a short
space.


Tim. Shall not the Jews be called first?


Silas. So it verily seems, Romans 11, 24, 25, 26, 27. etc. but they are part
of the elect, whose calling may speedily be performed and wrought.


Tim. Who is the Sovereign Judge?


Sil. God, by whose authority the judgment is to be held: first because he
alone sees the secrets of men. Secondly, he alone can open the book of the
Conscience. Thirdly, he alone can raise the dead. Lastly, he alone can execute
the sentence; all which should work great fear of offending him, and
continual care of well-doing, 2. Cor. 5, 7.


Tim. But the Scripture says of Christ, that he shall judge the world as he is
man, Acts 17, 31. how then shall the Saints judge? 1. Cor, 6, 2.


Silas. Christ shall pronounce the sentence, Mat. 25. but the Saints shall
judge as assistants to Christ, and approuers of his sentence. The consideration
whereof should breed terror to the wicked, that he whom they have despised
shall judge them: and matter of comfort to the believers, that their head and
Savior shall be their Judge.


Tim. What shall be judged?


Sil. Secrets of men, by which is meant all inward thoughts conceived in the
heart, all hidden affections seated there, and all outward deeds closely
carried from the knowledge of the world, and done in dark or remote places.


Tim. What should this teach?


Sil. To have a great eye even to our thoughts and affections, that they be
such as shall agree with Gods will. Secondly, to do nothing but that we would
have all the world to know; for God who sees all, and shall judge all, is
greater then the world, and will open all to the world.


Tim. Why is the judgment a part of the Gospel?


Sil. First, because it stirs to repentance which belongs to the gospel.
Secondly, it teaches charity and patience, two parts of the gospel. Thirdly,
it brings perfect deliverance and redemption from all sin and misery; which
is the matter of the gospel: or else the meaning may be, that Christ shall
give sentence according to the doctrine of the gospel already published. John
3. 16. 17. 36.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 17. Behold thou art a Jew, and restest in the law, and gloriest in God,
and know his will: and tryest the things which differ, in that thou art
instructed by the law.


Sil. What is the drift of this Text?


Sil. To convince the Jews as guilty of sin and damnation, as before he had
done by the Gentiles; and so to drive them both to seek their justice, not in
their own works, but in Christ Jesus alone.


Tim. What order does the Apostle keep in this part of his treatise?


Sil. He does these three things. First, he rehearses seven privileges or
benefits of God toward the Jews, to the chief whereof, even to their
Doctors he directs his speech. Secondly, he reprooueth their unthankfulness
in the abuse of these benefits. Thirdly, he answers their objection about
circumcision, and shows which is true circumcision, and which be true Jews,
which be otherwise.


Tim. What was the first benefit which they might pretend for their immunity,
why they should be exempt from the severe judgment of God?


Sil. That they were called Jews, which was an honorable title and noble, as
now it is to be called Christians; but they were not such as they were and
would be called; which shows us, that truth may be severed from titles: and
that glorious names through the wickedness of such as bear them, may become
most odious and infamous.


Tim. What was the second benefit?


Sil. That they had the law and the service of God prescribed them by it; this
benefit appears to be great, by Deuteronomy. 4. 7. 8. And Psalm. 147. 19. 20. But
their abuse about it was, that they rested and contented themselves in the
reading, knowledge and profession of the law, also putting their trust
therein, and proceeded not to practice and obedience, to walk in the statutes
which they understood and professed.


Tim. What was the third benefit?


Sil. That the true God was their God, and made a covenant to take them to be
his people, this was a maruailous great benefit, the profession and dignity of
the covenant, as appears by Deuteronomy. 4. 29. and Psalm. 144, 15. And Paul says
it was their glory: but this was their abuse of this benefit, that they gloried
in God without due desire and care to advance his glory, by godliness of living.


Tim. Tell us what the fourth benefit is?


Sil. It is the knowledge of Gods will; this appears to be a precious
benefit by these reasons. First, because knowledge is a part of Gods image and
of Christ's kingdom. Coloss. 3. 10.
Secondly, it is to the mind, as the eye to the body, Psa. 119. 105
or the Sun to the world. Thirdly, it is of great price, more Math. 7. 22.
worth than all merchandise, Prou 3., 14. Fourthly, it makes one man to excel
another: but herein they abused their knowledge, both for that knowing the
will of GOD they did it not: and also because being severed from love of God
and their neighbor, it made them swell.


Tim. What is the fifth benefit?


Sil. Trial of things which differ: these words, they have another reading;
as thus, Thou allowest of things which are excellent. If we take the first
reading, then it has this sense; that the Jews had such a degree of knowledge
of Gods will, at least in their own persuasion, as they could discern between
good and evil, between truth and errors. Phil. 1. 7. 8. But if we take the
second reading, then the sense will be this; that they by their knowledge, not
only could tell what was good and what was not, but of sundry duties they knew
which was most excellent. This is a benefit of great moment, because in
comparison of two duties, when they come in balance together, it is a very
good thing to know which is to be preferred; for one may commit a great sin in
the doing of good duties, if for a less he neglect a greater, or hinder one
duty by another; as to be collecting for the poor, when they should attend the
word; or to be busy in reading and private prayer, when they should be given
to public devotion.


Tim. Come now unto the sixth privilege spoken of in this Text, and tell what
instruction is that he speaks off? what is meant by instructing?


Sil. That which is by Catechizing, or such as is fit for children, to enter
them into religion, to make them understand the principles thereof.


Tim. What is the manner of Catechizing instruction?


Sil. By questions and answer, as Math. 16. 13. 14. and Acts 8. 30. 31.


Tim. What difference is there between Catechizing and Preaching?


Sil. The one is short, the other is a more large treatise; the one belongs to
weak ones and beginners, the other to all, both strong and weak: the one is
as the laying of a foundation, the other is as a building up to perfection: the
one is redeliuered, the other not.


Tim. How ancient is this exercise?


Sil. Very ancient, practiced before the law by Adam Genesis 4. also 18.
and Abraham; under the law by David; and in the time of the Gospel by Christ
and Paul, as Heb. 6. 1. 2. Math. 16.



Tim. How may it appear that there is a necessity of this duty?


Sil. By the commandment, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. also (...). 6, 4. Secondly, because
this kind of instruction is compared to milk, Heb. 5. 13. and to the laying
of a foundation, Heb. 6. 1. and to the teaching of principles. Thirdly, also by
the resisting which Satan makes to this work. Lastly, because it is an
ordinance of GOD for good to his elect, therefore it is necessary, being a part
of the holy ministry.


Tim. What is the vtility and profit of Catechizing?


Sil. Manifold, first it prepares unto ripeness in knowledge. Secondly, it
enableth to descern truth from error. Thirdly, it fitteth for the receiving of
the communion. Fourthly, it causes Christians to hear sermons more
profitably: as by taking in milk, children are at length made able to bear
strong meat.


DIAL. XIII.
Verses 19. 20. And perswadest thy self, that thou art a guide of the blind, a
light to them that are in darkness: a teacher of the ignorant, an informer of
them that lack discretion.


Tim. WHat was the drift of these words?


Sil. To show the pride and vanity of the 7. Privilege: The chair of Moses,
and an heap of titles.
Jew, even of their chief Doctors, despising all other people, as babes and
idiots, in comparison of themselves, yet they had no sparkle of sound knowledge
in them, but were as bladders full of wind.


Tim. What especial things were learned out of this Text?


Sil. That ignorant and unlearned persons, are likened to the blind, and to
such as be in darkness: for whether by (blind) we understand Gentiles or
vulgar Jews, the unskillful be meant here.


Tim. Whereof did this put us in mind?


Sil. Of sundry and very profitable lessons: first, that ignorant persons see
not their way to heaven, as blind men see not their earthly way. Secondly, as
blind persons are soon misse-led from the way, so are ignorant persons soon
seduced. Thirdly, as we pity the blind, so we are to pity the ignorant.
Fourthly, as we are ready to lead the blind in their way, so we must do
toward the ignorant. Fifthly, as they in darkness and blindnesle are in danger
of taking bodily harm, so are the ignorant in danger of spiritual hurt, by
falling into sin and errors. Sixthly, as the blind have no comfort of the
Sun, so neither the ignorant have any comfort of the word whiles they remain
such.


Tim. What other things were learned out of this text?


Sil. That teachers are called guides and lights, and should be able to
enlighten others; though these meant here by our Apostle, were nothing less
then such in truth, whatsoever boasts they made, delighting to be called
masters, Rabbi, Teachers, Scribes.


Tim. Whereof did this admonish us?


Sil. Of diverse good instructions, as first that there is a necessity of
teachers, as of guides in our journey to heaven. Secondly, that teachers ought
to have more skill in Gods matters then the hearers; as a guide ought more
perfectly to know the way, then the party guided. Thirdly, that hearers ought
to love and recompense their teachers, as trauailers do their guides.
Fourthly, that great is the loss of skillful guides and lights, it is as the
falling of the light and stars from heaven. Lastly, that great is their
unthankfulness, which do abuse their teachers, as if one should abuse his good
guide.


Tim. What other things were noted out of this text?


Sil. The nature of pride, in this that it is said, thouperswadest thy self,
noting to us that they were such in opinion, rather than truth; being puffed
up with the vain persuasion of great knowledge.


Tim. What is that that pride works in men?


Sil. It causes them to be puffed up through the knowledge of Gods word, and
to persuade themselves, to be what indeed they are not. From whence proceeds
these two things, first a contempt of others which have less knowledge.
Secondly, an envying of such as are praised above them, for greater knowledge.


Tim. What remedy for this disease?


Sil. First, to consider that our knowledge is the gift of God. Secondly, to
think that the more knowledge we have, the more we are indebted to GOD, and
have the greater account to make. Thirdly, that others excel us as far both
in knowledge and other gifts, as we can excel our inferiors in knowledge.
Fourthly, that our knowledge is joined with great ignorance, and with many
other wants and deformities. Fistly, that the abuse of our knowledge by pride,
is oftentimes grievously punished of God, with heresy and profane life.
Sixthly, that when our knowledge is through love applied to profit others, it
is much increased through Gods blessing.


Tim. What is meant by the form of knowledge?


Silas. An appearance and show of knowledge, with an opinion, that they could
infuse that knowledge into others.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 21, 22. Thou therefore that teach another, do thou not teach thy
self? Thou that say steal not, do thou steal? Thou that say a man
should not commit adultery, breakest thou wedlock? Thou abhorrest Idols, and
yet committest Sacrilege.


Tim. What is the drift and matter of this Text?


Silas. To show how the Jews abused and reproached the name of God by their
evil life, and were very hypocrites, their manners not being suitable to their
teaching and profession, not doing what they taught others.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Sil. Two: First, a reprehension: Secondly, a confirmation of it by Scripture.


Tim. What is the sum of the reprehension?


Sil. That the Jews by their sins (which they did contrary to their
knowledge) did dishonor God, and therefore were far off from true
righteousness: this reprehension is set down by Interrogation or Question,
the better to affect them with shame, and pierce their dull and hard hearts,
which would hardly be moved with soft and gentle words: as if he should say,
Do thou not blush to neglect thy self, when thou directest others?


Tim. What is the matter of this Reprehension?


Sil. It is either general or particular; generally, he reproves them for
doing such faults as themselves blamed in others: also, for leaving undone such
duties, as they did commend to others.


Tim. What is it to teach others, and not to teach our selves?


Silas. To teach others, is to give others good instruction what to do, and
what to leave undone; and not to teach our selves, is not to follow the same
instruction in our selves, nor to be examples of our own instructions and
lessons.


Tim. How many sorts of men are reproved by this?


Sil. Three sorts: First, such as are merely ignorant, who know so little,
that they can neither teach themselves nor others. Secondly, such as for their
knowledge can and do teach themselves; but for lack of utterance they cannot
instruct others. This is a fault in some Pastors. Thirdly, such as have skill
to teach others, and do it in a good measure, but themselves for lack of
application, have no profit to amendment of their own life: this is the fault
both of evil Pastors and evil professors, and is the thing which is blamed in
this text.


Tim. Is it not of these the Scripture says, that seeing they see not?


Sil. It is so indeed meant of such as have knowledge to see what is good, but
lack grace to make use of it to themselves. These men are great Hypocrites,
and be under fearful judgments, Math. 13, 14. Acts 28, 27. they pull down
with one hand, what they built up with the other.


Tim. What is it that he does particularly reproous in the Jews?


Silas. The breach of the eight commandment, which forbids theft or
stealing, which even their Priests were guilty of, Hos. 4, 8. Math. 23, 13.


Tim. What do ye call Theft?


Sil. Theft (in a proper speech, or according to the common use of the word) is
a secret conueying from other men their goods, without their knowledge or
leave. Of this theft there are two kinds, either it is of persons (that is
called man-stealing,) or of things.


Tim. What are the things that may be stolen?


Silas. They are either holy, profane, or common: to steal holy things it is
Sacrilege, when things appointed to an holy use, are turned to a private use.
Also, the stealing of common or profane things, is either by taking away the
goods of private men, or else by robbing the common treasure.


Tim. Has not theft yet a more large signification and what is it?


Silas. It has so, for theft imports all wrong any way done to others, in
that which by right is due unto them, yea, all desire of other men's substance
is theft; and when theft is thus taken, many other sins will come under it;
as first, all withholding from others things found or committed unto our trust,
is theft. Secondly, when things borrowed are never paid again, or be worse
at the returning, then when they are borrowed. Thirdly, things sold by false
weights or measures. Fourthly, the uttering bad wares instead of good. Fifthly,
the ouer-prizing of our Wares. Sixthly, the buying too cheap of such as are
driven to sell. Lastly, all fraud and deceit in bargaining. Moreover, to keep
back Servants wages, and to fail of doing toward others that duty which by
our place we are bound to do, as in Ministers, Magistrates, Masters, Servants,
etc.


Tim. What do ye call Adultery?


Silas. It is the uncleanness between married persons when they forsake their
own bed. This uncleanness is only named in the Law, because it is the most
common and most odious uncleanness. For the Holy ghost, Pro. 6, 30, 31. does
detest it more the^ theft, as the greater sin, and makes an Adulterer worse
then a thief. Such were the sons of Ely, 1 Samuel 2, 22. and those two false
Prophets, whom the King of Babel burnt, and many Popish Monks, Friars, and
Priests, which cry out in the Pulpit against uncleanness, yet greedily commit it.


Tim. What do ye call Idols?


Sil. Images either of false, or of the true God, even all religious Images
forbidden in the Law.


Tim. How may it appear that it is unlawful to have the Image of the true God?


Silas. First, the Law forbids it expressly, Deu. 4, 16. Secondly, the
Israelites made an Image of Jehovah, and were punished, Exodus 32, 4, 27.
Thirdly, it is a dishonor to God, being immortal and invisible to represent him
by a visible and mortal thing; as they diminish the majesty, so they deprave
the worship of God.


Tim. What else was contained under Idols?


Silas. Any thing whatsoever we love and honor as God. Thus money is an Idol
to the covetous, pleasure to the Epicures, honor to the ambitious, Philip. 3,
19. Col. 3, 5.


Tim. What call ye Sacrilege?


Sil. It is a sin committed about holy things, or things appointed unto an holy
use, as one would say a sacred theft, because things given to superstitious
uses, ought by the Magistrate to be abolished after the example of Josiah?


Tim. What do ye call holy Uses?


Sil. Such as any way belong unto the Service of the true God, as Churches,
Tithes, Communion Table and Cup, Pulpit cloth, Lands, Books, and such like:
the Priests which by covetousness spoiled the Oblations, were culpable of
Sacrilege.


Tim. When is Sacrilege committed about these holy things?


Sil. Either when public persons for private lucre, do convert these things
to their own uses: or when private persons without public authority do
violate them, by applying them to their use. This sacriligeous sin is worse
then theft, for Sacrilege is (as it were) a robbing of God, and a spoiling of
him, as Malachy in his first chapter speaks.


Tim. By what other way may we perceive the heynousnesse of this sin?


Silas. By considering the judgments of God upon such as were guilty of it.
Examples we have in Achan, who stole holy things, and was stoned, Josh. 7, 1.
Ely his sons for Sacrilege, both killed in one day, 1 Samuel 3, 13. Ananias
and Saphirah for this sin, were both suddenly stricken dead.


Tim. What other things were taught here?


Silas. That it is a mark of an Hypocrite to abstain from some gross sins,
and yet to live in other sins as foul. Secondly, to do the same things
which commonly he reproves in others. Thirdly, note that Paul joins Idolatry
and Sacrilege, not as opposites, but as things near of kin. For, every
Idolater is a sacrilegious person, for he does enormously profane the
holiness of God, and wickedly pollute his sacred worship, and rob him of his
due honor.


DIAL. XV.
Verse 23, 24. Thou which gloriest in the Law, by breaking the Law do thou
dishonor God? As it is written, The name of God is evil spoken of amongst
the Gentiles; Or, blasphemed thorough you.


Tim. WHat is the Sum of this Text?


Silas. To show, that the Jews are not righteous by their works, seeing their
works were such as did dishonor God. Secondly, the co nfirmation hereof by
authority of Scripture [ As it is Written.]


Tim. What is it to glory in the Law?


Silas. To take pride and pleasure in the knowledge and profession of the Law.
This is a vain and foolish glorying. When knowledge and professio n is severed
from the practice of the law, it is ridiculous to glory in such knowledge of
the law is not only vain and to no use, but tends to more grievous
condemnation, for he that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes.


Tim. What is it to break or transgress the Law?


Sil. It is a speech borrowed from earthly things, the Law being compared to a
bound or Land mark, because it should keep our heart, and all our thoughts and
affections in due compass.


Tim. How many things are here signified by transgressing the Law?


Sil. Four things: First, to do evil things forbidden in the Law. Secondly, to
leave undone good things commanded in the Law. Thirdly, in the manner of doing
things commanded to fail, and in the end by not doing them from perfect love
unto Gods glory. Fourthly to purpose to continue in the breach and
transgression of the Law.


Tim. How does the breaking of the Law dishonor God?


Silas. Not in respect of God himself, whose honor cannot be increased nor
lessened; but in respect of men By evil living and by giving occasion, they
blasphemed God.
who take occasion from the evil life of Gods people, to speak evil of Gods
word and holy Religion, as if it were a teacher of iniquity, 2 Samuel 12, 14. 1 Timothy 6, 1, 2. Titus 1. 11. 1 Pet. 2, 10. for as evil Children discredit their
Father, so it is a discredit to God, that they which are called his children,
should do evil and live unrighteously. Also in every transgression, there is a
contempt of divine Majesty, directly or indirectly, which is a dishonor to God.


Tim. What should this work in us?


Sil. A wonderful care to avoid all open disobedience to Gods law, because
it does not only offend and displease God, but exceedingly turn to Gods
dishonor: for Gods honor is a greater matter then our own salvation; better
it were that all men were destroyed then God should be dishonored. Again,
men were created unto the honor of God, not to his dishonor. This
consideration has kept many of the servants of God from sinning; for this
cause David would not hurt Saul when he might, because he would not dishonor
God by doing evil: Joseph was kept from incontinency by this reason; Sidrac,
Misech and Abednego were kept from Idolatry: Gods children do remember the end
of their creation, and consider that God will punish such as discredit him.


Tim. What was the other part of this text?


Sil. A confirmation fetched from testimony of Scripture, as out of Esaias 52, 5.
and Ezekiel. 36, 30. Wherein he meets with a secret objection, We mean not to
dishonor God, whose law we teach and proclaim: yes, says Paul, he is
dishonored by your deeds, amongst the nations, as scriptures foretold.


Tim. What is the meaning of these texts?


Sil. They be a prophecy to foretell, that in the days of the Messiah, the
wickedness of the Jews should be such, as should be a great scandal to the
Gentiles, and move them to reproach the name of God, measuring him by the
manners of his people: the Apostle therefore does cite these prophesies, to
strengthen his reprehension, and to stop the mouth of the Jews, which else
would have stood upon their own innocence, and deluded his own affirmation;
whereas now there is no place left for complaining, or starting back.


Tim. What is meant here by the name of God?


Sil. Either God himself, or else his doctrine and religion; because by these,
God and his will are made known to us, as men are known by their names.


Tim. What signifies blasphemy?


Sil. Reproaching, evil speaking, railing, contumely, when ought is taken from
God which is his due, or any undue thing is attributed unto him.


Tim. What were the lessons taught from hence?


Sil. First, that wicked men take occasion from the falts of Gods people, to
speak evil of God himself, and of his holy worship. Secondly, that it is a
grievous thing to prostitute the name of God to be dishonored by his enemies,
and that we are bound to have more care of Gods glory, then our own
happiness. Lastly, that therefore it behooves all Gods people to have a great
care of their conversation, that it be not only upright in the sight of God,
but also honest and unblameable even before men.


DIAL. XVI.
Verses 25. 26. 27. For circumcision verily is profitable if thou do the Law,
but if thou be a transgressour of the Law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision: therefore if the circumcision keep the ordinances of the law,
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision: and shall not
uncircumcision, which is by nature if it keep the law, condemn thee which by
the letter and circumcision art a transgressor of the Law?


Tim. HOw does this text hang upon the former, what coherence has it, with
the preceden^t verses?


Silas. Unto the forenamed pretext of the Jews, who by the dignity of of Moses
law and the covenant thought to be privileged, and that they should not
together with the Gentiles be condemned: he now adds a new excuse from the
prerogative of Circumcision, which was no idle and empty Sacrament but an
effectual seal of that league of grace which God had stricken with his
people: and this Paul denies not, but grants the excellency and efficacy of
this sacred sign, especially on Gods part who gave it as a seal of his free
promise; but on the peoples behalf which did not join obedience with
circumcision, it was of no more profit to them then if their foreskin had
never been cut off. Upon this occasion Paul does put a difference between
that circumcision which is available and heathfull, and that which is not
wholesome, also between a true Jew and one which is counterfeite, in show and
name only; and this is the sum of the verses which follow to the end of this
second Chapter.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To reprove the great folly of the Jews, who being breakers of the law,
yet held themselves righteous and acceptable to God, because they were
circumcised: unto whom the Apostle replieth, that there was no power in
circumcision to make wicked men accepted of God, and therefore a Jew being a
transgressor of the law, was no better then a Gentile that lacked circumcision,
if he were a doer of the law of Nature. Note that he speaks of the
Circumcision as it was in the time of the law, not as it is now, abrogate by
the Gospel, Gal. 5, 2 Timothy What was Circumcision?


Silas. It was a Sacrament of the old Testament, which God gave unto Abraham
for him and his seed. The outward sign of this Sacrament, was the cutting off
the foreskin of the flesh upon the eight day. The thing signified hereby, was
the grace of the Conenant, standing in reconciliation with God, and newness of
life. It consisted of a reciprocal promise, GOD promised pardon and grace, the
people promised faith and obedience, Genesis 17, 1, 2.


Tim. Upon what things or in what respect was this Sacrament profitable to such
as did keep the law by performing moral obedience unto God?


Silas. In these respects: First, it did serve to distinguish Gods people from
al other people. Secondly, it did serve as a Seal to assure them of the
forgiveness of their sins and of Gods favor Thirdly it did admonish them of
their duty, that they must abandon all sinful and wicked desires and
affections, and remain holy to God. Lastly, it was an instrument of the Holy
Ghost, to the mortification of sin.


Tim. What was further taught from this, that he says Circumcision was
profitable?


Sil. Namely to grant and yield unto any, with whom we have to do in causes of
Religion, what is in reason and truth to be yielded.


Tim. What was learned from this, that he says Circumcision profits him that
is a doer of the Law?


Sil. That the fruit and profit of sacraments depends upon the faith and
godliness of the receivers, and not upon the action done and the word spoken;
for sacraments they do not make a wicked man righteous, but he that is already
righteous, they confirm him in his righteousness, and increase graces given:
but as for wicked men, neither sacraments, nor any other external thing can
profit them, whilst they live wickedly without faith and repentance.


Tim. Then sacraments have not grace enclosed in them, as the virtue of healing
is enclosed in the medicine, nor do not regenerate, justify and save men by
the very work done?


Sil. No verily, but all their virtue is from God, who at his good pleasure,
makes them profitable to his children which fear him, and receive them duly,
walking before God, and being upright.


Tim. But sithence none are so upright but that still they be transgressors,
and therefore no keepers of the Law (which implies an exact performance of the
whole Law) therefore the Sacraments cannot bring profit unto any? And then in
vain were they ordained?


Sil. This Text which says (Circumcision is nothing to such as keep not the
Law) speaks of impenitent transgressors, such Hypocrites as do sin and
continue in their sins without any godly grief for their falls, or
confidence in the grace of Christ for remission of their faults; to these
indeed Sacraments bring no benefit at all. Howbeit such as do transgress the
law by infirmity against their own purpose and resolution, being heartsorry
upon their disobedience once espied, groaning with unfeigned sighs for the
offense of God thereby, and endeavoring to arise by repentance; such have fruit
by the holy Sacraments, because they stand to the condition upon which the
force and benefit of the Sacraments do depend. For they keep the Law, tho not
in their own person, yet in Christ in whom they believe, and for whose sake
their daily slips and faults of frailty are not imputed, Christ being made to
the fathfull the end of the Law for righteousness, Romans 10, 4, 5. of which
righteousness, as Circumcision to Abraham and the godly Fathers before Christ,
so Baptism and the Lords Supper since Christ his coming, be seals assuring
unto the godly Believers, their justification with God by faith in Christ.
Whereas to the unfaithful and wicked livers, they are utterly void and of no
force, except it be to seal up their just condemnation, and to be a witness
against them.


Sil. How do you prove that godliness is required in them that shall
profitably receive the Sacraments, and that to ungodly men, they are vain and
of no use?


Tim. By 1 Corinthians 11, 24. the end of their examination, is to find faith
and repentance which wicked persons do want; Also by the example of Judas, and
of Simon Magus, and by infinite testimonies of holy Scripture, namely by this
Text, which unto the promise of grace on Gods behalf, mentions on the
peoples part, the condition of obedience, without which God is not bound to
stand to his promise.


Tim. What is the profit that a godly man takes by the Sacraments if he come
repentantly, and do believe the promises of the Sacrament?


Silas. Manyfold and very great: First, it stirs up and strengthens faith
in the forgiveness of our sins by Christ, and so knitteth us more straightly
unto God the Father by him. Secondly, it kindles our love unto God. Thirdly,
it kindles our love one toward another. Fourthly, by it God mortifieth and
kills our corrupt lusts. Fifthly, it increases hope of heavenly glory in the
faithful. Lastly, it provoke thankfulness and praise to God for all his
free mercies by Christ Jesus.


DIALOGVE XVII.
Verse 28, 29. For he is not a Jew which is one cutward: neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
within, and the Circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter,
whose praise is not of Men, but of God.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this Text?


Sil. To teach who is the true Jew, and what is true Circumcision; and who is
the false Jew, and counterfeit Circumcision.


Tim. What is false Circumcision, and who is a false Jew? Also what is true
Circumcision, and who is a true Jew.


Sil. The false Circumcision is that which is outward only in the flesh and in
the Letter, whose praife is of men. True Circumcision is that which is inward:
also in the heart and in the spirit, whose praise is of God.


Tim. What do ye call outward Circumcision, and a Jew outward?


Silas. That is outward Circumcision, when the foreskin of the flesh is pared
away without any mortification of sin; and he is an outward Jew which is one
by profession only, and before men, without any inward renewing of his mind
by the spirit of God, working Faith and conversion of the heart unto God,
which was the thing promised on the part of the Circumcised.


Tim. Let us hear now more fully the difference between one that is a true
Israelits, and one that is a counterfeit: by consequence of a true Christian
and an Hypocrite.


Sil. The differences are many which I will rehearse in order. First of all, the
true Israelite loves God for himself. The counterfeit loves God for his
benefits; the one loves the word, because it is his word, and the food of his
soul; the other, because of knowledge, which delights him, which is a
natural thing. The one loves Gods Children, because they belong to God; the
other, loves them for some carnal respect, as for profit, credit, kindred.
The true Israelite seeks the praise of God, the false, praise and reputation
of the world: the one desires chiefly to have himself and his doings
approved of God, the other chiefly desires this, that he and his works might
be seen of men. The true Christian looks as much to the manner of doing, as
to the work done, so does not the Hypocrite, he looks to the act only, being
careless of affection. The one does rather desire to be, then to seem to be;
the Hypocrite is quite contrary. The one cleaves to the Lord with purpose of
heart: the other is wavering and unstable. The one is led to good, or to shun
evil, with regard of favor or fear; the other, that he may please God. The
one complains of his infirmity, rather then he will praise his good deeds;
the other, delights to hear of his own good doings. The one says little,
and does much; the other does little, and talks much. The one does cloak
bad actions with good pretenses, so will not the other.


Tim. What further observations and instructions from this Text?


Silas. First, upon this text is grounded the distinction of the inward and
outward Sacrament. Also of the visible and invisible Church. Secondly, that as
every Sacrament Some do receive the Sacrament and the thing: some the Sacrament
and not the thing, and some the thing, and not the Sacrament.
has a Sign and a thing signified: so these two are ever joined in the right
use of the Sacrament: the one taken outwardly by the sense; the other, inwardly
received by the spirit. Lastly, that grace is not tied unto the Sacrament,
which some have without grace; and the benefits promised, the thing of the
Sacrament, is separate from the sign, unto all believers.


CHAP. III.
DIALOGVE I.
Verse 1, 2. 1. What is the preferment of the Jew, or what is the profit of
Circumcision? 2. Much every way because unto them of trust, was committed the
Oracles of God.


Timotheus. IN few words lay down the sum and order of this third Chapter.


Sil. The Apostle still goes on, to prove the Jews to be guilty thorough
sin, of Gods wrath; that whatsoever prerogatives they had on Gods part to
grace them, yet because of their unbelief and other transgressions, they were
no more just before God then the sinful Gentiles, as he confirms by sundry
authorities divine, out of the Prophets and Psalms; whereupon he infers,
that by the works of the Law, none be justified in the sight of God; and so at
last concludes demonstratiuely the maine and principal proposition of this
Epistle, that all elect sinners, be they Jews or Gentiles, are justified
without the works of the Law, by the faith of Christ. Touching the general
parts of this Chapter, they be these three. First, is a confutation of diverse
cauils and calumnious Objections, which the Jews might move on their own
behalf, out of such things as Paul had written, until verse 9. The second,
from the 9. Verse, unto the 21. wherein he both propounds and proves the
quality both of Jew and Gentiles, in the case of sin and damnation. In the
third and last part, he infers, and by unanswerable reasons demonstrateth
this affirmative proposition [ All men be justified by faith,] from verse 21.
till the end of the Chapter.


Tim. What is the drift of this present Text?


Silas. To bring the Jews the better to the sight of their own sins and
wretchedness, by answering such things as they objected for their own
defense. For, it might trouble them (which the Apostle wisely foresaw) to hear
Paul so extenuate Circumcision, and other privileges.


Tim. What is the first Objection, and how does the Apostle answer it?


Sil. The Objection is this: If notwithstanding Circumcision yet the Jew and
Gentile be alike sinners, and miserable; wherein then is the preferment of the
Jew? in what does he excel the Gentile? For, it were absurd and injurious unto
God himself, to equal the Gentile unto the Jew. To which the Apostle so
answeareth, as leaving them equal for guilt of sin, yet he gives to the Jew
his prerogative.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Sil. Two; First, a question in the first verse. Secondly, an answer in the
second verse.


Tim. What learned we out of the Question?


Silas. Three things: First, how hard a thing it is to bring men to yield to
their own conviction and condemnation. Secondly, that men naturally do affect
excellency, to be thought better then others. Thirdly, that such Ceremonies
as men are accustomed to, they cannot abide to have them reproved. And add
this as a fourth, That Preachers must wisely prevent and remove what may be
scrupulous to the weak, or occasion of slander unto the malicious persons.


Tim. What did we learn of the answer?


Silas. The Wisdom of the Apostle, who in reporting the preferment of the
Jews, does not only stand upon the virtues of the Jews, but-onely reckons
such things as were meet, and belonged to God, being his benefits, least they
should be proud. For he does point at many things, in that he says, [ Much
every way] yet mentioned only the Oracles of God, as the chiefest of his
savors, which is signified by the word [ First,] noting not an order, but the
dignity of this privilege, as general, containing the rest; and most
excellent, surpassing the rest.


Tim. Whence did he setch this word [Oracles?]


Silas. From the Gentiles, who use to call the answers which were given by
Apollo at Delphos, by the name of Oracle.


Tim. What did this teach?


Sil. That we should not put Religion in words, when we may use them without
any wrong unto the truth.


Tim. What is meant here by the Oracles of God?


Silas. All the Scriptures of the Old Testament, both Moysaicall and
Prophetical, but especially, the free promises of grace and salvation by
Christ. These Oracles were committed to the Jews, not as another man's thing
laid to pledge, but as their own treasure to be enjoyed for their use, to
instruct and comfort them, if they could have used it well. Howbeit thorough
their own fault, they served not to this end, and so they lost the right of
this prerogative, so as it nothing profited them.


Tim. What instructions were given from hence?


Sil. Three, that to have the word of God amongst us, is the greatest
privilege and savor that God gives to any people, because hereby Gods
counsel for our salvation is revealed; and men are called to the kingdom of
heaven, and to other favors concerning the life to come: therefore we ought to
esteem and love the word above all other things, because God will not let the
contempt of such a precious treasure go without revenge. Secondly, we learn
that it is a sign that God makes high account of that people to whom he
does of trust commit his word, which should work in us great care of
thankfulness to God, with study and an earnest desire of pleasing him.
Thirdly, we learn that the office of the Church toward the word, is to be a
keeper of it, for it is of trust committed to us as a jewel to be kept: the
duty of the Church herein does consist in four particulars. First, to
interpret and give the true sense of the word. Secondly, to sever it from all
false and bastard Scriptures. Thirdly, to propound foundly the doctrine of the
word to the Children of the Church. Fourthly, to preserve the doctrine
vncorrupt, and to punish such as deprave it: and herein the Jews acquitted
themselves well, for they safely kept the scriptures from falsity and corruption
even to this day; and in the days of our Savior, when many other faults both
in manners and doctrine were laid to their charge; yet they were not charged
with deprauing the word.


DIAL. II.
Verse 3, 4. For what though some did not believe, shall their unbelief make
the faith of God of none effect? God forbid.


Tim What then is the sum of this Text?


Sil. An answer to a new objection of the Jews, which was this, that the
Oracles of God were in vain committed to the Jews, and that God did delude
his people with empty promises; seeing many of them did not believe Gods word
and promises: unto which the Apostle answers, that the vnbleefe of men cannot
change the truth of God, seeing it is Gods property to be true, whereas all
men are liars naturally; which constancy of God in his truth, he proves by
testimony of the Psalm 51. 4.


Tim. Expound the words contained in the objection, to make a way thereby unto
some lessons, doctrines and duties?


Sil. These words ( for what though) imply this to depend and follow of the
former, as thus: in the Oracles which GOD gave his people, there passed a
mutual covenant, God on his part promising grace and life, the Jews on their
part promising faith and obedience, though they proved perfidious and
disobedient: why should this derogate from the truth of God? Whereas he
says (some,) this word distinguishes the holy and believing Fathers, from
the multitude of unbelievers: so then albeit the greatest part were perfidious,
and gave no credit to these Oracles which God had left with them, of credit
and trust, to be both preseruers and dispensers of them: yet also there was
still in that people such as were elect and faithful, in respect of whom the
promises were not frustrate and void. By (unbelief) is meant here not only
their not believing the things promised by God in his word, but withal their
rebellion in falling from God and his true worship, unto Idols and vanities:
and by (faith) understand the fidelity of God, or his constancy in keeping his
word and promises, as the Heathen Orator has described faith to be a
constancy and truth, in observing sayings and covenants: and herewith agrees
the notation of the word (fides) quia fit quod dictum est. For this faith to
be of none effect, is as much as to be void and vnsulfilled; as who should
say, shall God be held unconstant and spoiled of his truth, for the infidelity
and perfidiousnesse of men? This introgation has the force of a negation, it
is as if he said: No, it is not so, because whiles many were unbelievers, yet
not a few there were to whom God fulfilled his faith and truth, even to so
many as brought with them the condition of obedience.


Tim. What learned we out of the objection?


Sil. Sundry things, first, all that have Gods Oracles, and hear and read
them, do not believe them; because it is not in themselves, who are all alike
unable to believe, but in Gods purpose, who has ordained some to faith; and
not othersome.


Tim. What is the use of this?


Sil. That such as do believe, should herein acknowledge the free mercies of
God. Secondly, that such as yet do not believe, should earnestly beg it by
prayer, and wait for it with patience, in the constant use of the means, with
all simplicity and diligence.


Tim. What other instruction from hence?


Sil. That the word of God as it stands of letters and sillables, has no
strength to be get faith in men's hearts, because many hear the sound of the
word and yet never believe, nay are thereby more hardened in (...), as the
Jews in Esayes time. Esa. 6. 9.


Tim. Whence had the word this power to beget faith?


Sil. From the ordinance of God appoynting it to such an use. Secondly, from
the spirit of Christ working together with it; the like is to be thought of
the Sacraments, for the elements or the action about them, has not any force
in them to increase faith, but all this depends upon the will of GOD, who at
his good pleasure gives grace when he will, and to whom he will.


Tim. What use was made of this paynt?


Sil. That none ought to rest in the work of hearing or receiving the
mysteries; but must pray that the spirit of Christ may ioyn with his word and
mysterle, to make them effectual for good to us. Secondly, that every one that
means to profit by the word and mysteries, should fit and prepare
themselves, as they are commanded in the word.


Tim. What other things (...) arne we from the objection in the third verse?


Sil. This, though al believe not, yet all which be within the visible Church,
stand bound to believe the word, because there is a mutual covenant between
God and every member of his Church: for God on his part promises his son and
eternal life with him, this is the faith of God: and we for our parts promise
and vow, that we will believe his word, and this is the faith of men. The
faith of God is passiuely, that whereby God is believed: so here, or actiuely,
that whereby we believe God.


Tim. Where unto should this serve?


Sil. As a weapon to fight against our natural distrust and unbelief,
considering that we have vowed against this.


Tim. What are we taught from this second part, which is the answer?


Silas: Diverse Lessons: First this speech [ God forbid,] it being a word of
detestation, to show how he does abhor the thing objected, should not be used
in vain and childish matters (as most commonly it is) but in grave and serious
business, and when the heart is affected. Secondly, the unbelief of men
cannot frustrate and make void Gods promises, because howsoever some remain
unbelievers, yet others which do believe, they feel the effects of Gods
promises?


Tim. What follows of this?


Sil. Two things, first that the blindness and contumacy of some hearers, must
not discourage the ministers in their function. Secondly, that the people
should not refrain from holy things for the wickeds sake; because there will
always be such, as to whom Gods word and ordinances will be offered in
vain: yet they shall not go without a blessing to the humble and contrite
sinners.


DIAL. III.
Verse 4. Yea, let God be true and every man a liar, as it is written, that
thou may be Justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art Judged.


Tim. WHat is the drift and purpose of this Text?


Silas. It does set forth and extol the constancy of God in keeping his
word. Secondly, he does confirm that which he had said, concerning the truth
of God by the authority of Scripture, which he fetched from Psalm 51, 4, 5.


Tim. How is the truth and constancy of God set forth?


Sil. By the contrary, that is; by the vanity and falsehood of men who are
liars. Secondly, by the authority of Scripture, out of the Psalm 51, ( As it is
written.)


Tim. In what sense is God said to be true?


Sil. First, because he is most faithful in his word. Secondly, being the
Author of all truth in his Creatures. Thirdly, infinitely hating all lies and
falsehood in others.


Tim. Yea, but the good Angels are also endued with truth, and so are righteous
men.


Silas. It is so, but God is true essentially, immutably, most perfectly, and
infinitely: which truth he does make appear first in his promises of mercies:
Secondly, in his threatenings of judgments. Gods promises be true in a
threefold respect. First, of God who cannot lie. Secondly, of themselves,
being al infallible truths. Thirdly, of the believers, who obtain them.


Tim. Yet he has promised sundry mercies which he did never perform, and
threatened many judgments which never came to pass.


Silas. Some of Gods promises are of things absolutely necessary to Salvation,
these are most firm, as forgiveness of sins, the Holy Ghost, etc. Some of
his promises are belonging to the welfare of this life; as health, liberty,
prosperity, these are made with exception of the Cross, and under condition of
obedience. As for his threatenings which have not taken place, as to Eezekiah,
and Jonas against Nineue, they are made with exception of repentance, either
expressed or understood, which being performed the evil was thereby removed;
as God purposed and meant, so declared and manifested by the event.


Tim. What duties are here taught us?


Sil. Sundry things: First, we must endeavor to be like unto God in this
property of his truth, being true as he is true. Truth is a part of his Image,
which we must bear and express in our lives. Secondly, the truth of God is a
good ground of our hope, that his promises shall be accomplished unto us,
whatsoever tentations happen, yet we may still trust. Thirdly, when we hear
Gods promises and his threatenings, we must assure our selves that they will
come to pass in their time, because he is true who pronounces them, who
cannot deceive nor be deceived. Fourthly, it reproves two sorts of persons,
the one sort which say they do believe the promises, and yet fear not at all
his threatenings; the other which doubt of his promises, yet believe his
threatenings, it being the same true God who is Author of both.


Tim. In what sense is it said that all men are liars?


Sil. That naturally as they are men, and unregenerate by the spirit, they are
liars, not only for the most part, but one and all. Secondly, men that are
regenerate, are still subject to lying, and do sometimes fall into that sin,
as did Abraham, and Rebacca with her son Jacob.


Tim. In what does it appear, that all men naturally are liars?


Sil. First, in their inconstancy and often change of their purposes. Secondly,
in speaking otherwise then they think. Thirdly, in doing toward men otherwise
then they speak and promise. Fourthly, in breaking vows and Covenants made to
God. Lastly, in broaching of lies in Doctrine, and in an aptness to receive
them, being prone to errors by corruption, as the water to run downward.


Tim. What use was made of this point?


Sil. That no lie may be spoken upon any pretense though it do no harm, yea
though it do good, because it is contrary to Gods nature, and no evil is to
be done that good may come of it. Secondly, that all men must mistrust
themselves and keep watch over themselves, being ready to slip into this
vanity of lying. Thirdly, that we be willing to see and confess this our
infirmity, and that prayer be made to God to change us and deliver us from
deceitefull hearts and lying tongues, saying, Lord correct our lying hearts,
and direct us in truth. Fourthly, that all men ought to be humbled for their
failing in this fault, and crave pardon of God through Christ: for as none can
say he is free from lies, so God is ready to pardon repentant persons.


Tim. What is the Sum of this Scripture, which the Apostle fetches out of the
51. Psalm?


Silas. That God will be known to be just both in his words and doings,
whatsoever men do deem and judge of him.


Tim. What Sayings does he mean, whether his words of wrath and rebuke, or
his words of promise and mercy?


Sil. Though God be most true, both in severe threatenings and sweet promises;
yet there he means the word of promise; and this made the Prophet to break
out into the commendation of Gods truth, even the consideration of his own
falsehood, and perfidious dealing with God in his gross sins, being compared
with the mercy and faithfulness of God, in pardoning such a treacherous
wretch, according to his promise. This also made the Prophet David to confess
so frankely his crimes against himself, even to this very end, that he might
the better manifest the exceeding constancy of God, who instead of destroying
him for his foul fault, did pardon and forgive his sin for his promise sake.
And note that to be justified here, can signify no other, then to be accounted
just, or absolved from injustice, and not to infuse the habit of Justice.


Tim. How did the Apostle Paul fit this to his purpose?


Silas. Very well; for if the perfidie and unbelief of men do serve for the
better declaration of his truth, in forgiving their iniquities (as in this
example of David,) then it is certain which the Apostle faith; That man's
unbelief does not make the truth of God to be void: which remains true,
notwithstanding men be Liars.


Tim. What is meant here by judgment?


Silas The chastisement of God for sin, as in 1 Cor. 11, 32. 1 Pet. 4, 17.


Tim. Now ye have expounded the words, tell what be the parts of this sentence?


Silas. Two: First, that God is just or true in his promises. Secondly, that he
is just in his corrections: true, because he truly inflicteth threatened evils,
though he be patient: just, because he inflicteth due pain.


Tim. What learned we out of this former part?


Silas That the sins which the elect fall into, though they deserve
destruction, yet they serve to set forth and declare how merciful and true God
is in his covenant. For as in the days of Christ, many fell into sundry
strange diseases, not only or chiefly for their punishment, but that he might
have occasion to show forth his power; so in all times some fall into gross
sins, to the end, God may have occasion to show and utter unto his greater
glory and praise, his constant love and truth toward his. Even as a kind and
wise father, also a good and godly Prince, make their clemencies the more
famous, by pardoning some grievous faults of their Subjects or Children.
Example hereof, we have in Paul, whose blasphemy ministered unto God occasion
to express his unspeakable long suffering and kindness, 1. Tim. 1, 12. God
would leave David and Paul, and many others to fall, not to kill them, but to
make his grace more illustrious.


Tim. What were we taught from hence for our use?


Sil. Sundry things. First, this let us see the wonderful wisdom of God, who
makes us to know that he can draw good out of evil. Secondly, it must serve
to keep such from despair of pardon, as have offended most grievously.
Thirdly it should make men wary how they easily offend such a gracious God.


Tim. In the other part of this sentence the wordt of Paul disagree from the
words of David, who speaks thus, that thou may be pure when thou iudgest:
reconcile them.


Tim. They disagree in show, but not in sense; because if God be pure in all
his corrections of men for sin, it must needs follow that he will overcome,
and have the upper hand, whenever me^ presume to judge or censure him and his
doings.


Tim. What is our Lesson from hence?


Silas. That the chastisement of sinners is most just, whatsoever men think or
speak. The reason whereof is, because God (being Judge) can do no wrong.
Secondly, because he corrects not without a just cause. Thirdly, his
corrections are ever less then men's faults. Fourthly, he corrects not so
often as men sin; nay, not one stripe for a thousand faults.


Tim. What use of this?


Sil. It teaches silence and patience under the cross, whether our selves or
others be corrected; because we cannot be discontent with our afflictions, but
that we must control the Justice of God.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 5, 6. But if our unrighteousness sets forth (or commends) the
righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous which takes
Vengeance? I speak after the manner of men, God forbid. For how then shall God
judge the World?


Tim. What is the drift of these words?


Silas. To answer a new objection of the Jews, arising from the former
Doctrine.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Sil. Two: First, an objection. Secondly, a resolution or answer.


Tim. In what Words is the Objection contained, and what be the parts of it?


Silas. It is contained in these words: If our unrighteousness do commend the
righteousness of God, what shall we say then? is God unrighteous which
punishes? This objection has two parts, to wit; an antecedent, and a
consequent. The antecedent was this; If our unrighteousness does commend Gods
righteousness; (this was Paul's Doctrine before) upon which antecedent was
gathered this consequent (by some cauillers) that therefore God is unjust if he
punish us (this was their own.)


Tim. Now put the whole Objection together.


Sil. It is thus: If man's unrighteousness do commend and advance Gods
righteousness, then God if he punish our sins, shall show himself unjust
to punish us, for that thereby his glory is increased: but it appears in the
former example of David, that Gods righteousness is made more commendable by
man's sin, in that for his promise sake, he would pardon and save him whom he
might justly have destroyed: therefore God is unjust if he punish. This is the
whole Objection.


Tim. Now that ye have laid forth the Objection, tell us the meaning of the
words: and first, what is meant by unrighteousness.


Silas. That which before in the third verse he called unbelief, and in the
7. verse a Lie.


Tim. Wherefore is unbelief called unrighteousness?


Silas. For two causes: First, because unbelief does rob God of the glory of
his truth, power, and mercy; as if he meant not to keep promise, or could
not, or would not, which is a very unrighteous part toward God. Secondly,
because unbelief is the spring and root of all unrighteousness and sins
which be in the world; as Faith is the root of all duties and virtues.


Tim. What was learned from hence?


Sil. That as we loath injustice, and would not deal unrighteously, so we
should abhor unbelief, and resist presently and mightily all motions of it,
because every doubting thought, is a wrong and Injustice unto God.


Tim. What is meant by righteousness?


Sil. That which before is called the faith of God, and afterward the truth
and verity of God.


Tim. Why is his fidelity or truth called righteousness?


Silas. Because it is a just thing with God to keep his word, 1 John 1, 7. a
principal part of righteousness to fulfill his promise.


Tim. What is meant here by commending?


Silas. It is put here not only for practice, but for confirming or
establishing, as afterward in the fifth chapter, God commends his love, that
is; confirms his love.


Tim. How is this true, that man's unbelief does confirm Gods truth, and make
it more glorious?


Silas. This is not in the Nature of unbelief, which in it self properly does
obscure Gods glory, rather then confirm it: but Accidentally, as the
uprightness of a Sins not (...) but per accidens, are causes of Gods glory.
Judge appears in condemning a Malefactor, yet no thanks to the Malefactor:
even so, whiles God does forgive perfidious sinners, it happens by his own
goodness and favor, that thus his truth is more renowned and established, it
is no thanks to sin, whose nature is to di (...) God; from whence, malicious
men did collect this bad consequence, that seeing his goodness and truth was
set forth by man's sin, therefore God could not justly punish sin.


Tim. Wherein was this Consequence and Collection faulty?


Sil. Herein, because that unbelief and sin being of it self filthy and
worthy of blame, did dishonor God, and thereby deserved punishment: and
whereas God was glorified by sin, that came of his own free mercy, not at
all through sin.


Tim. What was taught from hence?


Silas. First, that the truth is often wrested to a wrong end by corrupt minded
men, who of true premises gather false conclusions: which being done to Paul's
Doctrine, no marvel if the like be offered to other Ministers. Secondly, it
is the nature of wicked men, to promise to themselves freedom of punishment
for their sin: they would be glad after sin to go scot-free, because they
would sin more boldly. Thirdly it is a sign of a great degree in wickedness,
when men had rather have God charged for unjust, then themselves to be found
culpable.


Tim. But why is punishment called wrath?


Sil. Because it proceeds from God, being wrathful and angry with sin.


Tim. What was taught from hence?


Sil. That all punishments be so many tokens of Gods wrath. Secondly, that
sin is to be avoided as a fearful thing, seeing it does provoke God to
wrath, whose wrath is more heavy then any mountain.


Tim. What was considered in Paul's answer?


Sil. Three things, the first is an apology in these words, I speak as a man.


Tim. What was the meaning of these words?


Sil. Thus much, that the former objection did not come from himself, but was
the speech of some carnal man, which did judge amiss of Gods justice: in
their person he speaks, not in his own.


Tim. What was taught from hence?


Sil. That whenever we open our mouths against the truth of God, then we
show our selves to be but men, and led by the wisdom of a man.


Tim. What was the second thing considered?


Sil. A denial of the collection, with a protestation (God forbid) as who
should say, far be it from me, or any other to teach or to think God unjust
in punishing.


Tim. What was learned by this?


Sil. That we must have every thing in abomination which is uttered contrary
to Gods glory, which ought to be so precious and dear, as we should not endure
in our selves the least thought, or in others the least word against it.


Tim. What is the third part of the answer?


Sil. An argument to prove his denial, taken from the proper office of GOD;
which is, to be judge of all the world. This argument is thus framed from
hence: If God be unjust in punishing, then he cannot be the judge of the world;
but it is his office to judge the world; therefore he is not unjust, but they
rather wicked which dare so charge him.


Tim. Wherein does God declare himself to be judge?


Sil. In two things, first in the government of the world which he rules with
great equity. Secondly, in the execution of the last day, when as supreme judge
he shall render to every man according to his works.


Tim. What was gathered from hence for our instruction?


Sil. First, whatsoever punishment is inflicted upon sinners, either here in
this world or in the world to come, it is most just because the judge (who is
justice it self) does it.


Tim. Whereunto serves this?


Sil. First, this serves to stop the mouth of all wicked men; for howsoever
they may be discontent and murmr, yet God can do no injury to any.
Secondly, to teach Gods children contentment and patience in all adversities
which befall them, sithence they proceed from a righteous judge. Thirdly, it
admonishes all men in all places, at all times to live godlily and honestly,
because they are ever in the eye of their judge; now he must be impudent and
desperate, which will offend before the judge. Lastly, it instructs all
judges and rulers, and whosoever have any kind of power and authority over
others, to follow this great judge of the world in doing justly, whatsoever
they do to their inferiors by way of correction or reward. For following him
as their pattern, they are sure to have and find him for their patron and
shield in the evil day, when most need is of his favor and help.


DIAL. V.
Verses 7, 8. For if the truth of God have more abounded through my lie unto
his glory, why am I yet condemned as a sinner? and as we are blamed, and as
some affirm that we say, why do we not e-uill, that good may come of it?
whose damnation is just.


Tim. WWhat is the drift of this text?


Sil. To confute and answer a wicked and lewd slander objected against his
doctrine; which was, that the truth of God, through men's lie and unbelief,
does more abound to his glory; this was his doctrine which we have learned
before how to understand it.


Tim. What is the slander, and how does the Apostle answer it?


Sil. The slander was, that Paul should affirm that men may do evil that
good may come of it, which flander the Apostle answers; First denying the
slander, and secondly he threatens the judgment of God to the slanderer.


Tim. What is it that the Apostle calls the truth of God?


Sil. His fidelity and constancy in his promises, when he makes good indeed,
that which he has spoken with his mouth.


Tim. What does this offer unto us?


Sil. A ground of our hope, and an example for our imitation; for God who is
most true cannot deceive us, so as we may have hope in him; also we must
strive to be like him in truth.


Tim. What is here meant by a lie?


Sil. Not a word spoken untruly or with purpose to deceive, but some act or
deed wherein a man does deceive, or violate his faith and much plight to God:
for we are to know, that a lie may be committed sundry ways. First in
doctrine, as they that taught justification by works of the law, Gala. 3.
Secondly in civil judgment, as they which pronounced false witness against
Naboth and Christ. Thirdly, in gesture and countenance, as in Ioab, Cayne and
Judas. Fourthly, in words and common speeches, either ieastingly, officiously,
or hurtfully. Fifthly, in action of life, as when a man has made promise to God
to believe and practice his word, and yet otherwise lives in unbelief and
disobedience; this is here and elsewhere called a lie, as 1 Iohu 2. 5. 6.


Tim. What was our instruction from hence?


Sil. That we should labor to live as we profesle, least we be accounted
liars to God, to his Church, to our selves, and in our own consciences.


Tim. Show us now how our lie does turn to Gods glory?


Sil. As sin profits Gods children, so it turns to his own glory; to
wit, by accident (as before is said:) for it is not in the nature of sin,
which being a filthy thing, is both against Gods glory and his childrens good,
but it is of GODS mercy that it turns to his praise and their commodity,
whiles they become more wary after some sin, and Gods goodness more famous
and renowned.


Tim. What other thing were we taught out of this verse?


Sil. Two things: first in that the Apostle propounds the slander in the
person of an uncertain man; it teaches us that we must conceal the name of
offenders, when Prou. 22. 1. Eccles. 3. 7.
there is no cause to utter them; because the credit of other men must be
dear to us. Secondly, that self-love makes sinners seek all shifts to shun
the condemnation of their sins; nay the very imputation of sin, they would
not be so much as sinners.


Tim. What learn we from the beginning of the eight verse? (and as we are
blamed etc.) and from therest of the verses?


Sil. First, that the doctrine of the Apostle could not escape the blame and
slander of evil tongues. Secondly, slanders cast out against the Doctrine of
the Ministers, does hurt both the name of the Minister, and the faith of the
flock. Thirdly, that no evil fault and crime may be done to procure any
good; for a good pretext, or a good Sin is not eligible.
intent, nay a good event of an evil action, cannot make that action good that
is ever evil, which was evil from the beginning.


Tim. Whom does this reprove?


Sil. Three sorts of men, first the Papists who cover their own blind
devotion, with the cloak of good intents. Secondly, blind Protestants, which
do evil things upon pretense of good events, that be like to follow and
ensue. Thirdly, (...) worldlinges, who blame Gods children, because they will
not do some little evil, to compass some great good; which is directly
against the rule of our Apostle, that the least evil of fault or crime, is not
to be done, to gain never so much good.


Tim. What learn we from the last part of this text [Whose damnation is just?]


Silas. Two things: First, they which slander the Doctrine of the Ministers,
shall not escape the righteous punishment of God. Secondly, such as wilfully do
speak evil against the truth, must not be answered with many words, but turned
over to the Justice of God. For, if men once come to this pass, to be
cauillers against the known truth, there is little hope of them, their
judgment is perverted, and their heart filled with pride and Math. 7.
obstinacy, therefore to be avoided as Dogs or Swine.


DIAL. VI.
Verse 9, 10. What then, are we better then they? No, in no wise. For we have
before accused both Jew and Gentile, that they are all under sin, as it is
written, There is none righteous, no not one.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To prove all men, whether Jew or Gentile to be alike sinners, by the
testimony of Scripture. The words have first an Objection in the person of the
Jews: Secondly, the answer of Paul, which takes from them occasion of glorying
too much in their Ancestors.


Tim. What learn we hereby, that Paul puts himself in the same rank of
sinners?


Silas. The wisdom that ought to be in Teachers, by all means to mollify
their reprehension of sinners, and namely by taking in themselves, when they
may do it with truth. Secondly, that there is amongst men, a communion or
incorporation of sin.


Tim. Is not this contrary to the first verse, where he says, the Jews were
better then the Gentiles? And now he makes them both equal, Jew no better then
Gentile?


Tim. No, for there he means, that the Jews were better, in respect of God
and his benefits upon them; here he makes them equal in respect of natural
corruption; being alike sinners by nature, the Jews had a preferment of
favor, to be Gods peculiar people, to have his Law and Prophets: but
concerning their manner of justification before God (by faith not by works) it
was all one to Jew and Gentiles, all being sinners.


Tim. What did he mean by all being under sin?


Silas. That all men are under the guilt and punishment of sin, which is a
matter of such danger, as it were better to have the whole weight of the world
upon us, then to be under the burden of one sin, because the wrath of God
(which is the heauiest thing in all the world) does hang and lie upon sin and
sinners for ever. Under which condition all men without exception (that are but
mere men) do lie, John 1, 8.


Tim. Whereof does this admonish us?


Sil. First, of the miserable condition of al mankind through sin. Secondly,
it stirs up our minds to think upon, and look after a Savior. Thirdly,
it does teach us to reprove others with compassion, considering our selves be
sinners, and in the same case and condemnation, Gal. 6, 1.


Tim. How does he prove the guilt and condemnation of all men?


Silas. By authority of Scripture, Psalm. 14, 3.


Tim. What learn we from this?


Silas. That al Divine truth must be proved by Scripture, because the
Conscience is not persuaded of any saving truth till it hear God speak, who
now does not speak to us, but in his word only: Secondly, he speaks to
his Church in Scripture only, and his voice alone is sufficient to persuade
all truth. For the word of God is perfect, Psalm. 19, 7.


Tim. From what Scripture does he fetch his first Authority?


Sil. From Psalm. 14, 3. There is none rigtheous, no not one. In these words all
men be comprehended, as it appears by the universal particle [ None.] Also
by doubling the denial, [ No not one.] That is, none at all, one or other.


Tim. But were not Adam and the Man Christ righteous?


Silas. They were so: but Christ was more then a man, and Adam was righteous
before his fall. This sentence must be understood of mere men, such as they be
since the fall of Adam; as for David, Job, Zachary, with other righteous men,
they are indeed called righteous, None righteous ex natura.
but it was with imperfect righteousness inherent, or imputed to their Faith;
or by comparison, as in Genesis 6, 9.


Tim. What is meant here then by righteousness?


Silas. One that is perfectly conformed to the will of God in all his thoughts,
words, and works, without any fault or defect. Of this sort of men, there is
not one Some men be counted righteous ex gratia.
to be found in all the stock of Adam. The reason is, because al men are
conceived in sin; and after their new birth, they have sin still dwelling
in them, Romans 7, verse 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, etc.


Tim. But it is only men's actions that are not righteous, the persons of the
elect are always righteous.


Silas. This Text speaks of persons (no man:) again if persons be righteous,
then the actions are not, nor cannot be unrighteous.


Tim. What follows of this?


Silas. That all have need of the righteousness of Christ apprehended by
faith, that they may stand just before Gods tribunal seat, seeing all and
every one be in their own persons destitute of righteousness, nay full of
unrighteousness.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 11, 12. There is none that understands, there is none that seeks
God, they are all gone out of the way, they have been made altogether
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one.


Tim. What is the drift of these Scriptures?


Silas. To condemn all mankind of sin, and therefore void of true
righteousness, wanting Christ who alone is the justice of sinners.


Tim. Wherein does the corruption of sin appear?


Silas. First, in the understanding by ignorance. Secondly, in the affection,
by frowardness. Thirdly, in the actions, by doing evil, and leaving good
undone. Or thus: he accuses the Jews, first of injustice: Secondly, of
blindness: Thirdly, of falling away: Fourthly, of deceit: Fifthly, of cursing:
Sixthly, of cruelty: Seventhly, of discord: Eighthly, of profaneness.


Tim. Why does he say, That all men are without understanding?


Silas. Because all men naturally do lack the true knowledge of God to
Salvation, even as blind men, who for lack of eyes see hot the Sun, though
it shine never so bright: and note that Paul sets down by negation, what
the Psalmist spoke affirmatively, keeping the sense though not the words, by
his Apostolic authority.


Tim. What was observed here?


Sil. The policy of Satan, doing to all men as the Ravens do to the Lambs,
whose eyes they first pick out, when they will devour them. Secondly, the
misery of man, being in his most noble part (that is his understanding) wounded
and spoiled, so as he perceives not the things of God, nor can do. 1, Cor. 3,
14.


Tim. Why does he begin with the understanding?


Sil. Because on this depends the whole life, which cannot be but evil,
when the mind is naught, for ignorance is the mother both of error, [ Ye
err not knowing the Scriptures:] and of profaneness, as it is written, Ephe.
4, 18.


Tim. What learn we from hence?


Sil. First, to be humbled for our ignorance. Secondly, to pity others that
remain still in ignorance, being ready to instruct them, and to pray for
opening their eyes. Thirdly, to thank God for sound knowledge if we have any.
Fourthly, to pray to God for an understanding heart, for we have it not by
natural instinct.


Tim. Why does he say (none seeks God) seeing there is none but seeks God?
for the Heathens and Pagans acknowledge a God, and give a worship to God.


Sil. None seek him aright, and as he ought to be sought, nor can do while
they live in sin: for men in seeking God, fail in many things; as first,
men seek him not for himself. Secondly, they seek him not alone, but other
things with him. Thirdly, they seek other things before him, as worldings do.
Fourthly, they seek him coldly or carelessly. Fifthly, they seek him
inconstantly example in Judas and Demas. Sixthly, they seek him not in his
word, as Heretics do. Seauenthly, they seek him not in all his word, as
Hypoerites do. Lastly, they seek him not seasonably and timely, as profane
impenitent sinners do, have no care to depend upon Gods word, but follow their
own lusts and fashions of this world. Reuelat. 12, 2.


Tim. What is this that he says, All are unprofitable?


Sil. In respect of God, or any goodness, men are of no use no more then froth
or rotten things, which men cast out for their unprofitableness. In this
respect, the holy Ghost in Scripture, does compare unregenerate men to thorns
and thistles: as also, they are compared to chafe and other vile things,
wherein yet there is some profit: but men are altogether unprofitable. Also
they are compared to clouds without water, trees withered without fruit, Jude
12. cut off from God, as branches from the Vine, John 15, 4, 5. 7.


Tim. What are we to note herein?


Silas. The great Ruin brought upon us by Adam, that a creature so excellent
by Creation, should be fruitless. Secondly, that great grace given unto us by
Christ, in whom the elect be restored; in the one, there is matter of
humiliation, and of glory and joy in the other.


Tim. Why does he say, that [they are all out of the way?]


Silas. Because they are all departed from the commandments of God, which are
the ways wherein we are to walk toward Heaven: even as Sheep straying
from the foulde, and as wayfaring men loosing their way, Esaias 53, 6. running
into the broad way that leads and brings us unto everlasting destruction.


Tim. What was the use of this?


Sil. To show that Repentance is needful for all, seeing all are as lost
Sheep, or as men which have lost their way.


Tim. What is the meaning of these Words, [There is none that does good no not
one?] In the original it is, None unto one, and therefore corrupt is that
gloss, which made this the sense, None saving one, to wit, Christ.


Sil. That naturally all men are unkind and discourteous, and void of
humanity: example hereof, we have in the Jew to the Samaritan; also, that of
the Edomites to Israel in Obadiah. Obad. 12, 13, 14, 15.



Tim. But the Barbarians showed kindness to Paul, Acts 28.


Silas. God so disposed of their hearts for the good of his Servant.


Tim. Are all men alike unkind?


Silas. All men would show themselves unkind to others more or less, if they
were not restrained: but if there be any true kindness and desire of doing
good to others, it is to be ascribed to grace, changing mightily the heart, and
of fierce making it courteous and loving, so as if any perform any good, it is
of God, and not of themselves; and what is done by light of nature, it was
far off from being a good work, because it was not done as it ought.


DIAL. VIII.
Verse 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their
tongues they have deceived, the poison of Aspes is under their Lips, whose
mouth is full of bitterness and cursing: their feet are swifo to shed blood,
anguish and calamity is in their way: and the way of peace they have not known.
There is no fear of God before their eyes.


Tim. What means he by this when he says, [Their throat is an open
Sepulcher?]


Sil. It does (...) us, that the speeches of Natural Psalm. 5. 9.
unregenerate men, are unsavory, rotten, and hurtful to others: for, as a
Sepulcher does send out noisome savors and filthy smelles: so evil men do
viter rotten and filthy words. Secondly, as a sepulcher does consume and
devour bodies cast into (...): so wicked men do with their cruel words
destroy others, they are like a gulf to devout men. Lastly, as a sepulcher
having devoured many corpses, is still ready to consume more, being never
satiate; Also says Origin, Vsus sce lerum verecundiam (...).
so wicked men having ouerthrown many with their words do proccede still in
their outrage, seeking whom they may destroy.


Tim. What is the virtue contrary to this?


Sil. To use our tongues to honest, loving, and wise talk, which may do good
to others. Ephe, 4. 29. Coloss. 4. 4.


Tim. What is the next vice of the tongue?


Sil. With their mouths they speak deceitful words, that is, when the mouth
speaks that the heart thinks not, with a purpose to deceive others; to
cover hatred with words of deceit, as Caine and Ioab and Indas did.


Tim. What reasons against this kind of speech?


Sil. First, it comes from Satan: secondly, it swerueth from charity:
thirdly, it tends to destruction: fourthly, it is a work of a wicked man.


Tim. What is meant by Aspes?


Sil. A kind of Serpent which spitting forth their poison, does there with
kill even those which are a far off: by which the Apostle would signify that
wicked men (such as all men are by nature) do with their evil words hurt,
Psa. 113. 3.
not only such as be near, but even them which are far Note further that a
venomous tongue is thus resembled 1. because this Serpent infecteth by biting:
2. It is a poison incurable: 3. they are int: actable, stopping their care, at
the charmers voice.
off from them. Example hereof we have in San ballat and Tobiah being in
Persia, yet with their tou^gs huit the Jews which were at Jerusalem. Nehem. 4.
3. Also in Doeg, who hort with his tongue the Lords Priests being absent. 1.
Sam. 22. 9. In this respect malicious tongues are compared to arrows Psalm.
53. even because the malice of the tongue wounds a great way off, as an arrow
shot out of a bow, hitteth and hurts a great distance off.


Tim. What learn ye hereby?


Sil. That it is a great misery to have an evil tongue, it makes men like
poysonfull Serpents. Secondly, it is a blessed thing to have our speech
reformed, (...), 3, 3. That heed is to be taken how we deal with evil tounged
men.


Tim. What is the next fruit of man's corruption as touching his speech?


Sil. Bitter and cursed words, which be of two sorts; First against God, as
in Rabsakeh 2. Km. 18. 22. And in the Psalm. 10. 7.
Israelite which was stoned to death, Leuit. 24. 11. Secondly, Their mouth is
said to be full, because their mouth is as a large vessel, out of which flows
cruel word.
against our selves, as in the Jews, who wished Christ's blood to be upon their
heads, Math. 27. 25. Thirdly against others, as Shimie, who cursed David, 2.
Sam. 16. 5. As they have gall and bitterness in their heart, Acts 8. 23. so
their mouth runs over.


Tim. What reasons against this kind of speaking?


Sil. First, it is against the commandment, which says, Curse not. Leuit.
24. 15. Romans 12. Bless, and curse not. Secondly, it is against the end, for
which speech was given to bless God and man. Iam. 3. 9. Thirdly it is
recompensed with the like, Psalm. 109. 17. He loves cursing, therefore it is
come to him.


Tim. What is the next effect of our corruption?


Sil. Cruelty, feet swift to shed blood; that is, to compass and commit
slaughter, all men are such by nature, except Esaias 59. 7. 8.
grace do either restrain, or correct and cure our malicious nature; this
testimony is out of Esaias, that by the mouth of two witnesses, every word may be
ratified: Feet signifies affections with readiness, and shedding signifies
cruelty with greedines, pouring it out.


Tim. What is the fruit of their cruelty?


Sil. Destruction and calamity actiuely toward others, whom they destroy, and
also toward themselves passiuely at the last, as in Cain, Pharaoh, Jews,
Iudus, who were given to cruelty, and they were rewarded accordingly, blood did
draw on blood.


Tim. What is meant by the way of peace?


Sil. A peaceable and quiet trade of life, which these did not follow, but were
of a turbulent nature; and whereas he says they know not the way of peace,
he means that they do not approve it, nor practice it. Like phrase in Psalm.
1. 6. 7 knowing, put for allowing.


Tim. What reasons may encourage us to live peaceably?


Sil. First, the commandment (...) God Rom 12. 18. Secondly, the sweet and
manifold profit of peace, Psalm. 133. Thirdly, the sour fruits of contention.
Fourthly, the example of godly men, as Abraham, Moses, Joseph. Lastly, for
that God is a God of peace, and heaven a place of peace, and the Gospel a
word of peace, and Christ a mediator and Prince of peace.


Tim. Toward whom is peace to be kept?


Sil. Toward our selves and others, with kinsfolks and neighbouis, with
friends and with enemies, faithful and infidel, Romans 12. 18.


Tim. What is this that he says, the fear of God is not before Psalm. 36. 1.
their eres?


Sil. That men do not think themselves to be in Gods presence. Secondly, that
they are not drawn from evil by this consideration. Thirdly, that they are
not moved to do good upon desire to please GOD. Fourthly, when they speak
unto God, and do hear him speak unto them, they do it not with due reverence
and awe.


Tim. Why does he shut up all with this sentence?


Sil. Because the lack of this is the fountain from which all other evils do
flow; where Gods fear which is the Quideum non timent, sine retinaculo
curru^s ad maium (...) anus.
bridle and curb to sin, is absent, all vices will there be present and abound.


Tim. What things may stir up the heart to fear God?


Sil. His infinite justice and power. Secondly, his marvelous providence and
rule over all things. Thirdly, his incomprehensible mercies toward his
children. Fourthly, his judgments upon the wicked, and sharp chastisements
upon the godly. Fifthly, examples of such as fearing him, have been blessed and
protected. Sixthly, the great and precious promises made to such as fear GOD,
as that they shall be happy, be preserved and blessed in their goods, name,
(...), souls and body, temporally and eternally: see Psalm. 112. and 128.


DIAL. IX.
Verse 19. Now we know, that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them that
are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world subject
to the judgment of God.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text? Besides the meeting with this Objection,
it may well be, that area sem is given why the Law could not justify the Jews,
because it condemned them.



Silas. It is an answer to the secret objection of the Jews, which were ready
to allege, that the aforenamed Scriptures did not belong unto them, but unto
some other. Unto which the Apostle does answer, that the Law and Doctrine
thereof being given properly to the Jews, whatsoever was written in the Law,
must needs concern them, at least principally.


Tim. How proved he that the things in the Law, did belong to the Jews?


Sil. By these three Arguments: First, from the reference which the Law has to
them, to wit, the Jews, to whom it was given. Secondly, from the end, that
every mouth should be stopped. Thirdly, from the testimony of the Conscience,
whereas he says [ We know:] as who should say, there is none of us ignorant
of this.


Tim. What do we learn from hence?


Silas. That besides the light of the word, GOD has set up a light in every
man's Conscience, which makes him see and know what is true and fit to be done,
and what is otherwise.


Tim. How is the word [Law] taken here?


Silas. Not strictly for the ten Commandments, as Mat. 22, 36. nor yet for the
doctrine of salvation, as Ps. 19, 7. but for the whole Scripture of the old
Testament, as appears by the forenamed sentences, cited out of the Psalms
and Prophets.


Tim. What do we learn by this?


Sil. That every sentence of Scripture, has the force and authority of a Law,
to prescribe, enjoin, and command; and therefore with reverence and submission
to be received and obeyed?


Tim. What is it to be under the Law in this place?


Sil. To have the Law appointed for our use and instruction; elsewhere it
signifies to be under the condemnation and rigor of the Law: here it
signifies to be under it, as a Schoole-maister and teacher, to direct and
inform us touching the will of God and our own estate.


Tim. What does this teach?


Silas. That it is a special and peculiar mercy to have the word of God
allotted unto us for our direction and comfort: therefore, to neglect or
despise it, is more then unthankfulness, even iniquity.


Tim. But to what end does the Scripture condemn every man of sin?


Silas. That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world subject to the
Judgment of God.


Tim. What is meant by having every mouth stopped?


Sil. It is a borrowed speech taken from such as have Not the writing or
Scripture, but the thing written to wit, that al men are sinners, stops al
mouths.
something put in their mouth (as a gagge) to hinder their speech; by which the
Apostle means, that those Testimonies of Scripture, which bear witness of
our sins, they declare us void of all defense, so as we have nothing to say
for our selves, why we should not perish, but only the plea of pardon and
mercy, Psalm. 51, 1, 2, 3.


Tim. Whom does this reprove?


Sil. First, the blind Gospellers which plead for themselves, their service of
God, and their own good doings, thinking to merit thereby Gods kingdom.
Secondly, the blind Papists, which plead for themselves the merit of works,
both devised by themselves, and condemned by God. Lastly, all men which rest in
themselves for salvation.


Tim. What is meant by the world?


Sil. The people and inhabitants of the world: the place containing, put for
the persons contained, by a Metonymie.


Tim. What is it to be obnoxious or subject to the judgment of God?


Silas. To be guilty and worthy of punishment before him; which is the case of
all men without exception of any: All are by nature the Children of Gods wrath,
Ephesians. 2, 3.


Tim. Whom does this reprove?


Sil. Such as say the Virgin Mary was free from all sin. Secondly, this does
teach us, that all have need of a Savior, seeing all are thorough sin
guilty of damnation.


DIALOGVE X.
Verse 20. Wherefore by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified in
his sight, for by the Law comes the knowledge of sin.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this Text?


Silas. Having hitherto at large proved all to be sinners, he will prove that
Justification and absolution from sin, comes not by the works of the Law,
which now he proves by this reason: the Law shows us our sin, and
conuinceth us as guilty of sin, therefore it does not absolve and quit us
from sin. The reason is taken from the Law of contraries, which cannot at once
in one respect be affirmed of one thing.


Tim. What does he mean by the works of the Law?


Silas. Not simply the works of the Law, as they are Non opera que precip
untur, sed quae presta^tur.
commanded of God, but as they are performed of us imperfectly and with many
slips. For the Law simply considered without relation to us, could justify us.


Tim. What does he mean by Law?


Silas. He means the Law both of nature and of Moses, and by works he
means not ceremonial works only, but the moral. That the moral is chiefly
meant, may appear unto us by these reasons. First, because Works done before
Faith, cannot justify because they please not God, nor works done after faith,
because they be imperfect.
he had cited testimonies, which speak of moral vices. Secondly, this effect
(to know sin) is chiefly by the moral Law. Thirdly, moral works are
greatest cause of glorying. Fourthly, because all kind of working is set
against believing, as contraries and repugnant the one to the other, in the
cause of forgiveness of sins, and salvation of sinners.


Tim. What means he by, No flesh?


Sil. No man: but the Apostle says, rather no flesh, then no man; especially
to note what men are without Christ, to wit, a lump of flesh and corruption,
full of weakness and sinful infirmity, being unapt of our selves to bring
forth any thing which is good.


Tim. What does Justify import and signify?


Silas. To pardon sin, to absolve and acquit sinners, and to approve one for
righteous; and not either to declare just: so works justify: or to make
actually just; This were perfection of inhaaerent Justice, which none has.


Tim. What was learned from this?


Sil. That the Apostle speaks not against the doing of works, but against
the trust in them, and putting merit of righteousness in them: we ought to
labor in the doing of good works, but we cannot claim forgiveness of
sins, and eternal life by the worthiness of them.


Tim. What is that he says [In his sight?]


Silas. This phrase is used here, not to note hypocrisy, In his sight, this
distinguishes between righteousness of good men, and that which is before God.
but the imperfection of the best works: for he teaches, that the most
perfect works of the best men, come far short of being able to abide the
rigor of Gods Justice, because the best works of Gods Saints have both wants
and stains in them, and cannot therefore endure the severe and strict
judgment of God, in whose fight it is Christ alone, that makes believers holy
and unblameable. Col. 1, 22.


Tim. What should this work in us?


Sil. Humility and lowly conceit of our own best doings, 3. Reasons why none
can be justified by works before God. I the most perfect purity of gods nature
before whom heavens be not clean. Job 15. 15. 2. God looks unto the heart,
which is perfect in none.
which God might worthily cast out, and the doers of them, if with a just eye
he did behold them.


Tim. What is meant hereby, that the knowledge of sin is said to come by the
Law?


Sil. That the law serves both to show us what is sin, and does also argue
or reprove us of sin: and for this end is this alleged, even to make it
plain that righteousness and pardon of sin do not come from the law. For
as a felon or Traitor convicted by some statute law of a capital crime, it
were solly and madness for such an one to look to be acquitted by that law
which did show and condemn his crime to death. In like manner it is spiritual
frenzy to look for absolution and life from the law of Moses, seeing it is
given to convict us as guilty of 3. the law is spiritual, requiring exact
obedience, such as none can attain un to: yet before men we may be justified,
as Abraham was Romans 4. 1. and James. 2.
death through sin. Yet such mad furious fools our Papists be, as they
presume to find righteousness and life, where nothing but sin and death can
be found, therefore does the law reveal sin, and terrify the Conscience,
and show death and condemnation to be due unto transgressors, which is contrary
to justifying.


DIAL. XI.
Verse 21. But now is the righteousness of God made manifest without the law,
having witness of the law and the Prophets.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Sil. To teach how Gods elect do attain unto true and perfect righteousness
before God, to wit; not by their works, but even by the faith of Jesus Christ:
for seeing there is no other way to have righteousness but either by works or
faith, and by works it cannot be had; therefore by faith.


Tim. How many things are here to be considered?


Sil. Four: First, the circumstance of time [ Now.] Secondly, what is the
(...) of God. Thirdly, how this is manifest, and how manifest without the law.
Fourthly, what witness it has from the Prophets.


Tim. What is meant by [Now] this particle of time?


Sil. That is, at this present time wherein Paul and the other Apostles of
Jesus Christ did preach the word.


Tim. What did we learn from this circumstance?


Sil. That God has his appointed time for all his works, Eccles. 3, 1. which
should teach patience and waiting upon God. Secondly, that the time of the
gospel has a more clear revelation of Gods good will to the elect then that of
the law; which should breed thankfulness for so great a mercy.


Tim. What is here called the righteousness of God?


Sil. Not that whereby himself is righteous, for that is his own essence, and
is not communicated to us; but that righteousness which is after called the
righteousness of Christ, and the righteousness of faith, even that
righteousness which is by faith in Christ, who is made perfect justice to all
which do believe in him.


Tim. Why is this called the righteousness of God, of Christ, and of Faith?


Sil. It is called the righteousness of God both from the cause and the effect,
in as much as it is not of us and our works in part or in whole, nor from any
man, but it is the gift of God. Secondly, it is that only which God in his
strict justice approves, and for which we are accepted with him: also it is
called the righteousness of Christ, and of Faith, because Christ in his
manhood wrought it by his obedience to death, and our faith is that instrument
whereby we attain to it and receive it, that it may be our own for our full
Justification before God, unto life eternal.


Tim. How did the Apostles make this manifest to the world?


Sil. After this sort: First, they preached repentance, setting before men's
eyes their sins, and their just and fearful condemnation thereby. Secondly,
they gathered together out of the Scripture the properties of that Christ which
should heal these evils. Thirdly, they applied the same properties to Jesus of
Nazareth. Fourthly, they beseech and exhort all men to believe in him as their
only Savior. See Acts 2, 22. and 10, 36. and 13, 26.


Tim. What follows in such as believe such things?


Sil. First, they obtained remission of sins. Secondly, they were made
inwardly new, and outwardly they lived hohly. Thirdly, they called upon God
with perseverance, communicating together in prayer, doctrine, breaking of
bread, and all holy works. Fourthly, they steadfastly put their trust in God.
Fistly, they regarded not riches, for they laid the price of their things at
the Apostles feet. Sixthly, they gave testimony of Christ boldly. Seauenthly,
in his quarrel they bestowed their lives, and cheerfully shed their blood:
For proose of all these, have your recourse to the history of the Acts.


Tim. How is this righteousness manifested without the law?


Sil. That is without the works of the law, or without That law in this text
has a double acception, 1. for the doctrine of the moral Law: this does not
reveal faith in Christ, ney there yet natu ral law: 2 for the books of Mese,
where in be many promises of Christ.
this that the law be fulfilled of us; for some Gentiles were justified which
knew not the law: also some Jews were justified which regarded not the law:
and though some did both know, regard, and do it (as Nathanael and Zachary)
yet the observation of the law by them, was not the cause why they were
justified. The law then is an help to justification, in so much as it does
accuse and condemn us, and so drives us to Christ accidentally, as a disease
brings to the Physician: but the law of it self has no strength to forgive
sin, and to suggest and work faith into our hearts, or to enable us to keep
it perfectly, that we might be justified thereby.


Tim. How many ways has this righteousness witness of the law and the Prophets?


Sil. Sundry ways, First, by evident and clear sentences, John 5 46.
which prophesied of Christ, and of faith that justifies. Secondly, Acts 10.
43.
by tipes and figures, which went before in the old Romans 1. 2.
Testament, as the brazen Serpent, and Jonas his being in the Whales belly
three days; also the Paschall Lamb, the Rock, the Cloud, did show Christ.
Thirdly, by Sacrifices, Offerings, and ceremonies of the law, the blood of
Lambs and Goats, did signify Christ to be slain for sin. Fourthly, by the
Sacraments, as Circumcision and the Passover; all which do bear testimony
that our righteousness, remission of our sins, and eternal life, are not to
be found in our selves, but to be sought by faith in Jesus Christ.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 22. I mean the righteousness of God, through the faith of Jesus Christ,
in all and over all that heleeue.


Tim. IN what sense is the faith of Jesus used here?


Sil. Not actiuely for that which Jesus had, but passiuely, for that faith
whereby he is had and received.


Tim. What is the drift of this text?


Sil. To open and unsold more at large, that which he spoke concerning the
righteousness of God: laying forth first the instrument whereby it is applied
unto us, which is faith. Secondly, the persons or subject upon whom it is
bestowed, which be all believers without difference of nations. Thirdly, the
efficient and principal cause of righteousness, which is God. And fourthly, the
material cause, which is Jesus Christ.


Tim. What is the righteousness of God?


Sil. That which comes merely by Gods good gift, and makes us acceptable to
God, even able to stand before God; this righteousness we do attain,
through faith, which justifies obiectiuely, because it leads to Christ; and
instrumentally, as the hand of the soul to apprehend it: therefore it is
written, the righteousness of God through faith.


Tim. What are the kinds of faith?


Sil. Four, first historical, which is a knowledge of the history and letter,
or of the doctrine of the Scripture, thence called dogmaticall faith. Secondly,
temporary faith, which is a knowledge of the truth, with an assent to Faith
iustifies not effectiuely as working a justice in us or materially as being our
Justice.
it for a time, Math. 13. 21. Thirdly miraculous, which is a belief that by
the power of God, strange wonders may be done 1 Corin. 13. 1, 2. Fourthly,
justifying faith, by the which the righteousness of God is received. Of this
justifying faith, there are two parts, the first is a knowledge of the things
to be believed. as John 6. 69. we know and believe. Secondly application of
them to our selves.


Tim. How prove ye that there must be application in true faith?


Sil. First by the commandment, believe the Gospel, Mark 16, 1, 5.
Secondly, by the nature of faith, which is an hand to draw Christ to us.
Thirdly, by the example of Scripture, as David Psalm 18, 2. Mary, Luke 1, 28.
Thomas, John 20, 28. Fourthly by reason, for how can Christ profit us, if he
be not applied and put on by faith? And 5. by the testimony of the learned,
which teach true faith to be particular with application, as Hierom, Cyril, etc.


Tim. What actions are required unto faith?


Sil. These five: First, approbation of the things believed. Secondly,
expetition in an ernest desire of them. 3(...) apprehension in a fast laying
hold of them. Fourthly, oblectation in delighting my self in them. Fifthly,
expectation, in looking certainly to enjoy them.


Tim. What be the degrees of faith?


Silas. Threefold: First, such a faith which is a true and earnest desire to
believe the promises of Christ. Secondly, a little faith, which is a certain
assurance, that the same belongs to us. Thirdly, a full persuasion when the
heart is strongly assured thereof, joined with a sure and certain knowledge of
things hoped for, Heb. 11, 1.


Tim. What is the object of Faith?


Silas. Christ Jesus, in whom we do consider three things. First his person,
God and Man. Secondly, his Offices, King, Priest, and Prophet. Thirdly, his
benefits, Remission of (...), reconciliation, adoption, sanctification,
eternal life.


Tim. What are the persons unto whom God (...) Christ with his benefits?


Sil. All the believers, and only the believers.


Tim. What think ye of the elect Infants, are they Believers?


Tim. Some think them to be justified by the belief of the Church. Others
think it to be by the belief of their parents. Others, by the belief of
sureties. Others by some secret work of the spirit: But I think that they are
saved by their own faith: as it is generally written, The just shall live by
his own faith.


Tim. But they want knowledge, without which, there is no Faith?


Sil. True, they lack knowledge, which is by discourse, yet they are not
altogether without some knowledge, such as for their age they are capeable of,
as appears by this; that reason is in children, though they want the use of
it. Also by the example of Jeremy, John Baptist, and Christ; all which had the
light of the Spirit in their infancy, being sanctified in the womb.


Tim. What use was made of this?


Sil. That men which have not true faith, should labor to get it, seeing no
righteousness is had without it, nor salvation but by it. Secondly, such as have
it, should cherish and labor to increase it by all good means, and be
thankful to God for it. Thirdly, to take comfort to our selves, upon the death
of young children, seeing God who has made a Covenant of life with them, does
work in them to believe in him.


DIAL. XIII.
Verse 23, 24. For there is no difference, for all have sinned, and are
deprived of the glory of God, and are freely justified by his grace, thorough
the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.


Tim. WHat be the parts of this Text, wherein this former Doctrine is more
fully opened and illustrated?


Silas. Two: First, a general necessity of justification. Secondly, two causes
thereof, the efficient, and the matter.


Tim. What is the meaning of this 23. verse?


Sil. That all through (...) are deprived of the righteousness A word borrowed
from such as come shortin a race and cannot attain to the mark or prize
wherein God is most glorified. Or thus (as some expound it:) all the elect by
reason of their sinful nature and life, are void and destitute of eternal
life, which consists in the participation of Gods glory; and therefore are
deprived of righteousness, to which belongs the promise of glory.


Tim. How prove ye that al men haus sinned?


Sil. First, by the authority of Scripture, 1 John 1, 6, 8. and James 4, 2.
Secondly, by common experience, because it has been seen in all ages, that
the best men have sinned, as Noah, Lot, Abraham, David. Thirdly, by the
testimony of conscience, which does witness unto every man that he is a
sinner, and does bring dread and fear of judgment for sin. Lastly, the
judgments of God which are so common in the world do tell us, that no man is
without sin, which sticks close to man's nature ever in the godly, till the
dissolution of nature.


Tim. How many ways do men sin?


Sil. Not a few, but many; not one, but sundry ways, as originally, actually,
by omission and commission, against God and man, in thought, word, and deed;
of ignorance, of negligence, of presumption; secretly, openly, in matter and in
manner; in substance, in circumstance, against Law, and against Gospel.


Tim. What use make you of this point?


Sil. It reproves the Papists, which ascribe freedom from sin, to the
virgin Mary: and also other Heretics, which hold an absolute freedom from
sin, in the regenerate, even in this life. Secondly, it teaches us, to
think of other men's sin with compassion, considering our own. Thirdly, it
serves to humble all men, and to drive them out of themselves to Christ, to
feeke righteousness in him, and to be full of awe and watch, seeing there be
so many ways to miss the mark, and but one to hit it.


Tim. What is meant by the glory of God?


Silas. Some think it is the perfect righteousness of Christ, the imputing
whereof to the believers, is much to the glory and praise of his free grace and
good will. But I think it is hereput for eternal life, which stands in the
fellowshippe of Gods glory: and that this is the meaning, may appear by the
word (destitute or deprived) which signifies one that faints in a race and
falls short of the goal; now eternal life is the goal of our race, the
price of the high calling of God, Philip. 3.


Tim. What use of this point?


Sil. That through sin we are most miserable as having thereby lost the
chiefest thing, which is Gods glory, in the fruition whereof, is all our
happiness, which should make us love Christ, by whom it is restored.


Tim. What learn we hereby, that we are freely iustfied by his grace?


Sil. That which moved the Father to give his Son to us, was his free favor.
Secondly, it proves that faith justifies only; for were we justified by
works but in part, we could not be justified by grace. Romans 11, 6. If of
works, not of Grace.


Tim. What is the matter of our Justification?


Sil. The redemption which is in Christ Jesus, by which is meant a delivery
from sin and misery, by the merit and power of Christ's blood shed; of which
redemption we have the beginning now, and look for perfection in heaven.


Tim. What learn we from hence?


Sil. First, the exceeding love of Christ giving himself a ransom for sins.
Secondly, the exceeding danger of sin, having inthralled us to Satan and
hell. Thirdly, the exceeding great duty of thankfulness we owe to Christ our
Redeemer. Note that we are said to be justified freely, though Christ laid
down a price, and we bring faith, which is an act of our will; because God
freely gave Christ, and freely works faith in us, which justifies in respect
of the object Christ, and not as it is an act or work of ours.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood; to declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of sins that are passed.


Tim. What does this text set forth unto us?


Sil. All the causes of justification yet more fully.


Tim. Show us these causes what they be.


Sil. The efficient cause is God, the matter is Christ our atonement, the
instrument is faith, the end is the glory of God, in the declaration of his
righteousness.


Tim What learn ye by this, that God is said to set forth?


Sil, That we must seek the first and sovereign cause of salvation not in
Christ but in God: upon whose eternal John 3.
love it does depend. I Cor. 1. 30.



Tim. What learn we hereof, that Christ is said to be set forth of God?


Sil. That the doctrine of the Gospel is no new thing invented by men, but
comes from heaven, being a divine truth.


Tim. But how many ways is Christ said to be set forth?


Sil. Two ways, first by the revelation and preaching of the gospel; wherein
things to be believed concerning Christ and our salvation, are propounded to
us, and set before us. Secondly, therein the Spirit of Christ inspireth us with
faith, and persuades our minds to assent to the things showed and propounded,
being good and mostioyfull things.


Tim. But may not this, of Gods setting forth his son, be referred to
predestination?


Sil. It may so, because thereupon depends the merit This word ( set forth)
shows the everlasting purpose of God to give his son for our Redemption: so
is the same word used, Romans 8, 28.
of Christ's death. Now if ye take it so, that God in his predestination
decreed to set forth his son, then the meaning is thus much, that touching our
reconcilement to God by the redemption of Christ, we must account that this
comes to us by the only determination and free purpose of God. The reason of
which purpose seems to be this; that God meant to restore the world to his
first estate by him, by whom it was made at the first.


Tim. Christ the matter of our Justification, why is he called [Our
Reconcilement?]


Tim. Because Christ is the true propitiatory, as the word here used does
signify, our Propitiatour or Reconciliator: John 1.
for he does allude to the propitiatory or Mercieseate of the Law, which was a
figure of Christ in these three things. First, out of the Mercy-seate were the
Oracles given, so by Christ we are showed the Oracles of the will of God, as
touching our salvation. Secondly, God was said to dwell at the propitiatory:
so in Christ the whole fullness of the Godhead dwells corporally, Col. 2, 9.
Thirdly, there God was made favorable to the people: so is God by Christ
always pacified and reconciled to us, Col. 1, 18.


Tim. Why is Christ our only reconcilement?


Sil. Because he is a man free from sin. Secondly, because he is so man, as
he is God also. Thirdly, because he is appointed to be the person that should
reconcile mankind, John 6, 26.


Tim. Why is it added [By his blood?]


Sil. This may be joined either with faith, to show whereunto it leans,
namely to Christ crucified; or ynto atonement, because the propitiatory was
sprinkled with blood by the High Priest when he entered into the holy place, to
teach, that without blood is no remission of sin: but whereas Paul does only
mention his blood, thereby he would signify the whole entire passion of
Christ, by a (...): Blood a part, being put for the whole Sacrifice of Christ,
which was the consummation of his obedience.


Tim. What does this put us in mind of?


Silas. First, of the fierceness of Gods wrath, and his wonderful Justice
against sin, in that he could not be satisfied but by the blood of his only
son. Secondly, of Christ's abundant love to us, and what love we owe to him
again. Thirdly, it gives much comfort unto great sinners, being afflicted in
soul and humbled, that such an invaluable price was laid down for their
sins. Lastly, it shows that the favor of God is of very great worth more then
all the world, seeing it could not be purchased, but by a price greater then
the world.


Tim. But what means have we to apply the blood of Christ to us?


Silas. Only by faith, by the power whereof, we understand and believe that
blood to be shed for us, unto our full atonement with God. And note, that
there be two means or Instruments of our redemption: First, without us on
Christ his part, which is his death or bloodshed: Secondly, within us on our
part, Faith.


DIAL. XV.
Verse 25, 26. To declare the righteousness of God by the forgiveness of the
sins that are Dassed through the patience of God.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To express the cause or end for which God does justify elect sinners,
which is, the manifestation of his righteousness and patience, to the glory of
his name.


Tim. What is here meant by righteousness?


Sil. The truth and fidelity of God, in sending his son according to his
promise, to work the work of our redemption. Secondly, the Justice of God, in
inflicting the whole punishment of sin upon the person of his Son. Thirdly,
the mercy of God in smiting his Son, that he might spare us. We may
understand it of that which before was called the righteousness of Faith,
which God has manifested to be the true justice whereby men are just before him.


Silas. What learn we from this?


Tim. Seeing that God in reconciling the world unto him by his Son, did secke
his own glory, that is the mark which we our selves are to aim at in
seeking our salvation, not seeking so much to be saved, which may come of
self-love, as that in our salvation, God may have his glory.


Tim. May not this be understood of the righteousness which Christ wrought
in his Man-hoode?


Sil. True, it may be called the righteousness of God, because the person was
God which wrought it, and that is the only righteousness which God does
allow; and by which we are acceptable. For when this righteousness of Christ
is given us, even in our Justification, both sins past, present, and to come,
are forgiven us.


Tim. Why does he say then by forgiveness of sins passed?


Silas. Some do understand it of sins done under the old Testament but it is
of others otherwise interpreted offinnes already committed, because
forgiveness is properly of sins past which men have formerly done. But the
former interpretation seems to be the best, because of that which follows
at this time present. So then the meaning is this, that as well the sins done
before Christ's coming in the flesh, as those done since his first coming,
are forgiven Gods Children which believe.


Tim. What was the use of this?


Sil. To teach us that the merit of Christ's death, looks Hebr. 13, 8.
backwards, and not only forwards, to them believers Apoc. 13, 8.
that lived in the world before his passion, as well as to them that lived after
his death: and so he is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. For
from the fall of Adam, no forgiveness of sins to any but thorough Christ
believed on.


Tim. Why is this added [Through the patience of God?]


Sil. Because he would show that God does bear with those sinners whom he will
forgive.


Tim. What is the patience of God?


Silas. It is that property whereby he suffers them long, exercising it
toward the Reprobate in taking from them all excuse, and toward the godly in
giving them space of repentance.


Tim. What may we learn from hence?


Silas. First, to use patience toward such as do offend us, that we may be
like unto God. Secondly, not to (...) though God does very often for bear
offenders, because they may be such as God means to forgive, and eternally
save to his own praise.


DIAL. XVI.
Verse 26, 27. To show at this time his righteousness, that he might be just,
and a Iustifier of him which is of the Earth of Iosus? Where is then the
rejoicing? It is excluded. By what Law? Of works? Nay, but by the Law of
Faith.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To set forth now fully, the final cause or true end, for which God
shows mercy to sinners, for the pardoning of their sins; which was, to
declare his righteousness.


Tim. What is meant by this time?


Silas. That time when the Apostles lived and preached the Gospel, and so
forwards to the end of the world: neither the sins of former times. nor of
times present or future, are forgiven any other way, then by faith in Jesus
Christ.


Tim. What learn ye by this?


Silas. That there is but one way for forgiveness of sins to all men which
lived before and since Christ, even by faith in him. Therefore, the Religion
not of Papists but of Protestants, is the ancient true religion.


Tim. That he might be just, what is that to say?


Sil. That is to say, that he might be manifest and known unto us to be just,
as he is in himself. God does show himself to be just unto usward two ways.
First, by punishing our sins severely in the person of his Son. Secondly,
in pardoning them mercifully unto us which believe, for his promise sake. For,
as God is just in himself, so this Justice is communicated to us thorough
faith in Christ.


Tim. How is God called a Iustifier?


Silas. Because he it was which gave his Son; as also which offered him, and
who does impute him with his obedience for righteousness unto the believers,
which be of the faith of Jesus (that is to say) whosoever hec is, that by faith
embraces Jesus.


Tim. Why is faith required in them who are to be justified by Christ?


Sil. That men may be shut out from any matter of rejoicing in themselves. For,
if righteousness came by our works wholly or in part, then we should have
matter of rejoicing, because then we were acceptable to God for some thing
which is in our selves, and done by our selves: whereas faith carries us out of
our selves unto Christ for righteousness.


Tim. But yes good works are done by Gods grace, therefore glory belon geth to
them, and we may rejoice therein, as fruits of his grace.


Sil. Yet it is we which do these works by our understanding and wills
renewed; but some will say happily, it is also we which believe: Howbeit our
faith it is no more but the hand to receive Christ and his righteousness, to be
thereby accounted righteous in Gods sight.


Tim. Yet some rejoicing is left, in that Christ's righteousness is not our's,
unless we take it by faith.


Sil. No more then a poor Leper, for that he has reached out a leprous hand,
to take a kings gift bestowed upon him, to enrich himself thereby: for
notwithstanding his reaching out his hand, yet he should remain poor if no
gift were given: and that shows that not the taking, but the thing given,
even Christ is our justice, which yet must be taken hold off that it may be
ours. But all the virtue of faith, whereby it justifies, is not in it self,
but comes 1 Cor. 1. 29.
from the object Christ, who is laid hold on; which tends much to humble
all flesh before God, that we glory in none but Christ.


DIAL. XVII.
Verses 28. 29. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without
the works of the law. God is he the God of the Jews only and not of the
Gentiles also? yea even of the Gentiles also.


Tim. What is the sum and drift of this text?


Sil. It is a conclusion of the former dispute, touching justification by
faith, and has three new reasons to prove the same. First, justification is by
faith, because by that way God is most glorified. Secondly, if we were
justified by works of the law, it might be thought that God were God of the
Jews only: but the Gentiles which believed, and had not the law of Moses,
have God for their God; therefore it is by faith. Lastly, justification by
faith, does much ratify and greatly confirm the law; therefore it is by faith
that we are justified.


Tim. Whence is the first reason fetched?


Sil. From the word (therefore) which has reference to that which was said
before; as if he should say, seeing God declares his righteousness by our
justification by faith; and thereby al matter of rejoicing and glorying is
taken from us, that it may be in God alonees in these regards we conclude,
infer and gather, that righteousness is by faith.


Tim. What means this word (conclude?)


Sil. It imports the certain and infallible truth of that which is here
inferred, because the word signifies the casting up of many sums into one;
as of two tens (...) together is made twenty: so certain is this truth, as
there is no doubt to be made of it.


Tim. Wherefore serves this?


Sil. First, to stay the conscience upon this truth of righteousness by faith,
being so firm. Secondly, to teach that in matters of religion things ought to
be proved by firm demo^stration, or vngain sayable arguments, which may
evidently prove the thing in question, and strongly euict the conscience.


Tim. What means he by man?


Sil. Even every Christian, of what sex, age, or country whatsoever.


Tim. What means he to say that Justification is (by faith without works?)


Sil. That is to say, the man that believes is thereby absolved from his
sins, without any respect of fulfilling the law by works, or without all
merit by works, from whence is inferred, that faith only justifies.


Tim. Will not this open a gap to licenciousnes and neglect of good works?


Sil. No surely, because they are necessary to salvation, as a way that leads
thither, though not to Justification, which goes before works, as a cause of
them.


Tim. Faith it self is a work of the spirit, therefore if we be John 6. 27.
justified by faith, we are justified by a work.


Sil. It does not justify us as a work, for so it is imperfect and needs
pardon; but as it goes out of us, and lays hold on Christ, in whom is all
perfection; or it justifies as a woork ordained of GOD, to be the organicall
means to receive Christ.


Tim. What learn we from hence, that God is the God of the Gentiles?


Sil. That there were some Gentiles which were joined to Gods people, and had
their sins forgiven them, even before the general calling of the Gentiles,
after the coming of Christ. Examples hereof we have in Job, and also his
friends; and Iethro, Cornelius, the Syrophenitian woman for examples.


Tim. What is it to have God to be our God?


Sil. To make a league with us, to bestow all manner of happiness upon us for
Christ, so we believe.


Tim. What are the particular benefits which they have who have God for their
God?


Sil. First, union with Christ. Secondly, adoption to be the sons of God.
Thirdly, imputation of (...) with forgiveness of all sins. Fourthly, the
spirit of sanctification, together with peace of conscience, joy in the spirit,
hope of glory, access unto Gods favor. Fifthly, all Creatures are our
servants, (...) the very Angels. Heb. 1. 14. Sixthly, all Creatures are at
league with us. Hose. 2. 18. Seauenthly afflictions, yea sins turn to our
good, through Gods great love. Eighthly, his blessings are as pledges of his
favor. Ninthly, the Scriptures are written for us, and belong only and wholly
to us, which are in league with God through Christ.


Tim. What was gathered hereof?


Sil. That it is a wonderful mercy to be one of Gods people; blessed are they
whose God is Jehovah. Psalm. 144. there is more matter of thanksgiving and joy
in this, then in having a world of riohes, in being the sons of Kings and
Princes.


DIAL. XVIII.
Verse 30, 31. For it is one God which shall justify Circumcision of faith,
and uncircumcision through Faith. 31. Do we make the Law, etc.


Tim. WHat is the meaning of this verse?


Silas By circumcision is meant the Jew, and by uncircumcision the Gentile. A
Metonimie of the adioynt for the subject.


Tim. What then is it to justify Circumcision of Faith?


Silas. First, a Jew is not justified, because he is such a one, that is, one
circumcised according to the Law, but because he believes in Christ.


Tim. What understand ye by justifying uncircumcision by Faith?


Silas That a Gentile is not cast off, because he is such, that is,
uncircumcised; but having faith to believe in Christ, God justifies him also.


Tim. What follows of this?


Silas. That Jew and Gentile which believe have one God, a common God and
Savior to them both. For, God is God and Savior to every one whom he
Iustifyeth.


Tim. How does the Apostle from hence conclude his main argument of
Justification by faith, without works?


Tim. Namely thus: that seeing the Jew, which had the Law of Moses, had God his
God to justify him (not for the works of the Law which he had done) but
through Faith in Christ; and also the Gentile lacking that Law, yet by faith
laying hold on Christ, was admitted to the Covenant, to be one of Gods people,
and to have God his God to give him righteousness, thence it follows, that
Justification is not by works but by Faith, both to Jew and Gentile.


Tim. What instruction can ye gather from hence?


Sil. Even this; that Christ Jesus through faith, joins us in fellowship with
God, of what Country soever we be. Or this, that as there is but one God, who
is a comm on Savior of all his people, so but one way for his people, be they
Jews or Gentiles, whereby to be Justified, and that is by faith in Christ.


Tim. What words do follow?


Silas. In the verse 31. it is written, Do we then make the Law of none effect
through faith, etc.


Tim. What is the drift of these words?


Silas. To answer the objection of such as were enemies to justification by
faith, and secretly to confirm his purpose by that which is brought against
him.


Tim. What is the Objection?


Silas. If such as believe in Christ, be justified without respect to their
doing the works of the Law, then the Law is made void and of none effect.
This objection proceeds from the ignorance of such as do not know the
strength of sin, the Nature of Gods Justice, and the true end wherefore the
Law was given. Secondly, it proceeds from the pride of nature, loath to
yield to this truth, which so abaseth man, and honors God.


Tim. What follows of this?


Silas. That the truth has no greater enemies, then proud ignorance, or
ignorant pride, that dare lift up it self Gyant-like against God himself.


Tim. What was the answer to this objection?


Silas. It has two parts: First, a denial, with a detestation of the thing
objected [ God forbid.] Secondly, an inuersion or converting the matter upon
the head of the obiectors ( Yea, we establish the Law.


Tim. What learn we from the first part of the answer?


Sil. That all thoughts and reasonings against Gods truth, should be very
detestable to us: so as we should reject them with a marvelous hating of
them. For, Divine truth is such an holy thing, so precious to God, as we should
not with patience endure any muttering against it.


Tim. Whom does this reprove?


Silas. Such as do favor or wink at cauils and cauillers against the Doctrine
of salvation, or such as are no whit moved at their dealing.


Tim. How does the Apostle turn the thing objected upon their own heads?


Silas. Thus; Justification by faith, is so far from destroying the law, as
that the law is thereby established.


Tim. But how is this true which the Apostle says, That the Law is established
by faith?


Silas. First, the doctrine of justification teaches, that Christ fulfilled
the Law in his life. Secondly, that he suffered in his death the full
punishment due to the breach of the law, for all them who are justified by him.
Thirdly, Also without Faith it is impossible to keep the law, or any part
there of.
that such as believe in him, must endeavor the keeping of the Law, to declare
their thankfulness. Thus is the Law established by this Doctrine of
righteousness through believing.


Tim. What follows of this?


Silas. That there is no cause either for the Jew to cast off the Doctrine of
faith, in regard of any wrong done to the Law, which is thereby ratified and
made more firm: or yet for the believing Gentile less to esteem the Law,
because without it he is justified by Faith; sithence thus the Law is the more
countenanced and confirmed, as that which shows sin our sickness, and
drives to Christ, and teaches the good way wherein we are to walk, that we
may please Christ our iustifier.


CHAP. IIII.
DIALOGVE I.
Verse 1, 2. What shall we say then, that Abraham our Father has found
concerning the flesh? For, if Abraham our Father were Justified by Works, he
has whereof to rejoice, but not with God.


Timotheus. WHat is the drift of this whole Chapter?


Si. To prove Justification to be by Faith, by a new reason fetched from the
example of Abraham.


Tim. How stands the frame of his reason?


Silas. Thus: Abraham as the Father of the faithful, is the pattern of
Justification to all his seed or Children, as verse 23, 24. Look how Abraham
was, in such wise be his seed justified. Now it is certain, that Abraham was
justified not by works, but by believing the promise concerning Christ,
therefore all the Children of Abraham are so justified.


Tim. What be the parts of this 4. Chapter?


Sil. Two: in the first the example of Abraham is propounded unto the 23.
verse; in the second, this example is applied unto the end of the Chapter.


Tim. How was the example propounded?


Sil. First negatiuely, showing how he was not justified. Secondly
affirmatively showing how he was justified.


Tim. How was he not justified?


Sil. He was not justified by works, which the Apostle does prove by this
reason. Abraham had nothing to glory with God, but if he were justified by
works, then he had whereof to rejoice with God, therefore not by works?


Tim. But did his works gain him nothing?


Silas. Yea, amongst men, and in the account of the world, but not in Gods eye.


Tim. Why does he call Abraham Father?


Sil. Because of him came the Jews which were his Offspring.


Tim. Why does he call him, Our father?


Sil. Because Paul himself was a Jew, and descended of Abraham, which he does
acknowledge to this end, to decline the envy of his Countrymen, least they
should think he had not regarded Abraham.


Tim. Why is the example of Abraham chosen rather then of others?


Sil. Because he was of most reputation with the Jews also the Scripture had
expressly testified of him, that he had his righteousness by believing.


Tim. What Instruction do ye gather from hence?


Sil. That it is a good kind of teaching to teach by examples, because those
move the senses. Secondly, of examples, the fittest and most meet would be
chosen, which is a point of wisdom in the teacher.


Tim, What is here meant by flesh?


Silas. The external works of Abraham, as it is expounded in the next verse.
[ For if Abraham were justified by Works, etc.]


Tim. What do ye learn from the next verse?


Sil. Two things: First, good works get us commendations and matter of
rejoicing amongst men. Secondly, they do not at all avail us to procure our
acceptance, pardon, and release with GOD, because they want perfection. For
neither do we all good works, nor with all our heart, neither do we continue
so all our life long, because before our time of calling, we cannot do a good
work, no more then a thistle can bring forth a Fig; neither yet be such
works as we do after our conversion, without spots. Lastly, we do many
things contrary to the Law.


DIAL. II.
Verse 3. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness.


Tim. What does this Text teach us?


Silas. How Abraham was justified, namely, by believing the promise. This is
proved by authority of Scripture; the Scripture says, that Abraham was
justified by believing, therefore he was so justified. The text has a Question
[ For what, etc.] Secondly an answer thereunto [ Abraham believed, etc.]


Tim. What learn we from the Question?


Sil. That the points of Religion are to be proved by Scripture. Secondly, from
authority of Scripture, an argument follows affirmatively. Thirdly, that
proofs of Scripture ought to be brought fitly and sparingly. Fourthly, the
wisdom of Paul, in observing the phrase and course of Scripture.


Tim. Now let us come to the answer: the faith spoken of in Genesis 15, 6. which
the Apostle here cites, was not meant of Christ, but of an infinite posterity
andissue.


Silas. The answer heereunto, is this: First, Abraham by Faith had chief
respect to that which was promised in the beginning of the Chapter, that God
would be his shield and reward. Secondly, Abraham in his posterity foresaw
Christ, who was to come out of his loins. Thirdly, in all promises, the
promise offering Christ was wrapped, as the foundation and root of them all.
Fourthly, it was Christ which spoke to him at that time, Genesis 15, 6. for it was
the second person who spoke unto the Fathers, and (...) believed in Christ.
(...), the mercy of GOD whether it appears to us spiritually or temporally,
is the object of faith, and God is not merciful but by Ielus Christ: therefore
they that believe any promise of mercy, believe in Christ.


Tim. What more do ye observe here?


Sil. To believe God, and to believe in God, are all one: for to believe God,
is to give credit to his word, and to put our confidence in his goodness; thus
Abraham believed God.


Tim. What more was learned hence?


Sil. That it is a wonderful thing to believe God, or in God: because it
obtains the praise of righteousness to him that does it, as it is written,
He believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness. This one thing
should be sufficient to move all Christians to rely upon God his promise by
faith.


Tim. What other reasons may move men to believe God?


Sil. Very many and substantial: as first, because of Gods commandment.
Secondly, because God being most true, is worthy to be believed. Thirdly, there
is great danger if we do not believe, even eternal death, and the loss of
heaven, besides all temporal goods. Fourthly, it is a special service of God
to trust in him. Fifthly, it is the cause of all other duties, which spring from
faith, as the root of all. Sixthly, therein is God most honored, when he is
trasted in; and by the contrary, much dishonored, for he is thereby made a
liar, so much as lies in us. 1 John 4. 20.


DIAL. II.
Verses 4. 5. Now to him that works, the wages is not counted by favor, but
by debt, but to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for rightenesse.


Tim. What is the drift of this text?


Sil. To prove justification came not by works, but of faith, by an argument
of contraries; three contraries set against three: as first, he that works
not, and he that works. The second contrariety is between favor and debt:
the third is wages and imputation.


Tim. How stands Paul's argument from these contraries?


Sil. Thus; if Abraham were justified by merit of works, then he had his
righteousness by debt, and as a wages, but his righteousness came to him not
of wages and debt, but of favor and by imputation: therefore he was
justified, not by works but by faith. Or more briefly thus: If Abraham was
justified by favor and imputation, therefore not by desert of works, but by
believing.


Tim. What is meant by him that works?


Sil. Not one that has or does works, but one that desires to deserve by his
works, which appears by this: First, a believer must be a worker, and such
an one was believing Abraham. Secondly, wages and debt is given to merit, not
to works.


Tim. What learn we by this, that the reward is counted according to debt, to
him that will claim it by merit of works?


Sil. That eternal life is due to him that can fulfill the law; this comes
by virtue of a compact or covenant which God has made, promising to them which
do the law, that they shall live by their works.


Tim. What is meant by him that works not?


Sil. Such an one as either has no works to commend him to God, and deserve
his favor; or having works, do put no affiance nor trust in them.


Tim. What was the doctrine here?


Sil. That we must claim nothing by our works: the reason hereof is, first,
because our good works are joined with many evils. Secondly, our works be not
our own. Thirdly, there is no proportion between our works and the kingdom
of heaven. Fourthly, our works are a due debt. Fifthly, our best works have
their imperfections and wants, that we do not all good works, neither do we
them in perfect love of God and our neighbor.


Tim. What is it to believe in him that justifies the ungodly?


Sil. To put trust in him that he will be merciful to our sins, to forgive
them to us for Christ.


Tim. Who are the ungodly?


Tim. Such sinners as be strangers from God, as all the elect be before their
calling.


Tim. Does God accept wicked men to favor while they are wicked?


Sil. No, but first he forgiueth their sins. And secondly of wicked he
makes them good, putting his holy spirit into them, to regenerate and
sanctify them. But at their justification he finds them ungodly, and makes
the^ godly; and he does it, both by taking away the guilt of all their sins by
free pardon; also, by cleansing away the filthiness of sin, by a powerful
sanctification.


Tim. What is meant hereby, That his Faith is counted to him for
righteousness?


Silas. That the righteousness of Christ is reckoned the righteousness of
that person, which does by Faith embrace Christ.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 6, 7, 8. Even as David described the blessedness of the man unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works, saying; Blessed are they whose
unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, Blessed is that man to
whom, etc.


Tim. What is the drift of this text?


To prove that righteousness is imputed unto faith, and comes not by Works.
The which the Apostle proves by the testimony of David, Psalm. 32, 1, 2.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Sil. 2. First, the Preface or entrance, [ Even as David, etc.] Secondly, the
testimony it self [ Blessed are they, etc.]


Tim. What note ye out of the Preface?


Sil. These things: First, that the testimony is cited without naming the
Psalm or verse. Secondly, that the righteousness of Christ was preached to
them that lived before Christ. Thirdly, Paul so cites the testimony, as he
gives the sum and meaning of it in few words, which is thus much; that
Iustificato^ is the imputation of righteousness to the believer, without works.


Tim. Who was David?


Sil. The Penman of the Holy Ghost, one of the holy Prophets.


Tim. What follows hereof?


Silas. That his testimony is to be received as the testimony of God, because
the Prophets wrote as they were moved by the holy Ghost.


Tim. What means he by describing?


Silas. Not a perfect definition, but a short and plain setting before us of
the matter.


Tim. What is meant by the Blessedness of the man?


Sil. The man which is blessed, or which may be esteemed and held blessed.


Tim. What do ye call blessedness?


Sil. The happy condition and estate of such as be in Gods favor through
Christ.


Tim. What is meant by imputing?


Silas. To impute, is to put a thing into ones account or reckoning; it is a
word borrowed from Merchants, who are said to impute that, whereof they exact
a reckoning and account.


Tim. What is meant here by righteousness?


Sil. The exact and perfect conformity and agreement to the will of the
Creator, which since Adam was found in Christ only.


Tim. Why does he say (without works) seeing David speaks not of works in
that part of the Psalm?


Sil. It must of necessity be understood: for if this be the blessedness, to
have the righteousness and good works of another (that is) of Christ accounted
to us, then a man is righteous and blessed without his own works.


Tim. Tea but he means ceremonial and natural works done before our
conversion: works done before faith.


Sil. Nay not so, but he means all works wherein sin may be committed, and
therefore more principally works of the moral law; because more properly sin
is in them: again, David speaks this even of himself, being now converted
and renewed unto faith.


Tim. What were we taught out of the testimony it self?


Sil. Sundry things, first that there is but one way for all men to become
blessed, and this is by free pardon. Secondly, from hence is matter of great
comfort for the pore and needy, in that the wealthy of the world, have no other
true happiness, then that which is common to the poorest believer. Thirdly,
here is matter of great humbling for the mighty and rich, in that the poor are
equal to them in the chiefest things. Fourthly, here is matter of great unity
and love amongst all sorts, in that there is but one common salvation, or
means of forgiveness of sins to the beggar and to the king.


Tim. What is that way of blessedness which is common to all the Saints, tell
vs-this more plainly and distinctly?


Sil. Free forgiveness of sins through faith in Jesus Christ; which is
expressed here by three phrases or fashions of speech. First, remission of
sins, which is a discharge of a debt. Secondly, covering of transgression, it
being a speech taken from such as hide unseemly things from the eyes of
others, least they be offended; so our sins by forgiveness are hid from the
eyes of Gods justice. Thirdly (of not imputing) that is, not reckoning it to
us, or calling us to any account for it. A speech borrowed from Merchants or
Creditors, who do put that debt out of the In this sense the word imputing is
used Nom. 8. 27.
reckoning, which they mean to forgive; so are we said to have sin not
imputed, as when a creditor of grace and favor, accepts a debt to be paid,
accounting it discharged, when the party indebted is not able to pay it.


Tim. What understands he by forgiveness of sin, more then is expressed?


Sil. The imputation of Christ his righteousness, which cannot be severed from
remission of sins: so here is a 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Synechdoche of the part.


Tim. What was further here noted?


Sil. That forgiveness is of all sins great and small, many and few one and
other. Secondly, that seeing we cannot be free from sin, but by forgiveness,
we should therefore avoid sin the more carefully, being wary that we do not
that from which we cannot be quitted but by a pardon; and least we abuse that
mercy, which does so graciously cover our faults.


Tim. What other things more were noted out of this text?


Sil. Sundry, first touching blessedness. Secondly, touching Gods mercy in
forgiveness of sin. Thirdly, touching our duty about leaving of sin.


Tim. What was noted and observed concerning blessedness?


Sil. Many things, first the causes of blessedness, the chief working cause is
Gods grace or the favor of God; the meritorious and material cause is Christ
his obedience to death; the end or final cause is Gods glory: the instrument
Gods word offering, our faith apprehending, the Sacraments sealing: hence it is
written, Blessed are they that believe, blessed are they that hear the word
and keep it. Secondly, the effects of blessedness; the effects toward our
selves are forgiveness of sins, regeneration, peace of conscience, joy in the
holy Ghost, graces of the new man, as knowledge, wisdom, faith, hope, love
and patience. The effects toward others be the works of love and mercy, and
all fruits of our labor in our calling: hence it is said, Blessed is the man
whose sins are covered, Psalm. 32. and Blessed are the merciful, and the
(...) and the poor in spirit. Math. 5. Thirdly, the degrees of blessedness,
which be three, first in this life an entrance into a blessed estate, by
being engrafted into Christ through faith, to be (...) of him and his
benefits, of forgiveness of sins and sanctification. Secondly, the proceeding
in it at death, when the soul is received into glory, the body being laid
into the earth. Thirdly, the perfection of it in heaven, when the whole man
shall be glorified: hence it is said, Blessed are they which dye in the Lord,
Revel. 14. 13. and Blessed are they who are called to the Lambs martage. Reave.
19.


Tim. What was observed touching forgiveness of sins?


Sil. That the Prophet speaking in the plural number, gives us to understand
that not one or a few, nor small, but many and great sins are forgiven the
faithful: the reasons hereof are first, because otherwise they could not be
blessed if one sin were unpardoned, for they could have no true peace.
Secondly, Christ's merits and Gods mercies exceeds all, and be much greater
then all the sins of the (...), were they all in any one man.


Tim. What use of this?


Sil. Sound consolation to believers, in the time of (...) for sin. Secondly,
an instruction for us, to forgive our brethren whatsoever offense against us,
when they come and say, it repents me: even as God for Christ's sake forgave
us, Ephe. 4. 32. Observe that our sins only hinder our blessedness, which
shall be perfect when our sins be wholly taken away, mean time it is but
begun.


Tim. What were we to learn as touching our duty about sin?


Sil. That before the committing of sin we do take good heed; (...), that
we may not offend so merciful a God as has forgiven us so great a debt. Romans
12. 1. Secondly, because sin being once committed, we cannot be well eased
till we be forgiven: further we learn, that after the committing thereof, we
despair not, because there is mercy with God, to give a free and full pardon to
them who seek for it. Lastly, that Gods children may commit sins of all sorts
and kinds, except only one sin, from which they are preserved.


DIAL. IIII.
Verses 9, 10. Came (...) blessedness then upon the Circumcision only, or
upon the uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was imputed to Abraham
for righteousness, how was it then imputed when he was in the Circumcision, or
when he was in the uncircumcision also? not in the Circumcision but in the
uncircumcision.


The parts of this Text be two: 1. a question, 2. an answer.

Tim. What is the drift of this text? at what mark does it aim?


Silas. To apply to Abraham the text in the Psalm, and to prove by
circumstance of time, that not by works but by faith Abraham was justified
before God: for there David mentions not works; yet seeing he was circumcised,
it might be thought that thereby came forgiveness.


Tim. How does he prove it by circumstance of time, that circumcision did not
justify Abraham, and so not David or any other man?


Sil. Thus: Abraham was reckned righteous at the time when he was not
circumcised, therefore his righteousness came not by the works of the law;
for that which was not, could not bring righteousness to Abraham: but
circumcision was not when Abraham was justified, God did not justify him by it.


Tim. How does it appear that Abraham was pronounced Just, before he had
Circumcision? Abraham had the promise of righteousness, Anno 85. of his age: but
he was circumcisea, an, 99.



Sil. By the history of Genesis, comparing the 15. chapter with the 17. from
whence I do gather that Abraham was circumcised 14. years after he was
pronouaced (...) by faith: hereof the Apostle does collect two things, first,
that circumcision was no cause of Abraham's justification, because this was
first, and circumcision came long after, and a cause must go before his effect.
Secondly, that no works justified Abraham, because all the controversy about
justification, grew first about circumcision, which the Jews joined with
Christ: also because the Jews counted circumcision a noble work, and a worthy
worship of GOD; from whence we may infer, that if Abraham were not justified
by circumcision, much less by any other work: therefore the imputed justice
of faith belongs to Abraham's Children which are not circumcised, so that they
believe as Abraham did.


Tim. What were we taught from hence?


Sil. That all, even the least things in Scripture, the very Righteousness of
faith is often had before the Sacraments be had, which follow as seals, and do
not go before as causes.
circumstances of time are of great use. Secondly, that the Scriptures must be
read with very great study and diligence. Thirdly, that Sacraments by the work
done, and action of the Minister, confer or work nothing toward the
forgiveness of sin; for Abraham had his sins forgiven him, and was
accepted for righteous being yet uncircumcised; but he had the Sacrament of
circumcision as a sign and seal of the pard on of his sins, and of
righteousness which before he had obtained through his faith: for this order is
well to be marked. First, God set forth to Abraham his promises. Secondly, then
followed faith. Thirdly after that in order of causes (but not of time)
justification. Fourthly, unto this was added circumcision to confirm his faith,
and to restifie his obedience to God: it is Popish error to tie grace unto
Sacraments.


DIAL. V.
Verse 11. After he received the sign of Circumcision as the seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had when he was uncircumcised.


Tim. What is the drift of this text?


Sil. To answer a secret objection, which was this: If Abraham were justified
before his circumcision, wherefore then did he take circumcision? unto which
the Apostle answers, that he received circumcision to confirm his faith in
that righteousness which before was given him, when he began to believe; or
rather here is an answer to a double objection. First is, that righteousness
belongs to the uncircumcised only, sithence Abraham had justification in the
time of uncircumcision bestowed on him. Not so says Paul, for he was
circumcised: but to what purpose (might one say) having already faith and
righteousness? That is true (says our Apostle) but his faith needed
confirmation: therefore he took from the hand of God circumcision, which is not
only a Sacramenta sig na sunt and sigilla, non merita (...) et vitae.
signifying or distinguishing sign, but a stre^gthening seal more to assure
him of Gods promises in Christ. For interpretation of the words, note that
(sign of circumcision) is put for circumcision, which is a sign (as Math. 24.
sign of the son of man, for the son of man whose appearing shall be a sign
of a present judgment) not a common, but a sacred sign; thence by the latins
termed ( sacrame^ta:) to receive signifies to take it in his flesh by the
apointment and ordinance of God: now if Abraham received it, this argues that
God Sacraments be signs, first of grace, secondly of duty.
gave it (for receiving and giving are relatiues,) so circumcision was a sign
both on Gods part giving, and on Abraham's part receiving it: it signed, and
assured the grace and promise of the one, and the faithful embracing of the
other. ( The sign) that is for a sign, or to this end, to be a sign
Obsigna' and analogia signi, and pactionali stipulatione.
and seal, that is as a divine pledge or seal, to ratify unto Abraham the
righteousness of faith, which he received, being yet uncircumcised. ( Seal) a
speech borrowed from Kings and Princes, which add their seal broad, or
private signet, to ratify and confirm the leagues, edicts, graunts, charters
for better assurance of such as be confederates, or subjects, to warrant
covenants and gifts. So did God that heavenly King, against the shaking and
weakness of Abraham's faith, touching the promised seed, and blessedness by
him, (which is here called righteousness, and before was termed forgiveness of
sins,) and not imputing sins, which is blessedness inchoate or begun,
leading to perfect happiness in heaven. The sum of the text is, that though
Gods promise of blessedness to believing Abraham, by Christ his seed, were
certain and undoubted; for God is truth it self: yet for more authority, and
the better to fence and stablish Abraham's faith, against doubtings and fears,
there was added a seal of circumcision. Observe that albeit it be one use of a
seal to shut up and hide for a time, things which be secret and must not yet
be manifested, (as Math. 27, 66. Revel. 5, 1. and 10, 14.) Yet in this text
Paul has respect to the other use of a seal, which is for ratification, as it
is used, 1 Cor. 9, 2. 2 Timothy 2, 9. Reave. 7, Sacramenta (...) tantum significa^t
iustitiam, sed dant et obsignant (...) in glossa.
2, 4. 2 Cor. 1, 22. Sithenco God had in his word expressed and mentioned his
covenant with Abraham, therefore he could not take circumcision to hide or
cover the righteousness of faith, but rather to help and comfort his faith in
temptation and trials, wherewith God meant to prove his faith, as he did to
the uttermost, namely at the offering of Isaac.


Tim. What thing was chiefly taught out of this text?


Sil. The true nature and the principal use of all Sacraments old and new,
which generally serve to be signs given of God, to admonish us by mystical
signification; and seals to assure us of Christ and our righteousness by him.
Every sign is not a seal, but circumcision is both; and


DIALOGVE VI.
Verse 11, 12. That he should be the Father of them that believe, not being
Circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also; and the Father
of Circumcision not to them only which are of the circumcision, but unto them
also which walk in the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham, which he had
when he was uncircumcised.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To show the end of Gods counsel, in justifying Abraham in time of his
uncircumcision, which was to show, that the Gentiles which believe are Abraham's
children though they be uncircumcised, as well as the circumcised believing
Jews. To explain this better, in the former verses two things were affirmed
of Abraham: First, that he was justified by the faith he had in his
uncircumcision: 2. that he received circumcision as a seal of forgiveness of
sins by the redemption of Christ, thorough faith in his blood. Now he shows
the cause of each, and that each had his mystery. For the former was so done,
that he might be the Father of such as believe, being not circumcised. i.
Gentiles: the latter happened, that he might be the Father also of Circumcision.
i. the Jews, not universally, but particularly such as walked in the steps of
Abraham's faith: and all to this end, to teach that the benefit of imputed
righteousness, pertains to both Jews and Gentiles which are believers, as
being equally children of Abraham, and therefore heirs of all the privileges
and rightes which were Abraham's by virtue of Gods promise that he made to him,
Genesis 17. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. And again, Thou shall
be the Father of many Nations. Abraham etc. in this name was this whole mystery
expressed. Concerning the interpretation of the words, this phrase of walking
in the steps of the faith, etc. has reference (as may seem) unto the
commandment, Genesis 17, 1. Walk before me, etc. and it does very
significantly declare, that there is no other Faith required in the posterity,
then which was in the Parent Abraham, namely, such a faith as seeks remission
of sins and life everlasting in grace alone, and not in Circumcision and works
of the Law.


Tim. Of how many sorts be the Children of Abraham?


Silas. They be either Jews or Gentiles. The Jews may be distinguished into
circumcised and believing Jews, and uncircumcised and believing, as Abraham
did, but not circumcised as he was; as they were which received the Gospel
when the law ceased.


Tim. What is it then that gives this dignity to men, to be Abraham's Children?


Silas. It is not Circumcision, but Faith, believing the promises after
Abraham's example; for it causes righteousness to be imputed to them, yea,
though they lack Circumcision.


Tim. What things are learned from hence?


Sil. That it was a great honor which God did unto Abraham, to make all
believers his Children: First, because it is a large and honorable posterity.
Secondly, it is also a marvelous great matter to have Abraham to be our
father. For righteousness, forgiveness of sin, and all happiness belongs
to such. We are here very diligently to observe (least we err) that
father-hoode in respect of the faithful is here given to Abraham not by
efficiencie, as if he should be the worker and author of faith in all his
children (for faith is the gift of God, it is not of our selves, or of any
other creature) but by a kind of proportion, because the grace of the Covenant
was given him upon that condition and agreement, and by that Law, that as
carnal parents do pass over and derive all their inheritances and goods unto
their natural Children: so Abraham this spiritual Father, should by covenant,
doctrine, and example, derive unto all the faithful his spiritual Children,
that free blessedness and Justice of Faith, which he had received of God.
Learn also the unity and harmony of the Church, Faith, righteousness in the
old and new Testaments. There is but one Father of all the believers: and
therefore but one faith, one body, and one Church: one Lord, head, and Savior;
one Justification, one salvation, even as we profess one catholic Church, the
Communion of Saints, to which pertaines remission of sins, resurrection, and
glory. Hence falls to ground that carnal conceit of the Jewish Church, that it
had only temporal promises, and were not partakers of Christ and his
righteousness. Furthermore note here, that to be the children of Abraham, and
heirs of his Justice, we ought to labor for such a faith in all points as
was his Faith, so qualified as his belief was: coming after him in believing,
as we would tracke and follow the steps of one which had gone before us in a
rough, uneven, and cragged way.


Tim. What were the qualities of Abraham's faith, in which we must imitate him?


Sil. Sundry and excellent: First readiness, in that he believed God without
delay or deliberation, after once he had his promise and understood it.
Secondly sincerity, in that he believed truly without Hypocrisy Thirdly
strength, for that he strove against, and overcame all lets of his faith.
Fourthly patience, in that he waited long for the performance of the promise.
Fifthly, constancy, in that he continued to believe unto the end. 6. Wisdom in
that he grounded his faith aright, upon the word and promise of God, and not
upon men or his own merits. Seauenthly fruitfulness, for his faith was
fruitful of good works, James 2, 22. Abraham's Faith wrought with his works.
Lastly, it was not coniectural opinion, but a Plerophory or firm and full
assurance of the promise, Romans 4.


Tim. What were the chief fruits of Abraham's faith?


Sil. First, singular love of God, for whose sake he was ready to offer Isaac.
Secondly a true fear of God. Thirdly, rare charity toward men, gladly
entertaining strangers. Fourthly, denial of him self, for he left his own
country and his fathers house. Fifthly, sortitude and valorous courage, for he
feared greatly no danger nor enemy. Sixthly, contempt of the world, with the
pleasures and delights, profits and honors of it: for he was ever ready to
loose and leave all for Gods name. Such as be like to Abraham in his faith,
having or striving to have it so qualified and so fruitful, are indeed the
children of Abraham.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 13. For the promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not to
Abraham or to his seed through the law: but through the righteousness of faith.


Tim. What is the scope and drift of this text? what is the purpose of Paul?


Sil. To prove by a new reason, that Abraham had righteousness, not by his
works but by his faith: the reason is this; By what means Abraham was heir
of eternal life by the same means he obtained righteousness but Abraham was
heir of eternal life, by believing the promise, therefore also he had
righteousness by believing.

Thus most commonly the purpose and connection of this text is laid down by
interpreters: But Master Beza and Paraeus will have it not a new argument to
prove the principal thing in question, viz, that righteousness is by faith,
(for this is not the thing concluded, but the medius terminus, or reason to
infer a conclusion premised in verse 12. that the children of Abraham are
they only which walk in the steps of Abraham's faith, (not they which walk
in the steps of his circumcision or works:) for the law, viz. (works of the
law natural or written) is nothing to this child-ship (as I may speak:)
reason is because the promise given to Abraham to be heir of the world, or
to have the world his inheritance, came to him by the righteousness of faith:
therefore they which walk not in Abraham's works, but in his faith be his
children; as Abraham became their father, not by his working, but by believing:
If this sense and coherence be judged best, then by world, the believers
dispersed and scattered over the world is meant: also there is an Ellipsis of
the word (given) which should be added to promise; and the particle
disjunctive (or) has couched in it a close objection; as thus: Be it that the
promise of being father of many nations, and heir of the world, were given to
Abraham, on condition of his believing, yet to his seed it might be on
condition of works: no, says Paul, in no wise; the reason is rendered in the
next verse, because so the promise of the inheritance and faith should be void
and of no effect.


Tim. What is meant here by the world, as you do Judge?


Sil. Some say the land of Canaan, at least typically and mystically: some by
it understand all the believers which are dispersed through the world, as is
aforesaid: some by it understand all the creatures of the world, which are the
inheritance of Abraham and every faithful person: and I take it to be meant of
the world to come, even of the possession of salvation in heaven, of the
celestial inheritance. That this is the meaning, may appear by the whole
former treatise of justification, also by the 14. verse of this Chapter;
wherein by heir, none can be meant but the heirs of eternal life: if any
think good to join this sense and that of Paraeus and Beza together as
subordinate one to the other, it is not a miss.


Tim. What learn ye hereby, that this inheritauce of heaven depends upon the
promise of grace?


Sil. That believers may surely look to have it in the end, because the
promise does not deceive, seeing it is his promise which cannot lie. Secondly,
we learn that it behooves the faithful to have an eye still upon the
promises, and to have their refuge thither when they shall be assaulted; as a
chased Heart flies to the cold broke, and the fearful Coney to the rock or
borrow; so we being tempted run to the promises.


Tim. Upon what condition was this promise given or made of God to Abraham.


Silas. Not upon condition that he should fulfill the Law, because the Law was
published long after the promise, and therefore could be no condition thereof;
again, none can possibly keep the Law. But the promise was given upon
condition of believing, namely; that Abraham and his seed should embrace it by
faith.


Tim. What does this show unto us?


Si. The necessity of Faith, in that we are not partakers of the promises
without it. 2. the excelency of faith, that to it the greatest promises are
made. Lastly, from hence we are exhorted to labor and strive to attain the
gift of Faith, and to increase it if we have it, laboring against
hindrances. Let this be further noted, that though this promise given to
Abraham be chiefly accomplished in the heavenly inheritance, yet it
co^prehends the church of Christ over the world, as a spiritual heritage, yea
and the right to temporal things in this world, 1 Cor. 3, 21. and all this
thorough Christ the promised seed.


DIAL. VIII.
Verse 14. For if they which be of the Law be heirs, then is faith but
vain, and the promise made of none effect, because the law causes wrath: for
where no Law is, there is no transgression.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this Text?


Silas To prove that the inheritance of heaven is not given on this condition,
that the Law be fulfilled by us; and therefore it is given on condition of
believing. This is proved by a reason taken from absurdities, or from
contraries, which is thus; That if the inheritance be got by fulfilling the
law, then faith is void, and the promise of none effect: or more plainly thus,
If salvation be given on condition of woorking or doing, then it must needs be
that faith which believes the promise is idle, and so the promise is also idle
and frustrate; which were an absurd thing either to think or speak so, for
God neither does or promises ought in vain.


Tim. Has the reason good weight and firmness, if it be framed from the law
of contraries?


Sil. Yea, for to have salvation by merit of our works, and to believe that
it is given us by virtue of a free promise; these two are so contrary, that if
merit be granted, believing is clean destroyed, and if belief be taken away,
then the promise vanishes; the promise and the law, works and favor in this
case of justification, cannot agree together, as Romans 4. 4.


Tim. What is meant by them which be of the law?


Sil. This phrase in Scripture signifies two things; first, by them of the
law, is meant the Jews which are circumcised, to whom the law was given.
Secondly, such as challenge and claim salvation by merit of works, or upon
condition to fulfill the law, so it is taken here: now the law thus taken for
merit of works, does suppose a debt, and destroys grace, being quite
opposite to the promise.


Tim. What is meant by this, that faith is vain and the promise void?


Sil. That is to say, faith should be required of us in vain, and the promise
of God made in vain, if the inheritance of heaven came by works: but it were
a very absurd and wicked thing to say thus, as apeareth by these reasons.
First, because God does nothing in vain. Secondly, because none can in any
wise keep that condition of fulfilling the law: therefore the promise of grace
and faith, be most needful and necessary, without which, our mind would
always be full of distrust, the law being impossible.


Tim. But if the law and the promise be so contrary, that the putting of the
one destroys the other, how is it that God has annexea so many promises to
the law?


Sil. There is a difference to be put between the promises of the law and of
the Gospel; for the promises of the Gospel be of remission of sins,
justification, the holy Ghost, salvation: these are not made to the law (that
is,) on this condition to keep the law perfectly, or else not to have them,
because then these promises should be void, seeing none fulfill the law, and
so we should ever be doubtful.


Tim. What is the second reason why the fulfilling of the law is no condition
of the promise?


Sil. It is taken from an evident effect of the law through our default, not of
the law it self, as thus; the law accuses us and pronounces us guilty of
wrath, that is, of punishment: therefore remission of sins and salvation, is
not from the law; for we cannot be saved by that which condemns us; and
punishment is repugnant to the inheritance and promise.


Tim. How comes it that the law condemns us to punishment?


Sil. Through our tra^sgression and breaking of it, whereby we fall into the
wrath of God, for there must needs be transgression where there is a law,
because man's corruption cannot observe it; and where there is transgression
there must needs be wrath; and such as are subject to wrath and vengeance are
void of eternal life: therefore the Apostle reasons well, that the
inheritance is not by fulfilling the law, because the law causes wrath by
revealing it, and declaring us guilty of it, insomuch as we have broken the
law.


Tim. What woorketh this in men; that the law causes wrath?


Sil. In wicked men it works a hatred of GOD, and causes them to fly from
him and strue against him: but in the elect it leads them to Christ, as the
disease being felt drives to the Physician.


Tim. What use is there of this?


Sil. It serves first to reprove the Papists, who teach that eternal life may
be merited by the works of the law, as one should say, that life may be
found in death, peace in wrath. Secondly, it reprooueth ignorant Christians,
who attribute salvation to their good deeds and serving of God. Thirdly, it
teaches the true bounds and limits of the law, that it was not given to
justify, and therefore that we should not lean to the law for salvation: but
having learned and been made to feel by it, that we are under wrath thereby
to be driven unto Christ our peacemaker, as the sense and smart of our wounds
sends us to the Surgeon.


DIAL. IX.
Verses 16. Therefore it is by faith that it might come by grace, and the
promise might be sure to all the seed: not to that only which is of the law,
but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this text?


Sil. To prove the former point, that the promise of heavenly inheritance is
ours by believing, and not by woorking; the reasons to prove this, are two.
First, if the promise be made upon any other condition then believing, then it
is not free but of debt. Secondly, the promise is not sure, except it be ours
by believing: for there can be no certainty by works of the law, which we be
not able to do perfectly.


Tim. What other thing is contained in this text?


Sil. A distribution of Abraham's seed, into believing Jews and believing
Gentiles: the former called his seed after the law, because the law was given
to the Jews; the other which be of Abraham's faith, viz. believing Gentiles.


Tim. What does he speak of here when he says [it is]?


Silas. He speaks of the heavenly inheritance promised to Abraham; also he
says, it is by faith, to show that the promise of the heavenly inheritance,
was given on condition that we do beleeuc, and that faith is the Instrument to
receive it: and the manner of Scripture phrase, is to attribute that unto the
instrument, which is proper unto the agent.


Tim. What is meant by this, that [It might come by Grace?]


Silas. We may understand by Grace, either the object of Faith, that is, Gods
grace and mercy offered unto us in Christ, which is the very thing that faith
looks unto, and leans upon, as the mark and stay of it: or by grace may
be understood the scope and end of Faith, which is the glory of Gods grace
and favor: for, it is much to the praise of Gods grace, to forgive sinners,
which believe in Christ, without all consideration of merits.


Tim. What things did we learn from hence?


Silas. These three things: First, that to attain a benefit by Faith, and to
attain it freely is all one; Faith and grace being so knit, as one put the
other is put, and contrariwise. Secondly, that it is a Doctrine that tends
directly to the glory of Gods grace, to teach, that righteousness and life
comes by Faith. Thirdly, that such as will have heaven by merit of works,
are enemies to Gods grace, whatsoever pretense they have to cloak their
wickedness, yet he pulls down grace, who builds merit.


Tim. What learn we by these words, that the promise might be sure to all the
seed


Silas. First, that there is a mutual relation or reference between the
promise and faith, that is to say; the promise is made, that men should by
faith lay hold on it; and faith on the other side, takes to nothing but the
promise. Secondly, we learn, that Faith makes believers sure of their
salvation, because it leans upon a sure and firm promise: for it is the
nature of faith to be sure and certain, yet it is the more firm and certain,
because the promise which it believes, is firm and certain, like to God the
promiser.


Tim. Were not the promise sure, if it were given on condition to keep the
whole Law?


Silas. No, because of man's weakness which cannot keep it: as also, because
of the Gentiles, which were not subject to the Law and Ceremonies: and
therefore could not have enjoyed the promise of life, if it had bin by the Law.


Tim. Tell us, is there any thing which may hinder this certainty of belieuers?


Silas. Yea, two things: First, doubt of perseverance to the end, which satan
and the flesh do suggest to the godly. This hinderance may be removed first by
prayer, which being made from faith for the gift of perseverance, it
obtains it. Secondly, by the Meditation of Gods eternal love and covenant,
that he will be our God for ever, ler. 31. 3, 32. 40. and of Christ's
intercession, which keeps the believers from salling away, Ioh 17. The 2.
hinderance is our manifold and great sins. This hinderance may be removed, by
considering, that none can be without sins, and that the best men have foul
ones, who yet lost not the certainty and hold of the promise thereby, because
upon repentance, they were sorgiuen for Christ his sake.


Tim. But will not this certainty of Faith breed in us carnal security?


Sil. No, especially if these cautions be observed. First, that we ground our
certainty out of our selves, upon the infallible promise of God. Secondly, our
certainty must be joined with fear of offending God, as it is written, Be not
high minded but fear, Romans 11, 20. Thirdly, presumptuous sins are to be
avoided, Psalm. 19, 13. Fourthly, it may not be applied to licentiousness. I
astly, we are not to be ignorant, that it is never severed from some
doubting, which is moderated and overcome by a true and lively Faith.


Tim. How can our Faith be certain, and yet be moved to doubting?


Sil. Yes, for these come of diverse grounds; certainty of faith springs from
the nature of faith, and from the truth and power of the promiser, Romans 4, 20.
but doubting comes from the weakness of faith, as shaking comes from the
palsy, not from the hand.


Tim. What is the use of all this?


Silas. First, it administreth a maruailous great comfort to such as have
obtained grace to believe truly, although weakly, for they be without hazard
of perishing, and certain to have salvation. Secondly, an admonition to labor
hard for faith, and to preserve it when we have it. Lastly, that the Papists
must needs doubt of their salvation and be fearful, seeing they will have the
promise of life eternal fulfilled unto them, upon the merit of their works,
and not on their faith only. For they are always doubtful whether they have
merited sufficiently, they know not when they have done works enough: yea, in
their Tridentine Council, they commend no other faith but coniecturall, even a
bare opinion and haesitation; condemning full assurance or certainty of faith,
for impious presumption, allowing not certainty of grace, without a special
revelation from heaven.


DIAL. X.
Verse 17. As it is written, I have made thee a Father of many Nations, even
before God, whom he believed, who quickened the dead, and called those things
which be not as though they were.


Tim. WHat things be contained in this Text?


Silas. Four things: First, he proves by the word of the promise, that
Abraham is the father of believing Gentiles, (as it is written.) Secondly, he
she weth how and in what manner he is their father (before God.) Thirdly, he
commends Abraham's faith in respect of that A digression into the praise of
Abraham and his faith.
whereunto it leaned (which is God himself.) Lastly, God is described by two
effects, impossible to art or nature: First, quickening the dead, secondly,
calling things which were not, as though they were; here is the second main
part of this chapter, namely a degression into the praise of Abraham.


Tim. From whence is the authority fetched, which is here brought to prove the
believing Gentiles to be Abraham's children?


Sil. Out of Genesis 17. 5. which Oracle contains the Etymology or notation
of Abraham's name.


Tim. What is here meant by many nations?


Sil. All such as should believe, of what nation or people soever they were.


Tim. In what sense is Abraham called their father?


Sil. First, because he was a pattern of faith to all believers. Secondly
because he was a teacher of that says, being a Prophet, Gene. 20. 7. Thirdly
and chiefly, because all believers have fellowship with Abraham in those
promises concerning the Messiah, which were made to him.


Tim. But how came Abraham by this honor, to be the father of all believers?


Sil. By the virtue of Gods free promise, being believed by him; therefore
Abraham had not this honor by works.


Tim. But how and in what manner is Abraham the father of all believing people?


Sil. That is expressed in these words [ before God] which words be taken
diverse ways of interpreters: some expound Non (...) more, sed dei exemplo, vt
Chrysostom.
it thus, (before God) that is to say (as God is, or after the example of God,
who is father of all people, Gentiles as well as Jews;) so is Abraham a
father. Some again expound it thus, (before God) that is, so he is a father as
the fatherhoode of Abraham cannot be understood by man's reason, but by the
Spirit of God. But these words (before God) are to be understood of a
spiritual kindred, such as has place before God, in his sight and account,
and makes us accepted in his sight: there is great necessity hereof, because
sithence the blessing of saving health is contained and shut within the seed of
Abraham, therefore we must be Abraham's Children according to faith, that we
may be partakers of life eternal.


Tim. What is the instruction from hence?


Sil. That the Jews which are Abraham's children only according to the flesh
by carnal generation, are not so precious in Gods sight, as the Gentiles which
believe; for these are properly children and heirs of heavenly Canaan, where
of the earthly was but a type and a shadow.


Tim. What is that whereunto Abraham's faith does lean?


Sil. It is God whom he believed; now to believe God is not only to give
credit to his word, but to put confidence in his merciful promises; for faith
cannot find any stay until it come to God, because he only is infinite in
power, as well as in truth and goodness; for he alone can produce a being out
of a-not-beeing, and restore life to things dead.


Tim. What testimony did God give to Abraham of his infinite power and
omnipotency?


Ril. Unto the persons of Abraham and Sarah, who in respect of generation were
as good as dead; for she was both barren, aged, and past bearing, and he was
an hundred year old: so as there was in reason as much hope of the dead to
engender, as of them. This of quickening the dead may be stretched further, even
to the particular raising of some who were naturally dead, as Lazarus and
others, as also to the general resurrection of the dead at the last day, in
both which respects God does quicken the dead: also the Saints while they
lived, have had often experience of this effect of Gods power; namely, that
being often (as it were) dead in their own opinions by great sickness or
very perilous dangers, they have been suddenly and mightily revived, as
Daniel in the den, Isaac on the Mount Moriah, Joseph in the pit, Moses in the
water, and Peter on the water: nay further, this has also place even in soul
cases, for while some that have thought themselves no better then dead and lost
men, in respect of their many and fearful sins, have yet bin quickened by
Gods mighty grace, and restored to hope, as Job, David, and others. Lastly, in
order of Nature, this has place: for we yearly see things, as Herbs,
Plants, and other creatures dead in winter, revived in the spring time.


Tim. Whereunto should this serve?


Silas. To teach the godly in their greatest extreamitics, to fix the eye of
their mind upon Gods Almightinesse, that they may have comfort, knowing that
they have to do with a God, that can say to the dead, Live, and they shall
live: Also, to ground all their prayers upon his power, as the chief prop of
faith.


Tim. Whereunto do ye refer that which follows, of calling things which are
not, as though they were?


Silas. Unto the Gentiles, which of no people were made a people by Gods
especial calling. These words have yet a larger sense, for God fulfilled them
in the first creation, wherein by his word only, he made all things of
nothing: also he daily fulfilleth them in the regeneration of the elect, who
before being not beloved, are now beloved. Hos. 2. 23.


Tim. What may we note from hence?


Silas. The easiness of creating and regenerating, which with God is no harder
for us then to call a man to us, or to call any thing by the name. We see also
what an effectual calling is, a powerful woorking, causing persons to be what
they were not; of enemies and sinners, sons of God and righteous.


DIAL. XI.
Verse 18. Which Abraham above hope believed under hope, that he should be
the Father of many Nations, according to that which was spoken, so shall thy
seed be.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To extol and praise Abraham's Faith by two reasons: First, that it did
not give place to sense, nature, or human reason. For he believed above the
hope of man. Secondly, that it did embrace the truth of Gods promise, contained
in these words; So shall thy seed be. And thirdly, that he made the Divine
promise, the support and prop of his Faith (according to that was spoken.)


Tim. What is meant when he says [He believed under hope above hope?]


Sil. That he believed under the hope of God, and above the hope of man: for
when things were dosperate in the reason of man, and there was no hope at al,
yet looking up unto God, he had hope; he conceived invincible faith in his
heart, joined with an infallible hope even against hope of flesh, nature, and
all man's reason.


Tim. Do ye not by hope understand things hoped for?


Sil. It is true, and then the meaning is contrary to that which might by man
have been hoped for, he waited for things which were set forth of God to be
hoped for; ouercomming by his faith, all difficulties, absurdities, and
impossibilities, which natural reason might object and oppose to him.


Tim. What was our instruction from hence?


Sil. This, that a true faith does enable us to expect such things as the
reason of man would never look for. Example hereof we have in Abraham, who
being an hundred year old, it was against reason, that he should look to be
a Father, yet his faith believed it (seeing God promised it.) Also David
against all human reason and hope believed, that he should be King of Israel.
Also, when Moses believed, that the people should pass through the Red sea as
on dry Land, it was against reason: the like is to be said of Joseph and of
many others.


Tim. Is it not dangerous in things which are set forth to be believed, to take
counsel with the wisdom of the Flesh, or with human reason?


Silas. It is so, as appears in the example of Sara, of Zachary, and Moses;
all which were punished, because they consulted with flesh and blood instead of
believing. Also, in the example of wicked men, who have received hurt by
leaning too much to the wisdom of the flesh, more then to the word of God, as
they which perished in the wilderness: also a Prince which was servant to
Iehoram King of Israel, 2 Kings 7. Lastly, Zedekiah K. of Judah, Ier. 39, 7.
Therefore in things which are propounded by the word to be believed of us, we
must renounce that which our own and other men's reason can object, seem it
never so absurd and impossible which God promises, yet it must absolutely be
believed.


Tim. What was further commended to us out of the first part of this sentence?


Silas. That it is the property of a true faith, to keep men in hope, even
when things seem desperate. Example hereof we have in our Savior Christ,
Math 27. My God my God, why have thou forsaken me. And Saint Paul, Act 27. and
Job and Jeremy. For faith does bear it self bold upon the truth of Gods
promises. For faith does believe the whole word of God, according as is
written, Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10, 17. But
the word of promise is that whereabout Faith is properly occupied, and
especially the word of the Covenant, wherein God promised to be merciful to
our sins.


Tim. Yet the promise that Abraham is said to believe, was of a temporal
blessing, even of a large posterity.


Silas. It was so, but this depends upon the Covenant of grace, and helps
him to believe that. For, he that can believe God to be faithful in smaller
things, can also believe that he will keep his truth in greater things.
Again, all earthly pronuses are fulfilled for Christ, who is the substance of
the Covenant. Again, all earthly promises proceed from mercy, and Christ is
the foundation of Gods mercy toward us.


DIAL. XI.
Verse 19, 20, 21. And he not weak in Faith, considered not his own body now
dead, when he was almost an hundred year old, neither yet the deadness of
Sarah her wombs; he doubted not at the promise through unbelief, but was
strong in faith, and gave glory to God, being fully assured, that he which had
promised, was able to perform it.


Tim. WHat was the drift and end of this Text?


Silas To praise the faith of Abraham by these few Reasons. First, by setting
down the hindrances of his faith, as the deadness of Abraham's body, and of
Sarah her womb. Secondly, by opposing to it the contrary, which is unbelief.
Thirdly, by the measure of his Faith, which was a strong and full assurance.
Lastly, by the end of his believing, which was, the giving of God the glory.


Tim. What is meant here by being weak in Faith?


Silas. Sometimes Faith is put for the Doctrine believed, Romans 14, 1. then to
be weak in Faith is to be rude and ignorant of the truth, and not to be weak,
is to be very expert and skillful. But faith is here put for the gift of
faith, and by not being weak in faith, he means that he did strongly believe
God. This speech is a figurative kind of speech, when one means more then he
expresses, as Psalm. (...) 1. 17. not to despise, is put for to hold in great
account.


Tim. What were the hindrances which might have troubled and hurt Abraham's
faith?


Sil. The deadness of his own body and of Sarahs womb, which he did not
consider; that is, he thought not these things so able to hinder the promise of
God, as Gods power was able to fulfill the thing promised: neither did he
reason by unbelief against the promise of God, saying he mocks me, or it will
come to nothing.


Tim. What was the instruction from hence?


Sil. Thises a strong faith yields not to such lets which discourage or daunt
it: but breaks thorough, and overcomes, them all, be they never so many
and so great: whereby the faithful are to be admonished of their duty, which
is, to strive against the impediments of their faith, not to yield.


Tim. What thing is contrary to faith?


Sil. Unbelief, by which is meant either a mere privation of faith, when
there is none at all: as in Turks and Jews, and wicked men: or a defect in
believing, whereby one believes a thing faintely, through infirmity of faith.
Unbelief if it be a mere absence of faith, then it breeds that wavering,
where of James speaks, Iam. 1. 7. if it be but a defect of beleese, then it
engenders doubting such as is here spoken off.


Tim. But had Abraham no doubting at all, touching the thing which he believed?


Sil. Yes, on every side doubting offered it self, but when he looked to the
will and power of God, he was certain of the promises and subdued doubts
arising; for it is impossible that any man should so believe as to be freed
from all doubting; because every man's faith has infirmities in it.


Tim. Whence happens this infirmity of faith unto godly men?


Sil. It comes two ways; first, by want of knowing well such things as are
to be believed: example in the Jews, Rom 14. 21. Secondly, by not constantly
and firmly cleaving to such things as they know well; as Peter when he walked
on the water, knew Christ would have him come to him, but did not closely hold
to Christ's words.


Tim. What should this work?


Sil. Earnest prayer unto God to increase and stablish our faith.


Tim. Now tell us of the measure of Abraham's faith what it was?


Sil. It was not a little and weak faith, but a strong and great faith, such a
faith as fully assured him of the thing promised to him. This word, full
assurance, is fetched from ships, which against wind and waves, are yet with
full and strong sail carried unto the haven: so Abraham by the strength of his
faith, overcame al waves of doubts beating against his mind.


Tim. What may be observed from hence?


Sil. That in every true faith there is an assurance and persuasion of that
which it beleeuth, but not a full assurance, for this is proper to a strong
faith. Secondly, that weak Christians should not be discouraged, because they
be not fully assured, so as they strive toward it: for the mea sure of true
faith is differing, and God looks not to the quantity, but to the truth of
faith.


Tim. What is the end whereunto faith tends?


Sil. It is the glory of God, because our faith gives unto God a witness of
his great power, truth and goodness, ever contrary to our reason and sense.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 22, 23, 24, 25. And therefore it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. Now it is not written for him only, that it was imputed unto
him for righteousness: but also for us to whom it shall be imputed for
righteousness, which believe in him that raised up Jesus from the dead, who was
delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification.


Tim. What is the end and scope of this scripture?


Sil. Together with the conclusion of this Chapter, it does conclude the
treatise of Abraham's justification. In this conclusion we may observe these
things: first, the conclusion it self, verse 22. ( and therefore.) Secondly,
an application of Abraham's example to the believing Romans, and to all
believers, verse 24. as teaching a doctrine common to the whole Church.
Thirdly, a proof of the fitnes of this application, from the end and drift of
this Scripture, verse 23. (now it is not written.) Lastly, a declaration of
justifying faith, by the twoe special things on which it principally leans,
(the death and resurrection of our Lord.)


Tim. For the conclusion, tell us what is the meaning of it.


Sil. Thus much; that it is no marvel if the faith of Abraham were imputed to
him for righteousness, seeing by it he did so strongly and lively apprehend
the mercies and promises which the strong and faithful God gave him.


Tim. We may not then think by the Apostles words (therefore) that he meant to
make faith a meritorious cause of Abra hams righteousness.


Sil. No surely, his purpose is to declare, not what his faith merited, but
that it was a true, lively, and sound faith, seeing it did so firmly lay hold
on the truth and the power of God, promising to Abraham eternal blessedness
in the person of the Messiah.


Tim. May not a weak Believer by this be moved to think that he is not
reckoned just, seeing he cannot so strongly believe Faith is but a condition
or Organ of righteousness, not a meriting cause.
as Abraham did?


Sil. No such matter: For this Text applies Abraham's example not unto strong
believers, but unto believers. For whosoever believes truly though weakly,
yet that weak faith (being true) shall justify them. For Faith justifies not
as a quality, or in respect of the quantity and measure, but by the virtue of
the object.


Tim. But is not righteousness imputed to the elect, before they do believe?


Silas. No such thing; it was not imputed to Abraham till he had faith.
Likewise, it is reckoned to his children on this condition, so as they believe,
or at that time when they shall believe. Faith and imputation of righteousness
go together in order of time, though not in order of Nature, for so faith as a
cause goes before.


Tim. Tell us now what the application is?


Silas. Abraham believed and was reckoned righteous: likewise all Abraham's
Children are justified by believing the promise. For no otherwise are the
Children to be just, then was the Father, who by an inheritable right conueyeth
to them, the Justice imputed to himself.


Tim. What is the ground and reason of this application?


Silas. The scope and end of the Scripture which aimed not at Abraham only,
when it is written (he believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness)
but had respect herein to all that should believe as Abraham did. This may
appear by the fifteenth Chapter of this Epistle, verse 4. that the things
which are written of some one, do concern all. Also Paul says so much in
effect in this place, That that which was written of one Abraham, did belong to
all the faithful.


Tim. But how will this hold in other things which are written both of Abraham
and others which no man may draw unto himself for imitation, as Abraham's
sacrificing of his son, and lying with his handmaide, and many such like
things? and if it hold not in these things, how then does Paul with any
strength of reason gather in this point of Justifying by Faith, that it
belongs to us, which was written of Abraham?


Silar. The answer is this: Some things which are written of Abraham and other
of the Saints, are personal or singular which either were their infirmities,
or such things as they did by a singular calling, as Elias his praying for
fireto fall (...) heaven: and some other things are written of them, which
they did by virtue of an universal vocation, which are common to them with all
others. These we may distinguish after this manner: Such things as they did
besides or contrary to the law of God, these are singular and personal, and
herein we must not imitate them; but such things as were agreeable to the
law, or the general commandments of God, they belong to the general estate
of all Gods people, and in them we are to follow them; as for the other, we
are not to read or think of those singular things without fruit, for the
whole Scripture is profitable: howsoever we may not become followers of them
therein, yet there is of every Scripture a profitable use perpetual to all
times.


Tim. What other things may be noted from this ground of the Apostles
application?


Sil. Sundry things: first, the saving use of the Scriptures is proper to the
faithful, for whose good alone they were written; a speciallmercy. Scondly,
that divine truth must be proved by divine Scripture, and not by human
writers, which are of no authority in matters of salvation. Thirdly, examples
serve very well to declare doctrines and commandments, because to things
hard and doubtful, they bring great light and cleerenesse, for that in them
the mind and senses both are joined together. Fourthly, we learn that it is a
great comfort to the faithful, to be made equal to Abraham in justification.
To Iusticiaries, mercenarie hypocrites, infidels, and profane unbelieving
worldlings, it has no comfort.


Tim. What is the fourth thing contained in this text?


Sil. To lay forth the two principal things, whereunto faith leans, to
wit; the death and resurrection of our Lord. For Christ dead and raised
again, is the thing which a true faith chiefly looks unto because there it
is that faith finds matter of support and stay to itself. Therefore the
Apostle does join his death and resurrection together: God manifested in the
death and resurrection of Christ, is the even or equal object of true faith,
which is so carried to God, as it acknowledges Christ the re deemer, and
confidently rests on him dead and raised.
because neither his death without his life, nor his life without his death,
could any whit avail us to Salvation. Hence are they in Scripture so often
joined together. Pagans can believe that Christ being a man died, but that he
is risen, they do not.


Tim. Who delivered Jesus to death?


Sil. Judas for his gain, the Jews for envy: Christ delivered himself for
his Fathers will to obey it; God the Father delivered his Son for the
redemption of sinners, out of his love, as it is written, So God loved the
world, John 3. 18. This last delivering is meant here: Judas, Christ, God did
one and the same thing, but not for one and the same end; therefore Judas a
sinner, and God just.


Tim. What was learned hence?


Sil. That the whole efficacy of Christ's death, does depend Judas shall have
the reward of his malice, when Christ shall reap the praise of his Love.
upon Gods free will and decree, that is; that his death had been of no force
to satisfy Gods wrath, had he not dyed according to the determination of his
father: and this is that which is written, John 6. 27. Him has God the Father
sealed.


Tim. To what death was Christ delivered?


Sil. To the most shameful and cruel death of the Scriptures lead our mids to
God as soueraign cause Esaias 53.
Cross; his bare death is not only here meant, but all the miseries of his
life, yet his death only is named, because it was the perfection of all, and
that wherein his obedience John 13. 17.
most appeared; the top of his obedience, and Epilogue Romans 8. 32. 33
of his passion.


Tim. What necessity was there of his death, seeing he was free from sin in
himself?


Sil. Although himself had no sin, yet our sins were 2 Cor. 5. v. last Esa
53. 5. 6. 7.
all imputed to him, as to our surety and pledge, who was to answer for us.
But further, this was the end for which he dyed, that ouercomming death in his
resurrection, he might fully satisfy for our sins. For death by GODS just
decree, was pronounced the wages of sin, Genesis 2. we had surely suffered it
eternally, if our Mediator had not both borne and conquered it.


Tim. What sins does he speak of?


Sil. Not our light and common infirmities, but our most grievous and heinous
sins, by the which we deserve even to fall from the grace of God, if he
should deal with us in rigor: not his but our sins were the cause of his
death; which suffied for all, has acquitted us from them all, one and other.


Tim. What learn we from hence?


Sil. Very many things; first, that we are bound to love That we may have the
fruit of Christ his death, we must bring Abraham's faith, love and repentance as
proofs of a true faith.
Christ, who so loved us. Secondly, we must love our enemes as Christ Jesus
dyed for his enemies. Thirdly, sin is a most loathsome thing, being the cause
of Christ's accursed d ath. Fourthly, that there is just cause of being
humbled by this consideration, that we were the means of Jesus death, we
killed the Lord of life. Fifthly, there is matter of great comfort, to hear
that our greatest sins are done away by his dying for us, for his blood was
of infinite value, being the blood of God, Acts 20. Sixthly, that all men must
be fearful to offend God, who showed himself so merciful and so just, in
the death of his son: just to his Son standing in our room, but merciful to
believing sinners, whom he absolueth by his Sons death let this mercy lead
men to reverence God continually.


Tim. Did Jesus remain in death?


Sil. No surely, for then he should be thought to die for If Christ had abid in
the Grave, sin had not been ransomed, nor Gods wrath appea led, not death
conquered, nor life merited.
his own sins, also to be but a mere man: and therefore he rose again,
even to declare that he was God, and absolved from our sins and we in him:
for in that death could not hold (...) in his den and house, that made it
manifest that our sins which he took upon him, were all discharged, that
we might be just through him. This is the meaning of that which is here
written, He rose again for our justification. Christ is said to be raised of
God, who delivered him, and of himself, for God does all things by his Son.


Tim. Is there any other fruit of his resurrection?


Silas. Yea, for thereby Christ's members are raised up to newness of life,
Romans 6, 4. Also it is a pledge of our resurrection to life eternal at the last
day, 1 Corm. 15. Lastly, in his resurrection, he began his exaltation unto
glory, and has given sufficient testimony and declaration of our absolution
from sins, out of which since he was delivered, as his raising again did
prove (for he had stayed in death, if but one sin had been unsatisfied for)
hereby we have assurance of our justification in him.


CHAP. V.
DIALOGVE I.
Verse 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we are at peace with God through
Jesus Christ our Lord.


Timotheus. WHat is the connection or dependence between this Chapter and the
former. Also tell me the argument of this Chapter, and of what parts it
consists?


Silas. Paul having taught in the last verse of the former Chapter, that man's
justification before God, was founded upon the death and resurrection of our
Lord Jesus being by faith apprehended, now he continues the same argument, and
shows what a river of benefits do flow out of this Fountain of free
Justification, both to present comfort, and life eternal in the heavens. Upon
the rehearsal and demonstration of which benefits, (as the two principal
parts) this Chapter stands. For first, he reckons up the several and
singular fruits of the passion and resurrection of our Lord, beginning with
justification, the foundation of reconciliation and peace, whence the rest do
issue to ver. 5. after follows the demonstratiue confirmation of the same, to
verse 19. Unto which is anexed an answer, touching a question wherefore the Law
entered, namely, to increase sin, and make the grace of God to superabound, in
the two last verses. For this first verse, there be these four things done in
it. First, the Author and worker of so many great benefits is mentioned, [ The
Lord Jesus Christ.] Secondly, the hand which receives him, to wit, [ Faith.]
Thirdly, Justification, as the imediate fruit of Faith in Christ. Fourthly
Peace, as the nearest effect of a justifying Faith. Touching the words, by
Justified is meant as before in Chapter 3. to be absolved from sin, and
accepted as righteous before God, through or by faith; that is, not for faith as
a meritorious cause, or by infusio^ of the habit of faith formed by love, but
by faith, as a spiritual hand and instrument receiving Christ dead and raised
again. By peace, not mutual concord between Jew and Gentile differing about
the Law, but reconcilement with God; and therefore the verb [ Haue] is to be
read in the indicative, not in the imperative mood, as the old Latin
translation reads it; which reading and sense, some of the Fathers favor,
contrary to the authority of the Greek Copy.


Tim. What is the drift of this Chapter?


Silas. To teach and set forth justification by the effects, and by the
contraries. The effects of justification mentioned in this Chapter, be sundry.
First, peace with God. Secondly, access unto his grace. Thirdly, standing in
that grace. Fourthly, hope of glory: these be internal, they which follow be
external. Fifthly, rejoicing under that hope. Sixthly, joy in tribulation.
Seauenthly, patience and experience out of a sense of Gods love in Christ. The
contrary is Adams disobedience and death ensuing thereby.


Tim. What use is to be made of these fruits of Justification?


Sil. A twofold use: First, there is a reason from them to prove, that
Justification is by faith the reason is this; That Justification which breeds
and brings forth peace and the rest of these effects, that is, true
Justification. But Justification by faith, brings forth peace, and the rest
of these effects, therefore it is the true Justification. The second use is
this; by these effects in our selves, we try out the truth and certainty of our
Justification before God. Where these effects be found in any true measure,
there the cause which is justification, must go before.


Tim. What (...) the first of these effects?


Silas. Peace with God, by which (some think) is meant mutual concord and
amity amongst men, and then they do read it exhortatiuely [ Let us have peace.]
but this cannot here be understood, for then he would have said peace with
men; neither would he have said in the first person [we have:] But by peace
with God, is understood Reconciliation, not human, but divine atonement,
whereby our sins which breed enmity, and separate God from us, being
forgiven us, we have him now pacified toward us, and of a more then terrible
Judge, he is become a most kind and amiable Father.


Tim. Then our sins had made a division between us and God.


Silas. They had so, but the guilt of them being done away and pardoned through
faith in Christ's death, now God is one with us, and we with him, even so many
as have Faith to believe in Christ, who was dead and risen for them.


Tim. Where do ye find peace put or used for truce or atonement with God?


Silas. In many places of Scripture, as where Christ is called our peace, and
the Prince of peace, and our Peacemaker, Esaias 9, 6. Ephesians. 2, 21. Col. 1, 18.


Tim. Is this a great benefit to have God reconciled unto us?


Silas. Yea surely, for all our happiness stands in it, and without it there
is nothing but misery. For, in his favor is life, and death in his
displeasure. From which benefit, does follow a tranquillity and peace within
our selves, which is called peace of Conscience, upon which does follow another
outward peace, even agreement among Brethren.


Tim. What do ye call peace of Conscience?


Silas. When the wounds and terrors of the Conscience, caused in us by the
fear of Gods judgments for sin, being healed by the death of Christ,
instead of accusing and terrifying, it does excuse and acquit us before God,
whereof follows unspeakable quietness and rest in the soul.


Tim. What difference put ye between a true peace of a good Conscience, and a
false peace of a dead and benumbed conscience?


Sil. They agree in this, that both are quiet, but in other things they differ
much; as first, the dead conscience is quiet, because it has no feeling of
sin at all, and of the terror of Gods wrath for the same: but a good
conscience is quiet, because it feels sin to be forgiven, and God pacified.
Secondly, a dead conscience fears not sin, but a good conscience is awful
of sin. Lastly, a dead conscience though it be quiet, yet it comfort not;
but a pacified conscience has unspeakable comfort within it self. For, it is
a continual Feast, chearing the heart admidst dangers.


Tim. How is this peace of Conscience gotten and preserved?


Sil. It is gotten two ways: First, by grieuing for our sins past, done
against Gods Law. Secondly, by believing the promises of the Gospel touching
forgiveness of sins. Also, it is two ways preserved, first, by avoiding
all, but especially known sins. Secondly, by doing every duty uprightly,
though not perfectly. Thirdly, by often confessing our sins, and earnest
asking of pardon, and forgiveness for them.


Tim. May not this peace with God be lost?


Silas. The sense of it may be lost, but the thing it self cannot be lost:
the sense of it may be lost, either by some gross actual sin, or by some
strong fit of temptation, or when men wax proud and secure. This may be
declared by the comparison of the Sun under clouds, of fire covered under
ashes, of trees dead in the Winter, of a man in a trance. Also, it may be
declared by the examples of the godly, as Job, Jeremy, David, Ezekiah, Christ.


Tim. How is this peace recovered, after the sweetness of it is lost?


Silas. By private prayer and comforts of the Godly, James 5. Secondly, by
remembering the old mercies of God. Thirdly, by attending the public
Ministry. Fourthly, by renewing our repentance more seriously.


Tim. By what means is our peace wrought with God?


Silas. By means of our Lord Jesus Christ, without whom nothing is to be
found in God, but wrath and horror. As contrarily thorough his mediation and
merit, all grace and favor is procured for us. They which say, that Jesus is
the preserver of us in this estate of peace, say true, but say not all, for
this peace was effected by Christ, as a joint cause and fellow-worker with his
Father: for whatsoever the Father does, that does the Son.


DIAL. II.
Verse 2. By whom also we have had an entrance by faith unto this grace,
wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.


Tim. What is the Sum and drift of this Text?


Silas To lay down three fruits of a iustifyfying Faith. First, access into
the grace of God. The second is, a standing in this grace. The third is joy
under the hope of glory.


Tim. What is meant here by grace, and by access unto this grace?


Silas. Some do understand by grace, the grace of a good conversation, or of
imputed justice, which here is called Grace, because it is freely given; and
then to have access, is freely to be brought into such an estate, wherein
Christ with his merits is imputed to us so soon as we believe. But by Grace I
understand the free favor of God; and to have access to this grace, is to have
a liberty to come or approach to God in all our wantes, being through Faith in
Christ made gracious and favorable to us. This is the same with that of Paul,
Ephesians. 3, 12. We have entrance with boldness through confidence and faith in
Christ: and also with that Heb. 4, 16. We may with boldness come to the
throne of Grace, hoping to find help in the time of need.


Tim. How does this fruit follow the former?


Silas. Very fitly: for as our sins not forgiven, do shut us out, so sin
being pardoned, and God reconciled, we may now resort to him, being made
propitious to us. This may be declared by the example of Absolon, who being in
his Fathers displeasure, might not come in his sight; but atonement being made
by Ioab, he afterward came before his Father. This then is a maruailous great
benefit, that we so little and unworthy, should be allowed to enter once into
the glorious presence of so great and worthy a God. It is a great privilege
for a mean subject, obnoxious through some crime to punishment, by the mercy
of his Prince not only to be pardoned, but so honored, as he may at all
times have access to his Prince, and entreat both for himself and his
friends. Here is then an amplification of the first benefit. For it is more to
be brought to presence, then only to be reconciled.


Tim. By whom have we this privilege?


Silas. By Christ Jesus alone. For he alone it is, who presents our Prayers
in his own name, and by the merit of his death cleaoseth our Prayers, that God
may accept them. And heerofhee is called our Intercessor, because his death
comes between Gods justice and our sins, to make way for our prayers to come
before his Mercy-seate.


Tim. What think ye of them who come unto God by the Saints?


Silas. First, it is vain and needelesse, seeing we have Christ our atonement
and spokesman, by whom we may come to his Father. Secondly, it is injurious to
Christ, to join any with him in the office of Mediatourship. But whereas it is
objected, that we may well use the Saints by them to come to God, as we come
unto Kings by Dukes and Earls; my answer is, that the comparison is not like.
First, because earthly Kings cannot be every where to hear and see all,
whereas Christ is infinite, and is every where. Secondly, God alone has
appointed us to come unto him by Christ, and by him alone.


Tim. What then think ye of them who say, We must come unto God thorough
Tears, sorrow, Repentance, and good works?


Silas. They honor those things too much, and make Christ of them, by whom
alone it is, that we have access to his Father: we must bring those things to
God as fruits of his grace, but by the merit of them we may not look to be
brought into Gods favor and acceptance.


Tim. Why does he mention Faith?


Silas. Because both Christ himself and all his benefits, come to us by the
means of Faith.


Tim. Rehearse the third fruit of a justifying Faith?


Silas. (...) in the grace of God. By which is meant the perseverance of
believers in the grace and favor of God, and in that blessed estate into which
they are brought by his favor: that this is here meant, may appear both in
Scripture speech, and common speech: perseverance and continuance, is noted by
standing, as Psalm. 1. 1. and 122. 1 Cor. 16. 13. These. 2. 8. And we use to
call a place of continuance a station or a standing: also of a man that is
resolved, we use to say he stood to it.


Tim. What then do ye gather from hence?


Sil. That a true believer which once has peace with God, being reconciled to
him by Christ, cannot wholly and for ever fall from this grace of
reconcilement, but abides to the end in that grace.


Tim. Why do ye say he cannot wholly fall?


Sil. Because partly or in part he may loose grace; that is, he may loose many
tokens and gifts of grace: as peace of conscience, touching the secret feeling
of it, joy in the spirit, cleerenesse of understanding, feeling and affection
to goodness, feruency of love, holy boldness, confession of God, with many
such like, as appears in David and Peter's case. For as a healthful sound man
falling sick, he may loose many benefits and comfortes of life; as health,
strength, liveliness, favor, beauty, appetite, and such like, but yet retain
life it self: So he that once by faith lives to God, cannot wholly loose this
life of faith, though he loose many effects and companions of this life, which
the godly do loose when they waxproud, grow secure, or fall into some grievous
sins.


Tim. Why do ye add that believers cannot fall for ever?


Sil. Because the falls of the faithful are but for a time, for they rise
againby repentance, and after recover themselves; as in David and Peter and
others.


Tim. Why do ye say that believers cannot fall from the grace of reconcilement?


Sil. Because all others which are not true believers may utterly and for ever
loose all grace, and believers themselves may loose many graces and fruits of
faith; but the grace of atonement with God, being once by true faith laid hold
on, can never totally be lost, nor that faith where by it is embraced, because
Gods love and covenant be eternal.


Tim. Nothing is unchangeable but God, therefore grace is changeable and may be
lost.


Sil. Grace is double; first, a grace making us gracious and freely accepted
with God: this is unchangeable as God himself, for it is his free love and
favor. Secondly, a grace freely given; that is, every gift which flows from
his free favor, as the grace of sanctification, of faith, repentance, hope,
love, etc. These graces in themselves be cha^geable, but being preserved of
God by a second grace they be durable and lasting; to the grace of faith God
adds another gift of perseverance, by which the former gift is kept also, 1
Pet. 1. 5.


Tim. But Saul, Judas and Esau, did wholly loose grace.


Sil. The grace of reconcilement and true faith whereby it is received, they
never lost, because they never had it: they lost only that they had, even a
general illumination, and common gift of the spirit.


Tim. But Solomon had the grace of reconcilement, for he was Gods child, yet he
fell from that grace.


Sil. It is true, he was the child of God, and he fell most grievously, and did
long lie in his sin, but he recovered his fall and was saved. For first, he
is of the Holy Ghost entitled the beloved of God, 2 Samuel 12. 24. 25. which was
never affirmed of any reprobate. Secondly, he was one of the penmen of the
Scripture, even an holy Prophet: and of all the holy Prophets, Christ says they
sit down in the kingdom of God, Luke 13. 28. Thirdly, he was a tipe of
Christ, and so was never any reprobate. Fourthly Gods promise was made
especially touching the person of Solomon; that howsoever his sins should be
corrected with the rod of men, yet his mercies he would never take from him,
nor remove his loving kindness, 2 Samuel 7. 14. 15. Fifthly, he was by repentance
restored to God and to his Church, as appears both by the title of his book,
called Ecclesiastes, which is as much to say, as a person united again to the
Church upon his repentance done and published in the Church. And the argument
of that Book, which is a large condemning of those vanities and follies
wherewith he had been overtaken, do fully witness his repentance; but none
that repents can perish, Luke 13, 2. Therefore whatsoever else he lost by his
fall, yet the grace of reconciliation with God, he lost not.


Sil. But the Apostle says of such as taste the good word of God, and the
power of the world to come, that they may fall away, Heb. 6, 5.


Silas. True, such as taste only, that is, lightly and slenderly be touched,
may; but the true believer which eats, and digesteth, and receives the
word, cannot fall away.


Tim. Yet the Apostle, Heb. 10, 26. says of such as have received the
knowledge of the truth, that they may utterly forsake God and renounce him.


Sil. The Apostle speaks of such as receive the knowledge of the truth by
their judgment, and not by their affection, into the brain, and not into the
heart.


Tim. But Christ in the 13. of Matthew, says of such as do receive the word
with joy, (which is an affection of the heart) that in time of temptation they
fall away?


Silas. The joy there spoken of, is not the fruit of the spirit in a truly
sanctified heart, rejoicing in the sense of Gods peculiar love, under the hope
of his glory, but a tickling of the mind, delighted with knowledge of new and
strange things, which may be in an Hypocrite and be lost, but the other cannot
be lost, for of it says Christ in John 16, 22. it cannot be taken from us.


Tim. Yet the Apostle, Heb. 10, 29. writes of such as be sanctified by the
blood of Christ, that they may go from God and perish?


Silas. He speaks of such a sanctification as stands in profession, and not
in power and practice. Secondly, he speaks of a general sanctification,
which makes a light and slender change, not of a special sanctification,
which effectually and more thoroughly changes and transformeth a man into the
Image of God.


Tim. But the true Believers which are truly sanctified may sin grievously
against Conscience, and thereby wholly loose Grace.


Silas. All grievous sins against Conscience, do not utterly destroy and put
out grace, but much weaken and slake the grace of God. These grievous sins of
Conscience be of two sorts. Some proceed of human infirmity, such as of
David, Peter, Solomon. Others arise of diabolical malice, such as of Judas,
Cain, Esau; these do destroy grace. But Gods children after their calling,
cannot fall into such, for all their sins come either of ignorance or
weakness, but not of malice and profane contempt of God, and these alone do
lay wast the conscience.


Tim. What think ye of that Doctrine, which teaches that one effectually
called, may wholly through some gross sin, loose grace, and fall from Christ,
yet afterward again be joined to him?


Silas. This is utterly untrue, for as Christ being alive from the dead, dies
no more but lives eternally unto God; so likewise the life of grace in his
members is perpetual, and can no more return to the death of sin, then
Jesus can return to the grave, Romans 6, 8, 9. for the life of grace must be the
life of glory, therefore eternal and unchangeable. Moreover, if a Christian may
so fall from Christ, as he shall need to be engrafted and joined to him the
second time; then also this new ingrafting must be sealed by a new baptisine,
which is absurd and impious. For, as men are but once borne into this world,
so they are but once borne anew, and are but once to have the Sacrament of new
birth: and if there be any such extinction of Grace, how is the seed of new
birth immortal, and his love unchangeable, and his (...) abides for ever.


Tim. How (...) it the prodigal child (who is the picture of one that after
grace of reconcilement, falls from his obedience to God) is said, Luke 15. to
be lost and dead, being before a child.


Sil. To this I answer, that it is a parable, and sure arguments cannot be
raised from parables. Secondly, it is said of that child, that he was lost and
dead; and it is true, he was so in his fathers opinion, and in his own
seeming: so Gods children in their own sense, and in the opinion of the Church
their mother, they are lost: but truly and indeed they are not so.


Tim. You hold then confidently that a man regenerate, which once truly
believes in Christ, can never be quite plucked from grace?


Sil. I do confidently affirm and that for very good and undeceivable
reasons and grounds, which I will rehearse in order. The first is from the
authority of Scripture, Psalm. 1. 6. The wicked and his ways shall perish: but
the Godly and his ways shall be known and crowned. Psalm. 37. 24. The
righteous falls and rises again, because the Lord held under his hand.
Psalm. 125. 1. He that trusts in the Lord shall be like Mount Sion that cannot
be removed. Math. 24. 24. It is not possible that the elect should be deceived.
The second reason depends upon Gods election, upon which the stablenes and
firm stedfastnes of the faithful is grounded as upon a most sure rock and
mountain of brass; as it may appear by 2 Timothy 2. 19. where the Apostle having
spoken of some Apostatates who were fallen from God, he does comfort the weak
minds of believers with this resolution, that their standing is firm because
of Gods election: which for the assurance and certainty of it is there likened
to a soundation or seal, two things of greatest strength and validity. The
third reason or ground, depends upon the free and unchangeable covenant,
which God has stricken with his elect: the tenor whereof is in Jeremy 31, 38
40. From whence I do observe, that the covenant of grace and salvation is
every way sure and constant, both on Gods part who alters not his good will
toward his: and also on our part, who shall have no will to depart from God.
This reason may be strengthened by the consideration of Quisacit boons, (...)
per (...) in bono. (...) et (...) dei timor in cordibus piorumvt dco (...).
Idem. (...) charitas Christi (...) sacit (...) rabiles Ambro. Sine muta. (...)
dena dci. Hoc est (...) fider (...) nunquam (...) deturbatur. (...).
Gods infinite power an (...) truth, which makes him able and careful to
perform unto the elect his most merciful covenant. Romans 4. 2. The fourth
ground or reason is the intercession of Jesus Christ, who as he prayed for
Peter that his faith should not fail, Luke 22. 32. so in John 17. 11, hec
prays for all the Apostles, and all believers, that they might continue in
grace unto the end: and God the father will deny nothing to his Son, who is
heard in all which he prays for. The fifth ground is from the nature of
spiritual and saving grace, which is not subject to corruption, but is
permanent: this may appear by the words of our Savior, John 16. 22. My joy
shall none take from you, also John 14. 16. My spirit which I give to you shall
abide with you for ever; and Saint Peter in his first Epistle, 1, 23. calls
the seed whereof we are begotten anew, immortal seed: and S. John says it
remains in those which are born anew. Lastly, S. Paul says, that the gifts
of God are F. (...) est perpetua, (...) quoni am vera. Luthe rus. fides cocuti
potest non (...) non (...) and (...).
without repentance, Romans 11, 29. Now the reason why saving grace does not
corrupt and dye, is, because it is confirmed and preserved of GOD, Jude 1 5.
Sixthly, the constancy of the love of God, who never (...) nor casts out, such
as once in love he imbraceth. John 13. 1. Moreover, the faithful are committed
of the Father to Christ to be kept, who being stronger then all, none can
pluck them out of his hands, John 10, 18. Lastly, if any which once be truly
Christ's members, and Gods children could utterly fall from God, both the power
and truth, and will of God must be called in question. The stablenesse of Gods
children may be set forth by these comparisons. First, of a tree planted by
the waters side, whose fruit and leaf never fades, Psalm. 1. 2. Secondly, of a
Cedar tree in Libanon, which is a strong and lasting tree, Psalm. 92, 12.
Thirdly, of a high and firm mountain, which is impregnable, not to be
prevailed against, Psalm. 125, 1. Lastly, of a house built upon a Rock which
stands immovable against all weather, Math. 7, 24.


Tim. By what means be the faithful preserved in this estate of Grace?


Silas. Especially by the Ministry of the word and Sacraments: also by
private prayer and Meditations, also by conference and practice of the word.


Tim. Will not this Doctrine breed security in Gods children?


Silas. No, because the Scripture which teaches their steadfastness, does also
teach that their own care and watchfulness is required thereunto, as in that
saying of Paul, Let him that stands take heed least he fall, 1. Cor. 10, 12.
1 John 5, 18.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, an earnest desire to be in such a permanent condition, as in
earthly things we couct the most dureable. Secondly, a great thankfulness to
God, who has set us in so firm an estate of happiness. Thirdly, Gods
Children may arm themselves with this doctrine against the dread of being
utterly forsaken. Fourthly, it will stir up a diligent heed and looking to
our selves to continue in the use of all good means.


Tim. What is the fourth fruit of a justifying Faith?


Sil. Joy under the hope of Gods glory. Secondly, Hope. Thirdly, the joy which
arises from hope of his glory.


Tim. Does God Communicate his glory unto his Saints?


Silas. He does so, as it is plain by these words, and Romans 8, 29. But
whereas the Prophet Esaias says, he will not give his glory to another, that is
his essential Divine glory, which is peculiar to himself as God; as to trust
in him, to pray to him, this he will not give to another: but his blessed
glory, of this his Children shall have part, so far as they be capeable of it.


Tim. In how many things does this blessed glory of Heaven consist?


Silas. In three things: First, in remouall of all manner of miseries, from
which the Children of God in heaven shall be as free as God the Father; for it
is written, Reu. 14, 13. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, they rest from
their labors, Revel. 21, 4. All tears shall be wiped from their eyes: also,
There shall be no sorrow, nor cry, nor pain. Secondly, they shall be as free
from sin, as God himself is, for in the heavenly City no unclean thing
shall enter. Thirdly, they shall enjoy the presence of all good in all
perfection, and for ever.


Tim. What is the glory peculiar to the bodies and souls of Gods Children in
heaven.


Sil. Their bodies shall be strong, immortal, incorruptible, beautiful, and
bright as the Sun, 1 Cor. 15, 41. Math. 13, 43. and their souls shall be
filled with the love of God, and of his Saints. For every glorified person
shall reign as a King, having a crown of glory set upon his head. Moreover,
this glory shall know neither end nor measure, but is infinite both for
continuance and degree. But their glory shall not be equal, all shall have
glory (that is) heavenly glory, and most blessed glory, and all shall have
fullness of glory; but all shall not have equal glory, there shall be more
or less, according to the measure and fruits of faith, as an hundred vessels
cast into the sea, all shall be full, but one may contain more then another.


Tim. What do ye call the hope of glory?


Silas. A certain expectation or looking for it to enjoy it hereafter, as
verily as though we had it already. For it may appear by that which is written
of it in this chapter, that there is great certainty in Christian hope, because
the Apostle says, That Hope makes not ashamed, which it would do were it
doubtful and might fail us.


Tim. What arises of this Hope?


Silas. Unspeakable and glorious joy of heart.


Tim. What do ye call this joy, and how does it differ from worldly joy?


Silas. This joy is an holy affection of the heart, being made glad and
cheerful upon this undoubted truth, that the time will come when all evil
shall be taken from us, and all good bestowed upon us in all perfection; that
is, when we shall be glorified with God. This joy does differ from worldly joy
in sundry and many things. First, Christian joy comes from the spirit, the
other from the flesh. Secondly, Christian joy arises from the sense of
heavenly blessings present, and hope of full blessedness to come. But worldly
joy springs from the having and presence of earthly and perishing good things
of this life. Thirdly, christian joy is lasting, worldly joy is fading. Lastly,
Christian joy stirs up to the praises of God in whom they joy; worldly joy
(...) up to the comendations of such worldly things and pleasures as men love
and delight in. I et worldlinges strive to turn their carnal joy, which is as
the cracking of thorns short and vanishing, into spiritual joy, which is
always lasting: and let the godly beware they change not their Christian joy
into worldly, but learn more and more to joy in Gods present love, and hope
of his promised glory.


DIAL. III.
Verse 3. Not so only, but also we rejoice in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation works patience?


Tim. What does this Text deliver unto us?


Silas Another fruit of a justifying Faith, which is joy in afflictions.


Tim. How does he prove, that believers rejoice in afflictions?


Silas. By this reason: because God uses affliction to increase in them hope
of glory. This the Apostle does manifest unto us after this sort: Affliction
works patience, patience works experience, experience works hope;
therefore affliction causes hope.


Tim. What means the first words of the Text [Not so only?]


Silas. They imply a comparison of the more with the less, and are thus much.
Believers do not rejoice alone under the hope of heavenly glory, but which is a
far less likely matter, they rejoice in and for their afflictions. Or more
plainly thus: If believers rejoice, because they certainly look to be
glorified with God in Heaven, this is not to be marvelled at: but this is rare
and wonderful, with gladness to embrace afflictions, which have in them both
much pain and shame. In the conexion of sentences, note, that it is the
property of that joy which arises from the hope of celestial glory, to
cause and breed this joy which believers have in their tribulations and
sufferings. For the remembrance of that great and blessed glory which they
shall have in the end, causes all things to be sweet and pleasant unto them
which they meet with in thelr way, whereby they must pass to that glorious and
most happy end, their Country in heaven.


Tim. What may be gathered from hence?


Silas. If hope of glory sweeten troubles, how much more does it make benefits
sweet and joyous? And this is that which we are to learn from hence, that
where hope of glory once enters, it makes both prosperity and adversity to be
joyful and gladsome: and further, that there is no true and sound joy either
in time of affliction, or in time of peace and plenty, but that which
springs from hope of glory to come. This is the root of true joy.


Tim. What is to be noted in the next words, [We rejoice in tribulation?]


Silas. First, that Gods children are subject to troubles in this world.
Secondly, the troubles of Gods children are helpers of their joy.


Tim. Of what sorts are the troubles of the faithful?


Silas. Of two sorts: some be common to the^ with other men of the world. Some
be proper and peculiar to the godly themselves. These common afflictions or
troubles, are sickness, poverty, reproach, famine, plague, war, banishment,
pain, anguish, and such like. These common troubles they all come from God,
who is the author of all afflictions: for there is no evil in the City, but
the Lord has done it, Amos 3, 6. Secondly, they come by means of our sins.
Man suffers for sin, Lam. 3. Thirdly, to the end, to correct for sin
past, to prevent sin to come, to humble for sin present, to make trial of
patience, to whet our Prayers, to teach us love and compassion toward others.
Secondly, the proper and peculiar troubles, they be either such as happen for
righteousness sake, that is, for a good cause, namely for defense of the
truth, or for well-dooing; these trobles be called persecutions. Or such soul
afflictions as arise from the apprehension of Gods fierce wrath for sin,
which is called conflict of Conscience. These afflictions do arise from the
weakness of faith, distrusting Gods promises and mercies: and also from the
malice of Satan, aggravating their sins and Gods Justice. The reason why God
does thus afflict his Children is, first, for a more especial trial of their
Faith, also by their constancy to stre^ngthen others which be weak, and to
reprove the wicked world. Lastly, for the greater manifestation of Gods glory,
who makes known his power in their infirmity, 2 Cor. 12. Now as concerning
the use of this, it is to warn us to look for afflictions, and that every
soul is to prepare for tribulations, as Mariners prepare against a storm, and
Soldiers against the day of battle.

Thus the godly have prepared themselves for troubles, and being under them
have rejoiced; examples hereof in the Apostles, Acts 5, 41. the believing
Haebrewes, Heb. 10. and the blessed Martyrs. True it is indeed, that some of
Gods Children have been heavy and sad for afflictions, as David, Nehemiah,
Jeremy, and Job, but yet they are joyful too; their outward man was heavy,
their inward is joyful: one man at one time may have contrary affections in
diverse respects, both sadness and joy.


Tim. Yea hut tribulations are evil.


Sil. They be so, howbeit Gods Children rejoice in them, not as they are
evil, but as by the clemency of God they are made good and profitable, for all
things work for good to them, Romans 8. 28. For first by them God shows forth
his power and goodness in them, by defending, supporting and comforting his
childeren. Secondly, our daily faults are corrected by them, and we provoked to
amendment of our sinful lives, 1 Cor. 11. Thirdly, they pull down our pride
and hautinesse of nature, Job 33. 16, 17. Fourthly, they restrain the wanton
lasciuousnesse of the flesh. Fifthly, our sluggishuesse and sloth, is shaken off
by afflictions. Sixthly, they discover our weakness of strength for humbling
us, Psalm. 39. 11. Seauenthly, they put us in remembrance of our mortality,
being messengers and forerunners of death. Eighthly, by means of afflictions,
many confessions of faith are wrung out of us. Ninthly, by afflictions, the
malice of Satan and the world are better known and avoided, as in Jobs
afflictions. Tenthly, they stir up the mind to more fervent prayer, Psalm.
39. 12. Lastly, they exerciseiand work increase of patience, experience,
hope: here it is that the godly take matter of comfort, even in their grievous
evils.


Tim. What use may be made of this whole doctrine concerning troubles?


Sil. It does teach us that a true believer is an happy and joyful man in
every estate, therefore all should covet to be such. Secondly, this doctrine
corrects the opinion of the worldlings, who think it an unhappy thing to be
afflicted, and those men accursed which be always under the rod, and most
severely scourged.


Tim. What is to be considered in these words (afflictions works patience?


Sil. Two things, first that afflictions do work patience. Secondly, that Gods
children (...) know this, (knowing that affliction works patience.)


Tim. But many are impatient in their afflictions, and fall to despair, as
Judas.


Sil. That is (...) of the wicked, that by afflictions they are disquieted and
onraged; but Paul teaches here what use afflictions have in the faithful.


Tim. But patience is the work of God, how then is it said of afflictions,
that they work it?


Sil. True it is, God who is the author and giver of patience, Phil. 1, 29.
Paul means here, that afflictions be the instruments by which God is pleased
to work patience: and it is usual in Scripture, to attribute that to the
instrument which belongs to God, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Romans 3, 30. But we must not
hereof think, that by afflictions God works patience there, where there was
none before: but GOD is pleased to use afflictions to exercise and to work
increase of patience where it is, to cause them which by the work of the
spirit be already patient, to become more patient, and to declare their
patience which they had before: and this is not in the nature of afflictions to
work this, but accidentally through Gods goodness, turning them to good.


Tim. What do ye call patience?


Sil. It is a virtue or grace whereby the mind is made strong, to endure
adversities and troubles contentedly. Contrary to this virtue of patience, is
(...) when we repine and grudge at Gods dealings toward us, as the Israelites,
Numb. 1. 1. Also blockishnesse when we are without feeling, and even senceles
in our troubles, as Nabal 1 Samuel 25, 37. Now patience is the mean between
these two, for it so feels the smart and bitterness of affliction, as yet it
keeps it self quiet under the burden, as David, Psalm. 39, 9. Job 1, 22.


Tim. What learn we from hence, that God out of such evil and grievous
things as afflictions, can work increase of such virtue as patieuce is?


Sil. His wonderful wisdom and almightines, which as it drew light out of
darkness in the creation: so also he fetches and works good out of evil in
the administration of the world: as Physicians, of Hemlock and other poysonfull
herbs, can make good medicines.


Tim. Show us (...) after what sort God deals when he works patience by
affliction?


Sil. When afflictions comes, then God confirms and strengthens the minds
of his children to patience, by many good considerations. As first, that their
afflictions come not by chance, but by the determined counsel and will of
their Father, Psalm. 39, 9 Job 1, 12. Secondly, by the conformity of Christ with
his members in their afflictions, Romans 8, 29. Thirdly, they are moved to
consider that it is the will of God that they should be patient in afflictions;
therefore their patience it is an acceptable sacrifice and service to God.
Fourthly, they have before their eye, the goodwill of God afflicting them in
love, and that they have reason, well to bear any affliction which in love of
their salvation comes to them. Fifthly, they consider all the afflictions of
this life, to be both light and momentary, and that the glory which shall be
given to patient Christians, it has weight and euerlastingnesse, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Lastly, they consider that every affliction shall not only have an issue, but
a good issue, which shall be for the best to them, 1 Cor. 10, 13. Finally, by
afflictions the hope of glory is increased in the hearts of Gods children, to
whom afflictions are seals of their bliss: in these meditations the Spirit is
effectual to stir up and strengthen patience in the faithful.


Tim. Tell us now what difference there is beetweene the Christian, worldly,
and heat henish patience?


Sil. Christian patience (as ye heard) is grounded upon Gods gracious
prouldence, his righteous commandments, and the glorious end which the
patient shall have: wordly men are patient because there is no remedy, and
because it was Gods will to have it so. The patience also of the Heathen men
was grounded upon necessity of the matter, it was their lot, and by sorrow
they could neither mend nor pair themselves. Also if they dyed, they thought
either they should feel nothing, or else be in better estate.


Tim. What was taught from the other point, that Gods Children know the use of
afflictions?


Sil. First, that Christians ought not to be ignorant of the use of
afflictions. Secondly, that to know the right use of afflictions by proose, is
a great means to help up to bear them. Thirdly, that it is a good sign of
our reconciliation with God, and that we are his Children when we gain patience
by our afflictions, to be the more patient the more we are troubled. And in
great troubles to find great patience, the measure of our patience being made
proportionable to our sufferings, strength equalled to temptation, 1 Cor. 10,
13.


Verse 4. And patience works Experience, and Experience hope.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. Two things: First, a fruit of patience, which is experience: Secondly,
a fruit of experience, which is hope.


Tim. What is the meaning of these words [And Patience works Experience?]


Sil. Even this: that Gods Children by their suffering afflictions patiently,
do get experience of Gods assistance and gracious presence, thorough the work
of Gods Spirit in them.


Tim. What do ye call experience?


Silas. Experience is the knowledge which any man gets of any thing, upon
some proof and trial of it. The experience which the Apostle here means,
is not civil experience in humane things, but Christian and godly experience
in things of God and salvation.


Tim. How (...) is that experience which the godly get by their suffering
afflictions? Are there sundry kinds, and which be they?


Sil. It is sundry and manyfold. It concerns either Onesiphorus to Paul, 2 Timothy 1, 16. Also the wicked make known their hatred to us in our afflictions,
as Alexander the Coppersmith unto Paul. Neuters and indifferent ones, do also
bewray their unconstant and unstable minds, and the rottenness of their
friendship, as they that forsook Paul, 2 Timothy 1, 15 Fourthly, the faithful
concerning themselves in their afflictions, they have experience both of their
corruptions, and of their graces. For their afflictions open unto them the
perverseness of their Nature, which before was hid from them, as in Job. 5.
Also their weakness, how unable they be to bear, and how apt to faint under
burdens, Psalm. 116, 11. and moreover, they have experience by their
afflictions of their love to God, and of their faith and trust in God, as also
of their meckenesse toward men, and of their fortitude and courage. And
lastly, it will lead them by the hand to another experience of themselves, that
they are the sons of God, truly and indeed, not in name and profession
only and this last experience is especially meant here, as appears by the
5. verse of this chapter.


Tim. What is the fruit of this Christian experience?


Sil. Hope, which is a sure expectation, whereby believing What Hope is.
Christians do certainly look to enjoy the good things promised, especially the
blessedness of eternal life.


Tim. How is it meant, that experience brings forth Hope, seeing there is no
patience nor experience, except first there be an hope of glory? How is it that
hope does beget experience, and yet experience does bring forth hope? how can
hope be both the mother and daughter of experience?


Silas. The case stands thus hope of glory causes that afflictions are
suffered patiently in this patience, Gods Children have trial and experience,
not only of the great might of God strengthening them, but also, of his great
love in conforming them unto his own son: this trial breeds a better, and
a larger measure of Hope:


Tim. By what means do the faithful attain this greater Hope?


Sil. By this Christian consideration, that seeing God was present with them to
aid them under their crosses, therefore they will hope he will likewise do it
still, and in the end make them happy. For as an honest poor man, who upon
confidence he has in some rich man, borrows of him money in his need, and
being pleasured, often and chearefully he gathers new hope of like favor in
the like necessity; so Gods Children being kept and blessed with patience in
some great affliction, upon this trial conceive good hope, that God will
strengthen and deliver them. Like unto this is the saying of the Prophet, Psalm.
9, 10. Let him that knows the Lord trust in him; and teaches the same
instruction with this Text, namely, that such as by trial in their afflictions
know the goodness and power of God, have cause by this experience to gather
much trust and hope in God for the time to come.


Tim. What are we learn of this?


Silas. First, the maruailous goodness of God, in raising up the hearts of his
Children, unto a more strong hope, by afflictions, whereby Satan seeks by
all means to drive them to despair. Secondly, Christians are bound to make this
good use of their experience, thereby to gain much heart and more confidence
in Gods goodness for hereafter. Example we have in Paul, God has delivered
me (says he) and he will (...) me, 2 Timothy 4, 17, 18. Also of Christ, who by
the long experience of his Fathers help, gathered good hope even in the very
agony of death, saying; My God, my God. Math. 27, 46. Thirdly, the Kingly
prophet David, as appears in Ps. 23, 6. and 1 Samuel 17, 35, 36. for we our
selves make bold to trust them whom we have always found friendly and
faithful unto us.


Tim. But is it not presumption to bear our selves thus bold toward God?


Sil. No such thing: it is presumption to lean upon our own strength and
wisdom, merits and works, but to rest steadfastly upon God his mercy and
truth, it is the duty of Christian hope: and also, it is an honor which is due
to God; for even by our steadfast hoping in him, he is acknowledged to be a God
constant in his truth and mercies. Therefore it is a grievous sin in such, as
by their long experience of Gods kindness in blessing and protecting them, do
not grow in hope of his goodness and power for hereafter, but wax rather
more faint and distrustful. This is a token of a very weak, if not of a
wicked heart.


DIAL. V.
Verse 5. And hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given us.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Sil. Two things; first, a property or effect of hope that it does not
confound, or it does not make ashamed. Secondly, a reason or cause why
Christian hope of heavenly glory is so certain, as it does not make the
faithful ashamed, because the Holy Ghost persuades them that God loves them,
in that he gave his Son to death for them being his enemies: here it is that
they do most surely hope in God: for how may they not firmly look for all
things from him, who spared not his Son for them? Romans 8. 32.


Tim. What hope is here spoken off?


Sil. That Hope mentioned before in the second verse, which is there called the
hope of glory, and this is the hope that does never make ashamed; because this
hope does not frustrate or void men of the thing hoped for.


Tim. How many ways do men become ashamed?


Sil. Two ways, first upon the conmitting some sin, Romans 6, 21. Secondly, by
missing our desires and hopes.


Tim. How does this help to the understanding of our text?


Sil. Thus: they which have the hope of blessedness in them, shall not miss
and forgo the thing they hoped for, and so shall have no cause of being
ashamed: again, by considering the nature of human and civil hope, which if
it do not attain the thing hoped for, there is shame, which is not here in
Christian hope, because it always is sure to attain the glory which is hoped
and looked for, therefore no shame can follow it.


Tim. Wherefore do some translate it thus [hope confounds not]?


Sil. They had regard to that perturbation of mind, which goes after shame;
for the missing of our hope brings shame, and shame brings trouble or
confusion in the mind. It is also said of faith, Romans 10. 11. that it
confounds not: and this is not to be maruailed at, because faith and hope be
of so near kindred, hope looking to the performance, and faith to the truth
of Gods promise.


Tim. What is the doctrine of these words [hope makes not ashamed?]


Sil. That the godly are assured to be saved and glorified in heaven; for first
the hope of the godly shall not make them ashamed: but the godly do hope for
everlasting life; therefore they are sure and certain of it, otherwise their
hope would bring shame. Secondly, the godly are said to rejoice under the hope
of glory; but there is no rejoicing with godly wisemen, but in things assured
and most certain. Thirdly, the godly do stay their hope upon Gods merciful
and true promises, which are constant and cannot deceive, therefore their hope
is certain. Fourthly, their hope looks to the power of God, by persuasion
whereof their hope is nourished. Lastly, if their hope were not certain, how
could they call God their Father, which cannot be done in truth, where there is
not affiance and confidence in his love?


Tim. But though the hope of the godly be certain for the present, yet their
great and many sins, and the changeableness of their will, may make their
perseverance to the end to be doubtful.


Sil. First, if hope were at any time uncertain, and might miss of glory, then
it should make ashamed, contrary to the saying of the Apostle. Secondly, great
and many sins cannot make hope vain, because all sins are forgiven to the
godly which beeleeue and repent, 1 John 1. 9. Thirdly, the godly are taught of
Christ, to pray for forgiveness of sins, and the confirming of their wills to
the end, Math. 6, 12. And that which they ask according to the will of God, is
granted them. Finally, though men's wills in their nature be changeable, yet the
hope of glory is founded upon the unchangeable will and counsel of God.


Tim. What use and profit is to be made of this doctrine?


Sil. First, it controlleth the opinion of the Papists, which ground hope (at
least in part) upon merit of good works, from whence will follow continual
un certainty, and doubt of salvation; for that they never are sure when their
merits are sufficient. Also their corrupt opinion will prove unsound by these
reasons. First, because all hope and confidence is accursed, which does not
rest upon God, Iere. 17. 10. and our good works are not God, therefore no
hope is to be put in them. Secondly, such as are newly converted unto Christ,
from some wicked life and grievous sins, they have hope then, but they (...) no
merit of works going before; therefore their hope cannot rest upon their
merits which be not: but as for those who have good works and live well, they
have more cause to hope well, because good works are a good sign of good
hope, and some prop they are to help hope; but they may not be hoped in, or
taken as a cause why we must hope. If any say that patience is a good work,
and Paul faith, hope springs of patience, therefore hope springs out of
works: I answer, hope comes of patience, but not as from a cause of it, no
more then afflictions be cause of patience. Furthermore, from hence we are
admonished, that such as always doubt of their Salvation, can have no
Christian hope, therefore they must strive against doubting. Lastly, there is
great use for them which feel themselves endued with Christian hope; for
whatsoever their afflictions, or enemies, or sins be, yet they cannot be
confounded, but at last must be happy, for we are saved by hope, Romans 8.


Tim. Now come to the second part of this text, and tell us how many ways is
the love of God taken in Scripture?


Sil. Two ways, either passive for that love wherewith God is loved of us, 1
John. 4, 12. or actiuely, for the love wherewith God does love us in his
Son; this is meant here.


Tim. How may it appear that it is put here, for that love wherewith God
loves and embraces us?


Sil. First, by the reason used in the next verse (for Christ dyed for us)
which proves Gods love to us. Secondly, by the 8. verse following, where it is
written, (God commends his love to us.) Thirdly, we have not our hope
certain and unshaken because we love God, but because God (who deceives not)
loves us.


Tim. In what meaning is Gods love said to be shed abroad in our hearts?


Sil. It is thus much; that the sense and feeling of his love, is shed and
powered into the hearts of his children.


Tim. Did not God love the elect from everlasting before they were borne?


Silas. It is true: howbeit that was only in purpose and decree, and so it was
secretly known to himself. But Paul speaks of the manifestation of this
love unto the elect, after they are borne a new: for when the elect are
regenerate, then God does express his love unto them, and they do by faith
lay hold of the love of God, believing that they are loved of God, and have
their hearts affected with a joyous feeling of it. For as the box of costly and
precious ointment which the woman poured upon Christ's head, Matthew. 26, 7. gave
no favor while it was shut up in the box, but being shed and powered out, did
yield a most sweet sent and savor unto all which were in the room: even so,
the love of God is pent and shut up (as it were) in Gods decree, before
regeneration and faith, so as it is not felt of the elect; but at their new
birth, when they have faith to believe the promise of salvation by Christ, the^
this love is as an ointment powered out, and does exceedingly and plentifully
refresh the hearts of the elect, with the sense and feeling of it.


Tim. What then is the doctrino we learn here?


Silas. That the most loving God is content not only to love his children, but
withal does assure them of his love, so as they certainly know that they are
loved, and are cheared in their hearts by the persuasion of his love. For, as
it is nothing to a blind man to know that the Sun is a glorious bright
creature when himself cannot see it: or to a poor man to know where much
treasure is, whiles himself cannot come at it: so it is nothing to hear and
know that there is much love hid in God, except our selves feel it, and become
partakers of it. Examples we have of the Apostles, and many other believers,
Acts 5, 41. Rom, 8, 38, 39. who have had the sense of Gods love in their
hearts, and have rejoiced therein even in their extreme afflictions, in the
flames of fire, and depth of Dungeons horrible and darksome.


Tim. Have the faithful a feeling of Gods love always in one tenor, and like
measure?


Silas. Neither of both: but by sins and temptations it is often interrupted,
as the light of the Sun is darkened and lessened by mistes and clouds: yet
this love of God shall always endure in them, because God alters not.


Tim. Whence comes the feeling of Gods love?


Silas. It is the especial work of Gods spirit of Adoption, Romans 8, 16. and
it comes by the free gift of God, who gives it to all the members of his
son, Romans 8, 9. Ephesians. 1, 13.


Tim. What does the sense of Gods love given them by the spirit work in the
faithful?


Silas. First, a fervent and unfeigned love of God, 2. Cor. 5, 14. 1 John 4,
19. We love him because he loved us first. Secondly, an hearty love of our
neighbor for Gods sake, 1 John 4, 21. Thirdly, joy in the holy Ghost, 1, Pet,
1, 8. Lastly, great increase of hope in a more full assurance of inioying the
glory looked for, inasmuch as God who loves us and holds us dear unto him,
cannot change nor deceive us.


Silas. I pray you tell us here, is it the nature of hope to be certain, and
to give this assurance ye speak of?


Silas. Of hope generally taken, it is the property only to look and expect
for a thing which we have not, Romans 8, 24, 25. but the certainty and assurance
of hope grows from the nature of the things hoped for, which if they be
certain and have sure and certain causes, the hope is certain and assured;
otherwise it is not: for hope of worldly things (which we may call human or
civil hope) it is of things uncertain, which may fall out, or not fall out,
because they have uncertain causes; and this hope has no assurance, but is
joined with continual doubting: but Christian hope, it has always assurance
and certainty joined with it, because it is of spiritual blessings and
protections; also of heavenly glory which comes of a most firm cause, namely
the unchangeable good will and love of God, as also his most free and firm
promise in Christ.


Tim. Whereunto does this serve?


Sil. To reprove both the Papist and ignorant profane Protestants, which sever
assurance from Christian hope, wherein they do injury to God himself; and
show that they are not such, who have his love shed abroad in their hearts.


DIAL. VI.
Verse 6. For Christ, when we were yet of no strength, at his time died for the
ungodly.


Tim. What is the drift and end of this text?


Sil. To confirm that which he had said, of the love of God toward us, by an
effect and fruit of his love, which is, the death of his Son Christ Jesus.
Here begins the demonstration, which is the second part of this Chapter, as
before.


Tim. How is this set forth?


Sil. It is set forth by a double circumsta^ce of time; first in that the
Son of God was given to death for us at that time when we were yet weak,
ungodly, sinners, and enemies. Secondly, in that he dyed for us at the time
appointed of his Father, called (his time.)


Tim. What be the parts of this sixth verse?


Sil. Four; first, what ones God loved, (weak and ungodly ones.) Secondly, by
what gift he expressed his love (his Son Christ.) Thirdly, at what time the
gift was bestowed (at his time.) Fourthly, to what thing he was given, (to
death.)


Tim. Now come to the interpretation of the words, and first tell us what is
meant by [weake] in this place?


Sil. The word here used, is applied sometime to the body; then it signifies
either weakness, which comes by some disease or sickness, after which, men
be feeble; or else it notes the want of al might, as in that text of 1 Cor.
15, 43. The body is sown in weakness: or it is affirmed of the mind, and
then it is either put for small strength, as Romans 15, 1. or for no strength, as
here in this text: that this is here meant, may appear by this, that they
which are called weak, the same are called ungodly, sinners, enemies; such are
void of all spiritual and saving power, to believe or repent.


Tim. What do these terms teach us?


Sil. That they for whom Christ was given to death, were such as had no force
of their own to help themselves, but needed all manner of help unto salvation.
Secondly that such as Christ died for, do not only need all help, but being
ungodly, refuse helps being offered; and being sinners increase their evils
more and more, and which is most of all, they grow in hatred of the remedy,
being open enemies to God: here is a singular gradation to amplify Gods love
to lost mankind.


Tim. What is the use to be made of this truth?


Sil. It shows the wretched estate which men live in without faith in Christ.
Secondly, it condemns the madness of such as affime that the elect being in
this estate, were yet Justified, and the sons and heirs of God: this their
madness may appear in this, that the self same persons at one time, shall be
actually and indeed both enemies and friends to God, sinners and righteous,
ungodly and sons, to need all help, and yet to have all help; this is to
confound heaven and hell grace and corruption, Satan and God, death and life
together. Thirdly, it confuteth the Pelagian and Papist, who ascribe some
strength to nature to prepare, at least to dispose it self to grace. This the
Pelagian sets forth by a similitude of wax fit for any impression, of white
paper, or a naked table ready to take any form: so is our nature (say they)
apt to learn, if it be but taught us: also the Papists they express it by the
similitude of a man sore wounded or much enfeebled, or laden or borne down
with bolts and fetters, which with a little help of another man's hand, will
raise up himself, and make shift to stand upon his feet: So say they,
nature is but wounded, enfeebled, or ouerburthened, and with little help of
grace, can rear it self to heauenwards. These their corrupt opinions appear
to be false, by Ephesians. 2. 1. where it is written that we are dead in
trespasses and sins, and therefore as touching God and godliness, we are by
nature dead corpse; and in this our text, we are said to be of no strength.
Fourthly, it provoke Gods children to great humility and thankfulness toward
God, to consider what they were before their conversion; for the more miserable
our former estate, the more amyable present grace: also it must move them to
compassionate others, which yet be in this woeful estate, seeing themselves
once were such. And lastly, it must stir up a fervent love to God, who in
this most pitiful case loved us, and gave such a guist and remedy to us, and
for us.


Tim. What was that gift whereby God does express his love unto us, being so
sinful and wretched?


Sil. No less then Christ, his own and only begotten Son, which is the
greatest and best gift that the most As God could not swear by a greater then
himself so he could not give a greater then himself in the person of Christ.
great and good God could bestow upon mankind: the reason is, because it is
more worth then all the world: for it is himself in the person of his Son,
therefore the greatest. Also through this gift all other gifts are made good and
profitable to us, which else would be so many curses. Therefore the best cause
that moved him to bestow such a gift upon us, was the good pleasure of his
will, which here and elsewhere is called his love, John 3, 16. 1 Ioh. 4.


Tim. What did we learn by this, that God would witness his love by such a
fruit of it and gift?


Sil. That our love must be like the love of God, that is, an effectual and
fruitful love, not in purpose only and goodwill, but in effect as we are
able to express it. Secondly, that as God declares his great love, and that
to his enemies: so after his example, we should out of love do good to our
enemies, whereby we are known to be Gods Children, Luke 6. For even Infidels
and the most wicked persons, they will love such as love them, Math. 5.


Tim. What does this mean, which is added [According to the time, or at his
time?]


Silas. It means thus much: even that fit and convenient time appointed of
his Father, called fullness of time, Gal. 4, 4. and his hour, John 5, 25. for
God has his times appointed for all his works, Eccl. 3, 1.


Tim. What follows of this?


Silas. That Christ could come neither sooner nor later then he did. Secondly,
it commends the more Gods love unto us, to send him at a time when a floode
of wickedness had ouerflowed all. Thirdly, that there is a fit time for every
work of God, which should teach men to wait upon God, Eccles. 3, 1.


Tim. Where unto gave he Christ for us?


Sil. Unto death, which was a dissolution of his body He suffered the first
death and the pangs of the second death.
and soul, joined with the curse of God, Galath. 3, 13. Of this death there
was great need. For Gods Justice had decreed it, his word foretold it, the
sacrifices prefigured it, the foulness of man's sin deserving it, Christ
willingly suffered it, man was sufficiently redeemed by it, and God greatly
glorified by it.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. It shows us the greatness of man's sin, and of Christ's love, of
Satan's malice, and of Gods Justice, and of Popish blindness and corruption,
which teach some sins so light and venial, as asprinkling of holy water and
ashes will purge them.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 7, 8. Doubtless one will scarce die for a Righteous man, but yet for a
good man one dare dye: but God sets out his love toward us, seeing that
while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To set forth and extol the love of God toward us, by a comparison
of the less with the greater. The sum of this comparison is this; There is
scarce any man's love so great, as that he will die for a just person, though
he be also good and profitable unto him: how great then was that love that
moved God to give his Son to death for us which were sinners and his enemies?
From whence the Apostle does gather, that if Gods love be such, as our sins
before we did believe, and whiles we were enemies, could not hinder him from
giving his son to die, much less shall those sins which we do afterward, be
able to hurt our salvation; therefore the hope which the godly have in God,
cannot make them ashamed.


Tim. What he the parts of the comparison contained in this Text?


Silas. Two: First, a proposition, verse 7. Secondly, an application, verse 8.


Tim. What is here meant by righteous?


Sil. Not a just matter or cause, but a just man, as is to be seen both by the
6. and 8. verses, where he uses words noting persons.


Tim. What difference is there between a just man, and a goodman?


Silas. Some understand a good man to be Christ, for whom Martyrs dyed. Others,
by a good man understand one who is profitable to us: this is most probable.
Others put righteous and good both for one thing.


Tim. Why does the Apostle say, [It may be one dare dye for a goodman?]


Si. Either for that if any did die for others, it were more for their own
sake, then for another man's sake: or else for that he never found nor knew any
such example. As if he should say, it may be, but for my part, I know of none
that ever did so.


Tim. What instruction now do ye gather from these first words?


Sil. That a man's life is a dear and precious thing: for seeing so few are
found, that will give their life for righteous men; this shows that men hold
their lives in very greataccount.


Tim. What does this put us in mind of?


Sil. Surely of thus much, that the charity of the best men is faint and
faulty, because the Apostle knew none whose love had carried them so far as
to die for their brethren, whereas we ought to do so, 1 John 3, 16.


Tim. Can ye tell us of none that have adventured their lines for others sake?


Sil. Yea, the Apostle Paul as he witnefleth of himself, 2 Corinthians 12, 13.
also Aquila and Priscilla, Rom 16, 4. and the Martyrs. This was great charity,
but yet not to be compared with the charity of Christ, which he showed toward
us.


Tim. One would think that it did rather exceed his love, for it is a greater
matter for a mere man to dye, then for him that is more then a man: (hrist
could take up his life again, and so could not other men resume theirs.


Sil. The charity of Christ yet far exceeds that other; for first, Christ is
of more dignity by far then any man, therefore his life by far more worth
then ours. Secondly, the love toward sinners is far more, then that love which
is toward good men; for that is free from all self respect, and therefore is
the more pure lone.


Tim. What instructions gather ye from hence?


Sil. That the love of Christ to his Church far surmounteth all the love of al
men toward men.


Tim. What use is to be made of this (...) singular love?


Sil. First, it serves for confirmation, that he will not cast out and
condemn such as he has thus loved as verse 10. Secondly, it serves for
imitation, for it Christ so loved us, we ought also to love one another, John
15, 12. 1 John 3, 16. This is the mark we must aim at, and wherein we come
short, we ought to be sorry and amend.


Tim. But when the Apostle says, Christ dyed for us while we were yet
sinners: has his death brought this to pass, that we are now no more sinners?


Sil. After we believe that Christ dyed for us, and are regenerate by his
Spirit, we have sin still, but we are not any longer to be called sinners;
because that now our sins by forgiveness are blotted out, and that which
remains still in our nature it reigns not, and the denomination of a person
or thing, is ever from that which is more excellent and worthy. But here the
Apostle means by sinners, such as be under the guilt and dominion of sin,
as al men are before faith.


Tim. What could God see in us then to move him to love us?


Sil. First, he saw in us his own creation, which he loved with a general
love, as he does all the works of his hands. Secondly, he saw in us much misery
through sin, and this made him love us with a pitiful love. Thirdly, her
loved his elect being yet sinners, in that he purposed in himself to call and
justify them in due time. And now lastly, having grafted his elect in his
Son by faith, and instified them, he loves them actually, having set his
own image in them.


Tim. You hold then that there are sever all degrees and kinds of Gods love,
even toward his (...)


Sil. There be so, for he cannot love his elect with that degree and kind of
love when they are sinners, as he does after they are now in his Son
justified and sanctified: for now sin which bred hatred and enmity, is
defaced and cast out by remission; and holiness which God loves, is imprinted
in them, and brought in by renouation.


DIAL. VIII.
Verses 9, 10. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled
to God, by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved
by his life.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Sil. It contains a conclusion drawn from the circumstance of time, wherein
Christ showed his love by dying for us, while yet we were sinners and enemies;
the sum whereof is thus much: If Christ out of his love dyed for us being
wicked, now being through faith in his death and bloodshed justified, he
will much more save us from eternal punishment.


Tim. How is this conclusion amplified and enlarged in the 10 verse?


Sil. By comparing us with our selves, and Christ with himself according to
diverse estates after this sort: Before we believed we were sinners, vng odly
and enemies, now we are made friends and justified. Christ once dyed, and by
his death wroght much for us; now he lives an eternal life, and reigns with
his Father, and can do more for us; for if Christ by his death could do so
much, as when we were enemies to make us friends, and to justify us being un
godly: now that we are friends, and he is alive reigning in heaven, he is much
more able to bring us to felicity and glory.


Tim. Now we have heard the scope, sumnie and order of this text, let us hear
the words expounded, and tell us what is here meant by his blood, and by
justified?


Sil. By his blood is meant, the whole death and sufferings of our lord,
whether they were felt in soul or body; and by being justified, is to be
acquitted from our sins, and to be accounted perfectly just with God by
Christ's death, and obedience imputed.


Tim. Does Christ his obedience to death Justify us alone, without any other
thing?


Silas. Wheresoever justification is spoken of, there Christ and his blood or
death (if faith be not named) are to be understood with respect to faith,
which apprehends and applies it: and on the contrary, where faith is named and
not Christ, it has reference to Christ. This does appear to be so: first, by
those plain places where it is said, we are justified by faith in Christ.
Secondly, by comparing, Genesis 12, 3. and Gal. 3, 8. together: also in this
present Text, in the particle [ Now] which implies that before, while they
were ungodly and unbelievers, they were not justified.


Tim. What then do ye think the meaning of these words to be?


Silas. Thus much: we are justified, that is; we are freed from the guilt of
our sins and accepted for righteous with God by his blood, (that is) through
faith whereby we believe the blood of Christ to be shed to death for us, and
those other things which he suffered, to be suffered for our sins.


Tim. What is meant here by wrath?


Silas. Not only all judgments here inflicted upon A Metonimie of the cause
put for the effect.
the unrepentant world, but an eternal pain or punishment in the world to
come, proceeding from a just and wrathful God offended with man's sin.


Tim. What learn we by this?


Sil. Not to make light account of sin whereby the wrath of God is kindled
even to the everlasting destruction of his creature, but to fear it more then
Hell, for Gods wrath and displeasure is the greatest evil.


Tim. What is meant by being saved?


Silas. Two things: first, our delivery from the gulf of perdition. Secondly,
the keeping or preserving of the faithful unto heavenly bliss.


Tim. But we are saved when we first believe and have our sins forgiven us,
and are regenerated by the spirit of Christ, as Christ said to Zacheus at his
conversion, This day salvation is come to thine house. Luke, 19.


Silas. True: that is the beginning, but Paul speaks here of the top and
perfection of our salvation, which is the glorifying of us in Heaven.


Tim. What learn we from this?


Silas. That both the entrance and end, the first beginning and last
consummation of our salvation is from Christ by faith; therefore they rob
Christ of his glory which attribute any part of their salvation to any other,
as all sects do, save true Christians.


Tim. What things were considered in the tenth verse?


Sil. A threefold estate of Gods Children: the first is of corruption (they
were enemies.) The second is of Grace: they are justified and reconciled. The
third is of Glory: they shall be saved. There is a fourth not named here, to
wit; the estate of innocence by creation. Every true Child of God must pass
through all these.


Tim. What else is to be considered here?


Sil. A two-sold estate of Christ, one of humiliation (he was dead:) the second
of exaltation (he now lives.) In the former estate Christ merited for us, as
our HighPriest, in the latter he effects and applies unto us all his merits
as a King, daily working and bringing us toward the salvation once merited.


Tim. What do ye gather from this?


Sil. This comfort; that true believers which have their sins forgiven them
by Christ, they have good hope that they shall certainly be saved: the reason
is plain, for if Christ by the merit of his death being believed in, could set
the elect (being enemies) in the estate of salvation: now that he lives,
surely he is able by his power to set them (being friends and reconciled) in
the possession of salvation. Secondly, from hence are reproved such as say,
that true believers may fall from grace and perish: also, such as teach that
they ought continually to doubt of their salvation, as the Papists do teach.
Lastly, it reproves Gods Children which do yield to doubtings of their own
salvation. For this is an injury unto Christ as if he were not strong enough to
save them, whom he was sufficient to reconcile. This is a most excellent place
for the infallible (not probable and coniecturall, as Romanists speak)
certainty of glory, and perseverance in grace. Lastly, we are taught by
example of our heavenly Father, to make atonement with our enemies.


DIAL. IX.
Verse 11. And not so only: but we rejoice concerning God by Jesus Christ our
Lord, by whom we have received the atonement.


Tim. WHat does this Text offer unto us?


Silas. An amplification of that which was said before in the third verse of
this Chapter, to which it must be (...) after this sort. He had said verse
second, We rejoice under the hope of glory. Then verse third, he added a
correction; Not so, but we rejoice also in tribulations: now in the eleventh
verse, he joins a third member of glorying or rejoicing, and not only so,
but we rejoice concerning God through Jesus Christ our Lord. The sum whereof is
thus much; seeing we have God reconciled unto us by Christ, even unto our
certain and assured salvation in heaven; we rejoice not in our hope of glory
to come, nor in afflictions present, but especially in the knowledge and Faith
of this great grace and favor of God the father unto us through his Son.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. First a duty, to rejoice. Secondly the cause hereof, because God is
reconciled and become our Father in Christ. Thirdly, the means how we attain
this reconcilement, in that we receive it, to wit; by our faith in Christ. This
rejoicing is a special good thing, and it is as it were, the very life of a
man's life.


Tim. How many kinds of reioycings be there?


Silas. There is a natural rejoicing common unto all men when the heart is
cheared, either by an inbred liveliness, or by outward occasions, as in the
presence of things pleasant or agreeable to our nature. This rejoicing is not
meant here. Also, there is a spiritual and Christian kind of rejoicing,
which arises from the spirit of God, stirring up the heart to rejoice in
spiritual and heavenly things, when they are present with us, or certainly
hoped for. As first, when the Church flourishes, Psalm. 137, 3. Secondly, when
a sinner returns to the Lord, Luke 15, 10. Thirdly, in the means of
salvation, Ps. 122, 1. Fourthly, in doing righteousness, judgment and equity.
Fifthly, in the exercising our selves in Proverbs 1.
the praises of God, Psalm. 95, 1. Sixthly, in the reconciliation that we have
with God through Christ when it is believed or felt, of this our Text speaks.


Tim. What is it to rejoice concerning God?


Silas. To have joy of heart in this respect, that he is become our Father,
and loves us as his Children and Sons.


Tim. What difference is there in these speeches concerning God as here: and
to rejoice in God, as 1 Cor. 1, 31. and to rejoice with God, as Romans 4, 2?


Sil. To rejoice in God, it is to attribute all things which be good unto God,
and to render him all thanks for them; this we may do. Secondly, to rejoice
with God, it is to to bring something with us of our own, wherein to glory
and rejoice besides Gods favor; and this we may not do. Thirdly, to rejoice
concerning God, it is to be merry in our hearts for this, that we do understand
how God does love us, as a father his children. The like unto this, we have in
Ier. 9, 24. Let him that rejoices rejoice herein, that he knows me to be
merciful and righteous; whereas others rejoice in riches or pleasure, or
honor, or wisdom; the Christian ought to rejoice in Christ.


Tim. Is there great and just cause to rejoice for such a gift bestowed on us,
as Gods Fatherly favor through Christ?


Silas. Yea very great, for herein consistes all man's happiness, both now and
for ever, to have God reconciled, that he may be a Father to take us for his
sons sake and love. Such only do rejoice; therefore such as weigh these
things, and do inwardly feel them, so as they are are affected with them, do
from hence gather exceeding strong hope of enjoying everlasting life. For God
is such a Father, so constant in his love, as though he will correct them, yet
never will he disinherit them.


Tim. By whom is it that God is become a favorable Father unto us?


Silas. By Christ his beloved son, who by his death on the Cross, has made
atonement for our sins, being there in our stead by the will of his Father;
and by means of our receiving it thorough faith in the promise of the Gospel,
we have made it ours.


Tim. What things do ye consider severally in this atonement spoken of in
this place?


Silas. First God, to whom we are reconciled, he loving us, and giving his
son for us. Secondly, his Son coming to work our atonement by his
obedience, passion, and Sacrifice. Thirdly, our Faith embracing this
atonement, and receiving it. Fourthly, a great rejoicing of heart in the Faith
and certainty of this reconcilement with God.


Tim. What do ye collect from this whole Doctrine?


Silas. That our Christian and spiritual rejoicing, it is as our measure of
believing is: none, if our Faith be none; little, if our faith be little;
great, if our Faith be great. Therefore, as any do long for much true
Christian comfort, let them endeavor a daily increase of Faith, by the humble,
sincere, and constant use of al those holy means private and public, whereby
God uses to enlarge the belief of his children.


DIAL. X.
Verse 12. Whereas by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and so death went over all men, in whom all have sinned.


Tim. WHat is the purpose of the Apostle in this Text?


Silas Having spoken hitherto of the first part of Justification, touching
remission of sins by faith in the sufferings and death of Christ, and laid out
the same in the causes and effects: now he proceeds to handle the other part
of Justification, touching the imputation of Christ's perfect obedience unto us
which believe.


Tim. Is there any necessity of this part of Justification?


Sil. Yea, very great: for we were two ways endangered to God, 1. by not
fulfilling and keeping the law (as we are bound) we lost all right and title to
Heaven. Secondly, by our sins done against the Law, we become worthy for
ever of eternal punishment in Hell, and therefore we have need of a double
remedy from Christ: one, to have a satisfaction for the deserved punishment,
and this we have by the death and bloodshed of Christ imputed to us. The
other, to restore us to the right of our lost inheritance, and this we have by
the perfect obedience of his life put upon our faith.


Tim. How may it appear that Paul does thus distinguish the parts of our
Justification?


Silas. Two ways: First, by the word rejoicing or glorying, used in the former
verse, wherein he makes his passage to this Treatise.


Tim. What do ye gather from hence?


Silas. Thus much: believing Christians cannot fully rejoice and glory
concerning God, until together with the discharge from the pain due to their
sins by free forgiveness through Christ's passion, they know and believe
themselves to be decked and blessed with that absolute obedience and
righteousness which the Law requires, and unto which by the promise of the
Law eternal life is due: which seeing they have not nor can have in
themselves, therefore they have it of Christ.


Tim. What is the second way how ye gather this distinction of two parts of
Justification?


Silas. By the comparison of Adams unrighteousness and his disobedience, with
Christ his obedience, both communicated to all elect persons, though in diverse
sorts and fashions, the which he does begin in verse 12. and continues it to
verse 20.


Tim. Wherein be Adam and Christ compared together?


Sil. Both in things wherein they are like one to the other, and in things
wherein they are contrary one to the other. They are alike in this generally,
that each of them conueyeth that which is his, unto such as are theirs, and be
of them; particularly, Adam sends over to all that come of him guilt of sin
and death by his disobedience imputed; Christ conueyeth over righteousness and
life to his members by free imputation of faith. Also they differ in this, that
the offense of Adam by which death came upon all men was but one, but the
obedience of Christ imputed to believers, does not only cover and do away that
one, but all other offenses of the elect: also his obedience puts upon the
faithful a righteousness which meriteth a far better condition then we
lost by Adams unrighteousness: this unlikeness is pointed at, verse 15, and
further laid open, verse 16, 17.


Tim. What be the profits that will arise of this comparison?


Sil. These: First, it will serve to confirm our minds touching the certainty
of having the righteousness of another given to us to make us happy, this
being as reasonable as that the unrighteousness and sin of another should
be derived to us to make us guilty. Secondly, it will serve much to humble Gods
Children, to consider well the nature and force of sin, and what hurt they
have taken by it. Thirdly, the great benefit they have from Christ will be
better known, more hungered after, and esteemed of us more greatly by setting
before it the contrary evil, as a cure is more commended being compared with
the danger of the disease.


Tim. What be the parts of this 12, verse?


Silas. Two: First, a proposition of the double harm which is come upon the
whole world by Adam, through whom all men are under sin and death. Secondly,
a reason hereof, in as much as all men were in Adams loins when he sinned,
and so sinned in him; ( In whom we all have sinned.)


Tim. Now to the words, and tell us what is meant by that one man here spoken
off.


Sil. Adam, as verse 14, under whom Eve also is contained; for sin came by
them both, Psalm. 51, 5. but the man is named, and not the woman, because he
being the man, was the more worthy person. Secondly, because he was more in
fault then Eve, in regard of his more eminent power and grace. Thirdly, sin
is propagated and derived to us, rather by the Father then by the Mother,
because he is the principal agent in generation.


Tim. What were we taught hereby, that Adam being but one man, so great and
general a mischief came of him?


Silas. Two things: First, the infinite hurt that may come of one person being
evil, and the marvelous good that may redound to many, by one being good.


Tim. Whereunto should the knowledge hereof serve us?


Silas. First, to admonish Parents very carefully, to look to the education
of every one of their Children. Secondly, that it behooves the public state
much, what manner of person he is that bears government. Thirdly, it
behooves them who have government, to watch over the manners of all men under
their charge, because one man neglected, may mar all, as Achan did, Josh. 7.


Tim. What was the other thing gathered from hence?


Silas. An exceeding comfort to great offenders, so they turn and believe the
Gospel; which may be raised thus; Adam and Eve which sinned so heynously, and
also wrapped their whole kind (even a world of people) within sin and
destruction, were yet received to mercy and saved: therefore let no sinner (how
horrible soever) be out of heart, if they come to the throne of grace for
pardon, with trust to have it.


Tim. What is further to be observed from this, that it is said [Sin entered
by one man?]


Silas. Even this: that God is not to be blamed, as cause and author of sin,
seeing it came in, by, and thorough man. For, whereas Adam might have refused
the temptation if he would, he freely obeyed, and willingly yielded, and so sin
entered by him, without any fault in God, who had made him righteous, and given
him freedom of will.


Tim. Was there not a necessity herein, that Adam should yield?


Silas. True, there was so, in regards of Gods counsel, who had decreed not to
strengthen his will in the temptation, but to forsake him; yea and further, that
being left to himself, he should follow the suggestions, that so there might be
occasion of giving and sending his Son, to redeem the world, to the
manifestation of his Justice and mercy. But notwithstanding this, yet Adams
disobedience was voluntary, because Gods decree, tho it ruled the event and
business, yet offered no force to Adams will, which could not be compelled; and
therefore of it own accord, inclined it self to fulfill the motions of the
Serpent and his wife; and therefore the whole fault of our fall lies upon
Satan and our first parents, as the proper cause of sin. For God made man
righteous, but they found out sundry inventions, Eccles. 7, 31.


Tim. What was further learned by this, that sin entered upon al by means of
one man?


Sil. That sin is not by creation, but came in afterward. Secondly, how
dangerous it is to hearken to ill counsel; by means whereof, Adam being
depraved, did deprave the whole world.


Tim. What is meant here by the world?


Sil. The men which dwell in the world, whither elect or reprobate, as it is
expounded afterward, Death came over all men. The word [World] sometime
signifies that fabric or frame of heaven and earth, as John 1, 10. The world
was made by him. Secondly, it signifies elect me^ only, which are the chief
part of the world, Ioh. 3, 16. And God was in Christ reconciling the world, 2.
Cor. 5, 19. Thirdly, it signifies the wicked and reprobate only. John 17, 9.
Fourthly, the corrupt qualities and fashions of the world, 1 John 2, 15. Love
not the world. Fifthly, the whole mass of mankind good and bad, as here in
these words, Sin entered into the world.


Tim. What is meant here by sin?


Sil. That hereditary disease, called commonly original sin, or birth-sinne,
spread over our whole kind, as a Leprosy, and has tainted the whole race of
us. That this only is here meant may appear: First, because he uses the
singular number; but when he speaks of the fruits of it, he uses the
plural number. Secondly, that which he calls sin here, he afterward in
verse 17. calls disobedience of one man, which must needs be the first or
Original finne. Thirdly, he says verse 17. by this sin many are made
sinners; and this is only by original sin. Fourthly, there was no other sin
brought death over all men except that: therefore that sin is only meant
here In that I call it hereditary, it is because, as a disease which rests
in any stock, and descends from father to son, so is this sin; it
runs from Adam through his whole progeny, from Parents to the Children, even
to the worlds end, as it is said here, It came over al men.


Tim. What may this teach us?


Sil. That this sin is hard to be expelled out of man's Nature, as hereditary
diseases are hard to be cured; and therefore must the more be striuen against.
Secondly, that Children have no faults, which they do not borrow and derive
from their parents, of whom they have corruption, which is the spawne of all
sin; which should cause in parents commiseration and patience toward their
Children.


Tim. How many things are contained in this sin?


Silas. These four things: First, guilt or fault. Secondly, deserving of
punishment. Thirdly, corruption of nature. Fourthly, privation or absence of
Original integrity, even of that innocence wherein man was created.


Tim. How prove ye guilt or fault, and deserving of punishment thereby?


Silas. There is guilt or fault, because we are made sinners by it, verse 17.
and there is deserving of punishment, because this cannot be severed from the
former. Also it is expressly said, that by it, death went over all.


Tim. How do ye prove, that there is corruption of Nature?


Silas. Because it is written, That weee go astray from our Mothers womb,
Psalm. 58, 3. Again, that the frame of man's heart, is only evil continually,
Genesis 8, 21. and that we are borne in sin, Psalm. 51, 5. and man borne of a
woman cannot be clean, Job 25, 4.


Tim. What do ye call the corruption of our Nature, and what be the fruits of
it?


Silas. It is a naughty vicious quality in our Nature, whereby it is inclined
to all evil naturally, and undisposed unto any good, yea enemy to God, and
disposed against all good, as Titus 3, 3. Hating God, Col. 1. Minds set upon
evil works. The fruits of this our corrupt Nature, are all sins
whatsoever, even all those sins reckoned up, To. 1. 29, 30, etc. Gal. 5, 19.
Tit. 3, 3. Col. 3, 5. or in any other place, even all manner of sins, not
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost excepted.


Tim. By what degrees does this corruption proceed and go forward?


Silas. First, it begets lust; which is an evil motion or desire sweruing
from Gods will: this is the spawn of all sin. The second is, obedience to
this lust, Romans 6, 12. which we call consent, when the will yields unto the
evil motions, with purpose and resolution to do it: this is called of James
the conception of sin, Iam. 1, 15 Then thirdly, there follows an evil
action in word or deed, this is called of the same Apostle, the bringing forth
of lust (it brings forth sin,) that is some outward gross act in speech
or action. Lastly, the going over this sinful act by custom and
continuance in it; this is called the perfection or finishing of sin: upon
all this, there succeeds death, as the term and last period or full point of
this proceeding and course in sinning, wherein it rests.


Tim. But how prove ye, that Original sin, has privation or absence of
Original righteousness?


Silas. This is the consequence upon all the former; for we could not be
guilty, deserve punishment, and be corrupt, if we had our first perfection.
Secondly, except we had lost that, we should not need to seek and fetch that
from another, even from Christ, as ver. 17. Thirdly, when the Scripture says,
God made man righteous, but they found out many inventions, Eccl. 7, 31. This
proves, that the perfect righteousness given unto us in our creation, is not
only lost, but through our own fault lost.


Tim. Why is this sin called Original?


Silas. First, because it is from the beginning. Secondly, because it is first
in us before grace. Thirdly, it is the first head and beginning of all sins.
Lastly, it is in us from our beginning, even from our very conception.


Tim. What use of all this?


Sil. First, it confuteth the errors of such, which say, it is nothing but
privation of righteousness. Also such as say, it is nothing but the inclination
of our nature to evil. Secondly, it shows the most heavy case in which we
are all by birth, we being all ouer-couered with corruption and sinful
putrefaction, rotten and full of sores; and not so full of evil, as void of
all goodness, and so hateful to God, whose pure eyes cannot but hate us and
abhor us; and therefore we are called the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2, 3. See
Ezck. 16. No leaper, no lazar, no Job to be compared to us; if we saw our
selves, we should loath our selves. Thirdly, the knowledge hereof, must
humble our stomachs and courages. Fourthly, it must stir up great care of being
washed and cleansed from this spot: all the water in the sea is too little to
wash this one stain, all care in the world is not great enough to get it
scoured out, Psa. 51, 2, 6. either repentance for this sin, or for no sin.

Fifthly, it must stir up a desire and a thirst after the pure and holy
conception of Christ, which is the cover to hide, the Salve to cure this
original sore. Sixthly, it may make us compassionate and merciful one to
another, especially to our children, being all alike infected, and they by us:
and therefore in our chiding and corrections, were should be moderate.
Seauenthly, it must keep us from extolling nature, and the goodness of
nature; for all natures even the best is poisoned, there being nothing good in
us till grace come and plant goodness in us: for can one gather figs of
thistles, or grapes of thorns? Math. 7.


Tim. What is meant here by [death?]


Sil. Properly a deprivation of life, improperly all such things as are
forerunners and furthereis thereof; all miseries, sicknesses, pains, the (...)
of death.


Tim. What life did Adam live before sin?


Sil. A twofold life; first, of grace being led by the holy Spirit, which moved
him wholly to celestial and divine things, this is called spiritual life. The
second is of nature, whereby he was moved to follow those good things which tend
to preserve nature, and the estate of his body: of both these kind of lives
Adam was deprived, and so dyed a spiritual and natural death: for being
before joined to God, in his favor, moved by his spirit: he now having
sinned, was turned from God, lost his savor and spirit, and so could not
aspire to any divine thing, but had his heart wholly set upon evil; and
touching his natural life he was threatened, that to dust he should go.


Tim. Did not his sin deserve eternal death?


Sil. It did so, but eternal death is nothing save the continuance of
spiritual death.


Tim. Yet natural death was not inflicted upon him after his sin, for he lived
still in the world, and that a great while.


Sil. He did so, howbeit he may be said to be naturally dead, so soon as he had
sinned. First, because by the guilt of his sin, he was presently subject
unto it. Secondly, God straight way gave sentence of death upon him, and
therefore he may be said, straight way to have dyed, as condemned persons
are called dead men, though they be respited. Thirdly, the messengers and
soldiers of death, presently took hold on him and arrested him, as hunger,
thirst, cold, heat, diseases daily wasting of his natural moisture, to the
quenching of life: but God did spare him that the sentence was not presently
executed, to commend his patience, and to give Adam thereby, occasion of
salvation; for the promise being given, and he called to repentance and
faitb, by that means attained a better life through Christ, then he lost
through sin.


Tim. What did this show?


Sil. That God does not delight in the death of sinners but rather that they
should return and live. Secondly, it teaches us patience toward such as are
offenders of us, being ready to receive them to favor, whenever they truly
repent.


Tim. How understand ye this, that all men are under death?


Sil. After this sort; first, every man so soon as he is borne, is every
hour apt to die. Secondly, every man at his birth is spiritually dead, quite
destitute of Gods grace and holy spirit, Ephe. 2, 1. till his regeneration.
Thirdly, every person deserves this death to become eternal, even everlasting
separation from GOD, and his presence and felicity.


Tim. What equity or justice is there in this?


Sil. The equity is just, for that one man's sin was every man's sin: for
Adam was the root of our kind, and therefore this fault is not personal
resting in himself, but reaching to all his posterity, which were then in his
loins, as Leuy was in Abraham's loins, Heb. 7, 10. For such juice as is in the
tree, comes to all the branches; also such as is the water in the fountain,
such it is in the river; and some such diseases as be in the parents,
descends to the children: also amongst us men, the father being a Traitor,
the whole blood is tainted. Lastly, the righteousness of Christ the head, is
conuayed over to the members, so it is here: again, God who is most just, so
decreed and would have it; that the grace which Adam had, he should keep or
loose for himself and all mankind, who were to stand and fall wih him: thus
it appears to be very equal.


Tim. What instructions learn ye hence?


Sil. First, it reproues the vulgar conceit, that God will not punish but for
actual sins. Secondly, it reprooues some Papists which exempt the Virgin
Mary from this general condition of sin and death. Thirdly, it does
admonish us of our most woeful condition, which we are in without Christ.
Fourthly, it puts us in mind of mutual compassion, seeing our case is equal,
one no better then another, all alike (...) and wretched. Fistly, it teaches
the necessity of a Savior, not only to know there must be one, and who he is,
and what he has done, but to get him to become ours by believing the
promises of him.


Tim. What are we to be put in mind of, by the connection and joining together
of sin and death?


Sil. First, that every one is bound to make account of dying every moment,
having sin the matter and means of death still about him. Secondly, that the
da^me of such a brood, that is sin, which causes no less then death, is
most carefully to be avoided and abhorred, even to be fled from, as one would
fly from death. Moreover, think that if an others sin could do this, as to
make thee culpable of death, what will that sin do which thou do in thine
own person? for Adams sin is thine in account, not in act; yet so as this
proves Adams sin to be every man's own proper sin, as if he had himself
acted and done it, because else he should not dye for it: for men in justice
are not to suffer death for any sin, save that which is their own by act, or
imputation. Christ had had wrong done to him, to be brought to death, if sin
had no way belonged unto him; for death is not inflected but with reference to
sin.


DIAL. XI.
Verses 13, 14. For unto the time of the law was sin in the world, but sin
is not imputed where there is no law. But death reigned from Adam to Moses
even over them that sinned not after the like manner of the transgression of
Adam.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this scripture?


Sil. He proceeds in his purpose to prove all men (even to the young In fants
newly borne) to be through Adam sinnetull, by bringing in a secret objection
and answering it.


Tim. What is the objection and how is it answered?


Sil. The objection is this: there could be no sin nor sinners before Moses,
seeing there was no law, and where there is no law there is no sin. This
objection the Apostle does answer two ways; first by a distinction between
This is Piscators judgment.
being and reputing: sin was in the world before Moses law, yet not so
reputed and esteemed so vile and soul, seeing yet no law was given them.
Secondly, he proves there was sin by the effects of sin, which is death,
whereunto even before Moses law, both old and young were subject; which is a
sufficient proof that then all men sinned, death being the stipend of sin.


Tim. Now expound the words and tell us what is meant here by this, until the
time of the law?


Sil. That is to say, all that time that passed between Adam and Moses, so
expounded, verse 14. Death reigned from Adam to Moses.


Tim. What is meant hereby, that sin was in the world till then?


Sil. That is to say, men which lived in this world had sin in them as well
before the law as afterward.


Tim. But how could that be, seeing that yet there was no law, and sin is the
transgression of some law, and indeed what law could be given to some of them,
as to Infants which had no use of reason?


Sil. Therefore the Apostle in affirming, that notwithstanding this, there was
sin in the world; he means there was a sin even before the Law, by which
sin al men were borne sinners, being both guilty of wrath, and corrupted even
from the womb. This is the sin of Adam, in whose sinning, all men were
comprehended, he being head and root of our kind, as was said verse 12.


Tim. Belike then this is now the scope of the Apostle, to prove, That as al
men are guilty by their own sins, which they do in their own persons, and
have in their own Nature: so there is a sin of Adam, by guilt whereof, al
men are obnoxious and culpable of death?


Sil. True, this is in very deed that which is intended, and wherein Adam is
like Christ: the one, being fountain of sin unto death; the other of
righteousness to life.


Tim. What mean ye hereby, in that it is said, Where no Law is, there sin is
not imputed?


Silas. That before the Law was given, sin was not so thoroughly known and
reputed: but when the law was published, it was better known and became more
grievous.


Tim. But may not these words carry another sense which may well stand with the
Apostles mind and drift?


Silas. They may so, as thus: that such as lived in the world after Adam,
though they wanted Moses Law, yet they wanted not a Law altogether.


Tim. How makes he that appear?


Silas. Hereby, because that sin was imputed, and men became thereby guilty
of wrath.


Tim. What Law might that be?


Silas. The Law of nature given them in their Creation.


Tim. What examples can ye give, that sin was imputed to men before the giving
of the Law by Moses?


Sil. Sundry and very manifest. First, the punishment of Caines murder, Genesis
4, 11. Secondly, the reprehension of Abimelech, Genesis 20, 6. Thirdly, the
overthrow of the world by a flood, Genesis 7, 20. Fourthly, the destruction of
Sodom, 19, 24. Fifthly, the drowning of the Egyptians, Exodus 14, 27, 28. al
which happened for sin.


Tim. What other examples can ye give to prove this, that sin was imputed?


Silas. The death of infants, as well as of men of years, which plainly
proves all men to have bin sinners, and guilty before the Law of Moses.


Tim. What learn ye by this, that sin and death do unseparably follow one
the other?


Silas. That death came in not by creation, but by corruption. Secondly, that
if men account death terrible, they should not think slightly of sin the
breeder of it.


Tim. What means this which is said here, [That death reigned from Adam to
Moses?]


Silas. Hereby he signifies the force and power of death to be exceeding
great, bearing all men down before it, as a mighty King does subdue such as
rise against him.


Tim. How long does the reign of death continue and last?


Silas. Not from Adam till Moses only, but till the end of the world.


Tim. Over whom does death exercise his power and kingdom?


Sil. Over all, both old and young, none exempted, Infants nor men.


Tim. Yet the Apostle says of some, that they shall not dye but be changed,
Cor. 15, 52.


Sil. True: yet that change shall be instead of death to them. Secondly, this
is the condition of all men, that through sin they are subject to death; God
may privilege whom he will, as Enoch and Elias.


Tim. Whence got death this power?


Sil. Through man's sin, according to Gods decree.


Tim. What learn ye hereby?


Sil. That there is a necessity for all men once to come unto death.


Tim. But the faithful have their sins forgiven them, how is it then that
they dye?


Sil. Yet sin is still in them, whence comes death to them, not as a part
of the curse for sin, but as an entrance into heavenly bliss, whither they
cannot come but by death; so as they are freed from the hurt which death
brings, but not from the necessity of dying.


Tim. What should this teach?


Sil. That all men are so to make account of death, as they do prepare
continually for it, and arm themselves continually against the fear of it, by
keeping faith and a good conscience.


Tim. You said that death reigned over Infants, tell us by what words are
infants described?


Sil. That they sinned not after that manner that Adam sinned.


Tim. What means this?


Sil. That they are free from voluntary and actual sins, as in respect of their
own persons.


Tim. What sin then have Infants to procure death?


Sil. Their byrth-sinne, or original corruption, which they draw from their
Parents by propagation.


Tim. What is to be gathered hence for our instruction?


That parents have cause to mourn for sin in their young children, as well
as for their own. Secondly, that in the death of their children, they consider
not so much the loss as the cause which is sin; which would keep them from
impatiencie, and serve to humble them. Thirdly, that there is diverse kinds of
sin (to wit) voluntary, inuoluntary, original, actual. Moreover, that all
sin is equal thus far as to deserve death, though in other respects
unequal.


Tim. What will follow of this?


Silas. That God is no respecter of persons, young or old, all are one with
him.


Tim. Yet sins are not every way equal.


Sil. No: For there is difference in the degree both of the offense, and of the
punishment, some more heinous then others, some to be more grievously punished
then others.


Tim. What should this work?


Silas. It should be a bridle to wicked ones to refrain from sin as much as
they can, thereby at least to lessen their pain. Also, a Curb even to the
godly, whose sins howsoever pardoned so as they shall not dye eternally for
them, yet sorer temporal punishments are inflicted as their sins be greater:
As is to be seen in David's example, who had many smartfull blows for his very
shameful falls.


DIALOGVE XII.
Verse 14, 15. Which was the figure of him that was to come. But yet the gift
is not so as is the offense. For if by the offense of one, many be dead, much
more the grace of God and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ,
has abounded unto many.


Tim. VVWhat does this Text contain?


Silas. Two things: First, the similitude or like, nes between Adam and Christ
(which was the tipe or figure.) Secondly, the dissimilitude or unlikeness
betwixt them (but yet the gift is not so.)


Tim. What is meant by him that was to come?


Silas. First, Adams posterity as some judge, and then the meaning is, all they
should be sinners as he was. Secondly, Jesus Christ, who in respect of Adam
sinning, was to come; this is the truth.


Tim. In what meaning is Adam said to be a tipe or figure of Christ?


Silas. Some take it thus: that as Christ is an example to such as willingly
obey God, so Adam was an example to so many as sin and disobey willingly:
this savors of Pelagianisme, as if sin came by imitation, and not by
propagation.


Tim. How then do ye take Adam to be a figure of Christ?


Silas. In respect of that force and efficacy which was in Adam to propagate
and convey even into all his progeny destruction by sin. Herein he was a
figure or a Tipe of the second Adam, the man Christ Jesus, in respect of the
like force in him to derive into his members eternal life, by his
righteousness imputed to their faith.


Tim. Report unto us more plainly and in few words this analogy and proportion
which is between Adam and Christ Jesus.


Silas. As Adam by his sin was the cause of death to all men, though they did
not eat of the forbidden tree, so Jesus Christ was made righteousness to
believers, though themselves had wrought no righteousness. Herein was Adam a
figure of Christ.


Tim. But it may appear that this is rather a difference and unlikeness then
a likeness.


Sil. True, it is so if you take it particularly, but not if it be taken
generally: that is; that as Adam meriteth death for his, so Christ meriteth
life for his, that is to take it generally: but particularly there is great
odds, for grace, righteousness, and life came by Christ: Sin, death, and
damnation by Adam. Also Adam by generation of the flesh pours evil things
into men: Christ by faith pours good things into his members.


Tim. What use can ye make of this?


Silas. It serves to confute both Jew and Papist, the one for thinking that
one Christ cannot be the redeemer of the whole world, whereas it is of them
confessed that the whole world was corrupt by one Adam: the other, for denying
that we are just before God by the obedience of another, to wit; of Christ: yet
all men be made unjust by the disobedience of another, to wit; of Adam: and
why not that as well as this? De similibus simile iudicium, parium par est
ratio.


Tim. What do ye observe in the unlikeness or dissimilitude in verse 15?


Silas. These two things: First, the unlikeness set down plainly (that the
sin is not as the gift.) Secondly, that wherein it does consist (for if
through the offense of that one etc.)


Tim. What is (...) here by gift [But yet the gift is not so?]


Silas. The righteousness or perfect obedience of Christ in keeping the Law;
now this is termed a gift, to teach us that it is free, and becomes ours
not by desert of works, or dignity of person, but because it is given us of
mercy, even contrary to the merit of our deeds.


Tim. What is meant by offense?


Silas. It is as much as fall, and is put here for sin; Adams sin was his
fall.


Tim. What learn ye hereby, that sin and fall are knit together?


Sil. How dangerous a thing sin is, which brings with it a fall, even as
deep and perilous as from heaven to hell; from the height and top of all
happiness, to the lowest bottom of misery.


Tim. What follows of this?


Silas. That seeing such a fall follows sin, sin is to be fled, as one
would shun a breakenecke downfall, with all godly care and watchfulness before
it be committed, and repentance afterward.


Tim. Tell us now wherein consists the vnlikelines between Adams sin, and
Christ's righteousness?


Sil. Herein: the righteousness of Christ is of more great strength and
efficacy to justify, then Adams offense was to condemn.


Tim. Now open the words, what is this he says, [Manie are dead through the
offense of one?


Silas. By one, he means Adam; by many, he means all, it being set against
a few: by dead, he means separated, or cast out from God unto everlasting
death.


Tim. What do ye observe here?


Sil. This thing peculiarly, that the infinite and Divine Justice, is a
wonderful scarfull thing, seeing it being but once hurt in one offense of
Adam, yet inflicted extreme and eternal misery on a whole world of men: oh
let that Justice be dreadful to thee.


Tim. What does he here mean by Grace, and guifte by Grace?


Silas. Some think Grace does signify Gods favor, and Gift the holy Ghost,
and such good things as we obtain by him.


Tim. But how think you these words are to be taken?


Silas. By Grace is understood Christ his righteousness, whereof the grace
and free favor of God is the root and fountain.


Tim. What signifies that gift by Grace?


Silas. That most blessed condition wherein they be, which have Christ his
righteousness of frec favor imputed to them.


Tim. What is that blessed condition?


Sil. That they are not only absolved and quit from all guilt of sin, both
Adams and their own, and so from all punishment, temporal and eternal; but
also are adorned and clothed with Christ's perfect justice and innocence, even
to the obtaining of eternal life.


Tim. By what similitude do ye explain this difference between Grace, and
gift by Grace?


Silas. Of a poor miserable man in bondage for debt to his Prince, who not
only has his debt freely discharged by his Sovereign and King, but withal
has a large treasure of many thousand pounds given him. The treasure bestowed
by the Kings Liberality is grace, because it comes of free favor; and his
happy condition, in that of poor he is made rich, may be called Gift by
Grace: so it fares in the case of a sinner, Christ's righteousness bestowed
upon him freely, is Gods grace; and the gift by Grace, is that blessed
condition wherein he is set, through that righteousness imputed to his faith,
being of a sinner made perfectly just, and the child and heir of God, even
heir annexed with Christ. Romans 8, 17.


Tim. What is meant by this, that grace has more abounded?


Sil. That the righteousness which comes by Christ, does in many degrees
exceed in excellency and force, the guilt and hurt that came by Adam.


Tim. Declare this unto us how grace has far exceeded sin?


Sil. Because by the grace of Christ we have forgiveness of sin, we are
regenerated and adopted to be the sons of God; we are become brethren of
Christ, his members, heirs of his kingdom, yea heirs of this world also, for
all is ours, 1 Cor. 3, 22.


By what similitude can ye express this super abundance of gracs?


Sil. Of a Surgeon not only healing a wound by his medicine, but making one
stronger and fairer then before. Secondly, of an Emperor, not only drawing a
wretch out of prisou, but advancing him to all manner of riches and dignity: so
has the grace of God abounded, not only for pardon of Adams sin, but to
many excellent purposes; besides to the engrafting us into Christ, to
justification, to reconciliation, to sanctification, to adoption, to
preservation in grace, to glorification in heaven.


Tim. What is the instruction to be made of this?


Sil. That believers have gotten more by Christ, then they lost by Adam, by
whom we should have had an carthly paradise, and unconstant happiness.
Secondly, that exceeding and unmeasurable grace of Christ, should stir up and
provoke unto exceeding love, obedience, thankfulness, and praise of Christ,
who is to be blessed again and again, for ever and ever.


DIAL. XIII.
Verse, 16. Neither is the gift so, as that which entered in by one that
sinned: for the fault came of one offense unto condemnation, but the gift is of
many offenses to justification.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Sil. An explaining of the difference or unlikeness put down in the former
verse, concerning Adam and Christ.


Tim. What was that difference?


Sil. That the grace of Christ was of more excellency and force to restore us,
then was Adams sin to hurt us.


Tim. How is this explained to us here?


Sil. Adams sin that condemned him and us all, was but one; Christ's
righteousness covers that sin, and infinite others, which we have added to
it.


Tim. What sever all things do ye observe in this verse?


Sil. A threefold opposition, or three things set against three, as contraries;
First the gift and fault. Secondly justification and condemnation. Thirdly one
offense and many.


Tim. What is meant here by gift?


Sil. The righteousness of Christ freely given, and that most happy condition
which the faithful are in, by having it allowed to be their justice, being now
not only absolved from all sins, but made just there by, and heirs of
eternal life.


Tim. What is meant here by that which entered in by one that sinned?


Sil. This is meant by it; first Adams fault in his disobedience to God.
Secondly, that woeful condition wherein all men are wrapped by it, being not
only deprived of perfect justice which they had by creation, but covered now
with the filth and condemnation of sin; thus it is expounded in the next words.


Tim. What is signified by condemnation?


Sil. The pronouncing of all men for sinners, and worthy adiudging them to
eternal torment; as in civil condemnation the malefactor is first pronounced
guilty, and thereupon adjudged to his punishment.


Tim. How came this condemnation upon us all?


Sil. By the guilt of one offense which Adam did, being imputed and reckoned
unto all his progeny.


Tim. Should this one offense without any more, have condemned and adjudged us
all to destruction eternally?


Sil. It should so; for the Apostle in the words of truth does avouch it, and
that not without good reason; for this is reason enough, that it was Gods will
to have it so, whose will is never severed from reason and Justice; for there
is no iniquity with God, Psalm. 5. 4. and Psalm. 45, 7.


Tim. What may we learn hence for our instruction?


Sil. That sin is no ieasting matter, and the offense of divine justice is no
light thing, but the most dreadful evil in the world. Secondly, that infinite
misery by due desert lies upon every man that is condemned, not only for Adams
fault, but for so many thousand sins as himself has done in his life time.


Tim. What is meant here by justification?


Sil. An acquiting or absoluing of sinners from all their faults, both Adams
and their own; and pronouncing them just from God, adiudging them worthy of
eternal life through Christ: whose fulfilling of the law in his obedience and
death, not only makes himself just, but causes also all-his members to be
absolved from all sins, and to be pronounced just, so soon as they are
converted and do believe.


Tim. What does follow hereof?


Sil. Thus much; that fithence the iuftice of Christ freeth us from Adams
offense, and al our sins added to that; and more over makes us just before
God when we be sinners; so as we stand before the tribunal seat of God, not
only without all manner of sin, but decked with absolute righteousness,
according to our estate and degree which we had by creation; therefore it is
true that the grace of God has abounded above the fault of Adam.


But seeing Adam by his offense corrupted us all, and spoiled both us and
himself of perfect innocence, and moreover that all other sins come in by him
and his one offense, it should appear that the good which Christ has brought,
does not exceed the hurt we take from Adam, but that they are equal; at the
least, as much guilt and hurt by the one, as benefit by the other.


Silas. It is true, that we have lost a perfect righteousness in Adam, but yet
(the person of Christ considered) we have a more excellent righteousness from
him, which brings us to a blessed life in Heaven. Secondly, it is also true,
that all other sins do come from original sin, yet they are not of
necessity knit unto it: for then all men should have the self same sins,
every one should do such sins as others do. Abell should have done murder
as Cain, Jacob should have been profane as Esau, Peter should have been a
Traitor like Judas, etc. which is not so: Therefore other sins of our life,
though they spring from the root of birth-sinne, yet our sclues are to be
blamed for them, as being done by our own election and consent. Now Jesus
Christ our redeemer absolueth and freeth us not only from that one sin of
Adams, but from innumerable heaps brought in upon that by our own
deliberation and counsel, and so excels it very far: for to take away
many sins is more then to bring in one offense; and a righteousness which
consists of many good acts as Christ's does, is more excellent then one sinful
act, such as Adams transgression was.


Tim. But all are made sinners, and condemned by Adams offense, so are not all
justified and saved by Christ, therefore Adams sin exceeds the grace of
Christ.


Silas. The power and force of Christ's righteousness above Adams offense,
respects not number of persons, but worthiness and number of effects, which
are more and also more worthy, from the righteousness and grace of Christ. For
first it blotteth out Adams sin, and all others as touching guilt. Secondly,
it breaks the strength and rage of sin. Thirdly, it reformeth the heart to
new obedience, and gives interest to perfect glory.


Tim. But for the number, may it not be truly said in some sense, that as
many be saved by Christ as perished by Adam?


Silas. It should seem that it may in this sense; only Infants which dye in
their infancy do perish by original sin, and not all they, but such only as
are not elect: such as be men and perish, do perish for their impenitency and
continuance in actual sins, and not only for their birth-sinne. Whereas all
that be saved, whether infants or men, are saved by the grace of Christ only.
Add hereunto that touching such as do perish, Christ Mill mundis red mendis
sufficit Christus. (...).
were sufficient to save them, (as most Divines affirm) but because God will
not save all, therefore his grace has no effect in them; for being not
ordained to life, neither are they ordained to faith, whereby the
righteousness of Christ is laid hold on: yet they worthily perish for their
sins which they willingly do. O Israel, thy destruction is of thy self.


Tim. What is the instruction from all this?


Sil. That the grace of Christ has overcome sin as Conqueror over it; for
else, sin would overcome all the elect: also, the Scripture witnesses so
much, to wit; that Christ is stronger then Satan or sin.


Tim. But sin shall abide in the regenerate.


Silas. Yet it cannot hurt them, because it is taken Prisoner, and broken in
the strength of it, also the faithful are commanded to believe the remission
of all their sins by Christ.


Tim. What use of all this?


Silas. In this necessary Doctrine consists all Christian comfort and assurance
of hope; therefore it is, that (...) so much urges it.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 17. For if by the offense of one, death reigned through one, much more
shall they which receive that abundance of grace and of that gift of
righteousuesse, reign in life through one, lesus Christ.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Sil. A repetition of the former matter, touching the excelency of the grace of
Christ, above the sin of Adam, somewhat more fully and plainly set forth.


Tim. What is the substance of this 17. verse?


Sil. This; that if Adam could power sin and death into men, so as they
reigned or had rule in them; much more is this to be granted to Christ, that he
can give grace, right ousnesse and life, and that liberally and so
plentifully, as to make them also even to reign in his members.


Tim. What contraries be here expressed?


Sil. Three, offense and righteousness, death and life, Adam and Christ.


Tim. How is the grace of Christ amplified and set forth?


Sil. Three ways; first it is called (abundance of grace) which is more then
barely to say (grace.) Secondly, (gift of righteousness) which is more then to
say barely righteousness. Thirdly, (reign in life) which is more then to
obtain life.


Tim. But what new thing has this verse differing from the former?


Sil. First, it expresses the means how the righteousness of Christ
becomes ours; to wit, by the receiving it with the hand of faith. Secondly,
that this we get by Christ that we shall reign in life, not only here by
grace, but be heirs of a glorious kingdom in heaven; and so our happiness by
Christ exceeds that which we lost in Adam.


Tim. What do ye note here, where it is said (sin and death raygned by Adam?)


Sil. That not only they entered upon all men, but mightily reigned over them,
so to have a predominant power.


Tim. What is it for sin and death to reign?


Sil. To rule in men, and (as a King) to subdue them to the lusts of sin, so
as they can do nothing but what sin will: neither can they go a foot from
death, but all they do, even their go odlicst works tend to death and
condemnation; for all deeds, how glorious soever in show, yet are but gorgeous
sins in men unregenerated.


Tim. Is this the condition of all men before Christ be rereceyued by faith?


Sil. It is so; even the elect of God are vassals to sin, and to their corrupt
lusts which work in them to destruction, so as their fairest works are deadly
and damnable. Ephe. 2. 2, 3, 12. Titus 3, 3. Romans 5, 6.


Tim. What follows hereof?


Sil. That the elect before they believe, are so far off from being
justified, as they be in most miserable case, slaves to sin and death, in
bondage to Satan; which should work in such as are under the kingdom of
sin and death, to let them see what great cause they have to look after a
Christ and Savior.


Tim. But how shall men know they stick in the power of sin and death?


Sil. By these two marks; first if never they felt the bondage of sin, nor
suspected the flauery of it. Secondly, if they do not taste the sweetness of
their liberty, and rejoice in it above all things.


Tim. What should it work in such as are brought out of this raygne?


Syl. A continual thankfulness to Christ, expressed by a care never to look
back to the service of sin, from which they are so graciously freed.


Tim. What is meant by that righteousness?


Sylas. By an excellency he notes the righteousness of Christ Jesus.


Tim. How manyfold is his righteousness?


Sylas. Twofold; first essential as he is God, Jehovah our righteousness, Ier
23, 6. that is, his deity or divine essence, which is righteousness it self,
and giver of righteousness to other creatures. Secondly accidental, which
belongs to his manhood, and is inherent in the man Christ, or in his humanity
as a quality: this accidental righteousness (which is a quality,) is twofold;
first an habit of most perfect vprightnes and holiness, infused into his humane
nature, even from the moment of his conception by the holy Ghost. This is
opposed or set against the corruption of our nature: of the imputation whereof,
at the eight Chapter is spoken at large. The second is, the most absolute
Justice and obedience which he performed in the actions of his life, and
sufferings of his death: this is the effect or fruit of the former habit, and
it is distinguished of Divines into active righteousness, consisting in the
fulfilling the works commanded in the moral Law; or passive righteousness in
suffering obediently the punishment of death for our breach of the Law. The
imputation of this we have heard of in Chapters 4, and 5. unto the 11. verse;
and now in this place, he entreats of his active righteousness, as it
comes instead of that guilt of Adams disobedience imputed to his posterity.


Tim. Why is his righteousness called Grace?


Sil. To note how we come by it, that is, by free favor, and what our
condition is by means of it.


Tim. Why does he add abundance of grace?


Silas. To note, that this Grace did overcome Adams offense, for that was but
one act, Christ's righteousness consists of many actions. Secondly, that was
but one fault, his righteousness both quits us from that and all other sins,
and gets us to be pronounced just and worthy of eternal life. And besides all
this, with that grace of righteousness, there goes the reforming of our
nature, breaking the force of sin, and framing us again to Gods Image, which
cannot be lost, as before has been said.


Tim. But how do we obtain to this gift of righteousness?


Sil. By our faith receiving it. For it is the proper Office of Faith to
receive Christ, and belongs to no other grace whatsoever, as John 1, 12. Romans
5, 11. Galath. 3, 14.


Tim. Is this receiving necessary?


Silas. So necessary, as without it Christ and his perfect righteousness cannot
profit us, no more then clothes not put on, or meat not taken into the
stomach, or a great gift never received.


Tim. Is there in this behalf any difference between Christ and Adam?


Silas. There is so, and very great: for being all in Adams loins when he
sinned, we sinned with him, and so every one at the instant of our conception,
are corrupted by sin: whereas, though Christ were promised from the
beginning, and had suffered death long since, yet it does not benefit us, till
we do believe and receive him.


Tim. What should this admonish us of?


Silas. That great need there is, that every one labor for this true faith.
Secondly, the blessed estate they be in which have it, for they have received
Christ and his righteousness unto life eternal; by which assurance they be
armed against doubtings.


Tim. When it is here said, That such as received Christ shall reign in
life: What is meant by life?


Silas. That spiritual life of grace, whereby the believing soul now lives to
God, and which hereafter it shall live with him in glory.


Tim. What is meant (by reign) in life?


Sil. When the righteousness and grace of Christ so bears sway, and rules
in the soul, as though one have still many sins, yet he stands against their
motions, and fears not the guilt and danger of them, and so is brought at last
to salvation.


Tim. What learn ye now from this place?


Silas. That these five things are knit together. Christ, Righteousness,
Grace, Faith, and Life; have one, have all; lack one, lack all. Secondly,
that the Grace and righteousness of Christ, has set believers in better
condition for happiness then they lost by Adams fault. First, because that was
chaungeable, this is permanent, this word [shall raigne] noting perpetuity and
euerlastingnesse. Secondly, that was to be enjoyed in earth, even in Paradise,
this in the kingdom of heaven, noted in the word [Raigne;] where God has his
seat and throne, and reigns in glory, there shall believers reign likewise.
For they shall sit on thrones, even as Christ shall sit upon a throne.


DIAL. XV.
Verses 18, 19. Likewise then as by the offense of one, the fault came on all
men to condemnation; so by the Justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward
all men to Justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of that one, many shall be made Righteous.


Tim. WHat does this Scripture contain?


Silas. First, a rehearsal of the comparison between Adam and Christ, begun
in the twelfth verse. Secondly, a laying forth the ground of this whole
comparison.


Tim. Declare the comparison, as it is rehearsed in the 18. Verse?


Silas. As by the offense of one Adam, guiltiness came over all men to make
them subject to death, so on the contrary part, the righteousness of Christ
imputed to believers through Gods free favor, justifies them, that they may
become partakers of eternal life. Or thus; as by Adam, guiltiness came on all
men to death eternal, so by Christ, righteousness is given to all believers
unto life eternal.


Tim. What is the ground of all this comparison?


Silas. That Adam and Christ, by the decree of God, are not as two particular
persons, but as two roots or stocks or heads of all mankind: that as out of
the one, springs sin and death by Nature, so out of the other springs
righteousness and life by Grace.


Tim. Whereunto tends all this?


Silas. To make us to understand, that we are justified not by our own works,
but by Faith in Jesus Christ. For having in our selves (by means of Adams
offense) guiltiness and death, how can our works justify us? and if they do
not, then Christ's his obedience apprehended by faith, must be our Justice
before God.


Tim. Now let us expound the words and gather instructions: What does he mean
here by the offense of one?


Silas. The sin of Adam, which was but one sin, as himself was but one
person.


Tim. What learn ye by this, That guiltiness came on all men to condemnation?


Sil. That there is not one that came of Adam by natural generation, which
escaped the condition of sin and death: Christ only is exempted, who was
conceived by the Holy ghost, and not by the seed of man.


Tim. What do ye observe herein?


Sil. This; namely, how dreadful a thing the offense of Gods Justice is, when
but one sin done in a moment, could wrap a world of men in everlasting death
and pain.


Tim. What learn ye hereby, That the Justifying or righteousness of Christ is
set against the offense of one?


Silas. That as the offense is without us, which makes us all guilty, so is the
righteousness which iustifies us, not in us but in Christ. Secondly, that
justifying is an absoluing or acquitting us from guilt and condemnation.


Tim. What means he by all men?


Silas. All the Children of God which believe, whereof there is an
universality, as there is an universality of the Reprobate.


Tim. Why does he join life unto Justification [Iustification of life?]


Sil. Not only by the custom of speech peculiar to the Hebrews, but to teach
that life is knit to righteousness; The just shall live by faith, Rom.1.
and hereof it is also, that faith and life are so often joined together,
because it is by Faith that we take hold on righteousness, which brings
with it life I live by faith Gala. 2.
as a proper and necessary effect.


Tim. What learn ye generally out of the whole 19. verse?


Sylas. That Adam and Christ are not to be considered of, as other particular
persons be: but as two heads or roots of all mankind, which depend on them.


Tim. What several and special things do ye now learn out of the 19. verse?


Sylas. That Adams offense was disobedience to Gods word. Secondly, this
disobedience ought to be familiarly known, and what hurt we get by it;
therefore by an excellency called that disobedience, as exceeding al others
both for the quality and effects. Thirdly, this disobedience is communicated to
all men to the making of them sinners, which is done by an action called
imputation, and so it is every man's own sin, no less then Adams. Fourthly,
that distrust or doubting is the root of all sin, and so to be greatly
taken heed of: Adams fall began at doubting, that carried him to disobedience.
Fifthly, that wherein we disobey Gods will, therein we bewray old Adam, whose
children we show our selves to be by our disobedience against Gods blessed
commandment.


Tim. What do ye call disobedyence?


Sylas. It is a vice which causes us not to believe God promising or
threatening, nor to obey him, forbidding nor commanding, either because the
commandments be troblesome, or because we cannot see the reason of them.


Tim. Now tell us what was that whereby righteousness and life entered into the
world?


Sil. The obedience of Christ Jesus.


Tim. What is obedience?


Sil. It is a power by which a godly man is ready to do, and to obey the will
of God, though the reason of it be not understood, nor it appear to be any
way profitable.


Tim. Wherein did Christ show his obedience to God? Christs-obedience actiuein
doing, passive in suffering.



Sil. Throughout his whole life, doing always in all things what his Father
appointed without any regard of men; but especially in his death, wherein he
submitted himself wholly to the will and pleasure of his Father.


Tim. Is the active obedience of Christ in fulfilling the moral law by doing
it, necessary unto the justification of a sinner before God, or his passive
obedience in sufferiug death does it alone justify us? for the Scripture
ascribes our purging, remission of sins, and salvation, to his blood and death
in many places, and it may seem that Christ kept the Law not for us, but for
himself, to make him a meet high Priest.


Sil. Justification has two parts: First, the forgiveness of sins, secondly
the making of us just. For as we owed unto God a satisfaction by death for the
breach of the Law, so we were bound to perform subjection to God with all
power of body and soul, and all the might of those powers even from the time
of our being. Therefore as we needed the passion of our Lord to discharge the
first debt of pain and punishment, so the other debt of homage and conformity
to the will of God, was answered in the obedience of his life; that so we might
not only escape death, but find an entrance into life eternal, which without
perfect obedience to the commandment, might not be granted, according to the
tennor of the Law, Do this and live, Leuit. 18, 5. By which words it is
plain, that by mere passive obedience we could not have possession of life,
which is promised to doing all that is required in the Law: for even Christ
himself by his doing the Law, may claim and challenge eternal life, and it
cannot be denied him in rigor of justice, because he fulfilled the condition
of works enjoined by the Law: and how should we think to have life without the
Law done? which not being possible by our selves, therefore Christ's obedience
in his life, must be imputed to make us capable of life. For seeing every jot
and tittle of the Law must be done, Mat. 5, 18. therefore the sum and
substance much more. Now the sum of the law is to love God with all our
hearts, etc. and this cannot be done by us which are sinners; then there must be
a translation of the law from us in our persons, unto the person of our
mediator who must do every jot for us: therefore he says it behooued him to
fulfill all righteousness, Math. 3. and that he is the end of the law for
righteousness, Romans 10 and has made us just by his obedience, as in our text;
and became subject to the law, to redeem us which were obnoxious to the law,
Gal. 4, 4. 5. And indeed seeing Christ himself was given us, and that he was
borne for us, wrought miracles, suffered death, arose, ascended, etc. how must
not his life also be ours? Again, is it not written that Christ was made our
sanctification as well as our righteousness, and our righteousness as well as
our redemption? 1 Cor. 1, 30. Moreover, he that continues not to do all
things contained in the law is accursed, Deuteronomy. 27. last verse. Where of it
follows, that if any will avoid the curse of the law, he stands bound
constantly from his conception till his death to keep the law: which for so much
as none can do by himself, therefore all the contents of the law must be
accomplished by our surety, or else no escaping the curse. Besides, if the
actual obedience of Adam made us sinners, how should we be just without the
actual obedience of Christ? and it seems that Christ should be but half a
Savior, only suffering, and not doing things pleasant to his Father for us.
What means that, that Christ sanctified himself for us? John 17. and who
knows not that it is written of Christ, that he came to do his Fathers will?
Heb. 10. Whereas Scripture attributes our salvation to his blood, that is a
Synecdoche, a part put for the whole: likewise where justification is placed in
forgiveness of sins, Romans 4, 5, 6. and the blood of Christ shed, being his
chiefest obedience; as it comprehends the rest that went before, so it excludes
only legal sacrifices, as not meritorious.


Tim. Is not this a special mark of a good Christian, to follow the example
of Christ his obedience in our doings and sufferings?


Sylas. It is so, hereby men are known to be Christians, if after Christ's
example they do endeavor to do the will of God, and not by their profession
only, which may be in an hypocrite.


Tim. Why does he say, many shall be made just, and not in the present time,
many are made just?


Sylas. Because this obedience is given to the elect, at what time they shall
live in the world and believe.


DIAL. XVI.
Verses 20, 21. Moreover the law entered thereuppon that the offense should
abound, nevertheless where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more.
That as sin has raygned to death, so might grace also raygne by righteousness
unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Tim. WHat do these words contain?


Sylas. The Conclusion of the whole treatise of Justification by faith.


Tim. What is the matter of the conclusion?


Sylas. In the conclusion he does meet withal, and make answer to a secret
objection made in the behalf of the law. The objection is this, that if the
obedience of Christ be our full righteousness before God, without the works of
the law, then to what end does the law serve? To which the Apostle does first
propound his answer barely (verse 20.) and nakedly; that the law was given,
first, to increase our guiltiness. Secondly, that the grace of Christ thereby
becomes more glorious; the which the Apostle does enlarge by a comparison of
contraries, (verse 21.) sin and death set against righteousness and life, as
contrary one to the other; the sum of which comparison is thus much: that as
sin preuailes to make all guilty of death, so the righteousness of Christ
being freely given to the believers, does prevail much more to make them
partakers of eternal life.


Tim. Now expound the words, what is meant by the Law?


Silas. The moral Law, contained in the ten commandments.


Tim. In what meaning is it said, it entered thereuppon?


Sil. The Apostle means that it came in and entered upon Adams offense, which
had made us guilty of death, that we might become more guilty. Some expound
and say, it entered beside the promise of grace, as the more principal doctrine.


Tim. Was this the purpose of God in giving the Law to increase our guiltiness?


Silas. No, not so; the Apostle does not note the intention of God, with what
purpose he gave it, but the event that did follow the giving of the Law, that
thereby our offense did more abound.


Tim. In what respects is offense and sin said to abound by the Law?


Silas. In these respects: First, because a Law being given, sin was made
more grievous now by the breach of it. Secondly, sin is more stirred up and
irritated by the Law, our nature desiring the things that are forbidden it.
Thirdly, the Law does afford us a clearer sight and knowledge of our sins,
which were more manifested unto us by the Law, as may be made plain unto us
by these comparisons, first of a Glass, which makes us see the spots of our
face what they be, and how foul they be. Secondly, of a Candell which does
discover unto us the things in a Room which lie out of order, and could not
be espied in the dark. So by the law we come to understand what our sins be,
and how grievous they are.


Tim. Tell us now what is meant by Grace?


Silas. The favor of God, in the free forgiveness of all sins by the merit
of Christ his obedience.


Tim. In what sense is it said, that grace abounded?


Silas. In respect of us and of our knowledge, for by the forgiveness of our
many and great sins, the mercy and favor of God in Christ, did appear most
manifestly unto us, and is more fully and famously known.


Tim. By what similitude may this be declared unto us?


Silas. Of a skillful Surgeon or Physician, who by curing and healing great and
desperate wounds and diseases, does not get more skill, but do more manifest
their skill which they had. Secondly, of a most kind Prince or father, who by
pardoning some great faults of their Children or subjects, do so much the more
make known their clemency and kindness, by how much their offense was more
heinous: in like manner the more and fouler the sins be which be forgiven us
of God, the more plentifully does he declare his grace. From whence we learn;
first, that wonderful is the wisdom and goodness of God, that can turn
such a thing as sin is, to the praise of his grace; as David's fall, Psalm. 51,
1. and Peter's denial, Luke, 22, 32. Secondly, it affoordeth a great comfort to
great sinners, so as they feel their sins and believe in Christ; for
whatsoever their sins be, there is mercy with God, more then to counteruaile
them: grace in Christ is more able to save, then Adams sin to condemn.
Thirdly, God suffers men to abound in sin, with a meaning not to destroy
them therefore, but to pour and show forth his goodness more richly:
therefore let none with Caine say, my sin is greater, etc. but rather with
Paul, 1 Timothy 1, 15.


Tim. But will not this Doctrine give some liberty to sin?


Sil. Nay: it is a restraint rather and bridle from sin; for Gods children
are made the more careful not to offend him, by how much the more they feel
his mercies to be great toward them. Therefore if any abuse this Doctrine to
licenciousnesse, it is a maruailous bad sign and a fearful token that they
are grown desperate.


Tim. What are we to learn by the beginning of the 21 verse, As sin has
reigned to death?


Silas. First, that sin rules as a king in all unbelievers. Secondly, while
sin bears rule, whatsoever men do, tends to destruction. Thirdly, all
Gods elect are first under the reign of sin and death. First, Prisoners,
wounded, dead, ere they be healed, delivered and restored to life.


Tim. When are we to judge of sin, that it reigns as a King?


Silas. When the lusts and motions of our sinful nature, are willingly
obeyed and followed.


Tim. What are we to learn by this, where it is said, That grace might reign?


Sil. That as there is a kingdom of sin, so also there is a Kingdom of
Grace; under which two Kingdoms the elect must pass. For, they are translated
from the reign of sin, to the reign of Grace, as the people of Israel were
drawn out of Egypt into Canaan: and seeing every one must belong to one of
these kingdoms, therefore our care must be, to examine unto which we are
subject.


Tim. What do ye call the reign and kingdom of Grace?


Silas. When our conscience being assured, that our sins are accounted
Christ's, and his righteousness accounted ours, we begin to leave and withstand
our sins and to live unto God, thinking on those things which please him, with
care and study to do them.


Tim. What is meant here by righteousness?


Sil. Christ's obedience imputed to us, to justify us before God.


Tim. What is meant here by life?


Silas. That blessed estate wherein we are set by means of this righteousness,
whereunto it is annexed as a fruit.


Tim. Why is eternal added unto life?


Silas. To show, that the blessedness of just men shall continue for ever in
Heaven, as long as God endures.


Tim. Why does he mention Jesus Christ?


Silas. To teach us, that it is by him alone, that we obtain Grace,
righteousness, and life.


Tim. Wherefore is there no mention of Faith?


Silas. In the matter of Justification, Christ is never mentioned without
respect to Faith, which apprehends him.


CHAP. VI.
Of Sanctification.
DIAL I.
Verse 1, 2. What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin that Grace may
abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dcad to sin, live yet therein?


Timotheus. WHat does the Apostle entreat of in this sixth Chapter?


Silas. Of Sanctification: whereby they which are Justified, and have their
sins forgiven them thorough Faith in Jesus Christ, are enabled to walk in a
new life, and to do good works, so as they cannot licentiously live in sin,
though through infirmity they do sin.


Tim. What may we learn from this order of the Apostle, in teaching
Sanctification after Justification?


Sil. Two things: First, that the Doctrine of free Justification by faith,
does not destroy good works, but produce them rather. 2. the doctrine of good
works or Sanctification, must follow the Doctrine of Justification: as an
effect the cause, and fruit the root.


Tim. What be the differences between Justification and Sanctification?


Sil. Justification, is an action of God, imputing to us the perfect
righteousness of Christ when we believe in him. Sanctification is a work of
the Spirit, framing in the hearts of the elect, a new quality of holiness.
Secondly, Justification remoues from us the guilt and curse of sin,
Sanctification remoues and takes away the rule and power of sin. Thirdly,
Justification is as the cause and root, Sanctification is as the fruit and
effect, though both done to us at one time. Fourthly, Justification is perfect
here, Sanctification is imperfect and increases daily, till at length by
degrees it be perfected in Heaven.


Tim. What be the parts of this Chapter?


Silas. Two: the first entreats of the Doctrine of Sanctification, proving
that such as be sanctified cannot serve sin, unto the 12. verse. The second,
has the duty of sanctified persons, who are exhorted to fly the service of
sin, and to live holily, serving righteousness, unto the end of the Chapter.


Tim. How does the Apostle enter upon the Doctrine of Sanctification?


Sil. By a Prolepsis, wherein he preuenteth a certain Objection against his
former Doctrine.


Tim. Where is this Objection contained?


Sil. In the first verse, in these words; Shall we remain in sin, that Grace
may abound?


Tim. What is it to remain in sin?


Sil. To fulfill the lusts of sin, with a purpose to continue in the obedience
of sinful lusts; which is a thing that cannot stand with grace, howsoever
grace and sin may stand together.


Tim. Tell us now the objection made against Paul's Doctrine, what it was, or
what is the effect of it?


Silas. This, that he had taught men to live and abide in sin, that grace might
abound.


Tim. How did they raise this Objection, and from whence did they gather it?


Silas. From Paul's words, when he said, Where sin abounds, there grace more
abounds.


Tim. How did they collect and reason from hence?


Silas. Thus: it is a good thing that Grace should abound, therefore to live
securely and purposely to sin, it is a good thing, for by that means grace
shall abound the more.


Tim. But if the increase of sin do cause grace to increase, why should it
not be good to increase and multiply sin, seeing it is a very good thing that
grace should abound?


Sylas. This objection is very faulty and absurd; for first it makes sin and
increasing of sin to be the cause of grace, whereas it is but the occasion
only: as a discase makes a Physician famous by occasion only, for his skill
in his Art is cause of his fame: so our sins being many and great, are
occasions of illustrating and magnifying the grace of God, and not causes to
purchase grace for us; they are indeed properly causes ofire and vengeance.
But howsoever sins are not, nor can be causes of grace, yet there needed an
abundant and infinite grace to take away sins, being mightily increased:
this then is the first fallacy in their reason, that which is no cause put for
a cause. The next fault, it is in the ambiguity of the word; for they take this
word ( where) as if it were as much as (wheresoever sin abounded) which is not
so; many being overwhelmed with sins, as Cayne, Esau, Judas, (...), etc.
which had not a drop of grace affoorded them. The meaning of the Apostle is
this: where sin abounds, that is, of whom sin is abundantly known and felt,
with desire of the remedy, which is Christ, toward them grace is more
abundantly showed and known. Lastly, there is a fault about diversity of
time, for Paul speaks of sins done before calling, these cauilers did wrest his
sayings to sins afterward: that whereas the more our sins are before
regeneration, the more abundantly does grace utter it self in doing them
away: yet hereof it follows not, that therefore one being regenerate should
sin more impudently, and securely.


Tim. What other things do ye observe about this objection?


Sylas. How easy a thing it is for them which cavil against the truth, and
forsake the grounds there of, to fall into diverse errors; therefore we should
do well when we read or hear Scriptures, to ponder them, ere by way of
reasoning we gather any thing from them. Secondly, we may aslure our selves,
that the doctrine of our Church touching justification by faith without works,
is a found doctrine, because such things are objected by (...), against our
teaching of this truth, as was against Paul's teaching the same; as that it
opneth the window to sin, and overthrows all care of good works. Thirdly, that
the teachers and their doctrine, be subject to wicked cauillations: and
therefore they have need of wisdom and patience, and their hearers, of
charity.


Tim. Thus far of the objection, now let us hear what answer the Apostle
makes unto this objection?


Sylas. He does not answer the argument, but does perform two things in
his answer. First, he detesteth that consequent, that men should continue in
sin: God forbid; wherein he shows how grievously he takes it to hear the
Gospel defamed with wicked suspicions and accusations, whose zeal herein for
the truth, deserves to be followed. Secondly, he gives reason why believers
ought not continue in sin, because they are dead to sin, therefore they ought
not, they cannot live in sin: it is an argument from contraries, as if ye
would reason thus of Moses: he is not alive, because he is dead; or of a man
that he hears not, because he is deaf; so the regenerate being dead to sin
by mortification, which is the first part of sanctification, it cannot be that
they should live in the service of it, for death does exstinguish life, as all
men do know.


Tim. What is it to be dead to sin?


Sylas. To have the power and rage of sin abated by the Spirit of God; this
work of the Spirit is called mortification.


Tim. What differences between these two speeches, dead in sin, and dead to sin?


Sylas. The first notes a person unregenerate, that is yet under the power of
sin, drowned in the lusts and desires of sin. The second speech poynteth out a
person delivered from the dominion of sin, and so he does not follow and
serve the wicked sinful lusts of his corrupt nature, but is as a dead man to
them. Look what difference is between one that is under the water, over whelmed
in a whirlepoole where he has no footing, and another which is compassed with
waters, but has sure footing, and his head above water; such odds there is
between one dead in sins, being plunged deep into the lusts of the flesh
over head and ears, and another that is dead to sin, being so compassed with
infirmities of sin, as there is a power in the Soul over them, from the
sanctifying grace of Christ.


Tim. What is it to live in sin?


Sylas. It is this, in the whole course of ones life, and all the actions
thereof, to be obedient to the motions of sin; as a man's life is nothing but a
continual act of sinning. From al which we learn, that seeing every justified
person is sanctified, and dead to sin; therefore such as still obey their
wicked lusts, and licentiously live in sin, in vain do they profess
themselves to be believers, and to have their sins forgiven them: for such as
be dead to sin, are no more to be persuaded to love and practice sin with
delight therein, then a man naturally dead is to be moved to fear or joy, by
having terrible or pleasant things presented to him: and they which are
otherwise, following the service of sin with pleasure in it, therein
sufficiently testify that their sins are not forgiven, and that they are
utterly void of faith, because they lack sanctification, the necessary fruit
of faith.


DIAL. II.
Verses 3, 4. Know ye not, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus
Christ, have been baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by
baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of his Father, so we also should walk in newnes of life.


Tim. What is the purpose and scope of this text?


Sylas. To prove that believers are dead to sin, by their communion with Christ
and with his death, whereof baptism is a sure and effectual pledge, the
reason stands thus; all believers are partakers of Christ himself (baptism
being a testimony of their communion with him.) But whosoever are partakers of
Christ, are also partakers of his death for mortification of sin, as well as of
his resurrection for quickening to a new life: therefore all believers are dead
to sin by the virtue of Christ his death communicated to them by the Holy
Ghost, and therefore cannot live in sin.


Tim. What does this text contayn as subject and substance of it?


Sylas. The doctrine of sanctification, which is declared and set forth three
ways; first by the parts; secondly by the cause; thirdly by the testimony or
pledge of it.


Tim. What be the parts of sanctification?


Sylas. Three; first, the death or mortification of sin. Secondly, the
burial of sin, which is the progress of mortification. The third and last
part is newnes of life or vivification, which is our quickening to a new and
godly life.


Tim. What do ye call mortification or the death of sin?


Sylas. It is that action or work of the Spirit, whereby the tyranny and power
of sin is weakened and taken down, that though sin do still live in the
faithful, and tempt them to evil; yet it is truly said to be dead, because
in mortification, the strength and vigor of sin is so broken and abated, as it
can ever recover his old force again, but wastes daily till it be consumed;
as we use to say of one that cannot recover his health, that he is a dead man,
though yet he breathe and live.


Tim. Tell us now which is the second part of Sanctification?


Silas The burial of sin, which is a new work of the spirit, whereby sin
already mortified, does still more and more consume and moulder (as a dead body
wastes in the Grave:) the burial of sin being the proceeding of the death of
sin, till it be abolished and brought to nothing, as the burial of the body
is the progress of natural death.


Tim. What is the third part of Sanctification?


Silas. It is newness of life, whereby the soul is quickened and enabled to
lead a new life that is; to live godlily and justly.


Tim. What is meant here by the glory of the Father?


Silas. The power of God, which was then chiefly declared to his glory, when
Christ was raised from the dead; and in us it is showed manifestly, when
casting away sin, we live incorruptly and holily.


Tim. What is signified by newness of life?


Silas. The blameless life of Christians, or pureness of living.


Tim. By the word [Walking,] what does he teach?


Sil. That of a pure and blameless life there be certain degrees, as in
walking there is a going forwards to a certain place; so there must be a
profiting in Christianity more and more.


Tim. Thus far of the parts: now tell us the true and proper cause of our
Sanctification.


Silas. Our communion with Christ Jesus, dead, buried, and raised again, or
our fellowship with the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ; which is
meant by those phrases of being baptized into the death of Christ, and of being
buried with him, hereby signifying unto us thus much: both that Christ when
he dyed and was buried, was in our stead as our surety; and also still
communicates the merit and virtue of his death and resurrection to such as
are one with him, for the destruction of sin, as well as for remission.


Tim. Show us this more plainly what your meaning is?


Sil. They which are the members of Christ by faith, there is a power and
virtue derived and conveyed into them, from his death and burial, for the
beating down and consuming the strength of sin; and from his resurrection,
to the quickening and raising up their minds and wills to the study and love of
godliness.


Tim. Tell us now distinctly and particulerly, how does the death of Christ
avail to the mortifying and killing of sin?


Sil. Thus: Christ Jesus consists of two Natures, he is God and Man, as man
he dyed. Now the power of his Godhead did in his death uphold his manhood from
sinking, and gave merit to his death: and the same Divine power works in his
members, for mortifying sin thorough his death.


Tim. How does his burial profit to the burial of sin, or to progress of
mortification in us?


Silas. Christ's body buried, was by his divine power kept from corruption in
the grave, and that very power of Christ buried, works the continual wasting
of sin, that it may dye by little and little in his people.


Tim. Show us now how our raising to a new life is effected by Christ his
resurrection?


Sylas. That divine power that raised the dead body of Christ out of the
grave, works in the elect the resurrection of their souls, from the death of
sin to the life of righteousness.


Tim. What does follow of all this?


Silas. First, that Christ is a Savior, not by merit only, but also by virtue
and efficacy. Secondly every christian that desires to partake in the merit
of Christ's death for Justification, must labor to have fellowshippe with him
in his death for mortification, and to feel the Virtue of his resurrection
unto newness of life. Thirdly, such as have fellowship with his death, for the
leaving of sin, with a hatred of it; and with his resurrection for the
leading of a godly and a just life, out of a love unto God and to his Law, do
thereby declare, that they are one with Christ himself grafted in them.


Tim. How is our Sanctification made known to a Man's self, and unto others?


Silas. By two pledges and testimonies, the one inward, the other outward: the
inward, is the change of our affections, when the heart loatheth the sins it
was wont to love, and strives against them; and loves such Virtues and duties
as once it did abhor, endeavoring to do them with a desire to please and
glorify God. The outward pledge is baptism, which is no empty and bare, but a
powerful pledge and instrument thereof. Therefore it is said, We are baptized
into his death, that is to say, it is an effectual pledge of our fellowship
with Christ in his death, as well to Sanctification as to Justification.


Tim. Declare how Baptism is a pledge of our sanctification in all parts of it?


Silas. The holy Ghost by the water of Baptism (being sprinkled upon the
child) as by an instrument, not only seals but works Sanctification, by
linking and knitting the elect nearer unto Christ, from whom they draw virtue
and power, not only for the mortifying and the burying of their sins, but
for the pleasing of God in a new course of life. Or thus: the death of sin is
effectually represented by the water cast on us at our baptism; and burial of
sin, by our being under the Water: and by our coming out of the water, is
signified our arising out of our sins to a better life, thorough the power of
the holy Ghost, applying Christ his death and burial for the beating down of
our corrupt Nature; and his resurrection or our quickening to godliness of
living.


Tim. Then the power of Baptism depends not upon the Element of water, or on
the Minister, or actions performed in the ministration?


Silas. No surely, but upon the ordinance of Christ, appointing it to be a
pledge of remission of sins and repentance: and upon the Spirit and divine
power of Christ, working by his ordinance a straighter Conjunction between
himself and the elect believers.


Tim. Whereof should this put us in mind?


Silas. That such parties as are baptized, are much beholden to God for such a
testimony and instrument of his grace; and in this regard, stand bound to
depart from sin, and to live godlily, especially having made a solemn Vow
and covenant in their Baptism, that they will not serve sin in the lust
thereof, but God in keeping his word, and doing his will therein revealed, to
the utmost of that Grace which they have received.


DIAL. III.
Verse 5. For if we be planted with him to the similitude of his death, so
shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To make it manifest, that the power and grace of dying to sin, and
walking in a new life, is derived and borrowed from Christ Jesus.


Tim. How is this declared and made plain?


Silas. By a similitude or comparison of planting. For as it fares with a
grift translated from an old stock into a new; so is it with elect believers.
As the grift lives, grows, and fructifieth by the juice drawn from the new
stock into which it is planted: so the elect being taken out of the old
rotten stock of Adam, and planted into that Noble stock Christ Jesus, they
participate of his heavenly Spirit, by whose virtue (applying the death and
resurrection of Christ to them) they receive power to die to sin, and to live
to God.


Tim. What is meant by the similitude of his death and resurrection?


Silas. Thus much, that what was done in Christ by nature, must be likewise
done in us by Analogy or proportion, as thus: Christ dyed naturally, so we
must feel in our selves a dying of our sinful desires, as he rose again
out of the grave, so we must rise out of sin to live a godly life. And the
power whereby we can do this, is derived from the death and resurrection of
our Lord, as the grifte lives by the life of the stock, to which it is joined.


Tim. What does this similitude of planting teach us?


Sil. Sundry things: First, that naturally we are strangers from Christ, being
in the stock of rotten Adam, whence we must be taken that we may be one with
him. Secondly, that whiles we remain in Adam out of Christ, we can no more do
any good, then a grift can bring forth fruit being alone, and severed from the
stock. Thirdly, to the end we may live spiritually to God, we must first be
united to Christ, as the plant or grift is united to the Tree, into which it is
planted. Fourthly, whatsoever power is in us to do good, or to leave sin, it
is al from Christ, not from our selves. As the graft set in a stock, takes now
no life from it self, but from the stock into which it is grafted. By this is
quite ouerthrown the concurrence of nature and grace.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, that the Resurrection of Christ is
here annexed and joined unto his death, and mentioned after it?


Sil. These two things: First we learn, that as Christ had no way opened unto
his resurrection but by death; so till we depart from sin, we cannot be
raised up and renewed to a righteous life. Secondly, as Christ's death and
resurrection be joined together: so our death to sin is ever accompanied with a
new and unblameable life, which can no more be severed from mortification,
then the resurrection of Christ can be severed from his death: and therefore our
Apostle has truly affirmed before, that such as be dead to sin cannot live in
it, verse 2. for now they lead their lives according to God.


Tim. I have heard you speak of the likeness between a grift and the elect,
and what we are to learn by it, show me now in this likeness what
dissimilitude and unlikeness there is?


Silas. It is a sure truth, that no similitude does hold in all things, it is
sufficient to hold in that for which it is applied; as in this present
similitude which is brought to show, that as a slip passes from one tree to
another, and has life from that stock into which it islast planted, so the
elect passing from Adam to Christ, are partakers of his spirit: but as in every
other similitude there is a dissimilitude, so in this likeness there is an
unlikeness, and it does consist in two things: first, the slip or grift is
taken from a good tree and fastened to a wild. Secondly, it retains still his
old nature though it be planted into a new stock: now it is not so in this
spiritual planting of men into Christ. For we are plucked from an unfruitful
tree and wild Olive, even from the corrupt nature of Adam, and are grafted into
Christ as a most noble stock, a tree of righteousness, whose very leaves are
wholesome: also we put off our old nature which we had before, and leave the
affections which spring of our birth-corruption, and are partakers of the
spirit of Christ, whose nature and properties we put on. Romans 12, 14.


Tim. When may we be said to leave off our old nature and affections of sin,
and by what means are we best furthered to it?


Silas. When we begin perfectly to know our selves, that whatsoever comes of
our nature and is in us without Christ, is naught and vicious, and are moved to
be displeased with it, and to abhor it, with an earnest and constant
endeavor to leave and forsake whatsoever is from our corrupt nature: whereunto
we are much furthered and helped by the faithful and fruitful meditation of
Christ's painful death; when we do consider the shame and bitterness
thereof, to be occasioned by our own sins, it will cause a man's heart to
rise against them, as a man's heart arises against his enemy, provoking us
speedily to shake and cast the^ off, which cast our beloved and blessed Savior
into such a bloody agony, and hell of sorrows: for who can believe that Christ
was made a curse for his sins, and yet still live in the love and service of
sin?


Tim. When may it be said of us, that we have put on the nature and properties
of Christ, into whom we are newly planted?


Silas. When we do feel wrought in us by his spirit such feelings and
affections as he had, putting on like mercy, love, faith, meekness, patience,
long-suffering, joy, goodness, temperance, and kindness, as the man Christ
had; being meek and lowly as he was, etc.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 6, 7. Knowing that this our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin,
for he that is dead, is freed from sin.


Tim. WHat is the substance of this Text?


Silas. It rehearses the principal argument to prove that believers are dead
to sin, taken from their Communion with Christ and his death, [ with him.]
Secondly, it mentions the kind of death by which he merited for them the
spirit of Sanctification, by the death of the Cross, [ Crucified.] Thirdly, it
lays forth the end of our Sanctification, which is the destruction of
sin, [ that the body of sin might be destroyed.] Fourthly, the duty of
sanctified persons, [ that henceforth they serve not sin.] Lastly, a reason
thereof, because they that are dead, are freed from sin, verse 7.


Tim. What is meant here by the old man?


Silas. The universal corruption of our nature as we are conceived and borne
in sin, whereby we are prone unto all evil, and undisposed unto any good,
the which corruption is therefore called old, because it has been in man's
nature ever from our first parents Adam. Secondly, because it is in every Child
of God, before that new quallity of holiness, for which they change their old
deformity at their new birth. And for other two respects the name of [ Man] is
attributed unto our sinful corruption. First, to show how nearly the evil
and poison of sin cleaves to us, being as it were a man's self. Secondly, to
note how men are addicted unto it before they be sanctified, they do not think
themselves to be men without it, so striving for the maintenance of their
dearling sins, as they would do for the safety of soul or body: one were as
good pluck out a man's heart as seek to pull him from his beloved sins, as
good kill the man himself as his sin.


Tim. In what sense is our old man said to be crucified?


Silas. To have our old man crucified, is to have the strength of our sin
enfeebled, weakened, and broken by little and little, as Christ's body was
weakened upon the Cross till he dyed.


Tim. What may this word Crucify put us in mind of?


Silas. Of the kind of death which Christ suffered; namely, the cursed death
of the Cross, by which death he deserved the Holy-Chost for us, to crucify,
that is, to pull down the strength of sin, that though it be, yet it may not
rule in us.


Tim. But how may we understand this, where it is written (that our old man is
crucified with him) sithence the death of Christ was past long before this, how
then crucified with him?


Sil. We are to understand it thus: that when Christ suffered upon the Cross,
the corruption of our nature was imputed to him as to our surety, who once
bearing the punishment of it, does not only for ever take away the guilt from
us; but does daily by his spirit (which by that death he merited for us) kill
and crucify that our old man, that it may not reign in his members:
therefore it is here written in the present time, that our old man is
crucified with him, to teach us, that howsoever his death was but once
suffered, yet the merit thereof and efficacy is everlasting in all those which
are one with him by faith; therefore he is said in Hebrews to have purchased
eternal redemption.


Tim. What instruction for manners and amendment of life, will arise from
hence, that our old man is crucified with Christ?


Silas. First, we can never sufficiently abhor our corrupt nature and the
lusts that spring from it, sithence it was that which nailed Christ to the
Cross. Secondly, we must labor to feel the virtue of Christ crucified in the
mortifying of sin, and then we may assure our selves of the benefit of
Christ crucified, in the forgiveness of sin. Lastly, as Christ gave himself
wholly to the cross for our sakes, so ought we to strive against all and
every sin, not bearing nor nourishing any one sin, but keeping under one as
well another; seeing Christ spared none of his members and parts of his body,
which were all and every one payned for our sins, even from his head to his
feet.


Tim. What does this word (body of sin) signify?


Sylas. The whole man (Body and Soul) as he is borne of his parents, and comes
into the world corrupted by sin; and albeit not the body alone, but the whole
man through out, in his mind, will, affections, and all be infected with sin:
yet for good reason does the Apostle liken sin to a body, calling it the
body of sin, (that is sin which is as a body.) First, to teach us that sin is a
thing subsisting and of force in us. Secondly, because it has innumerable
lusts, as it were so many members annexed to it. Thirdly, though sin be seated
in the Soul, yet the desires of sin are executed by the members of our body,
as by instruments. Lastly, because sin is conuayed into the soul at the
first by means of the body.


Tim. What is it to destroy the body of sin?


Sylas. Quite to abolish it, and to take it out of our nature that it should
not be at all; but this thing is not performed during the time of this life, it
is still in doing, and certainly shall be perfected in the end of our life;
therefore it is said to be destroyed, as if it were already done: and this is
the end and mark that Christ aims at, in the work of our sanctification,
which we are still to strive toward, though we cannot attain it while we live,
having sin still abiding and dwelling in us: howbeit the spirit of
sanctification so far prevails against our sins, as that they cannot rule
in us, and make us henceforth to serve sin, as we were wont to do before our
sanctification.


Tim. 'Declare unto us now what it is to serve sin?


Sylas. It is to do that willingly which sin would have done, when men do
freely and readily execute by the members of their body, that which sin
desires and lusts: and on the other side, the not serving of sin, is when
the motions and desires of sin, are not obeyed either in will or work, but be
cast out of our thoughts, words and deeds, as much as may be.


Tim. What is the difference between the having of sin, and the serving of sin?


Silas. Such as is between the having of a naughty servant, and the suffering
him to rule all in the family. Every godly man has sin, but he keeps it
under, as a servant or slave, not suffering it to command or bear rule in
them. The wicked, they both have sin and serve sin, because they resist it not,
but suffer it to bear rule in them; as a Lord or King carrying all the powers
of body and soul after it mightily.


Tim. Seeing some men do fulfill some motions of sin which yet do not serve
sin, and others do abstain from some acts of sin which yet do serve sin,
how then may it be known who serve sin, and who do not?


Silas. The service of sin is manifested by the obedience How many ways the
service of sin is known.
to the desires and lusts of sin; as it is written. His servants we are to
whom we obey; and this obedience is manifested by yielding unto sinful
thoughts, in consent of our will, and in practice of our life. Also by striving
for our lusts, and defending of them: by hating and disliking them which
reprove us; by loving such as sooth and flatter us in our evil ways; by
upholding and mantayning sin in others; by giving favors and appoynting
rewards unto sins and vices.


Tim. But some there are which outwardly reeld obedience unto the word, who yet
are servants of sin, how shall they be discerned of themselves and others?


Sylas. They are to be discerned and known by these How Hypocrites be
discerned from true Christians.
marks following. First, though they do in their outward actions yield
obedience to the word, yet they do still retain the yoke of sin, for they
love not those duties which yet they do for sinister respects of profit, or
praise, or pleasing themselves or others: and those sins which they leave
undone, yet they still like them in their hearts, as the people of Israel being
delivered from the bondage of Tharao, looked back into Egypt in their thoughts,
wishing themselus there again; so it is with these men, they leave the outward
act of sin, and yet love sin, having their hearts set upon it. Secondly, the
servants of sin, though they forsake many sins, yet not all their sins they
still keep some beloved sin, either of their trade, or of nature which they
serve as their mistress: and though they do sundry duties touching the outward
deed, yet they leave undone some duty, as necessary as any which they do,
because it crosses their lusts. Thirdly, those sinful actions which they do
forsake, and those good duties which they do persourme, they do but for a
time; for they are soon weary of well doing, and return to their sins as a
dog to his vomit. Lastly, they that be the servant of sin, both in the good
which they do, and in the evil which they would do, they are led and driven
by corruption, that is the groundwork and beginning of all their actions, they
walk after the flesh, not after the spirit: the flesh (that is their sinful
nature) is the pipe after which they dance, and the guide which they follow.


Tim. But tell me what are we to learn by that word (henceforth) in the 6.
verse?


Sylas. That the Gospel does look forward to the time to come, it respects
not what believers have been before their repentance and turning to God: but
requires that henceforth, that is from the time of their conversion forward,
they should carefully serve God by doing his will, fors king the service of
their sinful lusts: see the like place in Acts 17. 30. and Ephe. 4, 17. 1,
Pet. 4, 2. Which affoords a great comfort unto those which morn for sin, and
a special admonition unto such as be yet secure: it will be sufficient to
either of these, it henceforth they look unto it, mourning and loathing that
which is past, being careful hereafter no more so to sin.


Tim. What be the reasons which may dissuade all men from the service uf sin?


Sylas. Very many and sorcible: First because the service of sin is a
spiritual bondage, the end of which service is shame and everlasting death.
Secondly, if we serve sin we cannot serve Christ, for no man can serve two
such contrary masters. Thirdly, it is contrary to our vow in baptism, where
we promise that we will forsake sin and serve God. Lastly, we are by
mortification dead and freed from sin, and therefore we are not to serve it.


Tim. How do ye make plain this last reason?


Sylas. By a comparison of natural death and the effects thereof, which our
Apostle does touch in the seventh verse; when he says, they which are dead
are freed from sin: the meaning whereof is this, as they which are naturally
dead, cease from their sins, which they were wont to do whiles they lived: so
believing Christians which are spiritualy dead by mortification, must resolu to
cease from their former sins.


Tim. But we cannot be so free from sin as men that are dead, for they sin
not at all, whereas there is no man living that sins not.


Sylas. True, it is so; yet the godly Christian is free from sin in a twofolde
respect. First, because the guilt and punishment of sins is forgiven him by
Christ. Secondly, because he does no more follow the impulsion or motion of
sin, but as a bondsman delivered and ransomed from some cruel Lord, does not
now any thing at the commandment of that Lord, whose yoke he has shaken off.
So it is with true believers, being once delivered from the dominion and rule
of sin, they are no more under the government and beck of sin, and though
they be not free from the corruption of sin, which cleaves to their nature as
skin to their flesh or as the flesh to their bones: yet they are free from the
command and compulsion of sin, not any more to be ruled and led by it, but
by the spirit of Christ.


Tim. By what tokens may it be known to our selves and others, when we be
thus freed from sin?


Silas. By these tokens: First, a person freed from sin, has not any purpose
to sin, but is determined in all things to please God so far as grace shall
enable him, and frailty suffer him. I am determined to keep thy righteous
judgments, Psalm. 119. Secondly, he fears sin as How and by what signs our
freedom from sin is manifested.
the greatest evil, as it is said of Esra, that he feared God greatly, Esra
7, 10. Thirdly, he is very watchful over himself, resisting the very
motions in evil. Fourthly, he shunneth every occasion of sin. Fifthly, he
prays heartily and continually against the power of sin. Sixthly, if he
sin at any time, it is with godly grief, which causes fresh repentance,
never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. Seauenthly, he labors to pull others out
of the bondage of sin, and to keep from sinning, such as are set free
therefrom, especially such as be under his charge. Eighthly, he is joyful and
heartily thankful for his own liberty in Christ, and for the freedom of
others, Romans 7, 24. Lastly, he loves Christ which has freed him, and tenders
the glory of Christ his deliverer, above his own salvation, Romans 9, 2.


DIAL. V.
Verses 8, 9, 10, 11. Wherefore, if we be dead with Christ, we believe that
we also shall live with him. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead,
dies no more; death has no more dominion over him. For in that he dyed, he
dyed once to sin: but in that he lives, he lived unto God. Likewise think
ye also, that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.


Tim. WHat is the drift and purpose of this Text?


Silas. To admonish all Christians, that they may in no wise live licentiously
in sin, sithence they receive this mercy from God, to have communion both with
the death and life of his Son, both for mortification of sin, and for
newness of life; and this to be the drift, appears by the twelfe verse, Let
not sin therefore reign, etc.


Tim. What is the sum and substance of this Text?


Sylas. It sets forth the doctrine of sanctification, by comparing Christ and
his members together in these 4. things, wherein they are one like the other.
First, as Christ dyed once for sin, so all his members are once to dye to
sin. Secondly, as Christ being dead did live again, so all his members are
quickened by him to live a new life. Thirdly, as the life which Christ now
lives is perpetual and can never be again extinguished by sin or death, so
all his members shall persevere to the end in newness of life. Lastly, as the
end of Christ's death, was to take away sin, and as the glory of his father
was the end of his life; so it is in his members, their mortification shall
quite abolish sin at the last, and the vprightnes of their life, tends to the
glorifying of God, who takes himself much honored, when his be holy, as he
is holy.


Tim. Tell us now the meaning of the words, what is it to be dead with Christ:
and also what it is to live with him.


Sil. To be dead with Christ, it is to have communion or fellowship with his
death, for the mortification of our sins, by the virtue and power of his
Spirit, which his death merited for us; and to live with Christ, is to have
communion with his life, or to be partakers with his life, whereof there be two
degrees. The first degree is the life of grace in this world, whereby believers
are enabled to think and do in some measure things pleasing unto God. The
second degree is the life of glory, which they shall have and live in heaven
in all perfection, loving God, his Angels, and Saints with all their heart,
soul, and strength.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, that such as die together with Christ,
shall also live with him?


Silas. Two things: First an instruction, that dying to sin, and newness of
life are inseparable. For he that has the first, cannot but have the latter.
Secondly, a consolation that the life of Christ is annexed to his death: for
they are sure to have part with him in his life, both of grace and glory, that
have part with him in his death. So the Apostle says, We believe it; that is,
we are certainly persuaded of it, that the life of Christ belongs to us, if we
be dead to sin; it is no matter of opinion or conjecture, but of faith.


Tim. What things learn we out of the ninth verse?


Sil. First, that Christ was dead to take away sin, touching guilt and
dominion. Secondly, that he was raised from death to life again. Thirdly, that
his life is no more subject to death, for it cannot again be quenched with
sin and death; whereupon does follow these two most comfortable things.
First, those sins of ours, which were imputed to him, he has wholly
abolished and freeed himself from them. For if any one of our sins were not
taken away by him, either he must not rise from the dead, or being risen, he
must return again to dye: for where sin remains vnremooued, there of
necessity death has power, because it is the stipend of sin. Secondly, that
as Christ has freed himself from our sins and death, so he will free his mebers
wholly from them both. For he took our nature upon him, to that end, to chase
sin and death out of it, as it is written, He came to destroy the works of
the devil, 1 John 3. Also in his death and resurrection he bare our persons,
and for us and in our behalf overcame sin and death, as if we our selves
had done it.


Tim. Unto what uses will the knowledge of these things serve us?


Sil. This knowledge must serve us to these uses. First, to provoke our
thankfulness unto Christ, who has wrought our liberty from sin and death,
the two maine enemies of our salvation. Secondly, to increase our hatred of,
and our strife against sin, in a joyful hope of full and perfect freedom
from it by Christ.


Tim. What other thing is there to be learned out of this 9. Verse?


Sylas That Jesus Christ was once not only dead, but under the dominion and
power of death; not as one constrained as it he could not have kept him self
from the power of death, but willingly because he would obey his Fathers
decree, who had appointed that death (for our sin) shouldseaze upon him and
hold him as prisoner in the house of death for a time: and this is the lowest
degree of Christ's humiliation, containing the true meaning of that article of
his descension into hell: hell signifying the grave, according to the phrase of
scripture; and descending into the grave, was the putting of his body under the
dominion of death for a certain space. The use of this is to teach us humility,
that the same mind be in us which was in Christ; who at he abased himself to
such a vile condition for our good, so ought we in humbleness of mind to
serve and profit others, though they be our inferiors, and though we should
put our selves to do very mean or hard things for their sakes.


Tim. What is contained in the tenth verse?


Sylas. The end of Christ's death, which was to abolish and wholly take away sin,
both touching the punishment and the power of it: therefore it is said, he
dyed once to sin, that is, to take away sin from his members, by that one
death, which he once suffered. Also it contains the end of his life, which he
now lives in heaven; to wit, the glory of his Father: therefore it is written
that he lives to God, that is, to the praise of God, and in his glorious
presence, or most gloriously.


Tim. What are we to learn from this, that Christ is said to dye once to sin?


Sil. First, that our sin was the cause of his death. Secondly, that sin in
the elect shall be destroyed and taken away by the merit and virtue of his
death: the time will come (to wit after this life) that the children of God
shall be as free from sin, as Christ himself is. Thirdly, that for the
destruction of sin, it was sufficient for Christ once to dye, and therefore
the sacrifice or offering of Christ in the popish Mass to take away sin, is
absurd and abominable: it is absurd because it implies a taking away of sin,
without death, and a sacrifice for sin without blood, or else an iteration of
his death, or often shedding of his blood, all which is most absurd: it is
abominable, because it is directly against the Scripture, which speaks of
Christ as of one once dead, and once offered. Secondly, because it does
derogate from the allsufficiency and perfection of Christ's only sacrifice in
his death; for if his sacrifice be sufficient for this purpose to take away
sin, their sacrifice of the Mass is superfluous; if this be needful, then
Christ's is weak.


Tim. What other thing learn we from hence, that Christ dyed but once?


Silas. That it is sufficient for us, once to be mortified, and once to dye to
sin, from whence we may gather that they are in an error, which think that
the grace of mortification and repentance, may be wholly lost; for then Gods
Children must twice dye to sin: howbeit though the grace of sanctification is
but once given, yet Christians must labor to cherish and preserve that grace,
with purpose never to return again to the service of sin, as Christ never
returns unto the Grave.


Tim. Why is it said that Christ raised from the dead lines to God, seeing he
always lived unto God, even before his death?


Sil. Christ after his resurrection from the dead, does otherwise live unto
God, then he did before his death. For though it be true, that always even
before his death as well as after, he was led by the spirit of God, and did
all things to the praise of God; yet before his death he so lived to God, as
he had in him as in one who was a true man, the infirmities of our nature,
weariness, hunger, thirst, cold, etc. and upon him as upon our surety all our
sins charged and imputed; but after his resurrection he so lives to God as
his manhood is wholly freed from all infirmity of nature, and imputation of
sin, being most perfectly glorified.


Tim. What is contained in the 11. verse?


Sil. It is the conclusion of the comparison between Christ and his members:
the effect and sum whereof is this, that what thing was done in Christ, the
same thing ought to be done in his members. For as Christ once dying does ever
live to God, so his members are once to dye to sin, and perpetually to live
to God.


Tim. What is meant here by our living unto God?


Silas. When not sin but the Spirit and the word of God be the grounds of
all our thoughts, words, and deeds.


Tim. How is this spiritual life whereby we live to God, to be preserved and
maintained?


Silas. First, by the means of spiritual nourishment, 1. Food.
the flesh and blood of Christ, spiritually eat and drunk by faith. Secondly,
by recreation, to wit; singing of 2. Recreatio^.
psalms with ioyfulnesse. Thirdly, by exercise of prayer, 3. Exercise.
repentance, and good works. Fourthly, by sleep, 4. Sleep.
even by meditation of the word, Law, and Gospel. Fifthly, by physic, and
good use of afflictions, both upon 5. Physic.
our selves and others. Sixthly, the avoiding of hindrances, 6. Removing
impediments.
as namely of sin, evil company, evil example, evil counsel. Psalm. 1, 1.
and 26, and 119.


Tim. What further instructions are we to take out of this 11. verse?


Sil. First, the death and life of Christ is not for himself, but for us which
believe in him; therefore as Christ dyed and lived for us, so let us think our
selves bound to live for the good of others. Secondly, whatsoever good thing
believers have, which concerns the spiritual and heavenly life, they are
beholden only unto Christ therefore: which must help us first of all to beat
down the pride of our heart, and to make us humble, seeing we can neither dye
to sin, nor live to God, nor do the least good thing but through Christ.
Secondly, to quicken our love and thankfulness more and more toward Christ, by
whom we have all our grace, and look for all our glory. To Christ therefore
which has sanctified us and given us fellowship with his death and
resurrection, both for remission and for mortification of sin, be thanks
and praise for evermore, Amen.


DIAL. VI.
Verse 12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal bodies, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text, and what does it contain?


Silas. To persuade those which are sanctified, not to suffer the grace of the
Spirit to be idle, but to set it on work, for the suppressing of sin which
remains in our nature. These words of our Apostle, contain an exhortation
to that purpose, and here begins the second part of this chapter; the first
part was doctrinall, this latter part is paraeneticall or hortatory.


Tim. What be the parts of the exhortation contained in this 12. verse?


Silas. Three: First, the substance of the exhortation, [ Let not sin reign
in you.] Secondly, the reason why we should not suffer sin to reign, in
these words, [ Therefore] and [ Mortal.] Thirdly, the means how to hinder the
kingdom of sin, [ By not obeying the lusts of sin.]


Tim. Now expound the words, and tell us what do ye call [Sinne?]


Sil. The corruption and pronnesse of our nature to all Est peccatum, luet non
imputalur Sanctis. Augustine.
evil, this natural corruption is here called sin: first, because it is
the punishment of the sin of our first parents. Secondly, the matter and
cause, root and fountain of all other sins. Thirdly, because it has the
proper nature of sin.


Tim. How prove ye that it has the proper nature of sin?


Silas. First, it is the transgression of the Law, Romans Reatus tollitur in
Baptismo, non corruption and macula. Idem.
7, 7. Secondly, it strives and rebelleth against the motions of the spirit,
Romans 7, 23. I see a law in my members rebelling etc. Thirdly, because it
engendereth death, which is the fruit of that which is properly sin. Romans 5,
14. Original concupisence is sin formally, and not the matter or mother of sin.
and 6, 23.


Tim. When may sin be said to reign?


Sil. When the lusts and motions of sin are confented unto, and followed
without resistance, or when it is done readily, which sin wills and
commands to be done.


Tim. What is meant here by the body?


Sil. The whole man consisting of Soul and body; now he does rather name the
body then the soul, because sin is first conuayed into the soul by the body,
and afterward executed and fulfilled by the body, as an organ to the soul in
committing of sin.


Tim. What are the instructions that we are to learn from this exhortation
thus expounded?


Sil. First, though sin cannot but still be in the regenerate; Every sin
original and actual reigns in the unregenerate, not so in the godly.
yet it ought and may be kept from reigning, else this exhortation were vain.
Secondly, that it behooves every child of God to do his part and endeavor
that sin may not reign. Thirdly, where this care is not taken to resist
sin, there it will reign as a tyrant, or rather as a King.


Tim. What reasons may stir up Gods children to a care of hindering the
kingdom of sin, so much as ever lies in them to do?


Sil. First, seeing Christ has put into them the grace to Therefore.
mortify their sin, it is their part not to suffer it to be idle and
unfruitful; but to labor more and more to keep under and master that enemy
which Christ has already begun to slay and destroy. Secondly, because we are
mortal Mortal.
and subject to death, therefore our resistaunce of sin must be the stronger,
seeing it will shortly have an end. Thirdly, if we strive against the kingdom
of sin to hinder it, we are sure to conquer it, otherwise it will overcome us
to our everlasting shame and destruction.


Tim. But what needs this exhortation to the faithful, in whom sin cannot
have any kingdom, because Christ is their King, and rules them outwardly by
his word, and inwardly by his Spirit?


Sil. It is very needful, because by their own care and endeavor in resisting
sin, it is kept from exercising any rule or kingdom over them. God who will
not have sin to rule in his children, the same God wills his children not to
be secure, but to do what they can to stop and hinder the power and course
of sin in themselves: GOD works by means.


Tim. Tell us now what is the special means to hinder the kingdom of sin?


Sil. Not to obey it in the lusts thereof; whereby this word (lust) is meant
not corruption of nature, but the first stirrings thereof, even all the evil
desires and motions that spring from it, which may appear to be so by these
reasons. First, because he does distinguish sin from lust, as the root and
cause from the fruit and effect. Secondly, because he speaks of lusts in the
plural number, saying lusts and not lust; this shows that he meant not
natural corruption, which is one entire thing dispersed into the whole man;
but those diverse and many wicked motions and desires which come of it, whereof
we may read the particulars, Romans 1, 29. 30. 1, Cor. 6. 9. 10. Gala. 5. 19.
20, 21. Colos. 3. 5. and Titus 3, 3. Such an heap, sea, or world of evil
lusts there be lurking in our nature, as so many enemies to fight withal.


Tim. Now ye have told us what is meant by lusts, tell us what it is not to
obey these lusst?


Sil. Neither to practice them in our works nor so much as to consent unto them
in our will, with great watchfulness and continual prayer to withstand all
motions and occasions of sin.


Tim. What is the doctrine we learn from hence?


Sil. That such as will keep sin from reigning, must keep down the first
motions thereof, which may be declared Obsta principijs sero medicina paratur,
cum mala per longas conualuere moras.
by these similitudes; first of wounds and diseases in the body, which being
looked unto at the first, be more easily cured, whereas being let run too long,
they grow desperate and cureles: Also of Fields and Gardens where the weeds
being neglected too long, will ouergrow the corn and good herbs. Lastly, of
warriors who set upon their enemies, where they find them feeblest; so sin
being in time resifted, ere it get hold on our will, or break forth by the
members of our body, is kept from bearing rule over us and held under as a
slave and vassal.


Tim. What other means are there by which sin must be kept from reigning?


Silas. This forenamed mean, has other subordinate means as helps
thereunto, when God will work by them. First, meditation on the word read and
heard. Secondly, exercise of private prayer, and daily confession of known
sins. Thirdly, admonition of the godly. Fourthly, Christian fasting. Fifthly,
avoiding the occasions of sin, and the company and counsel of wicked men.
Pfal. 1, 1. and 26, 4, 5. Proverbs, 1, 10.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 13. Neither give ye your member, as weapons of unrighteousness unto
sin: but give your selves unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and
give your members as weapons of righteousness unto God.


Tim. WHat is the sum of this Text?


Silas. It has an illustration or further setting forth of that which was
taught in the former verse, by a borrowed speech from warriors or Soldiers,
which bear weapons in defense of those Kings or Lords under whom they serve.
Whereby the Apostle gives us thus much to understand, that as kings are
maintained in their Kingdom by the ready obedience of their subjects in peace,
and by their willingness to fight for them in time of war: so the reign of
sin is furthered by the same means, and hindered by withdrawing these
means; that is, by not obeying nor fighting for the lusts of sin, as a King
must needs fall and come down when his Subjects will not obey him, nor bear
weapons against his enemies.


Tim. What is meant by [Giue?]


Silas. It is as much as to exhibit and voluntarily to present our selves
before sin, to do the lusts of it; as Soldiers of their own accord show
themselves in presence of their Lords and Generals, to take commandment from
them. Whereby we are put in mind that we are so ready and prone to go after
the motions of sin, as no servant is more ready to do his masters will. We
do naturally offer our powers of body and mind to receive commandments from
sin, as from a General and Commander.


Tim. What is meant by [Members?]


Silas. It signifies all faculties and powers of body and soul, even our
whole selves (as it is expounded in the next part of this verse,) and the
reason why the Apostle does call our members [ Weapons,] it is to agrauate the
matter, even to teach and show thus much unto us, that when we put soorth that
strength and force that is in us, As weapons may be used by a good Subject, or
a Rebel, so the body is an indifferent thing. Theophylact.
to strive for the lusts of sin, to execute them, therein we do fight
against God, and in Giant-like manner bear weapons against Heaven (though
sinners think not so,) as if he would provoke the Almighty unto battle: as
the Philistims waged war against the israelites, so our perverse rebellious
nature with her faculties fights against God.


Tim. What is meant by sin, and why is unrighteousness joined with it?


Silas. By sin is meant the naughtiness of our nature springing from the
first sin of our parents, wherewith the Apostle does yoke unrighteousness in
this place, to teach us, that we can do no sin, but that therein we shall
deal unrighteously with God, whom we disobey and dishonor; with our selves,
whom we defile and destroy; with our neighbor, whom we hurt in body, soul,
name, or goods, or with all three actions.


Tim. Now that ye have expounded unto us the words, tell us what we are further
to learn, out of the former part of this verse?


Sylas. These two things: fi st, what all men would do naturally, if we were
left to follow our own corruption; namely this, we would break out into open
rebellion, to make war against God in defense of our sinful lusts, as
mutmous soldiers and (...) bear weapons against their lawful Captain or
Sovereign. And this indeed is the estate of all natural unregenerate men,
howsoever (...) perceive it not, all the powers that be in them do fight
against God, not a sinew nor a vain of theirs but it wars against their
Creator, as Achab sold himself to do wickedness, and the Ephesians sinned with
greedmes: which is a most perilous estate, wherein a man (if he could choose)
(...) not live a minute of an hour for a million of worlds. For if it be a
dangerous matter for a Subject to rise up in arms against an earthly King; how
extremely dangerous must it needs be to (...) against the King of Heaven, who
in one instant can destroy both body and soul in hell (...)? Secondly, we
learn hence what it is that every child of God by grace may do and ought to
do; to wit, to strive and fight most willingly, not for the lusts of sin,
from the tyranny whereof they are delivered, but to do the will of Christ Jesus
their new Lord, to whom they are subject in respect of creation, redemption,
conservation, and dominion.


Tim. Come now unto the latter part of this sentence, and tell us what is
meant (by your selves, and by giving your selves up to God?)


Sylas. Body and soul with all the saculties of both, which we do give unto
God, when we are ready to take knowledge what is the will of God, and to live
thereafter, fighting now as much against sin, as we were wont to strive for
it.


Tim. But how can we give our selves to God seeing we our Not I (says Paul)
but the grace of God in me. 1 Cor. 15, 2.
selves can do nothing? it is God must do all in us.


Sil. This text speaks to regenerate persons, and these are said to do
that, which Gods grace makes them able to do. Secondly, Gods grace and man's
endeavor agree well together, as efficient and instrument; here our endeavor is
called for, that we stir up the grace that is in us, and not suffer it to
lie still and be idle.


Tim. What is meant by the (dead) and what is it to be (alive from the dead?)


Sil. By (dead) he means those which were spiritually Ephe. (...), 1.
dead in sin: these are said to be made alive when they are raised up by
Christ from their sins to live the life of grace, having the spirit of
Christ put into them to move and lead them to do good things unto his glory,
in the obedience of his will.


Tim. What instructions are we to learn from hence?


Sylas. We learn from hence our duty, and the reason Help the pore with those
hands with which ye oppressed the poor: let those feet run to Church which
once ran to Idols: let that tongue etc.
of it; our duty is this: that being regenerate we must be as prompt and
forward to serve God, as other men to serve sin, while they be unregenerate.
The reason hereof is equal; that seeing God has made us now alive by grace,
that once were dead in sins, therefore we are bound very readily to obey him,
by whom we are translated from the death of sin unto the life of
righteousness.


Tim. What are we to learn further, by the last words of this text?


Sylas. That when we once come to God, we must contend Ga. 5. 17.
and fight for him against our own sinful lusts, as before we fought for our
lusts against him.


DIAL. VIII.
Verse 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, because ye are not under
the law but under grace.


Tim. HOw is this text divided?


Sylas. The parts of this text be two reasons; one subordinate to the other,
the latter to the former.


Tim. What is the drift and purpose of this text?


Sylas. To encourage men to strive and make resistance against sin, by a
reason of great force and weight: this reason is taken from the certain hope
of victory; if we strive lawfully against sin we shall overcome it in part at
least, it shall not overcome us wholly or finally; for among all other things,
these two ought most to prevail with Christians, to make them stoutly and
manfully to fight against 1 Part.
sin. First, that our quarrel or cause is good; for we stand with Christ our
redemer, with his word and glory, Goodness of the quarrel, and hope of victory,
the two whetstones of a Soldiers courage.
against sin, both his and our mortal enemy. Secondly, that of our strife
there will come a good and happy issue in the end, even the conquest of sin:
therefore we are to quit our selves like men and to be strong; for if David
fought most vali^atly against Goliath, because he was assured of the victory;
and if worldly souidiours be animated and whetted on to fight, when they have
but a likelihoode of 1 Samuel, 17. 36.
victory: how much then ought Christians to strive against sin, being certain
of the victory? the Apostle in the word of truth assuring us, that if we
fight, sin shall not have dominion over us; it may and must remain in us as a
mutiner, but shall not reign over us as a conqueror.


Tim. What other thing is to be learned from the first words of this text?


Sylas. That sin will exercise dominion and rule, where it is not resisted; for
it is certain that sin must either be kept under as a slave, or else it will
be above as a tyrant to domineere, which is an exceeding great and harmful
matter. For better it were to be a slave unto the most crueltyrant in earth,
then to be under the dominion of sin; because earthly tyrants can but hurt
and kill the body: but this tyrant sin, if it be suffered to rule and have
dominion, will destroy both body and soul for ever; for the wages of sin is
death. Romans 6. last verse.


Tim. Let me hear now how ye prove that sin shall not have dominion, so we
strive against it?


Sylas. Because we are not under the law, but under grace.


Tim. Expound the words, and tell us what is meant by law?


Sylas. Not the ceremonial, nor the judicial law, but the moral law, which
in ten commandments teaches our duty to God and our neighbor. That this law
is meant, may appear by these reasons. First, there is no reason to speak of
any other law, for it is besides the Apostles purpose. Secondly, it appears
by the 7. verse of the 7, Chapter, where an instance is given out of the moral
Law. Thirdly, it is the moral Law which by forbidding of sin does increase
sin, and stirs us more to go after sin, and so makes it more hard to be
overcome.


Tim. What is it, not to be under the Law? show us this somewhat For our
corrupt nature is more bent unto that which is forbidden. How still subject to
the Law.
plainly and distinctly.


Silas I hus much: to be delivered and set free from it, as the wife is
delivered and set free from her dead or divorced husband: so Christians are no
more subject to the Law. For howsoever Gods Children after their regeneration
are still subject to the regiment and doctrine of the Law, and are still bound
to yield obedience to it as to the witness of Gods will, and the rule of our
life, yet believing persons are freed from it, in sundry other respects. First,
they are freed from the Law, as touching How free from it.
the curse and malediction, whereof in the former Chapter. Secondly, as it is a
Schoole-maister to compel and enforce unto duty, 1. Tim. 1, 9. Thirdly, from
the rigor of the Law, as it does exact perfect obedience, but gives and brings
no help to perform any thing toward it. Lastly, they are freed from it as it
is the vigor and strength Iubet, non Iuuat.
of sin, more and more increasing and stirring it up by forbidding and
prohibitions; for this is the naughtiness of our crooked nature, more
earnestly to run upon such Nitimur in vetitum, cupimus semperq, negata.
evils as we are most restrained from, and in this last respect are we said in
this place not to be under the Law.


Tim. What is it that we may learn from hence?


Silas. That the godly being freed from the Law, as it is the vigor and
strength of sin, sin now will be the more easy to be mastered, so they
strive against it; even as a woman by the lack of her husband is much the
weaker and sooner overcome: so it is in this case, sin without the Law to
strengthen and stir it up, is as a wife without her husband, as in Chapter,
7, 1, 2, 3.


Tim. Tell us now what is meant by grace, and what it is to be under grace?


Silas. Grace signifies the free forgiveness of our sins through the merit
of Christ's death: in this sense the Apostle uses the word Grace in the former
three Chapters, wherein he entreats of Justification. Secondly, it signifies
the gracious help and assistance or the work of Gods spirit, for the
mortification and killing of sin; and so it is used in this Chapter, where he
entreats of Sanctification. Now (to be under this grace) is to be in such an
estate, as to have the Spirit of Sanctification to reign in us and rule over
us, as a husband over his wife, and a King over his Subjects.


Tim. What instruction gather ye from hence, that we are under grace?


Silas. That the faithful need not fear that sin shall conquer them if they
strive against it, because the grace that rules in their hearts, is stronger
then sin: as if the Apostle should say, Be strong, quit your selves like men
and fight valiantly, and suffer not sin to reign; for he that is with you,
to wit, the spirit and grace of God, is mightier then your enemy sin that is
against you, you are both graciously pardoned your sin, and graciously
assisted. The Prophet Elizeus when his servant was in 2 Kings. 6, 15, 16.
fear upon the sight of the Aramites army, did thus comfort him, saying; Fear
not, for they that are with us are more then they that are against us: in like
manner must true believers encourage themselves against sin, to think that a
stronger then it, is on their side; for though (...) be stronger then nature
and natural strength, yet grace is stronger then it.


DIAL. IX.
Verses 15, 16. What then? shall we sin because we are not under the Law but
under grace? God forbid. Know ye not that to whomsoever ye give your selves as
servants to obey, his servants ye are whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness?


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. An answer of the Apostle Paul unto a cauilling objection, made against
his former doctrine. 1. Part. Objection.



Tim. First of all tell us what he means by [Sinne,] when he says, What
then, shall we sin? v. 15.


Sil. By (Sin) is meant here, not one act of sin, but a continual course of
sinning, and it is as much as if it had been said; Shall we live or lead our
lives in sin, as before verse 2. or shall we serve sin, verse 6. or shall
we obey sin? This then is the meaning of the objection, Shall we give over
our selves licenciously to sin, because we are not under the Law but under
Grace? Which objection did arise from the ill understanding of the Apostles
words. For his words were so taken of some as if he had meant (by not being
under the Law) our freedom from the government and doctrine of the law, and so
the bridle being cast loose in our necks, we might have lived as we list; which
was very far from the Apostles meaning.


Tim. What may we learn from this Objection?


Silas. Our first instruction from this Objection, is to learn how ready and
prone sinful men be to snatch up all manner of occasions which may nourish
liberty in sin, perverting holy doctrine to this end: therefore al men must
watch over their own hearts, being naturally bent to these crooked shifts,
avoiding the company of sinful men which affect such natural
licenciousnesse. Secondly, that the il understanding of things well taught,
breeds errors and cauillings, and therefore we must take heed of mistaking good
doctrine. Thirdly, that there is no doctrine so sound, but one or other will
carpe at it and wrest it: therefore Teachers must arm themselves with
patience. Fourthly, that Ministers of the word, must Titus. 1,9.
have skill not only to teach the truth, but how to meet 2. Part. Answer.
with, and convince such gaine-sayers.


Tim. Now tell us what answer the Apostle makes unto the former cauillations,
and how the Objection is wiped away?


Sylas. It is first to be noted, that the Apostle does not directly answer
their cauilling argument which is Sophistical, being a fallacy from the
ambiguity of the speech, (of not being under the law) which the obiectours
took as being meant of a freedom from the obedience of the law; whereas the
Apostle understood it of the rigorous exaction of the law, forbidding evil
things, and giving no strength to forbear them; but rather provoking our
lusts more after such evils as it forbids. Our Apostle therefore contents
himself to answer the consequent of the argument: namely, that which was
untruly concluded and gathered from his own doctrine; to wit, (that we might
freely sin:) this consequent he answers two ways. His first answer is, by
words of detestation [ God forbid] in 15, verse: hereby teaching us that all
wicked and false things inferred from the word, must be abhorred of us. In
the second part of his answer, he proves the quite contrary to the objection,
namely that such as be not under law, but under grace, ought not to serve
sin, but Christ their Lord.


Tim. How does he prove this, by what argument?


Sylas. By these two reasons: the first is taken from the condition of
Servants, in the beginning of the 16. verse. This reason stands thus; It is
meet that every one obey him, whose servant he is: but all true believers are
the servants of God and not of sin: therefore are they bound not to obey sin,
but God, in doing his will. Which the Apostle does confirm and back by the
testimony of every man's conscience: know ye not that a servant must obey him
that is his Lord, and that Christ is your Lord, and not sin? ye all know this,
by the light of nature the one, and the other ye know by the light of the word.


Tim. What things are we to learn out of this first reason?


Sylas. First, that it is wisdom in the Ministers of the word, to build their
doctrine upon known and received principles, of which every one is convicted,
that they are true. Secondly, we must judge of our service, either to sin or
to God, not by our profession, but by our practice and obedience: if we do
fulfill and obey the lusts of sin, then are we the servants of sin,
whatsoever we profess or say to the contrary. Thirdly, that it stands with
great reason, that a Christians life should be a continual obedience to
Christ, because he is our Lord, and has admitted us to be his servants; who by
nature through Adams fall, were wholly captives to Satan and sin: but Christ
by his death has freed us from this captivity, and addicted us to himself, to
this end that we should not now serve sin our former Lord, but Christ our new
master, who has delivered us from sin and Satan; as servants which paste
from 1, Cor, 6, 20, Luke 1, 74, 75
one master to another, do ever please and serve the latter master.


Tim. What is the second reason whereby he proves that we ought to obey
Christ, and not sin?


Sylas. The second reason of this text, is taken from the effects which follow
the service of Christ and of sin, which be death and life: (whether it be of
sin to death, or of obedience unto righteousness.) This second reason has two
branches, and may be thus framed; such as obey and serve sin must have death
for their reward, therefore we ought not to serve sin, least we dye for it.
Again, such as obey Christ by doing righteous things, shall have eternal life
for their reward: therefore we ought to obey Christ, and renounce the service
of sinful lusts, that we may live for ever.


Tim. What instructions do ye gather from hence?


Sylas. First of all, that sin and righteousness be two contrary Lords, as fire
and water, as God and Mammon; love the one, and hate the other. Secondly, that
all men must do service to one of these two Lords, no man can serve both at
once, because they command contrary things. Thirdly, we learn here the
nature of sin, that it is repugnant to the obedience of the law or unto
righteousness, therefore a filthy, unrighteous and bitter thing. Fourthly, that
the service of sin is to be avoided as a damnable or deadly thing, bringing to
destruction in hell, and deserving it. Lastly, that a righteous life that
yields obedience unto God, shall end in eternal life, though it cannot merit
it.


Tim. But our Apostle having said (whether of sin to death,) why did he not
likewise say, (or of righteousness to life?) but says thus, of obedience to
righteousness. What are we to learn by this kind of phrase and style?


Sil. These three things: First, that this is the righteousness of works, to
live obediently unto the will of God, revealed in his word, as the
righteousness of faith is to have sin forgiven by Christ. Secondly, that
this is the beginning of eternal life, to lead here a righteous life, which
is the entrance of it, and the way to it. Thirdly, because he would have none
to think that life Psalm. 119, 1, and 112, 1. 2, Pet, 1, 11.
eternal is due to obedience, in such sort, as death eternal is due to sin.
For this is due as merit, the other by the promise of mercy: the one is a debt
and stipend of sin, the other is of grace, and a fruit of righteousness,
depending on Gods mere goodness, and not on man's desert: for how can
creatures and Children make their Creator and Father indebted?


DIAL. X.
Verse 17. But God be thanked that ye have been the servants of sin: but ye
have obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine whereunto ye were delivered.


Tim. WHat does this Text contain?


Sylas. A new argument or reason to persuade the Romans, and in them all
Christians, to resist the motions of sin that they may serve God. Which reason
is fetched from the benefit of their deliverance from sin. For which it
behooves them to become thankful, by avoiding that which might offend, and
doing that which may please such a Benefactor. Their deliverance is declared
and set forth, first by the Sovereign cause and worker of it, to wit; God
himself [ I thank God.] Secondly, by the contrary, to wit; their former
estate, [ Ye were the servants of sin.] Thirdly, by the means whereby it was
wrought, to wit; the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is like a form, stamp, or
mould. Fourthly, by the effect of their conversion, which was willing and
sincere obedience to God. Lastly, by the use or end wherefore this benefit was
bestowed, Verse 18. that henceforth they should not serve sin from which they
were freed, but righteousness unto which they were now become voluntary
servants.


Tim. What Instructions do ye gather from the first words 1. Part.
[I thank God.]


Silas. First, whosoever be delivered from sin, may here learn, that their
deliverance is not in their own power, but is the work of God, and they are
beholden to him for it. Hence it is, that all regenerate persons, are called
the workmanship of God, Ephesians. 2, 10. Secondly, in this example of Paul, we
learn to rejoice and be thankful, as well for the conversion of others, as
for Ephesians. 1, 3.
our own: and this is indeed a note and a mark of one Phil. 1, 3, 4.
truly converted, to be unfeignedly glad for the work of Gods grace in others.

Thirdly, this teaches, that the end of our freedom Ephesians. 1, 6.
from sin, in respect of God, is his own praise, that he might be
acknowledged, praised, and thanked. Lastly, the Apostle would show, what a
great benefit it is to be delivered from the tyranny of sin, for which God
cannot be sufficiently thanked. Also he bewrayes the affections of a godly
Pastor.


Tim. In what estate were they before GOD converted them? 2. Part.



Silas. They were the Servants of sin, which is the common estate of all the
elect before their new birth; they all and every one of them, are first the
servants of sin, before they are the servants of God, Romans 5, 6, 8. 10. Acts
26, 18.


Tim. What is it to be the Servants of sin?


Silas. To be held under the dominion and rule of sin, being wholly obedient to
the lust thereof. No slave or Servant is more subject to the will of his Lord,
then we are unto lusts and desires of sin: so that we can will, Genesis 6, 5.
think, speak, or do nothing, but what sin will and Co. of. 1, 21.
commands. And this is a most fearful and dangerous estate, much worse then
the cruel tyrannical bondage and slaueric of Egypt. For first, that bondage
was of the body only, but the service of sin is of the whole man, body and
soul. Secondly, in the bondage of Egypt they served men; but here in this
bondage, service is done to sin and Satan, most vile Lords which command
most base and silthy works. Thirdly, in the bondage of Egypt, the most harm
was temporal, loss of liberty, smart and pain of body: in this service of
sin, the loss is eternal, even destruction in hell for ever, without the
infinite mercy of God. Fourthly in this bondage under Pharaoh, they had a sense
of their thraldom, and desired liberty; in this service of sin, men do not
so much as suspect themselves to be bound, but think themselves to be free
and despise liberty, Re. 3, 17. Lastly, in all outward bondage, they which be
bond can help themselves, as by running away, or by entreaty, or by ransom: in
this bondage we lie still as it were bound hand and foot, til God by his mercy
deliver us, not so much as the least thought of relieuing our selves.


Tim. Tell us now to what purpose the Apostle puts them in mind of their former
bondage?


Silas. First, by the remembrance of it to humble them and to keep them from
being puffed up with their present graces, when as they shall call to mind what
they were once, worse then beasts, yea worse then nothing. Secondly, to provoke
them to a great thankfulness unto him, who freed them from so heinous a yoke.
Lastly, to move them to withdraw their hearts further off from that vile
service of sin, which they have so well escaped; as no slave will return to
that tyrant from which Luke 17, 32.
he is delivered; so neither ought sinners to look back again. Remember Lots
wife.


Tim. What other thing may we observe in this, that he says We were the
servants of sin, not, That ye are the servants?


Silas. That such as be freed from sin, though they still have sin in
them, yet they are no more servants to sin. For they have changed their
Master and their Liucry, and are become servants to a new Lord, to wit; Christ
Jesus their Redeemer.


Tim. Show us now by what means our Conversion was wrought? 2. Part.



Sil. By the Doctrine of the Gospel, which in this respect is in Scripture
called the Arm of God, Esaias 53, 1. An immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1, 23. The
savor of life, 2. Cor. 2, 16. The power of God to salvation, Romans 1, 16. A
form or a mould, as in this Text fitly. For as a mould or form uses to leave
behind it such a print or Image as it self has, upon such things as are put
upon it, or into it; so does the Gospel, it alters the minds and hearts of
men, and makes them lke it self, that is to say, full of heavenly wisdom and
holiness. And herein consists the difference between the Doctrine of the
Law, and the Doctrine of the Gospel. The Doctrine of the Law forbids us
evil, and commands us good, but puts no strength in us to forbear the
one, or to do the other; and therefore it is called the Ministry of the
letter: whereas the Doctrine of the Gospel teaches us Faith, Love, Hope,
Repentance, Patience, etc. and withal imprinteth the selfsame graces in us;
giving us power to be that which it would have us to be. Therefore, is it
termed the Ministry of the Spirit, and of righteousness, 2 Cor. 3, 8, 9.


Tim. What are we to learn by this, where it is said [That we are delivered
into this form?]


Silas. Two things: First, that in our conversion and freedom from sin, we
our selves do nothing toward it at all, but suffer God to work upon us; as
the wax or Non agimus, sed agimur; sumus mere passiui.
clay receives the print of the seal or mould, themselves doing nothing, but
suffering the impression only of the Seal or mould. Secondly, we have
continual need to have the stamp of heavenly doctrine put upon our Souls,
because the image or form of godliness which we have from that doctrine,
receives continual decay by our own negligence and Satan's malice. Hence it
is that the Apostle speaking here of the godly Romans, says in the present
time that they are delivered, to teach that the work of our sanctification, is
not a work of a day or a year, or to be perfected by one or two, or a few
Sermons, not till death come.


Tim. What may this put us in mind of, that the doctrine of the Gospel is the
effectual Instrument both to begin and to perfect our deliverance from sin?


Sylas It serves to surre up a great love unto the doctrine of the Gospel,
seeing it is the means of our conversion. Secondly, it shows of what great
efficacy that doctrine is: when God is pleased to work by it, it can pull our
hearts from sin, and knit it unto God; and can make us be like unto God, who
before did bear the Image of Satan. Thirdly, we ought to have those which
bring this doctrine in reverence and love, acknowledging them and having them
in singular reputation for their work sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 13. Their feet (even
their basest and foulest parts) ought to be beautiful unto us. Romans 10, 15.
What is the estate then, or what will be the end of such as hate and rise up
against Leus, despising prophesy?


Tim. What manner of obedience is this that the Gospel uses to work?


Sylas. It is from the heart, that is to say, such as is both voluntary and
unfeigned, not compulsory and hypocritically: In words and outward show to
serve God, is not enough, like them. (...), Tim. 3, 4.
and this is a special mark whereby to try the truth of our own conversion,
when we find that we can willingly and in a good uprightness, apply our
selves to do these things which be commanded in his word, being contrary to
our lusts: this also must encourage all men which But inwardly from the heart,
Origin.
be conuerred, to stick to the service of Christ, without looking back,
seeing they willingly put themselves into it, being by his grace, of unwilling
made willing.


DIAL. XI.
Verses 18, 19. Being then made free from sin ye are made the servants of
righteousness, I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of
your flesh; for as ye have given your members etc.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Sylas. Three new reasons to dissuade from living in the service of sin.


Tim. What is the first reason?


Sil. Because Christ having set them free from the bondage 1. Reason.
of sin, they are not now bound to obey the lusts of it: as bondmen and
servants do give obedience to their Lords, whiles they are their servants, but
being once free, they do not serve them any more: nay now they overrule
sinful lusts, or else in vain they profesle Christianity; it is to no purpose
to put on the purple kingly robe, if there be no man to command; so in vain to
profess thy self a Christian, if thou have no command over thy passions and
lusts.


Tim. What is the second reason?


Sil. They are made the servants of righteousness, therefore 2. Reason.
they must not serve nor obey sin but God; this reason may be declared two
ways. First, by comparison of bodily servants, who are careful to please
their masters, so ought Christians to be, being Gods servants, Romans 14, 4.
Secondly, by consideration of his goodness and bounty, whom we serve,
declared both in the manifold good things, spiritual and corporal which we
have from him; and in those which we further hope for, to wit, the preservation
and sustentation of our lives in this world, and eternal life in heaven with
God and his Angels.


Tim. Let me hear of you what we are to learn by this that he calls them the
(servants of rigteousnesse) which be the servants of God?


Silas. It helps us to distinguish the true servants of God from the
counterfeit: for such as truly serve God, have care to please him by doing
the righteous things which he commands in his word. Whereas false servants
neglecting his righteous precepts, do yet profess themselves to be his
servants, and therefore be his servants in name only, and not in truth and
deed.


Tim. What is the third Reason?


Silas. The third reason is taken from things which be 3. Reason.
like or equal, as thus: The elect before their conversion diligently serve
sin in doing the lusts thereof; therefore being converted, they must with
like diligence serve God in doing his will reucaled in his word.


Tim. What do ye consider in this third reason?


Silas. 1. The preface or entrance. Secondly, a similitude with his parts,
which sets down two parts of Gods service, 1. subjection, 2. war with
sin.


Tim. Now show unto us in what words the preface is contained, and the meaning
of the words.


Sil. The preface is contained in these words (I speak after the manner of
men.) This phrase has sundry significations, one is this: I require no hard
matter, but such as men are able to perform. The second is this, I require no
unjust thing, but such as any that has the reason of a man, would grant to be
equal and just. Thirdly, I speak plainly and familiarly, as every man may
easily understand me, fetching a similitude from common matters known to all
men, because ye should the better perceive what I say. Of all these expositions
the last is best to be allowed of, because of that that follows in the verse,
where he borrows his comparison from the worldly affairs of men, such as all
men by reason and common experience knew and were well acquainted with.


Tim. What is the cause why the Apostle would teach the Romans after such a
plain manner, by comparisons from easy and homely things?


Silas. Because of the infirmity of their flesh, by which is meant their
carnal and corrupt understanding, which hinders that they could not receive
heavenly things, being taught them in profound and exact manner, as appears
by the example of Nicodemus, and also by the words of our Savior to him, John
3, 12.


Tim. What were the instructions gathered from hence?


Sil. Threefold: First, it concerns Ministers, that they apply themselves in
their teaching, to the capacity and rudeness of their hearers, which being
rude, therefore the plainer we speak, the better it is. The second, concerns
hearers, for whom it is safest to be taught with the greatest plainness that
may be, because of the weakness of their understanding; which even in
regenerate persons is more carnal then spiritual, their blindness and
ignorance being far more then their sight and knowledge. Lastly, it reprooues
such Ministers which teach darkly and covertly, affecting obscurity in matter
and in manner of teaching; and such people as love to be so taught, loathing
simplicity.


Tim. Now come to the similitude it self, and tell us whence it is fetched?


Sil. From worldly matters, wherein it is usual for servants to serve their
several Masters, with like diligence and promptness; which the Apostle does
thus fit to his purpose. It is meet, that Christians should be as willing,
forward, and cheerful in serving God, now they are regenerate, as they were
in serving sin before they were regenerate, seeing bodily servants equally
please their Lords.


Tim. What be the parts of this similitude or comparison?


Silas. Two: First, a proposition, contained in these words [ As ye have given,
etc.] In which words is contained the conditions of that service which the
elect yield unto sin, while they are natural men.


Tim. What conditions do ye observe in their service to sin?


Silas. These four: First, they wholly served sin [ Your Members] that is to
say, your selves. Secondly, they served sin with all readiness, and with
their whole strength [ Ye have giuen] that is, ye have willingly presented
your selves before sin, as a Servant before his Lord to do his will. Thirdly,
they did and fulfilled not one, but all manner of sin, which is meant here
by uncleanness and iniquity. Fourthly, they proceeded and went forward from
one degree of sin to another ( To commit iniquity) whereby is meant the
outward work of sin, and that they rested not in the inward lust and consent of
sin.


Tim. What does uncleanness and iniquity signify?


Silas. Under uncleanness be contained sins that tend to our commodity and
pleasure; and under iniquity such sins by which we are injurious and hurtful
unto our Neighbor.


Tim. What is the secondpart of this similitude?


Silas. It is an application of the former proposition, contained in these
words ( So now give your Members, etc.)


Tim. What things do ye observe out of the second part of this reason?


Sil. These four things: First, the elect being converted, are bound to
serve God with the whole man, Iustitioe seruiendum. 1. libenter. 2. vigilanter
3. celeriter. 4. potenter. 5. ardenter. 6. indesinenter.
[ Your Members,] that is your selves. Secondly, they must do it with great
readiness and alacrity [ Now give.] Thirdly, they must serve God in every
duty, [Righteousnesse, which has our duty to man, and Holiness which has our
duty to God.] Lastly, they must go forwards, and profit daily in godliness
and in the service of God, as they did before in the service of sin and
wickedness. For there is no standing at a stay: Men go backward, which go
not forward in goodness; and the Nature of Non (...), and deficit, qui non
proficit,
sanctifying grace, is to grow and increase to perfection, as Scripture and all
experience teach us: wherein men may take a true trial of themselves, whether
they be led by the spirit of sanctification.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 20, 21. For when ye were the Servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death.


Tim. What does this Text contain? Sum.



Sil. Two things: First he declares the cause why they did so diligently
follow the lusts of sin before their conversion, verse 20. because they were
free from righteousness. The second part is argumentatiue, 1. Part.
giving reason why sin ought not longer to be served but resisted rather.


Tim. What is meant by righteousness?


Silas. Not the righteousness of Christ imputed to believers, (yet they were
free from that also) but the righteousness of works, which is a quality
infused into the soul to conform or frame it after the will of God in their
desires and actions; and it is Gods Image after which man was made in his
creation, and restored in his regeneration.


Tim. What is it to be free from this inherent righteousness?


Silas. To be utterly without it, and void of it, and a stranger from it. As
before verse 17. to be free from sin, signifies a clean riddance and
deliverance from all sin, If unregenerate men be free from Justice, then they
have no inclination at all to it, says Beza.
touching guiltiness and rule of sin: so here to be free from
righteousness, is to want it, and to be without it wholly; but yet not so as
if unregenerate persons had no kind of righteousness, for they have a civil
righteousness, which consists in outward works before men: thus we read of
Paul, that as touching the righteousness of the Law he was unblameable, even
then when he was a Pharisie, Phil. 3. of which our Savior says in the fifth
Chapter of Matthew, That except our righteousness exceed that which Pharisees
have, we cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven. The righteousness then
which unregenerate men are void of, it is Christian righteousness, which is
not in external duties and observation before the world, but in pureness and
cleanness of heart before God.


Tim. What is the instructions from hence?


Silas. First, it teaches a true cause why natural men do so greedily strive
for the fulfilling of the desires of sin: the cause is, for that they are
utterly without righteousness Homo (...) liber est a (...), non ab (...),
inquit Aquinas.
or grace, which should hinder or stop their study and course in sinning. As
an untamed Colt runncs headlong having no rider or bridle to stay him, or as
Children grow rude and wanton, being without Tutors or guides; so they which
are free from righteousness which should bridle their nature, must needs sin
Iustily and horribly. Secondly, it shows the miscrable condition of natural
and unregenerate persons, in that they are stripped of all grace, and so are
wholly bound to sin, and kept under the heavy yoke of corrupt lusts. The
darkest night has as much light as they have grace, the veriest vassal and
Gally-slaue has as muth freedom as the servants of sin have; which should
breed in all Voluntas quoe li bera est in malis idco non est libe rain bonis,
quia non libcratur a christo, inquit Anselmus.
natural men a desire to be out of this estate, and a thankfulness in such as
are already pulled out. Thirdly, it serves to confute two sorts of men. First,
such as stand for liberty and freedom of will without grace, because we being
before our regeneration altogether bondmen to sin: there cannot be therefore
in us, any freedom Mali habet libertatem culpabilem. Ansel.
of will unto goodness. Secondly, such as hold works preparatiue in natural
men, disposing them unto grace: whereas they being free from righteousness,
cannot do any works but sinful; and sins (seeing they merit death)
cannot dispose them unto grace and life.


Tim. What is the other thing contained in this text? 2. Part.



Sylas. It is an argument to dissuade and draw the godly from the service of
sin taken from the fruit of sin in this life, which is shame, and from the
end of it after this life, which is eternal death. The argument may be thus
framed; All Christians stand bound to avoid that which is filthy, bringing them
shame, and that which is harmefull breeding their death: but sin if it be
served and obeyed, it will engender both shame and death; therefore the service
of it is of all Christians to be carefully avoided.


Silas. What be the general instructions from this 21. verse?


Tim. First, where sin goes before unrepented of, there of necessity by the
ordinance and justice of God, shame and death will follow after, these be the
fruits which sinners must reap even as they sow. Secondly, we are to learn
from hence, that howsoever men are not ashamed whiles they are in the act of
sin, yet afterward though they have repented, as these Romans had, the memory
of their sin does breed shame and trouble of mind. Lastly, the children of
God, because they have much flesh and corruption remaining in them, had need to
be awed and held to their duties, by fearful threatenings, where of there is
use, even for the most godliest to help to subdue their sturdy nature.


Tim. Now expound the words of the 21. verse, and tell us what is meant by
fruit?


Silas. Commodity, gain, or profit; this speech of the Apostle has a mock in
it: for he well knew that there came no fruit of such things, but by this
means he thought to press and urge their conscience more forcibly, when they
should perceive that they had spent their time in things whereof there came no
credit or profit, but both shame and loss even eternally: this must cause
every one examiue himself in every act, whether he serve sin or righteousness.


Tim. What are the things whereof the Romans had cause to be ashamed?


Silas. Two things generally; first, vnpurenesse of life and conversation, see
Chapter 1. 24. 25. etc. Secondly, vnpurenesse of their religion, they being
both worshippers of Idols. and profane in their manners. Romans 1. 20. 21. 22.
etc. These things were accompanied with shame (that is to say) with griese and
perturbation in mind and conscience in the fight of God, upon remembrance of
these their offenses against him: for the shadow does not more necessarily
attend the body, the^ shame does sin, which makes conscience blush within,
as well as red checks without.


Tim. How many ways is shame taken in scripture?


Sylas. Two ways; first properly, that affection so called, which appears in
the countenance by blushing: this is natural shame, which comes either for
griese of some dishonesty already done, or for fear of some dishonesty that
may be done. This kind of shame is common both to good and bad, and brings
forth in them both certain common effects, as to cause them to change their
minds, to be loath to come in presence, to doubt least they do not please
others to discourage them in their duties, and somewhat to disquiet them:
finally, touching this affection of natural shame, this counsel is to be
given, that it be so cherished in all, (in young folks especially, to be made
a bridle to keep from filthy things) as care be taken least it grow vehement
and excessive. Secondly, This is mea^s in the text- Some at al are not ashamed
of their sins, as Sodomites Ierc. 3. 3 Some hauc shame without repentance as
Cain. Icre. 2. 26. Some shame and repent. Ier 31. 19.
shame is improperly taken, for trouble or griese of conscience, being cast
down and abased before God; the former may be called shame of face, and this
latter shame of conscience, when no shame-faced man is so dashed out of
countenance before men, for offending against common honesty and ciuility, as
the soul and conscience is ashamed for some sin wittingly committed against
Gods law: this shame considered in it self, and as it is in the wicked, is a
part of the torment of hell, but as it is in the godly it is blessed, as a
means to keep them from running into hell, being a fruit and consequence of
their repentance; as in these Romans who nowafter their conversion, had shame
for things done before.


Tim. What things does this shame of conscience work in the children of God,
and in the wicked of the world?


Sil. First, it causes the godly to come into the presence of God with
reverence and fear; but it makes the wicked to shun his presence, as Adam, who
after he had sinned hid himself in the thicket of trees; and Cain who hid
himself after he had murdered his brother. Secondly, it makes the godly to
blame and accuse the sins which they have done, with detestation and forsaking
them; as it is written Ier. 31, 18, 19.
of Ephraim, He was ashamed; but it hardens the wicked in their evils.
Thirdly, it provoke the godlic more unto duty, but from the wicked, it
takes al heart of doing any good duty. Fourthly, it helps the godly unto
true peace at the last, whereas it is but a torment unto the wicked, and
beginning of their hell. Lastly, the godly are ashamed of God that he should
know their sins; but the wicked are more trobled that the world does take
knowledge of their sins. This is it that vexes them.


Tim. What advice is to be given concerning this shame of Conscience?


Sil. A double advice unto Gods Children. First, that it should serve to stay
them from committing sin, seeing shame and grief will follow it. Secondly,
when they feel this godly shame and grief, after any sin vnheedefully done,
let them thank God for such a mercy. Also, unto the wicked this advice is to
be given, that it move them to hasten their repentance, as they desire to
avoid confusion of Conscience for ever in hell, whereof their shame of sin
here is both a part and an entrance, if it be not looked unto.


Tim. Seeing all evil is the fruit of sin, wherefore does the Apostle
mention shame only?


Silas. The reason is, because shame does always follow sin, so does not
other evils. Secondly, shame follows us in every place, but we do not in
every place meet with affictions and other evils. Lastly, if as often as we
sin, God should strike us with some evil, we should never abide it;
therefore, it is best for our profit to have such a gentle monitour as shame
is, to pluck our conscience by the ear, and to iogge us on the Elbowe; that
we may be stayed from doing evil when we are tempted, or from going on, if
we have yielded.


Tim. What is the next Reasons to hold us from sin?


Tim. It is taken from the end of sin, which is death; by which is meant the
second death, which is called eternal death; in which we may consider two
things: first a separation of the whole man from heavenly glory. Secondly, a
destruction of the whole man in hellish pain.


Tim. What is meant here by [End?]


Silas. This word signifies either the cause for which a thing is done, or it
is put for the last term of any thing; so it is used here. For men do not
sin for this cause, that they may dye eternally, yet eternally death is the
term of the service of sin, which does determine in fearful and endless
destruction. The reason whereof is this: First, because in sin eternal
Justice is offended. Secondly, wicked men if they might live always, they
would sin eternally, and therefore are worthy at the last to be punished with
death eternal.


Tim. Now tell us the Instruction that we are to learn from hence.


Silas. It would serve to keep us from yielding obedience to sin, if we
would often and earnestly think of the end of sin. He that desires to be
preserved from the service of sin, had great need to remember four things.
First, his own end. Secondly, the end of the world. Thirdly, the end of
well-doing. Lastly, the end of sin, which is most bitter woe and pain,
without all end.


DIAL. XIII.
Verse 22. But now being freed from sin, and made Servants to God, you have
your fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life.


Tim. WHat does this Text contain?


Silas. Two Reasons to persuade the service of God. One, because the fruit of
it is in holiness in this life: the other, because in the end it brings unto
life eternal. These reasons are set down in form of a comparison; three
contraries being compared together. As first, God is set against sin.
Secondly, holiness against shame. Lastly, eternal life against death. The
sum of all is this; As the service of sin bringes forth shame here, and
destruction for ever, so holiness and life eternal, are the fruits which
follow the service of God: therefore we stand bound to embrace godliness, and
to eschew unrighteousness and sin.


Tim. What is it to be freed from sin?


Silas. To be delivered from the tyranny of sin, that it should have no power
to rule over us. For here he entreats of Sanctification.


Tim. What learn we by this, that he says [Now ye are freeed from sin?] and
wherefore does he use the Verb of the passive signification [being made
Servants of God?]


Silas. We learn that there was a time when as they were the servants of sin,
but are now at this time escaped out of that bondage. And he uses the Verb of
the passive signification (saying, we are free, and we are made servants to
God) to teach us that of our selves we are prone to sin, but not to serve God,
without a special and effectual working of God in our hearts; making us to be
that by Grace, which by Nature we could never be. For we are not borne but
made the servants of God; we are not the servants of God by our own endeavor,
but we are made such by Gods spirit; we are borne the servants of sin, but we
are made the servants of God: and that we are the servants of God, it may
appear by our hearty obedience unto the will of God in all things, as the
servants of sin are manifested by obeying the lusts of sin throughout.


Tim. What is meant here by holiness?


Silas. Praise by increase of holiness, as appears by this, that it is set
against shame howbeit the Apostle chooses rather to mention holiness then
praise, because though praise be due unto the service of God, yet such as
exercise themselves in doing the will of God, do often live under reproach;
whereas increase of inward holiness, to the praise of the godly in the eyes of
God and good men, does always follow well doing, as a wholesome fruit for Gods
children, when they have served God. They be indeed worthy of praise, but
they may and do miss of it, at the hands of this unthankful world: yet they
are sure of this, that the more pains they take in serving God, the more holy
they shall be, and their conscience more undefiled: also they shall reap
praise amongst all good men, and with God their Father; and this is no small
encouragement to make men more earnest in the service of God, to consider that
they shall be blessed of God, with greater purity before him, and more praise
among his children. For though Gods childeren are to do well, not only nor
chiefly for gayning praise or holiness to themselves, yet these things which
will follow of their own accord by the ordinance of God (as the shadow does
the body) put some heart and cheerefulnes into them,


Tim. What other thing do we learn from this, that we have our fruit in
holiness?


Sylas. That the full reward of serving God, is not altogether laid up in the
world to come; but there is much given unto them in this world, both in
corporal and spiritual blessings. For as the children of Israel tasted of the
fruit and good things of the land of Canaan before they entered into it: so it
pleases GOD to give unto his servants even here in this life, some fruit of
their obedience to him, to confirm their hope of that reward which they shall
have in the life eternal; hence their graces are likened to first fruits.
Romans 8.


Tim. What use is to be made of this?


Sil. It reproues those that say that there is no profit in the serving of God.
Secondly, it serves to whet the hearts of Gods children more obediently to
please and serve him, when they shall by good experience perceive that their
service proves fruitful in spiritual respects, as well as in outward
regards.


Tim. Rehearse now the second reason to encourage our selves unto the service
of God?


Sylas. It is the same which was used in the 17. verse, namely, that this
service will end well, even in life everlasting: and therefore we must give
our selves carefully to serve God; for men have reason to follow that hard,
which is sure to end well.


Sil. What does the Apostle here understand (by life?)


Sylas. Heavenly happiness and glory, which is therefore shad owed out and
signified by this term of life, because of all earthly things, life is most
delightful and precious. This life or heavenly happiness consists in these two
things; first, in the absence of all evil both from soul and body. Secondly,
in the presence and perfection of all good, both bodily and spiritually.


Tim. What are we to learn hereby, that this life iscalled everlasting?


Sylas. Thus much, that our heavenly happiness is not for days or years, but
endures for ever, even as long as God endures, without any limitation of time,
or measure of greatness.


Tim. In what sense does the Apostle say, that this life everlasting, is the
end of Gods service?


Silas. In a threesold sense; first, that it is a cause moving us to labor in
good duties. Secondly, because it is the term or end wherein our service shall
determine. Lastly, because it shall be given us as a free reward unto all our
trauails in godliness, at the end of our life; even as rewards use to be given
unto laborers at the end of the day, when the work is done. For our short and
mean service is not worthy of that lasting and glorious blessedness: but God
of his goodness, according to his free mercy, has promised and ordained, that
such as seruc him soundly and constantly, should live for ever in celestial
glory.


Tim. What profit are we to make of all this?


Sil. It should prevail with all Christians to make them 1 Cor. 15, 9. v. last.
serve God, not only more diligently, but cheerfully and constantly,
considering their labor in serving God shall Hcb, 6. 7, 8.
not be in vain, but shall have such a great recompense of reward. As
soldiers endure much in hope of victory and Math, 5, 12.
spoil, and merchants upon expectation of a commodity Rom, 8, 13, 1 Cor, 9,
25, a Tim, 4. 13.
in the end; also husbandmen labor hald for a good harvest: so should Gods
children do, to attain eternal life at last: yea so much the more and rather,
because of such an excellent and eternal glory in the end.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 23. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Tim. WHat does this text contain? what is the scope and sum of it?


Sylas. It proves that death follows sin, because it is the wages which is
due unto it: and it also proves that life does follow good works; yet not so
as death comes after sing; for this follows by way of justice, but the other by
free favor.


Tim. What is meant here by sin, by wages, and by death?


Silas. By sin is meant the corruption of nature, being the matter and mother
of all sins, and it self a sin: and by wages is meant properly victuals,
paid by the (...) omaine Emperors to their soldiers (as their wages,) in
recompense He means death in general, of what kind soever.
of their service: and by death is meant both natural, violent, and spiritual,
but especially eternal death: all which in divine justice be as due to sin,
as wages to soldiers.


Tim. Why is this death called the stipend or wages of sin?


Silas. Because it is rendered as due, and paid worthiiy to the merit of such
as fight for their lusts; even as soldiers which warred for their Emperors,
deserved their stipend in that behalf.


Tim. What consider ye in eternal death?


Silas. Two things, the substance and circumstance, the substance of eternal
death has two parts: First, separation from Gods presence, bliss, and glory,
which is called in Scripture, the casting out of his kingdom. Secondly,
destruction of body and soul, each to have several torments. The
circumstances be six; first the place, a pit, a dungeon, a prison, a lake.
Secondly, companions be the Devils and his Angels, and the whole route of the
Reprobate. Thirdly, darkness, blacker and thicker then that of Egypt, there
shall be a continual night. Fourthly, eternity, even as long as God endures,
for the worm never dies, nor the fire never goes out. Fifthly, sinful
concurrences, as hatred of God, blasphemy, despair, etc. Lastly, weeping and
gnashing of teeth. This wages though it be due to all sin, yet it is not
rendered to all sin and sinners, because this payment was exacted of Christ, in
behalf of all elect believers, who are discharged from it in their own
persons.


Tim. What are the instructions that do arise from hence?


Silas. Three: The first whereof does concern the unrepentant, who still serve
sin, to warn them that betimes they shake off such a Lord as sin is, which
renders such deadly and damnable wages. For the performance whereof, let them
consider these four things: First, that in respect of their sins past, it
may move in them a great grief to think that they have earned and worthily
deserved such a stipend. Secondly, a searching out, and particular confession
of such sins as have reigned in them, and made them worthy of so deep a
punishment. Thirdly, great care and endeavor to refrain from occasions of such
wickedness in time to come: and lastly, to ask earnestly of God forgiveness
through Christ, and the grace of true repentance. The second instruction does
concern such as have repented, and left the service of sin; they are first
to be thankful to Christ, who has freed them from such a wretched wages due
to their sins, himself taking the whole punishment upon him. Secondly, it
prouokes them to humbleness, to remember what misery they have escaped.
Thirdly, it does admonish them never to return again unto the service of
sin, but to study rather how to please such a redeemer, which has for given
them such a debt: after the example of the woman, Luke 7, 47. who loved much,
because much was forgiven her. Now the third and last general instruction, is
that which concerns all men both good and bad, who may learn from hence what
a dangerous thing sin is, to which such woeful wages of due does belong.
Secondly, what a terrible thing Gods To the believing penitent finners, all
sins be venial, and all be mortal to the vebeleeuers.
justice is, which does repay such bitter recompense to such as offend against
it. Thirdly, what cause there is for all Christians to tremble at the least
motion of sin in themselves, and to avoid al occasions of sinning with all
their power. Finally, this proves all sins in their own nature, to be
mortal and none to be venial, for he speaks of sins generally, that death is
their wages.


Tim. Tell us now how he does prove that eternal life does belong to good
works?


Sil. Because the gift of God is eternal life through 2. Part.
Jesus Christ our Lord. The which words do affoorde us this reason: God does
freely give eternal life to such as live well, and Christ Jesus merited it for
them, therefore they must at the last be brought to it.


Tim. But why does not the Apostle say, that eternal life is the wages of
righteousness, as he said before that eternal death is the wages of sin?


Sil. If we had perfect righteousness, eternal life should Leuit, 14, 5. Gal. 3.
be rendered unto us as wages, because God has said, Do this and live; but we
have it not, for our own righteousness Romans 10, 5, 6.
is imperfect and therefore in rigor of justice deserves rather death then life.


Tim. But ere we go any further, satisfy me I pray you, how these words ought
to be read?


Sil. They have these two several readings; first, Eternal life is the gift
of God, and then they teach us this lesson, that eternal life does follow our
good works and holy life, as death follows sin, yet not as a due debt, but
as a free gift. The second reading is thus: The grace of God is eternal life;
and then it has this meaning, that true holiness which God of his grace and
free gift gives us, is eternal life; (that is to say,) leads and brings
unto eternal life, as a way brings a man to the place where he would be; and
as one must pass through the running place to the goal, so by holiness must
all true Christians pass unto life eternal: this latter is the fitter and
better reading, more agreeing unto the phrase and scope.


Tim. What do ye call eternal life?


Silas. The full fruition of celestial joys, without any possibility of
loosing them, so long as God himself lives. And therefore are they called
eternal; because there is no end of them: and they have the name of life put
upon them, to teach of what great value and price they be; of all earthly
things, life being most pleasant and precious.


Tim. What instructions are we to learn from hence?


Silas. First, we learn that our salvation is Gods free gift, both as touching
the beginning and end of it, and comes not by our merits either in whole or in
part. Secondly, Christians must encourage themselves to lead a godly life;
notwithstanding all hindrances in their way, from themselves, from the world,
and Satan; because a holy life being continued in, will at the length bring to
a life eternal. Thirdly, seeing godliness of life does by the ordinance of
God necessarily lead unto eternal life, and they which do live godlily, may
know that they do so: hereof it follows that all the godly have certainty
and good assurance of their own salvation; if one may know that he lives
holily, thereby he may know that he shall live happily.


Tim. Wherefore are these words added, [Through Jesus Christ our Lord?]


Silas. To teach us that all merit is to be sought out of our selves, and to
be found only in the person of Christ Jesus, who by that which he himself
has suffered and done, has fully deserved life eternal for all believers
which live uprightly; to whom therefore all praise honor and glory is due.
Amen.

For further clearing of this Scripture, and having a little empty Paper to
fill up, I have thought it not amiss, to set down what our Divines have cited
out of Antiquity for the sense of this latter clause, that to the unlearned it
may appear, what consent is between us and the Fathers in the Doctrine of
grace. When we find life eternal to be called Grace (says Augustine) we
have S. Paul a magnificall defender of Grace. Again, he calls 'Death the
Wages of sin, because it is due, it is worthily paid, it is rendered as a
merit.

But least Justice should lift up it self, he says not Eternal life is the
Wages of it, but terms it the Grace of God, and he adds, by Jesus our
Lord, least life should be sought any other way, but by our Mediator.
Chrysostom. Life eternal is not a retribution of labors, but the free gift of
God; not deserved by virtue, but given freely. Ambros. Such as follow Faith
shall have life everlasting. Theodoretus: he says Grace, and not reward: not
by works says Photinus, but by Grace.


CHAP. VII.
DIAL I.
Verse 1, 2, 3. Know ye not Brethren (for I speak unto them that know the
Law) that the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives? For the woman
which is in subjection to a man, is bound by the Law to a man while he lives,
but if the man be dead, she is delivered from the Law of the Man: so then, if
while the man lives, she takes another Man, she shall be called an
Adulteress. But if the man be dead, she is free from the Law; so that she is
not an Adulteress, though she take another man.


Timotheus. WHat parts may this seventh Chapter be divided into, and what take
you to be the purpose of the Apostle therein?


Silas. The purpose of Paul is to confirm and illustrate that Paradox or
strange Doctrine propounded in the former Chapter, of being not under the Law,
but under grace, which happily some of the Jews might have taken, as if the
Apostle had bin an enemy to the knowledge and obedience of the Law: therefore,
now he shows how our freedom from the Law is to be understood, and upon what
grounds and reasons it is founded. This is showed and declared by the
similitude of civil marriage, wherein the woman during natural life, is
obliged to the Husband, 1. to be his, or to him only, 2. not to depart from
him, 3. nor to marry with another; but the husband being dead, she is free,
being, 1. his no more; 2. and may (without guilt of Adultery) marry to another.
3. to bring forth fruit to another, to the second man. So all the elect before
new birth, are in bondage to sin, to which they bring forth Children, that is
evil works by the force of the Law; Of this freedom therebe three reasons
in verse 4.
but after regeneration, the vigor and coaction of the Law cease (in part at
least) and they 1. are free, being dead to the Law. and 2. married unto Christ.
3. do now bring forth good works (as children) to God. Paul exemplieth in the
woman, rather then in the man, because her Obligation and bond is straighter
toward the man, then of him toward her (for by the Law the man was suffered to
give a Bill of Divorce to the woman, so was it not on the contrary) also
because his meaning was to compare us to the wife.

The Chapter consists of three parts. The first, sets Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6.
out our liberty from the Law, and proves it by 3. reasons, in verse 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. Secondly, he answers certain objections made against the Law,
which he excuses and commends by the manifest and necessary From v.6. (...)
14.
effects; also by the properties and Nature of the Law, and all this in his
own person. Thirdly, the spiritual combat between grace consenting to the
Law, and flesh or corruption resisting the Law, is described in his own
example, both touching the fight and battle, and the From v. 14. to the end.
issue or end of it.


Tim. What be the parts of this similitude?


Silas. They be two: First, a proposition in three Verses. Secondly, an
application in the fourth verse. The proposition is thus; that the Law binds
a man so long as he lives, the which is amplified two ways. First, by the
testimony of the Romans themselves, of whom he says they knew the truth of
it.


Tim. What are we to learn from the first proof of the proposition?


Silas. First, the wisdom of the Apostle, in preventing the offense of the
converted Jews, to whom he wrote not only by a loving Title in calling them
Brethred, but by attributing the knowledge of the Law to them, and by taking
upon him the defense of the Law. Secondly, Gods people ought not to be
ignorant of Gods Law; for it does both help the teachers to speak to a people
endued with knowledge, and the people to know those things whereof their
teachers speak.


Tim. What is the use of this?


Silas. It reproves such as lack knowledge, and labor not for it, as being
injurious both to themselves and to their teachers. Secondly, it must stir up
all men to endeavor to increase in knowledge, as they do desire their own
profiting, or the ease and comfort of their teachers. Lastly, it warns
Ministers by Paul's example in their teaching, to prevent offenses, and to
speak wisely.


Tim. What is the other way by which he does explain the proposition?


Silas. By the example of marriage, whereby the wife is linkt unto her husband,
and is not free till death: so as Verse 1, 2, 3.
if she marry another while he lives, she commits adultery; but he being dead,
she is free to marry to whom she will, that she may bring forth to her new
husband. Even so our first husband, to wit; sinful corruption (by the Law
irritating and provoking it) brought Verse 4.
forth evil works as Children to death: but our corruption By the Law is
meant neither Law of Gospel, or of Nature, or of Romans, but Moses doctrine.
being mortified by the death of Christ, we are dead to the Law, and it is
dead to us, as the vigor of sin, having now no force to engender or increase
sin in us; so as we are free to pass over and to marry our selves to Christ,
as to a new husband, by his spirit to bring forth good works (as fruits) to
God.


Tim. What things are we to learn from this example of Marriage?


Sil. First, that the bond of Marriage is exceeding strickt which nothing but
death can dissolve and break. True The bond of marriage by Law divine and
natural, is indiuidable until death.
it is, that Adultery does break the knot of marriage, and the Jews gave unto
their wives, bills of divorce by permission, to avoid an inconvenience; yet the
Apostle does truly say of the wife, that she is bound till death, because he
speaks of a marriage well ruled and rightly Adu'torium sohut vniculum
governed, wherein nothing has force to loose the knot save death: Marriage by
Gods institution (which Paul here respects,) was to continue so long as life
lasts, Genesis 2.


Tim. Whereof should this put us in mind?


Silas. Of the exceeding great care that both Parents Quod faciendum nist
semel, deliberandum diu.
and Children-should have about the entering into this estate of marriage, which
does oblige and tie persons even till death: that which is but once to be done,
and lasts for the space of life, carrying continual weal or woe with it, had
need long to be thought of before it be done; rashness is the mother of late
repentance, in marriage especially therefore be wise.


Tim. What other thing is to be learned out of this example?


Silas. That the woman being married, has not power over her own body, which
by the Law of marriage is subject to her husband, for lawful begetting of
Children. A woman is three ways bound to her living husband, first she is the
man's power, second ly she may not depart from him, Thirdly, she is an
Adulteress if she marry to another.
Therefore if she withdraw her body from her husband and give it to another
man, she commits that most odious and most dangerous sin of Adultery, so
does the man likewise, if he give the power of his body for generation to any
other save unto his wife; but if so be that adultery be committed by either
party, seeing the offending party by Gods law ought to dye, and is ciuilly
dead, therefore the innocent party by virtue of the Law is free to marry where
they will, the knotte of marriage being loosed. Mat. 5. 32, and 19. 9. Also
here we learn the lawfulness of second marriages. Lastly, that the law does
rule over the living only, not at all over the dead, because the living can
keep or break it, so cannot the dead.


DIAL. II.
Verse 4. Even so ye also (my Brethren) are dead as concerning the Law by the
body of Christ, that ye should be coupled to another, even unto him that is
raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruits to God.


Tim. What does this Text contain Here be three reasons to prove us free
from the Law. 1. because we be dead to the Law. 2. we be married unto Christ a
second husband 3. we must fructisie and bring Children to this husband.



Silas. An application of the former example, contained in these words [ So ye
my Brethren are dead unto the Law.] The sum whereof before being delivered
more at large, may be contracted into these few words. As the wife is free to
marry to another, her former husband being dead: so the law and sin being
dead, through the death of Christ, the believers are free to join themselves
unto Christ, raised up again, (as unto a second husband) by his Spirit to be
made fruitful in good works, as before they had been full of sinful
works, while they were subject to the coaction and provocation of the Law.


Tim. What be the parts of this application?


Silas. Four: First, the freedom of believers from sin, their first
husband. Secondly, the means thereof, (to wit,) the body of Christ crucified.
Thirdly, the end of this freedom, that they may marry unto Christ being
raised from the dead. Fourthly the effects of this marriage, the bringing
forth fruits to God.


Tim. Now expound the words, and tell us why he calls the Jews his
brethren? 1. Part.



Sil. First, they were his kinsmen according to the flesh, and such are called
brethren in Scripture. Secondly, they were of the same profession and Religion,
being common worshippers of one true God.


Tim. What means this, when he says, ye are dead to the Law?


Silas. Thus much: as if he had said, ye are mortified The servitude of the
Law stood in these three things, 1. declaration of sin. 2. in the
condemnation of it 3. in increasing of it. From all which, Christ has sreed
the elect.
or dead to sin, or sin is extinct, as touching the dominion and power
which it was wont to have over you, in regard whereof, the law cannot now
exercise his force either to condemn us as guilty, or to constrain us unto
sin. Therefore ye are dead in respect of the Law by the mortification of your
sins, so as the law cannot be the vigor and strength of sin, as heretofore
it was wont to do.


Tim. Why does he not rather say, the Law is dead to you, then you are dead to
the Law?


Silas. Because of the infirmity of the weak Jews which dwelt at Rome, who
attributing too much unto Imbccillitatis indaeorum rationem babu't ct eorum
offensionis vitanda lanquam voluit inucrtere orationem. Caluinus.
the Law, would have been offended with that speech: yet he says that which
is all one; for it is sin by which the Law has force to condemn men, and
which is increased and stirred up in unregenerate men, by the prohibitions of
the Law. Therefore sin being mortified and we spiritually dead to it, the
Law has thereby lost all his force, both of accusing us, and provoking us unto
sin. Either party being dead, man or woman, the bond of marriage is
dissolved also: see verse 6.


Tim. But while we live here, sin does still live in us, and we shall still
have use of the law; why than does the Apostle say, we are dead in respect of
the law and sin?


Silas. The Apostle in this phrase has respect unto that which one day
Christians do hope shall be; to wit, that Moral law is in force still in
respect of obedience: for Christ came to confirm the law, and not to destroy
it. Math, 5.
their sin, which is partly mortified and dead in them, shall be perfectly dead
and plucked up by the roots: in the mean space, there are still in the best men
many things to be reproved by the law, to be lamented for, and to be amended
and reformed according to the rules of the law: but the law as it is the force
of sin to increase it, so it is taken away; as also touching the curse, it is
abolished to the believers, and concerning the strict observation, whereupon
follows malediction.


Tim. What instructions are we to learn now from the first words of the text,
thus opened and declared?


Sylas. Two, first they set before us the mark that al our life long we are
to aim at; that is, carefully to suppress and mortify our sinful lusts, for
this is a work not of one day or one year. Secondly, as any Christian gets
power to mortify his lusts, and goes on still so to do, let him assure
himself that he is so much the further off from the condemnation and rigor
of the law, and so much nearer to Christ and heavenly blessedness.


Tim. By what means are the faithful dead to sin and to 2 Part.
the law?


Sil. By the body of Christ crucified and raised again Per corpus Christi
(...) cruci affixum est melan'on pro nobis per emptum Oecumenius Ambref in
mortem pro nobis (...).
from the dead; for we are said to be dead to sin, by the body of Christ
dead and crucified, in as much as the body of Christ fastened upon the cross,
has merited and obtained for believers, remission of all their sins, and the
Holy Ghost also, by whose virtue in dwelling, sin is daily mortified and
maistered in them, till it be quite abollished and extinct utterly at their
natural death.


Tim. What does this teach?


Sylas. That the death and mortification of sin, as well as the sorgiuenesse of
sin; is the fruit and effect of Christ's death.


Tim. Whereunto should this serve us?


Sylas. To a twofold purpose; first, to stir up in Christians a great care to
sub due and kill their sins, least Christ's death be made void unto them; for
it never profits any unto forgiveness, whom it does not profit unto
mortification. Secondly, such as feel sin die and loose strength, may be
persuaded thereby, that they have a saving part in the death of Christ, it
being made effectual to them for mortification of their lusts.


Tim. What is the end of our liberty and freedom from sin and the law? 3 Part.



Sil. That it may be free and lawful for Christians to pass over to a second
marriage, to be joined to another husband; that is, to Christ being dead and
raised again: and for very good reason it is, that the Apostle after the death
of Christ, does make mention of the resurrection of Christ. First, because
upon his resurrection depends the force, efficacy, and fruit of his death,
which had no whit benefited the Church, if he had not been raised from the
dead. Secondly, because Christ being now raised again to life, and reigning in
glory, he is able to do toward his Church, and every member of it, all
husbandly duties of protection, supporting, instructing, blessing, enriching
her with graces and gifts of al sorts. Lastly, to teach that as Christ dyed and
rose again, so it is not enough for us to crucify sin, but we are to rise to
a new life, as well bound to live godlily and righteously, as to cease from
evil.


Tim. What are we to learn from this that you have said?


Sil. First, such as have not sin mortified in them, are strangers to Christ:
for we cannot at once be under the law as the servants to sin, and yet be
joined to Christ as a wife to an husband. Secondly, the great dignity of every
true Christian which has his sins taken away touching Note that Christ dead
and raised, is called God absolutely.
the guilt, by forgiveness, and touching power and tyranny, by mortification;
such a one is the spouse of Christ, and is one with him and with all his
graces, and lives by his Spirit, which enableth him to do good works
acceptable to God, as sweet fruits are acceptable to men; or as childeren
which are the fruit of the womb, be grateful to their parents. A most happy
estate, to be fruitful in good works through the Spirit of Christ, to whom we
are joined in spiritual marriage.


Sylas. Is not this the effect of our being joined in marriage 4 Part.
with Jesus Christ, that we may abound in the fruits of the Spirit?


Sil. It is so, as the chief effect of natural marriage, is the begetting of
Children, whom the Hebrews call the fruit of the womb, Psalm. 127. and 128.
So the maine fruit of our spiritual marriage, is the bringing forth such
fruits as are commanded in the law. This does first of all encourage us to
labor in every good work, because God will accept it as a pleasant fruit.
Secondly, it reprooueth such as are either utterly and wholly, or partly
unfruitful in the works of righteousness: for as the barrenness of the
womb was a reproach amongst the Jews; so barrenness in good works is much
more reproachful to a Christian who is elected, redeemed, called, joined and
espoused to Christ, sanctified also to this end to glorify God by fruits of new
obedience.


DIAL. III.
Verses 5.6. For when we were in the flesh, the affections of sin which were by
the law, had force in our members to bring forth fruits to death. But now ye
are delmered from the law, he being dead in whom ye were holden, that we
should serve in newnes of spirit, and not in the oldnes of the letter.


Tim. What is the drift of this Scripture?


Silas. To confirm the exhortation of bringing forth fruits to God by the
comparison of contraries, Comparatio ml noris a contrario. Paraeus.
wherein our old and first marriage with sin, is compared with our latter and
new marriage to Christ. The sum where of is this: If in our first marriage sin
was effectual in us by the law to bring forth evil works, as fruits to
death; now that we are freed from sin and the law, and be married to Christ,
let his spirit be effectual in us to bring forth good works as fruits to God:
if before we brought forth evil fruits unto destruction, much more now let us
bring forth fruit pleasing to God, and wholesome to our selves.


Tim. What then be the parts of this text?


Silas. Two, the first has the condition of our first marriage with sin, in
the 5. verse. The second part has the condition of our second marriage with
Christ, in the sixth verse.


Tim. Now expound the word, and tell us what is meant here by the flesh, and
by being in the flesh? 1 Part. To be, live, and walk after the flesh here and
Rom, 8, 12. 2 Cor, 10 3, 15. To follow carnal lusts greedily as vnregerate
persons do.



Silas. By the flesh is meant our sinful corruption, such as we bring with us
into the world, through carnal generation: and by being in the flesh is meant
to remain or abide securely in the estate of corruption, our sin and our
nature being united together as husband and wife. And this is here to be
noted, that it is one thing to have flesh in us, and another thing to be in the
flesh. For the regenerate have flesh, that is, some sinful corruption in them,
because their sanctification is imperfect; but they are not in the flesh,
because their sinful nature is mortified and reformed: before their new birth
they are in the flesh, being every way obnoxious unto sin: after new birth the
flesh is in them because sin still dwells in them.


Tim. What are we to learn from this kind of speech?


Silas. That all the elect before their conversion, are so necrely linkt to
sin, as they and sin are but one, even as the woman coupled in marriage
unto the man, they are no more twain but one. And note here, that in this
comparison sin answers the Husband, and we our selves the wife, married
first unto sin, and then to Christ.


Tim. What is meant here by affections, and why are they called the affections
of sin?


The word signifies passions, which with great force affect the soul, and
generally all evil motions. But more particularly by affections, is meant not
only the lusts which be in the inferior part of our soul, as in our will,
but they comprehend our reason and mind, as it is corrupt by sin; and so our
evil thoughts, counsels, purposes, devises, immagination, discourses are all
contained under this word affections. And they are called the affections of
sin, because they 1. come from sin, 2. they are themselves sinful, and 3.
eggers unto sinful works, begetting in us those works of the flesh
mentioned, Gal. 5, 19, 20.


Tim. How are these sinful affections, said to be by the Law, seeing every
man by Nature, has them engrafted in him, before ever he hear and know the
Law?


Silas. It is true, we have these affections by Nature, before we hear the
Law, for they are borne with us, yet they are said to be by the Law. First,
because thereby they are laid open, and made more known unto us. Secondly,
Romans 3, 20.
by it sins are accused, condemned, and made more grievous, insomuch as he
that offends against the Rom, 7, 7.
will of God once known, has the greater sin. Thirdly, by the Law our
sinful affections are more irritated. Romans 7, 8.
For the Law (as a let in the way) forbidding and withstanding As the Sun on
a Dunghill makes a greater stench, by fault not of sun but of the dung.
them, makes them become more fierce and vehement, through the fault of our
corrupt Nature, which endeavors to do that which is forbid unto it, and to
rebel when it is crossed by prohibitions and comminations of the Law.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence?


Silas. That sinful lusts are most venomous and poysonfull things, being
increased by the Law, which God appointed as a mean and remedy to restrain
them. Secondly, the use of the Law toward all ungodly men, is to increase and
manifest their sins, to cause them to know their sins, and more eagerly to
run after them.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. It admonishes al, what cause they have to be humbled in regard of
their accursed Nature, which causes so good a thing as the Law, to be occasion
of more sins.


Tim. What is meant here by members?


Silas. The powers and faculties of soul and body; in which, sinful
affections work mightily by an inward secret force, not only in the ears,
eyes, hands, mouth, etc. but in senses, appetite, will, and in the
understanding and mind.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence?


Silas. That the affections of sin are no weak and feeble things, but
mighty and forceable to engender wicked works: which may be declared by
comparison of that force which man's seed has in generation, which al see to be
operative and fruitful; and by that seed which is cast into the earth, which
also is effectual and full of force. Secondly, by the example of Gods children
after their new birth, in whom their lusts had force to effect fearful
things, as in Sarah, Rebecca, Noah, Lot, David, Peter. Thirdly, by the example
of men unregenerate, who by the force of their lusts, have been carried unto
monstrous iniquity, as Caine, Esau, Ahab, Judas, Seminary Priests, Jesuits,
Gunpowder Traitors.


Tim. What profit is to be made hereof to our selves?


Silas. By consideration of the strength of sin, men should be much moved to
get all the strength they can, to resist such a mighty enemy. Secondly, it
reproues secure Christians which strive not against it, because they never
think nor know how forcible a thing is: and by their security, are miserably
oppressed by the tyranny of sin, which keeps them under as vassals.


Tim. What is meant here by fruit to death?


Silas. Sinful works, which do deserve death, and lead to death; without
repentance, all sinful desires, thoughts, words, and works, be in their
own nature mortal, and become venial by grace only.


Tim. What be our Lessons from hence?


Silas. First, that sin has eternal death yoaked to it. Secondly, the
unhappy estate of men unregenerate; all whose works are mortiferous and
deadly: and this is the condition of our first marriage with sin, that all the
fruits that come of this marriage, be as Children dead borne. Lastly, this
should move in us an earnest desire and care to be divorced from the flesh,
that we may pass over unto Lucrum tune sacit mors (...) peccatur. Ambros.
Christ, as unto a new husband. For howsoever carnal secure sinners do not
directly intend destruction as the end of their course, yet Satan intends
it, and the sinners themselves can reap no other fruit, as Chap. 6, 22, 23.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 6. But now ye being delivered from the law (be being dead in whom ye
were holden,) that ye should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the
oldnesse of the letter.


Tim. What does this Text set forth?


Silas. The condition of our new and latter marriage to Christ, whose Spirit
is effectual in the faithful to bring forth fruits to God.


Tim. What things consider ye in this second marriage?


Silas. Two things: First, the freedom from the Law and also from sin, our
former husband. Secondly, fruitfullness in good works, by the Spirit of
Christ their second husband.


Tim. What is it to be delivered from the law, and what 1. Part.
means the Apostle, by him that is dead?


Silas. Here is meant deliverance from it, as it is the strength and vigor of
sin to irritate and enrage it, and not as it is the rule of a righteous life:
also (by him that is dead,) is meant sin, which in the regenerate is said to
be dead, though sin still live in them; as we use to say of one stuck to
death, that he is dead because he cannot recover: or of one that has his
brain pan broken that he cannot live. So is sin dead, it can never recover
that strength and power it was wont to have before new birth.


Tim. Why doeye rather think the Apostle means sin by that which is dead,
then the Law?


Silas. Because it does not agree with the nature of the law to be dead, it
being a word of life coming from (...) peccato quod nos detinc (...).
the living God; but our sins are mortified and dead, and then the law
cease to compel or to provoke unto evil: notwithstanding this, there is
still use of the Law toward men which be mortified, because mortification is
imperfect, therefore there is much in every godly person to be repented of and
reformed by the law.


Tim. In what sense may we be said to have been held of the law or sin?


Silas. Because our corruption is as a strong bond or cord, which holds all
the faculties of our soul and body fast tied and linked to it, as we cannot
stir one inch from it, till we be converted. And albeit regenerate persons
have sin abiding in them, by which they are hindered in their course, and in
some sort are held (that is, held back with it) yet they cannot be said to be
held in their sins, as when they were natural men, because sin (that bond
that held them) is now broken by the grace of mortification, whereby the power
of native and inbred corruption, is greatly weakened.


Tim. If the godly be held of sin otherwise then natural men be, show us
where is the difference?


Sil. A natural man is as one whom the Tyrant keeps still in his own hand
and possession, having the full power over him: a regenerate person is as one
that has escaped the bondage of a Tyrant, and yet is still troubled and
assaulted by him. Take another comparison: A natural man is as one lying in
prison, fast bound hand and foot, held fast in bonds and chains, at the
pleasure of his keeper; but a regenerate person is as one that has broken out
of the prison and is at liberty, yet still cumbred and clogged with some piece
of his fetters hanging about him.


Tim. But how is it that men unregenerate, do sin freely and voluntarily,
seeing sin does hold and detain them so violently in his bonds?


Sil. Every natural man finneth freely and willingly; for sin cannot offer
any force to the will, whatsoever the will does, it does it freely, and without
constraint; yet it is true that sin does exercise tyranny over the ungodly,
and holds them bound so, as they cannot but fulfill the lusts os it. For as it
fares with a prisoner that is for debt kept and held by his Iaylor in prison,
so as he cannot get out, yet for some respects he is more willing to be in
prison than to be abroad. So it is with all sinners before regeneration, John
8, 44,
they sin freely because their will cannot be compelled, and yet they cannot
but sin, because they are the servants of sin.


Tim. Whereof does this admonish us?


Sylas. First, of the miserable estate of all men before their new birth.
Secondly, it teaches that in our new birth, God must utter his whole power to
pull us out of the bands wherein the tyrant sin violently held us: a stronger
then he must come, or else we cannot be freed.


Tim. What is the end of our freedom from sinne' and the law?


Sil. Not to live as we list, but to serve God who has been so gracious to
us as to set us free from such tyranny; which we all stand bound to do in these
two respects: first, as he is God our Creator, full of majesty having dominion
over us. Secondly, as he is our merciful and mighty redeemer, having freed us
from the cruel bondage of our sins, he has paid a price for us, sc as we
are not our own, but his, to serve and glorify him in body and spirit, 1 Cor.
6. and last verse. As prisoners taken in war, and asterwards 1 Cor, 6, last
verse.
ransomed are bound to serve their redeemer: so elect ones are obliged to
Christ their ransomer, and also their husband, to bring forth godly works, to
the honor and glory of his name.


Tim. How will this God be served? 2 Part.



Sil. Not in the oldnesse of the letter, but in the newnes of the spirit; that
is, in such a new and holy life, as is wroght in us by the Spirit, and not as
we were wont to serve him before our calling.


Tim. What does the Apostle signify unto us by these words, when he says,
that they are to serve God in newness, etc.


Sil. By newness is meant here a new life, or a pure and unblameable life,
led according to the will of God, (...) deo (...) et spontanco (...): aut
interna co'dis obed (...) vt (...) et (...).
which does consist in a twofold change: the one is inward, of the mind and
will, when of foolish and perverse we are made wise, to discern what pleases
God, and obedient to follow it: the other is outward, when we which have our
souls thus inwardly regenerate, do show forth in our manners, new and
unwonted words and works, speaking and doing far otherwise then we were
wont to do, while we were unregenerate and natural men.


Tim. In them that are thus changed and renewed, is all become new in them?


Sil. Yea, all Both within and without, but not wholly and perfectly new: for
in those that are renewed there sticks much corruption, which is daily to be
mortified; but they are said to serve God in a new course of life, because
though sin remain in them, yet they do not now obey the motions of sin as
before, but resist and strive against them; obeying and following for the most
part new and holy desires and motions, doing good duties out of the love of
God, and of their brethren, whom before they respected not, but themselves
altogether. Example hereof we have in these Romans, and in Paul Rom 6, 16.
the Apostle, and the converted These, and sundry others. Luke. 23.



Tim. What is the lesson and doctrine from hence?


Silas. First, that it is not possible we should serve God and do things
pleasing to him, till we be changed and renewed. The reason is, because we are
not sufficient to think a good thought of our selves: and secondly because God
does not allow any works, but such as come from one in grafted into his Son;
for it is faith that purifieth the heart, Acts. 15, 9.


Tim. What is the use of this?


Silas. To reprove Papists and such blind Protestants which think to please
God with good intents, and a civil life, without new birth. Secondly, to move
all men to labor for renewing in holiness.


Tim. Now tell us why newness is attributed here unto the Spirit?


Silas. Because our new birth or change from evil to good, is the work of the
Spirit, which by regeneration renues us, first in our body and soul, and then
in our manners and conversation.


Tim. What is the doctrine feom hence?


Silas. It teaches Gods Children, that whatsoever Gal. 5, 22.
good is in them, it proceeds from the Spirit, by whose John. 3.
grace and strength it comes, that they can love God and obey him.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. It does admonish them of humility, because we have nothing without
gift; of thankfulness, for such a free and great gift; and of prayer: also it
reproues such as presume to do good, or to resist evil, without the aid of
the Spirit.


Tim. Now tell us what is meant here by the oldnesse of the letter?


Silas. By oldnesse is meant the corruption of our nature, Intelligit ofotiosam
legis notitiam pareus. Externamliteram que fraenat tantum externas actiones.
Calvin.
and that course which was shaped by it, which is called old, because it comes
not from a will renewed and changed, but such as was in us before our new birth.
Also by [ Letter] is meant all Doctrine of the word whatsoever, outwardly set
forth unto us, being severed from Christ and his healthful grace: this is
called the [ Letter,] because it is dead and of no force to us, unless it be
to frame us to an outward obedience only, until the Spirit of Christ do
join with it, to mortify sin, and to work our renewing.


Tim. What instructions are we to gather from hence?


Silas These two: First, that the whole word of God being severed from the
regenerating Spirit of Christ, can effect nothing in us toward newnes of
life. Secondly, whatsoever obedience men unregenerate, yield unto the word of
God before their conversion, it is but corruption, and no part of that service
which God will accept. For it is oldnesse of letter, glorious in show, rotten
within, not coming from an heart purified by faith, which is the foundation of
every good work. Moreover, it admonishes us, not to look for any fruit upon
our hearing or reading the word, unless Gods good Spirit come to join with it
to make it effectual.


DIAL. V.
Verse 7. What shall we say then, is the law sin? God forbid, nay I knew not
sin but by the law: for I had not known lust except the law had said, Thou
shall not lust. 2 part of the Chap



Tim. What is it that our Apostle now intends, in the verses following?


Sylas. Having showed in what meaning and sense true An Apology of the law
against certain cauilations and slanders.
believers are not under the law; he does now purpose to avoid offense, and
for larger instruction, to lay forth the true use of the law, both in respect
of men unregenerate and regenerate; the use of the law touching men
unregenerate, is threefold. First the true knowledge of sin, which is showed us
by the law, this is in the seventh verse. Secondly, the increase or irritation
of sin, in the eight verse. Thirdly, death or the sense of Gods anger for sin,
in the 9. verse, and other verses following.


Tim. How does the Apostle enter into this treatise, to extol and commend the
use of the law?


Sylas. By a prolepsis or prevention of some thing which might be objected or
alleged against his former doctrine in the fifth verse, unto which in this
verse he does make an answer; so as the parts of this text be two. The first
is an objection moved by way of question, in these words: What shall we say
then? is the law sin. The second is a replication or answer in the words
following, God forbid. etc.


Tim. Tell us now the sum of this objection, and from 1 Part.
whence did it arise?


Silas. The Sum is thus much. Is the Law the cause of sin? For this is the
meaning of these words [ Is the Law sin?] that is to say, does the Law beget
it, bring it forth This phrase is like that in chapter 6. verse 23. also 8. verse
6. and ch: 17, 13.
and lead us unto sin? This objection arises from this, that Paul had taught
that the affections of sin were by the Law, verse 5. which some adversary
(belike) taking hold of it, did so wrest it, or might so turn it, as if he
had taught that the the Law did persuade to sin; and were the proper
efficient cause of it; which contumelious and reproachful slander, would have
touched God the Author.


Tim. What instruction may me gather from this part of the Text touching the
Objection?


Sil. These two: First, that no Doctrine can be so sound, nor so warily
delivered, but malicious persons will cavil and wrest it to a contrary
meaning. This proceeds from an hatred they bear unto their teachers, which
causes them that they distaste their doctrine, and carpe at it. Secondly, the
Ministers of Christ must be careful, and able not only to propound the truth
soundly, but to defend it against wicked objections and cauillations:
otherwise, there is danger least weak and unstable minds be perverted and
drawn from the truth by such as speak against it: our nature being more prone
to suck in error, then to receive the truth.


Tim. Tell us now how the Apostle does answer the former Objection? 2. Part.



Sil. Two ways: First, by infiiciation or denial in these words [God forbid,]
which are words that utter a loathing or detestation of such an impiety, as to
make the Law the cause of sin; as if he should say, He was so far from doing
any such thing, as he did abhor the motion or thought of any such Doctrine.


Tim. What instruction have we from this part of Paul's answer?


Sil. That it is our duty when we hear the truth of God depraved, not only
to mislike it, but to declare that we have it in detestation and abomination;
which serves to reprove cold and indifferent Christians, who can abide to
hear the true Ministers of Christ and their Revel. 3, 15.
Doctrine to be slaundered, without any care or grief, like to Luke warm
Laodiceans.


Tim. What is the next and second part of Paul's (...)?


Silas. By argumentation and sound reason fetched and taken from the contrary.
As thus: The Law cannot be the cause to beget and persuade sin, for that it
is the Instrument to discover it, and make sin known unto us; detecting the
deceits and assaults of such an enemy, that we beware of it, as Paul's
Kinsman detected the treason of the Jews against Paul. Upon which detection
Act: 23, 16.
of sin, if sin do the more rage and rebel in us against the will of God;
this is not to be imputed to the Law, but to our corrupt Nature, which grows
worse, and more fierce by that which should restrain and help it. All this
the Apostle proves by his own example: for he confesses that there were some
sins which he knew not to be sins, till the Law did reveal them unto him
to be so; whereof he gives instance in lusts, or in the evil motions of the
mind, suddenly conceived without the consent of our will; of which he says,
That had not the Law told him they had been sins, saying; Thou shall not
Lust, he had not mistrusted them, or thought them to be such grievous matters,
as to be offenses of God, and to deserve damnation. I had not known lust,
except the Lord had said, etc.


Tim. What are we to learn by this, that the Apostle names himself, and
proves these things by his own experience?


Silas. Two thing; first, it is lawful for the Ministers of the word, to
report what they have learned by their own experience, in the matter of sin
and salvation: this is a great help and confirmation of the hearers, if it be
truly and discreetly done. Secondly, this example of Paul, directs As Paul
examineth his sins by the law, so let cue ry one enter into himself. Psa. 32,
5. gives like example.
all men to enter and go down into themselves, to get understanding of their
estate and case: the reason is, because till they come to see and feel how
corrupt and wretched they are through sin, they will never be humble nor
perceive what need they have of Christ, but contrariwise they will rather
despise and set light by the doctrine of free Salvation by the blood of Christ;
as it happened unto this Apostle, who being a Pharify, before he descended into
himself and searched his heart by the light of Gods law, he took himself to
be righteous by the works which he did, and not only neglected Christ, but
persecuted the doctrine of Phil. 3, 6.
grace: howbeit after the law had revealed unto him the Acts 9, 1.
corruption of his nature, and showed him that his evil desires 1 Timothy, 1, 13,
(though not consented to) were sins, and worthy of death: and after that he
believed and considered this, it greatly danted him, and made him see and feel
that al his righteousness of works and civil honesty was nothing, Rom, 7, 8,
9.
and that he was a dead man without Christ. Therefore they are in a miserable
case which have not got the true knowledge of themselves by the law; for such
cannot, nor will not seek after the grace and health of the Gospel.


Tim. Now ye have told us what we are to learn from the manner of his answer,
let us hear what the matter of his answer will teach us?


Silas. It teaches us sundry things: the first is a special Lex tanquam
speculum peicatum repraesendtat.
office of the law: which is to show and bewray sin unto us; as by a glass we
come to see the spots of our face, so by the law we come to know our sins:
and as by the light Rom, 3, 20.
of the Sun we discover little moates, so the light of Gods law, detects even
the least offenses against God or our neighbor: this office of showing sin
unto us, the law performs in sundry sorts. First, it makes appear unto us,
How the law dcteineth sin.
what is evil and sin, and what is not. Secondly, it brings us to behold the
nature of sin, how vile and filthy it is, being against a righteous law, and
an infinite divine justice. Thirdly, it reueales the danger of sin, what hurt
it brings to the committers of it, to wit, no less then everlasting
destruction in hell, after all the miseries of this life. Lastly, it gives a
feeling of sin in our hearts, troubling our Consciences by some certain
biting and sting. This experimental knowledge is that which is chiefly meant
here: where we are further to note, that howsoever all Laws, both civil,
ceremonial, and judicial, as the law of nature also serves to manifest sin;
yet the moral Law of God, being written by Moses, and rightly understood,
does perform this office of revealing sin, most fully and feelingly; because
it strikes at the root, discovering The Law be (...) perfect (...) R ghteo
(...), that (...) be taken for evil, which (...).
our hidden and secret evil thoughts, causing us to seele the force of sin,
inasmuch as God himself in this Law, does with great power speak to the
conscience; for it has his spirit joined with it, which deserying and laying
open our hidden naughtiness, and our bondage to it, breeds terror in us, Romans
8, 15.


Tim. What may be the use of this first instruction?


Sila. First, it does admonish all men to be conversant in the Law of God,
and to study it, if they do desire Psalm 1, (...), and 119. and 19.
to be more and more acquainted with their own sins and woeful estate thorough
the same. Secondly, it renders a reason why men have so slender a sight of
sins, either their own or others, because they are ignorant and insensible of
the Law. Thirdly, it warns the godly to be thankful unto God, who has
given them the Law, to be (as it were) a Sentinel to bewray their enemy to
them, and a scourage to drive them forward to lesus. Fourthly, this directs
us how to read and hear the Law with fruit, namely; when we find out some
thing by it which must be forgiven by mercy, and repented of or amended by
grace. Lastly, it serves to pull down our stomachs and hearts, by the view
of our own sinful estate, to force us unto Christ, and to make much of his
grace and merits. Thus far of the first instruction.


Tim. Now tell us of what knowledge the Apostle speaks, when he says [He had
not known Lust, etc.] As also, what Law he speaks of?


Silas. He means the moral Law or ten Commandments, as is plain by the
instance of [Lust] which is sorbidden or condemned in every one of them, as the
root whence springs all other sins. As for knowledge, he means both
speculatiue and experimental, but rather this; so as the sense is this; I had
never understood lust to be a sin at all, or felt it to be so grievous a
sin (as now I do) without the help and light of Gods Law, which forbids
Lust. Hence we are put in mind again, how diligently the Law of God is to
be learned and weighed of us, seeing without it, the hidden sins of our
nature cannot be espied and known; nor the force of sin so thoroughly felt, as
to enforce us to Christ.


Tim. But what Lust may it be, that this our Text mentions? for there be
sundry sorts of Lusts, some be good lusts which he cannot mean, and sinful
lusts be not all of one kind. Show us which of them is understood here?


Sil. It is true (as ye say) for there be natural Lusts, when things tending
to preservation of our own nature are desired; there is also a spiritual lust
(an hungring and thirsting for justice) which is a desire of heavenly things
that come from the Spirit; and also, there is carnal and sinful Lust, which
is of things contrary unto God. These be meant here, but not all these. For of
sinful lusts, there be sundry kinds. As first Original lust, which is the
fountain, root, and spring of all other sins, being that which is called
byrth-sinne, or corruption of Nature. This Original Lust, is an impotencie of
man's heart, whereby it is inordinately disposed to this or that evil.
Secondly, actual lust, which is every evil motion and desire of the soul
against the law of God. This proceeds as a fruit from the former, Romans 6, 12.
of which, there are two degrees: the one, is an evil motion of the mind
suddenly conceived without consent of will: this is called voluntary Lust. The
other is an evil motion, which goes together with consent, and is joined with
purpose and deliberation, lames 1, 15. This is called voluntary lust, because
it has the consent of our will, and is not only in desire, but in resolution
to effect it, if occasion serve. Now our Text does not speak of our voluntary
lusts, which are consented unto by our will, and resolved upon. First, because
without the moral Law Paul might know these lusts to be sin by the light of
natural reason, as many Heathens did.

Secondly, by that which follows in this Chapter, it appears he speaks of
such lusts as be resisted, and irksome to a godly mind, which do lead the
Saints captive, even against their will, making them cry out ( O miserable
men:) and therefore it is an original lust, which is the prauity of nature
disposed to evil, (which is meant here,) and also the first degree of actual
lusts, to wit, such as go before consent: the moral law being rightly
understood of the Apostle, gave him light to see that those lusts were sins,
deserving eternal death, which before he knew the law he did not perceive, or
once surmise it to be so, or to stick so deeply in his nature, and so to make
him obnoxious to Gods wrath.


Tim. Let us now hear what doctrines and lessons we are to gather from hence?


Silas. The first is this, the miserable estate wherein all men stand by Adams
fall, having their nature wholly poisoned and corrupted by sin, Iusting after
evil things alone; in so much as if we should never think, speak, nor do
evil, yet our very corruption of nature being the breach of Gods eternal
law, makes us guilty of eternal wrath. Secondly, our evil desires and
motions, Paul calls lust sin, and it has disobedience against the Law of
the mind. August.
though they be misliked and striuen against, yet they be sins, and deserve
Hell fire, because they are transgressions of the Law.


Tim. What use and profit is to be made of these doctrines?


Silas. First, every one must see that they have need of the death and
bloud-shedde of Christ, even for the least vain and sinful thought or
imagination, yea for healing their infected dead nature. Secondly, that every
one must be humbled, mourn, and with sighs crave pardon for such thoughts,
and for their natural inclination to sin. Thirdly, all Christians stand
bound, not only to take care and heed of their words and works, Lust formed
or unformed, before or after consent, is to be repented of and resisted.
but even of their thoughts and desires; for there must a Conscience be made,
not only of what men speak and do, but what men think and desire. Fourthly,
it serves to reprove such as do think evil thoughts to be free: also such
as know evil thoughts to be sins, and yet labor Concupiscence is not
merely natural, but is moral and spiritual, and resists grace; so it is
sin.
not to bridle and mortify them: and lastly it confutes the Papists, which
affirm that lust because it is vnuoluntary and natural, is not sin, until
it be consented to by the will, till then it is but fomes peccati, and set ad
agonem.


Tim. What further instruction may we observe out of this present Text?


Silas. That in elect persons baptized, and by the Spirit effectually
regenerated, concupiscence does remain as a sin and a vicious thing; the
reason is, because of it is written, Thou shall not lust: which shows it to be
sin, else it should not be forbid, nor called by the name of sin, as it is
often in this Chapter, yea in Paul being regenerate, as verse 17: not alone for
that it is the effect of sin, as the writing is called ones hand, or the
cause of sin, as death is termed pale; but for that it is properly and
truly sin, being a Rebel against the government of the Spirit in the mind
of godly persons, Chap, 7, 23. and causes death which springs only from
sin properly taken, Romans 5, 13, 14, etc. Indeed it is forgiven the elect
touching guilt, but the fault and spot is not removed, as the Conscience of the
holiest persons may and do witness to them. Whereto agrees Augustines
testimony. Concupiscentiae reatus in Baptismo soluiter; sed infirmit as manet:
and again ad Iuliam, Concupiscentia minui, consumi non potest. It is therefore
a novel error in the Romish Synagogue, repugnant to Scripture and antiquity,
to teach that Concupiscence both for guilt and corruption is quite abolished in
the regenerate; by which error they extenuate sin, extol man's nature and
free will and ability to keep the commandments; also diminish the benefit of
Christ his grace, lesson our prayers and thankfulness to God, and our diligence
and care to purge out such a stain as Concupiscence is.


DIAL. VI.
Verses 8, 9. But sin took occasion by the commandment and wrought in me
all manner of concupiscence; for without the Law, sin is dead: for I was once
alive without the law, but when the etc.


Tim. What is the sum and purpose of this Text with the several parts of it?


Silas. It does deliver unto us the second use of the law, in respect of men
which are unregenerate, whose sin is And withallit lays the cause of sin
upon hidden corruption properly, and accidentally upon the law.
increased and irritated by the Law through the prauity and corruption of
nature, taking occasion by the Law more to rebel against God. The parts of
this Text are two: the first is a proposition, in these words, [ But sin
took occasion;] the second is a reason, in these words, [ for without the Law
sin is dead.]


Tim. Now come to expound the words, and tell us what is 1. Part.
meant by the word Sin, and by Commandment?


Silas. By sin is meant corruption of nature, or that Non diabolum peccati
authorem sed peccatum inhabitans intelligit.
original lust which is the root of all other sins, which is either in
thought, word, or deed, in omission or commission: and by Commandment is meant
that Commandment mentioned in the former verse, which forbids lust, and
that when it is truly known and duly considered.


Tim. In what meaning is it said, that sin took occasion by this
Commandment?


Sil. This: that the law in it own nature is so far from being the cause of
sins and transgressions, as it does not so much as yield or give any occasion
of sinning; but man's corrupt nature being irritated, provoked, and stirred up
by the prohibitions of the Law once manifestly known, does snatch and take
occasion thereby to become more fierce, and to break out into more foul sins.
And this is it which is meant by the word [ Wrought] for the meaning is, that
man's corrupt nature by the knowledge of the Law, which condemns it, in stead
of being amended thereby, does beget and bring forth sin and sinful desires
more abundantly. Even as Rivers flow from a Fountain, and sparkles arise out of
a furnace: so corrupted nature engenders more wicked lusts, the more it sees
it is restrained by the Law.


Tim. What is the doctrine or instruction from hence?


Silas. It sets before us the woeful and wretched condition Further observe
here that all things to the unregenerate fall out to their evil, seeing even
the law so good a thing gives advantage to sin; it is con trary with the
regenerate.
of man's nature, such as it is before new birth; which appears in this, that
the Law which should serve to call men to God, does make them the more to fly
from him, and to run away headlong unto sin and death. For as stubborn
diseases (as the Canker or Leprosy,) which by laying too of remedies become
the worse: even such is the lust of our sinful hearts, increased by the
remedy. Also as an untamed Horse which the more he is spurred forwards, the
more he goes backward, and as a wicked son who being commanded a duty, does
the more labor against it: even so it fares Romans 8, 28.
with our corrupt minds, they give themselves the more to do evil, the more
they be forbidden them; and this does bewray the most untoward disposition of
our croo ked nature, altogether (before grace received) adverse and estranged
from God, and all goodness.


Tim. What use and profit is to be made of this doctrine? Causa generaus
peccatum per se est prauitas latens in homine: per accidens, lex prohibens dum
aduersus hanc illa insurgit. Paraeus.



Sil. First, it takes the whole fault of our sins from the Law, and lays it
where it ought to be, even upon the naughtines of our nature. For the Law is
no more to be blamed by becoming the occasion of so great and many evils, then
a Physician is to be blamed, if upon the forbidding cold drink unto a sick man,
the patient should more fervently thirst after it. Secondly, that there is
nothing so good, but it may become the ocasion through our own default, of
grievous evils; as God, his works, his benefits, his judgments, his
creatures, yea his Gospel, and his Son, proves a stone of stumbling, and a
rock of offense.


Tim. What other use of this former Doctrine?


Silas. The exceeding vicious quality of our poisoned Nature, should cause all
men by all possible means to seek to have it renewed. Secondly, such as have
their Nature already cured and changed by the grace of new birth, must see
that there is cause for them to be humbled, both in regard that they were once
under the power of this poisoned corruption, and have still the remnants of it
sticking in them, and soliciting them to offend. Thirdly, it must admonish all
which come to hear Gods word, to hear it with fear and prayer, that they be
not made the worse by it, through the fault of their own wicked nature.


Tim. What is meant here by Concupiscence?


Silas. By Concupiscence is meant actual lusts or evil All naughty motions
first and second with consent or without.
desires both vnvoluntary and voluntary. For it is plainly distinguished from
sin (which is original Concupiscence) as fruit from the root. And (by all
manner of Concupiscence) is meant all evil desires and motions of all kinds
and sorts, either against holiness required in the first, or righteousness
commanded in the second Table of the Law.


Tim. Were not these in men before they knew the Commandment, seeing he says
they are wrought by it?


Sil. Yes, these wicked motions are both in us, and are somewhat known of us
before we have the knowledge of the commandment which forbids them: but they
are not known so fully and absolutely, nor the great force of them so fully
felt, as after the true knowledge of the Law is once had.


Tim. What do these words [wrought in me] put us in mind of?


Sil. That if this happen to Paul, what may happen to us? The case of Paul is
every man's case: for we are all by nature alike perverse; and our natural
perverseness will be as ready upon the Doctrine of the Law, forbidding and
condemning our lusts and inward evil motions, to break out and more to be
enraged and increased by that which should do it good: which though we do not
perceive till afterward (as Paul did not) yet when it is perceived, it should
move us to justify the law, and condemn our selves after Paul's example.


Tim. Is there any other Doctrine out of the former words?


Silas. Yea, namely, that original Concupiscence is more then a defect of
Justice, as sickness is a defect of health: but it is a very sin, offending
God, and making Nature culpable, being condemned in the Law, and the very
proper cause be getting all vicious motions and actions within and without man.


Tim. What is it to be without the Law? 2. Part.



Silas. To want the true knowledge of the Law: for it cannot be said, that
any are simple and altogether without the Law, seeing all men have the Law of
Nature written in them. Two sorts want the true knowledge of the Moral Law; as
Infants and Children, which for want of age cannot attain the understanding of
the Law. Secondly, men of years, which either do not at all consider it, or
but slenderly. On the other side, they may be said to know the Law, which so
know the true meaning, as therewithal they do think upon it so long, till
they see and feel their sins, and the deep danger of them: except men know
the Law to this purpose, they had better be without the Law.


Tim. What then is the instruction from thence?


Silas. That whosoever do hear the Law and Gospel, without application to
themselves for humbling and strengthening of them, it may be truly said, that
they are without the word of God, whatsoever knowledge they get; as a man is
without the Sun, without Riches, when he has no use of them, though he have
riches, etc.


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Sylas. To reprove such as hear the word, and content themselves with some
general confused knowledge, and not ponder it nor apply it to themselves, that
they may be touched thoroughly with it: of these it is true which is written,
They hear and do not understand, and they see and do not see; which is a most
heavy judgment of GOD, and worse than famine, plague, and sword.


Silas. What is the meaning of this, that he says sin is dead?


Sil. That is, without the due knowledge of the law, sin Absque legis notitia
pecatum la tet (tanquam non sit) non apparet, penitus ignoratur, et in tenebris
sopelitur. Aug.
lies still, void of force and power as if it were dead; neither is it known
to be so grievous as it is: for as a Dog which while he sleeps, he seems
to be dead, but if you awake him, he will fly in your throat: or as a body is
said to be dead when it wants strength and moves not; so sin before the true
knowledge of the law, because it does not stir and rage, is therefore said to
be dead.


Tim. In what sense does Paul say he was alive without the law?


Sylas. Not that he lived indeed, but that he seemed to himself to live to
Godward, because he was not troubled, nor his conscience made afraid of Gods
justice and vengeance, til the law was well known unto him, and duly
considered of him: which his case may be declared by the similitude of one who
has an enemy, and grows secure, because he is quiet and stirs not,
thinking himself safe. So Paul while sin was not impelled and stirred by the
law, took himself to be alive indeed, and out of all peril of perishing by
eternal death.


Tim. What is the instruction that is to be gathered from these words, being
thus opened and expounded?


Silas. In the person and case of Paul, we learn what is As in a kingdom
which has no law or King to go uerne it, their crimes be held for no crimes,
and rage without fear or dread, Iud g. 17, 6. So it fares with the conscience
of a sinner, sin is quiet and lies hid and unknown.
the estate of all natural men while they are ignorant of, or duly regard not
the law, so long they do little or nothing feel their sins, or fear their
own damnation; but contrariwife judge themselves to be happy and alive,
though they be dead and miserable. This their fearful estate, may be set
forth unto us, by the comparison of one being sick near to death, yet
complaynes not, but says he is not sick, because he feels not his disease:
even so it fares with all unregenerate men, before they have the right
understanding of the law, and of their sins and danger thereby, they take
themselves to be in blessed case having their sins forgiven them, because
they are blockish, without al true sense and feeling of their sins; which how
dangeraus a case it is, may hereby be perceived. For as a man not feeling his
sickness, neglects the means of health, and dies without remedy: so these
not feeling their multitude of sins, do think that they are well already:
therefore they never earnestly seek after Christ, but do perish in their
senseless estate. And this is the condition of many thousands which do live
in the Church of God.


Tim. What is the profit to be made of this point of doctrine?


Sylas. First, it may provoke such as neither felt the sting and force, nor
feared the damnation of sin, to mistruit their own estate greatly, that they
are not alive to God, howsoever it seems otherwise to them: for the reason why
their conscience is quiet, and their minds at rest, as if they did live and
were in bliss, it is, because sin is dead and quiet in them through their
ignorance, or ill regard of the law. Secondly, that Christians must reck on
it a great mercy of God, to have the law truly expounded, and wisely applied
to themselves, that they may come to feel their sins and their own miserable
condition, as they may be provoked by that means to seek a remedy. Lastly,
Concio legis in Ecclesia necessaria, Piscator.
such as are disquieted and vexed about their sins, through the threatenings
of the law, are in better plight Gal. 3, 19.
then many, which never knew what trouble of mind meant; because they are
nearer unto Christ, then the other be.


Tim. Now expound the other part of the ninth verse, and (...) plainly what is
meant by the commandment, and the words following?


Silas. That commandment which forbids lust or (...) habuit, sed non prius
in tellexit. Paroeus.
all evil desires; which is said to come unto one, when it is rightly
understood, without which the commandment is as it were absent from us, as the
Sun when it shines not: The coming of the commandment is the true sense,
knowledge, and consideration of the law.
also sin is said (to revive) when in stead of not stirring and raging, it
does move and trouble our minds to see and to feel it. For sin is never
truly dead in any natural man, but counterfotly, and in seeming only, while
the knowledge of the law is absent: there is a true death of sin by the Holy
Ghost, as Chap, 6. 2, 3. and a dissembled death, while the law is hid from us.


Tim. What does the Apostle mean in the beginning of the 10. verse, when he
said, he dyed?


Sylas. That is, while before he seemed to himself to Viuere mihi vi debar.
August. In mea opinione. Paroeus.
be alive, nor he saw himself to be under the wrath of God and eternal
condemnation, through the breach of the law: hence came death (not from the
law) as he shows by his own example.


Tim. What instruction have we from hence?


Silas. This; that the law serves to kill men, by showing As a lethergy is not
deadly, if one be rowsed out of it: so sin stirred by the law hurts not the
elect.
and making them feel that they are dead and most wretched, by reason of their
sins. Some are thus killed to destruction, as Cayne, Esau, and Judas, and
such as wholly despair: Others are killed unto salvation, as Paul and such as
by their despair are driven to Christ, when they are brought to see nothing in
themselves, save matter of eternal misery, and be out of hope ever to be
saved by any goodness or strength in themselves, this causes them to look
about for succor from elsewhere.


DIAL. VII.
Verses 10, 11. The same commandment which was ordained to life, was found to
be unto me unto death. 11. For sin took occasion by the commandment and
deceived me, and thereby slew me.


Tim. What is the drift of this text?


Sil. To prove that the law is not properly the cause of death but sin,
verse 10. and withal to show how it is that sin did slay and kill Paul;
namely by deceiving him, verse 11. he clears now the law from being cause
os destruction, as before from being cause of sin.


Tim. How is it proved that the law is not the cause of death and of Gods wrath?


Silas. Because on Gods part it was ordained unto this end, that it might give
life; but sinful lusts stirred up in Paul, by occasion of the law deceived
him, and by that deceiving, slew him spiritually: so sin is the proper cause,
and by it self, of death; law is the occasion only, and that by the deceit of
sin abusing it.


Tim. In what meaning does the Apostle say that the commandment is ordained to
life?


Silas. It teaches what end and use there is of the law, in respect of it
own nature: that is, if so it be observed, it does give life eternal. For so
it forbids evil things, and commands good things, as it propounds the
promise of life to the perfect doers of it: as it is written, He that does
these things shall live in them. Leuit. 18, 5. Indeed the Apostle says Gal. 3,
21. That the law cannot give life. and Romans 8, 3. that it is impossible for
the law to give life. But the fault hereof is not in the nature of the law;
which of it self is a word and oracle of life, like to the fountain whence
it flowed; but in our weakness which cannot fulfill the perfect righteousness
of the law: whence it is that it cannot give life, as the Sun cannot give
light to him that has no eyes to see it; nor Christ cannot give righteousness
to him that has no faith to receive it.


Tim. How does the Apostle mean that the commandment was found to be to him
to death?


Silas. Thus much, that at length he felt it to be so; for the law when he
rightly understood it, made him perceive that having in it own nature a good
use, even to give life, that accidentally and besides the nature of the law, it
proved to him the cause of death; insomuch as by breaking it, he felt himself
guilty of death and damnation. For the proper cause of death and damnation, it
is sin or our natural Decepit lex (...) do suauius (...) cupidita (...).
corruption deceiving us, which abusing the ministry of the law, (by being
stirred up by it the more) brings forth of it own nature properly, and by it
self, death and damnation. Thus sin as the true cause, does produce death,
Paraeus.
and the law occasionally does produce it.


Tim. Open this somewhat more plainly and fully unto us, how death comes of sin
by the occasion of the law, and how sin deceived Paul the Apostle, being in
his Pharisaisme?


Sylas. Thus: when we begin to know the law rightly, we see and feel our
sins which before we did not, and that thereby we are woorthily adjudged to
damnation in hell fire. This cannot be carnestly thought on, but that it will
bring us to some taste of destruction, in which respect though we do live in
our bodies, yet we are said to be slain by sin and to be dead. For as a
malefactor condemned, who by fear and feeling of his death approaching
(looking for it every minute with terror,) may be said to taste of death, and
to die before he be dead: so it was with Paul, being unregenerate; and so it is
with all the elect, when the law has effectually convicted them of death
through sin, they have a sense of death eternal, which breeds great heaviness
and disquietnes in their minds.


Tim. What instruction is to be gathered from hence?


Silas. That there is none of years which are partakers of the life of Christ
and of his righteousness, until by the preaching of the law, they have such
a sense in regard of their sins, that they feel themselves dead: this is the
course that God takes with all his children to kill them, before he make them
alive, to humble them in feeling of their own dead-sick, and damnable estate,
before he heal them and save them. The reason hereof is, because till men be
brought to a through-sight and sense of their own dsmnation, they will never
secke after Christ nor desire him: without which they can never find him nor
have him: God having so ordained it, that by seeking we shall find him.
Secondly, the health and salvation by Christ, becomes more sweet and precious
to men that first have felt themselves lost and damned without him: as health
is more pleasant after sickness, liberty after bond, plenty after scarsity,
fair weather after foul, peace after war; therefore to have his grace
highly esteemed, God uses to bring them very low that shall enjoy it.


Tim. What is the use of this Doctrine?


Sil. First, to stir up secure sinners, to labor much to be brought to the
feeling of their own deserved damnation, that they may become capable of the
grace of Christ unto salvation. Secondly, to comfort those which be humbled to
Hell gates, in the sense of their sins seeing by this means God is a
preparing of them for his Son, to become meet to be his members by faith.
Lastly, to admonish such faithful Christians as have by the Law been brought
to seele the death due to their sins, to be thankful in word and deed for
such a deliuereance. This is both the duty and testimony of a truly Romans 7,
(...).
delivered sinner, which has indeed by the death of Christ escaped death.


Tim. But tell me what course sinners are to take, that they may get the sound
feeling of their own woeful damnation, due to their sins?


Silas. It is no easy thing to get it, nor every sinners case to come by it:
yet I will commend unto the sinner (desirous to be humbled,) four
looking-glasses, wherein if he use often and intentiuely to behold himself,
he may happily through Gods mercy attain his desire, to his euerlastaing good.
The first is Adams fall, wherein he 1. Glass.
shall see not only himself deprived of all goodness and exposed to all sin
and misery, but the whole race of mankind, Genesis 3.
and al creatures in heaven and earth folded in gods Romans 8, 2.
fearful malediction and vengeance. The second is the 2. Glass.
curse of the Law, in which he shall see God as a most terrible Judge most
severely denouncing unto his Creature (the work of his hands,) all the
miseries of this life, bodily and spiritual, which are innumerable; separation
in the end of life of the body from the soul, which is terrible; and after
this life ended, everlasting destruction both of body and soul, which is most
horrible: and all this even for the least transgression of his Law, Deuteronomy. 27,
26. The third is the estate of a damned man in Hell, 3. Glass.
where he shall see a lively picture of misery it self, to with a man for
sin chained up in a prison, where there is a continual night, and most
lamentable roaring and outcries, having for his companions, the Devil and his
Angels and the Reprobate, his tender flesh extremely pained in every joint and
sinew, his soulc lying in inexpressible horror, filled with hatred of God,
blasphemy, and despair, fretting and vexing not so much in the sense of
present punishment, which yet is easelesse and endless, as in remembrance of
his exceeding loss, being cast out of Gods kingdom, without hope of
recovery. And here remember (I pray) that this woeful estate every one has
deserved a thousand ways. The fourth 4. Glass.
and last, is the most bitter death and passion of our Lord Jesus, wherein let
him see and consider himself as principal debtor, and Christ, but as his
surety suffering for his sin, even at the hands of his own vassals, the
Jews and Gentiles, most grievous tants, scorns, and reproaches most smartfull
buffeting, whipping, crowning and piercing with thorns, spears, and nails,
in his head, hands and feet (his most tender parts:) and at the hands of his
angry revenging Father, receiving such invisible strokes in his soul, as drew
from his body abundance of bloody sweat in the garden; and from his mouth a
most doleful complaint and cry upon the Cross, My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Here upon if a man will consider this deeply, that if Gods wrath
did lie so heavy upon Christ for sin imputed, who also had his divine power
to uphold his manhood in suffering it, how heavy will it lie when it lights
upon a mere man, and that for his own sin? This meditation may prevail much
to bring down the stoutest and proudest heart and stomach that is, in the
sight and feeling of his own misery, which by desert of sin is due to him in
justice; or if this do it not, the case is very hard, for it is a sign of a
full hard heart not to be touched with grief, for such grievous things as the
only Son of God for our cause endured.


Tim. Now that you have told us how the Law does kill us by engendering in us a
sense of Gods wrath and eternal death; let me hear you declare unto me by
what means sin did kill Paul?


Silas. Sin deceived him, and so slew him: deceitful Text.
sin killed him.


Tim. What is the instruction from hence?


Silas. That sin is a deceitful thing may appear by these three ways:
First, by the testimony of Scripture By authority.
as Heb. 3, 12, 13. Take heed least any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin: also in Ephe. 4, 22. the lusts of sin are called
deceivable lusts: now whatsoever God says is deceitful, must needs be so,
for he cannot lie. Secondly, by the example first of Paul, confessing that
sin deceived him, he being very wise, learned, Example.
and heedfull. Secondly, of Peter, who was deceived by his sinful presumption.
Thirdly, of Solomon and David, by incontinency. Fourthly, of Judas, who was
deceived by covetousness. Lastly of Herod by pride. Thirdly, by reason because
it is the brood of the Devil, Reason.
that old Serpent, full of subtilty, who deceived the whole world by his guile
and craft: the Child being like his father, such damme such brood. Second
reason: sin is in quality contrary to holiness, therefore as holiness has
sincerity and truth, so sin has deceit and guile annexed to it. Lastly,
seeing it makes our hearts deceitful, therefore it self must needs be full of
deceit. For that which makes a thing to be such, it self is more such. Quod
facit tale, id est magis tale. Aristot.


Tim. What hurt and danger is there in being deceyned?


Silas. From this deceit of sin, springs hardness of heart, and spiritual
deadness, Heb. 3, 13. And after this there follows eternal death, without
the mercies of God, and great repentance.


Sil. Are all men deceived alike?


Silas. No, the wicked are deceived wholly and willingly, and unto their
destruction. The elect in some things are deceived by sin, even after calling,
but never wholly and finally.


Tim. After what sort and ways does sin deceive us?


Silas. First, by making men think that they are alive and happy, when they
are dead and miserable thorough sin. Secondly, by causing them to neglect
their inward thoughts and lusts, resting in outward obedience only, as if that
were enough, and could justify them. Thirdly, by insinuating it self into
their hearts, becoming more pleasant and delightful to them; by the
prohibitions of the Law, forbidding and condemning it. By these three ways
especially, was Paul deceived with sin. Fourthly, by blinding our judgment, by
putting out the eyes of our mind, that we should not be able to see it to be a
sin in our selves, which we see to be a sin in others; and not to be a fault in
particular, which men do know to be a fault in the general. As the covetous,
proud, malicious, will condemn covetousness, pride, hatred in general, yet
perceive not that their own actions savor of these vices Fifthly, sin
persuades me^, that the things which the law forbids are good and commodious
for them; as some kind oflyes, and some little breaking of the Saboth, and usury
and such like sin, does often put on the name and countenance of virtue; as
pride of cleanliness, niggardnesse of thrift, great swearing and revenge of
manhood and courage, etc. Seauenthly, it turns away our thoughts from
thinking earnestly upon the punishment due to sin. Eighthly, when we do any
good, it makes us ascribe it to our selves, and to think that we have kept the
Law. Ninthly, our sinful Nature frames it self glad to hear the Law, and yet
continually draws from the obedience of it. Lastly, it persuades us, that
there is more ease and pleasure in following our lusts, then in obeying Gods
Law. There be other (...) inumerable, whereby sin uses to deceive men, yet
these be common and most dangerous, which I have named.


Tim. What profit is to he made of this doctrine?


Silas It reproues such as are ignorant of the Nature of sin, not so much as
knowing that it is deceitful. Also, such as knowing this, yet suspect it not,
but are secure; not providing and arming themselves against the slights of sin.
Secondly, it teaches all men what need they have of wisdom and wariness,
and all good circumspection, considering what a deceitful enemy they have
within their own bosom, and how many wisemen have bin deceived; and how easy
a thing it is to be deceived, and what danger it is to be deceived: therefore
watch, take heed, and pray continually.


DIAL. VIII.
Verse 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and that commandment is holy, and just,
and good.


Tim. What is the Sum of these words?


Silas. A conclusion of the things said before, co^ Cum lex neque gignit
peccatn^, ncque mortem, sed peccatum inhabitans, sequitur eam non essedamnandam
cluding the Law not to be the cause of sin, by a reason fetched from the
property of the Law, thus: The Law is good and holy, therefore cannot be the
cause of sin. For howsoever it does detect and show sin, and does irritate and
increase it in natural men, yet the fault is not in the law which is just, but
in our selves which abuse it. Now, whatsoever is the cause of sin, must
needs be it self sinful and unjust. Therefore a Law just and holy, cannot
beget sin which is filthy.


Tim. What Law and commandment does he mean here in this Text?


Silas. He means the moral Law delivered by Moses unto the people; and by
commandment must be meant that commandment which forbids Lust, and
condemns it as sin. The reason why he mentions both Law and
Commandment, is to show that these properties here named, do agree to the
whole Law, and to every part of it. For, if the Law be holy, it does follow
necessarily, that every commandment is so; and on the contrary, if any one
commandment be holy, just, and good, the whole law must be so. The reason
why he singled out that commandment which forbids Lust, is because it needed
clearing. And heereunto our Apostle borrows these properties of the Law from
Psalm. 19, 7, 8 9. where it is written, that the Law of God is undefiled, his
testimonies pure, his judgments righteous, etc.


Tim. What is meant here by holy, and in what respect is the Law called holy?


Sil. By holy is meant that which is pure and undefiled Holy.
seucred from all pollution of falsehood, lies, sins, and errors. Lex sancta,
iusta, bona ratione authoris, and doctrine, and effectorum. Paraeus.
To which purpose it is likened to filuer tried in the fire seven times, Psa.
12. 6. and to the light of the Sun, Ps. 119. The respects for which it is
called holy be five. First God the author of the law, is most holy. Secondly,
it was published by the ministry of the holy Angels. Thirdly, Moses the penman,
and the Prophets the interpreters of it were holy. 4. The matter holy, to wit,
all duties to God or man. And lastly, the end it aims at, is to make a This
effect is in the life to come.
people holy to God. Therefore it must needs be holy.


Tim. In what sense and respect is the Law called Just and Good?


Silas. It is called Just, first, because it is righteous, having Just.
in it no wrong or iniquity. Secondly, it teaches just things. Thirdly, it
proceeds from a just God. 4. It is able to justify such as perfectly keep
it. Fifthly, it justly denounces death to them that break it. Also, it is
called Good.
good: First, because it likes, allows, and bears with no evil. Secondly,
it she weth us every good way which we are to walk. And lastly, it has
promises of many good things, both temporal and eternal; for this life and for
a better.


Tim. How else can ye fit these properties to the Law?


Silas. Thus: It is holy, because holiness toward God is taught in the first
Table of the Law; Just, because Justice toward our Neighbor is taught in the
second Table; and because the good and perfect way is taught in both the
Tables; as also, God the chief good, who and what he is, and what he wills.


Tim. What is the use and profit we are to make unto our selves, from these
properties of the Law?


Sil. Very many and manyfold. First, it sharply reproves them which think or
speak reproachfullie of the Doctrine of Gods Law. Secondly, it does admonish
us with delight, reverence, and love to think and speak, to read and hear
it, being so highly praised of Gods own mouth. Thirdly, it proves the
Scripture of the Law to be inspired of God, whose Image it bears being like
himself, in his most glorious properties. Fourthly, Deuteronomy 4, 8, 5.
it commends to us, the great mercy of God, and sets forth the great dignity
of his people, in having a Law so holy and just given unto them. Fifthly, it
encourages all Christians to be very studious in the Law, to learn it, and
carefully to practice it, being a rule so right and pure. Sixthly, it bewrays
what a filthy and foul thing sin is, that is contrary unto so holy a Law.
Seauenthly, it informs all men, that they ought to bear with, and to brook
the severe Discipline of the Law, because it is good and just. Eighthly, hereby
all men must be warned to stand with Gods Law against their dearest lusts, to
condemn whatsoever the Law condemns, and to praise whatsoever the law
praises. Ninthly, here is a pattern for Teachers, how to frame their Doctrine,
to see that it be holy, just, and good; as well as for hearers how to frame their
conversation, to look to it, that it be such as the Law is; for till it be
such, it is never holy and just. Tenthly, that we must have in honor and
estimation, not only the word of the Law, but every portion of it, it being
throughout like it self. Lastly, we see here what to judge of the Gospel,
namely, that it is a Doctrine full of goodness, Justice, and holiness, worthy
of all love and obedience. For if the Law be holy, sure the Gospel is no less.
For it is from the same Author, penned by as holy instruments and
Secretaries, containing matter most Divine and holy, even redemption by Christ;
and not only tending unto, but serving to make us holy, effecting it in us;
being the power of God to salvation, and so to Sanctification, which is one
part of Salvation, as Justification is the other, which we attain by the
Gospel only, Romans 1, 16, 17.


DIAL. IX.
Verse 13. Was that then which is good made death unto me? God forbid. For
sin, that it might appear sin, wrought death in me by that which is good,
that sin might be out of measure sinful, by the commandment.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To clear the Law from a new slander, which might by cauillers be
cast upon it. The flaunder was, that Paul in his Doctrine did make the Law a
very pestilent thing, the very cause of death to himself, whom it had slain,
verse 8. The which slander he does wipe away, and discharge himself of it
thus: First by denying it [ God forbid.] Secondly, by turning the blame of
death upon sin [ For Sin.] As if he should say, it is not the Law which
is made death, but it is sin which begets death. Thirdly, he proves by
reason, that the Law cannot be the cause of death, for that it is spiritual
(that is) ordering or framing a man to spiritual obedience, and to live
conformably unto God; which if any could do, they should not dye, but become
spiritual and live for ever: therefore in it self it must needs be an holy
and a good thing.


Tim. What learn we out of the Objection?


Silas. First, that a malicious Cauiller, will never make an end of obiecting
against the truth, an unsanctified wit is ever insatiable. Such as enquire and
object soberly, out of a desire to learn, will soon receive satisfaction: but
wanton wits, and contradicting spirits, delight in crossing the truth.
Therefore their error being plainly showed them, they are to be left, least we
cast Pearls before Swine.

Secondly, that the Doctrine of the Gospel, does lie open unto many slanders
of wicked men, who because they will not believe sound Doctrine and obey it,
therefore they are justly given over to the spirit of calumniation; against
such men must be armed. Thirdly, it behooves the Ministers of Christ, not
only to lay down their Doctrine soundly and plainly; but wisely to foresee
what accusations may be brought in against it, and how to remove them; for as
they may assure themselves that Satan will sifte all the corners of his wit, to
devise slanders against the truth; so it behooves them to be prudent, to
forecast and prevent it.


Tim. What are we to learn out of the first part of Paul's answer, denying
the slander?


Silas. That no man (especially a Minister) must suffer a slander, especially
in the matter of Doctrine, falsely to be fastened upon him, because the
discredit of a Teacher in matter of Doctrine, is the endaungering of the
souls of the hearer. For, who will give credit unto us, if it should be blown
abroad and believed, that we had taught poysonfull and unsound things?


Tim. What is the use of this point?


Silas. First, it reproves such as put them up, and pass by such slanders
lightly, as the betrayers of the salvation of their flock. Secondly, it
reproves those that put them out, and be Authors of them, as being the
procurers (as much as lies in them of other men's destruction. Thirdly, it
admonishes all to beware how they father any false Doctrine upon the Ministers
of Christ, seeing the hurt reaches to them and others.


Tim What is the second part of Paul's answer?


Sil. That sin wrought deatl in him thorough that which is good (to wit the
law,) the meaning whereof is twofold. First, that his sin the more the law
forbid it, the more it did rise up against the law, and so wrapped himself more
deeply in death and damnation; as an vntained Horse, the more he is curbed,
the more he rages. Secondly, the law showed him his sin and made him feel it,
and that by the desert of it, he was under Gods wrath adjudged to hell fire;
upon the apprehension and taste whereof, his heart was smitten with deadly
heaviness. It fares with him, as with a man condemned to dye, and respited two
or three days, he feels death every hour though he be alive: So Paul being
under eternal death through sin, and made by the law to see and feel so much,
he was by this means as a flaine and dead man; as one that has the axe over
his neck, and every moment looks for the mortal blow.


Tim. At what time was it, that sin through the law had wrought this death
in him, seeing it is plain by Scripture, that while he was a Pharisy, he was
far from thinking himself in any such woeful and deadly estate: because it
is witnessed of him, that he lived unblameably. Phil. 3. 6. keeping a good
conscience, Acts 23, 1. profitting in the religion of the Jews above his
fellows. Gal. 1, 14. In so much that he rather took him self to be just by the
keeping of the law, the^ feared death by the breaking of it: therefore show me
at what time it was, that the law wrought in him this feeling of death, by
reason of his transgressions aginst it?


Sylas. This happened unto him (upon all presumptions) even a little before his
conversion, after that Christ had met him in the way as he went to Damascus,
and had begun to humble him by terrible actions, words, and sights, committing
Acts 9. 2, 3, 4.
him over for further direction unto Ananias. By whose ministry he was brought
and made to see two things (amongst many others.) First, that the good works
which he did before his conversion, they did not proceed from faith and
charity, and therefore in the sight of God, they were no better then sins.
Secondly, he was instructed to know the meaning of that commandment, which
forbids lust; to wit, that all sudden motions and desires of the mind,
deserve damnation in strictness of justice: now being made to perceive this,
that his best righteousness was but iniquity with God, and that his heart had
been full of evil affections and motions in the sight of God; howsoever his
life had been without blame in the sight of men: these things (I say) being
believed and eainestly thought of, with application to himself, of the
threatenings of the law, against his inward and secret corruptions and
hypocrisy, brought him to see and feel himself to be in the case of a fellon
condemned to dye, even a most miserable and dead man, without the grace of God
in Jesus Christ; this was the beginning of his conversion.


Tim. Tell us now what instructions we are to gather from all this?


Silas. Two, first that it is a man's own sin which produces and begets his
death, the law only shows a man his sin, convict him of it, and makes him
feel himself guilty of death; provoking him by his own fault, to do that
which shall more deserve condemnation. For as an earthly King hearing of some
subjects apt to mutiny and rebellion, gives his commandment to them to
forbear assembling, to wear no weapons upon pain of death; hereby they are
made the more rumultuous, are apprehended, convicted as guilty of the breach of
the Kings edict, and therefore executed, whereof their rebellious mind is the
proper cause, the kings commandment only an accidental cause: so it is with
the law, it is but the accidental cause of our destruction, which properly
comes from our sins. Secondly, we are taught, that whosoever God means to
bring to his Son Christ, to enjoy his righteousness and life, they must
feel their own death denounced by the law against the desert of their sins;
for howsoever there were in Paul's conversion somethings extraordinary, yet this
is ordinary to him with other elect sinners. First, to be killed by the law in
the sense of their sins and damnation, ere they be made alive by the grace of
the Gospel.


Tim. Whereto serves this?


Silas. First, to comfort them which have got a taste of their own destruction,
and are troubled and humbled by it; such are in a good way to Christ, as a
corasiue or potion when it smarts, works a good sign. Secondly, it serves
sharply to reprove such as are forward to draw the promises of life unto
themselves, before the law has slain and wrought a sense of death in them:
it is all one, as if they would have their wound or sore healed without
lanching, their disease or sickness cured without physic.


Tim. We have heard that not the law but sin being irritated by the law,
works death: what would the Apostle have us to learn by that?


Sylas. That it brings to open knowledge the malice of our natural sinnne and
prauity, which consists herein; in that it does abuse perniciously such a
good thing as the law is, to the increasing of sin, and to the woorking of
death. This may be set forth by the comparison of such stubborn diseases, as
are made the worse by such remedies as are applied to heal them: even such a
vile thing sin is, which takes occasion to break out more vehemently by
that means, which was given to restrayn it. And it is in this sense said of
sin, that it is made by the law out of measure sinful: partly, because by
the knowledge of the law, sin which was hid before, does now show it self
to be more grievous; and partly because by the restraynt of the law, it does
rage more vnmeasurably.


Tim. What use is to be made of this truth?


Sil. First, to be humbled considering that we carry such a poysoufull thing
in our own bosom. Secondly to be very watchful over our own heart, taking
diligent heed unto it, least the inbred venoune break out. Thirdly, to (...)
us to pray unto God in hearing the Law, that our vicious nature abuse it or to
the waxing worse thereby. Lastly, tobe thankful (...) Christ, by whose
sovereign grace this malady is begun to be cured in us, and shall be
perfectly healed at the time of our dissolution by death. Hitherto we have
seen three excellent uses of the Law: first, discovery of sin; secondly life
and blessedness if it be obeyed, also death if it be disobeyed; thirdly
irritation and increasing of sin and of destruction: this happens
accidentally, and is not of the Law it self, as the two former.


DIAL. X.
Verse 14. For we know the Law is Spiritual.


Tim. What does this Text contain, or whereunto tends it?


Sylas. A reason for to prove why it is not to be reckned as a fault in the
law, if upon the knowledge thereof, there The Law would free us from death.
Thence called a quickening Spirit.
follows death; because the law is spiritual, but the Spirit is properly the
cause of life; and therefore it cannot be properly the cause of death for one
and the same efficient cause, cannot by it self produce two contrary effects,
unless it be in respect of a subject diversely affected, as the Sun hardens
clay and softeneth wax.


Tim. In what meaning is the Law called spiritual?


Silas. First, because it is not given by men, but God himself by his Spirit
was the inditer of it. Secondly, In respect of Author.
because it reaches not to the outward man only, but Of manner.
to the most inward motions of our mind and will, requiring Of obedience
obedience from our very spirits and thoughts, yea requiring a spirutually even
a perfect and Angelical obedience in soul and body. Thirdly, because this
inward Of the end to teach us the worship of God, who is a pure Spirit.
obedience of the Law, must come from that Spirit which is the author of the
Law in these respects it is called spiritual. But this property of
(Spiritual) cannot be affirmed of the whole law. For the ceremonial law stood
in bodily rites. The judicial law did respect outward acts. Therefore it is
meant only of the moral law Lex ordinat hominem ad spiritualem obedientiam.
the ten Commandments, of which it may be affirmed that every Commandment of
it is spiritual, striking at the root, and piercing even the very soul and
spirit of a man: such is the nature of the world, answerable to the nature of
God, who searches hearts and thoughts, Heb. 4, 12, 13.


Tim. What benefit are we to make to our selves from hence, that Gods Law is
spiritual?


Silas. First, here we learn a difference between the civil laws of men,
and the laws of God; the former take no knowledge of thoughts, except they be
uttered in words and acts, the latter does. Secondly, one may keep all the
laws of men, and yet be a very vicious and wicked person, whereas Gods law
teaches to follow all virtue, and to shun all vice. Thirdly, it is not
enough to conform a man's self to Gods own law, namely, in outward actions
only, without internal obedience. Fourthly, it reprooues such as thought the
Law of Moses to require no more then external duties: as the Pharisees
expounded the Law. See Math. 5. Fifthly, it proves to us, that the Law is
impossible to be kept of us, who cannot in this flesh attain such exact
purity; Indeed we should be spiritual and free from death, it we would do
the Law.
and so reprooues the Papists, who teach that we may merit by works, and do
more then the Law commands, cue^ works supererogatory. Sixthly, it helps to
understand the true meaning of the Law, that in the forbidding or commanding of
outward works evil or good, God forbids and commands the very first thoughts
and desires of those works. Seauenthly, it does admonish all men as they would
please God, to have more care about the ordering of the inward motions, then of
the outward actions. Lastly, it must warn us with earnest prayer to crave
help of God, to strengthen us by his Spirit to give obedience to the Law, in
some measure of truth and sincerity.


Tim. What learn we by this, that the Apostle says we know that the Law is
spiritual?


Silas. It teaches us that this doctrine was not uncertain and doubtful, but
well and publicly understood and known in the Church only. Secondly, it
reprooueth such as live in ignorance of the nature of the Law, which is a
dangerous thing; for it causes men to rest content with outward ciuility, and
honesty of manners, with neglect of the inward reformation of the heart; Law is
a rule of spiritual holiness.
which is the maine duty of a Christian: as appears in the example of
Pharisees, Mat. 23, throughout. Whereas Christians must exceed the
righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees, Math, 5, 20. and imitate Zachary and
Elizabeth, Luke, 1, 6.


DIAL. XI.
Verse 14. But I am carnal, sold under sin.


Tim. What is the drift and purpose of this Scripture?


Silas. In these words the Apostle does confess and A transition to the third
part of the Chapter.
bewail his remaining natural corruption, and so makes an entrance into the
description of the fight and combat between the flesh and the Spirire, which
he very notably sets forth in his own person, unto the end of the
Chapter. For having opened the estate of all men, Jew and Gentile, under the
guiding of sin without Christ, Chapter. 1, 2. and secondly their estate
under the grace of redemption by Christ, being justified by faith they have
peace with God, Chapter 3, 4, 5. and thirdly, their estate by grace of
sanctification or regeneration, opened in Chap. 6. the justified by faith are
freed from the dominion of sin, as well as from the guilt thereof: Now in Paul
now speaks no more in time past, I have, but I am.
the end of this 7. Chapter, what weakness and disficulties are in this estate
of sanctification, how tough and dangerous a conflict with sin, regenerate
men have, is most huely set forth in Paul's own example, being a regenerate
person; hereupon he now speaks of himself in the present time.


Tim. But does Paul speak thus of himself as he was aregenerate man?


Sil. Vocibus Apostoli sunt gemitus sanctorum, pugnantium contra carnales
concupiscentias. August.
He does so: he does now speak of himself as he was an Apostle and regenerate,
not as he was a Pharisie and unregenerate. Because he does not speak of himself
in the time past, as he did before in this Chapter, verses 8, 9, 10, 11. but
now he speaks in time present, saying, I am carnal sold under sin.


Tim. But Paul as he was an Apostle was holy, being sanctified by the Spirit,
and therefore spiritual, not carnal. Paul was partly spiritual, partly
carnal, even after new birth.



Sil. It is true, being converted and made an Apostle, he was spiritual and
holy, yet not simply and absolutely so; but in part only and imperfectly,
having still some sinful corruption sticking in him, which did fight against
the divine Law, as he afterward speaks of himself, verse 17, 18. and 22,
23. where he distinguishes between the flesh or sin, and himself as he
was renewed.


Tim. What then is the sum of this Scripture?


Silas. Thus much: Paul confesses that being a regenerate Agnascit et dcplozat
potentes peccati inse habitantis reliquias. Paraeus.
man, yet there did still abide in his nature corruption of sin, which
violently resisted the Law, so as he could not attain that perfect integrity
and vprightnes, or spirituallity, as I may so speak, taught in the law, but
was forced against his own will often to do against the Law, and to obey the
lusts of sin. The conceit of Origin is strange and false, as if Paul in the
person of a natural man did only express the battle of reason and appetite.


Tim. What are we to learn out of this free and frank confession that Paul
makes of his own vicious naughtines?


Sil. First, that it is a good fruit and sure note of a regenerate person,
unfeignedly and ingeniously to confess their sinful infirmities, wherein
there is a great difference between the child of God, and those that be but
hypocrites: for an hypocrite does commonly deny, defend, or extenuate his
sin, or confesses it more out of the fear of punishment, then for the
grief of the offense, or out of hope of pardon: but the Children of God do
the quite contrary, for they freely accuse themselves out of a loathing of
their sins, with trust of the forgiveness of it by Christ.


Tim. What reason moves them thus to do?


Silas. First, because it is the high and ready way to pardon, the promise
whereof is made only to a faithful and sound confession, 1 John 1, 9.
Secondly, because this kind of confession is both grateful to God, in that it
is commanded of him, and does render unto him his due praise. Thirdly, it is
a true testimony and mark, that our repentance is not counterfeit, and
hypocritical, but hearty As Solomon and before him his Father David did. Psalm.
(...).
and sincere, because we are contented to ashame and abase our selves, that
we may give God the glory, and the Church a good example. Lastly, because it
brings true peace unto the conscience of a sinner: These reasons and grounds
are sufficient to move the childeren of God, even openly and publicly to
accuse themselves when need requires; as appears in the example of this our
Apostle, who to the end he might yield due praise to God and to his law, and
give unto the faithful an example of true humiliation, does in this place
publikly accuse himself of sinful corruption, and of bondage to sin in part:
for as he does here accuse himself generally of sin, so he does elsewhere
charge himself with sundry special foul vices by name, see 1 Timothy 1, 13. The
like did David and Solomon, and Peter, and innumerable others, whereof mention
is made in Sacred story.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this point?


Sylas. First, it ministers great comfort to such as having and feeling their
sin, are ready in uprightness to accuse and condemn themselves before God
and men, as need requires; for it declares them to be the newborn children
of God, because none save they can do this. Secondly, it instructs all
Christians as they tender Gods glory, or their own Salvation, frankely to
confess those their sins with their mouths, of which they have a sense in
their hearts, and a check in their conscience. Thirdly, it affords sharp
reproof unto such as deny their sins, or confess them constrainedly, for this
argues that they are yet in the power of sin, servants to their lusts, void
of the Spirit of grace, wherewith the Children of God are led; and utterly
careless both of Gods glory and their own good and other men's, whom by the
example of their humility they might edify.


Tim. What other things do we learn from this confession?


Silas. That in all true repentance, original and birthsinne, is ever to be
bewailed, selt, and confessed. Psalm. 51 4. 5. The reason is, because the flesh
or birth-sin, being the root of all other sins, he cannot be thought to
repent of any sin, that does not repent and loathe this.


Tim. What is the use of this point?


Silas. It warns us in all our repentance, to look back to the fountain, to
wit, corruption of nature. Secondly, it ptoues their repentance to be feigned,
who never complain of this, with a truly humbled heart, either they be
ignorant or careless of this soul spotte, and so unrepentant.


Tim. Having spoken generally of the whole verse, tell us now what be the parts
of this confession?


Silas. Two; first, he confesses himself to be carnal. Secondly, that he
is the servant and bondsman of sin, (sold under sin.)


Tim. In what respects does the Apostle call him self carnal? Paulus de se
loquitur in proescnti absque fictione, vcl prosopopoeia: scd ingenue ex sensu
infirmitatis suoe.



Silas. In two respects; first, because he was so by nature, being borne of
flesh, infected with original sin and corruption, even from his birth.
Secondly, in respect of carna, infirmities, which did still cleave unto him,
even after his ewe birth, as ignorance, unbelief, doubting, pride, vain glory
and hypocrisy, and lusts of all sorts, which trobled continually the Apostle,
even in this his estate of regeneration.


Tim. But how may it be that a man should be at once, both regenerate and
carnal?


Sil. Men in Scripture are called carnal in a double sense. First, the
children of this world, mere natural men, are called carnal absolutely
because they are in the flesh, and walk after the flesh, sauouring the things
of the flesh, being wholly carnal and sinful in all their ways, serning
diverse lusts and pleasures. Secondly, the children of God being renewed by the
Spirit, are called carnal after a sort, either comparatively, because they
have more flesh and corruption then grace, as the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3, 2. or
else partially, or in part, because they are still obnoxious to the infirmities
of the flesh; and have not the Spirit and grace, without evil concupiscence
and lusts, as Paul was, Romans 7, 22.


Tim. In what meaning is it said, that he was sold under sin?


Sylas. That he was captive to sin under the power of it, as a servant or slave
bought with a price, is in the power of him that bought himes for it is a
borrowed speech from such tyrants as buy others with their money, whom they
may use as slaves at their will. Into this bondage we come two ways. First, by
nature being borne such. Secondly, by election and choice, willingly yielding
our selves under this dominion of sin: every mere man is the servant of sin
both these ways, being the children of wrath by nature, and afterward
willingly obeying the lusts of sin.


Tim. But Paul being already freed by grace, how can he be called the bondsman
of sin?


Sylas. There is a double bondage to this tyrant sin, voluntary as in Ahab,
who sold himself to do cull in the sight of the Lord: Such a bondsman was Paul
before his conversion in all things, and readily obeying sin. And vnuoluntary,
when one sometime obeyes the will of this tyrant sin, but it is unwillingly.
Such a bondsman was Paul, in the estate of regeneration; also all other Saints;
for as a bondsman is often compelled of his master to that he would not so
Paul by sin was drawn to many things he allowed not, as himself expounds it
in the words sollowing.


Tim. Now show us for what purposes God does still keep his children in
bondage, seeing he could at once have given the (...) perfect liberty?


Sil. First, for abating their pride. Secondly, for stirring us up to fervent
prayer. Thirdly, for keeping us from sloathsulnesse, having such an enemy
within us. Fourthly, for manifesting Gods power in upholding us. Lastly, for
exercising mutual charity and compassion in bearing, and forgiving and
pitying, comforting and strengthening one another.


Tim. Now show us what profit we are to make by the consideration of these
things?


Sylas. First, all Gods children must take knowledge of their estate, that
though they are regenerate, yet they are still carnal, sold under sin, both in
regard of original sin, and actual infirmities. Secondly, let them
continually make faithful prayers unto God for the aid of his grace, for to
master the flesh. Thirdly, it behooves them to be watchful, not only having
such an enemy as sin in their own bosom, but through sin the devil ready to
mingle himself with all their thoughts. Fourthly, let every man suspect every
thing that comes of himself, least it smell and relish of the flesh; not
easily approving ought that is pleasing unto him without serious and narrow
examination. Fifthly, whenever we are afflicted, let us know that there may be
just cause given by us, though we cannot see it; and therefore forbear to
complain of God. Sixthly, seeing regenerate men are so bound to sin, that
they cannot use that liberty of will which they have by grace, how much less
is there any power of free will in men unregenerate? Lastly, let the
remembrance of our woeful captivity, cause us to strlue and sigh after perfect
liberty: and in the mean space to walk watchfully and humbly, both before God
and men, and in our own eyes: for we are like to captives which after hard
bondage have some liberty, yet in sign of captivity, carry an iron chain or a
fetter to clog them: so are Gods best children freed, as they bear still the
clog and chain of corruption for their better humbling and continual exercise.


DIAL. III.
Verse 15. For I allow not that which I do; for what I would that I do not, but
what I hate that I do.


Tim. What (...) the purpose and drift of this Text?


Silas. The Apostle Paul intends in his own Sighs and complaints of trobled
sinners, can hardly be brought in order: yet Paul is not without Method.
person to describe and set forth the spiritual combat and strife which is
in every regenerate man between corruption and grace; the which he sets
forth by rehearsing three sharp assaults (like three strong fits of an Ague)
which his flesh and corruption did make against his mind, being renewed by the
Spirit. The first assault, is, that he found in himself two contrary grounds
of his actions, to wit; Original sin, still abiding in his nature, and his
regenerate will wrestling like the two twins in Rebeccaes womb; the one made
him hate God, and do that which is evil; the other, caused him to hate evil,
and to will that which is good, unto verse 18. The second assault was, that,
when his purpose and will was good, it had no good effect but a quite repugnant
and contrary effect, verse 19, 20. The third is, that he felt two contrary
Laws enforcing him; the one, unto holiness and life, the other, unto sin
and death, Verse 21, 22, 23.


Tim. Tell us now what is the Sum of this present Text?


Silas. Thus much: that though his heart being renewed, did abhor all evil,
and approve good things only, yet through sin dwelling in him, he was
violently drawn to those evil things which he abhorred, and from those good
things which he allowed, which proves his former complaint to be true; for he
did things quite contrary to his judgment and will, through the force of
flesh remaining, haling and carrying awry.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First, he generally propounds the strife between his will,
being good by grace, and his nature remaining corrupt, in the 15. verse.
Secondly, he does more particularly and distinctly, lay down both the parts
and members of this strife, in verses 16, 17.


Tim. Now come to expound the words, and tell us what is here meant by
allowing, [I allow not.]


Silas. The word in the Original Text is [ I know not,] Id est (...) Aug.
which signifies not only thus much, I allow not, or approve not, but I
hate, abhor; and condemn, as it is expounded in this verse [ But what I
hate.]


Tim. What does he understand by [That which I do?]


Silas. Not a wicked life, or any sin willingly committed and done wilfully
against Conscience; for Paul being converted, neither did nor could do so: but
he means first sinful thoughts and motions sweruing from the Law of God, or
defect in his love toward God and men. Secondly, sinful affections, as anger,
envy, pride, Psalm 10, 12. 130, 3.
and such like. Lastly, some things done in outward actions, repugnant to Gods
will and his own.


Tim. But under these words [That which I do,] may we not comprehend crimes
and notorious sins?


Silas. We may: if so be we will take Paul generally to speak of all
regenerate men, whereof many through frailty take gresse falls even after their
calling, as it is to be seen in the example of David, Peter, and other of the
Saines: but we cannot so expound it, if it be limited to Phil. 3, 17.
Paul, who lived vnblaincably when he was a Pharisic; therefore much more
vnrebukcable now, being an Apostle, Acts 24, 16. He is set forth as an example
unto the Saints, of an holy unreprovable life.


Tim. What Instructions do ye gather from the words thus expounded?


Silas. First the Children of God in their regeneration do not receive fullness
of grace to do well. For then they should do nothing which they allow not, but
their will and their deed should accord, both should be perfectly good. Whereas
in Paul, his decde and will disagreeed both in doing evil, and leaving good
undone.


Tim. What use is to be made of this instruction?


Sil. First, it does reprove such as do hold, that the regenerate in this life
cannot sin, as Familists. Secondly, it admonishes al men to find out and
acknowledge their imperfections with grief, and to strive toward perfection.
Lastly, it does serve to comfort such, as do labor under sinful infirmities
and defects. For this was the Apostles case. How much less maruail, if it
prove so with others inferior to him.


Tim. What other instruction arises out of these words?


Silas. That it is a good sign of a regenerate man, when not only conscience
checketh, and judgment disliketh, but his heart dissalloweth and is displeased
with the evil he does; because this bewraieth, that they are not wholly under
the power of original sin, but have another beginning and ground of their
actions, even grace and the holy Spirit of God, from whence comes that hatred
of evil, and desire of good.


Tim. What use are we to make of this second instruction?


Silas. First, it proves them to be mere natural and unregenerate men, who do
allow and be pleased with their sins that be in themselves and in others.
Secondly, it admonishes the godly of their duty, which is not to allow, but
with hatred to condemn every sinful thing in themselves, even to the least
motion and lust, not at any hand after it is known bearing with it, but
stirring up the heart to detest and lament it with godly sorrow, in regard it
is an offense to God.


Tim. What is the third Instruction?


Silas. That the elect of God being regenerate, they are never so given over,
as to sin with their whole will, because this is true of them all, that they
allow not the evil which they do: so that in all their evils and sins,
there is some striving in their will against them though it be but faintly and
in great feebleness, as it happens in great tentation.


Tim. Show us now by what reason the Apostle proves this proposition, that he
allowed not what he did?


Silas. By this reason, because both in the leaving undone good, and in the
doing of evil, he offended not willingly, but with a detestation and
loathing. For the evil which he did was hateful to him, and his will was to
do the good he could not do; not that Paul was compelled unto evil, but
that he consented not to it with his whole will; his heart being now changed
and made confermable to the law in part.


Tim. What instruction is to be gathered from hence?


Silas. First, we learn that the godly cannot do all the good they would,
because sin hinders them; and secondly, that they cannot do all the evil
as their lusts would, because they have grace to hate and resist evil. For
the Spirit lusts against the flesh. as the flesh does lust against the
Spirit. Gal. 5. 17. Observe further out of this whole verse, that it is far
from the godly to excuse, extenuate, and cloak their sin; they abhor it
and that out of a reverence toward the law, unto which their sin is contrary:
again, in holy persons there be beginnings of their doings, one whereby they
will good, and will not evil, called the innerman, law of the mind, Spirit,
etc. the other whereby they are drawn from good unto evil.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 16. If I do then that which I would not, I consent to the Law that it
is good.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. Two inferences and conclusions which If I do what I would not, then I
consent to the Law that it is good, but the former is nue, therefore the latter.
do arise from the former strife between original sin and Paul's renewed
mind. The first is out of the 16. verse, the sum and effect whereof is this,
that there was a good agreement and consent between the heart of Paul being
renewed, and Gods law; seeing he abhorred the cuill which was done by him, being
contrary to the Law. The second conclusion is contained in the 17. verse, the
effect and sum whereof is this, If I abhor the sin which I do, then I
being renewed do it not, but that sinful corruption that dwells and sticks in
my nature, does it.


Tim. What is meant by that which Paul did do, and would not have done?


Silas. Some evil thing forbid in the law of God, which though he hated, yet
corruption wrested it from him, whereof he infers that so far forth as he
was regenerate, he did approve Gods law to be good and holy. For whosoever
hates an evil in this respect that the law forbids it, and loves a good thing
in this respect that the law commands it, he must needs have some thing in him
that does allow the law, and consent to it to be good, howsoever he do the
evil he hates, and cannot do the good he would,


Tim. What instruction will arise from hence?


Silas. That it is a true and certain mark of a man grafted into Christ, and
regenerate by his Spirit, to consent unto the Law; when his sins can
displease him because they are against the law, and good duties are loved and
therefore performed, because Gods law requires them: the reason is because none
can consent to the law of God and allow of it, save such as are borne anew of
God, whose law it is.


Tim. How is it written then that the Gentiles do by nature the things
contained in the Law, Romans 2, 14?


Silas. That place is to be understood of precepts and rules given forth for
policy, and government of Cities. For which purposes the very Heathen forbid
vices and command honest things pertaining to civil life: and not of their
daily conversation, wherein they were great sinners, either openly, or
secretly, as Paul accusech them before, Chapters, 1, 2. Besides in their common
life they did some good things, and eschued some evil, out of vainglory to
get praise of men.


Tim. But Esau and Caine were displeased with the evils they did against the
Law, and yet were no regenerate men.


Sil. It is true, they were displeased for their sins, not for that they
allowed Gods law, which condemned their sins; but because they begun to
feel the discommodities and calamities of their sins, and did fear further
destruction. Secondly, they were so displeased with the evils they did against
the law, that they had no care to do the good commanded in the law, as
regenerate men have; and that out of conscience and obedience of the law, and
in one thing as well as in another.


Tim. But Herod was not only displeased, but he did good things. Mark 6, 20.


Silas. Herod was indeed displeased with his sins, because Mark 20, 6.
he feared the punishment, and not because the law forbad it; for then he
would have put away Herodias his brothers wife, and have repented of that main
and gross sin. Secondly, though he did good things, yet not thoroughly: for
when the text says, (he did many things) it implies that he neglected other
things which were as needful to be done as those which he did: whereas the
regenerate that consents to the law, does hate, and repent of one sin as well
as another, and allow one duty as well another, though they perfectly never
leave any sin nor do any duty.


Tim. Yet it is reported of this Paul, that when he was a Pharisy and
unregenerate, he was conversant in all the righteousness of the law without
rebuke?


Silas. All this is true, and yet did not he then consent to the law of God
that it was good. First, because his conversation was unrebukable outwardly
and before men alone, his lusts and inward motions being vicious and sinful
before God. Secondly, the fear of men or the fear of punishment from God, or
both (and not the love of the law) might and did move him to be outwardly
righteous. Lastly, he was not stirred up to the works which he did by faith
and charity, either toward GOD or man. All things are quite contrary in the
regenerate, who content to the law of God both outwardly and inwardly, and have
a pure heart cleansed by faith, the ground and foundation of all that good they
do.


Tim. Yea, but even regenerate men they do many evil things, quite contrary to
the law, and do leave undone sundry good things enjoined in the law, and in
those things which they do best, they come short to the perfection of the
law: how do they then consent to the law?


Sil. Yes, all this may be and stand very well together, if men consider his
conclusion set down in the next verse; which is, that Paul as he was renewed,
so far his mind, his will, his affections, did all allow the whole law; and
the evils which he did, he was violently drawn unto them by original sin,
which still remained in him.


Tim. Show us then when it may be said of a man, that he consents to the law?


Sylas. When he is so affected to the law, as David and Paul were, not for
degree, but for sincerity of affection: see Psalm. 1, 2. and 119, 14, 15, 16,
18, 30, 31. Romans 7, 22, 23.


Tim. Now declare unto us what profit we are to make of this doctrine?


Silas. First, we have from hence a notable difference between the godly and
the ungodly, the sincere Christian and the hypocrite: for the ungodly man and
the hypocrite, when he does any good or eschew any evil, it is not from the
heart, because the law commands it; for he ever has respect unto gain, or
credit, or pleasure, or pain, and not to the will of God: but the godly though
he sin, yet from his heart he loves the law, having that in him which
resists and hates sin. Secondly, from hence we have a special comfort unto
al such as consent to the law of God, whose inward man delights in it, and
whose mind serves it: such surely are regenerate, though they have many
fearful imperfections and sins: yet if they in truth allow the law,
condemning those sins they do, and allowing those things they do not,
because the law wills them, (repe^ting from their hearts so often as they
violate the law through weakness) this is a certain mark of a new born child of
God. (...). It shows how fearful their case is which are ignorant of Gods
law, either because they cannot, or because they care not to know it. These do
not consent to the Law which they do not know; and therefore are as yet in the
estate of damnation. Therefore, it is a needful thing together with the
preaching of the Gospel, to have the Law soundly interpreted and applied. For,
as men cannot consent to the Gospel without the preaching of the Gospel,
which is the power of God to write it in our heart; so we cannot so much as
know the Law without the preaching of the Law. Finally, here is a sure truth,
that whosoever wills not the evil which he does, but disalloweth it, out of a
reverent love unto the Law, whereunto he sees the evil which he does
repugnant, he certainly approoueth the Law to be good, and a rule of
rightnesse.


DIAL. XIII.
Verse 17. Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. A second conclusion, inferred and gathered from the first combat
between grace and corruption in the heart of Paul, or between a good will and
a bad deed: the conclusion is thus much. If I Paul do what I hate, and what I
would not do, then I do it not (as I am renewed) but sin dwelling in my
Nature does it, by drawing me from good to evil; whence it is too manifest,
that the force of sin is yet great in me, and that I truly complained in
verse 14.


Tim. What Instructions are we to learn from this Conclusion?


Silas. That every regenerate man is divided into two men, or into two parts,
that is, himself and sin, the new man and the old, grace and corruption, flesh
and the spirit, the law of the mind, and the law of the members. The reason
hereof is, because in this life theit regeneration is imperfect. Secondly,
that a regenerate person takes his denomination from the better part, that is,
from grace which reigns in him, not from sin which does but dwell in him.
Thirdly, that part which is regenerate and renewed in a man never sins, but
it is that part which is corrupt and vnrenued that sins, and does evil.
Fourthly, it affoords a plain and evident mark to discern a man that is
regenerate, from him that is not regenerate.


Tim. Before you do particularly name the marks of a regenerate man set down
in this verse, tell us how many marks are contained in this Chapter, whereby
we may judge of a regenerate man?


Silas. There be seven several marks of the regenerate Children of God, set
down in the latter part of this Chapter; that is, from the 14. verse to the
end of it. The first is, to will that which is good, and to hate sin, verse
15. The second, to consent to the law that it is good, and to delight in the
sound knowledge and spiritual obedience thereof, verse 16, and 22. Thirdly, to
have an inward man, that is, such a man as is in secret and in the Spirit,
verse 22. Fourthly, to feel a strife and fight between the law of the
members, and the law of the mind, verse (...). when the Spirit does lust
against the flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit. Fifthly, to account it
our wretchedness, to have sin still abiding and forcibly working in us, and
in this respect to groan and to mourn in our souls, verse 24. Sixthly, to
desire unfeignedly and constantly a perfect deliverance from sin, giving thanks
from the heart to God through Christ, for the grace of deliverance already
begun and wrought, verses 24, 25. Lastly to be led captive unto the Law of
sin, verse 23. which is all one with this named in our Text, to have sin
not reigning but dwelling in them. For there is as great difference between
sin reigning and dwelling, as is between a king ruling a kingdom, and
Subjects dwelling in a kingdom; or between a Master in a family governing
the house, and servants in the house.


Tim. What is meant and signified here by this word dwell?


Silas. It is a Metaphor, or borrowed speech from the power and government of
house-holders, signifying the true and mighty presence of sin, forcibly
crossing and mightily striving against the motions of the (...) in the heart of
a regenerate man. This powerful presence of sin dwelling in us, may be
declared and set forth by the comparison of seditious subjects, mutinous
Citizens and servants, and of quarrelsome Inmates; who though they do but dwell
in a kingdom, City or house, yet do prove exceeding troublesome to their
Princes, Governors, Owners, or Masters: Likewise dwellingsinne does mightily
hinder good in Gods Children, and pull them to evil things.


Tim. What use and profit is to be made hereof unto our selves?


Sil. First, it is a comfort to Gods Children that sin does but dwell in
them, and is kept by grace from exercising any dominion over them. Secondly, in
that they have sin still dwelling in them, it must warn the^ to be very
wary, watchful, and circumspect, as one should be that has a cut-throate
dwelling in his house, or a secret traitor in his City. Thirdly, this
reprooues such as knowing that there is such a cumbersome mate or guest as
sin dwelling in them, are yet secure: but much more it reproues such as are
secure, and yet have sin reigning in them, as if it were nothing to be
enthralled to such a Lord, as can pay no better wages but damnation in Hell.


Tim. What other thing may we observe out of this verse?


Silas. That they do wickedly abuse this sentence, which apply it to excuse
and cloak their wicked and vicious life, as common Drunkards, whore-maisters,
swearers, liars, perjured persons and such like; who use to say for themselves,
that they do not the evil, but sin that dwells in them. And there is very
good reason for it, why this sentence cannot agree to such manner of men;
namely, because they are not able in truth to say, that they hate the evil
which they do, and that they would not do it; because they sin willingly,
rushing into sin as a Horse into the battle. For when they sin they sin
wholly because they are wholly flesh and corruption: whereas this sentence
cannot agree unto any but to such as by grace hate the evil they do of
frailty, and by grace would do the good which by sin they cannot do


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 18. For in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing, for to will
is present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is good.


Tim. WHat is the sum of this Text?


Silas. It contains the second paroxisme or fit of Paul's spiritual conflict,
which does herein consist, that when his will was prompt and ready to do
good, it had no good effect, but a quite contrary, being forced by
dwelling-sinne, to do the evil he willed not, and not to do the good which
he willed.


Tim. Wherein differs this fit and part of his conflict from the former?


Sil. In the former fit Paul was troubled that his sinful infirmities hindered
him from doing good, and forbcaring evil things, so perfectly as he would and
should now here in this second fit he is molested with this, that he found his
upright purpose and heart so weak, and sinful corruption so strong, as it did
sometimes draw him unto things and actions directly contrary unto his renewed
mind, and to Gods holy will: the goodness of his will, was not answered with
suitable deeds, but the quite contrary rather.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First, a proposition in these words, [ I know that in me (that is)
in my flesh, dwells no good thing.] Secondly, a reason in these words, [ for
to will is present with me, etc.


Tim. What is meant by this that he says, [I know?]


Sil. Thus much: as if he should frankely say, I freely and frankely
acknowledge it as a thing known certain unto me to be so. Thus the holy
Apostle hides not, but ingenuously confesses his weakness and disability to
effect what he willed well.


Tim. What are we to learn from this?


Silas. In this example of the Apostle, we are to note a Christian duty, that
we must not dissemble the weakness of unregenerate nature, but be ready to
confess it ingenuously, and to acknowledge it when it shall make to Gods
glory, and the good of others. Secondly, this reproues such Hypocrites who will
not be known that they have any conflict in them, or find any defect, as if
they did only that which is good, without all strife.


Tim. What good is that he speaks of, when he says, it is not in h mselfe?


Silas. Not natural nor moral, but spiritual good; by the doing where of God
is well pleased. The earnest desire and study hereof, he complains, that he
always has it not in him.


Tim. But the Apostle had the holy Ghost dwelling in him, how then does he say,
he had no good dwelling in him?


Sil. When he says, that there is no good dwelling in him, he expounds
himself and says, that he means Non loquitur de carne Physice, sed I (...)
ogice. (...).
it of his flesh. For by this word flesh, is not meant that external part of
man which is called the body: but the sinful corruption of our Nature, which
is conveyed into us by carnal generation.


Tim. But this was mortified and cured in Paul by the grace of Sanctificat on,
how then could he say, [That he has flesh?]


Silas. His sinful corruption was indeed mortified, but yet in part only:
and therefore by flesh, is here meant that remainder of sin, which does
still stick in his reason and will, and other parts of his soul and body,
which may be thus more plainly expressed. The Apostle means by his flesh the
whole man, so far as he was not regenerate, and had not perfectly and
universally put off the old man and naughtiness of nature.


Tim. Show us now what is meant by awelling?


Silas. A firm or fixed seat or abode; which is more (not to dwell) then not
to be in him.


Tim. What is the meaning of this whole sentence, That there was no good dwelt
in (...) flesh?


Silas. Thus much: that by reason of sin that was resident in his nature, his
purpose and care of spiritual good was not so firm and constant, but that it
was tumbled and ouerturned sundry times, by the contrary blasts of evil lusts
and concupiscence.


Tim. The Words being thus expounded, tell us now what we are to learn out
of them?


Silas. First, that Paul did divide himself into two parts; whereof the one is
here called the flesh, and the other the inward man, verse 22. Secondly, that
a regenerate party as he has two parts, so he knows them, and can discern
them; as Paul here complains of his flesh; but afterward gives thanks for
his inner man. Thirdly, godly persons are corrupted and depraved not in
senses or sensual parts and affection only, but in their will and mind.
Fourthly, if it be thus with believers, much more is it with them that believe
not that there is no good in their flesh. Fifthly, they are deceived, which
think, that though men believe not, yet their mind remains perfect in
nature, able enough in all things to direct them to that which is right.
Sixthly, they also are deceived, which think, that before regeneration a man
may do good works, which may please God, and to merit of congruity. Lastly,
they are deceived, which say; that if men do what lies in them, then God will
grant them his grace: for let men unregenerate do what they can, yet they do
naught but what is evil. For their flesh and corrupt nature, is the ground of
all that they do, and therefore they must needs sin. For the flesh is
aduersaric to all good, and parent to beget all evil.


Tim. What other instructions are to be gathered from this part of the Text?


Silas. That no regenerate person can perfectly keep the Law, because they
have flesh in them. Secondly, that evil motions be sin, for they are called
flesh. Thirdly, that the best things which best men do, need forgiveness,
being stained with flesh.


Tim. Now come to the second part of this Text, and tell us what is the sum
of it?


Sil. This second part contains a reason of the proposition in the former
Verse, that howsoever he could 3. Part.
will that which was good, yet his sinful nature so plucked him away, and
hindered him; that not only he fulfilled not the good which he would, but the
evil which he abhorred, and therefore there was no good in his flesh.


Tim. What is here meant by [To will is present with me?]


Sil. By will is meant, not absolutely to will, or to will evil, but he means
the willing of that which is good, as was expressed before: and by (present) he
means that it is ready at hand, on every side pricking him forwards to God,
as corruption is ready to incite him to evil: and [by me] he means me Paul
as I am renewed, or touching my inward man.


Tim. What is the instruction to be taken from these words thus expounded?


Silas. Seeing Paul affirms of himself being regenerate, that his will was
earnestly bent to God, it follows that a ready purpose and inclination of the
heart in all things to please God, does agree only unto that man, whom God by
his grace has made a new man. Examples hereof we have in David, Psalm 119.
in Barnabas, Acts 11, 23. In Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh.
24, 15. For as it is a mark of a wicked man willingly to purpose to live in
any known sinue; so, when as there is a will prepared in every thing to please
God, this is a note of a new man.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. First, it admonishes the godly to strive for this readiness of will
after doing good things. Secondly, it comfort such as find this in
themselves, being a testimony to them of their regeneration. Thirdly, it is a
witness against such as lack it and have the contrary: let such betimes
bestirre themselves to get their hearts changed.


Tim. What is the meaning of that which follows (he found no means to
perform that which is good?)


Silas. Thus much, that when he had a desire and will to do Voluntas bonum
eligit, care bonum eligit intercipit. Paraeus.
good things agreeable to Gods law, he did lack ability in his deeds to
perform what his will purposed to do; as prisoners that are escaped, would go
twenty miles a day, yet cannot go one; sick men that do recover, would walk
up and down, but are too weak yet to do it; poor men which would do more
good then they are able: so the regenerate they purpose and would do a great
many things, which they lack strength to effect and do.


Tim. This should show that Paul was no regenerate person, for of such the
Apostle says, that they have from God both the will and the deed?


Sil. In that the Apostle would do that which was good, he had this of God,
which proves him a regenerate man: for when the Apostle says, the deed and
performance is from God as well as the will: he means not that it is so
always, and in every particular act of a renewed man, but often times it is,
and for the most part as it pleases God to give assistance: therefore it is
said there, according to his good pleasure; now Paul for most part, could as
well do good as will good.


Tim. What instruction arises from hence?


Silas. That it is not possible for any godly person whatsoever, to do any
good so perfectly, as that there should not be any sin in it: the reason is
first, because the godly being not perfectly renewed, therefore there must needs
be some want and defect in the greatest good they do. Secondly, because wicked
desires be never absent from them wholly, therefore good is never done
perfectly by them: for as godly persons cannot perfectly do evil, because
they have good desires in them, which resist sin and call the to the right way:
so they cannot perfectly perform that which is good, because they want not
evil desires, to corrupt and hinder them.


Tim. Seeing this is so, to what purpose and end is it then that God should
forbid them every lust, and command them with all their heart to love him?


Sylas. Though the godly cannot be perfect, yet these precepts are not
unprofitable to be set forth unto us to be learned; for they serve the godly
first to let them understand that they have need of a remedy and must seek it,
seeing they have sin; as sick men must seek for a medicine. Secondly, they
are by these precepts put in mind whereunto in this mortal life, by profiting
they must endeavor themselves. Lastly, they know by them whereunto they shall
attain in the blessed immortality of the life to come; for unless these
precepts one day should be performed, they should never at al have been
commanded.


Tim. Now show us how we may apply these things unto our benefit and ed
fication?


Tim. First, it ministers occasion of being humbled, even in and for the very
best actions of our life, which being imperfect and spotted, cannot please God
without par don by Christ. Secondly, it reproues such as have their minds
lifted up, when they have done or spoke something well, whereas the
imperfection of the deed ought to be before them to abase them Thirdly, when
Christians have showed their best care and endeavor to do good things, they
must not be discouraged for such wants and faults which stick unto their
doings; but heartily repent, asking fogiuenesse of Christ, and striving to do
better. For as an earthly father perceiving in his child a good will and
defire to please him, takes that he does in good worth though it be
faulty: so will God spare his own children, that do good things willingly
though weakly, Mala. 3. 17. I will spare them as a man spares his own Son
that serves him. Lastly, it reproves such as think the keeping of the law to
be possible; whereas it is a transgression of the law, not only to do what
we should not, but to do less then we should; a want of perfection breaks
the law, no less then an evil done; from such defects none are free, no not
Paul himself.


DIAL. XV.
Verses 19.20. For I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I
would not, that I do. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I, but sin
that dwells in me.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Sylas. A proof of the former reason in the 19. verse, and a conclusion drawn
from thence in the 20. verse.


Tim. How comes it to pass that in these two verses he does rehearse the self
same thing that he bad spoken of in the 16. and 17 verses, and what is it that
we are to learn thereby?


Silas. That which is set down in these two verses, is not altogether the
same, but differs at least in words; for here the words (good and evil) be
put in, which were left out before: again, these repetitions and rehearsals,
they are not idle, but serve to good purpose, for thereby the Apostle would
admonish us of two things. First, that we are to think, that these things which
he writes of the spiritual combat, are very necessary for us, and can
never be too much known of us. Secondly, that through our dullness they are
not enough considered and marked; and therefore have need to be much urged
and often repeated; repetitions have good use when they are timely used.


Tim. What is meant by this, that he says, he would have done good?


Silas. That it was the earnest desire and purpose of his heart to please God.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, that he says I do not that good I
would?

(...)
ly, to embrace death willingly, which does stop the breath of sin. Lastly,
in the mean time to strive mightily against the motions of sin and as a
Soldiour in a besiedged town, to stand still upon our guard, and to fly to
our General for succor in assaults, that we be not overcome, or overtaken
at least, with temptation of sin.


DIAL. XVI.
Verse 21, 22. I find then that when I would do good, I am thus yoaked that
evil is present with me. For I delight in the law of God; concerning the inner
man.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. It contains two things, according to the number of the verses, the
former is the winding or shutting up of the second paroxisme, or second fit of
temptation: the latter is an entrance or beginning of the third or last fit.
verse 22.


Tim. What be the parts of this conclusion?


Silas. Two: In the former he confesses the readiness of his will to do that
which is good; in the latter he renders a reason why he could not do the
good he would, because evil was present with him.


Tim. What is meant here by [Yoaked?]


Silas. The word in the original, signifies law, [ I find this Law,] which
some do take in good part for the law of God, but others in evil part, for
the law of sin and corruption. This latter interpretation is the best,
because of the words which follow, [ Evil is present with me,] which words
seem to expound the former.


Tim. What evil does he speak of, when he says, evil is present with me,
and in what sort is it present with him?


Silas. Not the evil of affliction, but of sinful desires and lusts, which
are said to be present, because they are ever with the godly at hand, to cross
and hinder their good purposes and desires. For the flesh lusts against the
Spirit, Gal. 5, and the law of the members rebelleth against the law of the
mind.


Tim. What is the instruction arises from hence?


Silas. That this is the common condition of all regenerate persons, that their
good motions which come from Gods spirit, are ever mingled with some evil
motions which arise from their corrupt nature.


Tim. What is the sum of the 22. verse?


Silas. A profession of the Apostle, that his whole man (so far as he was
renewed by grace) it took especial pleasure and delight in the knowledge and
spiritual obedience of Gods Law.


Tim. What Law is it that he speaks of here?


The moral Law, or the Law of the ten Commandments, which teaches perfect
love of God, and of our neighbor, because it is set against the Law of sin,
to which no Law is so contrary, as the moral.


Tim. What is meant here by the Inner man?


Sil. The Inner man, is the same with the new man, or spirit, and signifies all that within a man or without, from top to toe, which is by grace reformed: as
by outward is meant all that in a man which is not renewed.


Tim. What is the instruction that we are to learn from hence?


Silas. That a regenerate man does love Gods moral Law, and take great delight
in it. This delight does not so much declare and show it self in the pleasure
which godly men take to know the things contained in the Law (for that is
common with the wicked) but to do it, and conform their hearts and manners
agreeable unto it; as he which sees a curious artificial picture, is so
pleased with it, that he studieth how to expres it: so it fares with Gods
children.


Tim. What reason have Gods children to delight in the law, seeing it reueales
sin unto them, accuses them, and condemns them?


Silas. First, unto the godly this is a great benefit which it brings that it
does discover unto them evils, that they may see them, repent of them, and
forsake them, as well as good, that they may practice it; and so drives them
nearer unto Christ, that they may be saved by his grace.


Tim. What other instruction may be drawn from this Verse?


Silas. That seeing the children of God delight in the Law, they have greater
reason much more to be delighted with the word of the Gospel: because the
doctrine of the Gospel heals those diseases which the Law shows forth;
and effectually comfort, whom the Law has terrified; being both seed of
their new birth, and food to nourish them after they are borne again.


Tim. Is this a proper mark of regenerate men to delight in Gods word?


Silas. Yea, it is so: forasmuch as none can delight in such wise, but those
that have the Spirit of (...) to engender in them a love of God, and of his
word, and that Doctrine which is taught therein.


Tim. But seeing it is written of (...), that they do hear the Gospel with
joy, what difference shall we put between the godly and ungodly in their
delight?


Silas. The difference is both in the matter, manner, and end of their delight
and joy. First, as for the matter and ground of delight unto the godly, it is
the obedience yielded to the Law, and Christ received by the Gospel; whereas
bare knowledge of the Law and Gospel, is the ground of an Hypocrites delight.
Secondly, they differ also in the manner of their delight; for the delight of a
godly man is sincere and constant, as proceeding from the special grace of the
Spirit; the delight of a Wicked man is unsound and unconstant, proceeding
either from nature, or from a general grace of the Spirit: therefore, as it
looks not to God, so it lasts not. Thirdly, they differ in the effect and
end of it: for the delight of the godly leads them to an universal practice of
the Law inward and outward: so does not the delight of the wicked, which
content themselves with an outward reformation of life at the utmost. This may
be set forth by the comparison of two skillful Painters, who both together
behold one and the same portraiture or picture very artificially drawn;
whereof the one contents himself to behold it and commend it, but endeauours
not himself to make the like: the other so praises it, that he sets his
skill a-worke to make such an one. So it fares between a man regenerate, and
a man unregenerate; the former so likes and delights in the word, as he
studieth to be a doer of it; the latter, rests in contemplation of the word,
neglecting action, and hating to be reformed. And lastly, their delight does
differ in the measure of their joy; for evil men delight in riches and
pleasures more then in the word, but godly persons have more delight in the
word, then in all manner of riches. O Lord how do I love thy Law? I more joy in
it then in Psalm 119.
all spoils, it is sweeter to me then the Hony-combe, etc.


DIAL. XVII.
Verse 23. But I see another Law in my Members, rebelling against the Law of my
mind, and loading me captive unto the Law of sin wh ch is n my members.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To set forth his third most tough and hard combat, which he had with
the remainder of sin,


Tim. What be the several parts of this Verse?


Silas. Two; First, the degree and measure of the enmity of sin against
grace, sin resisting grace violently, as a rebel his Prince. The second
part is the effect and sequel of this resistance of sin, namely, that it
leads him away captive and prisoner.


Tim. Now expound the Words; and tell us what he meantb by Law [Another Law.]


Silas. Evil or sinful lusts or desires of our corrupt Nature: these are
called a Law, because of the force which they have even in men regenerate, such
as a Law has, which is forcible and mighty.


Tim. What is meant here by Members?


Silas. All the powers of the mind, and all the parts of the body, as they are
defiled with sin, and so far as vnrenued by grace.


Tim. What lessons may these words teach us?


Silas. First, that the corruption of sin slays not in some one part of us,
but pearceth throughout all the parts of the whole man. Secondly, that sinful
lusts not only remain in the godly, but have great force in them, being as a
law to rule, moderate and govern them.


Tim. Whereunto should this serve?


Sil. First, to humble us, in that there is no part free from the infection of
sin. Secondly. to awake us and make us more heedfull, in that we hear that sin
is such a powerful and forceable thing.


Tim. What other instruction from this word (I see?)


Silas. That the godly perceive and discern, both how far sin does spread
it self in their nature, and what might it bath in them: in which things the
unregenerate be blind.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. That it is a very bad sign to be ignorant and careless of the power of
sinful affections; it is a token they stick still in their natural
blindness, and are not an hair beyond an unregenerate man.


Tim. What is here meant by rebelling?


Silas. Not a weak nor a secret resistance, but an open and warlike opposition
and defiance, such as professed enemies and Rebels, do make against their
lawful Sovereign. For as Traitors and Rebels do hate their lawful king, and
seek by force of arms and strong hand to put him down, that he should not
reign over them: even so wicked lusts are not only not subject to the grace
of Christ, but mightily strive against him, that he should not reign as king
in our hearts, as they in the Gospel say of their king gone into a far
country; We will not have this man reign over us: so sinnesull lusts would
not have Christ to be our king, to rule in us.


Tim. What instructions do arise from hence?


Silas. First, we learn that the Sin which remains in the godly after their
conversion, is a maruailous dangerous thing, and does as much hazard the peace
and safety of his soul, as a Rebel does the peace and safety of his king and
Country.


Tim. What use is to be made of this instruction?


Silas. First, it serves to reprove the slothful, which either neglect or
forget such a dangerous enemy, and therefore do but slenderly provide against
it, to their own certain ruin. Secondly, to keep the watchful Christian from
falling asleep in security, seeing it is meet that he be as Tutus,
siattonitus, securus, si cantus. Tertull.
careful to preserve his soul, as this rebel Sin is diligent to destroy
it. For it is certain that a Christian is no longer safe then while he is
watchful: mistrust makethsafe, says Cominaeus.


Tim. What other things are we to learn from the former point?


Sil. A maruailous comfort to the godly, that though sin struggle and fight
against them, yet being but a Rebel, it shall never prosper, because God
curses Rebels. Lastly, the godly have from hence an admonition, in any wise to
A Mayor in Canterbury beheaded, for comforting Rebels, Edward. 4. In the north
many undone for favoring the two Earls.
be at utter defiance with all wicked motions, seeing it is a fearful thing
to take part with Rebels, yea to affoorde them but a good word or look, as all
Stories make plain, as the butcher in Cambridge-shiere, Inne-keeper in London.
How much more fearful then is it to join side with such a Rebel that rises
up against Christ his Crown and dignity? so is every sinful lust: take heed
and cherish it not, but resist rather.


Tim. Tell us now what is meant by the law of the mind?


Silas. The law of the mind and the law of God, they be all one in substance,
they differ but in respects, for the same law which is called the law of God,
because it expresses the will of God, commanding good things and forbidding
the contrary, is also termed the law of the mind, because it is most known in
the mind, and there reigns chiefly: also because the mind renewed is inwardly
delighted with Gods Law.


Tim. What instructions does this afford us?


Silas. First, that all the motions of a renewed mind agreeable unto Gods will,
must be obeyed and submitted unto, as men obey the just Laws of their Prince.
For they have such force to bind Christians to obedience, as the Princes Law
has to bind the subject. Secondly, that a renewed mind and sinful lust, be
most repugnant the one to the other. And therefore it is, that a Christian has
a continual and grievous combat and war with sin. For no sooner can his mind
guided by the Spirit, frame it self to that which Gods law commands, but
presently he finds a most dangerous and strong conflict and resistance made by
sin against him. Such as feel it, do mark it, and mourn for it, and
bemone themselves to God their defense.


Tim. What is the event and success of this spiritual Combat 2. Part.
in the Apostle Paul?


Silas. That he was led captive to the law of sin which was in his members.


Tim. What is meant here by Members?


Silas. It is a speech borrowed from military affairs, or custom of warlike
Warriors, which in battle with their enemies do prove Conquerors; such were
wont to lead them as prisoners whom they had taken alive, being fast tied and
bound, and kept under their power as their bondmen and slaves. In like manner,
sinful lusts sometimes so far prevailed in the Apostle, as to lead him
prisoner, bound hand and foot, (as it were) and to make him a Bondslaue to his
sin: as he said before; I am sold under sin. And again, I do the thing
which I hate, etc.


Tim. What is here meant by the Law of sin?


Sil. The same which was meant by the Law of Members, to wit; the corruption of
nature, with the evil Lusts thereof, having force as a Law to rule and
moderate our actions, not wholly but in part.


Tim. What is the instruction that we are to learn by this?


Silas. That the end and issue of the strife which the godly have with sin,
is sometime very heavy and grievous, whilst they are brought under the power of
sinful lusts for a time, as slaves and vassals which are subject to a Tyrant.


Tim. The Apostle said in the sixth Chapter, that sin should not have dominion
over the godly: how comes it then to pass, that sin does so overcome the
godly, that it takes them prisoners and captives?


Sil. The Apostle meant in the sixth Chapter, that sin should not have lawful
dominion over them, such as a King has over his subjects, whom he rules
without controulment. Howbeit sin (as a Tyrant and Usurper) may subdue and
overcome the godly, keeping them as prisoners against their will; as many
valiant persons unable to resist, are led captive by the enemy. Again, the
Apostle in the sixth Chapter, meant of full dominion and for ever; whereas the
godly are captives to sin in part only, and for a time: for they wrestle out
and overcome at length by their faith in Christ.


Tim. Seeing both the godly and the wicked are captines to sin, declare unto
us more plainly, what difference there is between Captivity?


Silas. The maine difference is this; that whereas the wicked freely and with
their whole will put themselves under the bondage of their wicked lusts, godly
men become captives against their will, with an earnest desire and longing to
be freed from their captivity and bondage, which may be thus further explaned.
The godly are overcome with sinful lusts, not because they are willing, but
because they are weak to resist, and being ouercom, they are never quiet till
they have shaken off the power of their lusts, that they may return unto
their former cheerful service and obedience of God: but the wicked being
tempted with their lusts and evil motions, they yield unto them without
resistance. This may be somewhat the better set forth unto us, by the
comparison of two Soldiers in a warlike fight, being of two Nations, whereof
the one bearing a false heart unto his King and Country, does of set purpose
and willingly yield himself to be taken prisoner, and with purpose to
practice treachery against his lawful King. The other is carried away
prisoner, because he was unable to with-stand the force of his adversary, yet
keeps still a good heart to his king, using all good endeavors to recover his
freedom. Even so it is here in this case, the godly come under the power of
sin, surprised by deceitfullness of sin, and by the sleights of Satan,
being unable to abide their encounters, carring still an upright heart unto
God and to his service. Whereas the ungodly make themselves voluntary slaves to
Satan and sin, very willingly fighting under their banners, against God and
his word. This whole matter will yet be made more clear by some few instances
and examples out of Scripture, as first of David, who was overcome by his
incontinency, being violently led captive of it, his heart striving against it,
though with great weakness; who being in the bonds of sin, did much desire
and seek after the freedom of grace, as Psalm. 51, throughout.

Secondly, of Peter who was led away captive of carnal presumption and
security, howbeit not of set purpose before, nor without reluctation in the
instant of yielding, and repentance or rising again afterward. Lastly, by the
example of this our Apostle Paul, who confesses that sin led him captive,
and in this captivity by sin he mourned for his thraldom, counting it a
misery, and suing for deliverance. But it is quite contray in the wicked, as
appears by the example of Caine, Esau, Ahab, Judas and others, who did lie
still under their captivity, not seeing any freedom, or nor mistrusting or
misliking their sluery.


Tell us what profit we are to make of this instruction?


Sil. First, here is an exhortation to the godly, considering the force of
their enemies, and their own weakness and the hurt that sin has done to
mighty strong men, to put on the whole armor of God, being excceding watchful
and given to prayer. Secondly, here is an admonition for weak Christians to
be marvelous heedfull unto themselves, with great mistrust of their own
infirmities, when as such an one as Paul could not always stand against the
power of sin. Thirdly, here is consolation for such as at any time shall
faint and yield in the fight against sin, that they be not too much
discouraged therein, forasmuch as such a Champion as this blessed servant of
Christ, has been danted and quailed by sin and Satan. Lastly, here is a
mark whereby we may judge of a regenerate person, namely this; that he is
drawn captive to the law of sin, and is carried away by the lust of sin, yet
not without contradiction: whereas the wicked which are void of grace, of
their own accord do run on to evils, as a horse unto the battle, as Romans 3,
15. Their feet are swift to shedbloud. And again, They drink iniquity like
Water, and draw sin with Cariropes, Esaias 5, 18.


DIAL. XVIII.
Verse 24, 25. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ my Lord. Then I my self in my
mind serve the Law of God, but in my flesh the Law of sin?


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. A conclusion both of the whole chapter, and of the spiritual conflict
with sin, which has bin set forth in the person of Paul.


Tim. What is the Sum of this conclusion?


Silas. He confesses himself miserable, because he was obnoxious to sin
and death, desiring full deliverance from them; giving God thanks for the
grace and merit of Christ Jesus.


Tim. What be the parts of this conclusion?


Silas. Three: First, an exclamation or complaint of his misery, in these
words [ O wretched man, etc.] Secondly, a consolation in respect of his victory
by Christ [ I thank God through Jesus Christ.] Lastly, an acclamation, [ So
then in my mind I serve, etc.]


Tim. What is meant here by wretched man?


Silas. Not one that is accursed, as being out of Gods favor, but one tired
and wearied with the continual and miserable conflictcs and striving with
sin. It is a wretched and woeful thing, to be toiled and troubled with
filthy motions, but every such man is not in damned case.


Tim. What instructions are we to learn from this?


Silas. First, that it is a wretched thing, to carry about one but the
remainder of sin, and to be troubled with the continual assaults and force
of it. The reasons hereof be: First, because sin even in the godly does
defile their conscience within, and their actions without, Mat. 15, 18. James
1. 21. Secondly, it offends their most good and loving Father, being contrary
to his Law, To. 7, 7. Thirdly, it does grieve and make sad the holy Spirit of
God, Ephesians. 4, 30. Lastly, it procures many temporal chastisements, and
deserves eternal punishment. See David's example, 2 Samuel 12, 10. Romans 6, 23.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this instruction?


Silas. First, it reproues them that make slight and slender reckoning of their
sins. Secondly, it admonishes the godly to be humbled, because howsoever
they be blessed with forgiveness of sin: yet their blessedness is not
perfect, but mixed with some misery.


Tim. What other instruction from hence?


Silas. It is the mark and token of a regenerate man, to feel the misery he
is cast into by the force of sin, to mourn for it, and complain of it. The
reason hereof is, because none but such as have the Spirit of Christ, can
think themselves miserable in this behalf, that thorough sin they are drawn
from the obedience of Gods Law: for they that be vnre generate, think
themselves wretched for bodily evils, as if they be blind, or dease, or
maimed, or imprisoned, or extreme poor; they never take themselves wretched
in that they are full of spiritual evils, and thereby hindered in the service
of God.


Tim. What use of this point?


Sil. First, it affoords a great comfort unto such as can vnsaignedly sigh
because of their sins, which still stick in their nature and strive against
grace. Secondly, here is a testimony against such as bear their sins without
grief, that they are not Gods children. If there be a struggling in the womb,
Rebecka feels it; but the barren which bring not forth, feel no such
wrestling.


Tim. What other instructions from hence?


Sil. From hence, wicked and impenitent sinners may consider how extreme their
wretchedness is, that have sin reigning in them; when as the godly count it
their misery but to have sin dwelling in them.


Tim. Proceed and tell us now what is meant by the body of this death?


Silas. Some expound it thus; for a mortal body subject to death, and then the
meaning is, that Paul does desire to be freed from this conflict with sin by
his corporal death.


Tim. If we follow this meaning, what lessons then will arise for our
instructions?


Silas. That the battle of sin will not be at an end, while the godly live
in this world: in which regards, the sighs and repentance, the exercise and
striuings of a Christian man, are continual and have no other term but
death. And thus God will have it be for many good purposes: to exercise
patience, stir up prayer, watchfulness, to humble us by sight of our
weakness, and comfort us by experience of his power.


Tim. What other meaning is given of these words?


Sil. Some by body do understand our corrupt and unclean nature, even the
whole mass of sin as it is yet unmortified; which is called a body of
death, to signify that it is a deadly thing deserving both temporal and
cternall death, this is the best interpretation.


Tim. What instruction from hence?


Sylas. In that sin is likened to a body, it teaches that it is no idle and
weak thing, but as it were a thing subsisting full of force and power, and
therefore not to be neglected. Secondly, as a body has many members, so sin
has innumerable lusts. See Romans 1. 29. 30. Gal. 5, 19, 20.


Tim. What instruction from hence, that it is called the body of death?


Silas. That the bondage of sin, even such as it is to the godly, is a very
grievous and heavy thing, often thrusting them into the jaws, and wrapping
them in the bonds of death both worldly and everlasting; which makes them cry
out, wretched man, and blessed are they which for this can cry thus.


Tim. What is meant by being delivered?


Sylas. To be wholly and perfectly freed from the corruption of sin,


Tim. Did Paul doubt or knew he not who should deliver him?


Silas. No such thing, these be the words not of doubting, but of desire.


Tim. What is the instruction from hence?


Sil. That it is the note of a regenerate person, constantly to desire perfect
liberty from his sins.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, that he does not say who has delivered
me, but who shall deliver me?


Silas. That the grace of sanctification is never perfect while we abide in
this life: the godly are so delivered as there is still cause to say, who shall
deliver me?


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, in that he says (thanks be to God
through Jesus Christ our Lord?)


Sil. That as Paul faints not in the combat, but comforts himself with a
certain hope of victory: in like manner all the godly must fight against
sin, with assurance of hope to overcome in the end, so they strive lawfully.
2. The godly must be so sure to overcome, as that they do rejoice and triumph
as if they had already overcome. Thirdly, their trust to overcome, relieth not
so much upon their own virtues, works, and merits, as upon the mercies of
God the Father, by whose aid and grace they look certainly to prevail.
Lastly, their hope of help and aid from the mercies of God, is grounded upon
the merits and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and not upon the law, or good
works or good conscience: not these things, but Christ has appeased Gods
wrath, reconciled, and continually pacifieth him.


Tim. What are we to learn from the last words?


Sil. First, that Paul deuides himself into two parts, mind and flesh; not
wholly flesh nor wholly the mind, but partly the one, partly the other.
Secondly, that according to these two beginnings or grounds, his purposes and
endeavors were diverse: for in his mind he served the law of God, to know and to
do it; and in his flesh he served the law of sin, that his corruption which
still stuck in him, did solicit him to evil, and sometimes overcame him.


Tim. What use of this?


Sil. Snfull infirmity must keep the Saints from pride, and their grace must
stay them from despair: they cannot nor ought to be proud which carry sin in
their heart as a law, neither need they faint which have grace for a governor
in their mind.


Tim. What obserueye in this that he says, I my self?


Sil. First, that he speaks of no other then himself. Secondly, that he
speaks not in time past but present; which serves to consute the Palagians and
Libertines; who take it so as if Paul spoke all this from the 14. verse
forward, in the name and person of a mere natural man, and had set forth no
other fight but, that which is between reason directing to things right and
honest; and affection or will drawing unto things crooked and dishonest: as if
Paul had in all this, showed himself an Arestotelian, and not an Apostle,
extolling the power of nature, and not the force of grace; debasing and
disgracing sensuality, and not sin and birthcorruption, which both in reason
and will even after regeneration, utters force and great power, like a mighty
rebel, striving and fighting even against the good work of the Spirit, in
regenerate ones.


CHAP. VIII.
DIAL I.
Verse 1. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit?


Timotheus. WHat is the sum and scope of this eight Chapter?


Silas. It does conclude the doctrine of justification and sanctification of
the faithful through Christ, amplifying and applying it to their comfort,
against temptations.


Tim. What be the parts of this Chapter?


Silas. Two: The first a doctrinall or exhortatory comfort against the secret
corruption of nature, or against the remainder of sin and corruption, still
sticking and dwelling in the godly: for though sin remains, yet it is not
damnable to the godly. This part continues unto the middle of verse 17. The
second part contains a comfortable exhortation, patiently to suffer
afflictions for the name of Christ, because their afflictions have most equal
and wholesome causes, and most healthful effects. This part continues to the
end of the Chapter.


Tim. What is the sum of this first verse?


Silas. It does propound and set down the comfort against dwelling-sinne, that
albcit sin does abide in the godly, yet condemnation does not abide, but is
taken away. Secondly, a description of the godly negatiuely and affirmatively.


Tim. How is this comfort limited?


Silas. Two ways: First, by the circumstance of time, and secondly, of the
persons. It is declared by the circumstance of time thus: Now that we are
justified by faith, and sanctified by the Spirit, there is no condemnation to
us. Secondly, the persons to whom this comfort does belong, are described by
two conditions. First, that they are in Christ, and secondly, that they walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


Tim. But how does this general comfort belonging unto all the godly, depend
upon the former Chapter, where Paul's particular conflict with sin, and his
complaint against it, was set out unto us, together with his thanksgiving for
his deliverance from it by Christ?


Silas. Indeed one would think that upon these premises he should have
inferred, there is no condemnation to me, but measuring all the godly by his
own sense and feeling, he does enlarge the comfort, propounding it more
generally thus; Now then there is no condemnation to such that are as I am.
This shows that he sustained the person of all regenerate men, in the
seventh Chapter.


Tim. It is now time that we come to expound the words: Tell us therefore what
is meant by [Condemnation.]


Silas. A damnatory sentence of the law, to wit; that every one is accursed
that transgresses it. Or thus more plainly, The sentence of God, the Judge of
the world, pronouncing guily, and adiudging to eternal death such as
transgress the law.


Tim. What is meant by [no condemnation?]


Sil. Full and perfect freedom from this damnatorie sentence and punishment of
death; also that the godly that are thus freed from divine condemnation and
most dreadful destruction, are also accepted for righteous, and worthy of
eternal salvation through Jesus Christ: nay there is not only no
condemnation, but certain salvation unto such. This may be collected to be the
sense of these words, thus: Where there is no condemnation, there is no wrath;
where there is no wrath, there is grace; where there grace, there is neither
sin nor death; and where death is chased away, there must needs be life and
salvation.


Tim. What is that we are to learn from hence for our profit and (...)?


Silas. First, we learn here a difference between the doctrine of the law and
the Gospel, and al other doctrines whatsoever; which appears herein, that
this doctrine of comfort can be fetched and drawn from none other but from
the doctrine of the Gospel. Secondly, it is a comfort that exceeds all other
comforts, to be exempted from condemnation and the wrath of God, without the
which men were in far worser case then the brute beasts, because they live
securely without fear: whereas men if they be without this comfort, that they
shall not be condemned, cannot but all their life long, live in a continual
fear of condemnation, which must needs disquiet their hearts, and rob them of
al true contentment, and rest in their souls. This comfort may be set forth by
the comparison of a fellon or traitor, which have great comfort and quietness
of mind, being by the kings gracious pardon freed from deserved and sentenced
death; and of other malefactors living in daily expectation of death, to which
they are adjudged without hope of pardon.


Tim. To whom may this comfort be most effectual?


Silas. Though it be very joyful news to all believers, that they shall not
be condemned, yet this comfort should be most effectual to the godly poor;
because amidst many worldly wants and miseries which trouble them, it may and
should excedingly joy their hearts to think upon, what great good things
they have by Christ, as forgiveness of all sins, freedom from all
punishment of sin, from Gods anger and hell fire; yea and more then this,
even perfect righteousness and eternal life: of which things the least is more
worth then a whole world; and therefore whosoever cannot rejoice in these
things (whatsoever their worldly crosses be) it argues deep vnthanksulnesse,
and is a sign of unbelief. Finally, touching the godly rich, they are to be
admonished here, that they are more to cheer themselves with the comfort of
this freedom, then with all their wealth and worship.


Tim. But seeing none shall have this comfort, but such as are in Christ, and
walk after the spirit, tell us what it is to be in Christ?


Silas. To be knit and joined unto him through faith, as members be to the
head, or as branches be to the vine.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence?


Silas. First, that none save the faithful are capable of the former comfort,
because only they are in Christ; therefore howsoever hypocrites and other
wicked men, yea and profane men and Atheists, do lay claim to this comfort,
yet it does not at all belong unto them, because they are out of Christ.
Secondly, we cannot be partakers of any benefit by Christ, except first we be
in Christ, as the members must be one with the head, and the branches with the
vine, ere they can draw any life from them. Thirdly, such as believe in Christ
and abide in this faith, may be sure and certain to be saved: the reasons
hereof be, first because every believer is justified and is freed from the
guiltiness of his sins, and therefore must needs be saved. Secondly, he is
one with Christ, in whom there is nothing but righteousness and life,
therefore he is free from sin and damnation.


Tim. Yea but though he is freed from sins past and the punishment of them,
yet every believer by his daily sins, makes himself worthy and guilty of death?


Silas. True believers need not fear, neither sins past, present, nor to
come; for this universal negative particle (No) excludes all sins, the
believer being justified from sins past, sins present are pardoned, and
sins to come shall not be imputed; therefore he needs fear no destruction.


Tim. Will not this doctrine make men secure and careless?


Silas. This doctrine shakes out of men's hearts the fear of condemnation, and
therefore in that behalf they may be spiritually secure: but it nourishes
the fear of God, being an enemy to carnail security, Psalm 130, 4. Romans 12,
1, 2.


Tim. Yea but we cannot be so certain of our salvation as S. Paul, who had his
certainty by special revelation.


Silas. This is not so; for first Paul speaks not here of his own particular
assurance, but gives a general comfort common to all the faithful; therefore
he writes not, there is no condemnation to me, but, to them. Secondly, the
signs and tokens of this comfort, to wit, to be in Christ, and to walk after
the Spirit, are common with Paul to all other true Christians, verse 1.
Therefore the certainty of salvation, and the comfort from thence must needs
be common.


Tim. Yea but it is no where written that thou art in Christ, and that thou
shall not be condemned, and it is the doctrine of Protestants to believe no
more then is written, and therefore no man can be assured to be saved.


Silas. When we teach that no more is to be believed then is written, it is to
be understood of universal doctrine and general points of saving truth, to
which we are not bound to give credit, nor can we firmly assent unto them,
unless we find them in the written word, which is the only sufficient
perfect rule of faith and manners, John 5. 29. and 21, 24. and 2 Timothy 3, 16.
Secondly, we affirm and hold, that the certainty of every man's own salvation
is written in the fleshy tables of his heart, by the finger of the Holy Ghost:
for as this universal tries, that there is no condemnation to such as are in
Christ, is written in the word; so this particular assumption of the faithful:
but I believe and am in Jesus Christ, is written in his own heart by the
Spirit, which always together with Faith, works and engenders a feeling and
testimony of his own Faith, whereby he knows he is a believing person. 2
Cor. 13, 5. 2 Timoth, 1, 12. Mark 9, 24. all which places show, that a man
has in himself a witness of his own Faith.

Now we are bound no less certainly to believe the inward particular
witness, written by the Spirit, in the hearts and consciences of ieuery
faithful person, then that outward universal testimony which is written in
the word: for both these testimonies come from one Spirit, and the sense of
faith, is as firm as an article of faith.


Tim. Yea, but this singular Faith, what is it else but a singular presumption?
For how common is it for every evil liver to say, I trust to be saved?


Silas. It is very true, that such as have no faith and so be not in Christ,
if they say they trust to be saved, it is presumption: but for a truly
faithful man to believe, and to say it, is no presumption but duty, and godly
submission to him that commands to believe in his Son.


Tim. But how shall we be able to know the presumption of the Flesh, from the
assurance of faith, they be so like the one to the other?


Sil. By this mark, which the Apostle himself gives us, that such as have
Faith and be in Christ, walk after the Spirit, that is, by the Spirit they do
mortify the flesh, and the works thereof.


Tim. What other instructions arises there hence?


Silas. It teaches us the exceeding privilege of a true Christian believer,
in that he is freed from all fear of condemnation, and eternal punnishment in
Hell fire.


Tim. But tell us whether it may be known who they are that are knit to Christ
by faith?


Silas. Yes, it may surely be known though not to others, yet to themselves,
for otherwise this freedom and privilege from condemnation, could be no
ground or matter at all of any comfort. Secondly, the taking of an elect soul
out of Adam, and the corruption of nature, to graft it into Christ, is not such
a slight work, but that it may be known and percciued of him in whom it is
wrought, being a person come to years and discretion. For it is the opening
the eyes of the blind, the quickening of the dead, the translating from
darkness to light, the healing of the withcrcd hand, the making of the lame
to walk, the setting at liberty, him that was in prison. All which, shows
this work to be both mighty and manifcst.


Tim. Seeing you say that he that is in Christ by faith may know that he is
so, declare unto us by what means he may know it?


Silas. By two means: First, every true believer has with his faith a gift
and power from Gods Spirit, whereby he understands and sees his own faith,
as one that sees, or feels, or walks, knows infallibly that he does these
things. Besides it is written, that by the Spirit we know the things that are
given us of God, 1. Cor. 2, 12. Whereunto add the example of the man, Mark,
9, 24. and of Paul, 2. Tim. 1, 12. excepting the time of some great falls, or
strong temptations, or the instant of a man's new birth, when this knowledge of
a man's own faith is not so clear. Secondly, every true believer may know it
by the proper and peculiar fruit of a true faith; to wit, by an holy and
upright conversation, which is called here the not walking after the flesh,
but after the Spirit. For as the Sun is perceived by his heat and light,
and the goodness of a tree is known by the fruit, and a living man by his
motion, speech, and actions; so a believing Christian is discerned to be such a
one, by his godly and religious life. Therefore are we exhorted by Peter to
make our calling and election sure by good works, 2. Pet. 1. 10. For howsoever
faith go alone in the apprehending Christ, and in the matter of our salvation
by him, yet in our conversation it is not alone, but accompanied with good
works, as tokens and signs to make it known. Therefore seeing a faithful
person cannot be condemned and perish, and every such an one has good means
whereby to know his own faith. Heerevpon it follows necessarily, that every
faithful person may assuredly know he shall be saved.


Tim. Let us hear what profit and use we are to make of this truth?


Silas. It does convict the Papists, who teach that the faithful in this life
can have no ordinary certainty of Gods grace, and their own salvation by
their faith. For thus they write in the (...) hemish Testament, that it is a
most damnable false illusion and presumption, to say that a particular man can
say, that he is assured insallibly that himself is justified, and has
certain knowledge of his own predestination: they allow a certain knowledge
by special revelation and probable persuasion by hope.


Tim. What harm and inconvenience will follow this incertainty and doubting of
salvation?


Silas. The overthrow of all Christianity and Religion. For except we be sure
of grace and free love to us in Christ for our salvation, we cannot love him,
nor hope in him, nor pray to him, nor obey him, nor be thankful to him, nor do
any other good work but in hyprocrisie, 1. John. 4, 19. Romans 5, 2, 3, 10.
Secondly, this doctrine of incertainty and doubting of salvation, shakes the
sufficiency and persection of Christ's merits, destroys the truth and
constancy of Gods promise, and weakeneth the testimony of the holy Spirit
witnessing to the faithful that they are Gods Children. Romans 8, 16.


Tim. Yea, but they which are now in Christ and do beleeue^, are not sure to
persevere to the end?


Silas. Yes, he that is once in Christ, shall ever be in him. A member of
Satan, may become a member of Christ; but a member of Christ can never be the
member of Sahtan: for none can pluck them from Christ, John 10, 28. Who also
prays for our perseverance, Ioh. 17, 11.


Tim. What other profit is to be made of this former truth, touching the
certainety of Salvation believed in?


Silas. In all terrors of Conscience and conflictes with sin, it ministers
no small comfort to the godly, to know and be assured, that their salvation
stands firm and immooueable. Lastly, here are all men admonished how to
judge and discern of their own faith, whether they be true believers, and
such persons as shall not be condemned; which may be done by the second
condition heereunto added and annexed, to wit; if he walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit.


Tim. What is here meant by walking?


Silas. Living, or ordering and disposing our life and actions.


Tim. What is here meant by Flesh, and by Spirit?


Silas. By Flesh, is meant that vicious quality of sin, or corruption of
Nature, with the blind and wicked motions thereof: and by Spirit, is meant
that quality of holiness created, and working in us by the Spirit of God, by
a Metanomie of the cause for the effect.


Tim. Show us now who may be said to walk after the Flesh?


Silas. Not they which have corruption of nature and sinful motions, (for
these be in every godly person,) but they which in their living and ordering
of their life and conversation, do follow these sinful motions and lusts,
as their guides and Leaders: so thinking, speaking, and doing, as their own
carnal blind reason, and corrupt affections, leads, directs, and
governs them. This is to walk after the flesh, to set ones course by the
counsel and direction of his corrupt reason and wit.


Tim. May not a man walk after the flesh, whose Works are outwardly good and
honest, as when he prays, hears the word, gives thanks, reproues sin,
bestows alms, gives counsel, etc?


Silas. It is very true: he that does these things, and other good things, and
does them often and continually, yet may be a person that does walk after the
flesh; if he do them out of a corrupt carnal mind, and vnpure conscience,
seeking to please himself and other men, being carried with his own profit
or praise, and not seeking Gods glory; Finally, doing them rather of custom,
then of conscience and obedience to Gods commandment.


Tim. Then tell us how many sorts there be of them that walk after the flesh?


Silas. Two sorts: the first be they, which are wicked and open sinners, having
cast off the reverence of God, and shame of man, as Drunkards, common swearers,
perjured persons, adulterers, common liars, covetous, railers, contentious
persons, and the like. The second sort be Hypocrites, which cloak their
actions and life with appearance and show of faith, obedience of the word,
good conscience, and the spirit of God: yet in truth, they are void of all
these; and have no other leader, guide, or ground of their life and doings, but
their own ignorant minds and false hearts, being wholly carried with bye and
fleshly respects and worldly gain.


Tim. Give us some plain marks, whereby they that in this sort walk after
the flesh, may perceive it in themselves that it is so?


Sil. First, that they use not to take counsel of Gods word, to make it their
rule of every particular action of their life, Psalm. 119, 9. Secondly, they
never look upon their pattern and example Christ Jesus, how he spoke and did,
that they may do the like, 1 John 2, 5. John 10, 27. Thirdly, they do not by
prayer lift up their hearts to God, to govern them in their counsels,
speeches, and deeds, 1. These. 5, 17. Nehem. 2, 4. Fourthly, when they have
spoken or done any good thing, they do not return the praise of it to God, 1.
Cor. 10, 31. Lastly, they are not resolved to suffer reproach and wrong, for
their profession and well doing, Mat, 10, 37. Luke, 14, 27.


Tim. Now show us who may be said to walk after the Spirit?


Silas. Not they who have some good desires and deeds, but they whose course of
life and actions for the tenor of them, are evermore constantly ruled by the
motion of Gods Spirit, which they follow as their guide and leader: as it is
not a fair day, wherein the Sun shines now and then, if there be foul
weather in the rest.


Tim. May not a man slip and trip in his way sometimes, yea stumble and fall,
and yet be said to walk after the Spirit?


Silas. It is right so, because a spiritual or godly conversation, must not be
judged of by one or a few actions; but by the tenor of it, and as it holds,
and is for the most and greatest part: otherwise none should be said, to walk
after the Spirit, because there is none that lives and sins not.


Tim. What be the sorts of them that walk after the Spirit?


Sil. Two: Some strong, as Abraham, David, etc. some weak, as the Apostles of
Christ were before the ascension of the Lord.


Tim. What be the marks of one that walks after the Spirit?


Silas. These two: First, an earnest desire both to know, and to walk in the
good way. Secondly, a sincere sorrow for his failing and falls, and arising by
repentance, and the contrary to these five before mentioned.


Tim. What profit comes there of these things?


Silas. First, it reprooues such as boast that they are in Christ, and yet
show the contrary by their walking after the flesh. Secondly, it assures them
that walk after the Spirit, that they are the very members of Christ.
Finally, it teaches all men, that sanctification of the spirit, is an
inseperable companion, and fruit of our justification by faith: moisture and
water, heat and fire, light and Sun, are not more firmly united then faith
and holiness.


DIAL. II.
Verse 2. For the law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, has
freed or delivered me from the law of finne and of death.


Tim. WHat is the drift and purpose of this Scripture?


Silas. It is a proof and confirmation of the former verse, and of the latter
part of it, (as some think) by a reason taken from the efficient and begetting
cause of holy conversation, to wit; the Spirit of Christ (...) to the
faithful, who having communion with Christ, have also fellowship with his
Spirit. But I rather take it to be the proof of the former part of the
sentence, confirming to us, that there is no condemnation to such as are in
Christ; which is confirmed by this reason, because the Spirit of life which is
in Christ the head, being allowed unto his members, does quite abolish sin
and death, that though sin remain in them, yet it shall have no force to
condemn them.


Tim. What then do you think the sum and substance of this verse to be?


Silas. This verse together with the three following, is to be expounded of the
third part of our justification, to wit; of the perfect holiness of Christ's
humane nature, imputed to us, as the remedy and cover of our most defiled
nature, of the delivery of our impure nature, by the imputation of Christ's
sanctified nature.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. The parts be four: First, what that is whereby we are freed (for the
law of the Spirit, etc.) Secondly, what manner of thing this freedom is.
Thirdly, to whom it does belong [ Me.] Lastly, from what evils we are
delivered, [ From the Law of sin and death.]


Tim. Come to the words, and tell us what is here meant by the spirit? 1. Part.



Silas. Some by the Spirit, do understand properly the holy Spirit, the third
person in the Trinity, which gouernes and rules our minds by his inward
motions, as by a Law. Others, by it understand the doctrine of faith, or of the
Gospel, which is a Doctrine of the spirit and life, Psalm. 19, 7. 2 Cor. 2. If
we follow this exposition, the meaning will be thus much; that the Gospel or
doctrine of faith does free, that is, absolve and pronounce me free from the
Law of sin and death, that is, from the guilt and condemnation that the Law
of Moses threatens unto sinners. This then is a very godly exposition, but
not fit to this text, that does not at al speak of the law of Moses, which is
no where in Scripture called the Law of sin; but forbids it and commands
wholesome and profitable things: neither does he entreat here of the efficacy
and power of the Gospel, and the doctrine of Faith, which is never called the
Law of the Spirit. But I judge Spirit to be put here for the work and
efficacy of the Spirit (to wit) for the grace of Sanctification and holiness,
which is called a Law, because it is like to a Law, having power to govern
and moderate. And the word Life, is added, to show that the Spirit which
works this, is no idle and dead thing, but a lively viuifying and quickening
Spirit, being the author both of an holy life, and eternal life, and that
first in Christ the head; and for his sake and merit, in the faithful his
members. That this is here meant, may appear by the opposing and setting it
against the law of sin. Under which must needs be comprehended corruption of
nature, being contrary to holiness.


Tim. I grant then, that by the spirit of life is meant the holiness and
purity of man's Nature, as a work of that quickening spirit which rules by a
Law: but whether take you it of holiness inherent and wrought in our own
Nature being regenerate, or in Christ his humane nature, as in the proper
subject?


Silas. I do take this latter to be true, that it is taken of the
Sanctification of Christ his nature. My reasons be, first, because it is
written, not in us, but in Christ (the law of the spirit of life which is in
Christ.) Secondly, because Christ his Sanctification meriteth deliverance from
sin, not our sanctification, which is but a token and testimony of our
purchased deliverance. Thirdly, by the imputation of Christ's sanctification,
this comfort (that we shall not be condemned) is confirmed unto us. Lastly, if
we interpret it of our begun inherent Sanctification, we shall further the
rotten opinion of the Papists, touching justification by inherent grace. See
verse 3, 4.


Tim. What thing is that deliverance or freedom which is 2. Part.
here spoken of?


Silas. It is the very selfsame that Justification is, to wit, a full and
perfect absoluing us before the Tribunal of God, from the whole guilt and
punishment of sin, which comes to us by the imputation of Christ's
Sanctification. The reason hereof is, because it is written in the Preter
tense or in the time past, to signify, that our justification is perfect in
this life: whereas, when he speaks of our imperfect Sanctification, he uses a
word signifying time to come, Romans. 7, 24. Who shall deliver me, etc?


Tim. Who are the parties that are partakers of this freedom 3. Part.
and deliverance?


Silas. All believers, without any difference of sex, age, stature, condition,
or nation, whether Jew or Gentile.


Tim. Why then does the Apostle use this phrase, saying, [Hee has freed me,]
rather then, he has freed all the faithful?


Silas. First, as he set himself before, an example of weakness and
spiritual strife; so now also of confidence and of the victory. Secondly,
here he would teach all men to make application of this comfort unto
themselves, saying and believing, Christ freed me, there is no condemnation to
me: for this is the power of true faith, to appropriate general promises;
contrary to the Papists, who will have faith to be nothing else, but a general
assent to the Scriptures, without particular affiance in the promise of Christ.


Tim. From what thing are we delivered by Christ?


Silas. From [ Sinne] that is, from our unregenerate nature, 4. Part.
as it is corrupted by sin. Death also is joined to it, because it makes us
guilty of, and subject to death and destruction, which follows all kind of
sin, as the night follows the day, and shadow the body.


Tim. What means he by putting this word [Law,] unto sin?


Silas. Because the guilt of our sinful nature is as a bond to make us bound
unto eternal death. Secondly, because in such as are not regenerate, it does
exercise a mortiferous tyrannical power and government.


Tim. Now show us what benefit we may make of this whole verse, thus expounded?


Silas. It affoords us an instruction, a comfort, reproose, and confutation.
The instruction is, that not only Christ his obedience in his life, and the
sufferings in his death, but the sanctification of his humane nature is ours,
and is as verily belonging to the faithful, as if they had bin borne without
sin. Secondly, the comfort is that such as are in Christ may in all their
temptations in life and death, comfort themselves with this assurance, that the
sins neither of their actions, nor of their nature, shall ever be imputed to
them. Though they may oftentimes feel their wicked and rebellious nature,
stir and resist Gods law, yet such as do resist the motions of sin, yielding
themselves obediently to the motions of the Spirit, are secured and made
certain that their remaining sin shall never condemn them; because Christ
has freed and delivered them from it perfectly, allowing them his own
sanctification to be theirs. It is a maruailous comfort to them that have
need of it, and can apprehend it. Thirdly, this does reprove the ignorant
dissolute Christian, who never thinks what an evil his corrupt nature is, nor
is ever troubled with those evil motions and desires that suddenly spring from
it: full little do they consider that the Son of God must descend from
Heaven, and humble himself to become a man, that he might free us from the
impurity of our humane nature. And lastly, it does consute our blind erring
Papists, of whom the very wisest of them never came so far as to know that
natural concupiscence is a sin in the regenerate, and stands in need of a
Savior.


DIAL. III.
Verse 3. For that that was impossible to the Law, in as much as it was weak,
because of the flesh, God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. It renders a reason to prove, that the most perfect holiness of
Christ's humane nature (called in the former verse, the Spirit of life) being
imputed unto believers, does free them from sin and death, that is, from the
remainder of sin sticking still in their nature, and the punishment of
eternal destruction due to it. This reason is taken from the end of Gods
purpose in sending his Son to take man's nature into the fellowship of his
person; for he was sent to take flesh upon him, to help and succor the
infirmity of our flesh. Or more plainly thus, Christ was sent of his Father to
take the nature of man in the womb of a virgin, free from sin, by the work
of the Holy Ghost, to this end, that he might restore our nature unto such a
perfection of righteousness, as the exactness of Gods law does require. For
though the law did teach a perfect righteousness both of nature and actions,
yet it is very unable to bring us thereunto, because we do lack strength
and power to perform and keep it both before and after our regeneration. From
whence does follow, that seeing by the strength of the Law we cannot attain
perfect righteousness and salvation with freedom from sin and death,
because of the infirmity of our flesh; therefore it was of necessity, that
Christ should take our Nature full of holiness, to do that for us which the Law
could not do, that is, to destroy sin and death, and to make them (which by
Faith lay hold on him) so absolutely righteous as the Law requires. For thus
the case stands, that not only our thoughts, words, and works should be
free from sin, and wholly upright, but also, that our nature, even the very
faculties of our reason and will, should be in all things conformable to Gods
will revealed in his Law, as Adam was in his creation, and according to that
which is written, Love God with all thine heart, etc. Now, because none, no not
the godliest, do ever get this perfection while they are here, (their nature
still remaining corrupt in part, and rebelling against God, Romans 7, 22.)
therefore all must needs have perished, except our nature had bin fully
sanctified in the man Christ, who is freely allowed to the faithful, to free
them from condenmation.


Tim. Divide the Text now into his several parts?


Silas. It has these two parts. First, the end for the which God sent his Son
into the world, to wit, that the infirmity or weakness of the Law (by occasion
of us and our sin) should be no let or hinderance to man's salvation.
Secondly, what Christ Jesus did, being sent and come: he did by sin condemn
sin in the flesh.


Tim. What Law is meant here, and what is it that it cannot do?


Silas. By Law is here meant, not the Ceremonial, but the Moral Law, which is
impossible to justify a man before God, or to bestow perfect righteousness upon
him, as appears by the beginning of the next verse.


Silas. Yet it was said in the seventh Chapter, that the law was ordained unto
life?


Tim. The Apostle shows there, what it is able to do in his own nature; and
here, what it is not able to do to us that are sinners. For the Law (by Gods
ordinance) could justify us, and bring us to life eternal.


Tim. But how is it that the Law cannot justify and make us righteous seeing
it does teach a perfect righteousness?


Silas. It is true indeed, that the Law instructs us fully, both what is to
be done, and what is to be avoided; but there are 3. other things required to
the justifying of us, which it is impossible for the Law to do for us. As
first, to offer us forgiveness of those things we do against the Law, which
accuses, but absolueth not. Secondly, to work faith in us, to lay hold upon
forgiveness being offered, which the law cannot engender. Thirdly, to put
strength and power into us, that we may be able to keep all the commandments
of the Law, to the end of our life. All which things are impossible to the Law,
because it only instructs what to do; but ministers no strength to do, that
it bids. It promises life to the doers, and threatens death to the
transgressors, but offreth no power to sinners, much less gives faith to
apprehend it; for this is the office of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3, 9, 7, 8. The
cause why these things are impossible to the Law, is because it is weak, that
is, vneffectual and feeble for these purposes; which comes not from the Law,
but from our flesh and corrupt nature.


Tim. What does the Flesh signify here?


Silas. That naughtiness and sinful corruption, that through Adams fall
passed thorough all mankind, and does remain still even in men regenerate,
but it is corrected and reformed in part in them, and that daily til it be
abolished.


Tim. What is the effect and fruit of this remaining corruption and sin?


Silas. It does make the members of Christ, and new borne Children of God,
unable perfectly and fully to keep the Law. As first, because through force
of this remaining corruption, they do diverse things contrary to the Law.
Secondly, they leave undone many good things commanded by the Law. Thirdly, in
the good things which they do, there is much imperfection and uncleanness,
therefore it is impossible to be kept of the most righteous that is. In our
creation it was possible, and in state of glorification shall be, but in
estate of our imperfect Sanctification, it cannot be.


Tim. Is it not a wrong to God to say, that he has given us a Law impossible
to be kept?


Silas. No, none at all: First, because in our Creation, we received strength
to keep it, which we lost through our own default. Shall a Landlord be
blamed, because the Tenant is unable to pay his rent? Secondly, because in the
estate of glorification, we shall have power to keep it perfect, for then our
knowledge and love of God and our neighbor shall be perfect. Thirdly, because
in the estate of regeneration, the godly may be said after a sort, and in some
sense perfectly to keep it. For the regenerating Spirit has begun in them
obedience to the Law, giving them strength to desire and endeavor it. Also
their wants and failinges in their obedience are pardoned, and he is said to
have no sin, when that is not imputed which is done. And lastly, the perfect
obedience of Christ, is allowed unto the faithful. Omnia mandata Dei (inquit
August.) fact a deputa^tur, quando quicquid non sit, ignoscitur.


Ti. In what sense is it the^, that the law is imposs ble to be kept?


Silas. The wicked which are strangers from Christ, are absolutely unable to do
any part of it, but break it thoroughout, Romans 5, 8. Secondly, the regenerate
and godly, they are not able by grace inherent in their own persons perfectly
to do it, but fail in many things, and sundry ways, 1 John 1, 7, 8. James 3,
2.


Tim. Declare unto us the profit that we are to make of this Doctrine, touching
the impossibility of keeping the Law, and being justified by it.


Sil. First, it conuinceth and confuteth both the Pelagians and the Papist: the
one, because they teach, that men by the strength of nature are able to keep
the commandments: the other, that by strength of grace, the godly are not only
able to keep the Law, but to do more then the Law requires. Secondly, it
serves to humble us much, that we cannot keep the Law, and that thorough our
sinful weakness: also to stir us up unto Prayer for grace to yield
better obedience unto it, seeking that strength from God which we have not in
our selves, to be able in some measure to yield obedience to the Law. Thirdly,
it instructs all the faithful, to know, that justification before God, is
not to be had by good works, because they are imperfect, not answerable to the
rigor of the Law, and are all stained by the corruption of the flesh mingled
with them. Fourthly, this does teach us, that seeing we cannot have
justification from the Law; therefore all men must be content to deny
themselves, and go out of themselves, and seek perfect righteousness in
another, to wit, even from the Son of God sent into the world, that he may be
made man for us; and the end of the Law, for righteousness to all which
believe.


Tim. What are we to learn from these words, that GOD sent his own Son?


Silas. These three several Lessons. First, the distinction of the persons in
the Trinity; for if the Son be sent from the Father, of necessity he is a
person distinct from the Father; which confuteth Sabelius, who held a
distinction not of persons, but of names. Secondly, that Christ is the son of
God otherwise then we are, even his own son, that is, consubstantiall and
coequall with the Father, contrary to the Arrians, who denied the eternal
Godhead of the Son, whom they make an inferior second created God, that is,
indeed not a God at all. Thirdly, hence we learn, that when the high and
sovereign cause of our salvation is sought for, we may not stay in Christ
himself, but arise up unto the goodness of God the Father, sending his Son:
which confuteth such as will have foreseen faith and works to be the moving
cause of appointing us unto salvation; when as Christ himself is not the
impulsive moving cause of appoynting us unto salvation, but Gods own love
moved him to give and send Christ unto us, John 3. 16.


Tim. What is the use of this third and last lesson?


Silas. It does admonish all the faithful, that since God freely out of his
love sent his Son for them; therefore it is their duty to send their hearts unto
him, wholly to be his, as men send mutually gifts one to another. Romans 12. 1.


Tim. What is meant here by the similitude of sinful flesh?


Silas. The meaning is, that Christ being sent of his Father, became a very
man, having the true nature of a man, being like to all other men except sin:
also by flesh is here meant, humane nature consisting of body and soul, being
considered without corruption of sin.


Tim Why does he say, in the similitude of flesh?


Silas. To teach us that Christ's manhood not only seemed and appeared, but
indeed was such, as is the manhood and nature of every other man. Secondly, to
show us, that howsoever a natural eye could see nothing but the form of a
man, yet that he had another, even a divine nature, not to be perceived but by
the eye of faith,


Tim. Why is sin added here and put to flesh?


Sil. First, because humane nature as we bear it, is corrupted with sin: but
Christ took it pure without sin. Secondly, our nature as Christ took it,
though it were free from the contagion of sin, yet it was not free from the
effects and fruits of sin; for he was subject to hunger, thirst, cold,
nakedness, weariness, and death it self: which because they are the
necessary consequents of sin, therefore are they here called by the name of
sin.


Tim. What is the instruction that arises from these words being thus opened?


Silas. That Christ was truly incarnate and made man for our sakes: as God
taking mercy on lost mankind, is the efficient cause of our freedom, so his
Son sent, is the material cause of our freedom.


Tim. Wherefore was the Son of God rather to take humane nature then the nature
of Angels?


Silas. Because the purpose of God was to redeem and Heb. 2, 15. 16.
save, not the Angels but mankind: which as it does express the greatness of
Gods love to man, so it must greatly excite and stir up man's love to God: for
it is very considerable, that men and Angels are both sinners, yet the remedy
was allowed to us.


Tim. But wherefore was the Son of God, to take man's nature pure without sin?


Sil. Because otherwise he could neither have been made Christ had not saved us
from sin, being himself a sinner.
a sacrifice for us, nor righteousness to us: for had he had our nature with
the least sin, he could not only have bin no Savior to us, but himself
should have stood in need of a Savior, and in stead of giving righteousness
to others, must have received righteousness from another.


Tim. But how was it possible to sever sin and our nature one from the other?


Sil. Well enough, he that severed them in the first Adam by creation, could
tell how to sever them in the second Adam by incarnation; as he will at length
sever them in all believers at their glorification, sin being but an accident
which may be separated without hurt to the subject.


Tim. What is the use of this?


Sil. First, to move us to bless God who has given us Heb. 7. 25.
a Savior holy and separated from sin and sinners. Secondly, to hunger and
thirst after the sanctity and pureness of Christ's humane nature, seeing we
have so great need of it, to cover our most unholy and defiled nature, the
infection whereof alone is enough to condemn us without this remedy.


Tim. What was it that Christ did for us being made man?


Sil. He did for sin condemn sin in the flesh.


Tim. What is meant here by condemn?


Silas. Not to punish or exact punishment for sin, but to abolish and take away
sin at once out of man's nature; as the word is used 1 Pet. 4. 6. condemnation
being put for that which follows it, as condemned persons use to be taken out
of the world that they may be no more: so is sin from us by the imputation of
Christ's perfectly sanctified manhood: for though sin remain in the godly, yet
it is as if it were not, being not imputed; as Augustine said, Quicquid ille
non imputare decreuit, sic est quasi non fuerat.


Tim. What is to be understood by this word when he says (for sin?)


Silas. Some interpret (for sin) of sin, because sin did unjustly set upon
Christ to get him to dye, and to be crucified, see John 16, 9. Secondly for
sin, by some does signify for remission of sins. Romans 5, 6, 8. Thirdly,
some interpret for sin, to be a sacrifice for sin, 2 Cor. 5, 21. but I take it
this word, for sin, must be joined to the word (sent) and then it notes the
final cause or end, for the which Christ became man, namely, to take away,
chase, and drive sin out of our nature which he took upon him; for this text
speaks of his incarnation, and not of his sacrifice and death.


Tim. What is our instruction then from these last words?


Sylas. This, that all true Christians stand in extreme need, not only of
his passion and death, in being made a curse, or of his perfect obedience in
doing the will of God in his life; but of his very incarnation, and of his most
holy and pure manhood: because otherwise it is not possible that ever any
believing Christian should be saved, but that they should all perish: and
Christ with whatsoever he is or has, as by testimony of Scripture given to us,
ordained for us and our Salvation.


Tim. Why do ye say sa, how can they perish for whom Christ dyed, and for
whom he has kept the law?


Silas. Because none can have eternal life in Heaven, unless they have the
absolute perfect righteousness which the law exacteth, one principal part
whereof is the perfect intregity of our nature; our will and reason being
conformed and fashioned agreeably to the perfect justice of God revealed in his
law, so as there be not the least inclination, or pronnesse to any evil, but
a through disposition to every good thing. This full perfection the law is not
able (as we have heard) to effect and work in us, because it is weak through
our corruption, whereby we are made unable to answer it. And therefore if we
should not find this perfect righteousness and integrity, which the law
requires of them that are to live for ever, in the humane nature of Christ,
and have it allowed and given to such as doc believe in him, it were impossible
that any should be saved, because nothing that is unclean and unholy, shall
enter into the new Jerusalem, Revel. 21, 27. and our nature even after
regeneration and faith, it is still defiled by the remainder of sin. Howbeit
Christ is not divided, he that has one part of his Mediatorship, has the
whole, like a Ladder where no one stale can be lacking.


Tim. What profit is there to be made of this?


Silas. First, it teaches Christians to be no less thankful for Christ's
incarnation, then for his passion. Secondly, it serucs to humble even the
godliest that are, to think upon their dwelling and remaining sin, for the
abolishing whereof, God must defcend and be made man. Thirdly, it helps to
comfort the weak ones, when they are tempted to doubt of their salvation
through the inbred corruption which they carry about them, and prouokes them to
sin against God. Let them by a true faith consider of Christ his most perfect
natural innocence, that it is no less reckoned to them for healing their
defiled nature, then his obedience and sufferings for remission of actual
sins, and acquiting them from eternal destruction.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 4. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled


Silas. First, it overthrows all Popish additions of men's merits, which are to
be abhorred, howsoever covered and colored with the name of Christ. 2. It
admonishes al men to seek after the true distinct knowledge of Christ, and to
desire to know nothing but him unto their Salvation; hungring after his
righteousness, wherein stands their full and perfect happiness.


Tim. What is the other instruction out of this first part of the verse?


Silas. That the whole righteousness of Christ, and whatsoever is in him, is
theirs which are his members by faith.


Tim. By what means may we know them which are thus his members?


Silas. By this mark, that they walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit.


Tim. But wherefore does the Apostle repeat this, having mentioned it before?


Sil. Because faith, by the which we are in Christ, being an inward and hidden
thing seated in the heart, may easily be counterfeited by hypocrites, who if
they do, say, profess and glory (as they are apt enough to do) that they are
in Christ; there is none can controlle them, because none can see what is
within their heart. And howsoever such as are in Christ and have faith, cannot
deceive themselves: yet many do, by thinking that they are in Christ, and have
faith when they have not, presuming of what they never received.

This moved the Apostle here again to mention such a witness of our being in
Christ, which is outward and more subject to sense, and therefore less apt to
deceive, namely, newness of life, or sanctification; which is such a thing, as
without it we can never assure our selves that our sins are forgiven by
Christ, and that we are free from condemnation. For though it be not the
proper cause of our comfort, yet it is a cause without the which we can have no
sound comfort, because it is joined unseparably with justification: for God
does ever sanctify by his Spirit, whom he does justify by faith: also
newness of life is a sure testimony of a lively faith, which makes us certain
of our reconciliation with God. Moreover, newness of life, is a fruit of the
Spirit, and it is a chiese part of our thankfulness to God, who is then most
honored, when his will is sincerely obeyed.


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it reproues the hypocrites, who say they have sanctification,
and yet still walk after their own corrupt lusts. Secondly, it admonishes
all to labor for sanctification, without which there is no certainty of
justification to be had. Lastly, it much confirms such Christians, as labor
to lead their lives purely after the motions of Gods Spirit, stiuing against
the lusts of the flesh; grieuing heartily with a godly sorrow for their daily
failings of infirmities, rising by true repentance, laying hold upon
forgiveness promised of Christ in the Gospel, and ever after walking more
awfully and warily, and endeavoring to profit to better and greater obedience of
the word; let not such despair.


DIAL. V.
Verse 5. For they that are after the flesh savor the things of the flesh, and
they that are after the Spirit, savor the things of the Spirit.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Sil. The Apostle having turned himself again to the doctrine of
sanctification, affirms of all believing justified persons, that they study
to live and lead an holy life; this he declares by a comparison of
contraries after this manner. They which are after the flesh walk after the
flesh, and live wickedly: but they which are after the Spirit, walk after the
Spirit, and live godly.


Tim. Now expound the words, and tell us who they are that are said to be after
the flesh?


Sylas. Unregenerate and wicked men, who are nothing (...) spirit: even as
carnal men guided by the flesh, are wholly given and addicted to such works
as be evil. The reason hereof is that which our Savior says Math. 12, 33.
make the tree good, and the fruit will be good: also it is the nature of the
spirit and grace of God, to move and provoke unto such works as be like it
self; that is to say, holy and good works, as the spirit is holy and good.


Tim. But many godly persons which are after the spirit, have both thought upon
and done the things of the flesh: as David, and Peter, etc. How then is it
said that they which are after the spirit, savor the things of the spirit?


Sil. It is so, yet godly persons are not moved to those evil works by the
spirit, but by remaining flesh and dwelling sin: for the godly are sanctified
in part, and not perfectly and wholly: therefore it is that they are still
subject to sin; which as they do not commit by full consent of will, so they
rise again from it by repentance. Secondly, a spiritual and godly person must
not be judged by one or some few acts and deeds of his life, but by the tenor
of it, and as it is for the most part: now for the most part, godly men do
savor and mind the things of the spirit; their desire is to live honestly, and
to keep an unspotted conscience toward God and all men.


Tim. Show us now the profit that is to be gathered out of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it teaches that all believing justified persons, much exercise
themselves in such works as are commanded of God: for justification by faith,
wheresoever it is, it has always annexed with it sanctification, or study of
an holy life; which can no more be separated from it, then a living man can
be separated from the Soul. Secondly, here is a special comfort for such as
endeavor to do good things pleasing to God, with love and delight in them;
because such have the spirit of Christ, and therefore are certainly justified,
free from sin and death, and shall never be condemned, but eternally saved in
heaven. Lastly, it affoards a reproof to such as say they have the spirit of
Christ, and yet savor not the things of the spirit, being either openly
vicious and wicked, or else careless of a godly conversation, neither fearing
the offense of God, nor yet once in earnest minding his glory.


DIAL. VI.
Verse 6. For the wisdom of the flesh is death, but the wisdom of the Spirit
is life and peace.


Tim. WHat does this text contain?


Silas. Unto the doctrine of sanctification set forth in the 5. v. here is now
joined an exhortation, stirring up believing persons unto holiness of life.
Secondly, a dehortation to dissuade from following the lusts of the flesh, and
living wickedly.


Tim. By what argument and reason does he call men from walking after the lusts
of the flesh?


Sylas. By a reason taken from the effects, thus; To live after the flesh,
following and obeying the lusts thereof, will bring forth death; and therefore
we must not savor and affect the things of the flesh, but eschew them rather.


Tim. By what reason are believers persuaded to savor the things of the
spirit, or to live holily?


Silas. By a reason taken from the effects after this sort: To savor the
things of the spirit, does bring forth life and peace: therefore we are bound
to follow the affections of the spirit, endeavoring diligently and uprightly to
perform and do such good works as we shall be moved unto by the holy Spirit
working in us.


Tim. Let us now hear you expound the words, and tell us what is here meant by
flesh?


Silas. That same vicious and naughty quality of sin, powered into our nature
from our conception, by carnal generation: whereby both in our reason and
will, we are wholly inclined to all sinful things, and not at all disposed to
any good, but rather clean bent against every good thing. Genesis 6, 5, Colo. 1,
21.


Tim. What is here signified by wisdom?


Silas. The concupiscence, lust, and desires of the flesh, or man's sinful
nature, as Gala, 5, 24. They which are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts. The word Phronema, may indifferently be interpreted
wisdom, sense, affections, desires, or lust: so that the meaning of the first
word should be this: That which corrupt nature lusts after and desires, if
it be obeyed, leads to death.


Tim. Why would the Apostle call the desire and lust of sinning by such a word
as signifies (wisdom?)


Silas. For two causes: first, for that unto carnal wicked men, it seems
wisdom to desire and do wicked things: for wicked men apply all their wit,
subtilty, policy, and See this in the story of Pbaraoh, Exodus 1, 2 etc Also of
Nebuchad (...), and (...) in Daniell.
craft, how to contriue and effect wicked and sinful purposes, being wise to
do evil, and being done, glorying in it, as if it had been wisely done.
Secondly, to teach us that that which is in man (being unregenerate) most
noble, and most highly esteemed of (to wit, his wisdom understanding and
counsel,) it is a corrupt and deadly thing, leading and guiding men in such
paths and ways as will at last bring them to euerlisting destruction: so
far off it is, that natural wisdom should be able to perceive the things
of God, and to direct men to do things pleasing unto God, seeing it is darkness
and enmity unto him.


Tim. What is the instruction you gather from hence?


Silas. First, it admonishes evil men not to rejoice in Ier. 9, 23.
their wisdom, which is such an evil and deadly thing, 1 Cor. 3, 18. 19, 20.
being severed from Christ. Secondly, it warns the godly to examine even
their wittiest thoughts and devises; to be humbled for them, if they come from
the flesh. Let the best and quickest wits most suspect and look most carefully
to themselves.


Tim. What is here meant by death?


Silas. A deadly thing, as before, Romans 7, 24. Where sin is called the body
of death. The reason why sin or the lust thereof is counted a deadly thing
is, first, because it comes from such persons as are dead in trespasses and
sins, Ephe, 2, 1. Secondly, because the lust of sin brings forth death
eternal, and deserves it as a proper and meritorious cause of it, Romans 6, 23.


Tim. How comes it that the sins which men do here in a short time, merit
punishment which is without any limit or end?


Silas. First, because God has so decreed it, it is his own ordinance and
appointment, that the soul that sins shall dye, Ezekiel, 18, 20. Secondly, an
infinite and eternal Justice is offended by sinners. Thirdly, because sin in
wicked men grows unto perfection, and they which follow sinful lusts would do
it for ever, if they might live for ever.


Tim. What is the instruction that arises from these words [in death?]


Sil. First, that the godly from hence are to be warned to avoid and abhor
every sinful lust and desire, because it deserves death eternal: wherewith
howsoever God will not punish the faithful, because there is no condemnation
to them, being in Christ; yet it stands them much upon, greatly to take heed
of loving and doing that which may make them guilty of such horrible pain in
Hell fire. A wise man would not deserve the loss of his temporal life, though
he were sure to be pardoned. What madness then were it to deserve the loss of
eternal life upon hope of pardon? Secondly, the wicked from hence are also to
be warned, that as they abhor death, and would not dye and perish
everlastingly both in body and soul: so let them beware that they go not on
to fulfill their fleshly and sinful desires of pride, covetousness, envy,
etc. For he that is truth it self, has spoken it, that the wisdom of the
flesh is death, and all unclean persons shall be cast into the burning lake,
Revel. 21, 27.


Tim. Come we now to the next words, and tell us what is meant here by the
Spirit, and by the wisdom of the Spirit?


Silas. By Spirit is here meant holiness and newness of life which is here
called the Spirit, because the Spirit (...) wisedeme of the flesh?


Silas. The affections and lusts of our corrupt nature: which are of two sorts.
The first sort be in the understanding part of the soul, called the mind, as
counsel, discourse of reason, purposes, drifts, thoughts, desires, motions,
together with all actions taken in hand by carnal wisdom; yea, the very
principles and beginnings of this carnal wisdom, as they be in men
unregenerate, they are wholly infected with natural blindness and unbelief,
being utterly displeasing to God. The second sort be seated in the will, and
do flow from thence, as anger, wrath, envy, covetousness, pride, emulation,
etc. with all the actions that proceed from such lusts.


Tim. Wherefore are these affections and lusts called by the name of [wisedome?]


Silas. Because carnal men are wise to do evil, esteeming it not the least
wisdom to plotte and perform sinful deeds. See before.


Tim. What is here meant by enmity?


Silas. Enmity does signify an adversary, an enemy, or one that fights
against another. The Apostle does rather choose to say [Enmity] then enemy,
because enmity is a word of greater force and vehemence, serving more to
increase and aggrauate the naughtiness and hurt of sin. For it shows that
the lust of the flesh, does greatly strive against God, as an extreme enemy of
his. See the like speech, Phil. 1, 21. For Christ is to me both in life and in
death, advantage, or gain, that is, very gainefull.


Tim. Does not this enmity argue that once there was friendship between God
the Creator, and men his Creatures?


Silas. It does so: for there was a friendship between them, at the first
creation of man, when God printed in man's soul, the image of himself,
consisting in perfect knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness; then did
God love man, and man did love God again. This friendship was broken off by
the malice of Satan, inspiring the hearts of our first parents, with
unbelief, pride, and sin, from whence arise this fearful enmity, God
extremely hating man for sin, and man through sinful affections, extremely
hating God. For sin made a separation, and divorced the Creator from the
Creature, which were sweetly linked together in an holy and happy Communion.


Tim. How may it be made clear unto us, that all natural and unregenerate men
be enemies to God?


Silas. By this reason, because their flesh or corrupt nature neither is
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. For such conjunction is
between God and his law, as to be enemy to either, makes us enemies to both.


Tim. What is meant here by not being subject to the law of God?


Silas. Thus much: the not yielding and obeying the law of God, but rather
resisting, rebelling, or rising up against it, after an enemy-like fashion,
loving and practicing that which Gods law forbids, and hating and eschuing that
which the law of God commands.


Tim. What will follow of all this?


Silas. That they which are in the flesh, that is to say, carnal and natural
men not renewed by the Spirit of God, such cannot please God, but are void of
his grace, being under death and damnation. Moreover, from hence does follow
even the very quite contrary; as namely, that the wisdom of the Spirit
submits it self to the law of God, being willingly subject and obedient to
it. And therefore they which are in the Spirit, endued with true holiness by
the work of the Spirit, they do please God and are his friends, and be in his
favor free from condemnation, and are in the way that leads to life and
peace. This contrariety and opposition, the Apostle does conceal, either
because it was manifest and plain enough to be understood; or for that the
wisdom of the flesh, and the wisdom of the Spirit, do not cause death and
life after one sort and fashion. For the former causes death, as an efficient
and meritorious cause, deserving it in strictness of justice; the latter
causes life and peace, as a way and means leading thereunto by Gods merciful
ordinance, and as a cause without which no man can ever attain happiness in
Heaven.


Tim. Having now opened and expounded the Text, let us hear what we are to
learn from hence for our profit and use?


Silas. This present Text serves and helps us to confute errors, to instruct
us in the truth, to humble the pride of our nature, and to comfort our feeble
minds. The errors that are here confuted, are first, such as restrain
Confutation.
the wisdom of the flesh to sensuality, thinking our appetite or senses,
only to be enemies to God, resisting his law; whereas our very reason and will
are defiled with sin, and be thereby turned against God, and bent against his
law. Secondly, the error of the Papists, which condemn marriage of Ministers,
because it is said, such cannot please God, which be in the flesh. Pope
Syrtius so concluded and collected from this Text. Thirdly, the error of the
Manichees, which thought that the very substance of the flesh and body, was the
work of the Devil, and sinful, because it is written, the wisdom of the
flesh is enmity with God; whereas flesh signifies not our substance, but the
vicious quality of sin cleaving to our substance. Fourthly, the error of the
Pelagians and Papists touching free will, of which they teach, that it was able
to love God and to be subject to his law without grace, or at the least being
a little helped by Gods Spirit, it could refuse grace, or receive it, if it
list, as the Papists teach; whereas indeed our free will is dead in trespasses
and sins, an enemy to God, and can no more without grace be subject to God,
to love and obey his law, or believe his promises, then an enemy abiding so,
can or will love his enemy, and be subject to him.

Secondly, the truths that are here taught, are these. Instruction.
First, that Satan's malice against mankind, is most extreme, in that he
has poisoned not only the inferior parts of our soul, but the chief and
most noble parts, even our reason, mind, and will: yea, the whole heart with
the contagion of sin. Secondly, that all men naturally are in a most wretched
and most woeful estate, being enemies and rebels to God, proudly and
obstinately bent against him, and he justly against us, to destroy us with
eternal wrath; as that subject must needs perish, that has the King his
enemy, and that pot must needs be broken, that fights against the Potter.

Thirdly, this Text serves to humble us, by remembering Humiliation.
and believing, that we were once in this wretched estate, and have in us still
some wisdom of the flesh, rebelling against God, Romans 7, 22, 23.

Lastly, this Text serves to comfort us, thus: If Christ Consolation.
by his death reconciled us to God, when by sin we were his enemies, he will
much more preserve us being reconciled to him, Romans 5, 10. Also Romans 8, 32. The
consideration hereof, should provoke all believers to greater love and
thankfulness to Christ Jesus, the greater his love appeared in restoring unto
us the friendship of God which we had lost by sin.


DIAL IX.
Verse 9. Now ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, because the spirit of
God dwells in you: but if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. An application of the former doctrine unto the believing and Christian
Romans. For that which he before had generally taught of the sanctification of
the Spirit, and of the desire and study both of spiritual and carnal men,
he does now particularly apply it to the Saints at Rome, as his manner is.
The sum whereof is thus much; That they which are after the flesh and carnal
men, savor the things of the flesh wholly minding and caring for things that
be carnal and evil; and so they with their course of life perish as enemies
to God; whereas spiritual men mind and care for spiritual and good things,
pleasing God as his friends and children. From whence the Apostle does gather,
that seeing the Romans were not in the flesh, but in the spirit, spiritual
not carnal men: therefore they were none of Gods enemies, but his friends and
children, being reconciled unto him and pleasing him made partakers of his
spirit and of his Son, and therefore free from condemnation, as he had
universally taught in the first verse of this Chapter.


Tim. What may we learn for our instruction, from this preceding and method of
the Apostle?


Silas. From hence we learn the way of cutting and dividing the word of God
aright, to be this: namely first, to propound doctrine generally, setting it
forth by similitudes, confirming it by reasons. Secondly, to descend to
particular applying it to the use of every Christian in the assembly, for
teaching, confuting, reproouing, for exhorting, and for comforting: this
application is the life and soul of doctrine, and as a whetstone to set an
edge on it; it is frequent in scripture.


Tim. Now show us the sever all parts of this text?


Sylas. The parts be two: first, a proposition in these words, (...) Romans
are not in the flesh; it is set forth by the contrary, but ye are in the
Spirit. Secondly, a confirmation of the things propounded by two prooses or
reasons; the one is taken from the efficient cause; to wit, the Spirit of God
dwelling in them: the second is taken from their communion with Christ, whose
members they are; and therefore cannot be in the flesh but in the spirit.


Tim. What does it signify to be in the flesh?


Silas. It signifies two things in Scripture; one is to be an infirm and
weak man, to have flesh, and body, and soul, as other frail men have, 2 Cor.
10, 3. Secondly, to be carnal and unregenerate, as we are all by nature; to
wit, when in all our actions we are all ruled and governed by the sense and
affection of our nature, not yet regenerate by Christ; thus it must be taken
here.


Tim. Is there any difference between being in the flesh, and having flesh in
us?


Silas. Yea very much; for the most godly which are most renewed, yet still
have some flesh and corruption in them, being regenerate in part only; as we
have seen out of the 7. Chapter to the Romans, in the example of Paul: but to
be in the flesh, agrees to men wholly unregenerate.


Tim. Whereunto does this interpretation serve us?


Silas. First, to reprove such as do interpret this clause of Marriage, as the
Pope Syritius did, thereby to condemn the marriage of Ministers. Secondly, it
does admonish us, that it is a danger always to understand the Scripture
according to the proper signification of the words; for then we must say, that
there are men living that are without flesh, and bone, blood and body; because
Paul says here of the living and believing Romans, that they are not in the
fleshut is therefore a figurative speech to be understood of the corruption of
nature: in Scripture Dianoia and not To rheton only must be observed.


Tim What is it to be in the Spirit?


Silas. First, that the elect though they be borne in sin yet do not always
abide in the estate of corruption, but are translated into the estate of grace,
being of mere carnal men, partly spiritual. Secondly though many at once
have both flesh and spirit in them, yet none can be both in the flesh and in
the Spirit, these are such contraries as they cannot stand together. Thirdly,
that it is the essential property and most certain rule of a Christian, by all
means to avoid the affections of the flesh, and in all things to be carried by
the Spirit. Lastly, we are taught by this example, of Paul to judge charitably
of such Christians, which profess Christ and do not things contrary unto
their profession, that they are not carnal but spiritual. This is the cannon
and rule of Charity, which indeed is not so certain but that it may deceive,
because it cannot look to things within, and hypocrites bear a show of piety
without substance. Therefore the spirit of discerning spirits, is a great
blessing, the Apostles excelled in it.


Tim. Come we now to the reasons to prove that they are not in the flesh but in
the spirit.


Sil. The first reason is this; The spirit of God dwells in you, therefore ye
are not in the flesh to walk after it, but in the spirit.


Tim. What is meant here by the spirit of God?


Sylas. The third person in the Trinity, called the Holy Ghost; and the word
God, is put personally for God the Father, the first person in Trinity, of
whom the spirit proceeds; so as he is also the spirit of the Son.


Tim. What do ye learn by this, that he is called the spirit of God?


Silas. That the Holy Ghost does proceed from God the Father, John 15, 26. As
also from God the Son; and therefore he is in the latter part of this verse,
called the spirit of Christ.


Tim. What is signified here, by the dwelling of the spirit in us?


Silas. The word (dwelling) is taken from men which dwell in houses; who do
not only possess their houses, but command and govern all things therein, at
their pleasure: likewise the holy Spirit not only filles the hearts of the
faithful, but also rules and gouernes them, enlightening them to know, and
directing them to do things pleasing unto God, according to the measure of the
Spirit. For howsoever the flesh may rebel, yet the Spirit still possesses
the godly, and has the dominion and upper hand.


Tim. What does this borrowed speech of dwelling put us in mind of?


Sil. Not only of the efficacy of the Spirit, but of his continuance in the
faithful unto the end. For he is not in us as a guest to lodge for a night and
be gone, but as an Inhabitant to dwell and abide in us, even to the death, and
for ever, John, 14, 23. The Spirit which I will give you shall abide with you
for ever. Therefore they are in an error, who think that the Spirit of Christ
once had, can be utterly lost. Indeed false doctrine and corrupt manners may
hinder the working of the Spirit, but cannot extinguish the grace of the
Spirit. Secondly, this word [dwelling] puts us in mind of the presence of the
Spirit in the faithful, that it is not by immensity and infiniteness of his
poweras in other Creatures, but by presence of grace and of his healthful
effects.


Tim. How manifold is the grace of the Spirit which belongs specially unto
the elect?


Silas. Threefold: First, union with Christ, to be one with Christ, as his
members, whereof follow union with his perfect justice and all merit.
Secondly, sanctification to be made new Creatures, to be able to hate evil,
and to love and do good. Thirdly, adoption, and sealing up to us our
salvation: The Spirit witnesses to us that we are the Children of God.


Tim. What be the effects of the Spirit?


Silas. Sundry, but especially two: First, to lead us into all truth,
sufficient to our salvation. Secondly, to strengthen and comfort our hearts
under the Cross. John. 14.


Tim. What lessons learn we from hence, that the Spirit dwells in the
faithful?


Sil. First, the blessed condition of true believers, for whom Christ not only
dyed and rose again, justifying them by faith; but also by his Spirit
regenerates and quickens them to make them lively members of himself.
Secondly, the man which has in him the Spirit of Christ dwelling, cannot
follow and obey the lusts of the flesh, and they which be such, they have not
the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them. Lastly, as all in the house do submit
themselves unto the command of the chief House-holder, so Gods Children are
content to be at the direction and (...) after the Spirit, in newness of life,
Romans 8, 5, 6, 9.


Tim. Having now showed after what sort we are joined to Christ by faith, show
us after what sort Christ by his spirit, does (...) himself unto us?


Silas. First, Christ gives the elect his Spirit, to incorporate them into
himself, 1 Cor. 6, 17. Secondly, the same his spirit does regenerate them, and
quicken their souls by grace, that they may become his lively members. Ephesians.
2, 1, 4, 5. Thirdly, upon the elect being now become his members, he bestows
his benefits by his spirit, giving them righteousness, holiness, peace, joy,
and life. Fourthly, he puts his spirit into them, to direct and govern them
in the ways of God, that they may do the works pleasing to him. Note this,
that these several actions of faith and of the spirit, howsoever in the order
of causes some go before, others follow, and some are felt of us before
others, yet in respect of time they are all wrought together.


Tim. What instructions are we to learn from this spiritual union?


Silas. First we learn what a noble work our Union with Christ is, unto which
are required so many several actions both of faith and of the spirit.
Secondly, we are taught, that this union is to be taught and prized above all
things as being the foundation and root of all that good which we have by
Christ. Thirdly, it confutes such as have thought our union with Christ to have
been a natural commixtion of substances, his and ours together; or to be
nothing else but an agreement between minds and wills, such as may be between
friends, or man and wife, or Prince and subject. Lastly, it does admonish all
men what a needful thing it is, to be endued with faith and the spirit, seeing
without these there can be no union had with Christ.


Tim. And if we have no union with Christ through the spirit and faith, can we
not be Christians?


Silas. Without this union we may be Christians by profession, and before
men, but before God we cannot; for it is plainly said, If we have not the
spirit of Christ, we are none of his. And if we neither have Christ's spirit,
nor be none of his, we cannot be Christians otherwise then in name: for as a
branch and a member are said to live so long, as they do partake in the juice
of the Vine, and life of the body, from whence being severed, they are dead
and withered, cut off, and cast out: so it is with us, we have the life of a
Christian by being Christ's, and having his spirit, John 15, 1, 2, 3. Gal. 2, 20.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this point, that every true Christian is
one with Christ, and has his spirit?


Silas. First, this reprooues such as use to excuse their sins, by saying
they are flesh and blood, and not spiritual; which is as much to say, as that
they are no Christians: for if they be of the body of Christ, they must of
necessity have his spirit, and be spiritual. Secondly, it reproues the
Papists, that withhold the Scriptures from Gods people, upon pretense that
they have not Gods spirit; they might even as well say that they are no
Christians. For to be a member of Christ, and to be led by the spirit of
Christ, they be things that go necessarily together, and cannot be pulled
asunder, no more the^ can a living member of a natural body, be severed from
the soul; even so can no Christian be without Christ's spirit. Lastly, this
reproues such as say, we must always doubt, whether we have the spirit of
Christ or no, which we ought no more to doubt of, then whether we be
Christians or no.


Tim. I, but many pretend themselves to be one with Christ, and to have his
spirit, and so to be good Christians which yet are not? How then shall we be
sure of these things?


Sil. We shall surely know it by the effects of our spiritual union, to wit,
Justification and the fruits thereof, as they are laid forth, Romans 5, 1, 2, 3,
4. 5, 11. Also by the effects of our Sanctification, as they are laid forth,
Romans 7, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Psalm. 15. throughout. 2 Pet. 1, 6, 7.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin: but the
Spirit is life for righteousness sake.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. A comfortable conclusion, drawn from the spiritual union, which the
believers have with Christ, as thus: The faithful which have Christ dwelling
in them by his spirit, may be certain of the salvation of their souls,
without all perplexed doubting, wavering, and fear of condemnation.


Tim. In what manner, and how is this conclusion of comfort brought in?


Silas. By a Prolepsis or preoccupation, by the preventing a secret Objection,
which he propounds and answers. The Objection is this; To what end is it to
be Christ's, and to have his Spirit in us, sithence we must die as others? Unto
which objection the Apostle answers, that our bodies indeed because of sin
still remaining in them, are dead or mortal; but the Spirit is life, because of
righteousness. This text then has two parts, an objection and an answer to it.


Tim. Now to the words, and tell us what is meant by this particle [If?]


Silas. This particle [If,] signifies for so much; it doubts not, it
reasons, affirms, or demonstratiuely concludes. An argumentatiueparticle
or word, and not dubitatiue.


Tim. What is it for Christ to be in us?


Sil. It is all one with our being in him: both these speeches signify the
most secret spiritual joining or union of Christ and his members.


Tim. What is here meant by [Body,] and by [Dead.] As also why is this added,
[Because of sin?]


Silas. By body, some understand the flesh, or unregenerate part of man
figuratively: but it would be taken properly for that part of man, called the
body. The reason is, because body is never found put for sin, without some
addition; also by (dead) is signified mortal or subject to death, Romans 6. 12.
or frail and corruptible, Phil. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. moreover (sin) is added to
show the true cause of mortality; to wit, sin which brought in death. Genesis 3,
19. Romans 5. 12. now the bodies of the Saints being not void of sin,
therefore they be obnoxious and lyeable to death.


Tim. What does righteousness signify?


Silas. It well may be interpreted either of Christ's righteousness imputed to
faith; or of righteousness inherent and begun in our hearts by the
regenerating Spirit. If we take it of the former, the sense will be thus much,
viz. The soul or spirit shall live through righteousness imputed to the
believer, because he being justified and freed from guilt of sin, is also
thereby to be absolved and set free from death eternal; which being removed,
life eternal must needs come in the room as a necessary fruit and
consequence of righteousness imputed, Romans 1. 17. The just by faith shall
live, Romans 5. 18. But if we take the latter sense, then it will have this
se^ce, not as any meritorious cause of it: but because it is a certain
undeceivable sign of imputed righteousness, to which life eternal belongs:
also of Christ his spirit dwelling in us, and of our communion with Christ; al
which are soundly witnessed by our imperfect righteousness or holiness of
life; as trees known by the fruit.


Tim. What instructions do arise from hence?


Silas. The first is this, that all men, even the godly are frail and mortal,
which is proved, Heb. 9, 27. also by experience, and reason, which is dwelling
sin; whereof seeing none be free, therefore all be frail and under death.


Tim. What use of this instruction?


Silas. It serves much to shake off pride and security, and to provoke all to
watchfulness and humbleness. Should dust be proud? should man be secure,
seeing he must die and come to judgment?


Tim. What is the answer to this objection?


Silas. The Spirit is life because of righteousness.


Tim. What is meant here by the Spirit?


Sylas. Some by the spirit will have meant the Holy Ghost, the spirit of God
and Christ dwelling in us; and then the meaning is, though we carry about us
mortal bodies, yet the holy Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, is even in this
mortality, the earnest and pledge of immortal life in heaven. But by Spirit
here is meant the spiritual part of man, to wit, the soul being (...) by the
spirit of God. The opposition between the spirit and the body, do require this
sense.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. A singular comfort against the terror of death, and the horror
conceived from the putrefaction and rottenness of the body in the grave, that
howsoever the body must die by the decree of God: yet the soul being sure of
eternal life, shall live for ever with Christ in heaven, the better part shall
be well, even most happy; and the worst part the body, must follow in time:
for being both the members of Christ, and temples of the Spirit, both must be
vessels of celestial glory.


Tim. What other instruction from hence?


Silas. Whosoever is righteous indeed by inherent and imputed righteousness,
he may be undoubtedly sure, that he shall live for ever eternally with God:
first in his soul, then in his body. The reason is, because such have the
beginning of eternal life, and therefore are sure of the possession. For God
will finish that which he begins, also he will keep his promise.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It should cause every one to search whether he be justified and
sanctified. He that finds these upon due examination, finds strong testimony
of his eternal salvation; whereof the less we doubt, the more sure we are of
righteousness.

Secondly, it affoordes a sharp reproof to such as are unrighteous, as their
lives do show; yet promise to them selves life eternal, and profess the hope
of it: these lie and deal not truly, whosoever says that he shall live
happily, and yet has no care to live holily. He that walks in darkness and
says, that he has communion with light, does deceive himself.


DIAL. X.
Verse 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
Mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. A Consolation taken from the, effects of the Spirit, raising up our
vile bodies, unto a glorious life. It does naturally arise from the former
verse after this fashion. Our bodies when they be dead, and do lie and rot in
the grave, they shall be quickened again at the last day by the power of Christ's
spirit. The sum whereof is thus much: that howsoever death and corruption in
the grave be things very terrible; yet for all that, this is no small comfort
unto the faithful, that the same Spirit which at their death gives eternal
life to them as concerning their souls, shall also at the length quicken their
bodies, that the whole man may live, and be blessed for ever.


Tim. Let us now come to expound the words, and tell us what is meant here by
[Him,] and the [Spirit of him?]


Sil. By him is meant God the Father; from whom, because the holy Ghost
proceeds, therefore it is called his Spirit, or the Spirit of him.


Tim. What is meant here by Jesus, and the raising him up from the dead?


Tim. By Jesus is meant the body of Jesus, which being crucified and dead, was
quickened again the third day: and this is called the raising up Jesus from the
dead. A Synecdoche of the whole for a part.


Tim. What do ye learn from these words thus opened and declared?

(...)
Tim. What is the sum of this 12. verse?


Silas. That Christians must not live after the flesh, (but after the Spirit,)
which though it be not expressed, yet it must be understood by the law of
contraries.


Tim. By what argument is this exhortation pressed and urged upon us?


Silas. By four arguments: The first is taken from that which is equal and
honest, verse 12. The second from danger, the third from profit, the fourth
from the easiness of it, verse 13.


Tim. What is the argument taken from honesty?


Silas. It is this: Common honesty requires that every man pay his debt: now
all the faithful are debtors to the Spirit, and therefore we are all bound
to pay this debt, by living after the Spirit.


Tim. What are we to learn generally from this exhortation?


Silas. Two things: First, that in good order of teaching, exhortation must
follow doctrine; the reason is, first because exhortation pierces deeper, and
sticks longer when it is built firmly upon the ground of some doctrine, even
as doctrine becomes more lively, when there is an edge set upon it, by
exhortation. Secondly, from hence we are generally taught, that it is a point
of honesty and justice, to answer and satisfy our debts as it is written,
Rom, 13, 8. Owe nothing to any man. Whereunto add the example of the widow,
mentioned in 2. Kings, 4, 7. who being charged with many Children, yet sold her
substance to pay her debt. See more touching this, upon the Dialogue, Romans 13.
8.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. It reproues sundry sorts of people: First, such as borrow and never
mean to pay, taking all to be their own, that once comes into their purse.
Secondly, such as are of opinion that whatsoever is lent them is their own if
they need it, neither are they bound to restore. Thirdly, such as will pay
their debts, but they do it out of a love not to honesty, but to their own
reputation. Fourth ly, such as wickedly defer payment to the hurt of their
creditours, or wholly defiaude their creditours by unjust tricks. Fifthly, such
as discharge their debt but doing it with an ill will, loving them the worse
which have trusted them with their money: that proverb being often fulfilled in
this case: When I lent I was a friend, but when I asked I was unkind. Sixthly,
it rebukes Ministers which pay not the debt of teaching to their people, and
the people that pay not their due and debt of maintenance to their teachers.
Romans 1, 14. I am a debtor to the Grecian. 1 Cor. 914. The Lord has so ordained
it, that they which preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel.


Tim. In what respects, or by what ways do the faithful become debtors to
the Spirit?


Silas. The godly are debtors to the spirit three manner of ways; in respect
of his benefits toward them past present, Genesis 1. 26. This place proves that
our creation is the work of the whole Trinity Psalm. 33, 6.
therefore of the Spirit. Secondly, their regeneration, in that of the children
of wrath, they are become the childeren of God by faith. Ioh. 1, 12. 13. and 3.
5. 6. Thirdly justification, in that they are set free from sin and eternal
death, and accepted as fully righteous, by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness to them. Fourthly calling, whereby they have been drawn unto
the faith in Christ. Fifthly sanctification, whereby sin is mortified that
they may live in newnes of life. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Sixthly, all the graces and
fruits Gal. 5. 22. Secondly, the benefit present, is the spiritual
consolation in all afflictions, together with the government and regiment of
the spirit. Ioh. 16, 7. Romans other gifts of the spirit. Secondly, corrob
oration in grace unto death. 1 Pet. 5, 10. Thirdly, quickening of their souls
at their death with eternal life. Romans 8, 10. Fourthly, quickening of their
dead bodies at the resurrection. Romans 6. 11. Fifthly, the glorification both of
body and soul eternally in heaven. These many and great benefits of the
spirit, do therefore oblige and bind the faithful most straightly unto this
debt, not to-liue after the flesh but after the spirit, which does so many and
great things for us.


Tim. What is it, not to live after the flesh?


Sil. Not to live after the flesh signifies not to live after the motions of
our corrupt nature, but to study to mortify them.


Tim. What, do we ow nothing to the flesh?


Silas. Yes, to our flesh (as it is our substance) we owe love and cherishing;
but to the flesh as it does signify here sin and corruption, we owe nothing,
but crucifying and mortifying of it; for it strives against the spirit, it
rebels against the law of our mind, it leads us captive to sin, it causes us
to do the evil we would not do, and to leave undone the good we would do;
it is an enemy or rather enmity against God, it cannot please God.


Tim. What is it to live after the spirit?


Silas. To strive, take thought, and endeavor to do according to those motions
which are stirred up by the spirit; (to wit,) such thoughts and motions as
agree with the word of the law and Gospel, and such motions we are bound to
follow, for it is our debt: whereas a carnal man will repel such motions as
accord with the word, but a spiritual man will entertain them.


Tim. Show us now what we are to learn from this sentence?


Sil. This one thing, that a godly and a righteous life is a debt which is due
from us to God; the reason hereof is threefold. First, we are Gods creatures,
therefore we are bound to serve him by the law and right of creation.
Secondly, we are redeemed and bought with the price of Christ's blood;
therefore we do owe to him all obedience and service by right of purchase, 1
Cor. 6, 20. Thirdly, all the former benefits given us by the Spirit, do
oblige and bind us to a godly life, by the right of common honesty, which
binds us unto our benefactor.


Tim. What use and profit are we to make of this point of doctrine?


Silas. First, if living godly all our life long be a debt, then it cannot be
that our works should merit with God; for that which is a debt cannot be a
merit, no man merits (not thanks) to pay what he owes. Secondly, this
overthrows the works of supererogation, which if they beo works of the Spirit,
then we ow them of duty; and if they be not such works, then ought they not to
be done. Thirdly, hence we learn, that the doing of good works, or the
leading of a godly life is a thing necessary, though not as a meritorious cause
of salvation, yet as a duty which we are bound to pay, as a debt to the spirit
our benefactor. Lastly, all that live after the spirit, will be obedient to
the word of God; and the more obedient we are to the word of God, the more we
live after the spirit: for the spirit and the word are coupled together by
firm connection. The word is Esaias 59. 21.
understood and obeyed by sanctification of the spirit; and the holy Spirit
persuades to that only which is consonant to the word.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 13. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, but if ye mortify the
deeds of the body by the Spirit ye shall live.


Tim. WHat does this scripture contain?


Sil. New reasons to enforce the sormer exhortation of living after the
Spirit, and not after the flesh that is of leading a holy life; the reasons be
three. The first is from the unprofitableness, or danger if we do live after
the flesh, then we shall dye. Secondly, from the profit which will follow, if
we do live after the Spirit; then we shall live. The third is from the
facility and easiness, because through the grace of the holy Spirit, it will
be an easy thing to lead a godly life.


Tim. Now expound the words, and tell us what it is to live after the flesh?


Silas. To follow and obey the corrupt motions of our blind reason and
perverse will. The danger hereof is death: now all men naturally abhor
death, as a most fearful thing. Therefore as we would abhor such a
miserable and horrible effect as death, we must be careful that we live not
after the flesh, but that we obey the Spirit.


Tim. What death is that which is threatened to those that live after the flesh?


Sil. Not only the natural death which is common unto all, from which even
the godliest are not exempted, but must dye at the last. Again, this death is
so far from terrifying some of the godly, that it gives them much joy and
comfort, and is a thing most desired of them; and therefore these words are not
to be understood of a corporal death alone, which is the dissolution of
nature, but it may partly be understood of a natural death when it is
inflicted upon the godly, as a judgment of some lust of the flesh, which they
have too much followed. As it hapened to Moses, Aaron, Josias, Ely, Numb. 27,
12, 13. Deuteronomy. 32, 49, 50, 51. 2. Kings. 23, 29. 1. Sam. 33, 34, and 4, 11, 18.
Also the Prophet mentioned, 1. Kings, 13, 24. Yea sometimes the obeying some
lust of the flesh, does cost Gods children dear from the hand of civil
justice, as happened to some that perished in the wilderness, 1. Cor. 10, 5.
and to sundry others daily amongst our selves, who come unto public and
shameful death, for some work of the flesh which they have done, and yet no
doubt are the faithful Children of God; as it did befall the Thief upon the
Cross. But that death which is here chiefly to be meant, is eternal death,
which is the casting out of the whole man, both body and soul from Gods
presence, to suffer Hell torments for ever and ever.


Tim. But seeing they which are cast into Hell shall there live for ever how is
this called death?


Sylas. First, as the blessedness of heaven is called life in scripture,
because of all things life is most pleasant: so the miseries of hell are called
death, because death of althings is very miserable and most shunned. Secondly,
though the wicked do live in hell, yet because they are separated from God who
is life, and because they so live, as that they are ever dying, therefore it is
worthily called death.


Tim. The words being thus opened, now let us see what instructions will arise
from hence?


Silas. The instructions are two, the former concerns the wicked, the latter
the godly: for the former, the wicked are here admonished, that if they are
obedient unto the flesh and live wickedly, doing what sin comma^ds, they must
dye and perish for ever, if they continue so, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 20, 21.
Reave. 21. 8. the reason hereof is because the wisdom of the flesh is death,
Romans 8, 6. also because the wages of sin is death Romans 6. 23.


Tim. What is the use of this instruction?


Silas. It affoords an admonition to all such as do live in the service of any
fleshly lust, to forsake it betimes and earnestly, as they do covet not to be
destroyed perpetually; if this move not, yet let them forsake their evil
course, least they shorten their natural life, and purchase to themselves a
reproachful death, by being given over to some crime that shall deserve it.


Tim. What instruction may be given from hence to the godly?


Silas. This, that howsoever they are free from condemnation by faith in
Christ, yet the meditation of eternal death is profitable for them: the reason
here of is, because the godliest men have still some flesh and sin abiding in
them, yea the most have more sin than grace. Hereof it follows that they are
never free from blemishes and spiritual slothfulnes, security, presumption and
prophanenes; against which, the consideration of hell pains is a good remedy;
because the more Gods fierce justice and wrath be thought upon and feared, the
more careful men become to avoid the former and all other sins. The Papists
do us wrong in charging us to wish men not to leave sin for fear of Hell fire.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this latter instruction?


Silas. First, it reproves the godles, who do not think it needful often to
think of Hell fire, or be afraid so to do, least it trouble them; better
now to be feared with it, then hereafter to feel it. Secondly, it admonishes
all Gods Children much and very earnestly to consider the estate of the damned,
if they desire to live holily after the example of Paul, 2. Cor. 5, 9, 10. 2.
Tim. 4, 1, 2. It is Chrysostomes counsel, that at banquets and feasts and
public meetings, men should talk of hellish pains, that they may be awed,
and avoid them.


Tim. Proceed now to the words, which contain the second reason, and tell us
what is meant here by the deeds of the body, and what is it to mortify them?


Silas. By deeds of the body, we are to understand the same whichelse where are
called the lusts of the flesh, the works of darkness, even all sinful
motions and deeds which spring from the mind, and are executed by the body:
and [ mortifie] signifies to suppress and keep them down by the power of the
Spirit, that they do not flourish and reign in us, as a King to command and
govern us.


Tim. What is meant here by Spirit?


Silas. The power and strength of the Holy Ghost, abating and taking down the
strength of sin, causing it by little and little to dye in us.


Tim. How many ways does the grace of the Spirit work toward the mortifying
of sin?


Silas. Four ways: First, it does detect and discover sinful thoughts and
actions. Secondly, it stirs up a grief for them, and hatred of them.
Thirdly, it kindles fervent prayer to get strength against them. Fourthly, it
brings to mind sentences of the word, which are as a sword to cut down sin.
Lastly it makes watchful against sin, to avoid all occasions of it, and to
use all sanctified means against it.


Tim. What is here meant by life?


Sil. An happy, long, and prosperous life here, which is often granted to the
godly, as a fruit of their godliness; but especially eternal life in heaven,
which consistes in the participation with Christ, of his bliss, glory, and
dominion, Reu. 3, 21, 22.


Tim. Let us hear what instructions does arise from the latter part of this
Verse?


Silas. First, in the godly which are regenerate, there will always be found
some deeds of the flesh, because their regeneration is imperfect.


Tim. What use of this instruct on?


Silas. It confutes such as challenge to themselves a feigned perfection.


Tim. What is the second instruction?


Silas. That the life of every godly person must be a continual mortification
and repentance. They must always be offering violence to their sinful lusts,
resisting them by the word, praying against them, avoiding all occasions of
them, and using all other good means for the beating of them down, if ever
they will live holy.


Tim. What use of this second instruction?


Silas. It sharply reprooues the negligence of such Christians, as suffer
their wicked lusts (as weeds in a garden, or ill humors in a body) for lack of
mortifying and resistance.


Tim. What is the third instruction?


Silas. That sinful lusts are not to be mortified, otherwise then by the
grace of the Spirit, without which it is impossible to subdue them, and by
which it will be found very easy to tame them. The reason is, because the
force of the Spirit, is stronger then the power of sin.


Tim. What use of this instruction?


Silas. It confutes such as affirm, that vices may be maistred by strength of
free will, or by Philosophical virtues. Secondly, it humbles the godly, to
consider that they can overcome no sin of themselves, without the aid of the
Spirit. Thirdly, it admonishes all men to seek for strength against sin at
the hands of Gods Spirit. Lastly, the Spirit uses our endeauours as a means of
justification. He that made us without our selves, does not save us without
our selves.


Tim. What is the last Instruction?


Silas. To live after the Spirit, is the way to live happily here and for
ever, the reason is, Gods ordinance and promise.


Tim. What is the use hereof?


Silas. To encorage all men to lead a godly life, without the which they shall
never live a blessed life.


DIAL. XIII.
Verse 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.


Tim. What is the scope and drifte of this present Text?


Silas. To confirm and prove the latter part of the former verse, namely, that
they shall live eternally in glory, if they do mortifre the deeds of the body.
This is proved by a reason drawn from the efficiene cause, to wit, from the
right of sons after this sort: Sons are heirs of their fathers goods, even
of eternal life in heaven, verse 17. but the beloeuing Romans, and all other
the faithful which live holy, are the sons of God, verse 14, 16. therefore
al such as lead a holy life, shall live for ever with God.


Tim. But how does the Apostle prove, that belesuers which endeavor to mortify
their sins and live holily, are Gods sons?


Silas. By three arguments: First, because they are led by the Spirit:
Secondly, because they call upon God, as upon a Father, verse 15. Thirdly,
because the Spirit of God, and their own sanctified conscience do so witness
Romans 8, 16.
unto them; and in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word is confirmed.


Tim. Now show us what is the sum of this 14. verse?


Silas. It is this: Such as mortify the deeds of the body, they are the
sons of God, because they are led by The Spirit of Adoption is peculiar unto
Children Galath. 4, 6.
the Spirit of God, and therefore shall live for ever.


Tim. Let us now come to interpret the words, and tell us here what is meant
by the spirit?


Silas. The operation and work of the Spirit is here called the Spirit, by a
Metonymie of the cause for the effect.


Tim. What is it to be [Led by the Spirit?]


Silas. It is a word borrowed from the blind that cannot see their way, but
must have one to lead them: or from the lame that cannot go, but must have
one to help them: or from Infants and young children, which can very hardly go
without another to lead them.


Tim. What are we to gather from hence?


Silas. It does warn all Gods children, of their natural weakness, and
extreme misery: First, in that we are blind, having no light in our sclues,
as it is written, The Natural man perceives not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2,
14. Secondly, it appears in this; that being regenerate, yet we have no more
knowledge then that we receive from Gods spirit teaching us: This made the
Prophet to cry, O Lord open mine eyes, or, O Lord give me understanding, Psalm.
119, 18. Thirdly in this, that regenerate men still are like Babes, which have
continual need of the government of the Spirit, to lead them the way unto
Gods Kingdom.


Tim. To what purpose serves the knowledge of this our misery and weakness?


Sil. First, to the humbling and to the taking down of our proud hearts, from
ascribing any thing to our own wit or strength in the matter of pleasing God.
Secondly, to provoke the godly unto earnest prayer, that they may have the
conduct and leading of the Spirit, which is so needful for them, as without
the which, they can never be able to see one step in their way, or to set one
foot forward, no more then blind men or little Children.


Tim. But tell us now distinctly by what ways and means does the Spirit
lead the godly?


Silas. Not by a general motion, such as all Creatures in heaven and earth are
moved by, nor yet by any violent impulsion against our wills, as if we were
stocks and logges, but by an especial grace effectually stirring and
persuading them to such things as they being already renewed willingly desire
to do.


Tim. What things does this especial grace work in them, when it stirs them
up to things desired of them, and pleasing to God?


Silas. Three things: First, is information or instruction outwardly given by
the word, concerning things agreeable to Gods will. Secondly, an illumination
from the Spirit, to see and know such instructions to be from God himself,
Thirdly, inclination and bowing of the will voluntarily to will, and readily to
obey such divine instructions. For as the Spirit does not enlighten us, but by
the word expounded and opened: so it is in vain to know what we should do by
the light of the Spirit and word, unless will and strength be given us to do
it. And it were not enough to have will and strength given us to do it, if we
want knowledge of that which we are to do. Therefore unto leading, these three
things be necessary, first, to be instructed by the word, secondly, to be
enlightened by the Spirit in our minds, and thirdly to be mightily strengthened
in our wills and affections, that we will well effect what we do soundly affect.


Tim. What profit are we to make of those things unto our selves?


Silas. First, it shows how wretched we are so long as we live in
ignorance, and are obstinate in sin, because such are not led by the
Spirit, but are tossed up and down by the impulsion of their damnable lusts
Secondly, it shows the conduct and leading of the Spirit to be not enforced,
but free and full of pleasure and delight. It leads the willing, it haleth
not unwilling.


Thirdly, it confutes the Papists, which teach the government of the Spirit to
be contrary to the liberty and freedom of our will; because though it be
directed and led by the Spirit, yet it does still retain it own nature, The
will cannot be compelled, but wills all freely which it wishes.
both willingly willing that which is good, and in it self being flexible and
apt to will that which is contrary unto good, were it not for the conduction of
the Spirit carrying us the right way.


Tim. Now tell us who be the sons of God that are here spoken of?


Silas. Not sons by nature as Christ is, nor by Creation as Angels, be, but
sons by grace and Adoption. These may be considered two ways: either
according to predestination or Gods eternal purpose, in which respect the
elect before their new birth are termed the Children of God, John. 12, 52. or
else according to their Children of Gods purpose 2. and actual children being
called.
present estate, being effectually called unto Christ, and are actually
adopted: and thus our text speaks of the sons of God.


Tim. What are we now to learn by this, that Gods sons are said to be led by
the spirit of God?


Silas. First of all, that this is an undoubted and infallible mark of the
son of God, to be led by the Spirit of God, in such manner as is before
declared: even as the sons of Satan are known by this, that they are led
by the flesh, following and obeying their own corrupt hearts, and doing the
will of the Devil their father, John, 8, 44. so Gods sons are discerned
hereby, that they strive to be obedient to the Spirit and word of God their
heavenly Father, being much grieved and humbled when they slip and leave the
direction of the Holy Ghost, being very heedfull and wary for afterward.


Tim. Show us how the leading of the flesh may be known from the leading of
the Spirit?


Silas. First, the Spirit moves Christians to be holy and just in their
counselles and meditations, heavenly and divine; and carries them to things
unpleasant and quite contrary to the flesh, yet such as be acceptable to God:
but it is quite otherwise with the flesh, which moves men to things which are
unrighteous and wicked, earthly, vain and hateful to God. Secondly, it is
known by those fruits of the Spirit and flesh, mentioned in Gala. 5, 19. 20.
etc.


Tim. What other thing are we to learn out of this verse?


Silas. A new and forcible reason, to stir the regenerate to live holily,
because they are the sons and adopted children of God; and therefore must be
holy as their heavenly Father is holy: also because God has vouchsafed them
his Sons Spirit to be their leader, which is a worthy privilege; for the
world cannot receive this Spirit, as Christ says, John 14. 24.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again: but
ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry abba Father.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. The second reason to prove believers to be the Sons of God; which
is, invocation or calling upon God by prayer with child-like confidence, as
upon a most loving and most merciful Father. This argument is drawn from an
adioynt or property of the Son of God; for all they and none other then they,
can call upon God with a filial and child-like trust and confidence. Moreover
whereas Paul had said of all the Sons of God, that they are led by the
Spirit of God: now he declares what Spirit that is wherewith they are
led and governed, to wit, the spirit of adoption, which is here set forth
by the contrary, to wit, by the spirit of bondage and fear: and also by the
effects; to wit, feruency and earnestnes in prayer, whereby we cry Abba Father.


Tim. Collect now the sum of this verse, and tell us of what parts it does
consist?


Silas. The sum is this, that all true believers they are the Sons of God,
seeing they can call upon God, as their loving Father, and are governed by his
Spirit, not of trembling but of adoption. The parts of this text be two; the
first is a property of Gods Sons (to wit) faithful and fervent prayer. The
second is the cause of this prayer; to wit, the spirit of adoption.


Tim. Come we now to interpret the words, and tell us what is meant by
receiving [ye have received?]


Silas. Effectually to feel the grace and operation of the holy Spirit: in
this sense we are said to receive the word and the spirit, when they become
effectual in our hearts. And on the other side, they are said not to receive
the spirit, in whom the virtue and efficacy of the spirit, does not utter it
self. John 14. 24. The world cannot receive the Spirit.


Tim. What is signified by bondage and fear?


Silas. (...) fear or such fear and trembling as uses to be in bondmen or
slaves, which fear the whip or punishment, and for the only dread thereof,
they forbear evil.


Tim. What is meant by adoption?


Silas. An action of God, an adopting and taking them to be sons by savor,
which are none by nature.


Tim. What are we to understand by the Spirit?


Silas. The third person in the Trinity, even the Holy Ghost, which before was
called the Spirit of God and of Christ. Note this, that although the Apostle
makes here mention of the Spirit of fear and of adoption, yet the holy
Spirit of God is but one; but this one spirit has sundry effects and
workings, even in the self same persons, as appears in the example of these
believing Romans: in whom the spirit of God first of all brought forth
fear: their conscience trembling like bondmen before their Lord and Judge;
and afterward adoption and liberty: so as they could speak and pray to God, as
children to a most kind Father. Whereof we are admonished by this particle
[againe] ye have not received [againe;] giving to wit that before they were
converted, the spirit engendered fear and much dread in them: but now they
were converted, they had received another effect of the spirit, to wit; liberty
and boldness by the assurance of their adoption. The mark which the Apostle
aims at in all this, is to move the godly not only to do the will of God and
please him; but to do it willingly and readily, being made his Sons by
adoption, and free from all fear and bondage, they were delivered from the
hands of their enemies, to serve God in true righteousness and holiness without
fear. Luke 2.


Tim. The meaning of the Apostle being thus explayned, let us hear what
instructions arise from hence?


Sylas. First of all, we learn by what steps and degrees the Spirit of God
proceeds in the converting of elect sinners; the steps or degrees are two:
the first whereof is, servile fear and trembling: the second is the adoption
of sons, accompanied with much liberty and holy boldness. The true causes and
grounds of this proceeding of the spirit, in the conversion of a sinner, be
these three. First, that all Gods elect thorough the corruption of nature, are
the children of wrath in order of (...), before they are the children of God by
adoption and grace. Romans 5, 6, 7, 8. The second ground and reason is, that the
elect become fit to enter into the estate of adoption and grace; by seeing,
feeling, and fearing the misery of their former estate by nature. The third
ground is the ordinance and will of God so appoynting, that the elect should
have their conscience bruised and humbled by fear, before they be set at
liberty by grace. Ephe. 6. 1. 2. 3. Math. 3. 5. 6. 7. Mark 1. 9. 10. Esaias 61.
1.


Tim. But by what means and instrument, is this servile fear wrought in the
hearts and consciences of the elect?


Silas. By the law of God, which as it was given in Mount Sinai in a terrible
manner, by lightning, thundering, fire, etc. So the proper effect of it in men's
consciences, is no other but terror and dread, fear and trembling: therefore
the ministration of the law is termed by the Apostle, the ministry of death
and condemnation; because it begets the fear and sense of these things, being
revealed in the 2, Cor. 2
law to men's conscience in a lively manner. Example hereof we have in Felix,
who trembled when Paul preached the law unto him. Acts 23. 25. Secondly, of
Paul himself, who was filled with deadly fear in his heart, by the knowledge
of the law. Romans 7. 9 10.


Tim. When the Spirit does by the law work fear in the hearts of the elect, by
what way does he it?


Sil. By means of a practicke sillogisme after this sorre: Every tra^sgresfor
of Gods law is accursed, being guilty of 1 Proposition
eternal torments in hell: this proposition is Gods own voice. Deuteronomy. 27, 26.
Gala. 3, 10. But I am a transgresfor of 2 Assumption.
Gods law, says the elect sinner: this is the voice of every man's own
conscience, conuicting him of the breach of the law sundry ways. Now the
conclusion follows necessarily. 3 Conclusion
Therefore I am a most accursed and wretched man, worthy of eternal damnation
in hell fire. This conclusion is the work of the holy Spirit, causing every
elect sinner, to apply unto himself the most horrible threatenings of the law,
whereupon there arises in the conscience great fear, horror, and
astonishment: for which there is no salve in the law, which is able to kill,
but not to make alive.


Tim. But are all the elect partakers of this fear, before their connersion,
and all in a like degree?


Silas. All the elect which come to years and discretion are not converted
without this fear, but all have not a like portion of it: for God dispenses
the measure of this fear as it pleases him, to some more, to some less: it
faring with men in their new birth, as with men in their natural birth, where
some are borne more easily, some with more pain: as some sores are let out
with the pricking of a pin, and some need much lanching.


Tim. Tell us what profit and use we are to make of this doctrine, touching
the degrees that are used in the converting of elect sinners?


Silas. First, we are taught how miserable we are by nature, we being the
children of Gods wrath and condemnation, living always as bondmen in fear of
his punishment, Ephesians. 2, 1, 2, 3. Secondly, we are taught how needful it is to
have Gods Law soundly opened and applied unto us, seeing we have not the Spirit
of adoption, till we have the Spirit of fear, and this is gotten by the
ministry of the Law.

Thirdly, we are warned what duties men are to do upon the hearing and reading
the Law, that they may further their own conversion, which be these: First, by
the Law, to get distinct and sound knowledge of sin, Romans 3, and 7, 7.
Secondly, rightly to understand what that curse is, which the Law threatens
unto sin and sinners. Thirdly, a diligent search and examination of our
selves, whether we be not guilty of these very sins, against which the law
denounces the wrath and curse of God. Fourthly, Legal faith, believing that
we are breakers of the Law, and do deserve the curse of the Law. Lastly, upon
the application of the Law to our selves, to labor and work our own hearts,
to get them humbled and broken with fear and terror of Gods judgments. For
then, and not before, the heart is made meet to receive the Spirit of Adoption.
Here are reproved such as gather too much hope from the Gospel, ere the Law
have duly feared and taken them down with grief and shame.


Tim. Is there any other use to be made of this former point?


Silas. Yea, these three: First, they that had never any portion of this Legal
fear, have just reason to fear and mistrust their own conversion. Secondly,
if any be under this discipline of the law (having their conscience feared
and troubled with the consideration of the condemnation due to their sins)
let them not be much discouraged, for they are in a good way to true
conversion. Lastly, let such as have the spirit of fear, not rest there, but
pass on till they have the Spirit of Adoption, least it fare with them as it
fared with Esau, Caine, and Judas.


Tim. What is the next degree of a Christians conversion?


Silas. To receive the Spirit of Adoption.


Tim. What are we consider in this third degree?


Silas. These three things: First, of Adoption what it is. Secondly, what is
the Spirit of Adoption, and thirdly, what it is to receive the Spirit.


Tim. What is Adoption, and how may it be declared?


Sil. Adoption is the making one actually a son by grace, which is no son by
nature, Ephe. 2, 3. Gal. 4, 4, 5. For this word (Adoption,) is borrowed from
the custom of men, who being Childlesse do adopt and take to them of favor
the child of another to be their son. This benefit of Adoption, may be
declared many ways: First, by the person of him who adopteth, to wit; God, who
having a natural Son, yet wanting sons in our kind, has Adopted men and
women to be his Children; which is not the wont among men, but quite contrary.
Secondly, by the persons of us who are Adopted, being both beggarly, and void
of all goodness, being also his enemies, full of all unrighteousness, Romans 5,
6, 7, 8. Thirdly, by the dignity of the thing, it being a matter of wondrous
excellency to have such a sonne-ship, more a thousand times then to be the
son of a most mighty Prince. Fourthly, by the manifold and exceeding benefits
which comes by Adoption, namely, to be heir of the world and of Heaven.
Lastly, by the duty of adopted ones, being briefly touched in Malachy, 1, 6.
and more largely in 1. Pet. 1, 14, 15.


Tim. What is meant by the Spirit of Adoption?


Silas. A special grace of the Spirit, certifying our Adoption unto us. A
grace which flows from Adoption, and is proper to Adopted ones, serving to
witness their Adoption, and therefore fitly called the Spirit of Adoption.


Tim. What be the two effects and fruits of the spirit mentioned in this Text?


Silas. The first is, to seal or assure in the hearts of the elect children of
God, the witness of their adoption by Christ: hence it is called the Spirit of
Adoption, and in the same sense also it is termed the earnest of our
inheritance, Ephesians. 1, 14. The second is, to open their mouths with childlike
confidence and godly feruency, to pray unto God, as to a most loving father.
Hence it is called by the Prophet Zachary, the Spirit of Grace and of prayer,
Zach. 12, 10.


Tim. How do the elect receive the spirit of Adoption?


Silas. By the Ministry and preaching of the Gospel, as the Spirit of fear
and bondage, is given by the preaching of the Law. Hence the Gospel preached,
is called the Ministry of life, of righteousness, and of the Spirit, because
through the Ministry of the Gospel, the Spirit is effectual to quicken the
dead hearts of the elect, thorough Faith in Christ, thereby to be made
righteous before God, and to become his sons, and heirs of eternal life.
This is proved by the word of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 2. This would I know,
received ye the spirit by the works of the Law, or by hearing Faith preached,
that is, by hearing the Doctrine of the Law, or by the doctrine of Christ
apprehended by Faith?


Tim. But how and after what sort does God work in the Gospel, when by it he
will work in his Children the Spirit of Adoption?


Silas. The Spirit of Adoption is received into the hearts of the elect by these
degrees, or several works of grace. First, after the Conscience is humbled and
terrified by the Law, being brought to see and feel an extreme need of
Christ crucified, there is engendered an earnest desire and longing after him
and his merits, such as is in hungry men after meat, and thirsty men after
drink, or wearied men after rest, or in the sick after health. Secondly, this
desire is accompanied with an unfeigned confession of particular sins, so
far as be known to us, and hearty bewayling of the deep misery due unto
them. Thirdly, there is wrought a persuasion, that all their sins how great
and many soever, be pardonable, being far inferior to the infinite mercies
of God, and merits of Christ. Fourthly, there follows an earnest and constant
craving of the forgiveness of them all. Lastly, there comes the gift of a
lively faith, assuring the Conscience that all are forgiven, and they fully
reconciled unto God, whence arises great peace and rest with liberty and
freedom to the soul. And this faith in Gods promise is the testimony of the
Spirit, all which is shadowed out by the parable of the lost child, who felt a
great need of his Fathers reconciliation, much desired it, confessed himself
unworthy of it, despaired not to find it, earnestly begged it with persuasion
of it.


Tim. This Spirit of Adoption which is here set as contrary to the Spirit of
fear, does it expel all fear where it is given?


Silas. It does expel all servile fear (though not utterly) as it is written,
Perfect love casts out fear, 1 John 4, 18. but it engendereth filial fear,
as it is written, There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, Psalm.
130, 4. The adopted children of God have then a mixed fear, as they are not
wholly free from fear of hell fire; which serves them as a bridle and curb to
awe them and restrain them from sin: yet they chiefly fear him, because they
would not offend his infinite goodness. This fear is often commanded, and
they are often exhorted unto it, and it has many promises made to it in the
word.


Tim. How may the children of God perceive that they are endowed with this
spirit of Adoption?


Silas. Especially by that effect of calling upon God; for whereas the elect
before they had this Spirit of adoption, were afraid of God, and did fly
from him, as from a most terrible Judge, (example whereof, we have in Adam and
Eve, after their fall. Genesis 3.) being now adopted by grace, the Spirit of God
does open their mouths to pray unto God as children unto a father, with holy
boldness, Gal. 4, 5. The reason hereof is, because they being certain that
their sins be forgiven them, and that God who was their enemy is reconciled,
therefore they may freely speak unto him, aa one friend unto another, and God
is as ready to hear them, as a father is to hear his own dear Child. Yea
far more ready to hear, then his children are to ask, preventing their
prayers oftentimes, and always granting them.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. First, it confuteth such as teach that we ought always to doubt of
Gods good will, and of our own adoption. Secondly, it comfort such as have
the gift and willingness to pray, because this is a certain note unto them
that God is their Father.


Tim. Yet wicked men and hypocrites, also Idolatrous and superstitious men do
pray.


Silas. True: yet Gods children alone can in truth say, Abba father, and in
their prayers cry to God. These two things, godly confidence and feruency,
sever the prayers of Gods children from all other, who call upon God, either
for fashion sake, or for belly sake, and therefore coldly and without
confidence.


Tim. But from whence does arise this confidence and feruency, which the
faithful exercise in their prayers?


Sil. There confidence does spring first from the mercies of God, he being
pacified toward them in his Son. Secondly, from the truth of God, promising to
hear them for his Sons sake. Thirdly, from the merit of Christ's intercession,
to whom the Father will deny nothing. Their feruency also does arise first
from a true and particular sight and sense of their own sins and miseries:
and secondly, from the sound knowledge and meditation of the excellency of Gods
graces, which the more they are known and valued, are the more cagerly
thirsted after and desired.


Tim. What may we gather from these things for our own good?


Silas. First, the godly are instructed in all their prayers to provoke
themselves to earaest zeal and assiance, by thinking seriously upon the
infinite mercies and promises of God; the mediation of Christ, and their own
sins and miseries. Secondly, whenever Gods childeren pray without
consideration of these things, they must needs pray uncomfortably and with
weak confidence. Thirdly, from hence we may see that the prayers which be made
to Saints, to the Virgin Mary, and to Angels, that they come not from the
Spirit of adoption, which directs us to pray unto the Father: but from a
spirit of error being indeed a doctrine of devils. Fourthly, because we have
our adoption from Christ and his spirit: therefore no ungodly men, as Turks
and Jews, can call upon God. Fifthly, seeing the godly are certain of God to be
their Father: there fore they may be also certain of their adoption, and
consequently of their salvation, because sons be heirs. The sons of this
world cannot be so certain of their Father, as the faithful be of theirs.
Sixthly, by the change of the person ( we have) the Apostle would teach every
one to hope well of the adoption of other Christians, and to be assured of
their own, having the testimony of the Spirit and of Christ, teaching them to
call God, Father. Seauenthly, the expressing of the name Father, both by the
Hebrewe Abba.
and Greek words, teaches that God is Father both of Pater.
the Jews and Gentiles, which are indifferently partakers (through faith) of
this adoption. Lastly, because Paul uses here this strange word (Abba) we
cannot gather thence that the service of God should be in a strange tongue, as
the Papists affirm directly against Gods commandment. 1 Cor. 14. 19. But
these strange words were by use and custom grown common and familiar, being
thereby commonly understood, and easy to be understood: therefore it was that
both Hebrew in the Greek, and the Greek in the Latin and English, be often
kept in the natural sound untranslated.


DIAL. XV.
Verse 16. The same Spirit bears witness with our Spirits that we are the
children of God.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. A new reason to prove the believing Romans, and al other the faithful
to be the children of God. It is proved by a double testimony, one of Gods
Spirit, the other of our Spirit; and in the mouth of two witnesses, every word
or matter is confirmed, Deuteronomy. 17, 6. But all believers have two firm
undeceiueable witnesses of their adoption, the one without them, and the other
within them: Therefore they may be and are certain of their adoption, that
they indeed are Gods children. The sum hereof is thus much, that the Holy
Spirit which stirs up fervent prayer in the hearts of believers, does bear
witness with their own spirits, that they are adopted of God to be his sons
and daughters.


Tim. Into what parts may we resolve the matter of this text?


Silas. Into two parts it may fitly be divided: to wit, into a case, and a
resolution of that case. The case is this, how the children of Adam by nature,
may be sure that they are the children of God by grace.


Tim. What do ye judge and esteem of this case?


Silas. That it is a case of all cases, of most worth and Why we must labor
for certainty of our adoption.
weight, a most excelent and important case, of greatest consequence and use.
It is of great worth and excellency, because it tends to gain certainety of
a thing which is of al other most precious: to wit, our adoption and Sonship,
even of our right to the kingdom of heaven, that most glorious inheritance.
Also it is a case of importance and weight, because it does behooue and import
men very much to know how they hold their earthly inheritance; it must needs
then greatly concern Gods children to have ready their euide^ces of their
heavenly inheritance. Again, it is a very heinous offense for any Christian to
call God Father, and not to feel assuredly that he is his Child: but of
custom and in hypocrisy, with his tongue only and not in truth; which is
far more grievous and dangerous, then if one should counterfeit himself the
son As in Martine Marbecke, that fained himself to be Edward. 6.
of an earthly king, which yet is a capital crime: and yet furthermore it is
of great consequence and use, for it will stay and strengthen the heart in
soule-temptation and conflict. Also it will quicken to a cheerful performance
of duties: and lastly, it will nourish hope and patience in all afflictions.
For one being persuaded of Gods love, then follows ready service, confident
prayer, and patient hope.


Tim. Now tell us from whence we are to fetch the full and firm resolution of
this case?


Silas. From that witness which the holy Spirit does bear to our Spirit, or
from the witness of Gods Spirit, and of our spirit. Read it either to our,
or with our spirit, it comes much to one effect, only this ods that it
implies but one witness, if we read it (our spirit) but imports two, if
it be read to spirit.


Tim. What is meant by the same Spirit, and what do ye call the witness of
it?


Silas. By same spirit is meant the spirit of adoption, spoken of in the
former verse, even the holy Spirit; it does give testimony to Gods Children,
of their own adoption, and the witness of the Spirit is a motion of a soul
resting steadily on the mercies of God thorough Christ, inspired and stirred up
by the Spirit.


Tim. How and after what sort does the holy spirit bear this witness to
believers, that God is their Father?


Silas. These two ways ordinarily, (not by extraordinary revelation,) but
first by that cry (mentioned before) stirred up in the hearts of the faithful
by the Spirit, which moving them effectually to call God their Father with
filial and childlike trust in his goodness, hereby they are assured of their
adoption. None can say, Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit of God, 1. Cor.
12, 6. Likewise none can truly call God his Father, but by the motion of the
spirit of Adoption. Whosoever therefore in their Prayers, can call God their
Father in truth, they may thereby be persuaded that he is so, seeing the Spirit
of adoption is peculiar to Gods sons, as in verse 14. we have learned. Thus
Chrysostom expounds and declares this witness, of the cry of the heart
engendered by Gods Spirit. Secondly, the Spirit bears witness by a practick
Sillogisme, or reason, framed thus: 2 Proposition
Every believer is the Child of God, and shall be saved. 2. Assumption
This is the sum of the Gospel: But I am a believer, this is the work of
the Spirit, making every faithful person to know and feel this in himself,
2 Timothy 1, 12. 3. Conclusion
(...) Cor.2, 10. Therefore I am the Child of God, and shall be saved in
heaven. This conclusion is the testimony of the Spirit, upon the former
premises. Thus these two Servants of the Lord, Paroeus and Perkins, expound and
declare this witness of the Spirit.


Tim. By what reasons can ye prove, that this witness of the holy Spirit cannot
deceive us?


Silas. First, because it is the Spirit of truth, which cannot lie and deceive,
John 14, 17. Titus 1, 2. Secondly, this holy Spirit searches all things, even
the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2, 10. Thirdly, he is Lord of all, and
therefore worthy of credit and belief. If a man, or Angel, or Archangell,
should preach unto us this adoption, we might doubt of it: but seeing the
Spirit, who is Lord of all does witness it, what place is there of doubting,
says Chrysostom?


Tim. But how may a godly Christian discern this witness of Gods Spirit, from
the delusion of Satan, and from the presumption The truth, po were, and mercy of
God the promiser, cause me to be of good hope.
of Hypocrites and wicked men?


Silas. By these ways: First, by the grounds and reasons of the witness,
which are not man's own merit, or common graces, or outward blessings, but they
be the truth, power, and mercy of God the Father; also the merits of Christ the
Son, and the works and fruits of this Spirit Bernard.
of Adoption. These are such firm grounds, as cannot possibly fail him, who
rests on them. Secondly, by the manner of the testimony, which is certain and
firm, as an earnest or seal putting us out of doubt, settling the Ephesians. 1, 13.
conscience in such quiet and sound tranquillity, as far differs from
numbnesse and deadness of hypocrites, and of civil men. Thirdly, by the
effects of this Testimony, as 1. Ardent prayer, 2. Sincere love of God and our
Brethren for his sake, 3. Willing and constant obedience to Godward: unto
which, we may join these six means following, as good helps to descry this
difference. First, presumption is natural from our birth, but this testimony
of the Spirit is supernatural, and is not in us before the grace of
conversion. Secondly, this Testimony arises from the use of holy means, as
hearing, reading, Sacraments, etc. and is thereby confirmed; whereas
presumption is from security, and not from the use of means, which
presumptious persons neglect or contemn.

Thirdly, presumption is most confident, never doubting or making question of
election or salvation. This Testimony of the Spirit, is much assaulted with
doubts and fears, more or less, at one time or other, as in Job and David.
Therefore he that says I never doubted, I thank God I have always had a
strong belief, he speaks from presumption. Fourthly, presumption is cuer
joined with worldliness and profaneness: but this Testimony is never severed
from a desire to live holily and righteously. Fifthly, presumption presumes of
Gods love, in the time of Gods benefits only, but in aduersitity vanishes.
This testimony is constant and permanent, in adversity as well as in prosperity.
Lastly, this testimony of the Spirit, comes by the application of faith;
also it thoroughly persuades, and gives not only a bare Testimony, 1 Cor. 2,
12. Ephesians. 1, 17, 18. 1. John 3, 24.


Tim. What is the second witness of our adoption?


Silas. Gods Spirit is the first, and our Spirit is the second.


Tim. But seeing our hearts know not the mind of God, and they be deceivable
above measure, how can this be a meet witness?


Silas. Indeed our stony hearts such as they are by nature are blind and
deceitful: but our fleshy hearts which we have from grace are not so; for our
hearts, as they are renewed by the Spirit of God, does know the mind and good
will of God toward us, and bears a sincere and infallible testimony of it
unto us. For it is written, The Spirit of man which is in him, knows the
things of man, 1 Cor, 2, 11. Also if our hearts do not condemn us, we have
boldness toward God, 1 John 3, 21. But it were not possible that we should
have boldness and confidence toward God, if the testimony which our hearts
bears us, were doubtful and wavering, and not certain and firm.


Tim. What is then meant here by our Spirit?


Silas. Not our soul, as it is a natural part of man, but our regenerate and
sanctified conscience and affections. In which sense the word Spirit is used by
Paul, 1 (...). 14, 15. 1 (...) 5, 23.

It was well therefore observed, of one certain learned and judicious Writer,
that this Text says not, that the Spirit bears witness to our souls, but
to our spirit.


Tim. Yet the Sanctification of our (...), is altogether very imperfect and
weak, and therefore should rather cause us to doubt of our Adoption, then to
certify and assure us of it?


Sil. The imperfections of our regeneration, does and may make the witness of
our spirit less strong and full, but no whit hinders the certainty of it,
which arises not so much from the measure, as from the truth of our sanctified
desires and affections: even as a child may be said to walk and go
certainly and truly as a man, though not so firmly and steadily: and a small
piece of gold may be as pure as a greater, though not of such value: and an
honest poor man may bear as true a witness, as an honest rich man, though
he lack the credit of his wealth and purse.


Tim. Tell us now after what sort our Spirit and conscience renewed, does bear
this witness unto us?


Silas. By a kind of reasoning, framed in a regenerate mind, after this sort.
They are without doubt the Children of God, who have such holy motions and
affections, as 1 Proposition.
are stirred up by the Spirit of adoption, and be proper to the godly which
have that Spirit. This proposition though plain enough in it self, yet is
proved by the 14. verse of this Chapter, in these words: As many as are led
by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. But (says the regenerate 2
Assumption
man) I am truly endued with such motions and affections. This assumption is
testified by the regenerate conscience, which is in stead of a thousand
witnesses, certifying every new borne child of God, what graces he has
received from the Spirit of God, according to that which is cited before. 1
Cor. 2. 11. Therefore (he infers) 3 Conclusion.
I am the child of God. This conclusion is the testimony of our spirit and
renewed heart.


Tim. Tell us now particularly some of those motions and affections of a
sanctified heart, whereby we may be assured that we are the Sons of God?


Silas. They be innumerable and very many, yet for order sake we may bring them
into a few heads. As first they be such as concern either Gods mercies in
Christ. 2. or his Word, 3. or his Ministers, 4. or the Sabaoths and holy
assemblies, 5. or Sacraments, 6. or works. 7, or his children, 8. or his
religion, 9. or our sins, 10. or the joys of heaven, 11. or the pains of
hell.


Tim. What be the affections of Gods children touching the mercies of God in
Christ?


Silas. Three, first to thirst and long after them in a true feeling of the
need of them. Esaias 55. 1. John 7. 37. Secondly, to prize them above all things
in the world, which be most precious. Phil. 3. 8. Thirdly, to extol and praise
them before others, that they may be drawn to the love of them. Psalm. 103. 1.
2. 3. etc. Psalm. 34. 3.


Tim. What be the affections of Gods children toward the word, and Ministers
of God?


Silas. Touching the word; first they delight in the law of God touching the
inner man, and love his statutes. Psalm. 119. 97. Romans 7. 22. Secondly, in their
judgment they approve it and esteem it above pearls. Thirdly, in their
minds they mark and heed it well. Fourthly, in their hearts they believe it.
Fifthly, in their memories they keep it and treasure it up. Sixthly, that with
their ears they (...) unto it with trembling and reverence. Seauenthly, with
their mouths they confess it and speak good of it. And lastly, that they
submit their whole man to the obedience and practice of it, in all sincerity
and constancy, Prou. 3. 13. 14. Psalm. 119. 8. 9. 10. Mat. 7. 24. Also touching
the Ministers, they acknowledge them and have them in singular love for their
works sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 13. Secondly, they do readily submit themselves
to be ruled by their wholesome instructions. Heb. 13. 17. Thirdly, they be
thankful to them in ministering to them a cheerful sufficient maintenance.
Gal. 6. 6. and 4. 15. Lastly, they help them with their earnest prayers. Romans
15. 13. Colos. 4. 3. and otherwise as need and cause requires. Acts 9. 25.


Tim. What be the affections of Gods children toward the Sabbath and holy
assemblies?


Silas. Touching the Sabbath, they be thus affected toward it; they call it
their delight, they do not their own works, nor seek not their own will,
nor speak a vain word on that day, Esaias, 58, 13, 14. Secondly, they remember
to keep it holy, Exodus 20, 8. Touching the holy assemblies, it is their geiefe
to be kept from them by any urgent occasion, and when they come to them, they
first look to their feet, Psalm. 84, 1, 2. Eccle. 4, 17.


Tim. What be the affections of Gods children toward the Sacraments? Also
toward his works?


Silas. Touching the Sacraments, they reverently think of them, and willingly
submit themselves to the use of the^, in respect that they are Gods ordinance
and the seals of grace. Romans 4, 11. And touching the Lords supper, they will
never receive it without due examination of themselves, because of Christ's
commandment, and the dignity of the supper, 1. Cor. 11, 28. And touching the
works of God, that his works of judgment move them much to fear his power
and justice, Acts, 5, 11. And his works of mercy upon themselves and others,
move them to love him, and to trust in his name, Psalm. 116, 1. Acts. 4, 31.


Tim. What be the affections of Gods Children toward the Brethren, as also
toward Christian Religion?


Silas. Touching the Brethren, they do unfeignedly love them, whether they be
friends or enemies, and especially witness their love in praying for them, and
seeking and helping forward their salvation, and giving thanks unto God for
their graces: also by pitying and releeuing their miseries, Luke, 6, 30. Romans
10, 1. 1. These. 1, 2, 3. 1. John. 3, 14, 17. And touching Christian religion:
First, they fervently love it. Secondly, they endeavor to promote and further
it. Thirdly, they hate whatsoever is contrary unto it. And lastly, they study
to adorn it, by expressing the power of it, and walking according to the rules
of it. Psa. 119, 128. 1. Tim. 6. 1. James, 1, 27.


Tim. What be the affections of Gods children in respect of sins?


Silas. First, they mourn for the sins of others, as did David, Psalm. 119.
136. and Paul, Phil. 3, 6. Mat. 5, 4. Secondly, touching their own sins if
they be past, they are ashamed of them, Romans. 6, 21. If they be present they
have a godly sorrow and earnest strife against them, 2. Cor. 7, 10. Romans 7, 23.
And lastly for sins to come, they are afraid to fall into them, and have a
great care to prevent them, 2. Cor. 7, 11.


Tim. What are the affections of Gods Children to the joys of Heaven, and the
pains of Hell?


Silas. Touching the joys of Heaven they have hope, and a certain and
constant looking for them, Romans 8, 24. Heb. 9. 28. Titus 2. 13. Also they have
great joy of heart, under the hope of enjoying heavenly glory. Romans 5. 2.
Touching the pains of hell, they have a great fear and terror, in respect
that they have deserved them, with a maruailous care to avoid them. 2 Cor. 5.
11. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. and the ways that lead to them.


Tim. But what if any do feel in themselves these motions to be few and feeble?


Silas. Let such for their comfort have recourse to the least measure of
sanctifying graces, which consists in a detestation of their sins; even in
this respect that they are an offense to their good God. Secondly, a hearty
desire of hoping and believing the forgiveness of their sins, and above all
other things that they may be in Gods favor, and not only that they may be
happy in heaven.


Tim. What if any find none of these affections in themselves?


Silas. First, let them not despair. Secondly, let them wait upon GOD in the
use of all apppointed means. Thirdly, let them abstain from the outward act
of sin, and keep down their inward desires as much as they can. Lastly, let
them often humble themselves by a particular confession of their known sins,
and earnest prayer for pardon of them. For he that is not called now may be
called to morrow: who knows what a day may bring forth? Gods infinite power
works mightily, and suddenly, and his mercies be bottomless; therefore cast
not hope away.


DIAL. XVI.
Verse 17. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and
heirs annexed with Christ.


Tim. WHat is the drift and scope of this text?


Silas. To conclude the maine argument and reason, by which the Apostle before
did exhort the Romans, by the spirit to mortify the deeds of the flesh. This
argument was taken from the event which shall follow them, which live after the
spirit and not after the flesh, namely eternal life giving to wit, that such
shall live for ever, because they are the sons of God: from hence the Apostle
now concludes, that if such as walk after the Spirit be sons, then they
must inherit everlasting life in heaven: for all Gods children be heirs, and
have right to the heritage of heaven. This conclusion does very lively set
forth the manifold and great dignity of true believers, the more to stir them
up cheerfully to follow the government of Gods Spirit.


Tim. What be the degrees of the dignity of the faithful?


Silas. They be these four; first, that they be not servants but children.
Secondly, that all of them be heirs. Thirdly, that they be heirs of God,
not of any mortal king; but of that king which is immortal, namely GOD.
Lastly, that they be coheires, or heirs annexed with Christ.


Tim. Tell us now what is meant by children?


Silas. Even all the sons and daughters of God, whosoever they be which have
the spirit of adoption, and believe in Christ.


Tim. But Christ is the only begotten child of God, how then can the faithful
be children?


Silas. True indeed, Christ is the only begotten child of God according to
nature; being begotten of his Fathers substance from everlasting: but believers
be children by grace of adoption, being by nature the children of wrath:
Christ is a child of the substance of God his Father, whereas the believers are
children by favor.


Tim. Is this so great a dignity to be the child of God by grace?


Silas. It is so; for first, such as have Christ to be their brother, Mat. 12.
50. Heb. 2. 12. Secondly, the Angels are their servants. Psalm. 34. 7. Heb. 1.
14. Thirdly, themselves are Priests, Prophets, and Kings. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Reave.
1. 6. Fourthly, the whole world, yea even heaven is their right and
possession. 1 Cor. 3. 22. 23. If it be counted so great a dignity to be the
child of an earthly King, what a worthy thing must it then be, to be the
child of the King of Heaven. For to be the child of God is no empty title,
because by it we obtain this dignity to be heirs. The law of nature does
yield this unto children, that they shall enjoy the inheritance which is left
unto them by their deceased Parents: and the Law of grace does 2. Heirs.
promise the heavenly inheritance to all which be children of God by faith in
Christ.


Tim. Howbeit among the Children of Abraham, Isaac only had the inheritance,
the rest had gifts and were sent away, Genesis 25, 5, 6.


Silas. It is true, because God so commanded, and the promises were made to
Isaac, but the case falls out otherwise between the children of God and of men:
for amongst men in sundry countries, all Childeren be not heirs, but sons
only, and in some places not all sons but the eldest son alone; but Gods
children be they sons or be they daughters, they be all heirs, every one
without exception. There is neither Male nor Female with God.


Tim. But whose heirs are they, and what is their inheritance?


Sil. They are heirs of God, and God himself is their 3. Heirs of God,
inheritance, one and the selfsame person, is both father and inheritance in
this case: for to enjoy God fully and perfectly in his Son Christ, this is
the inheritance of the Saints, who in God do enjoy all other things. Gods
children therefore they are great heirs, and they have a goodly heritage,
Psalm. 16, 4, 5. 1. Cor, 3, 21.


Tim. What is the fourth part of the dignity of the faithful?


Sil. That they are heirs annexed with Christ, or joint heirs with Christ.


Tim. The inheritance of Christ, how manifold is it?


Silas. Twofold: It is the inheritance either of glory, or of dominion and
power. The inheritance of glory is this, that after his death he being risen
and ascended into Heaven, he lives there most blessedly and gloriously, his
body and soul being wholly freed from all infirmities and temptations, and
filled with all joy and glorious brightness, even like the Sun in the
Firmament: also his inheritance of dominion and power consists in this, that in
his humane nature he is exalted and listed up above all principalities and
powers, and every name that is named in earth, having all creatures and the
Church it self subject to him, as unto their head, Ephe. 2, 21, 22. Phil. 2,
9. Notwithstanding although that the elect be partakers of this double
inheritance of Christ, yet they are not partakers in equal degree: For Christ
reigns in Heaven as Gods only and first begotten, but the faithful are but
adopted children, Phil. 3, 21. Revel. 3, 21. Revel. 2, 26. Romans 8, 29. By all
this then appears, that the children of God are very honorable personnages,
because their dignity is not carnal 1 Pet. 1, 4.
and earthly, such as may wither and perish, but spiritual and heavenly, such
as endures for ever.


Tim. What use and profit may be made of this?


Silas. First, it should admonish the faithful not to behave themselves basely,
by making themselves servants to their filthy lusts: but endeavoring to follow
the direction of the Spirit in all things. 1. John, 3, 2. 2. Pet. 3, 11.
Secondly, not to take any leave unto our selves to think of, or deal basely
with such excellent personnages as Gods children be.


Tim. But tell me I pray you, do these honorable and worthy personnages give
any Scutchion or Coate-Armour?


Silas. That they do, the field and ground whereof is Azure and Gules, for
they are celestial creatures, borne from above, John, 1, 13. And they are a
people purchased by the blood of Christ, Acts. 20, 28. The parts of this
armor be many and several: First, in their Armor they give the Eagle, in
respect of their aspyring aloft; as it is written, Where the carcass is, there
will the Eagle resort, Luke 17, 37.

Secondly, they give an Helmet or Anchor, to wit, their Hope, which stays
their souls against all the Waves of temptation, Heb. 6, 19. Thirdly, they
give a Lion, because of their Christian fortitude, despising all threatenings
and dangers, Prou. 28, 1. The Righteous are bold as a Lion.

The fourth is the band of Charity, which knits together the faithful, as many
sticks tied fast together with one band, Col. 3, 14. Fifthly, they give a
Sheep, to witness their meekness and obedience, John 10, 27. My Sheep
hear my voice and follow me. Sixthly they give a Dove to witness and represent
their simplicity and innocence, Math. 10, 16. Be innocent as Doves. And lastly,
they give the Serpent, to signify their godly providence and wisdom to
forecast and prevent dangers. Math. 10, 16. Be wise as Serpents. Unto all
which may be added the girdle of verity, the sword of the Spirit, and the
breast plate of righteousness, Ephe. 6, 14, 17.


Tim. What is the moral or meaning of this their CoateArmour?


Sil. It serves to put all Gods children in mind, that if they will walk
worthy of that their honorable and worthy calling, they must express and show
forth a true faith, a firm hope, unfeigned love, Christian courage, meek
obedience, innocent simplicity, Serpentine wisdom, and generally an heavenly
purity in all parts of their conversation, as they may honor the house and
stock to which they belong and of which they come.


DIAL. XVII.
Verse 17. last part. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be
glorified with him.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. At this Text the second part of the Chapter begins concerning
consolation unto such as are under the Cross, and suffer for Christ. Hitherto
has continued the first part of the chap ter, wherein blessed Paul has
ministered comfort to the faithful, against the remainder of their sinful
corruption, and earnestly exhorted them to the diligent mortification of all
their sinful lusts and corruptions, not to bear with these, though they
fear no condemnation from them. Now the Apostle uses a transition, passing
forwards to that part of the Chapter which strengthens the Saints against the
bitterness of the Cross, and exhorts them to be constant in the bearing of
it, without fainting or being weary in their minds.


Tim. How do these words depend upon the matter contained in the verse going
before?


Silas. He had said a little before that the sons of God are sure for ever
to live in heavenly glory, now he proves it by a fresh and new reason, taken
from the use of afflictions, that the believing Romans and other the sons of
God shall be inheritors, because they have taken up their Cross. This reason
may be framed two ways, and both very good. First, by inferring the
consequence or that which comes after, by an antecedent, which necessarily
goes before, as thus: They which shall be glorified in Heaven must suffer
afflictions here for Christ: But ye Romans which are the sons of God, do
suffer afflictions for Christ; ye are therefore sure to be glorified with him.
The strength of this reason depends upon the authority of the word of God
affirming that such as dye with Christ, shall reign with him, and that such as
suffer with him shall be glorified with him, 2. Tim. 2, 12. Which is the self
same thing, which is here said in our text, if (with that great learned man)
Peter Martyr, we read (as we may) for these words (if so be,) seeing that or
because. The second way how this reason may be framed, is by a reasoning from
the less unto the greater, after this fashion. If ye be partakers with Christ
in his Cross and in his sufferings, ye shall much more be partakers with him
in his kingdom and glory. Thus Chrysostom gathers the argument.


Tim. Tell us now the sum of this sentence.


Sil. It is thus much: that so many as are vouchsafed this mercy, valiantly to
endure tribulation for the Gospel, thereby they may be well assured, that
they shall inherit eternal glory; God means to crown all such as take up the
Cross.


Tim. What Instructions are we to learn from hence?


Sil. Two: First, it does admonish us what the condition and state of the
Children of God is in this life, is namely this, that that way which Christ
passed from this life into his glory, by the same way must they pass this life
unto glory, even by tribulations and afflictions; whereof there is very
plentiful proof in many places of the Scripture, as Math. 10, 37. Luke 14,
26. Acts 14. 22. 2 Timothy 3, 12. Heb. 12, 5, 6. The causes why Gods will is to
have it so, are sundry and many, but these are the chief. First for the trial
of their Faith in God, and also of their love The ends and uses of the Cross.
(...) Romans 5, 3, 4.
toward God, 1 Pet. 1, 7. James 1, 3. Secondly, for exercise and increase of
their experience patience, hope, etc. Romans 5, 3, 4. Thirdly, for the
mortification and beating down of their rebellious stubborn nature, which had
need to be suppressed and tamed by the means of afflictions. Fourthly, for
the weaning and pulling their hearts from the immoderate loving of earthly
things. Fifthly, to humble their hearts before God, and to stir them up unto
a more fervent prayer, Job 33, 16, 17, 18. Sixthly, that God may have a better
occasion to manifest his great power and goodness in strengthening their
infirmities, 2 Cor. 12. 9. and in delivering them out of all their troubles.
Lastly, the more certainly to confirm their minds in a persuasion of having
eternal life by like nesse and conformity unto Christ in his sufferings, Romans
8, 29.


Tim. What use and profit are we to make now unto our selves, touching the
state of Gods children?


Silas. First it controlleth and conuicteth them of error, that think and
teach that the children of God may fall from the grace of adoption; for that
grace of God which adopteth them, so supporteth and strengthens their will,
that they stick and hold close to him, in most dangerous afflictions, until
they be glorified of him in Heaven. Secondly, it reproves such Christians as
(...) posuere die, (...) laborem: virtutis via (...) angusta porta.
never have a thought of this condition, and yet think they may be very good
Christians: much more such as to avoid afflictions will make ship-wracke of a
good conscience, soothing up other men in their sins and serving the time,
that they may live quietly and safely. Thirdly, it admonishes al true
Christians before hand to prepare their souls for the day of afflictions,
after the commandment of Christ, and according to the example of a wise
builder, and provident King, as in Luke, 14, 28, 31. Lastly, it serves to
comfort all such as do, or hereafter shall suffer any affliction in word or
deed, for the name of Christ; because they are in such an estate as God has
allotted his own Children, whom he purposes to glorify in heaven
everlastingly.


Tim. What is the second instruction we learn from hence?


Silas. It does give us a double consolation against the sharpness of the
cross and afflictions: the former is from the communion of Christ's sufferings;
Christians suffer not alone, but they suffer with Christ, and Christ with them:
which surely is no small comfort, to have Christ a companion and fellow in our
sufferings, as it were to bear up an end of the Cross; nay which is more,
even to suffer in us, accounting all that cruelty which is done to his members,
to be done to himself, as Acts, 9, 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
and Mat. 25, 40.


Tim. But how may a Christian be certified that in his own sufferings he
suffers with Christ?


Silas. By these two things: First, if we suffer with the same affection that
Christ suffered with, that is, of obedience to the will of our heavenly Father,
Mat. 26, 39. (...) afflictions, because how sharp soever they be, yet they
cannot be long; for they cannot continue longer then the space of this present
life, and the days of our life are but few, and our time but short, even as a
spanne long, or as a watch in the night. Now all short things though they be
great, yet are more tolerable, because they are short.


Tim. What use is there to be made of this instruction?


Silas. It does not only encourage Christians which do continue in
afflictions, but it does reprove such as faint before the end of this life:
these persons to avoid a momentany and light cross, do loose an immortal
weight of glory.


Tim. What is signified by this, that he says [they are not worthy?]


Silas. That is to say, they are not equal, or of so much moment and weight,
as to be compared with heavenly glory: it is a speech borrowed from things
put into the balance to be waighed therein; amongst which, those which be
heauiest, draw to their side the balance with their weight. So then the meaning
is, that afflictions and glory being put together, as it were in a balance,
afflictions would be found to be too light, and to come far short in worth
and price, unto that glory which is to come.


Tim. In what things are afflictions unequal to glory?


Silas. In two things, both in quantity and quality; first Quality.
they be unequal in quality, because afflictions are but bitter troubles here
on earth, before the world: but our glory is a heavenly blessed estate before
God. Secondly, afflictions be sharp evils which we feel with grief: but
the glory not only swallows up the evil and the grief: but fills us with
all good things most perfectly. They Quantity.
be also unequal in quantity, both for number, for measure, and for
continuance; for our afflictions are few, but the joys of heaven are
innumerable, more then the stars in the heaven. Also afflictions are but
light, but there is a weight of glory which is unmeasurable. Lastly,
afflictions are but short and momentary, but the glory is eternal, even for
ever and ever, and to last so long as God does last.


Tim. Why is it said of this glory, that it shall be revealed, and not that it
is revealed?


Silas. Because the godly now do see it and enjoy it but in part, whereas it
shall be manifested, and possessed perfectly in the end of the world; unto
which the future tense has respect.


Tim. What doctrine are we to learn from these words, being thus expounded?


Silas. The doctrine is this; all the afflictions which the 4 Doctrine.
godly do or can suffer in this world, are unworthy to be Reasons.
compared to the glory of heaven, the reasons here of be; because there is no
comparison between a thing finite and a thing infinite. Secondly, because the
afflictions which be suffered, are not incomprehensible, as is the glory which
the Saints shall enjoy; which made one of the Fathers to say, If I could
perform all things, and suffer all the evils which ever any man did, yet all
this could not make me worthy of heavenly glory, Origin.


Tim. What use and profit is to be made of this doctrine to our selves?


Silas. First of all it does convict the Papists of error, 5 Use.
in that they teach that our sufferings for Christ do deserve heavenly glory:
for this is quite against these words of Scripture, which say that afflictions
are not worthy of the glory; also they cannot deserve by merit the glory,
because there is no proportion between affliction and glory, but between
merit and reward given to merit, there must be a proportion; for the
recompense of a merit is an act or work of justice (says Thomas Aquinas,) but
justice is equality, therefore no merit, where there is vnequality. Secondly,
from hence also is overthrown, the Popish error of meriting by good works
done after grace, because to suffer with Christ is a work of more excellent
virtue, then to do good things; therefore if our sufferings deserve nothing,
our doings deserve less. Moreover, here is consolation to such as now are, or
ever shall be under the Cross for Christ's or the Gospels sake, to make them
cheerful to bear little evils, under hope of a greater good; as Mariners
which in a tempest do cast away their goods to save their lives, and as
heathen men spent their lives for earthly glory and reputation sake: how much
more would this be done for celestial glory?


Tim. Yea, but some believing afflicted Christians might say to Paul, We have
suffered much and long, but we see in stead of glory, more and more shame.


Silas. Yet we must possess our souls with patience, for the glory shall
fully be revealed: now our life is hid with Christ, but when Christ shall
appear, we shall appear with him in glory; the whilst we are not utterly
void of celestial glory. For we believe the promise of it by faith, and
possess it after a sort by hope, and have the beginnings or first fruits
thereof, in the gifts of sanctification; which is glorification inchoatiuely, as
glorification is sanctification absolutely and most perfectly.


DIAL. XIX.
Verses 19, 20. For the fervent desire of the creature waits when the sons
of God shall be revealed, because the creature, etc.


Tim. What may be the purpose of the Apostle in these verses?


Silas. His drift and purpose is, first to prove heavenly Drift.
glory which follows afflictions, in this life, to be certain: and secondly
to exhort Gods children to be patient in afflictions, under hope of that glory.
The former is proved by a secret and very great desire, which things Sum.
created, have after the glory of Gods Children till it be manifested. Now
this desire being put into them of God, it cannot be frustrate and vain, and
therefore the glory must needs be certain. The latter is proved by the
example of the cretures bearing their misery, (under which they are through
man's fault) in hope of restoring: therefore much more ought Gods Children
patiently to suffer their afflictions, seeing our restoring shall be far more
excellent then the restoring of the creatures: and there comes no afflictions
upon us from God, but they are by our sins most justly deserved; whereas the
creatures suffer for our sake.


Tim. Now let us know what be the parts of this Text?


Silas. It sets forth these two things unto us: First, Part.
the condition of the creatures, both in respect of their present misery, which
is here signified by the names of vanity, corruption, and bondage, verse 20,
21. Also of their futher restoration, which is here called deliverance,
glory, liberty, verse 21. The second thing is the affection of the creature, in
regard both of the misery, and restoring of them. This affection is declared
both for the kind and measure of it, by the terms of fervent desire,
waiting, groaning, traveling in pain, verses 19, 22.


Tim. Expound new the words, and tell us what is meant by the fervent desire of
the creature?


Sil. It is to be read word for word, (the expectation Interpretation
of the Creature expects,) that is, with greediness and continuance looks
for. There is in this phrase both a Prosopopoea, and a Pleonasmus. For he
puts upon the creature the person of one who most desirously expects and
looks after some person or thing; such are wont to put forth their heads,
and to look when such persons or things should appear, Psalm. 121, 1. So the
creature looks after liberty.


Tim. What are we to understand by Creature?


Silas. Neither the Angels as Origin, nor men good nor bad, as Augustine
thought; but the whole frame of Heaven and earth, with creatures therein
contained, as the Stars, Elements, all celestial bodies, brute beasts,
fruit of the earth, fishes of the sea, with whatsoever else was made for man's
use.


Tim. But what manner of desire is it that things created have?


Silas. It is a certain instinct, or inclination put into them of God, whereby
they secretly (after a manner unknown to us) are moved to covet to attain to
the end for which they were made. This end is that perfection and most
glorious estate in which the creature was at first created, and from which it
is now fallen for man's sin, and unto which it still tends by a natural
desire, even as heavy things by natural propension tend downwards, and light
things upwards.


Tim. What is meant by the revealing of the sons of God?


Silas. The meaning is, until that glory which is prepared for the sons of
God, be indeed manifested: the sons of God (by a Metonymy of the subject for
the adioynt) are put for the glorious liberty that is ordained for the^, as
verse 21. expounds it.


Tim. What instruction does arise from hence?


Silas. A twofold instruction: First, that the glory of Doctrine.
Heaven is most certain and sure, it is not doubtful whether there be such a
thing or no, or a thing in adventure, but there is such a thing indeed: and it
shall be certainly performed to all Gods Children which believe the Reason.
promises, and repent of their sins. The reason hereof is because God has
inspired the creatures with an instinct and desire after the glory of Gods
sons; and seeing God does nothing in vain, it must needs be that this
desire is after something that truly is, and not a Chimera or fiction.


Tim. What is the use of this instruction?


Silas. Such as are Gods children by adoption, must Use.
learn from hence to strengthen their faith, as concerning the truth and
certainty of their glory to come, if happily any doubt through temptation should
arise about it. Secondly, it informs our judgments about the estate of the
creature, what it shall be after this world is ended, that they shall after
their sort and manner be partakers of the glory of Gods sons, for otherwise
they should desire it in vain.


Tim. What other doctrine will arise from this 19. verse?


Silas. Seeing the creatures do greedily and continually 2. Doctrine.
desire the glory of Gods sons, the sons themselves ought much more
fervently to desire it; because the glory of the creature does but depend upon
the glory of Gods children, and is very far inferior unto it. Therefore if
their desire be great and constant after it, ours ought a great deal more so
to be, seeing that glory shall be fully revealed chiefly for our sakes, and our
state shall by many degrees exceed the estate of all other creatures.


Tim. What use is to be made of this Doctrine?


Sil. It is twofold, both in respect of godly and the ungodly. In respect of
the ungodly, it serves most Use.
sharply to reprove them as being worse then the dumb, sence-lesse,
unreasonable creatures, in that they have no desire nor longing at all after
the glory to come; whereas even the creature does covet it fervently. The heart
of the wicked it is set upon riches, they trust in uncertain goods, they mind
earthly things, their portion and their treasure is here; and therefore their
joy is here, they do not once look after heavenly glory, whatsoever they
profess, much less seriously: nay they do persecute the servants of God
which do put their trust in God, and hope for his glory, 2. Tim. 1, 11, 12.
also 2, 9, 10. Thus the love of the world, and strength of sinful corruption,
has quenched that desire and hope of the wicked concerning heavenly glory,
which still lives in unreasonable creatures: this is a miserable condition.
Secondly, in respect of the godly, this must serve first to check and reprove
the weakness and coldness of their desires after celestial glory, where of
the very creature is so greedy. Secondly, to provoke and whet themselves to a
more eager thirst and longing after it by example of the creature, and in
consideration that the same glory does especially belong to them in a more
special manner and measure, and therefore ought in an especial sort to be
coueted of them; for which purpose very great care must be had as for the
mortification of al sinful corruptions, so chiefly for the crucifying of the
world to themselves; because heaven is more or less desired, as worldly things
are more or less beloved of us.


Tim. What is the reason that the creature is kept from his desired end, to
wit, his perfection?


Silas. That is declared in the 20. verse to be the vanity, that is, the
vanishing and flceting condition of the creature, consisting in bondage and
corruption.


Tim. What is meant by being subject unto this vanity?


Sil. To be put under such a condition, or to be ordained to be under such an
estate as is vain and corruptible. Which vanity comes unto it, not by it
own will and inclination, (for we all know that all creatures do desire their
own preservation and perfection,) but by the commandment and will of their
Creator, which has thereunto subdued it.


Tim. What doctrine arises from hence? 3. Doctrine.



Silas. That all the creatures of God which be under the third heaven, be
liable to vanity, being at the first created of God in a most noble and
excellent condition. The reasons hereof, is first man's sin deserving it to
be Reason,
so. Secondly, Gods counsel appointing and ordaining it to be so, to wit, that
they being made for man's sake; should stand or fall together with him.


Tim. What use of this Doctrine?


Silas. It admonishes us how much God is offended Use.
with man's sin, in that he punishes the very creatures for it.

Secondly, to humble man, in consideration that all the creatures are impaired
and made the worse for his A righteous man regards the life of his beast says
Saloman.
sin. Thirdly, seeing all creatures partake with us in our punishment, it
should cause us to be merciful unto them which need our mercy, and be in our
danger. What concerns this matter, shall be further handled in the next verse.


DIAL. XX.
Verse 21. Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. A promise to the creature of deliverance from misery, under which it
lies by the appointment of God for man's sin.


Tim. What is meant by the creature, and what is it to be delivered?


Silas. By creature is meant the whole frame of the (...)
world, the insensible creature, and whatsoever GOD made, which is void of
reason or sense. And to be delivered, is to be set free or at liberty, quit,
and exempted.


Tim. From what shall the creature be delivered?


Silas. From bondage and corruption. These words to be bond or subject to
corruption, expound the word Vanity; and signifies corruption, or a
corruptible estate, whereunto for man's sin the creature is bound and subject.


Tim. Wherein does this corruption of the Creature appear?


Silas. In these things: First, it is wearied with continual labor for our
sake. Secondly, many creatures loose their lives for our use, and at our
pleasure. Thirdly, all of them are forced to do service unto the devils, which
range in the air, or to the lusts of wicked men. Fourthly, their beauty,
force, and glory, is by reason of man's sin often impaired. Lastly, they are
subject to a dissolution in the end, in such sort as they be now, they shall
be no longer.


Tim. What is meant by the Sons of God, and what is their liberty?


Silas. By Sons of God, is meant all the Children of GOD, whether his Sons
or Daughters (by a (...)) as man signifies often both man and woman, Psalm. 1,
1. and by their glorious liberty, is signified such a liberty, as shall not
only free all believers, from all manner of evils either of crime or pain,
but be accompanied with incomparable glory and honor.


Tim. What is meant by [into?]


Silas. So to be delivered, as to be partakers of the liberty and glory of the
godly. Chrysostom reads, dia, for the glorious liberty of the sons of God;
as if the end or final cause of their deliverance were pointed at, namely, that
as God made the world for man, and for man subdued it to vanity: so he would
deliver and restore it for men, even to illustrate and enlarge the glory of
Gods Children.


Tim. What is the Doctrine to be Learned out of this Doctrine.
Verse?


Silas. This: the world with the creatures therein, shall be set free from their
servile and corrupt condition, even at that day when God shall perfectly
glorify his Children in soul and body.


Tim. What manner of freedom and deliverance shall this be?


Silas. Of the manner of deliverance of the creatures there be two opinions.
The first opinion is, that it shall be by abolition or annihilation, making
the creature cease to be at all; which is a kind of deliverance, because if the
creature be not at all, then it can no longer be under vanity, bondage, and
corruption. The second opinion is, that this deliverance shall be by a change
of qualities, the creature being altered into a better estate; as a man is
changed in his regeneration, his substance remains the same, a new quality of
holiness is (...) brought in: or as Gold is altered in the furnace, the
dross being removed, it becomes more pure: so the world shall be but
purified and restored to his first perfection, Reasons.
but not wasted to nothing. And this last opinion do I hold to be the truest,
and that for these reasons following. The first is, by the (...) of Scripture,
teaching that the world shall be but changed and renewed. Psa. 102-26. 27. Esaias
66, 22. and 65. 17. And in this last place as in our text also, there is
promise made not of annihilation, but of a restitution of the world, that it
shall not utterly be extinct, but renewed; as Peter expounds it 2 Pet. 3. 13.
Secondly, as the world was but changed and cleansed at the first by water, so
it shall be no otherwise at the last by fire; that was only changed, and not
quite destroyed, so shall this be.

Thirdly, our Text does not barely say the creature shall be delivered, but
adds, (into the glorious liberty of the sons of God) which plainly shows
that their deliverance is another thing then being brought to nothing, even a
communicating with the sons of God, in one part of their glory, (to wit;) in
incorruption and immortality, which the creature had by Creation and by
natural instinct still desires to recover it, as verse, 22. Fourthly, every
creature desires it own preservation naturally and abhors destruction;
therefore it is not a bringing to nothing, (this deliverance;) for the creature
would never desire that, that is against nature. Fistly, Peter in Acts third
verse 22. speaks of restoring, not of men only but of all other things.
Lastly, the same Apostle Peter, exhorts us to live without blame, because there
should be new heavens and new earth: all this does argue and strongly prove,
that this deliverance of the creature, shall not be by a reduction into
nothing, but by an alteration into a better estate. The restitution of the
creature shall be like the resurrection from the dead: but what shall be the
particular properties, works, and uses of all and every creature after the
last judgment; let no man enquire, because it is not revealed in the word
(...) here is place for that which Tertullian calls a learned ignorance.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this truth?


Silas. First, it serves to strengthen our faith, concerning Uses.
the certainty of heavenly glory, because the natural appetite of the creature
after heavenly glory is not in vain Secondly, it warns the godly not to be
troubled with the confusions and disorders of the world, because one day God
will bring all these things into better frame. Thirdly, it must call our
hearts from the imoderate love of money and other riches, because these being
no part of the world, must be consumed and burnt up by the fire: and therefore
it is a folly to love them too much. Fourthly, it should stir all men to
endeavor earnestly newnes of life; because if the creature cannot enjoy glory
until it be first cleansed and changed, then much less we, before we be purged
and purified from our spots of sin, by continual repentance.


Tim. What other Doctrine is to be raised out of this 21. verse? Doctrine.



Silas. This: that the creature is under great misery, until the time of
restoring comes. Their misery stands in two things: the first is bondage,
in that they are driven to serve wicked men and devils. The second is,
corruption, in that many living creatures perish for us daily; and such as are
without life, shall be dissolved and changed. The reason hereof is; first
Gods decree, appointing Reasons.
it to be so, as the event has declared; for nothing falls out in time, which
was not decreed before all times. The second reason hereof is, Man's sin, for
whose sake and use, as God created the world at first in perfection, so when he
being Lord of the creature transgressed, the world was impaired and subdued to
corruption, through his disobedience. As the primum mobile, like a wheel,
does carry about in his motion all the other Spheres, so the good and evil
condition of the creature depends upon men.


Tim. But was this righteous in God to curse the Creature which sinned not?


Sil. Yea verily: First, because the only will of God Suprema regula iustitiae
(...) Dci (...).
is the Sovereign cause of all righteousness. Secondly, if civil Justice of
earthly Princes, may without wrong punish traitors themselves, and their
children also: much more rightfully may divine Justice for the treason of Adam,
curse the Creatures which were made for his sake.


Tim. What use are we to make of this point?


Silas. First, it teaches patience in afflictions, for the godly should not
faint in their calamities, seeing the creature quietly suffers misery for
their sake. Secondly, this should move us to abhor sin, which is such a
venomous thing, in that it has infected all creatures above us, about us, and
beneath us. Thirdly, it must move us to pity the creature, being liable and
subject unto labor, weariness yea and death for our sakes. Lastly, it
reproves the cruelty of such, as sport themselves in the mutual murdering of
the creature; the death and destruction whereof, being a part of the curse for
our sins, we may not make it our recreation; Gods curse may not be sported
with. I mean it not of the lawful sport, by hawking, hunting, etc. where the
use of the creature for sustentation of out life is sought after. For all
creatures given to man to use, may for his use be killed, yet with the least
cruelty.


DIAL. XXI.
Verse 22, 23. For we know that every creature groaneth with us also, and
trauaileth together unto this present time, and not only the creature, but we
also which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh in our
selves, waiting for the Redemption of our body.


Tim. What does this Scripture contain?


Silas. It further proves the certainety of heavenly glory, by a double
desire, the one of Gods creatures, verse 22. the other of Gods children, verse
23.


Tim. In what words is the desire of the Creature set down?


Silas. In two borrowed speeches: the one of groaning together, the other of
travailing in pain. The former is taken from such as sigh and groan under a
common burden which is too heavy for them. The other is taken from women,
which bring forth children with great sorrow and pain.


Tim. Is it meant that the creatures do (...) together with us, or one
together with another?


Silas. Though some take it that their groans be on our behalf and for our
cause, craving vengeance upon the wicked our enemies, and desiring liberty for
us; yet because this sense does cross the beginning of the next verse, where he
speaks of our groaning: it is rather to be thought that the meaning of the
apostle is, that the creatures amongst themselves mutually, do with sorrow
expect the end of their misery. That this is so, appears first by our own
sense, for we do see that the creatures are under vanity, and made by the
providence and commandment of God, to serve our necessity. Secondly, by the
word of God, which teaches us plainly both the original and end of their
misery.


Tim. What are we to learn now out of this 22. verse?


Silas. Matter of great comfort both for the creature, and for so many as are
Gods children; which consists herein, that both their and our vanity and
misery shall not only have an end, but shall end joyfully: for as at the
travail of a woman in the birth of a child, there is joy when a child is
brought into the world, so shall the conclusion of our misery be joyful and
happy both to men and creatures.


Tim. But have Gods children no other and surer ground of their delivery from
misery?


Silas. Yes verily, for their desire and hope of deliverance, is built upon two
firm grounds laid down in the 23. verse. The first is, the sense and feeling
of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, (for they have the first fruits of the
Spirit.) The second is, their waiting for the full accomplishment of their
heavenly inheritance, (redemption of their bodies.)


Tim. What is that which is here called the Spirit?


Silas. By a Metonymie of the cause for the effect, the Spirit is put here to
signify all the gifts of the Spirit (which be not miraculous gifts,) which we
cannot find that the Romans had, nor yet common gifts, such as hypocrites
and wicked men have; but special gifts peculiar to the elect: as calling,
faith, justification, sanctification, hope, love, repentance, etc.


Tim. How are these gifts termed first fruits?


Sil. It is a metaphor or speech borrowed from the manner of the Church of the
old Testament, when the Jews by the commandment of God, did offer their first
fruits unto God; partly to show their thankfulness unto God, and partly to
(...) the rest of the crop. Deuteronomy. 26. Leuit. 23. 14. The which the Apostle does
fit to his purpose after this sort: As by offering the first fruits, the Jews
received hope of a good harvest, to enjoy the rest of the crop in due time: so
the portion of saving and special grace, which Gods children have here,
assures them of the persection of glory hereafter, that God will fulfill that
certainly in them, which he has happily begun.


Tim. What doctrines do ye learn from the words thus expounded?


Silas. The doctrines be two? the first is, such as feel the special gifts
of Gods Spirit wrought in their hearts now, may be assured of (...) life in
heaven: the reason hereof is the faithfulness of God, who will accomplish the
beginnings of his grace. 1 Cor. 1. 9. Phil. 1. 6.


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Sil. First, it reproues them which hope for eternal glory, and yet have not
these gifts of the Spirit in them. Secondly, it comfores the godly, who have
these first fruits, because they certainly shall in the end have the fullness
of bliss, so as they do with patience (...) for it.


Tim. What is the other doctrine?


Sil. This, that (...) believers have the gifts of the Spirit but in a mean
measure; as the first fruits offered to God were but an handful (as it were)
in respect of the rest of the heap: so the portion of the gifts which the
faithful have, are but very small in respect of that they should, and one day
must have. The reasons why the gifts of the Spirit are measured out to the
faithful in so small a portion, is first to humble them in the sight of their
own imperfections and wants. Secondly, to stir them up to more seruent
prayer, that they may always seek to God and depend upon him, having ever
need of him. Lastly, because this way does most make for Gods glory, and also
it does nourish mutual charity amongst men, 2 Cor. 12. 9. 10. Gala. 6. 2. 3.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this doctrine?


Sil. (...), it serves to harten and cheer those that have any measure of
saving grace in them, be it never so little, ye a though it be but a desire
to believe; so as there be soundness and truth withal. Secondly, this must
admonish the children of God, that they endeavor to grow and increase in the
graces of God, 2 Pet. 3. 18. by the diligent and constant use of all good
means, Gala. 6. 8.


Tim. What other things learn ye hence?


Silas. As the first fruits were dedicated to GOD only, so all our gifts
should be bestowed to this end, only to serve and honor God by them, and
not for vain glory, or worldly preferment.


Tim. Now tell us what is meant by adoption?


Sil. The inheritance of heaven, whereunto believers are adopted.


Tim. But how can they be said to wait for their adoption, which be already
adopted, and be already Sons?


Sil. They which be already adopted, having the right of sons, and title to
the inheritance, may yet still wayt for the consummation of their glory, and
full fruition of their inheritance. And this is it which is here meant by the
redemption of our bodies, because when our bodies shall be wholly free from
corruption and misery, then shall our glory be consummate and perfect.


Tim. What is the doctrine that arises from these words?


Sil. That the redemption of the saithfull will then be effectual and
complete, when their bodies shall be again raised out of the dust. The reasons
hereof be, first because while they live, they are subject to many sinful
infirmities and miseries of this life. Secondly, because the body must be
dissolved from the soul by death, and afterward rotte in the grave; therefore
till the body be restored at the resurrection, the glory of the faithful
cannot be consmmate and perfect, howsoever now they are redeemed from sin,
satan, damnation, and hell.


Tim. What is the duty of Gods children in regard of their glory to come?


Silas. To wait for it with sighs.


Tim. How may the sighs of Gods children be descerned from the sighs of the
hypocrite?


Silas. Gods children do sigh in themselves; that is, soundly and secretly,
their sighs come both from the bottom of their hearts, in a lively sense of
that which they want and look for; and also they are secret and silent, not
appearing so much outwardly, as hypocrites do to be seen of men, as conceived
inwardly in the sight of God.


DIAL. XXII.
Verses 24, 25. For we are saved by hope, but hope that is seen is no hope:
for how can a man hope for that which he sees. But if we hope for that which
we see not, we do with patience abide for it.


Tim. WHat is the drift and purpose of this text?


Silas. To prove that which he said in Drift.
the former verse; to wit, that all true believers do with sighs wait for
their full and perfect adoption, even their celestial inheritance. The reason
which is here used to prove this, is taken from the nature of hope, thus: We
have heavenly salvation no otherwise but by hope, therefore our full salvation
is yet absent from us, and with patience to be waited for. For where the thing
hoped for is present, there is no place for hope, which so presupposes the
absence of perfect blessedness, to the grief of believers, as withal it
looks certainly to possess it in due time; whence arises joy and gladness.


Tim. What does this text contain? Parts.



Silas. Two things; first a proposition [we are saved by hope.] Secondly, an
application opening the office and nature of hope.


Tim. In the nature of hope what things does the Apostle Paul consider?


Silas. Two things: First, that the thing hoped for, is absent, verse 24. [ For
Hope which is seen, is no hope.] Secondly, that it must be patiently waited
for, Verse 25. For if we hope for that we see not, then we do with patience
abide for it.


Tim. Expound the words, and tell us what is meant by [We] and also what is
meant by [Saued,] We are saved?


Silas. By [Wee] is meant the Apostle himself, and all Interpretation.
believers whosoever, and by saved is meant the fullness and perfection of
salvation in heaven, when body and soul shall be glorified at the day of
judgment, and not the beginning of salvation in our new birth, which
consists in remission of sins, and reconciliation with God by faith; (for
this the faithful already have, they need not hope for it) but the
accomplishment of this, is that which is here signified by salvation, and
which they are said to hope for.


Tim. What do ye call hope?


Sil. That grace of the soul, whereby every true Christian, does surely expect
and look to enjoy promised salvation.


Tim. What is the doctrine from hence?


Silas. That our perfect salvation cannot in this life be Doctrine.
otherwise possessed of true believers then by hope: the Reasons.
reason is, because our perfect salvation is a thing to come, and to be enjoyed
after this life ended: also, because it is to be enjoyed only in heaven,
therefore now it is not had nor can be.


Tim. Yea but the Scripture says, we are saved by Faith, Ephesians. 2, 8. How then
is it said here, we are saved by hope?


Silas. We are otherwise saved by hope then by faith: What difference between
faith and Hope
the difference stands herein. First, by faith we believe the promise of
salvation, by hope we do look for the thing promised. Secondly, Faith does
enter and begin our salvation in apprehending remission of sins,
reconciliation with God, the perfect righteousness of Christ, and purifies our
hearts that we may live holily: but hope looks forward unto the end, and full
perfection of bliss. Thirdly, Faith saves as an isntrumental cause, without
the which we cannot lay hold of Christ: Hope saves as Faith is before hope, as
the cause before the effect
a fruit of Faith, as a sign of a person justified and reconciled, as the way
wherein we are to walk toward Heaven, as that which looks to enjoy
salvation, because God has truly promised, and Faith has surely believed
that promise.


Tim. What use is to be made of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, it reproues such as place all their happiness Use.
in worldly things; these are no truc believers: for they have no hope of
salvation in heaven. Secondly, this admonishes how to make trial of our
Faith, even by that hope which we have of salvation to come: for these two are
inseparable, none can certainly expect salvation except they do believe it to
be truly promised: and whosoever can undoubtedly look for heavenly glory by
Hope, it is because first by faith they have received the promise of it.
Thirdly it teaches, that the faithful by infallible certainty, may assure
their hearts of their own eternal salvation, because they are saved by hope,
which does not make ashamed or confounds, which it should do, if the hope of
glory might be frustrate.


Tim. Proceed to the next matter (the Nature of hope) and 2. Part.
tell us what is meant here by Hope, when he says [Hope which is seen?]


Silas. Not the gift of Hope which is inward, seated in the heart; but the
thing which is hoped for, even that which is present, and now enjoyed and
possessed, or now in our hands.


Tim. What is here meant by Hope?


Silas. That the gift of hope has no place, but when the thing hoped for is
absent. This may be proved by common sense, for every man sees and
perceives that one cannot hope for any thing that he already has, and which
is now already in his possession: of this we speak improperly and abusiuely, if
we do say that we hope for it; for it is present.


Tim. What is the Doctrine from these words thus declared and opened?


Silas. That this is the property of hope to expect and look for that which we
yet have not, but is absent and to come.


Tim. Will it not follow hereof, that Christian Hope is uncertain and
doubtfnll, seeing of things to come, it cannot be known many times whether
they will come or no?


Sil. No, it will not follow; because the things which Christian hope looks
after, they are always absent in such wise, as they must needs be fulfilled;
because they are promised by such a God, as both can for his almightincsse, and
for his mercy in Christ will perform them. It stands upon his honor to make
good his word, as a good christian at the hour of death said in my hearing.


Tim. Tou do not think certainty or assurance to be of the Nature of Hope?
Does Hope simply considered, breed (...) and affiance?


Silas. No, it is not; but assurance arises from the quality of the things
which be absent and hoped for, which if they have causes contingent, then the
Hope is doubtful and uncertain: but if they be of necessary causes, then
the hope is undoubted and firm. Now the salvation of the Saints to come, has
sure immovable and firm causes, as the truth, and mercy, and Oathe of God
the promiser; the merits and Mediation of Christ our Redeemer, dead and
raised again; the witness of the Spirit.


Tim. What is the use to be made of this point of Doctrine? Use.



Sil. It does warn the faithful, that they have continual cause to grieve
and sighe even in this regard, that their full and absolute happiness is yet
absent. Towant so great a good is cause enough of grief; many will grieve and
sigh for want of far less good things then their eternal life. Secondly,
from hence we may see, Ospes fallaces, meritis considere nostris.
that true believers have reason to rejoice, insomuch as though their perfect
felicity be absent, yet they are most sure in the end to have it. So cannot
Papists be, whose hope rests upon Gods grace and man's merit.


Tim. What is their duty in the mean time?


Silas. With patience to wait for it till it come. And Doctrine.
this is the other part of the nature of hope, even to expect with courage and
patience, that which it has not.


Tim. But what need is there of patience?


Silas. A twofold need: First, because their hope is Reasons.
deferred, therefore Christians must have patience; for it is no small trial
and temptation to be long kept from that which one does earnestly and truly
love, being of such inestimable worth. Secondly, because the faithful are
here subject to many and manifold miseries, therefore they must possess their
souls in patience, it being the will of God to afflict them diversely and
deeply, and not only to hold their inheritance from them for a while: and
therefore they have need of patience, that having done the will of God, they
may be glorified. This may be set set forth by the example of Merchants,
Soldiers, and Laborers, who are all of comfort, because they do look very
surely to obtain a good end of their labors; yet in the mean time they make
account to meet withal, and to resist diverse difficulties in their voyages,
wars, and affairs.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. It instructs us, that such are unmeet for heaven, Uses.
as promise to themselves ease and freedom from troubles here. Secondly, it
does admonish the faithful to get patience, because through many tribulations
they must come to the hoped for haven. Acts 14. 22.


DIAL. XXIII.
Verses 26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know
not what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes requests for us
with sighs that cannot be expressed.


Tim. What is the drift of this text?


Silas. It affords unto believers a new reason why they ought patiently to
bear the cross, and to suffer persecution for righteousnesle sake, with
comfort and Christian constancy. This reason is drawn from an effect of the
holy Spirit of God, in the hearts of the believers; to wit, his secret and
mighty help afforded them in their prayers to God: when they are so beset and
straightned, as they know what course to follow.


Tim. How may it be that prayer should afford comfort to the godly, while
they are vnden the cross?


Silas. They are helpful and comfortable in two respects. First, because they
are stirred up by the Holy Ghost, verse 26. Secondly, because they are heard
and granted of God, verse 27.


Tim. What may the parts of this text be?


Silas. Two, the first is, that prayer is a great stay in afflictions. The
second is the reasons hereof, the one taken from the author, to wit, the
Spirit stirring them up; the other from the fruit thereof.


Tim. Expqund the words and tell us what is here meant by the [Spirit?]


Silas. Some by Spirit understand a spiritual man: others by Spirit understand
an extraordinary and miraculous gift of the Spirit; but by Spirit is here meant
the third person in Trinity, even the holy Spirit of God.


Tim. What does infirmity signify?


Silas. These three things; first, our sinful weakness, to wit, ignorance,
distrust, etc. for these he as a proper cause to make us weak, Mat.26. 41. the
flesh is weak. Secondly, afflictions and crosses inward and outward, because
these serve to declare our weakness as trials of it. Thirdly, perturbation and
vexation of spirit, arising through the greatness of crosses and tribulations;
whence it is that even the faithful themselves are void of counsel
oftentimes, and know not which way to turn them: as it sared with Iehosaphat,
when three nations banded against him, and with Elishaes servant when he saw
the Aramites host.


Tim. What is meant by the word [helpe?]


Silas. It would be better translated [ helps togither] for it is a speech
borrowed from two or more persons, which being to take or lift up some heavy
burden, do mutually one help another, by standing one over against another,
each at one end of the burden: others take it to be a metaphor taken from
sick persons, or infants, or old rotten houses, which cannot stand unless
they be propped up. The meaning of the Apostle is, that the faithful are many
times so faint under the burden of the cross, as that they would languish if
the holy Spirit of God did not support them mightily by an especial aid and
presence, as it were standing over against them, to bear the burden with them
that they sink not.


Tim. What doctrines will arise from the words thus expounded?


Two, the first doctrine is, that all men (none exempted, no not the Apostles
themselves) are subject to al manner of infirmities in this life, outward and
inward, as appea reth in this, that the Apostle says [our infirmities] putting
himself in the number of those who are liable to weaknesses. It appears
also by the testimony of scripture, witnessing, that in many things we sin
all, James 3. 2. 1 Kin. 8. 46. 1 John 1. 7. These places prove sinful
infirmities to be common to all; and where it is written that we are to enter
into the kingdom of heaven through many tribulations, Acts 14. 22. and that
he that will live godly must suffer afflictions, 2 Timothy 3. 12. these places
prove also that other infirmities which be but effects and consequences of
sinnesull infirmities, are likewise common to all Christians. It appears also
by reason grounded upon holy scripture; for since our sanctification is
imperfect, and our life a warfare, and Satan and the world have leave given
them to tempt; therefore it cannot be but that all believers must beeliable to
infirmities of all sorts, so long as they live here.


Tim. But how then is it written that Christ has healed all our infirmities.
Mat. 8. 17. Esaias 53. 4. 5.


Silas. Christ has taken and healed our infirmities of sin, by remoouing
from us the guilt and curse, but not the corruption: and of afflictions, by
sanctifying them unto us, that they may not be punishments, but tryalles and
exercises unto us. Secondly, in the end, at the day of the resurrection, we
shall be wholly and fully freed from all infirmities both sins and tears;
in the mean space they are left remaining in the Saints, for excellent good
purposes and uses.


Tim. Tell us then what use we are to make of our infirmities, and of the
doctrine concerning them?


Sil. It is no small comfort to Gods children being under infirmities of all
sorts, that none are exempted. If Christ would have his Apostles be comforted
with this, that so the Prophets were persecuted. Mat. 5. 11. 12., then let
every Christian that has any affliction, labor to make this his comfort, that
others are so dealt withal: 1 Pet. 5. 9. Secondly, by the knowledge and sense
of these infirmities, the prayers of Gods children are much whetted and quick
ned, also their faith and patience much tried, as gold is tried in the
furnace, 1 Peter 1. 7. 2 Corinthians. 12. 8. Lastly, they serve greatly to humble
the faithful, and to correct the vain pride of their hearts, 2 Cor. 12. 7.
least after the example of Peter forgetting his infirmities, they do fall into
security, by presuming too much on their own strength. And very certain it is,
that whenever the cross comes, they are likest to stand to it, that best
know and feel their own infirmities; because such will not rely upon
themselves but on the power of God. The story of Master Sanders and Doctor
Pendleton does serve to declare the truth of this.


Tim. Thus far of the first doctrine, what is the next?


Silas. This: That the cross or afflictions for Christ's sake are like a
burden which cannot be borne but with much strength.


Tim. But the Cross is Christ's burden, and he says that his burden is
light, Mat 11, 30.


Silas. Our Savior in that text means the burden of his doctrine and
commandments, which indeed are not burdensome to believers in this life, 1.
John, 5. 3. He speaks not of the Cross and tribulations, which is so heavy,
as of our selves we are not able to take it up, much less to bear it, except
the Holy Ghost (like unto Simon of Ciren) lay his shoulders under it, and help
to bear it with us.


Tim. Tea, but the Apostle Paul calls our afflictions light, 2. Cor. 4, 17.


Sil. Paul there speaks comparatively, in comparison of that weighty glory
which follows afflictions. See Romans 8, 18. But afflictions considered simply
and absolutely as they are in themselves, they are grievous and a burden too
heavy for us to bear. For Ezekiah under the burden of his afflictions
mourned, David fainted, Job cursed the day of his birth, and Peter for fear of
the cross denied his Lord. If the Cross made such Champions to stoop, how
should we not fear such a burden? especially when it shall come to the fiery
trial, and Christians must be put to fight against sin to blood.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, to admonish Christians that it stands them upon, well to
prepare themselves against the time of the Cross, it being a thing so
burdensome. It was good counsel which Solomon gave, My son (faith he)
prepare thy souls against the day of afflictions. And again, In thy prosperity
think upon the time of adversity, Ecclesiastes 7, verse 16.

Secondly, seeing affliction is so heavy, let men be well advised, that where
no cause is they cast not themselves into troubles, 1. Pet. 1, 6. For this is
great rashness, and will breed no comfort, but late repentance. Thirdly, if
the Cross of afflictions be sent upon you by God, yet despair not though it
be heavy, suspecting your own strength, but fly unto the holy Spirit of God
for aid and strength: as men under weighty burdens cry for help, so must
the children of God do, the more heavy they feel the burden of afflictions,
the more earnestly they must call to God for help.


Tim. But how can Gods children be sure that the holy Spirit of God can help
them?


Silas. He will, because it is the office of the Spirit to help our
infirmities, as it is said in this Text: also he can I will be with thee says
god to Moses, Exodus 3. God and Moses will be strong enough even against Pharaoh.
well help them, because being the mighty God, he is stronger then all that
is against us; for if God be on our side, who can be against us? Romans 8, 31.
How weak soever man be of himself, yet he cannot be but strong enough, so
long as he has God with him: and therefore we are to look to our own
weakness and unableness to bear, that we may be humbled, but not
discouraged: also to fasten the eye of our mind upon the strength and might of
the Holy Ghost, considering not what we in our selves can suffer, but what he
is able to make us to suffer, 2. Cor. 12, 12. Psalm. 121, 2.


Tim. Now show us what this word [Likewise] must admonish us of?


Silas. It does admonish us of the abundant and manifold comforts provided for
the faithful, and before propounded, to encourage them to bear the cross
patieutly. For first, it is an honest thing so to do, because we suffer with
Jesus Christ. Secondly, it is very profitable for us so to do, because if we
suffer with Christ, we shall be glorified with him. Thirdly, our afflictions
are far unequal to that glory which in heaven we shall enjoy. Fourthly, the
creature gives us an example of patience, for they groan. Fistly, we have the
stay of hope certainly looking for eternal bliss, and of patience quietly to
wait and expect it till it come: and if all these be not enough to encourage
us, we have (likewise) the secret help of the Spirit in our hearts. Thus has
God in this Scripture, provided a rich storehouse of comforts for the faithful,
that as afflictions abound, so might consolations abound also. As a man in war,
having his Quiver full of Arrows, if he take up but one, it may serve to
preserve himself and avoid his enemy: so one of these comforts laid hold of,
will be enough to stay a soul in adversity, much more being jointly and
altogether laid hold upon.


Tim. Now proceed to the latter part of this verse (for we know not how to
pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes requests for us, with sighs
that cannot be expressed,) and tell us what is the sum of it.


Silas. Thus much: when the Saints in great temptations through ignorance and
weakness, know not what is good for them to ask, then the holy Spirit
stirs up sighs secretly, and causes them to pray with groans, which
cannot be uttered.


Tim. But is this ignorance common to all believers, that in some case they
know not what to ask?


Silas. It is so: as appears in this, that Paul numbered himself among those
which labored under this ignorance: the which he does not falsely of
counterfeite modesty, or for conclusion sake only, but in very truth and as
the thing was, as Romans 1, 10. He prayed often The Godly fail in their
prayers, for lack of knowledge.
that he might go to Rome, but God heard him not: also he was not heard when he
prayed, that the prick in his flesh might be taken away, 2 Cor. 12, 7. Also
Moses prayed to enter into Canaan and did not. Jeremy prayed for the health of
the people, but God did not hear him. Abrahum prayed in vain for the
Sodomites, and Samuel for Saul, and the widow Zebedee for her two sons, of
whom Christ said, She knew not what she asked. This then is the reason why
God denies the prayers of his Children many times, even because that they
which ask it is either hurtful, or not profitable for them, or else they ask
it out of time: but when God hears not his Saints after their will, he
hears them to their benefit giving them something better for them then that
which they ask, as in Paul's case, 2 Cor. 2. 10, 11. Also sometimes God does
fulfill men's Prayers in his wrath and displeasure to their own hurt, as it
happened to the Israelites, asking flesh in the Desert, Exodus 16, 13. Numb. 11,
33. and craving a King in the land of Canaan, 1 Samuel 8, 5.


Tim. What follows of this?


Silas. That both the godly and the wicked, are oftentimes ignorant of what
they ask. The reason hereof is, because the faithful take and think many
things to be good, which either are not good (but apparently) or not good for
them. Also they judge sundry things evil, which either be not evil (simply)
or not evil to them.


Tim. But the Lords Prayer teaches what to desire, (...) then can we be
ignorant what to ask?


Silas. It teaches what to pray generally, but not particularly. Secondly, it
expresses not indifferent things; (...) error is about particular things, and
things which be of a middle nature. Thirdly, the Apostle tells (...) what
befell the godly in one special case, to wit, of grievous afflictions, when the
minds of the faithful may be and often be so oppressed with cares and
perplexed fears, as they are altogether unmeet to call on God, the heart
being unable to dispose it self unto God, to think on him, and the tongue
altogether unfit to utter a word: as it fared with Hezekiah, Isaiah 38. and
Moses at the red Sea, Exodus 14, 15. and with Hanna, 1 Samuel 1, 13. and with
David, Psalm. 72. Finally with Christ, Mat. 26, 38. John 12, 27. My soul is
beauy, etc.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this truth, touching our ignorance in prayer?


Sil. It serves for our humbling, to consider our imbecility and natural
ignorance whereby we hang doubtful, and stagger of seeblenesse, and stick by
ignorance. Secondly, it shows that none be perfect, seeing we are ignorant
what to ask in prayer. Thirdly, it confutes the Pelagians, which ascribe too
much to natural strength, and yet we are so feeble as we cannot tell what is
profitable, much less be able to persorme any thing by any power in us.
Lastly, it teaches what need we have of consideration and help to pray;
greater then most, yea then good men commonly think of.


Tim. Come now unto the next part of the sentence, and tell us how the Spirit
makes request?


Silas. By stirring up requests in us, and causing us to pray. That this is the
meaning of the words, apeareth by comparing this Text with the 15. verse of
this chapter, where it is written. We have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father; the Spirit cries by making us cry. Thus understand
that in Gal. 4, 6.


Tim. What gather ye from these words?


Silas. Thus much: that when the Scripture says, the Spirit cries and makes
request, the meaning is, that it makes us to cry and to make request; and this
is an usual thing, to attribute unto God those things which the godly do by
divine inspiration. Thus God is said to know, by teaching others, and
illuminating their minds that they may know, as Augustine observes out of those
words, in Genesis 18, 19. I know thou fear me, and in the Galathians 4, 9.
Forasmuch, as ye know God, or rather are known of God, that is, taught that
ye may know. So Deuteronomy. 8, 2. God is said to tempt the Hebrews, that Facit nos
postulare quae Dco placet.
he may know what is in them, that is, make themselves and others to know what
is in them: so here the Spirit makes request, that is, moves us to request.


Tim. I but the Scripture says, that Christ makes request for us, Romans 8, 34.
how then does the Spirit make request?


Silas. Christ makes request as Mediator: the Spirit makes request for us,
as Author and inspirer of requests and desires.


Tim. What is the doctrine from hence?


Silas. That the prayers of the godly come from Gods Spirit. The text is
plain herein, to which may be joined that which is written, 1. Cor. 12, 3. No
man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit, (that is) either
confess him or pray to him in faithful confidence and reverence, but by a
special grace of the Spirit.


Tim. What are we to learn hence, that the Spirit is the worker and kindler
of prayer in the godly?


Silas. First, that no Turk, nor Jew, nor Idolator, nor Heretic can pray,
because they have not the Spirit Secondly, that no wicked man nor hypocrite
can pray, because they receive not the Spirit. Thirdly, that in our best
prayers, we ought to be humbled, seeing they are not our own, but come from
the Spirit, which is our prompter, moderater, and Schoole-maister. Fourthly,
that in beginning of prayer, we crave of God, the assistance of his Spirit.


Tim. What is signified by sighs inexpressible, or which cannot be expressed?


Silas. This is meant either intensiuely for such sighs as Quiasunt de re
incnarrabil's, sci. vita aeterna.
are most fervent, no man being able to utter them, for their greatness and
exceeding vehemence, or properly for such sighs as we cannot utter by any
speech, because of their weakness and feebleness. The godly in whom they
Facit gemere plus quam dici potest.
be, know not of them, through the infirmity of the flesh, and strength of
temptations, they are not aware nor do know that they do pray much less
speak any thing expressedly in prayer; yet they are groans and sighs wrought
in them by the holy Spirit, which though the believers feel them not, yet God
sees and hears them, for they make a loud cry in his ear, as in Exodus 14,
15. This is the fitter sense, therefore the better, because it suteth with
scope and matter, the phrase also will bear it.


Tim. What instructions arise from these words?


Silas. That the sighs of the heart albeit never a word be spoken, be prayers,
even as a desire to believe and to repent in a truly humbled heart, be
accepted for faith and repentance with God, who will not break the bruised
reed, and accepts the will for the work: so the desire to call upon God is
prayer in his sight, God will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, Psalm.
145, 19. See Master Perkins Grain of Mustard seed at large of this point.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point of doctrine?


Silas. It affoards a singular comfort to the godly, in their afflictions, for
that Gods Spirit works wonderfully in their hearts to list them to Godward,
even above that that themselves can perceive in mind, or be able to declare
in words. Secondly, it serves for to strengthen the weak against a temptation
that they cannot pray, whereas they are to consider that if they do but sighe,
it is a prayer before God, a desire is a prayer, a continual desire is a
continual prayer. Thirdly, it repoues hypocrites who imagine that they can
pray well when they speak many words, and yet have their hearts within void
of secret sighs and groans which do accompany true prayer.


DIAL. XXIIII.
Verse 27. But he that searches the heart, knows the meaning of the Spirit,
for he makes request for the Saints, according to the will of God.


Tim. What is the drift of this text, with the sum of it?


Silas. To comfort the godly Romans and all other believers in great
afflictions. The sum of the comfort is thus much: that their prayers how
feeble soever, which come from Gods Spirit, are known and granted of God.
This is proved by three reasons: First, from the infinite knowledge of God.
Secondly, because their prayers are framed after the will of God. Thirdly,
because they which pray are Saints and dear to God.


Tim. Let us examine these three reasons, and tell us how is God said to
search, seeing he needs no inquisition, but knows all things without search?


Silas. It is true he does so, for his knowledge is infinite, whereby he
knows most perfectly both himself and all other things, even the most dark
and hidden, 1. Cor. 4. 4. But this is a speech borrowed from the manners and
doings of men, and applied unto God for the better understanding of his nature;
for that which men desire perfectly to know, that they search for, and by
search they come to the exact understanding of things.


Tim. What is signified here by heart?


Sil. The Soul and all that is in it, even the most secret thoughts,
purposes, and motions, al which God does most perfectly behold: and this is
such a privilege as agrees to none save to God alone, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.


Tim. Yet Paul says that the Spirit of man knows what is in a man, 1 Cor. 2.


Silas. First, a man may know his own thoughts, and what is in his heart; but
nothing without a man can do it, save God only. Secondly, God knows every
man's heart, more perfectly then the man himself, 1 Cor. 4. 4. many sins
which are secret to the committer, are open to God. Psalm. 19. 12. Also many
good motions are known to God: but they are unknown to him in whom they be.


Tim. But the Devil knew the heart of Cayne, Saul, and Judas, and egged them
to wickedness, where unto he saw them bent; therefore God is not the only
searcher of the heart.


Silas. The Devil knows not men's thoughts, till they some way be uttered, by
signs, words, writings, and actions; God knows men's thoughts without these
means, Psalm. 139. 1. 2. Secondly, the Devil by observing of complexions,
does guess at men's inward dispositions: but God needs no such helps, without
which he perfectly knows what is in man, John 2. 25. Thirdly, the Devil
knows but some thoughts at some time, but God knows all our thoughts at all
times.


Tim. What is the reason this belongs to God alone to search the heart?


Sil. Because he alone made the heart, Psalm. 94. 9. Secondly, because he alone
is the judge of the world, therefore he must know all secrets, else how can he
righteously reward men according to their works? Eccle. 12. 14. Romans 2. 6.
Thirdly, God alone is omniscient or of incomprehensible knowledge, 1 Samuel 2. 2.
as he alone is omnipotent, able to do what he will.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this truth, that God alone searches the
heart?


Silas. First, it must bridle all men from judging the inward intentions and
purposes of men; for this is to make our selves to be God. Secondly, it must
hold us in charity to think the best of men where no evil appears. Thirdly,
it should provoke all men to labor to be as upright in thoughts before God, as
they are just in dealings before men. Lastly, it may comfort such as fear
least their prayers come not up to heaven, but through their great weakness
vanish in the air, and languish in the middle way: nay that cannot be, for
seeing GOD searches the heart, therefore such secrets and requests as are hid
from us, yet be not hid from him, for he knows the meaning of his Spirit.


Tim. What is meant here by the meaning of his Spirit?


Silas. Such prayers and sighs as come from the inspiration of the Spirit.


Tim. What is meant by Gods knowledge [he knows?]


Silas. His love and good pleasure, he delights in them, as Romans 8. 29. and 11.
2. Psalm. 1. 6. Mat 7. 23.


Tim. What is the doctrine from these words?


Silas. Even this, that God takes pleasure in the weakest prayers of his
Saints; for he knows them, as that he hears them, and in favor grants
them: the reason is, because they come from the spirit, the meaning whereof
God knows and embraces, as a man does whatsoever comes from himself. For
as a mother knows the cry of her own Infant though she sees it not, and
though an hundred other children cry; and likes it better than the cloquen t
oration and learned speech of some other, who is but a stranger to her: so God
is better pleased with the feeble requests of believers, then with the pompous
and long petitions of hypocrites.


DIAL. XXV.
Verse 28. Also we know that all things works together for the best unto
them that love God, even unto them that are called of his purpose.


Tim. VV Hat is the drift of this text? Drift.



Silas. It teaches a new comfort to those whichsuffer afflictions for Jesus
Christ: it is drawn from the effects which follow afflictions, which are not to
be hindrances, but rather furtherances of our Sum.
salvation. The argument may be thus framed: Christians are bound patiently to
bear that which is helpful to their salvation; but afflictions are so;
therefore they must patiently be borne.


Tim. By what reasons is it proved that afflictions profit unto salvation such
as suffer them?


Silas. First, by a reason taken from the general to the special thus. All
things serve to the salvation of the faithful, Order or me thod.
therefore afflictions serve also unto their salvation. Secondly, this is
proved by the testimony of all the godly, [ we know.] Moreover in this text, be
contained the persons to whom these crosses are profitable, they are described
by two marks: first, that they are such as love God; secondly, they are such
as are called of his purpose. This points to the high sovereign cause, the
which moketh afflictions to be behoouefull for Gods children; namely his
eternal counsel, the degrees whereof distinctly are laid down in the verses
following.


Tim. Now come to the words, and tell me how we may know that afflictions shall
do us so much good? Interpretation.



Sil. Three ways, first by scripture, Psalm. 34. 19. and 50. 15. and 119.
Secondly, by experience of Abraham, Noah, The word (know) is set against
opinion or doubting.
and the rest of the godly, who all took great good by their afflictions. And
lastly by reason, because the faithful being Gods childeren, therefore
afflictions must not destroy them, but only serve for chastisements to reform
them.


Tim. What is the instruction that we are to take from hence?


Silas. This, that all the godly are assured, that the end 1. Doctrine.
of all their troubles and crosses shall be happiness; it is not so with the
wicked, who cannot know that the end of their adversity, or prosperity shall be
good: and therefore they have neither sound joy in the one, nor constant
patience in the other; whereas the godly be cheerful under the cross,
because they doubt not but that it will be peace at the last. This truth may
be set forth by the comparison of a comedy, of which the spectators know that
the Similitude.
end will be joyful, though the beginning be troublesome; and such is the
estate of true Christians. Also by the comparison of a tragedy, of which the
beholders are sure, that though the beginning be pleasant, yet the end will be
lamentable; and such is the estate of the ungodly.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. First, it confutes the Papists, who teach that men cannot be sure to
be saved, because they cannot be sure Use.
that they shall stand fast in afflictions. Secondly, it serves to comfort the
faithful, and make their afflictions the more easy, seeing it is certain unto
them, that not only no harm, but much good will come to them in the end. And
it is great reason that men should bear that quietly, which they know will be
for their own good at last: as Merchants abide great hazard, so do Soldiers
too, upon an unassured commodity and victory.


Tim. What is meant by, all things?


Silas. It contains whatsoever may happen to a man prosperously or otherwise,
and whatsoever is within him or without him, either good or evil, all Angels,
all Devils, all men wicked and righteous, al gifts of body and, mind, and al
defects of both shall return unto the good of Inter hoec omnia etiam eaquoe
nibil sunt numerantur.
Gods Children: yea Augustine stretches it so far, as to the very sins of the
godly; after the committing whereof, men become more humble and wary. Which
yet is Bernard.
not the proper meaning of this place, because it does particularly treat of
afflictions, and of the cross, and (...) humiliores reddunt and doctiores. Aug.
of the good that comes thereof, which is eternal life, or the salvation of
our souls; which being the chief good whither all good things tend, is here
called of the Apostle by an excellency [that good.]


Tim. What is meant here by working together?


Silas. It signifies thus much: that afflictions themfelues in their own
nature, does not bring forth that good here spoken of.


Tim. But how then comes it to pass that they are so profitable?


Silas. By the force and virtue of another supreme cause working together with
afflictions (to wit) the maruailous Cooperantur, no^ per se opera^tur, sed
concurrant cum causa operante. Paroeus.
goodness and wisdom of God, disposing the afflictions of his people to
their good. As Joseph said to his Brethren, Genesis 50, 20. When ye thought evil
against me, God disposed it to good, even to save much people alive: so when as
Satan by afflictions means to drive us to despair, God disposes them to an
happy end, even to increase hope, Romans 5, 34. For if a Physician who is but a
man, can so temper Hemlocke, or other poisonous things, to make it become
medicinable, much more can God so temper and dispose of afflictions, that they
shall be wholesome to his children?


Tim. What is the Instruction to be gathered from hence? 2. Doctrine.



Silas. That afflictions through Gods great mercy, do help forwards the
salvation of his children; the reason Reason.
hereof is, because they are Instruments whereby the holy Ghost mortifieth
their sins, weaneth them from the love of the world, stirs them up to
better obedience, quickens their prayers, exercises their patience; and
lastly, humbles the pride of their heart, Job 33, 16, 17, Romans 5, 4. 1 Cor. 11,
32. Psalm. 119.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. It serves much to strengthen our minds unto godly and constant
patience. Secondly, to reprove such as faint in their troubles. Also to see how
to make our profit of every thing.


Tim. Proceed now to the latter part of this verse: and (...) me how those
persons be described, unto whom afflictions shall do good.


Silas. They are described by these three marks: First, they be such as love
God. Secondly, such as are called. 3. they are such as are elected, or called
of his purpose.


Tim. How do these three marks depend one upon another?


Silas. Thus: love is the effect of Gods calling, and calling is the fruit of
Gods purpose. None can love God, except first he be called, and our calling
proceeds from the eternal purpose of God. Thus our Apostle sets down
things first more manifest, and afterward things more secret: First the
effects, and then the causes. For as Gods purpose is the cause of calling, so
is calling in order before Faith, and Faith before Love in order of causes.


Tim. Tell us now first what it is to love God?


Silas. It is to set the delight of our heart upon him, and What it is to love
God aright.
to take pleasure to think and speak of him, of his properties, word, and
works, with liking and joy, studying by all means in all thingsto set forth
his glory. They which hate and abhor God, do the quite contrary to all this.


Tim. Whence springs this love of God in us?


Silas. From the sense and feeling of Gods love toward The fountain of our love
to God is Gods love to us.
us, 1 John 4, 19. For it cannot be that any man should certainly perceive
the love of God toward himself in Christ for eternal life, but that that
love will constrain him to love again, 2 Cor. 5, 14. Also the goodness and
mercy of God in Christ, is such a beautiful and amiable thing, as being
certainly known, it will be both earneftly loved and desired.


Tim. Why is it written they that love God, and not they that are loved of God?


Silas. Because it is better known to us, namely in afflictions, what love we
have to him, then what he has to us: for this is out of us, the other is
within us; and God strikes those he loves.


Tim. By what special note may one know himself to be one of their number
which love God?


Silas. By an unfeigned purpose and endeavor to obey his word, John 14, 15. If
ye love me keep my commandments. Also verse 21, 23.


Tim. What is the reason that the Apostle speaking of patience, suffering
afflictions, does rather mention the love of God, then of our neighbor?


Silas. Because our love to God, is that that makes the burden of afflictions
more easy and light to be borne, even as a man is ready to bear any
calamity for his sake whom he loves at his heart: thus did Jonathan for
David. And as the service of Jacob 14. years seemed nothing to him, for the
love which he bare to Rahel: so they that truly love God, will for his sake
suffer such adversities as he sends, either for correction or trial; and
this is the reason also why he rather mentions love then faith. For
howsoever patience springs from Faith, yet the next and immediate cause of it
is love. Secondly, it is to put a difference between counterfeit and sincere
faith, which cannot be severed from love, Gal. 5, 6. whereas they that
profess faith, and say they believe when they do not, have their hearts void
of al love either to God, or to their neighbor, or themselves, as appears in
the example of Cain, Esan, and Judas.


Tim. What instructions are we now to gather from this first mark?


Sil. Two: First, that the sound love of God is needful to all those which
shall bear afflictions patiently, James (...), 12. First, because it makes
the godly valiant, keeping them from fainting under the greatest crosses:
which is to be seen in the example of the Apostles Paul and Peter, and other
Martyrs, who because they loved God, were therefore ready to endure much for
him. Secondly, it kindles their zeal, and makes them earnestly bent to
glorify God by their constancy.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this point?


Silas. First, it stirs us up to seek for the love of God, and for the
increase of it in our hearts, seeing we cannot be patient without it. Secondly,
it warns us by our patient-bearing, to show our love to God, as God by his
chastisements shows his love unto us, Heb: 12, 5, 6.


Tim. What other instructions arises from hence?


Silas. This: none but Gods children can be patient in afflictions, because
none can love God save his own children: therefore they have but the shadow of
patience, and be blockish and senseless rather then patient.


Tim. What use is of this?


Silas It affoords comfort to such as have patience in afflictions, because
this is a testimony unto them of their adoption. Secondly, it teaches us, that
wicked men how quiet soever they are in afflictions, yet they have not true
patience, but an apearance of it; they are rather blockish, then endued with
true Christian patience.


Ti. What is the second mark of such as profit by afflictions?


Silas. Vocation or calling.


Tim. What calling is spoken of in this place?


Silas. Not that which is peculiar to each, but that which is common to all the
Children of God; which is that work of the Spirit of God, effectually drawing
the elect through the preaching of the Gospel from ignorance and unbelief,
unto true knowledge and Faith in Christ.


Tim. What is the instruction from hence?


Silas. This: seeing the end of our calling is to bring us to Faith, it must
needs be that afflictions shall do them good which are called, because to them
that believe, there is no condemnation, and therefore all things must serve to
their salvation who be called to faith.


Tim. What is the use to be made of this point?


Silas. To move us to seek for a true calling, because till we be called, and
do believe, there is nothing neither prosperity nor adversity that can do us
good. Secondly, to move them to thankfulness which have this calling, because
they have received one of the greatest mercies of God.


Tim. What is the third mark of such as shall take benefit by the Cross?


Silas. That they be such as belong to Gods purpose, for that which follows
plainly teaches, that this is not meant according to our good purpose, as
Origin thought.


Tim. What is here meant by the purpose of God?


Silas. The decree of Gods election, or the eternal good pleasure of his will,
for the saving of some by Christ, which is, as Augustine says, a preparation
of the benefits and mercies of God.


Tim. What are we to learn by this, that the Apostle speaks here of Gods
purpose?


Sil. That the faithful are beholden to Gods eternal Augustine refers this
to the purpose not of the elect, but of God.
election and purpose, for all the good they get by afflictions, or any other
way. For Gods purpose is the sovereign cause of all that good that is in man
or does happen to man, Romans 9, 15. Ephe. 1 4, 5. 2. Tim. 1, 9. The reason
hereof is, because God having once purposed to save men, it cannot be but that
they must have all good things which belong to their salvation. For God has
purposed the means as well as the end, and will cause every thing to serve
for their good, whom he has loved from everlasting.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. First, it reproues such as scoff at Gods purpose, or attribute any
thing to free will or fortune. Secondly, it warns the godly to acknowledge
the eternal goodness of God in all things that come to them, and to be
confirmed in the persuasion of it, by such wholesome effects as they perceive
and feel in the course of their life.


Tim. What may we learn by this, that the Apostle joins purpose and calling
together?


Silas. First, that the purpose of God for our salvation is manifested in our
calling, which is the first fruit of our election, Romans 8, 29. Secondly, it
serves to distinguish an outward calling by the Gospel, from an inward
effectual calling, which leads to Christ: for all which be called by the
Gospel are not called of Gods purpose. Thirdly, to teach that all be not
called nor do love God, but elect ones only, and that after the time of their
effectual calling.


Tim. What are we to learn by all these marks together?


Silas. That such as are the better by their afflictions, more humbled, and
made more obedient, have a good witness that they love God, and are the called
and elect of God; because none but these can profit by afflictions, unto sound
obedience of the word. Such as had David's grace, can say with David's words,
Since I was as sticted I have learned to keep thy statutes, Psalm. 119.


DIAL. XXVI.
Verse 29. For those which he knew before, he also predestined to be made
like to the image of his Son, that he might be the first borne, amongst many
brethren.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. A proof of the former Argument of comfort and patience in afflictions,
taken from the commodity which they bring, which was this: that afflictions
shall turn to the salvation of such as love God and are called according to
his purpose. This the Apostle proves by two reasons: the former is taken from
the definition of Gods purpose, which is the foreknowledge of God,
predestinating some to be made like unto his Son Christ.


Tim. How does the Apostle make this definition serve his parpose?


Silas. By reasoning in this manner: Whosoever be called of the purpose of God,
are fore-knowne and predestined to be like unto Christ. But Christ having
suffered asslictions, was afterward glorified. Therefore such as God bath
called of his purpose, must suffer with Christ, that they may be glorified with
him: for being conformed to Christ in temporary afflictions, they must be
conformed to him also in eternal glory.


Tim. What is the other reason to prove that all things work together, for the
salvation of such as are called of his purpose?


Silas. It is by an unchangeable connection, or knitting of causes and effects
together, after this sort. Whom God They which be predestinate, do not perish,
because Gods predestination is not deceivable.
purposes to save, them he foreknew; whom he foreknew, the^ he has
predestined; who^ he has predestined, the^ he calls; whom he calls,
them he justifies; whom he justifies, them he sanctifies; whom he
sanctifies, them he glorifieth. Therefore by reason of this immutable linking
of Gods purpose to man's salvation, the faithful must be brought to glory by
afflictions: for it must needs be, August.
that to the sons of God which love him, and are called of his purpose, all
things turn to their salvation.


Tim. What be the parts of this 29. verse?


Silas. Two: a proposition, and a limitation. The proposition lays down the
means by which God brings Parts.
all them to glory, whom he purposes to call to the likeness or conformity
with Christ his Son. The limitation is, that howsoever Christ and Christians
be like, yet he still has the pre-eminence as the elder brother, or as the
first begotten.


Tim. What is meant by this word knew, [whome he foreknew?]


Silas. Foreknowledge of God in Scripture has a Interpretation.
double signification. First, there is in God a knowledge of prescience,
whereby God long before knows what persons and things, good and evil, shall
be in the world present and to come; this is by Divines, called (Gods
prescience) or the knowledge of his prescience, whereof we read, Acts, 2, 23.
Secondly, there is a knowledge in God of favor, whereby he knows some before
hand as his own, with whom he was well pleased from everlasting. This is by
Divines called the knowledge of his love, or approbation, and it is the same
which the Apostle calls his good pleasure, Ephe. 1, 6. In this sense It is
not a prescience of merits and truth, which is the cause of election.
the word is used, Romans 11, 2. as also in this our text, Whom he foreknew, that
is, they whom he loved and elected from everlasting, out of the lost lump of
mankind. As the love which God exercises toward the faithful, is in
Scripture called his knowledge, Psalm. 1, 6. So the decree of his love from
everlasting, is termed foreknowledge.


Tim. What is the instruction that we gather from hence?


Silas. That God does not begin then to love his elect Doctrine.
when they be in this world and are regenerated: but he has loved them in
his decree and purpose from everlasting. For unto God those things toward men
were long since purposed and appointed, says Chrysostom.


Tim. But if this be true that we are from everlasting loved of God, how can we
at any time be enemies to him?


Silas. Though we be loved as creatures, and more loved as Gods elect, yet in
respect of inherent and remaining corruption, we are enemies of God, being
never actually beloved, till we be regenerate by the Spirit of God, and have
his image imprinted in us.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. First, that God has certainly loved us in this it Use.
appears, that our election is most firm, so as the chosen must needs come
to glory; because whom God loves once, he loves to the end. Secondly,
seeing God loved us in his purpose when we were sinners, we ought therefore to
love him again, and also one another, even our very enemies. Thirdly, if God
loved us even when we were enemies, he will now much more love and save us,
seeing we are reconciled by his Son through faith in his blood.


Tim. What is the second instruction?


Silas. That the eternal good will and pleasure of God, Destinare est rem ad
certum sinem ordinare: Praedestinare est proeordinare antcquam ad fi nem mittas.
is the spring and fountain of all spiritual graces now, and heavenly glory
hereafter. The reason is, for that the Apostle setting down the causes of our
salvation, names the foreknowledge of God as the head and chief of the rest:
for we are therefore predestined, called, justified, and sanctified, and
glorified; because God knew us for his own, before the foundation of the world.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. It teaches that faith, love, and good works Use.
cannot be the cause of our election, because Gods foreknowledge and election
is the cause of them. Secondly, it confuteth such as would have our believing
and working well, to come in part from our natural free will; whereas in truth
they are all the fruits and gifts of Gods eternal election and love, by which
they are given to us and wrought in us: insomuch that we have neither good
counsel, thought, nor good deed, but that which God has decreed to put into
us from everlasting. Ephe. 1. 4. we are chosen in Christ, (not because we
were) but to be holy.


Tim. What is it to predestinate?


Silas. To predestinate, is to decree any thing before hand, and bring it unto
a certain end through certain and appointed means: If this predestination
(says Augustine) can be deceived, then may God be overcome of man's sin, which
cannot be.


Tim. What learn we from hence?


Silas. That predestination is joined unto foreknowledge as subordinate to it.
Gods foreknowledge is no bare and idle thing, but is ever coupled with his
decree and ordinance; whatsoever God knows or sees before, he ordains to
some special end, and unto that end he shall at last bring it; this is it
which is here called predestination.


Tim. If this be so that all things are foreordained of God, how is he not
the author of sins, for they be in the number of things?


Silas. Sins are foreordained of God not as they are sins, but as they are
the means to effect his counsel: thus Adams fall and Judas treason were
foreordained of God, as means whereby God did effect and serve his own
counsel, in saving the elect to the praise of his mercy, and condemning the
wicked to the praise of his justice. Secondly, predestinating in scripture may
be taken generally and largely, for Gods general and whole decree touching all
things and persons; or strictly for the decree of election, whereby he has
foreordained some to salvation, as the end; and confourming to Christ, as the
means to lead to that end: and so it is here used.


Tim. Wherein stands this conformity with Christ?


Silas. In two things; first, in being like unto him in respect of the end,
that as Christ is now glorified in heaven, so all that are predestinate shall
be glorified with him. Secondly, in being like unto him in respect of the
means, stands thus: that as Christ entered into his glory through holiness,
and suffering afflictions and death; so they that live godly and are ready to
suffer with Christ and for Christ, are sure to be saved with Christ.


Tim. What is our instruction from hence?


Silas. This: every one that looks to inherit eternal life in heaven with
Christ, must endeavor to be like him in this life, they must be holy and
righteous as he was, and be ready to suffer afflictions as he did. The reason
here of is Gods eternal decree and ordinance, whereby he has appointed it to
be so, that they shall be partners with Christ in his heavenly glory,
whosoever shall be followers of him here in his patience and holiness; which
are the way we are to walk in, unto our country which is above.


Tim. What is the use to be made of this?


Silas. First, here is an exhortation to move us to live holily, according to
the will of God, and to suffer afflictions with patience according to the
example of Christ, as we desire to have communion with Christ in his
blessedness. Secondly, here is comfort for such as suffer any manner of
shame, or injury for Christ and his word; for this likeness with Christ in his
infirmities, is a witness that we shall be like unto him in glory. Thirdly, here
is sharp reproof for such as live profanely and shun the cross, saying it
mattereth not how we live or what we do, for we must be saved if we be
predestinate: and if not, then we cannot be saved though we do live well.


Tim. How is Christ the first begotten amongst his brethren?


Silas. This phrase has reference to the custom of the Jews, whose
firstborn did excel his brethren, both in power and portion, in dignity and
possession: so does Christ far excel all his brethren, who are all like to
Christ, but not equal with him, neither in nature, office, glory, nor
dominion: for by nature he is God truly, and Godman in unity of person; for
office, the only redeemer and mediator of his Church, therefore only king
and highpriest: for glory and dominion, he sits upon his Fathers throne,
having a name above all names. Phil. 2. 9.


DIAL. XXVII.
Verse 30. Whom he has predestinate them he has called: whom he has called
them he has justified: and whom he justifies them he glorifieth.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. The several actions and effects whereby God does witness his eternal
love to his elect ones, and by which (as means) he brings them to their
purposed and promised blessedness. Here is the golden chain whereby men chosen
are drawn up, and ascend to heaven: here be the steps and degrees whereby Gods
eternal love, descends to his chosen, and whereby they climb to their decreed
felicity, to which none can come but through these means, by which means the
elect are sure to attain it; yea though they be afflicted here: which causes
them to bear afflictions more patiently and valiantly, in that they perceive
their salvation to be of God, by so many excellent works of his grace, so
certainly and vndeceiueably procured and effected.


Tim. What are the degrees whereby the elect arise and climb to blessedness
in heaven?


Silas. Four: 1. predestination, 2. vocation, 3. justification, and
glorification: the first of these is done before all times, the three last of
them be performed in time.


Tim. What do ye call predestination?


Silas. It is an action of God, peculiar to all the elect which are purposed
unto salvation, the rest of mankind being passed by and left to their
corruption and just perdition. This action of God is not done in time, but from
everlasting, God fore-ordaining his elect, both to the end which is eternal
life, and unto the means leading thither, (to wit) vocation, faith,
justification, sanctification, the Cross, also death either natural or
violent. The very word (predestinate) is taken four times in Scripture in
this sense, as Romans 8, 29, 30. Ephe. 1, 5, 11. But yet the matter and doctrine
it self is handled in very many places, as Romans 9, and 11. Ephe. 1. Mat. 11,
25. John, 6. and 17, 6. Acts, 13, 48. 1. These. 5. 1. Pet. 1, 2. Jude, 4. Revel.
17, 8. and elsewhere often.


Tim. Some think this doctrine should not be taught, and therefore rail at
the teachers of it, what think ye, do they well?


Sil. No verily, for it ought to be taught to Gods people, and Gods Ministers
should sin if they passed by it. My reasons for this be these: First, because
Christ and his Apostles taught it, and their example is warrant enough for Gods
ministers. For as the Apostles were followers of Christ in doctrine and life,
so ought other Ministers. Secondly, it is a part of Gods revealed will, and
therefore belongs unto us, Deuteronomy. 29, 29. Thirdly, it is a special groundwork
of comfort and patience under the Cross to know our predestination to be so
unchangeable, strong and firm, as our Apostle does here advertise us ^^at
afflictions though many and great cannot hinder, ^^^t further our salvation.

Fourthly, it is the Mother of all godliness, to which a man or woman does
then (and never before) seriously and cheerfully apply themselves, when they
understand by Faith Gods eternal love toward them in their free
predestinating to life, 1 John 4, 10. We love him, because he loved us first.
Lastly, it begets true and joyful thankfulness, which we will not offer
unto God, except we know that all good comes of his eternal purpose, without
any respect to our worthiness.


Tim. But the conceit of Predestination, and that the Predestinate persons
must be saved, does take away from men all care of Faith, Ministry, Prayer
and Good works, use of Sacraments, etc.


Silas. This is a very slanderous untruth, because the Doctrine of
Predestination does necessarily put and commend unto us all these means; so
far off it is from destroying them, or extinguishing the care and use of
them: because it is taught, that whom God predestinateth, them he calls,
justifies, and glorifieth. Thus unlikely it is, that Predestination should
exclude Christ, the Gospel, Faith, Calling, Justification, Holiness of life,
as it does include and infer all these necessarily. The reason hereof is,
because it is wholesomly taught and believed, according to Scripture, that God
predestinating unto the end, has also foreordained to the means which bring
us unto such an end, and that immutably and most freely. And therefore it is a
gross error to say this Doctrine breeds either desperation or licentiousnes.


Tim. What is here meant by Calling?


Sil. It is that mean or work of God, wherein his eternal love in
predestinating us to eternal life, does first appear and show it self unto
us, for till the time of our Calling, the decree of predestination is secret
and hidden in Gods counsel: but by our Calling it is made known to the elect
themselves. For if God do call all those in time whom he ordained to life
before all times, then such as be called, may thereby know they are
predestined, as the cause is known by the effect, the root by the fruit,
the fountain by the river, so Gods eternal love by calling.


Tim. Yet it is written Math. 20. 16. that many are called but few chosen;
whereby it should seem, that calling is no sure mark of election, and
predestination unto glory.


Silas. It is true, there is an outward calling by the Gospel only, which
wants the inward grace of the Spirit, to make it effectual; this is common to
many reprobates, and is no sure token of election, because it brings no further
then to the bare knowledge and profession of Christ, and to some general and
slight reformation, such as an hypocrite may have; but not to Christ himself
by faith in the gospel. But the calling which is both a fruit, and a certain
note of predestination, is such a calling, which together with the outward
preaching of the word, has the inward working of the holy Spirit to be get
faith in the Gospel; whereby a man is carried to Christ himself to be planted
in him, and joined to him as a true member, and to be governed by his spirit,
working in us obedience to our caller: of this calling our text speaks.


Tim. What instructions are to be learned from this which has been said of
calling?


Sil. First, how needful a thing it is for us to have the gospel and the
preaching thereof, seeing persons of years are not ordinarily called unto the
faith of Christ without it, Romans 10. 14. Secondly, that no Christian must rest
in an outward general calling and knowledge (though it be a great mercy) but
strive and labor after that especial and effectual calling, which is ever
coupled with faith and obedience to the Gospel. Thirdly, such as have this
calling, have exceeding cause to rejoice and be glad, and to be thankful to
God; because they have received an undoubted pledge of Gods love and their own
salvation, in such sort as they may glory in God, yea even in tribulations.


Tim. But what shall we think of Infants that cannot hear the Gospel, cannot
they have an effectual calling?


Silas. Yea, all predestinate Infants (and such we are to take all the infants
of Christian Parents to be, for that they belong to the Covenant, and we know
nothing to the contrary,) they have an inward calling by the Spirit, though not
after the same manner, as persons of discretion and years. For the Apostle
here speaks of the means, how all the elect are brought to blessedness:
therefore seeing infants are predestinate, as no doubt many be, they must of
necessity be justified and have a Calling. For whom he predestinateth, them
he calls, etc. it is some unutterable and inconceivable work of the holy
Ghost, drawing them to Christ, either by Faith or Analogy.


Tim. What is the instruction that arises from hence?


Silas. That elect infants which dye in their infancy, are endued with a true
Faith: for this is the end of calling Scmen aut igniculi Fidel in insantibus.
to bring to faith, and elect infants are called, therefore they have Faith.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this instruction?


Silas. It serves greatly to comfort believing Parents, whose children are
taken away being young, that they be not perplexed with doubt about their
salvation. Secondly, it highly commends the mercy of God in that the grace of
Election and Faith be extended to us and our children. The promise is to you
and to your Children, Acts 2. I will be the God of thy seed, Genesis 17, 3.


Tim. What is the next fruit of Predestination?


Silas. It is our Justification or being justified, which signifies to be
absolved from the guilt and punishment of all our sins, and to be accounted
just by imputation of Christ's obedience through Faith, Acts 13, 48. Romans 4, 4,
5, 6.


Tim. How prove you that Faith is necessary to Justification?


Sil. First, because there is nothing but faith alone, which goes between
Calling and Justifying. Secondly, Scriptures do fully teach that our
Justification is by Faith: but yet Faith is not the cause why we are justified
no more than works. It is only the Instrument to apprehend Christ's Justice:
the true and proper causes thereof How faith does iustisie, and not justify.
See 3. Chap.
be Gods foreknowledge, election, predestination, and calling, Faith being but
the Organ and helping cause (as I said before) verse 22. chap. 3.


Tim. What Instruction are we to take from hence?


Silas. That we are freely justified by Faith without works: the reason here
of is, because we are justified at the very instant of our calling, at what
time we believe, before we have done any good work at all: also because elect
Infants which can do never a good work, are both called and justified, as
infants elect, which dye in their infancy.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. It confutes the Papists, which ascribe justification to good works,
which are fruits following justification, therefore they cannot be causes
going before our justification. Secondly, it conuicteth them of error, which
would have any persons in time justified before they believe. Lastly, it
commends unto us the necessity and excellency of Faith, without the which we
cannot be partakers of Christ, nor have our sins pardoned by his death, nor
be accounted just before God, nor be reconciled to God, nor have peace in our
selves.


Tim. What is the last degree and fruit of predestination?


Silas. Glorification: which signifies both the beginning and perfection of our
glory.


Tim. What mean you by the beginning, as also by the perfection of our glory?


Silas. By the beginning of our glory, I mean Sanctification Sanctificatio est
gloria inchoata: Glorificatio cst sanct ficatio consummata.
or holiness of life in earth, which therefore is termed glory by the Apostle,
2 Cor. 3, 18. because Sanctification is glory, as touching the inchoation and
beginning of it; and by the perfection of glory, I mean eternal joy and
blessedness in heaven, in the presence of God.


Tim. What is our instruction from hence?


Silas. That never any person shall be crowned with glory in heaven, which is
not first sanctified by grace on earth, enabled by the Spirit to lead a just
and holy life, which is both the entrance and the right way unto celesti all
glory.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this instruction?


Silas. It reproues of solly such as live loosely and profanely, and yet
expect salvation in heaven. Secondly, it gives great encouragement to all godly
persons, to proceed and increase in holiness, seeing their sanctification is
sure to end in glorification, even in eternal blessedness: and that is the
reason why the Apostle writes in the preterperfect te^ce rather than in the
present tence, to note the certainty of it; which causes Paul to write as if
it were already done; He has called, he has justified, he has glorified.


Tim. Now we have examined every particular word, tell us what we are
further to learn in general, from this whole verse?


Silas First, what the holy Catholic Church is; to wit, a company of men
gathered together, not by fortune, or humane reason and policy, or any
worthiness of their own; but by the mere mercy and goodness of God,
soreknowing, loving, predestinating, and calling them, that he may justify and
glorify them through his Son Christ. Secondly, that predestination is not
common to all, because all Election not universal.
be not called nor justified; and therefore we further learn that all shall not
be saved. Thirdly, that the elect cannot fall from grace and glory, because
Gods purpose in bringging them through all the means to glory, is immutable
and infallible. Fourthly, that predestination is most free, Predestination free.
and not depending upon foreseen works and faith: but upon Gods eternal
foreknowledge and love, upon which faith and good works do depend. Lastly,
that it proceeds either from ignorance or malice, to say, that men pre
destinated may live as they list, or that they need not care for the word or
(...); for God ordaines them to the means as well as to the end: nay there is
no attaining to their end, but by passing thorough (...) means as be
appointed for the effecting of the righteous counsel of God. Touching the
predestination of reprobates, no cause why Christians should trouble themselves
therewith, both because Paul passes by it here, and it does no whit pertain
to our comforts.


DIAL. XXVIII.
Verse 31. What shall we say to these things: if God be on our side, who can
be against us?


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. A most magnificall and honorable conclusion, of the whole disputation
touching free (...) by faith in Christ, from this verse to the end of the
Chapter. The sum of this conclusion is the victory and triumph of a justified
person, over all the assaults and encounters of all enemies, over all
temptations whatsoever; there being none now which ought to be feared of a
believing person, who is justified and reconciled by Christ.


Tim. How does the Apostle proceed in describing this glorious triumph of
faith?


Silas. He does set down the temptations which assault faith, both generally
in verse, 31. and especially in the rest; and then he does oppose or set
against them the contrary causes of comfort, remoouing every assault with a
stronger reason to the contrary part.


Tim. What is the general temptation, and how does the Apostle deal in
repelling it?


Silas. The temptation is this, that al things on all sides are against godly
Christians which believe in Christ; the Apostle in repelling this temptation,
first prepares way for comfort by a question or interrogation, (what shall we
say to these things?) Secondly, he beats back the assault with a strong
remedy; to wit, that God the Creator being with believers, they need fear
nothing from any creature.


Tim. Now expound the words, and tell us what is meant by [these things?]


Silas. By these words our minds are carried back to the matter formerly set
down; namely, in the 30. verse, as that there is no condemnation to faithful
ones, which be in Christ, that they have the Spirit of adoption, are sons,
heirs, fellow-heires: but chiefly that out of Gods most free and eternal
foreknowledge and love they were chosen and predestined, and had that
everlasting good will of God made known unto them, in their effectual calling
to faith, in their justifying by faith, in sanctification begun, and in the
hope of glorification to come. These are the things here pointed at.


Tim. What is his meaning in writing this by way of question [what shall we
say?]


Silas. To provoke unto a serious meditation of them, that we may lay better
hold of them for our stronger comfort; for it is as if he should say: Oye
believers, now that ye have heard of the exceeding great and manifold riches of
Gods grace and mercy toward ye, which affoards you a whole sea of comforts,
why stagger you, or why are ye fearful and troubled in your great agonies and
adueisities? By that which has been said of Gods immutable and abundant love
in Christ, already so much expressed to you, ye may easily gather what shall
follow, for the rest of your life.


Tim. What learn we from this?


Silas. First, that Ministers must not only lay forth and prove Christian
comforts, but must press them hard. Secondly, the people must hear
comfortable things, with a care to apply them unto themselves, to make use for
future strengthening their hearts.


Tim. What observe ye out of the latter part of this verse, [who can be
against us?]


Silas. Two things: First, a secret temptation, and secondly, a means how to
overcome it. The secret temptation is this, that all creatures are bent against
true believers, which be Christ's members: and indeed it is so, for not only
sin, Satan, the world, Devils, Tyrants, persecutors, heretics, Idolatours,
but even of the same profession; as brethren, yea Parents, acquaintance,
kinsfolks, wives, husbands, brethren, Sisters, Children, they of their own
house are enemies, and such as eat bread with them, lift up their heel
against them. So it was with David, and with Christ, and with the Apostles, and
so must others look to have it; which made Chrysestome by an Apostrophe with a
question, to rise up against Palus question; saying, O Paul, why ask thou
who will be against us? now if God be on our side, who will not be against us?
for we are hated of all for his sake: this is a heavy trial. The means to
avoid this temptation, is by this persuasion, that God is with us. Now God is
with us two ways, either by his general power to uphold us, as a common
preserver of all; or by his special care and providence, as a propitious
father and protector: thus it is meant here. For he says (with us) that is,
us whom he foreknew, whom he predestined. Hence Augustine has this sweet
meditation, worth our marking: When we were not, God predestined us; when
we run from him and turned our selves backewards, he called us to him: when
we were unrighteous, then he justified us: when we were impure, he
sanctified us; and after a short time spent in his obedience and service, he
will glorify us. Now then, who so fights against Gods children, fights
against God himself, their propitious Father, and powerful protector.


Tim. What means this word (If?)


Silas. It is as much as because, it is a particle of one who reasons, not of
one who doubts.


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Sil. This, the fatherly goodness and protection of God: being believed on, is a
sufficient refuge and succor against the whole world of enemies and dangers:
the reason here of is, because the power of God is infinite, his almightinesse
cannot be resisted, whereas the power of all Creatures is finite and limited:
and as God made them by his great power of nothing, so to nothing can he bring
them by the same power. I herefore the world is vanity, the Devil is a bugge
or fear-crow; men are as a bubble in comparison of the mighty God. Let this be
spoken to distressed ones. The godly have been greatly comforted with this
consideration of Gods being with them; as the godly Prophet David, Psalm. 3. 5.
and 27. 1 Samuel 30. 6. and Psalm. 23. 4. 5. For as the wicked and unbelievers be
unhappy (though all the world be with them) because God is against them: so the
faithful be happy, because God alone favors them, though the whole world be
against them. Because he cannot only preserve them that nothing hurt their
salvation: but can cause every thing to work for them, and to further their
salvation.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this?


Sil. It reproues such as do so lean unto their wealth and friends, as that
they make no account of Gods help: Such was Saul and his courtiers, Psalm. 4.
4. such was Toeg, Psalm. 51. 7. such were the wicked Israelites in Ieremies
time, which made the arm of flesh their strength, and leaned upon the broken
reed of Egypt: and such are 1, Tim. 6. 17.
all usurers and covetous persons, whose affiance is not in the living God, but
in their uncertain riches, whatsoever they say or profess: and therefore in
the day of the Lords wrath they shall be as a broken hedge and as a tottering
wall, as wax before the Sun, so shall they melt away. For as God will save
all that trust in him, so he will destroy all that do not. Secondly, here is
a double exhortation unto all faithful godly Christians: as first that they be
of a valiant and undaunted courage, even when they want all means of help,
because Gods protection is sufficient for them; after the example of Moses in
Egypt, David amongst the Philistims, and Daniel in Babylon. Secondly, that
although all earthly helps be present, yet then to make God their only stay,
not leaning upon second causes, which are as a deceitful broken bow, and
which cannot do us any stead, except God bless them: and here is the trial of
a man that truly trusts in God, that as he is not too much cast down at the
absence of means, so he is not too much lifted up at the presence of them.
Thirdly, this doctrine teaches that how miserable soever godly men be in the
eye of the world, yet they are most blessed, because they have ever more with
them, then against them; God being more able to do them good, then Devils or
men are to do them hurt.


Tim. What other instruction learn we from this verse?


Silas. We are taught how to judge when God is with us; to wit, not by his
patience, or outward benefits, or worldly deliverances; for these be common to
all sorts of men: but by the effects and fruits of our predestination to life;
as our calling, faith, justifying, sanctifying, dying to sin, living to
righteousness; by our love to God and our brethren, and by our hope of glory.
If we find these things in us, then God is with us; because these are proper
to his elect ones. This serves to discover hypocrites, and to call the
saithfull to a trial and examination of themselves, whether they have these
things or no: as they may praise God for the graces they shall find in
themselucs, and pray more fervently for supply of all their spiritual wants.


DIAL. XXIX.
Verse 32. Who spared not his own Son but gave him for us all, to death: how
shall he not with him, give us al things also?


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. First, a sound proof that God is with the faithful as a loving
sather, to protect them, and to take care for them. Secondly, an (...) to a
particular assault touching want, penury, and extreme poverty and need of
all things. The former temptation was ( de (...) mali,) this is ( de absentia
boni) for lack of things needful; (...) having our Savior Christ, they can
lack nothing.


Tim. How does he prove that God is with believers?


Silas. By an undoubted sign or fruit of his love, because he freely gave
them his own Son to be their redeemer and Savior, both by merit and
efficacy: this is such an argument of his love, as there cannot be a stronger.
Other Fathers give all to spare and redeem their children; but God having but
one child, gave him to spare us, which are ungodly and his enemies. Of this
love, Romans 5. 8. John 4. 9.


Tim. How is this gift set forth in this text?


Silas. First by the giver, God. Secondly, by the means and end [free and
precious gift.] Thirdly, by the substance of the gift [his own Son.]
Fourthly, by the persons to whom: to wit, [all elect believers.] Lastly, by
the consequents or appurtenances of this gift. With Christ all things are
given.


Tim. What learn we from hence, that God is the author of this great gift?


Silas. That not only our salvation, but even the sending of Christ, the
worker of it, depends upon the good will of God. 1 John 3. 16. Romans 5. 8.


Tim. What use is to be made of this instruction?


Silas. It confuteth the opinion of merit by works, for if Christ be not the
sovereign and first cause of our salvation (but Gods love is above it) then
much less are our works the cause of eternal life. Secondly, it commends the
exceeding love of God, that he being so great would respect us so little:
which should move us to love and reverence him again, and to express it by
our sincere and entire obedience to his word, and by suffering for him.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, that he says God spared not his Son?


Silas. That this gift for the kind and quality, is rare and precious;
because things which are rare and excellent use to be spared, and are seldom
or never to be spent, but when it is to purchase something which is more dear
and excellent. An Emperor of Rome, chused rather to spare Mauritius who dyed
most miserably.
his money, then to redeem his Soldiers being taken prisoners: but to
redeem us, God would not spare, no not his own Son; because no money nor
treasury would serve the turn, but only the blood of his Son, 1 Pet. Non
(...) tradid. t, sed occisions.
1, 18, 19.


Tim. What profit of this?


Silas. It should warn us, that we spare neither our selves, goods, or any
thing how dear soever, to please and glorify God. Shall not God spare his
Son, but kill him for us? and shall we spare to mortify our sinful lusts, to
please and honor him?


Tim. What learn we from hence, that the gift is called [His own Son?]


Silas. It teaches (against the Arrians) that Christ is God coessentiall to
his Father, John 5, 18. Secondly, it distinguishes Christ the natural Son,
from adopted ones, which are not his proper or own sons, but by acceptance
and grace. Thirdly, it highly extolles the love of God, which hereby appears
to be very great, by the greatness of the thing given: If Abraham showed how
he esteemed of God, in that he offered to have given his Son Isaac, how does
God declare his love to us, by giving his own Son for us?

Moreover, this serves to comfort Gods people in all their wants and
necessities whatsoever: for seeing God gave us his Son, it is not possible
that he should keep any thing from us, which is good for us. The reasons
hereof be very strong: First, because Christ is the greatest good thing, he is
more worth then a thousand worlds, and he that gives the greatest good, will
not stick at the lesser. Thus Christ reasons, Math. 6, 25. If he give you
life, he will much more feed you and cloth you. Secondly, Christ is the
Fountain of all other good things: it is for him and through him, that we
have any thing else that is good; and al good things come from him, as rivers
from the spring, and beams from the Sun; therefore having him we can want
nothing, and possessing him, we possess all things. The due meditation
hereof, affoordes strong comfort, in time of any want or penury: it is not
(...). 1, 5.
so forcible a remedy against the temptation of want, to Hebr. 13, 5.
hear God say, that he will not forsake the righteous, and he will not fail
nor forsake them, or they that fear him shall lack nothing that good is; as
to hear and believe that he has given his Son for us, in whom the sick,
the needy, and disgraced, may find health, riches, and honor and all things
else.


Tim. What else are we to learn from the latter part of this sentence?


Silas. That Christ, and the things of Christ cannot be divided, but that he
which has the one, must have the other; his person and benefits be
inseparable. See John 1 Cor. 3, 22, 23
6, 40. These benefits they are either spiritual, as righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1, 30. or earthly good things, so far
as they are behoouefull for his members: either they be supernal things, as
God; or equal, as Angels; or inferior, as the world; all is given with
Christ.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. It reproues two sorts of men: First Papists, who shut out the wicked
from eternal life, and yet affirm, that they eat Christ in the Sacrament.
Secondly, such as would have us partake in the benefits of Christ, without
partaking with himself: as if a branch could have the juice and life of the
Vine, and not be in the Vine. Besides, it greatly comforts such as be married
to Christ by faith: for having him, they are sure to have al his things, even
as a woman married to her husband, communicates in all his honor and wealth.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, that Christ is said to be given for
us?


Sil. It teaches, that we have not deserved Christ, because he is a gift, yea
a free and frank gift, proceeding of mere favor and love (as the word here
signifies.) Also it stirs us up to thankfulness, that Christ so holy, so
high, so blessed, should be given for us, so profane, so vile, so wretched.


Sil. What use of this is further to be made?


Tim. It overthrows humane merit of all sorts, seeing no man gives ought
unto God, but God gives all that he has unto him, and that freely.

Tim. What more may we learn from hence?


Silas. This: whatsoever is given to any man, if Christ be not given withal,
it can be no good thing to him, for as he that possesses Christ must needs
have all good John 6, 17.
things, so he that possesses not Christ, has no good thing. Above all
things then labor for him to have him, and judge all loss and dongue to him.


Tim. Who are the persons for whom Christ was given?


Silas. For us, that is even Paul and all others which are like him, (to wit)
such as God has predestined and called.


Tim. But is not Christ sufficient to save all men?


Silas. Yes, he is, were it that all men had Faith to receive him: but as the
Sun gives us no light without an eye to behold it, nor clothes warm us,
except we put them on, nor meat feed us unless it be eaten: so neither does
Christ avail any man but believers, of whom there is an universality and a
world, as there is a world and universality of unbelievers.


Tim. What use of this?


Silas. To provoke all men to labor for to become true believers: better never
to have bin, then not to be of this number. Note further, that the world [
All] is so limited to the faithful, as Gal. 3, 22. that it serves also to take
away the difference between Jew and Gentile, as To. 10, 11, 12.


DIAL. XXX.
Verse 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
who justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request
also for us.


Tim. What are we to think of the reading of this Text?


Silas. Some read it all by interrogation or question thus: who shall accuse?
shall God who justifies? who shall condemn? shall Christ who is dead? etc.
containing a reason. Some read it by question and answer, thus. Who shall
accuse? it is God who justifies; that is, The question has here the force of
a negotiation, and stronger denial.
no body shall accuse, for it is God who justifies: and who shall condemn? it
is Christ which is dead; that is, no body shall condemn, for it is Christ who
is dead, risen, sits at the right hand of God, and makes request. This
latter reading is the best, because it is more plain and casie then the
former, which does obscure the sense, and is against the credit of the greek
Copies, which rcade it not by a continued interogation.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. Two things: First, a double assault, implied and folded in the
Question, Who shall? etc. Secondly, it shows the remedy in the answer, It is
God etc.


Tim. Where is the first assault or temptation?


Sil. In these words: who shall lay ought to the charge of Gods chosen? to lay
to ones charge, is a word taken from civil Courts, and signifies to accuse, to
call one into law, to enter suite or action against him, charging him with some
crime or guilt; and (by Gods chosen) is meant such as be elected of God, unto
life eternal, and do believe the Gospel.


Tim. What do ye learn from these words?


Sil. That all the merits of Christ, are appropriate unto elect faithful
ones, for these he dyed, rose again, sits at the right hand of God, and
makes request for them: those God justifies, sanctifies, and glorifieth.
Where is then that universal grace by which all and every are said to be
redeemed by Christ effectually? For of his suffiency is not the question.


Tim. Now ye have expounded the words of the question, tell me what temptation
against our faith is infolded and wrapped in them?


Silas. This: there be sundry adversaries that will rise up and accuse us as
guilty of sin and death, how shall we do? And indeed so it is: First, Satan
will charge us Revel 12, 10. Secondly, the law of Moses which we have
transgressed, John, 5, 45. Thirdly, our own conscience will accuse us, Romans 2,
15. Lastly, the world will accuse us, as it accused Christ, John Buptist, the
Apostles and others. Now it is heavy to have so many and subtle accusers in
such a Court as before Gods tribunal, where the case concerns our salvation
or damnation. Now the remedy which Paul does give us against this temptation,
is a very fit and excellent remedy, even this: It is God who justifies. And
note here that justification by absoluing, is opposed both unto accusation,
and condemnation; from both an elect sinner is freed at his justification.


Tim. What is meant by justifying?


Silas. To justify, signifies to absolve or acquit from guilt of sin, and to
account or pronounce one just. That this is the meaning of the word, may
appear first by comparing this place with Acts 13, 39. Where the word
justified, can signify no other thing then absolution from sin. Secondly,
because it is set against accusing and condemning, which are two actions of
judgment, the one charging a man with guilt and crime, the there pronouncing
punishment upon him, being found guilty and convicted. Therefore
justification which is the contrary to both these, must needs signify the
absoluing and acquitting one from guilt and punishment, and the pronouncing of
him just; and this comes unto us by the obedience and death of Christ, being
laid hold of by a lively faith.


Tim. Now the word is expounded, let us hear what is the force of the Apostles
answer, and the effect of the remedy affoarded us?


Silas. Thus much: that it is in vain for any to accuse the faithful, because
they have God, who himself is the judge to acquit them.


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Silas. They (whose sins God pardons and accepts for A Maxim logical.
just men) need not fear the accusation of all their enemies; the reasons
hereof, be these. First, when contraries be immediate, the putting or granting
of the one, is the removing of the other, as thus. The number is even,
therefore it is not odd: Abraham is in heaven, therefore not in any part of
hell. So here, God absolues, therefore it boots Who shall dis allow whom God
allow eth: Gods judgment seat is highest says, (...).
none to accuse, for if they do, it is to no purpose. Second reason, God is the
highest judge, and his tribunal seat is the supreme judgment seat; therefore
from thence there is no appealing. As amongst men, persons accused or
condemned, may appeal till they come to the highest Courts so being absolved
before Gods tribunal seat, there is no further accusation to be feared; all
appeals from thence, be void and of no force.


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Sil. It must serve to strengthen and comfort us, in the terror of conscience,
being frighted with the guilt of sin, the sentence of the law, the cruelty of
Satan: in as much as these either dare not appear before God, to accuse and
charge us, or if they do it, it is but lost labor, since GOD the judge has
discharged us. Secondly, as it shows the happiness of justified persons, so it
bewrayes the great misery of such as do not believe; because they be subject
to the accusation of sin and Satan themselves, and of the world, and to the
condemnation of God and his law.


Tim. So do the believers, because they have sin still in them, and Gods
justice must needs condemn sin: how does the Apostle answer this assault?


Sil. Thus, that Christ being dead, he has in his death made satisfaction; and
where satisfaction is made to divine justice, there is no cause to fear
condemnation, which does never proceed but against persons who cannot
satisfy, neither by others nor themselves.


Tim. Tea, but what can a dead man profit us?


Silas. Nothing at all, had death swallowed him up and subdued him; but Christ
once dead is risen again, and now sits at the right hand of God.


Tim. Has God a right band, or does Christ sit in heaven?


Sil. No not so, for in heaven be no seats, and God is A speech borrowed from
Kings, who set at their right hand their chief and greatest Officers and
favorites, as Solomon used Bath sheba, 1. Kings, 2, 19.
a Spirit, and therefore is no bodily substance having fleshly members; but the
meaning of this phrase is, that Christ lives in heaven blessedly, and reigns
in exceeding glory and power, not only as he is God, but also as he is man,
being exalted in his kingdom and Priesthood, and declared king and head of
his Church, before God and the Angels, having all things subject to him. Of
which singular dignity and honor given to him by his Father, read Mat. 28,
18. Ephe. 1, 20, 21, 22. Phil. 2, 9. Col. 2, 15. 10. 13. 3.


Tim. What is meant by this, that he makes request for us in Heaven?


Silas. That as he once merited our salvation in earth by dying, so he now
continually preserues it for us in heaven by his intercession for us; which is
not now in humiliation by kneeling upon his knees, as in the days of his
flesh, nor as the Spirit does by stirring up requests for us: but he now
makes request by the virtue and merit of his death, appeasing his Fathers
wrath, and turning his favor toward us, so often as we sin of infirmity,
and seek for pardon in his name.


Tim. Tell us distinctly in what things does this intercession of Christ
consist?


Sil. In four things: First, in his appearing for us before God, Heb. 9, 24.
Secondly, in his satisfaction once performed to Gods justice for us, Heb. 10,
12. 14. Thirdly, in that his will is, that this satisfaction should ever stead
all his members before God, Heb. 10, 10. Lastly, the consent of God his Father,
resting in this satisfaction and will of his Son, John, 11, 42.


Tim. What is the benefit that believers have by this intercession of Christ,
to whom alone this honor is peculiar?


Silas. Exceeding great: for it quits them from all fear of condemnation by
Gods Justice, in respect of their sins; because where Christ becomes Patron
for to defend against the sentence of damnation, it is in vain for sin, Law,
or Satan, to attempt any thing against believers. Even as an innocent person
is safe, so long as he has his learned advocate to answer things objected,
and to plead his innocence: and as one accused unto a Prince, is well as long
as he has a friend in the Court to speak for him; so is it with all
believers, who have the Judge himself both judge and advocate, 1 John 2, 2.


Tim. What other thing is to be learned from hence?


Silas. Two things: First, that the sins of the elect shall never come into
examination or inquiry, being all for given and covered. Secondly, that Christ
Jesus is a sufficient remedy against all things that may trouble or fear the
conscience, and that these four manner of ways. First by his death, freeing us
from sin and damnation. Secondly, by his rising again, getting
righteousness and victory over all his enemies. Thirdly, by being at the right
hand of God, he sheddeth down the holy Ghost upon us with his saving graces.
Fourthly, by his intercession, he effectually applies unto us all his merits,
and For Christ to make intercession, and to pray, is not to be taken properly,
but to show the good will of the Son to us, as Chrysostom notes.
continually preserues us in the state of grace and salvation. Therefore all
that seek for any soul comfort, from any thing in heaven or in earth, in
themselves or others, they are most miserably seduced; for Christ is alone
sufficient both to merit and preserve our salvation unto us. Away then, and
with abomination cast away those blasphemous prayers and professions of
Papists, touching the blessed Virgin Marie, calling her Queen of Heaven, our
hope, our only hope, our health, our salvation, our comfort, refreshing, and
our joy, our deliverer from danger, our refuge; and calling upon her in life to
defend, in the hour of death to protect, to entreat God the Father not as
intercessor, but with authority to command the Son Christ as a Mother, with
such like horrible impieties unto her and to the Cross, and to Thomas Becket,
and to Saint Francis, as their own rotten Books do witness.


DIAL. XXXI.
Verse 35, 36, 37. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword, as it is written, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are
counted as Sheep for the slaughter: neuerthel esse in all these things we
are more then Conquerors, through him that loved us.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To confirm and comfort faithful hearts against a new and most
dangerous assault made against their faith, by sundry grievous crosses and
enemies, by which Satan endeavors to shake out of the minds of the godly,
the persuasion os Gods love toward them: men through weakness being apt to
think, that they are not loved of God when they are sore and long afflicted;
as if troubles and calamities were so many testimonies of his anger and wrath,
as David complains, Psalm. 13, 1. And against this temptation they are here
strengthened.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First a question, verse 35, 36. Secondly, an answer, verse 37. The
question contains two things: First, a rehearsal of the particular calamities
which fight against the believers, and seem to wrest out the sense of Gods love
from them, verse 35. Secondly, a confirmation of the last calamity, to wit the
sword, by testimony of Scripture, verse 36. The answer contains a notable
consolation from the contrary event (to wit) the most wholesome issue of
calamities and crosses, wherein the believers are not only not overcome, but
do ouercom, yea do more then conquer. This event is set forth by the cause,
which is the unchangeable love and assistance of God through him that loved us.


Tim. What is meant here by the love of Christ?


Silas. It is taken here not actiuely, for that love wherewith we love him
(as if our constancy were called in question, as Augustine and Ambrose think)
but passiuely for that love wherewith the faithful are beloved of Christ, as
if the sense of that could be shaken out of their hearts. That this is the
meaning, may appear by the end of the 37. and 39. verses, which expound it of
Gods love to us. Also it appears by that which goes before our Text, for Paul
had spoken of Christ's love to us, witnessed by his dying for us, rising again,
sitting at the right hand of God, and making request for us; all which proves
his great love toward the elect.


Tim. How may it be further known, that the sense of Christ's love is here to
be understood?


Silas. By Paul's scope, which is to comfort believers, who would have no
comfort of Christ's love except they felt it, as Romans 5, 5. Again, it is the
sense and persuasion of Christ's love, that Satan by crosses seeks to wrest
from us.


Tim. What learn we from hence?


Silas. A good Lesson, which is this: the godly must make reckoning to have
the persuasion of Gods love assaulted and sore shaken. The reason is, because
it is a notable advantage to Satan, and hurt to Gods children, to doubt of Gods
love to them. For then Satan may bring in impatiency, despair, dulhesse in
Gods service, disobedience, looseness of manners, and all iniquity, which we
are kept from by the sense of Gods love, quickening our love, and causing to
hope in him well and constantly.


Tim. What is the use of this point?


Sil. It warns the believers to arm themselves against this assault,
laboring by all means to setle their hearts more and more in the assurance
of Gods love, holding fast that truth, that Gods love is most constant, and
nothing in the world can be of such force as to hinder it, much less to pluck
it away, so as sin and security be taken heed of. This was Paul's persuasion for
his part, verse 28. and pray unto God that ye also may be thus persuaded, and
strive mightily for it.


Tim. Now show us particularly what things they be which be contrary to our
persuasion of Gods love?


Sil. They be either crosses and calamities whereof he rehearses seven; or
enemies, whereof he mentions nine in number.


Tim. Show us the meaning of these calamities in particular.


Sil. First, by tribulation is meant every thing which presses or wringeth, to
wit; any vexation. Secondly, by anguish, is meant straightness of place
properly, but (by a Metaphor) preplexity of mind, when one knows not what to
do; an example hereof, we have in Ichosaphat, 2. (...). 20, 12. Thirdly, by
persecution is meant some extreme violence offered by Tyrants and wicked men,
to our goods, name, person, or life. Fourthly by famine, is meant hunger,
through want of victuals to sustain our life. Fifthly, nakedness signifies
want of apparel and clothing to cover and defend our bodies from cold. Sixthly
by peril is meant dangerous distresses which put a man in peril and
ieorpardy, such as Paul reckons, 2. Cor. 11, 25, 26. and Heb. 11, 36, 37.
Lastly, by sword is meant slaughter, cruel tormenting, death, or punishment by
barbarous savage bloodshed, as happened to Abell, the Prophets, and Christ,
and holy Martyrs.


Tim. What observe you in this particular rehearsing of calamities? Seeing
Christ suffered for evil servants, why should not we suffer for a good Lord?
we had profit by his sufferings, he can have no profit by our passions. Ambrose.



Silas. First, what heavy and hard things the godly are subject unto for their
profession sake, others have felt these things, and we must prepare for them.
Secondly, the Apostle by reckoning up the most bitter things, would teach us,
that seeing these things cannot put out the sense of Gods love, neither any
else in the world can do it. For what can go beyond these for smarte or
shame?


Tim. But how is it proved by the Apostle, that the faithful are subject unto
the sword and bloody slaughters, for the Gospels sake?


Silas. By a text out of the psalm 44, verse, 22. For thy sake we are killed
all the day long, we are counted as Sheep for the slaughter. (All the day) may
signify all times of this life; or without intermission: or all the time of
the world.


Tim. What things do ye note from this testimony of the Psalm?


Silas. First, that Christians are subject even to death and slaughter, as well
as other calamities. Secondly, that They are slain without any resistance.
in this respect we are like unto Sheep (not which are fed for wool or
store) but such as are appointed for the kitching. Thirdly, they are put in
mind to be meek and patient in suffering of death, even as sheep are under
the Butchers hand. Fourthly, that death does continually hang over their heads,
even all day long, either for that they are ready every day to dye if need
require, or because their continual dangers are so many deaths as it were.
Lastly, that the cause of the death of Gods Martyrs, is not any crime of their
own, but their sincere faith and profession of Christ, ( for thy sake) as
Math. 10. for my names sake, and Mat. 5.


Tim. But what is the comfort of the faithful against all these terrible
things?


Silas. Even this, that in all these things they are more then Conquerors. The
meaning hereof is, that true believers in their miseries they do not only
not fainte and are overcome, but themselves get a glorious victory over their
crosses and persecutions, both by their patient wearying and vanquishing the
persecutors, and themselves brought to heaven.


Tim. But how may this be, that the slain and conquered should yet be
Conquerers?


Silas. Indeed this is a paradoxe, and strange to carnal reason, yet it is
most true in this spiritual warfare, howsoever it be otherwise in the bodily
warrefare. For the Saints when they suffer and are killed, they are not only
patient, but rejoice and glory, which is the part of victours, Romans 5, 3.
Secondly, because by their constancy they do even daunt the minds of their
persecutors, who rather seem to be overcome, then the Martyrs which suffer.
Example hereof in the Pharisees, Acts, 4. and in Julian the Apostata, whose
cruelty was conquered by the patience of the Martyrs. Lastly, of some of the
Roman persecutors, in the ten first persecutions, whose barbarous savageness
was even tired with the steadfastness of the Saints in suffering. Thirdly, the
Devils practice is by crosses to wrest from Gods children their confidence in
Gods love, which is rather increased by this means, Romans 5, 5, 6.


Tim. But whence have they strength to be so steadfast to hold out and to
conquer?


Silas. Not from themselves who are far unequal for so great a battle, but
from the help and aid of God confirming and establishing them. The cause that
moves God to afford this strength, is his great love which he bears them in
Christ, (Through him that has loved us.)


Tim. What is our lesson from hence?


Silas. That the victory which believers do get over all their troubles,
depends not upon their own power or merits at all, but merely, solely, and
wholly in the love that God bears them in Christ, see 1. Cor. 15. 57.


Ttm. What use of this?


Silas. It warnes the Saints in their greatest patience and constancy to be
humbled, seeing they have nothing but what they receive from Gods love.
Secondly, it must stir them up to great thankfulness to God, so graciously
and mightily confirming them. Thirdly, it admonishes weak Christians in the
time of any calamity to fly to the throne of grace for succor, distrusting
themselves as Iehosaphat did. Lastly, it teaches that the faithful, can never
fall from Gods love. Of this before, 2. Dialogue, on verse 2. Chap. 5.


DIAL. XXXII.
Verses 38, 39. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


Tim. What does this text contain, orwhereto tends it?


Silas. The same which did the former, even to prove that no enemies or evils,
how many, sundry, or mighty soever, can break off Gods love to the faithful,
that he should cease to love them, and cast off the care of their salvation,
which believe in his Son Jesus.


Tim. What be the parts of this text?


Silas. Two, first an enumeration or rehearsal of the several enemies, which
may terrify and threaten our separation from Gods love. Secondly, a most sweet
consolation, that Gods love to believers is constant, do all enemies against
them what they can do. This comfort is set forth by the certainty thereof in
these words, ( for I am persuaded etc.) Thirdly, by the cause of it, verse 39.
because it is grounded on the merits of Christ the Redeemer, and not on
themselves or any creature, ( Which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.)


Tim. Resken up those enemies which wrestle against believers, and show us the
meaning of every one of them in particular?


Silas. They be nine in number; as, 1. life, 2. death, 3. Angels, 4.
principalities, 5. powers, 6. things present, 7. things to come, 8. height, 9.
depth. Saint Paul in Ephe. 6. 12. reduces them all to two heads. First, flesh
and blood. Secondly, spiritual wickednesses; the meaning of them is this: By
life and death is meant all things which endanger us about life and death, or
prosperity and adversity, which be companions of life and death. By Devils is
meant wicked Spirits, which seek by all means to lead us from God, and
endeavor to separate us from his love; yea and good Angels are meant too (by
supposition hyperbolical) like to that saying, Gal. 1, 8. Also by
principalities and powers is meant such Angels as are set over Empires and
Kingdoms, also over Cities and particular Countries, as Dan. 11. or tyrants of
the world with their whole power, according to that threatened, Mat. 10, 17, 18.
Moreover, by things present and to come, we are to understand all things which
do presently, or hereafter may happen to us, in this world and the world to
come, or all both good and evil things, which now or hereafter shall come to us.
By [height] is meant things high and marucllous, or whatsoever strange and
unaccustomed things happen from Heaven by high; and by deep, is meant
whatsoever things burst forth of the lower parts and Regions of the earth:
and lastly, by Creatures is meant every thing created in the universality of
this whole world.


Tim. What learn we by this magnificent rehearsal?


Silas. That Christians and Christianity be assaulted with marvelous and
sundry enemies. Of this see before, what has bin said.


Tim. What is the use of th s?


Silas. That every Christian has need of a strong Faith, and much patience
and continual watchfulness, so much the more, by how much the more the malice
and number of enemies are greater.


Tim. What are we to learn of this, that he says of these particulars, that
they cannot separate us from the love of God?


Silas. That the love which God bears his elect, is immovable and most
firm; the reasons hereof are, First, because nothing in the world is able to
hinder and break it off. Secondly, he himself will never alter it, because he
is unchangeable.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. It conuicteth both the Papists and Lutherans of error, who teach that
such as are in the state of grace and Gods love, may loose it and fall from it.
Se condly, it affords much consolation and joy in time of deep temptations to
al such as are infallibly assured, that they stand in the love of God;
whatsoever they lose, yet they keep still Gods love: whereof before enough.


Tim. But may any Christian be after this sort assured?


Silas. Yes, Paul the Apostle was so, as himself confesses in this place, [ I
am persuaded, etc.]


Tim. Yea, but he speaks this of his own person, what is that to us? there
is great diffrence between Paul and other christians.


Silas. Paul speaks many things of himself, which are not peculiar to
himself, but in common do belong to al Christians, as Gal. 2, 20. and 6, 14.
Phil. 1, 21. and often elsewhere. Secondly, in the last words of this text, he
wraps up all other believing Christians with himself, saying; Who shall
separate us. Thirdly, every true believer may be certainly assured of his own
salvation, upon the same grounds that Paul was of his: which grounds are either
Theological and necessary, others are but Logical and profitable only. The
Theological and necessary grounds be first, the foreknowledge and immutable
purpose of Gods election, Romans 8, 30. manifested in calling Justification,
Sanctification. The second, is the inward persuasion of the holy Spirit,
witnessing to their spirits that they are Gods children, Romans 8. 16. Thirdly,
the most faithful promise of God, that such as do believe in him shall have
everlasting life, John 3, 18. Fourthly, Christ his delivering himself to
death, and his now making request in heaven for them, Romans 8, 32, 33. Lastly,
the effects of Gods sanctifying Spirit in their hearts (to wit,) unfeigned
faith, and diligent love, 1 Thessalonians. 1, 3, 4. The Logical and probable grounds,
be all the outward protections and blessings of God, which being very many and
great, though they have no force in themselves to persuade us to the love of
God, yet being joined unto the former, they help well to strengthen our
assurance, and to make the matter more evident. For Gods Children have them as
testimonies of their Fathers love, and fruits of redemption.


Tim. Now show us what use is to be made of this?


Silas. First, it conuicteth the Papists of error, in that they teach that we
have but a probable and coniectural assurance of our election (to wit) by hope
as they speak, to hope well of it; unless it be some certain men, who knew by
revelation Gods love, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Paul, etc. or of the
predestinate in general: but for any particular man to assure himself that
God loves him, and that he is justified and shall be saved, they esteem it
presumption, and an illusion of the devil. Their reasons be, First because none
can be certain of his perseverance in grace, contrary to Romans 8, 29, 30.
Secondly, Duplex persuasio: vna fidei, altera charitatis: haec aliqua^do
sallitur, illa nunquam. Lutherus.
because they find the word here Englished [ Perswaded] to be elsewhere in
Scripture applied unto coniecturall knowledge, as 1 Thessalonians. 1, 4. Romans 15, 14. 2 Timothy 1, 5. Heb. 6, 9. The cause whereof is, because in these places the Apostle
speaks not of his own, but of the faith and election of others, whereof we can
have but a charitable persuasion. The second use of this doctrine, is to
provoke all that find not this certain persuasion of Gods love, to labor for
it, and those which have it, to be exceeding thankful to God for it.

Lastly, this reproues those that build their persuasion of Gods love and their
title to eternal life, on grounds which be probable only, as because they are
baptized, and have knowledge and make protestation, and come to Sermons and
Sacraments, and do some good things, and refrain from some evil things, and
have bin many ways blessed and helped of God; for all these things are common
both to good and bad which live in the bosom of the Church. See Eccl. 9. 2. 1
Cor. 10, 1, 2, 3, 4. Hypocrites may have, and many have them all in a far
greater plenty and proportion, then very many of Gods children have them.


CHAP. IX.
DIAL I.
Verses 1, 2, 3. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing
me witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have etc.


Timotheus. WHat does the Apostle handle in this Chapter?


Silas. In this Chapter and the two following, Paul entreats of that great
mystery, of divine election and reprobation, and of the reiection of the Jews,
and the vocation of the Gentiles depending thereon.


Tim. How does he fall into this dispute and argument of Gods eternal
predestination?


Tim. Of this, diverse men judge diversely: they all so agree in the matter of
his treatise, as yet they vary about the coherence and knitting of these three
following Chap ters to the former. Some think that he climeth up to the
mystery of election, that he may lay forth the fountain of faith and
justification; and so prove them to be free and independent upon us. Others say
this depends on Chapter 3. verse 29. where the Apostle having proved right
ousnesse by faith; now he sets on the other thing, to prove that it comes
without respect of persons, both to Jew and Gentile which believe, and that
according to election. Others fetch the coherence from verse 30, or 38. 39. of
the eight Chapter, thus: If God will glorify whom he foreknewe, and the
faithful cannot be separated from Gods love; how comes it that the Jews
whom God foreknew once, and which are Gods only people, are now cast out and
repelled from grace and glory? Unto which he answers; that all which be Jews
by carnal generation, be not the people of God unto whom the promises do
belong, but the elect alone, whether Jews or Gentiles. But I take it rather
this to be the reason of the connection, that against the former doctrine of
justification by faith, the unbelief of the Jews might be objected thus: If
Paul's doctrine be true (which hitherto he has taught, of the right way of
being justified and saved thorough faith in Christ) why do not the Jews
approve and embrace it? either the Jews are none of Gods people, or the
doctrine and promises of grace belong to them; if not to them, then how is God
faithful in keeping promise, seeing he said he would be their God? Unto
which the Apostle answers, that the Jews obtained not righteousness and
salvation by Christ; because many of them were unbelievers. The reason of this
is, because they were reprobates; for such as were elect did believe and were
justified and saved, which is sufficient to prove God true of his promise,
which was never made but to Abraham's spiritual seed, not to such as came of
him according to the flesh.


Tim. What be the parts of this Chapter?


Silas. Three; first, a grave protestation of Paul's sorrow, in behalf of the
Jews which believed not in Christ, unto verse 6. Secondly, a defense of Gods
promise against humane reason, to verse 24. Thirdly, a declaration of the
mystery touching the calling of the Gentiles, and refusing of the Jews, by the
oracles of the Prophets, which did foretell the one and the other, to the end
of the Chapter.


Tim. Why did Paul begin with protestation of his sorrow?


Silas. To avoid the offense of the Jews, who were likely to take indignation
at this doctrine; therefore he uses an insinuation to gain their good will:
for which purpose he also prayseth them, ver. 4. 5. Which commends the wisdom
of the Apostle, in preventing the contempt of his doctrine.


Tim. What does he perform in these three first verses?


Silas. He lays down or propounds the truth: Secondly the greatness:
Thirdly the cause of his sorrow. The truth and greatness of his sorrow, he
proves by a sacred oath, calling Christ, his conscience, and the Holy Ghost to
witness that it was so, that he did truly and great ly bewail their case.


Tim. What instructions are we to learn out of this first verse?


Silas. That a Christian must always speak truth, but especially in an oath;
the reason is, because an untruth uttered in an oath, is not only a lie, but
it is a perjury, which is a greater sin. Secondly, because by such
untruths, Gods name is dishonored, when he is called to witness a false
matter, who is the auenger of all falsehoode.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. It admonishes all men to take heed what they affirm or deny upon
their oath, that it be no vain matter or uncertain and doubtful, or untrue
or false: but such as they know to be most certain and true.


Tim. What further instruction from hence?


Silas. Hence we learn what an oath is, by whom we may swear, and in what
form of words.


Tim. What is an Oath?


Silas. A confirmation of some hidden truth, necessary to be known, (and yet
not known to others) by appealing to the witness and judgment of GOD, who is
the searcher of hearts, and punisher of perjury, 1 Kings 8. 32. Heb. 6.


Tim. By whom may we swear?


Silas. By Christ Jesus and by the Holy Ghost, as well as by God the Father,
which does plainly prove the deity of An Oath a part of Gods worship.
Christ and the Spirit: as also that it is a sin to swear by any Creature,
because they are not the searchers of hearts, nor punishers of secret
periuries; also because swearing Deuteronomy. 6.
lawfully, is a part of Gods worship, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.


Tim. Why then does Paul put his conscience in the Oath, it being a creature?


Sil. His meaning is, that what his conscience knew to be true, Christ and the
Spirit also knew it more perfectly.


Tim. In what form is an Oath to be taken?


Silas. Thus: I speak the truth and lie not, Christ bearingmy conscience
witness.


Tim. What think ye of these words, as Pharaoh lives, as thy soul lives,
or verily verily? Genesis 42. 15. 1 Samuel 17, 55. John 3, 5


Silas. They be earnest asseuerations, affirming weighty things somewhat
gravely and vehemently, but are no Oaths.


Tim. Why does Paul say, I speak truth and lie not?


Silas. This is spoken after the manner of the Hebrews, who say one thing twice
for plainness. Also, one may speak truth, and yet lie: the thing may be a
truth which one speaks, and yet he think it a lie. This Paul disclaimes,
professing sincerity of mind, as well as truth in his words, he is no
Equiuocator.


Tim. What other things do ye learn from hence?


Silas. That though ones conscience be a thousand witnesses, (even a good
conscience as well as an evil) yet Christ and the Spirit are greater then the
Conscience, and sees more and further, 1 John 3, 20. Again, from hence we
learn, that a Christian may take a private oath lawfully, though it be not
before a Judge or Magistrate. Example hereof we have of Abraham's servant,
Genef. 24, 3. of Rahab and the Spies, Josh. 2, 12. and of Paul in this place;
it appears also by the nature and end of an Oath, Heb. 6, 16. but it is to
be done in grave and important cases, and not in light and trifling things;
but when it behooues and concerns Gods glory, and the salvation or some
great good of our neighbor, that some doubtful thing should be confirmed with
an oath. Thus was the case here: it was necessary the Jews should know and
believe, that Paul had true and great sorrow for them, least upon suspicion of
his (...) toward them they should have despised the Doctrine of salvation
brought to them by his writing, to their own destruction, and Gods dishonor:
therefore he gave an oath as a pledge of his truth.


Tim. What use of this point?


Sil. It reproues such as take rash Oaths, as profane persons do. Also such as
refuse lawful oaths private or public, as the Anabaptists do.


Tim. May not one refuse to swear, rather then to lay ones hand on a Book?


Silas. No: for that is nothing to the form and substance of an Oath, which is
one among all Gods people; but a circumstance and ceremony which is diverse in
diverse Countries. The Jews laid their hand under the Thigh, Genes. 24, 3.
Also, they lift up their hands to heaven.


Tim. How is the greatness of his sorrow set forth?


Silas. First, by the measure of it, it was great. Secondly, by the length of
it, it was continual. Thirdly, by the subject of it, it was in the heart.


Tim. What is meant by heaviness?


Silas. It is a grief arising either from fear of some evil Dolor est morbus
excrucians animum and ex malo vel imminent vel present oritur. Cicero.
at hand, or the seeling of some present evil upon our selves or others: as joy
is a sweet motion of the heart from hope of some future, or sense of some
present good. And whereas he says, that his heaviness was (great) he means
that his grief was not small or ordinary, slight or mean, but very vehement
and grievous, such as did sore vex him.


Tim. What manner of sorrow is that he speaks of?


Silas. It signifies such a grief and pain as women in travel feel, which
of all bodily sorrows is most sharp and bitter; such was the torment that Paul
had in his mind for the Jews.


Tim. But why does he call this sorrow [continuall?]


Silas. To show, that howsoever the pains of a woman end at the birth of a
child, or shortly after; yet he in his sorrow, could find neither remedy,
mean, nor end.


Tim. What Instructions may we gather from these words thus opened?


Silas. First, they teach us that Gods children be not stocks, blockish and
senseless. Secondly, that we ought to be touched with a feeling one of
another misery. Thirdly, that above all other miseries we are bound
exceedingly to grieve for the unbelief and destruction of others, because that
is the greatest evil, and therefore it should most affect us. Fourthly, it is
best known what love we bear unto others, by our grief for their harms. For
thus Paul seeks to confirm his great love toward the Jews, by witnessing
his great grief which he conceived for them.


Tim. What use is to be made of this last instruction?


Silas. It conuicteth such to be void of Christian charity as are not affected
at the hurts and harms of others, especially at their spiritual dangers and
miseries; no griese, no love.


Tim. What was the (...) of his heaviness?


Silas. His (heart) which is the sense both of life and affections: which may
put us in mind that the sorrow which Paul had for the Jews, was most bitter
and dangerous. The reason hereof is, because there is no sorrow like unto that
which presses the heart, for it does by little and little quench the vital
spirits, and oftentimes brings death with it, if it be immoderate: many have
suddenly dyed of hearts sorrow being extreme.


Tim. But what might be the cause of this extreme sorrow of the Apostle?


Silas. The damnation of the Jews for their unbelief sake, because they
rejected the Gospel, and refused Christ, as appears in that he wishes
himself to be separated from Christ for them, it argues that they were
separated from him, else there had been no cause of such a wish.


Tim. What is it to be separated from Christ?


Sil. To be removed and put from the favor of God, from the salvation
purchased by Christ, and from al hope of it, and in a word to perish and be
condemned for ever. For without Christ there can be no grace of God, no
salvation, no hope of being saved, nothing but condemnation.


Tim. But did Paul well in praying for his own damnation? or whether was it
his prayer that he might perish?


Silas. The truth is, Paul makes no such prayer, and if A thing unheard of,
that for Christ's sake one should wish to be separated from Christ. Hierom Like
to that of Christ, Father if it be possible. So ought Moses prayer to be
understood, Exodus Blot me out, etc.
he had, he had sinned greatly in praying unlawfully and vainly. The reasons
be, first because his prayer had crossed the constant purpose of God, and his
own certain persuasion spoken of in the former Chapter. Secondly, Paul was
not bound to prefer the salvation of the Jews before Christ and his grace.


Tim. If he did not make a prayer here to be cut off from Christ, what then
think you of it?


Silas. The sense of the Apostles words is thus much: that he could have wished
to be cut off from Christ, and so to have delivered the Jews from damnation,
by the loss of his own salvation, had it been possible. For the speech is
conditional, (if it might have been) he could have wished to be damned for
them, that he being but one, had rather perished then such a multitude. Like
unto that speech of David, wishing that he might have dyed for his son
Absolon: which as it bewrays David's affection for his son, so this
sufficiently discouers Paul's exceeding great affection for the Jews, how great
it was. But as David knew that his life could not redeem the death of his son
(being already dead,) so it fared with Paul.


Tim. Whom does he mean here by his brethren?


Silas. The Jews which were his kinsmen, as being all Israelites of his
stock and blood: and whereas he says for his brethren, he means in their
stead and room, or in their behalf, as Christ is said to have dyed for us.


Tim. What are the doctrines to be learned from this verse?


Silas. It teaches that Christians must be carried with a great desire of
others salvation, and namely of such as nearest unto them, as their kinsmen,
children, servants, stock or lineage. The reason is, because salvation is the
greatest good we can procure to any, therefore in the furthering of it, our
love should most appear.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. It reproues such as earnestly desire other good things to theirs, but
are cold in descrying and seeking the chief good. Secondly, it comfort all
that find any measure of this desire in them, that they are guided by the
Spirit of God. Lastly, it exhorts all men to strive for a greater measure of
it, because it will be a witness that they are led by the same Spirit that was
in Paul.


Tim. What other instruction from hence?


Silas. It proves that Christ's love exceedes all love, because he indeed was
made that for us sinners and his enemies, which Paul could have wished to be
made for his brethren, which is, to be a curse, Gal. 3. 13.


Tim. What use of this?


Sil. It warns us after Christ's example (especially Pasiors) deeply to love
and thirst after one another salvation. Secondly it rebukes all others, which
either by counsel or evil example, help forwards others damnation, or by
keeping away the means of eternal life wholly or in part, in substance or
degree.


DIAL. II.
Verses 4, 5. Which are the Israelites, to whom pertayneth the adoption, and
the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law; and the service of
God, and the promises: of whom are the Fathers, and of whom concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is Codouer all blessed for ever. Amen.


Tim. What is the drift and purpose of this text?


Sil. To render reasons of his deep love and grief for the Jews, for whose
sake he would have wished himself accursed and destroyed, to have had them
saved, and this his exceeding charity he now does expound, and set forth the
true reasons thereof.


Tim. From whence are these reasons drawn?


Silas. They are all taken from the noble properties of the Jews, and those
adioynts or qualities which are in number ten, whereof now we will speak in
order. The first is, that they were his brethren or kinsmen according This was
a private condition, next is public.
to the flesh; this is a great occasion to make us love our neighbor so much
the more, as Christ did this nation, and his own mother, and as nature
teaches even heathen to do, as 1 Timothy 5. 8. Their second property is, that
they were Israelites (that is, Gods people) such as were Princes and conquerers
of God. This name God for honor sake The chosen people of God, his flock, his
sheep, his lot, his inheritance consecrated to the true God: not as Athens, I:
elos, Sicilia, were dedicate to false Gods, which yet they reckned their honors.
gave to Iacoh who overcame God in wrestling, see Genesis 33. 38. thereof
called (Israel:) and he thought it an excellent blessing, to have his children
called by his name (Israel) as ye may see in his prayer, Genesis 48. 16 And this
is the second cause of his so great grief for their destruction, that a people
consecrated to the true God, who delighted to be called the God of Israel,
should (...). The third property is adoption, by which we are not to
understand that eternal adoption peculiar to the elect, whom God purposed
before all worlds, to make his children in Christ; and accordingly does
actually adopt them in time, when he calls them effectually: but the external
adoption, to be accounted and esteemed the only Church of God, all other
Nations and people being passed by and Ephe. 1. 4 5.
refused: by virtue of which dignity, God himself calls Israel his Son,
yea his first borne, yea his treasure, etc. Exodus 4. 22. and 19. 5. 6. Deuteronomy.
32, 8. 9. Iere. 31. 20. I am their Father, and Ephraim is my child and first
borne. And this is the third cause of his sorrow, that they should be lost
which had so worthy a privilege.

Their fourth property is the [glory,] by which is meant the Atke, which was a
token of Gods presence; 1 Samuel 4. 21. 22. There also God heard the prayers and
praises of his people, and gave forth oracles unto such as sought them; and in
regard of it, the Temple is called the habitation of his glory, or the place
where his honor dwells, Psalm. 26. 8. Therefore no people (as it is in Deuteronomy.)
so noble to whom God came so nigh as to this people. Now what a grief to a
good friend is this, that such a nation should be cast out and anathanized.

Their first privilege and quality was the covenant, that is, the Table of the
covenants, by a Metonymie: and he speaks in the plural number, because there
were two Tables, Deuteronomy. 9. 11. in these God wrote with his own hand his Moral
Laws and Statutes. Some understand it of the covenant which God often made
with this people for eternal life by Christ, howbeit this was but one,
howsoever it was often renewed with Abraham and Isaac, etc. Also the promises
which are after named, cannot be severed from the covenant which stood in
promises of eternal and temporal happiness.

The sixth property is the giving of the Law, to wit; the judicial Law for the
Commonwealth, which surpassed all the Laws of Solon, (...), Numa, Draco,
Themistocles, and Mines. For they came from heaven (God being the immediate
author) and were full of equity, a marvelous credit and renown to this
Nation, as Deuteronomy. 4, 8, 32.

Their seventh property was (the service of God) even the Priesthood, with
such outward rites and sacrifices wherein God would be lawfully served of the
Jews till Christ: and this was the ceremonial worship, Hebr. 9, 1. This was so
perfect, that nothing could be added to it. The eight property was the promises
both Legal, promising life on condition of keeping the law perfectly: also
Euangelical, promising remission of sins with salvation in heaven, to the
believers in Christ, temporal promises, and eternal promises, and of the
calling of the Gentiles. No people had such promises, by which God sought to
alure and inuit this people to his obedience. Their ninth privilege and
dignity, was, that of them came the Fathers (that is) they be the offspring
of the Patriarchs and holy men, whose praise is in the Word, which also had
the promises of Gods mercy unto their posterity, for a thousand generations,
Genesis 17, 4. Com. 2. and this is no usual commendation, to come and to be
borne of such noble progenitors, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob were, by whose
example they might have great help to piety, and pricks to godliness, yet so
far to degenerate as now the Jews were, this could not but much grieve the
Apostle who much loved them. The last dignity All these ren things, they be
not virtues of the (...) but guiftes of God, to keep them from pride, Chrysust.
of the Jews is, that of them came (Christ concerning the flesh,) a most high
excellency, that he who was the eternal Son of God, did vouchsafe for to
take his manhood of the Jews, and to have the same parents and ancestors (as
he was man) as they had. Now that such a sovereign favor as this should not
only not profit them, but turn to their destruction, through their wilful
blindness, no marvel it Paul did grievously mourn for it.


Tim. Wherefore is this added, [who is God over all?] Chrysostom under stands
it of Christ the Son. If beside Christ they cannot find any other person to
whom these words may be referred, let them leave this glory. Ambr.



Silas. To show that Christ besides his humane nature had another nature,
according to which he did not descend of the Jews, but was begotten of God
everlastingly, being equal to God in the substance and glory of the Godhead;
as it is here proved by two Epithites, one, that he is over all persons and
over al things, having made them all. Secondly, that he is God, blessed for
ever, a title attributed to God the Creator, Chap. 1, 25. This place then
informs us not of the divinity of the Father, or of the Trinity, but of that
high mystery touching Christ his natures and person, that he is true man and
true God also, both man and God in one person; which stops the mouths of
Arrians, Mahumetists, Nestorians, etc.


Tim. Now that those qualities and dignities are opened, show us what we are
hence to learn for our instructions?


Silas. First, that it is a singular favor (highly to be accounted of,) to be
a member of Gods visible Church, because many blessings do accompany them and
wonderful be their privileges. Secondly, we learn that we may not trust
nor rest in any out-ward privilege whatsoever: the reason is, because none
could have had more or greater then the Jews who had no good by them, because
being severed from faith and godliness, they could further them to no other
purpose, but to increase judgment and wrath upon their heads for abusing them.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. To warn impenitent sinners not to rest in external prerogatives of
word and Sacraments, and of profession. For notwithstanding all this, they
shall perish if they repent not, and amend their lives, as these Jews did. See
(...). 7, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1. Cor. 10, 1, 2, 3.


Tim. What other doctrine is to be gathered from hence?


Silas. That Gods gifts are still to be loved and commended, whatsoever the
men be to whom they are committed; because the sins of the person cannot
pollute the good gifts of God, which remain holy and excellent howsoever they
behave themselves in who^ they are.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. First, here we are taught to put a difference between the men and
Gods gifts. Secondly, it reproues such as condemn good things for their sakes
which are adorned with them; because they are evil, therefore all is naught
which is about them. Thirdly, it admonishes us that unto Gods outward gifts,
we join a new heart endewed with faith and repentance; then those guiftes
which be excellent in themselves, shall make us to shine the more.


Tim. What other doctrine?


Silas. That it is a great gift of God to come of holy parents and godly
predecessors, far more then to come of noble or honorable progenitors. The
reason is, first because God promises to do good unto just men for many
generations, Exodus 20, 6. Psalm. 112. 2. The generation of the righteous shall
be blessed. Secondly, children are greatly furthered in their education by
virtuous Parents. Thirdly, the examples of good Parents are spurs to children
to quicken them to follow them; for it were a shame to degenerate and grow out
of kind, bringing infamy to our stock and house.


Tim. What use is to be made hereof?


Silas. It conuicteth such children of unthankfulness as forget this gift, and
foreflow to make true benefit of it. Secondly, it exhorts all men to consider
of their godly Parents, and to strive to tread in their steps. It cost the
Jews dear because they did not, so it did Ely his sons, and Samuels children,
1. Sam. 1, 2, 1, 2. and Absolon and Adoniah.


Tim. What more instructions?


Silas. That godly parents may have full wicked children, as Abraham had, and
on the contrary, evil parents may have good children, as Josias came of Amon.
The reason hereof is, because graces come not by generation, but by
regeneration, which is not tied to the Elements of this world. For the Spirit
blows where it lists, John. 3.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. To warn all children unto their parentage to join piety, else it will
not profit them unto salvation. Secondly, to reprove such as think that the
children must be good, when their parents be good. Thirdly, to stir up all
parents diligently to bring up their children in Gods fear, and to pray for
them often and earnestly. A child of so many prayers and tears cannot be lost
as one said, concerning Augustine, the son of Monica.
Lastly, to comfort such as do their endeavor to train up their children
religiously, without answerable success; for it was the portion of Patriarchs,
and of many holy men and women. Such as do their endeavor, have therewith to
comfort themselves against the naughtiness of their posterity.


DIAL. III.
Verse 6. Notwithstanding it cannot be that the word of God should take none
effect. For all they are not Israel, that are of Israel.


Tim. What does the Apostle now in these words?


Silas. Hitherto of the first part of this chapter, wherein is contained the
grave protestation of Paul touching his great grief, for the reiection of the
most part of the Jews from Christ. Now he sets on the second part (to
(...)) the Apology and defense of God and his promises, against the reproaches
which humane reason obiecteth and lays in against God. These reproaches be
three: First inconstancy, to verse 14. Secondly, iniquity or injustice to verse
19. Thirdly cruelty, unto verse 23.


Tim. How does the Apostle Paul knit this Verse with the former?


Silas. Thus; If the Jews be separate from Christ, then Coherence.
Gods promises fail. For God promised Abraham to be his God, and the God of
his seed: which promise concerned Christ to be given them, and salvation by
him: but if the Jews which be Abraham's seed be accursed, having lost Christ
and his salvation, then how did God stand to his promise? Again, the promise
of the Messiah, was chiefly and first made to the Jews. No we, if more
Gentiles be saved by him then Jews, how does GOD keep his promise? Hence it
might be coniectured, Paul's grief to arise, because God seemed inconstant,
breaking promise? which the Apostle denies, and answeareth Method.
this cavil by a strong negation or denial. Secondly, by a distinction of
Abraham's seed, which distinction he confirms both by the word of God, and
from the mystery of Gods eternal election and reprobation; which mystery upon
this occasion he opens and proves in Hypothesis, by particular instances
given of some persons Sum.
elect, and some reprobate. The sum of this answer is this; that the true
Jews to whom Gods promises were made, were to be esteemed neither by
woorthynesse of blood, carnal generation, nor by any works present or
foreseen, but by Gods election. The elect only were the true Israelites and
children of Abraham: and therefore so long as God fulfilled his promise of
salvation to the elect, he cannot be counted false of his word and promise made
to Abraham, howsoever many thousands which descended carnally of Abraham be
lost.


Tim. What is meant by (notwithstanding?)


Silas. Thus much, that albeit the Jews mutter against Interpretation.
God, charging God with breach of promise (if they were cursed and separated
from Christ,) yet it cannot be that God should be unfaithful.


Tim. What is meant by [cannot be?]


Silas. That it is simply and absolutely impossible to be, that Gods word
should fall.


Tim. What is meant by [word?]


Silas. Not the word of the law, but the word of promise which God spoke to
Abraham, saying; I am thy God and the God of thy seed; and again, In thy
seed shall all Nations be blessed Genesis 17. 3.


Tim. What signifies [fall?]


Silas. It is set against (remain,) verse 11, by which is signified firm
steadiness, when the effect follows the promise: therefore to fall, in this
place is to be frustrate, void, and of none effect, when the promise is not
kept.


Tim. What is the doctrine out of these words?


Sil. This, howsoever many men do perish, to whom Doctrine.
the promises be offered and preached, yet God is evermore true and constant
in performing his promise. This doctrine may be proved first by scripture, Mat.
5. 18. Heaven Reasons
and earth shall pass away etc. 2 Samuel 7. 28. Romans 3. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
Secondly by reason, as first from the nature of God, who is truth itself, and
therefore he cannot deceive. Thirdly, he is unchangeable, and therefore what
he says he will do. Fourthly, he is powerful and therefore able to keep his
promise, Romans 4. 21. Fifthly, GOD stands upon his honor, and it were against
his honor to break his promise; as it is written, I will not give my glory to
another. Moreover, this doctrine may be declared and illustrated by
comparison, thus. If honest men keep their promise, much more God, whose
fidelity and truth is infinite: and lastly this may be proved by just and long
experience: for it was never known in any age, but what promises God
mercifully made, he did faithfully keep; no one instant to be given to the
contrary, thorough the whole book of God.


Tim. Yet many temporal blessings have been promised the A doubt.
righteous, which they never enjoyed?


Sil. It is true; but these promises were made with condition A solution.
of obedience, and exception of the cross; therefore if these promises were not
performed, it was because their disobedience drew chastisement on them, or for
that God saw it fitter for them to be exercised with afflictions, prosperity
being not good for them. Psalm. 34. 10. and 119. It is good for me that I was
troubled?


Tim. Yet the Jews were Abraham's seed, notwithstanding A 2. doubt.
the promise of saving them was not true Israelite, and that is sufficient to
discharge God, as shall be seen afterward.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point of doctrine?


Silas. It she was unbelief to be a great sin, because Uses.
it spoils God of his truth and makes him a liar. Secondly, it affoordes
matter of strong comfort to such as after their calling are tempted to doubt of
their salvation; for it cannot be that they which believe should ever perish,
God having spoken it that they shall be saved, and his promise cannot fall,
John 3. 17. 18. Thirdly, it encourages the godly, firmly to rest on Gods
promises; for he cannot deceive them, they be not yea and nay, but yea and
Amen.


Tim. What is the second part of Paul's answer to the first objection?


Silas. By distinguishing of Israelites into true and false.


Tim. What is meant here by Israel?


Silas. By Israel in the first place is meant all the elect and believers
amongst the Jews collectiuely, such as be Israelites in deed and truth, as
well as in name, as Nathanael Interpretation.
was, in John 1, 47. and such as Paul speaks of, Romans 2, 29. And by Israel in
the second place, is meant Jacob indiuidually, who was called Israel for his
wrestling with God, as ye would say a Prince of God, one which prevailed with
the mighty God.


Tim. What are we to learn from this partition or division of the Israelites?


Sil. That ever from the beginning, there have been two sorts of men in the
Church of God, both good and bad, true and false Israelites. This Doctrine may
be proved Doctrine.
first by plain Scripture, distinguishing the visible Reasons.
Church, into the children of the flesh and of the Spirit, Romans 9, 7.
Secondly, by examples, as Isaac and Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, David and Saul.
Thirdly, by comparing the Church to a net, Math. 13. to a field, Math. 13. to
a Barn, Math. 3. Lastly, by reason; because all that be within the Church be
not elect, therefore all cannot be believers: there be many in the Church, who
be not of the Church, 1 John 2, 19.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas It confuteth them that hold the godly alone to Uses.
be members of the visible Church. Secondly, it reproues such as forsake the
visible Church, for the wickedness of them that live in it, and do in that
regard condemn it for no Church. Thirdly, it warnes all men not to content
themselves with this, that they live in the Church; for so false Israelites
do, so Hypocrites and wicked men do. Lastly, it exhorts us never to give rest
to our souls, till we become true Israelites, true members of the visible
Church: for to such and to none other, the promises of grace and life by
Christ, be efficacious and fruitful.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 7, 8, 9. Neither are they all Children, because they are the seed of
Abraham, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called: That is, they which are the
children of the flesh, are not the Children of God, but the Children of the
promise are counted for the seed. For this is the word of promise: In this same
time will I come, and Sarah shall have a Son?


Tim. What is the purpose of this Text?


Silas. To prove the former distinction of Israelites, Scope.
in verse 6, that not all that come of Israel or Jacob, according to carnal
birth, are true Israelites or the true children of God. This is proved first
by an instaunce or example in Abraham's Family, where in the true seed are
restrained unto Isaac, according to the oracle of GOD, affirming that the seed
should be called in Isaac, Genesis 21, 12. The argument is this; Ismael was borne
of Abraham as well as Isaac, yet not both of them, but Isaac only Method.
was the true seed and son of Abraham: therefore all are not Abraham's seed,
which come of him by natural generation.


Tim. But if Ismael were Abraham's son, then must he be his seed. For what
difference is there between son and seed in Scripture phrase?


Silas. True, Ismael was the child and son of Abraham, that is, a child of
the flesh; but Isaac was the child of the promise, therefore he only was the
Child of God, and the true seed of Abraham.


Tim. How may it appear, that Isaac only was the child Interpretation.
of the promise, or borne to Abraham, by virtue of Gods promise?


Silas. By authority of Scripture verse 9. This is a word of promise.


Tim. What other proof is brought to prove this distinction of Abraham's seed?


Silas. A new example out of Isaaks family, for both Jacob and Esau were borne
of the same Parents ( Isaac, and of Rebecca) and at one birth; yet Jacob only
was loved, and Esau was not loved, and that before they had done good or evil.
The cause of this difference, is onelle the free election of God (as is proved
by Scripture, Mal. 1, 2. Genesis 25, 23.) not birth, nor blood, nor works present
Sum.
or foreseen. The sum hereof is thus much, that although the promises were
made to such as come of Abraham and be indefinitly offered to all his seed, yet
they take effect but in the elect, to whom they are contracted by God.


Tim. What instruction are we to learn from this seventh Verse?


Silas. That Gods promises are not tied unto any carnal Doctrine.
prerogatives and dignities. The birth of Ismael was as good as Isaaks, both
being of Abraham; and yet the promise of salvation was made to Isaac only: if
carnal Reason.
birth had been the cause of salvation and receiving Christ, then none yfsuing
from Abraham had perished.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point? Use.



Silas. It warns us not to be secure nor presume, because we are borne of
Christian parents.


Tim. What other doctrine out of this seventh verse?


Silas. That Gods visible Church is a mixed company, 2. Doctrine.
consisting of elect and Reprobates, whereof in the former Dialogue.


Tim. Now to the eight verse, and tell us what is meant by the Children of the
flesh, and by the Children of the promise?


Silas. By Children of the flesh is meant such as be born Interpretation.
by force of nature, according to the ordinary course of generation; and by
(Children of the promise) we are to understand such as are borne not by
strength of nature, but of Gods promise, contrary to the course of nature, or
unto whom the promise is appointed by election. For the word and promise of
God, framed Isaac in the womb of Sarah, being barren and unfit for conception.


Tim. But seeing Ismael came out of Abraham's loins as A doubt.
well as Isaac, which should not Isaac be the child of flesh as well as Ismael?


Silas. Because Abraham begat Isaac of Sarah, being A solution.
then both aged and barren, according to that which was As Sarahs womb being
barren, was not cause of procreation, so water in Baptism, is a thing cold and
dry, unable to regenerate.
promised [ Sarah shall have a Son.] Where Paul would generally show, that
all such are the children of God, to whom the promise of life is contracted by
the purpose of God.


Tim. What instruct on have we from hence?


Sil. That God who is the author of Nature, is not tied to the order of nature:
the reason is, because God being most free, may give Children to whom he will,
although Doctrine.
there be no natural power in them to bring Reason.
forth.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this truth? Use.



Sil. It teaches, that the power of God the creator, is above all power.
Secondly, that what God purposes and will have done, there is no impediment
can hinder it. Thirdly, that we must believe God under hope, above hope, that
is, when in respect of humane means and second causes, we have cause to
despair, yet then we are bound to trust God upon his word, as Abraham did in
this matter of a child, when there was no possibility in nature, nor
probability in reason.


Tim. What other instruction arises from this verse?


Silas. That all which are the sons of believing parents, 2. Doctrine.
are not the sons of God. The reason is, because the elect which be the
children of the promise, having Reason.
it applied to them by Faith, they only be Gods Children. Secondly, because
the Church has in it many hypocrites which seem to be that which they are not.


Tim. What use is to be made of this?


Sil. It admonishes us, that as we covet to be, and to Use.
be accounted Gods children, we must endeavor hard to believe the promises of
grace: because though the promises be universally propounded to all the
members of the visible Church, yet they do take effect peculiarly in the
faithful alone, who have the power to believe in Christ, which is the
condition of the promise.


Tim. What does follow hereupon?


Tim. First, that it is most necessary therefore to strive to get a lively
faith, seeing the promises are ratified and made effectual to none, but to
such alone as be elect, and have the guist of faith to receive Christ, which is
the substance of the promise. Secondly, though many which live in the Church,
never enjoy the things promised, yet that happens by their own default, God
still remaining true, because he fulfils his word in the elect ones, whom
the promises do specially concern, being of God applied to them, and to every
one of them, of his free mercy and goodness.


Tim. What instruction arises from the ninth verse?


Silas. That the Scriptures have force to prove every truth that pertaines to
salvation. Secondly, that children are the gift and blessing of God, which
should teach such as lack childeren, to wait upon God for them, who gives
them to whom he will, and when he will. Also such as have children, it should
provoke them unto thankfulness for this blessing.


Tim. What are we generally to learn from the next example of Jacob and Esan,
in verse 10. 11?


Silas. That the position of the stars at our birth, does Oracles of Apollo
at Delphos were given by the de rection of the stars, and what more false or
doubt full.
not over rule either our manners or our death; for beside that man was made
ruler of them, and not they of him, these two brethren were borne together, yet
were of contrary qualities and had contrary ends. This reproues nativity
casters, and star gazers, whose science and practice even all divining and
Astrologicall predictions touching future events which be contingent, are in
sundry texts of scriptures either forbid, or derided, or threatened, and that
very severely, yea and the seekers unto them. See Leuit. 20. 6. Deuteronomy. 18. 9.
10. 11. 12. Esaias 41. 22. and 44, 25. and 47. 18. Iere. 29. 8. Iere. 10. 2. Also
by experience there is found no certainty in their science.


DIAL. V.
Verse 10. Neither he only felt this, but also Rebecka when she had conceived
by one, even by our father Isaac.


Tim. WHat is the purpose of this text?


Silas. To prove by a new example in Scope.
Isaacs family, that all be not true Israelites, and Abraham's seed which be
so counted, but the elect only: and therefore sithence God performs his
promises to them which be elect, he cannot be said to fail of his word,
though many Israelites which were Abraham's children after the flesh, do loose
salvation.


Tim. What is the sum of this text?


Silas. That the promise of grace and salvation was restrained Sum.
unto Jacob by election only before he was born, not by his birth nor by his
works; for then Esau should have obtained the blessing promised (who came of
the same Parents) and yet was rejected and hated of GOD: therefore all which
carnally come of Abraham, be not the children of the promise.


Tim. How does Paul knit this example to the former?


Silas. By a gradation, as a thing greater and stronger Coherence.
to prove his purpose, that the promise of grace and salvation does not
indifferently and equally pertain unto all the posterity of Abraham, but to
such of them only as were elect. For the Jews might object that Ismael was
rejected because he was borne of a bondwoman (to wit, Agar;) whereas no such
thing could be alleged in this example of Jacob and Esau, who both came of
Isaac, Abraham's lawful Son, and of Rebecka at one time and by one birth, yea
and Esau was the elder of the twain: so as this example fits the Apostle much
better, to she we that the prerogative of carnal birth, is not the cause of
receiving the promise.


Tim. Yea but the Jews might allege that Esau being a Method.
profane man, and behauing himself ill, was therefore rejected: whereas Jacob
was loved and had the effect of the promise because he was a good man and did
well.


Sil. The Apostle meets with this objection, in saying that Gods purpose was
declared touching them both, ere ever they were borne; and therefore their
present good or evil works (for they had done none when God had uttered his
counsel of them,) could not move God to love the one, and hate the other.


Tim. Yet it may be said that God decreed of them both, for the foreseen
works of them both.


Silas. Paul denies this, saying it was not of works, and affirms the quite
contrary, that the purpose of saving Jacob, and of refusing Esau, came of his
free election, whereby of his love he chused the one, and not the other. Thus
whereas the Jews stood much upon the privilege of their birth and their
works, Paul rejects them both as no causes of Gods promises, which are
applied and take place by the decree of Gods election. The mystery whereof,
upon this occasion he begins to open both particularly by example, and
generally by testimony of Scripture, verse 15, 16. and in the rest of the
Chapter.


Tim. What instructions are to be gathered from this Text thus unfolded?


Silas. That faith nor good works, neither present or Doctrine.
foreseen, are any cause why God electeth any unto salvation. And
contrariwise, infidelity and badde works, whether present or foreseen, do
not move God to refuse any man and cast him off from having any part in
Christ, and the promises by him. The reason is, faith and Reason.
good works do proceed from election, therefore cannot be the cause thereof;
for one thing cannot be the cause and effect in respect of another. Now that
faith and works be effects, see Acts 13, 48. Titus, 1, 1. Ephe. 1, 4. No man
has any good but what God purposed from everlasting to put into him. Secondly,
Gods election depends upon his will only, verse 15. therefore not upon
foreseen faith and works. Thirdly, infidelity foreseen and bad works, were
not the cause that men were refused, because all sinning in Adam, God could see
in whole mankind no other thing but unbelief and concupiscence, which
hereditarily flowed from Adam upon all his race; and so all had been rejected
for sin foreseen if any were cast out.


Tim. But if wicked men be destroyed for unbelief and bad works, then God
decreed to destroy them in respect of these.


Sil. It is true, so he did, but he refused and did not choose them, only
because he would not choose them, without all respect to their ill qualities
and works. It is otherwise with the elect, whom God did appoint in his eternal
decree unto salvation, not in respect of their works, but in and for Christ;
yet so as he purposed in time to call, to justify and to sanctify them,
ordaining to these things, not for these things.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It reproues such as tie Gods predestination to Use.
men's merits, whereas it is independent and without all relation, to the
worthiness and unworthiness of men. Secondly, it moves the believers to
thank God for their free election, and to ascribe all to grace: because free
election is not only in it self a great mercy, but it is the spring of all
other mercies, both earthly and heavenly whatsoever. For sinners believe, and
receive the holy Ghost, and are borne anew, and blessed with repentance and
good works, because they are Gods chosen and elect ones.


DIAL. VI.
Verse 11. For ere the children were borne, and when they had neither done good
nor evil, (that the purpose of God might remain according to election, not by
works, but by him that calls.)


Tim. What is the drift of these words?


Silas. To prove that God cannot be charged Scope.
with failing of his word, so long as he keeps it with the elect.


Tim. What is the meaning and substance of these words?


Silas. That the salvation of believers, depends not Sum.
at all on our selves, but is all wholly to be ascribed to the election of God.
Whereas all men are alike by creation and nature, and yet some believe, do
good works and are saved, others believe not, but live wickedly and do
perish, the cause of this difference is not in nobility of birth and blood, or
dignity of works (as the example of Esau and Jacob shows) but in the
election of God choosing some to life according to his will, and refusing
others, because he would not choose them. Summarily, that which puts the
difference between one man and another, all men being alike, is Gods eternal
election before all worlds. Whence it is, that some are not called to Christ,
and some be, and of those which be called, some believe being elect, and some
do not believe, being not elect. Election being the fountain of all our weal,
therefore it would be taught distinctly, and well understood, for it is a
fundamental doctrine, revealed in the Scripture.


Tim. From whence is this word Election taken?


Silas. From the manners and affairs of men, who will Notation of the word.
have that to be firm, and to continue, which they have by election chosen,
and upon good advice (...). Whereas they are wont to alter such things which
they rashly appointed, but hold fast what by good election they have purposed:
so are we to think of God, of whom the Scripture speaks after the manner of
men, for our infirmity sake, noting to us in this word, the stablenesse of his
decree.


Tim. How manifold is Election?


Silas. Twofold, one humane whereby men choose who^ Division of the thing.
and what they like above others. And another divine, whereby God chooses what
and whom he loves.


Tim. How manifold is Gods election?


Silas. Twofold also, one is to an office, as Judas was elected to an
Apostleship. The second is to grace and glory, as Peter and Paul were elected.
I have not chosen you all, one is a Devil, yet Judas was chosen one of the
twelve.


Tim. But is there any such thing as election, or be there any such persons as
be elect?


Sil. Yea there be, because holy Scripture mentions both in this and sundry
other places, as Tit, 1, 1. Ephe. 1, 4. Romans 11, 5. 2. John, 1. 1. These. 1, 4.
2. These. 3, 13. and elsewhere mention is made of elect Angels and men.


Tim. Seeing there is an election, tell us what it is?


Silas. It is an eternal decree of God, purposing out of lost mankind, some
persons to be saved by faith in Definition. What election is.
Christ, to the praise of God; and not choosing others but refusing them and
appointing them to wrath. Herewith agrees Augustine, saying; Predestination is
a purpose in God, to have mercy on some for Christ; and reprobation is the
purpose not to have mercy.


Tim. How do ye prove that election is eternal?


Silas. Because it is written, God loved Jacob ere he 1. Election eternal.
was borne, Romans 9, 11. Also Paul says so expressly, Ephe. 1, 4. before the
foundation of the world was laid. The word predestination and foreknowledge,
proves it, for they note a precedent eternal counsel.


Tim. Then they err which think election to be all one with calling.


Silas. They do so: for calling is a fruit of election, and is done in time
after we are borne, but election is before all time, and is the cause of our
calling, as Chapter, 8, 30.


Tim. Also if some only be chosen, then they are deceived 2. Particular.
which will have all to be chosen of God.


Sil. True: First, then should all believe and be saved, because God changes
not. Secondly, because where all be chosen, there is no election, which is a
choosing of some out of many. Thirdly, we have examples of Reprobates, as Caine,
Esau, Judas, etc.


Tim. Is there then a decree of reprobation as well as of election?


Silas. There is so: for election is not the choosing and 3. Election in ferreth
reprobation.
taking of all, (as appears by Gideon, Judges, 7, 7. and Deuteronomy. 7, 6.) but a
taking of some, with a forsaking of others, Secondly, Scripture speaks of
appointment to wrath, 1. These. 5, 9. and of an ordination to disobedience, 1.
Pet. 2, 7. and to damnation, Jude, 4. Thirdly, experience teaches this,
because many unbelievers and wicked men have been and be in the world; which
shows that many be reprobates and refused, from whence it comes, that they
cannot have faith and godliness, John 10, 26. They believe not, because they
be not my Sheep. Propositu^ dei ad uersu vni genus humanum sese extendit
inquit. I utherus.
(yet the proper cause of all misery is sin, which sticks in man's nature,
even his Original infection, Romans 5.) Paul speaks here of the whole purpose
of God, as it contains both election and reprobation, as the two examples
prove, and verse 15. Whom he will be hardens. This makes against Huberus, who
is for universality of elect, and Stapleton, who restrains this place to the
elect. Also it appears that some be reprobated, because elect and reprobates
be opposed as contrary, in Esaias 41, 9. Lastly, God has made Vessels some to
mercy and honor, and some to wrath and dishonor, Romans 9. And finally, our
experience tells and teaches this, whilst daily we see some called and
altered, others abide in their sin.


Tim. The decree of Election and reprobation, whether has In massa pura aut
corrupta.
it respect to the lump of man pure or corrupt, that is, were men chosen and
refused as they stood upright in Adam, or as they are corrupt in him? In which
estate of these twain did GOD consider them when he elected some?


Silas. As they are corrupt by Adams fall, so Gods decree In massa corrupta was
election made.
of election and reprobation respects them; that is, to declare it more
distinctly, God purposed to glorifye himself by mankind, Prou. 16, 4. God
made all things for himself, Romans 11. God did purpose to create all righteous
in Adam, and to suffer him to fall for causes known to himself: and of men
being thus fallen, he purposed to save some by Christ, these be chosen: and not
others; Reasons.
these be Reprobates: For such as we are when God justifies us, such he
decreed to justify and choose: but at our justification, we are ungodly and
enemies, Romans 4, 4, 5, 8, 9. therefore such he chose, and decreed to justify.
Secondly, Christ the remedy, must needs in order of causes be purposed to be
given to such as were fallen: for man in his pure estate needed not Christ,
therefore they were not then chosen in Christ. Augustine says, that God of the
same lost man originally, as a Potter made one vessel to honor, and another
to dishonor.


Tim. What is the foundation and ground of election?


Silas. Christ Jesus, into whom he purposed to ingrast us, as members into an
head whom he purposed to save: see Ephe. 1. 4. The reason hereof is, because
we are chosen with respect of Christ's merits, as the material cause or
mean whereby all elect ones were to be saved.


Tim. What cause moved God to elect some and not others?


Silas. The cause is in himself, his own purpose and will, calling us to
himself of his mere purpose and good pleasure. Ephe. 1. 5. John 3. 18. Not
works past, for men are chosen from everlasting; nor works present, for Jacob
was loved and chosen ere he was borne; not works foreseen, for men were all
corrupt in Adam: and not by works, which in none are good by nature, but evil
in all Oracles is of the purpose of God, and the good plea sure of him who
calls. Origin.
(contrary to Palagians;) not foreseen faith, for it is given according to
election, whereof it is a fruit, and then we had chosen God and not he us:
yea, nor Christ is not the impulsive or moving cause: for the love of God
moved him to give his Son. And finally, not our worthiness or unworthiness,
for by natural corruption we are all alike unworthy, for Jacob and Esau were
equal in this.


Tim. Give us some reasons to prove that nothing in man could move God to choose
him.


Silas. First, then election should not remain firm by him which calls, but
depend upon some good thing in our selves, be it faith or works, that the
purpose of GOD might remain firm by merits; which is directly against the
text here. Secondly, then we should have some good thing in us which God gives
not. Thirdly, then grace should not be the high and sovereign cause of all
good, if there were something in us before it, as a moving cause. Fourthly,
election is derived from grace, and not from ought in us, Romans 11. 6. Fifthly,
all good things come after the grace of election, as effects and fruits of it,
Ephe. 1, 4. Sixthly, election is referred to the will and mercy of God in this
Chapter, verse 16, Seauenthly, God has as much right over men, as a Potter
over his pots, which for his will sake, he makes noble or base.

Eighthly, Paul saw no other cause of election but the will of God, and it is
dangerous to assign that to be a cause of election which Paul purposely
entreating of this matter saw not; this is to make our selves wise, and him
blockish, nay our selves wiser then the Holy Ghost. Ninthly, if the cause of
election were works or faith, or unbelief cause reprobation, what need he
say, Oh the Election com meth from the will of the Elector, not from any thing
in the elected.
depth, or object, Is their iniquity with God? and therefore it necessarily
follows, that election is most free and absolute, without any dependence upon
them. Yet God did not choose us to the end without respect to the means, for
his decree concerns both means and the end. This is sufficient to stop the
clamours of the Lutherans.


Tim. Do ye think so of reprobation, that it is free also without dependence
on infidelity or ill works foreseen?


Silas. In that some are not chosen to life, it is without Reprobation
privative and positive.
all respect of their unbelief, as a moving cause; but in that they are not
only refused, but also appointed unto destruction, this is not without
reference to infidelity and sin, which as it is the proper cause of
damnation, so it moved God to ordain to destruction, but not to refuse and
cast out from salvation: for this was done to Esau ere he had done evil.
Secondly, it is written, God hardneth whom he will; his will then is the high
and first cause why men are not saved. Thirdly, God as a Potter may We ought to
be content with this that Gods will is the only cause of election. Phocius.
make vessels to ignominy for his wills sake. Fourthly, as we were corrupt in
Adam, God could see nothing in any man, save unbelief and sin. And therefore
if these had moved him not to choose, all had been reprobated, then Paul also
should have said that the purpose might remain according to merit. Lastly,
there is no unrighteousness to cast off and refuse for sin, all will
confess this to be just.


Tim. What is the end or final cause of election? 7. end of elec tion Gods
glory.



Sil. The utmost end is the praise of his free grace, Ephesians. 1. 5. hence elect
are called vessels of mercy, Rom, 9, 23. The nerest cause is man's salvation, to
attain eternal life; and the final cause of reprobation, is the praise of his
justice, and the destruction of sinners.


Tim. What be the effects of election? 8. effects of election.



Silas. Two: First, grace in this life, as redemption by Christ, vocation,
faith, justification, adoption, sanctification, repentance, good works,
perseverance in grace. Secondly, unspeakable and endless glory in heaven.


Tim. Are men and women elected to both these?


Sil. They be so: for first, Jacob and Isaac were chosen to the grace of the
promise, verse 8. but this comprehends al. Secondly, it were absurd to separate
the means from the end, or end from the means. Thirdly, Scripture speaks
thus, Acts 13, 48. So many as were ordained to life believed. Fourthly, hec
speaks of election, which is a preparation of the Vessel of mercy to
glory, and which is joined with love, which is a willing of eternal life to
men, and all things which bring thither.


Tim. What use of this point? 9. election un changeeble.



Silas It confuteth the Papists, which say it is to grace, and not to glory;
this they attribute to man's merits. Secondly, it reprooues such as think
themselves elect to life, they wanting notwithstanding the means of effectual
calling and good life. Thirdly, it comforts such as have the means; that they
are sure they be elected to the end, for means and end be linked together.


Ti. May they perish who^ God has chosen and purposed to save?


Sil. No they cannot, for the purpose remains firm. Secondly, God is
unchangeable, and his love is so too. Thirdly, then God should not be
Almighty, if he were not able to save such as he was once willing to save.
Fourthly, there would be no sound comfort to the godly, except this foundation
of God remains sure, God knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2, 19.


Tim. May such as be elect know themselves to be such? 10. election known.



Silas. They may know it by their calling; therefore is Rom: 9, 23, 24
election here joined with calling, and before Romans 8, 28, 30, because the
counsel of election, being hid before in the counsel of God, is manifested in
our calling.


Tim. What should this teach us?


Silas First, that such as have but an outward calling by the Gospel, ought
to hope well of their own election, that it comes of his purpose to save
them by says. Secondly, because many are called which be not chosen, it should
stir up all sorts of Christians to examine their own hearts, whether they
have obeyed their Calling, having their hearts changed from unbelief and love
of sin, to faith, and love, and practice of righteousness. Thirdly, let such
as yet feel not this calling, not despair, for who knows what may be
tomorrow? God calls and turns at all hours, Mat. 20, 1, 2. Example in
Paul, and the thief, etc.


Tim. What are we to think of the election of others?


Silas. First, let every man be most careful of his own, to assure it to
himself by graces of the Spirit, 2 Pet. 5, 6, 7. Secondly, in charity we are
to hope well of all which hear the word, and outwardly obey it, 1 Thessalonians. 1, 6.
Leave to God the judgment of certainty and the searching of hearts.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 12, 13. It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, as it
is written, I have loved Jacob and hated Esau.


Tim. What is the end and scope of these words?


Silas. To declare that the difference between one man and another touching
grace and eternal life depends only upon Gods purpose and election, and not
upon our worthiness or unworthiness. This is declared by two Oracles of God
or testimonies of Scripture. The first is taken out of Genes. 25, 23. The
latter is taken out of Mal. 1, 2.


Tim. What is the meaning of the former place of Genesis?


Sil. That Jacob the younger brother should be Lord, and Esau the elder should
serve him.


Tim. This difference might come by chance, or by their own deserts?


Silas. Not so, for first it was spoken ere they had done good or evil.
Secondly, by another place of Malachy it is showed, that Jacobs dominion came
from Gods love, and Esaus bondage from his hatred; therefore it is Gods only
purpose which discerned between them, and consequently between all other men.


Tim. But do these words taken out of Genesis, fitly belong to prove Gods
eternal election, to be the sovereign cause of eternal salvation in heaven?


Silas. Yea they are so, or else Paul being led by the Spirit of God, would
not have alleged the^ so; for it were blasphemy against Christ, to say that
Paul did allege the Scriptures false or unfitly, being an Apostle of Christ,
who in his doctrine was privileged from erring, as all other Apostles were.


Tim. Tell us then how the lordship of Jacob, and servitude of Esau may prove
that for which it is cited: men may be poor and lie in prison, and be in
distress and serve others, and on the contrary, etc. yet from thence it will
not follow that the one be elect, and the other reprobate.


Sil. Though this place did speak of temporal dominion and servitude, yet
were it very well cited of Paul, because he means to prove this, that the
things which befall us in this life, whether good or evil, depend upon the
counsel of God merely, without any respect at all to our good or ill merits:
and this these words prove very well, because the Apostle tells us that God
said ere the children were borne, the elder should serve the younger; and
therefore no works in them, but Gods purpose made the one ruler over the other,
even against the law of nature, whereby the elder is to have dignity and
dominion.


Tim. But you do not think that this place is to be understood of temporal
bondage and rule, such as concerns this life only?


Silas. I do not, but believe rather that it has a spiritual meaning, and
speaks of things concerning eternal life and damnation. My reasons for this
be; first because Jacob in his own person never ruled over Esau, but rather
Esau ruled over him, as appears plainly by the story; yet this oracle did
concern the person, as it is manifest by the words of his Father when he
blessed him. Secondly, the birthright had the promise of grace and heavenly
inheritance annexed to it. Thirdly, Malachy shows, Chapter first, the rule of
Jacob to be joined with Gods love, being an effect of it, and the servitude of
Esau to come from his hatred, as a fruit of it; therefore this first testimony
must needs be understood of heavenly things, and not of earthly.


Tim. What instructions are we to learn from this first testimony thus
expounded?


Silas. First, it warnes all Christians very diligently to read the Scripture
after Paul's example, who gathered the deep mystery of Gods predestination out
of this oracle, being duly pondered, that it was spoken while the children
were in their mothers womb, and of such as came of the same parents by the
same conception, at the same time; and withal carefully comparing it with the
other place of Malachy, found that all must wholly be committed to the decree
and purpose of God, and to nothing that either was or should be in the children.


Tim. What profit of this instruction?


Silas. It reproues all careless and in considerate readers of the Scripture,
who read and mark not, and without conferring places, and prayer. Secondly,
it stirs up all to search the Scriptures, as Christ commands John 5. 39.
and the Bereans practiced, Acts 17. 11.


Tim. What other instruction from this first Oracle?


Silas. That examples serve well to make clear and plain the general
doctrines of Scripture; for here Paul as he proved the Hipothesis by the
Thesis, so now he illustrateth the Thesis by the Hipothesis. The reason of
this instruction is; first because by examples not only the understanding is
taught, but the senses are also affected and moved. Secondly, it is no small
help unto weak memories, to have the truth declared by examples, which are
much better marked and borne away, and stick longer by us then ought else,
save similitudes.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. It affords a direction unto Ministers how to proceed in teaching the
Gospel, by familiar examples added to general precepts. Secondly, an
admonition unto hearers, to have ready at hand such examples, by which the
doctrine of the Gospel is made plain and familiar.


Tim. What further instruction do these words minister unto us?


Silas. That not only our heavenly and everlasting condition, Doctrine.
but even our worldly estate here is governed by the decree of God; so as if
some be Kings, Princes, Magistrates, etc. If others be in (...), poverty, etc.
It is because Reasons.
God would so have it; for it is written, God does what soever he will. Psalm.
115. 2. And also if the fall of a (...), and the hair of our head be ordered
by the providence of God, much more greater matters. And lastly, it is written,
that God lifts up one, and puts down another, 1 Samuel 28. Dan. 3


Tim. Unto what use should this knowledge serve us?


Silas. To teach humility and thankfulness to such as Uses.
are in good case, because they have nothing but what they have received, and
they do receive, because God was purposed to give it them. Secondly, it
warns such as serve others, or be in any mean condition, to be content with
their estate, seeing it was Gods appointment, in whose will Will to good is not
of nature, it is Gods gift.
all creatures must rest without murmuring and resistance.


Tim. Is there any more instructions from this first Oracle?


Silas. Yea, here is a pregnant plain place, against the error of free will,
because there was no power in Jacob P. Martyr.
to move himself to accept grace offered, or in Esau to refuse it, for as much
as before their birth, grace was purposed to the one and not to the other.


Tim. What is the last instruction from hence?


Silas. That exceeding great is the efficacy of the election of God. For that
must be very effectual and mighty, which alters both the corruption of
nature, and the law of nature. First, it alters the corruption of nature,
because Jacob by nature was as sinful as Esau, yet the election of grace
called and reformed him, while Esau still did stick in his natural
uncleanness. Secondly, it crosses the law of nature, for by natures law the
younger should have served the elder: but by election God purposing it so, the
elder is made subject to the younger.


Tim. Now come to the second Oracle and tell us from 2. Oracle.
whence the words be taken?


Sil. Out of the Prophet Malachy, Chap. first, verse, 2, 3.


Tim. But Malachy speaks of temporal benefits, as the A doubt.
land of Canaan given to the Israelites, and of earthly afflictions, as the
Mount Seir being barren, to be given the Edomites, what is this touching
election unto eternal life?


Silas. It is true, he does so, but not only of such. The drift of the Prophet
is to reprove the unthankfulness of Solution.
the Jews toward God, whom they neither feared nor How this text does fit the
purpose of Paul.
honored, yet he loved them. Again, God preferred Jacob before his brother
Esau, for he gave to the posterity of Jacob a good land, and being for their
sins driven out, he promises to bring them back, but the barren and waste
country of the Edomites he would destroy, so as no man should build and restore
it. These be earthly things, by which no man can know love or hatred. Suppose
the Prophet spoke but of earthly things as a fruite-ful and barren land, yet
these falling to the posterity of Jacob and Esau, not by their merits, but
according to Gods will, it is sufficient for his scope. For the general drift
of the Apostle, is to show that whereas Jacob was prefered unto Esau were it
but in earthly things, the cause hereof, was not in their works, but in Gods
goodness and purpose.


Tim. But how may it be proved that in this testimony the A doubt.
Prophet comprehends things belonging to salvation?


Silas. First, because all Gods blessings had their foundation Solution.
in Christ, and in the covenant of grace through him. For if God gave the
Israelites Canaan as a more fruitful land, it was because he was merciful to
them; now certainly God is merciful to his people no otherwise then for
Christ's sake, in whom he is well pleased, Mat. 3, 17. Therefore upon the
promise of Christ, depends all external blessings given to the faithful
before the coming of Christ. Secondly, the possession of the land of Canaan
was not simply promised and given to Jacob and his posterity, but as a type,
figure, and sign of the heavenly inheritance, Heb, 11, 13, 14, 15. Therefore
does Paul prove the election of Jacob to eternal life by the enjoying of that
land, and the reprobation of Esau, by thrusting him and his posterity out of
it. Then these temporal things were effects and signs of Gods love and
hatred.


Tim. But that was spoken of the posterity of Jacob and Esau, how well does it
agree unto their persons?


Silas. It agrees unto both, though principally unto Jacob and Esau, as the
two Authors, yet so as that some of Esaus posterity might be saved, and of
Jacobs prosterity some might be damned, without any impeachment unto this
truth, namely; that God chooses unto salvation most freely whomsoever he
electeth.


Tim. Now interpret the words, and tell us what it is to love?


Sil. To love is to will unto one the greatest good, even eternal salvation,
and all things which bring thither.


Tim. What things do ye consider in Gods love?


Sil. First; purpose. Secondly, manifestation. As in our love to others, first
we wish them good whom we love, and then we do them good: as in the example
of Parents, friends, husbands, etc. So it is in God; he purposes all good to
his Children, choosing them from everlasting to be saved by Christ, and
afterward when they come into the world, he makes known his love by their
effectual calling, sanctifying and renewing their hearts, ingendering in them a
study of good works, strengthening them to an upright obedience, and
perseverance in grace, and finally glorifying them in heaven, Romans 8, 38, 39,
30. John 3, 17. Romans 5, 5.


Tim. But if we were always loved of God, how were we then his enemies?


Silas. We were enemies because of sin, which God extremely hates, but
loved because of his election and mercy. Though he out of his purpose decreed
the cheifest good to his children, yet while they stick and remain in their
natural corruption being out of Christ, they were children of wrath, enemies,
ungodly, etc. Ephe. 2, 1, 2, 3.


Tim. What is our instruction from hince?


Silas. That our salvation and all that appertains to it, Doctrine.
springs altogether from Gods eternal love. The reasons Reason.
hereof be, first because God being most free, would not fetch the cause of
our salvation from any other thing then from himself. Secondly, because there
can no higher, or former cause of man's good be given then Gods good pleasure.
Thirdly, to beat down the pride of man's heart that he might not glory in his
own merits, but render the whole praise of his salvation, and whatso ever
belongs thereto to the free love of God in Christ.


Tim. But though God were not moved to choose us for any works in our selves,
yet was he stirred thereunto for his sons sake.


Silas. Not so neither, but contrarily the love of God did move him both to
purpose and to give Christ for our Savior, and therefore could not be the
impulsive cause to Gods love, to the which it is subordinate, and not superior.
Indeed sinners having offended God, are (...) to favor for Christ's sake, (so
they believe and repents) but that is, because God out of his love had decreed
such a means of our recovery.


Tim. What use of this?


Silas. It teaches a difference between Gods love and our love, his ways and
our ways; for we are not bound to love or to choose any person but in respect
of his worth, even in our enemies we are to esteem Gods creation and adoption
in them, as grounds of our love: but with God there is no such matter, who
finds no cause of loving us out of himself, unless we speak of his actual
love which he bare us in time, and has reference to his own image restored in
us, Psalm. 11, 7. Secondly, hence we have a spur given us to quicken us to
thankfulness, when we consider that both for our selves and whatsoever good
thing we have, we are beholden to Gods eternal mercy for it. Thirdly, we must
endeavor in every blessing that we have, to see the love of God in it, since
his love is the fountain of all good, either temporal or spiritual that
comes unto us. Lastly, we are warned as God loved us freely, so to love him
freely, not for his benefit only, or fear of punishment, but merely for
himself: In loving God, studying to love God his infinite most sweet love,
grace, mercy, bounty, and all other things in him and for him.


Tim. In what meaning is hatred applied to God in Scripture?


Silas. In a threefold sense: First, to hate, it signifies not to love and
choose. Secondly, rustly to decree punishment and inflict it, Psalm. 5, 3.
Thirdly, to be displeased with things done against his law. God is not said to
hate Esau in this last sense, for he was hated of God before he had done any
evil; but in the two former meanings God hated him: for he did not elect him,
and he appointed to destroy him in regard of those sins which he should commit
after he was borne.


Tim. What is the instructions from hence?


Silas. That Gods hatred is the sovereign and chief cause of the damnation of
the wicked, their own sins either actual or original or both, being the
meritorious cause. Secondly, by the example of Esau we learn that all men are
not chosen, but that there are some reprobated as well as elected. Lastly, that
Gods promises though they be preached unto all the members of the visible
Church, yet they do take no place in those which are not elected.


DIAL. VIII.
Verse 14, 15. What then, is there iniquity with God? God forbid: for he says
to Moses, I will have mercy on whom. I will show mercy, and will have
compassion on him on whom I will have compassion.


Tim. What is the purpose and drift of this Text? Scope.



Silas. To clear God from al injustice in the matter of his eternal
predestination.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. First, an objection, verse 14. Secondly, an answer, Parts.
verse 15.


Tim. What is the objection, and whence does it arise?


Silas. The objection is, that there is iniquity with God, or that God is
unjust. It does arise from the pride of man's corrupt reason, rebelling against
the counsel of God.


Tim. What is it that offends humane reason in this Doctrine of free
predestination?


Silas. Two things especially. The first thing is, that God should hate some
and love others only, for his will sake, without respect to worthiness or
unworthiness: by which means the bad may be loved, and the good may be hated.
Secondly, reason cannot perceive how of them which are in like case, some
should be chosen, and others refused, or how they which are equal, should
unequally be dealt withal without injustice: as if a Judge of two malefactors,
should acquit one, and punish the other: or a King of two valiant Captains,
should prefer the one, and disgrace the other. Reason sees not this to be
just, and therefore thinks it to be unjust in God, to save some men and
punish others, whereas all were sinners, and lost alike.


Tim. Whence comes it that reason does thus cavil against Gods decree?


Sil. First, because this mystery (though it be not contrary to sound reason)
yet is above the reach of reason, the natural man perceives it not, even as a
sore eye cannot look against the brightness of the sun. Secondly, reason
dreameth God to be subject to humane laws, and to be able to do no more to his
creature then a Master to his Servant, or a King to his subject: who are held
to be unrighteous, if in distributing pains and rewards they do not observe a
proportion.


Tim. What are we to learn from this Objection?


Silas. First, that reason till it be reformed, is neither subject to God, nor
can be, Romans 8. therefore they must needs err, which in divine matters do
consult with humane reason; as he must needs loose his way which follows a
blind guide. Secondly we learn, that it is no new thing to bark and cavil
against the Doctrine of Gods predestination, charging it with injustice, and
him with respect of persons; if it be so now, it was so in the Apostles times.
Thirdly, we learn, that the foreknowledge of God touching men what they would
be, or not be, was no cause of Gods decree in his election or reprobation,
because then there had been no place for this objection to charge God with
injustice; for if he had chosen such persons only, whom he foresaw would be
just and righteous, and refused such as he foresaw would be wicked and
unbelievers, all men would have acknowledged this to have been as just
proceeding: but when it is said, that for his wills sake, such as were equal
are distinguished, some purposed to life, others reprobated to death, this unto
reason savors unrighteous.


Tim. How is this Objection answered?


Silas. First, by a negation or denial; [ God forbid.] Secondly, by a
confirmation of that denial by a testimony of Scripture ( For he says to
Moses, etc.)


Tim. What is the denial?


Silas. God forbid, as who should say let it never enter into the heart of any
man, to think than God should be unjust.


Tim. What is our instruction from this denial?


Silas. That it is our duty to acknowledge God to be righteous in all his
decrees, works and words, which he does in men, by men, or upon men, or any
other creature whatsoever: though the causes, reasons, and ends of his doings
may be hid from us, yet we are bound to adore them as holy and righteous. The
reasons (...) be: First, because it is written that God hates iniquity, Debilum
sinon reddis, habes quod gratuler's: sireddis, non habes quod querarn. Idem.
Psalm. 5, 4. and that he is righteous in all his ways. Secondly, he is the
judge of the world, and therefore cannot be unjust, Romans 3. 5: Genesis 25, 18.
Thirdly, the will of God is the (...) dause of all right (...): whatsoever he
will, it must be, because he wiss it; whereas in men things must first be just,
and then they are to will them. Lastly, if a Creditor having two debtors; may
forgive the one and cause the others to pay: (...) King (...) ohe (...) and
spare another, and yet (...), how much more God? who had not been (...), if
all had been appointed to death (as Augustine says) (...) being debtors to
God by man's fall; if he take not his debt of one, he has whereof to (...), and
if he (...) take it of another, he has not whereof to complain. Mercy is
showed without injustice, mercy is free, and flows from love undue, whereas
justice is to give every one his due.


Tim. What use of this (...)?


Silas. It serves to stop the mouths of such as belche out (...) against the
(...) and justice of almighty God. Secondly, it admonishes us to think of God
with (...) and humiliation in whatsoever he does, yea when we cannot reach the
reason of his purpose and actions. For it is against reason to measure Gods
counsels and actions by the rule of our baiardly reason.


Tim. How does Paul confirm his denial?


Silas. By a testimony of Scripture, the sum whereof is thus much, that God
has an absolute power over all men to choose whom he will, and whom he will
not choose to harden.


Tim. What are we to learn out of the preface before the testimony?


Silas. This, in that Paul appealeth to the Scriptures we learn, that they be
an all-sufficient judge to determine all controversies in religion, as they be
a perfect canon, both of faith and manners.


Tim. But the Scriptures ure dumb, and a Judge ought to speak?


Silas. The Scripture says to Moses, and therefore speaks, and therefore
fit to be a judge; for if a man's testament be of force (as if himself were
alive to speak) to decide all controversies which arise among his children,
ought we not much more to yield so much force to the Testament of God,
speaking therein to his children?


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. It resutes the Papists who set up the Church, or a general counsel,
or the Bishop of Rome teaching iudicially ex Cathedra, to be a competent
judge, refusing the Scripture and the Spirit of God speaking therein for
insufficient. Secondly, in all things questionable and doubtful, we must rest
and satisfy our selves with the sentence and testimony of the Scripture,
without all contradiction and caueling.


Tim. How does the Apostle fit this testimony to his purpose?


Silas. Some fetch the first occasion of Gods speaking these words to Moses,
from the act of God, in pardoning certain of them which committed Idolatry
with other; as if God should have said to him, Moses, (...) belongs not to
thee to know why some were punished and not others; For I will have mercy on
whom I will have mercy etc. but indeed many things go between this act of
God and the words of the text; also thus Paul's answer would not agree to this
objection: But the true occasion is this: upon Moses request to see Gods
glory, it was promised him that he should see his backe-parts, whereof these
words give a reason why God will show this favor to him, and to none other; For
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, etc. Now this the Apostle thus
fittes to his purpose; for where the equity and cause is common, there from a
singular example may be gathered a general doctrine, as here seeing no good
comes unto any man but by Gods mercy, therefore election is no less to be
ascribed the run to, then Gods revealing himself to Moses so familiarly.


Tim. What is here meant by [mercy and compassion?]


Silas. Mercy in the Hebrew comes from a word which signifies pity or free
favor; and compassion from a word which signifies to love, with such tender
affection as mothers do their children.


Tim. What may the often repeating of these words [mercy and compassion] teach
us?


Silas. First, that Gods mercy is most free and not due unto us, as if he
should say, In that I show mercy, I find no cause but in my mercy, and not in
any man's goodness or merit. Secondly, that it is arbitrary, proceeding
merely from his own good will, and not depending upon any man's goodness [
upon whom be will, etc.] Thirdly, that Gods mercy is unchangeable and most
constant, asin Pilats speech, John 19-22. What I have written, I have written;
that is, I will not change my writing. So this speech, I pity whom I pity,
is thus much, I will not break off the course of my mercy toward my child,
I am Jehovah, I change not. Fourthly, that Gods mercy is unmeasurable and
infinite, reaching it self not to some one, but to many and manifold good
things; as if he should say, to whom I show mercy in decree, I will she (...)
mercy in act; on whom I will have compassion in electing them, I will have
compassion in justifying, sanctifying, and glorifying: thus (...), do collect.
Hence is God in Scripture to armed the Father of (...), God of compassion, rich
in mercy. See Psalm. 103 11. And is said to give grace upon grace, lohn 1. 16.
also see Romans 8. 30.


Tim. What is the use that we are to make of the properties of Gods mercy?


Silas. First, it gives comfort to consciences afflicted with their sins, in
as much as we know that God will not deal with us after our (...), but after
his infinite mercies. Secondly, it serves to humble Gods children, in who (...)
no cause (...) him to she we them the (...); but must setch and draw it (...)
from himself, even from his own good will and pleasure. It is not a more vile
pride in a beggar, to attribute the alms given him to his own deserts, then
to ascribe the mercies of God unto our own (...), either in whole or in part.
Thirdly, it must move the godly unto true thankfulness, which consists in two
things, namely the confession and imitation of his mercies; to be merciful
unto others, as we have found him merciful unto us, according to Christ's
precept. Math. 5. good reason we should be merciful to our brethren, seeing
he expressed much mercy to his enemies, not in a few things but in many, not
for a while, but with continuance. Lastly, it confutes such as make foreseen
Augustine was of this opinion for faith, but retracted it.
faith and good works, or either of them, the moving cause of Gods (...) them,
as the Patagians, whereof one expounded these words thus; (on whom I will)
that is (says he) whom I shall know to be just and obedient to my precepts.


Tim. What doctrines (...) from this sentence (...) together?


Silas. These, first that election seeing it comes from mercy, does therefore
(...) misery; for mercy has relation unto misery; therefore God did not choose
men as they are in (...), but as in the (...) and fall. Also that so (...)
seen (...) could (...) God to choose or refuse, because then all had been
refused, seeing all were lost in Adam. Secondly we learn, that election is
not universal, seeing mercy is not universal, but pertains only to such
as God would show mercy to. Thirdly, that the mercy of God is most free Latct
discretionis ratio, sed non (...) ipsa discretio. Aug.
and absolute, depending upon nothing without himself, but wholly and
absolutely upon his own will: so as if question be, why was mercy taken on
Isaac and not on Ismael: The answer is, because he would. But why would he?
Hereof no reason is to be given.


Tim. What use are we to make hereof?


Silas. First, it admonishes us to ascribe the whole glory of our election and
salvation to the free favor and mercy of God. Secondly, to teach us to
exercise our mercy freely toward others, not upon any sinister respect, as for
gain and credit to our selves, but only for pity sake, that so we may
imitate our heavenly Father, as well in the manner of showing mercy, as in the
matter Note.
it self. Howsoever in the execution of Gods decree, there shall be place for
Justice, because it shall be rendered to every man according to his work, yet
in the decree it self, mercy bears (...) whole sway, choosing them on whom
he would have mercy, and leaving those to be hardened, on whom he would not
have mercy.


DIAL. IX.
Verse 16. Now then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy.


Tim. What does the Apostle (...) this text?


Silas. It is a conclusion of his answer, concerning This Text makes much
against them, which hold the beginning of our salvation to come from our
selves, August.
election (to wit) that God electing some whom he would, he is not therein
unjust, seeing he did it out of his free mercy, as he proved by a testimony of
Scripture in the former verse. So far off is God from being unjust, as in
choosing some, he shows (...) most good. Hence then the Apostle infers, that
seeing election comes wholly of mercy, and there is no Sum.
cause of Gods mercy but in himself. Therefore it depends not at all upon the
will and works of man [ Now then it is not in him, etc.]


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First, it remoueth that which is the falsely Parts.
supposed cause of man's election (to wit) our willing and running. Secondly, it
puts down the very true and sole cause, to wit, the mercy of God.


Tim. What is meant by [It?]


Silas Either election and Gods purpose is to be supplied Interpretation.
out of verse 11. or his love out of verse 13. which comes all to one; as also
to supply salvation, is the same in effect.


Tim. What is meant by [Hm?]


Silas. We may particularly understand it of Jacob mentioned before, but the
best is, generally to expound it of many, even Jacob and all others which be
chosen. For the Apostle now delivers a general doctrine touching the cause
of election. Therefore they are deceived which interpret this [ Him] of God,
referring to God all three following, willing, running, and showing mercy.


Tim. What means he by [Will?]


Silas. The thoughts, purposes, and endeauours of the mind, even whatsoever it
is that men do strive and attain unto, by all the inward faculties of their
mind and soul.


Tim. What must be understood by [Running?]


Silas. All man's outward actions, his words and deeds whatsoever. Not of Esaus
running to hunting, or Jacobs running to dress the Kid, for this is absurd,
but of all good works done by the elect.


Tim. What doctrine arises from these word thus opened?


Silas. That nothing that is in men, their thoughts, Doctrine.
words and deeds do not auail any thing to election or salvation, in such sort
as to be causes to move God to choose and save some, and not others: this comes
not by willing and running, out of our merits.


Tim. Must we understand this dectrine of unregenerate only or of the
faithful also?


Silas. Of all sorts of men both one and the other, it is not the desires and
deeds of any, whereupon their salvation and election depends, as upon (...)
motives, or efficient causes.


Tim. What is it then that you judge of the will and deeds of natural men?


Silas. Every man before his new birth, has in him the power of willing even
from his birth; the force and power of his will, is to will freely every thing
that is evil, and freely to will some good things: for the will cannot be
compelled, it wills freely whatsoever it wills. The good things which it
wills, are either natural and civil good things, that belong to this life,
as to eat, rest, take physic etc. or to resraine the outward (...) of vices,
and to do the outward actions of virtues; yea and in divine things a man has
power naturally to will that which is outwardly to be done; yet so as with
this power of willing, there comes the effectual power of God moving all
things, and prolpering that which men do well.


Tim. Why does the Apostle say it is not in man that wills or runs if it
be so?


Sil. He does not absolutely deny that men do will, or run, or forbid us simply
either to desire or endeavor or do any thing: but he teaches that God
eternally did see nothing that was to be naturally in man, to move him to
elect him to life, or that ought which a man does or wills before his new
birth, is acceptable to God, and auailable to save himself.


Tim. But are we not to judge otherwise of the works and wills of (...) persons?


Silas. No otherwise, as in this regard, (...) they should have any stroke in
their election to move God thereunto: indeed they please God through Christ,
because they are the fruits of his Spirit though imperfect, as also they be
the way wherein the godly walk toward heaven. But as they cannot merit our
salvation by the doing of them, so the foresight of them did not move God to
elect us, or yet to call, or justify, or adopt, and sanctify us, and save us.


Tim. But are not Gods children bound to will and to do good duties, to believe
and to repent?


Silas. True, they are, and without them none of years can be saved; but not
to ascribe their election unto them, because many Infants are chosen who never
could do good.


Tim. Show us the reason of this doctrine?


Silas. First, all the goodness which is in the work and will of man,
proceeds from Gods purpose and election, and therefore can be no cause of it,
1. Tim. 1. Ephe. 1. 4. Secondly, there is that contrariety in the matter of
election and salvation, between mercy and works, grace and merit, that if in
any sort it does depend upon works, it does in no sort come from grace and
mercy; as the opposition in this text shows, and the plain words of chap. 11.
verse 6.


Tim. What is the use hereof?


Silas. It confutes such as set up free will, and make the beginnings of their
salvation to come from themselves, which as it directly crosses the
Scriptures, which teach that in our will or understanding there is no
goodness, till GOD put it in; so it derogateth much from the glory of Gods
mercy, also too much exalts and puffs up flesh and blood. Secondly, though
this may not quench and kill our care and endeavor of well doing, yet it must
serve to humble us, even for our best desires and endeavors; for as much as
they do wholly spring from Gods mercy, and are of no value in the cause of
election and salvation.


Tim. What doctrine are we to learn from the second part of this text?


Silas. That Gods mercy is the whole and all-sufficient cause of man's election,
as also of all our willing and running well, yea and of our heavenly
inheritance.


Tim. If all must be committed to Gods mercy, what then, are we stocks and
stones, do we nothing?


Sil. Yea (...), the godly doc both will and work, but Nos volumus, sed Deus
qui dat been velle. August.
they are impelled thereunto by his Spirit, which they receive from his grace,
Gal. 4. 5. Romans 8. 15. Phil. 1, John. 15 without me ye can do nothing. God
preuenteth the unwilling, to make him willing (says Augustine) and follows
him being made willing, least he do will in vain.


Tim. Then it seems that our working, and Gods showing mercy, do together get
us to be saved: as God calls by the voice of the Minister, and by Parents
brings children into the world, and Magistrates rule through the help and
blessing of God; and he gives life by food, and light by the sun: so men are
saved by his mercies, and their own endeavors?


Silas. Indeed some have so taken these words of willing and running, as if
they alone by themselves were not Hoc appertissime contradicit Apostolo qui
tribuit Dco, quod demit voluntati
sufficient without Gods mercy, and so they part the matter of our salvation
between God and man, mercy and works, so as that we do, were nothing in
comparison of that which Gods mercy performs, yet were of some force; but it
may as well be said that mercy is not sufficient Totum Deo detur qui
voluntatem et (...) et adiuuat, bonam facit et conseruat.
without our willing and running. Secondly, mercy is here so set by the Apostle
against our will and courses, as that the setting up one of these, is the
putting down of the other. 3. It is the mercy of God that does enable men to
will and to do well, giving them faith and repentance, and perseverance in
these graces; so as mercy is all in all, it begins and finisheth our salvation,
What I am I am by the grace of God?


Tim. Why would God have all that belongs to our salvation referred to his
mercy?


Silas. First, that all might be free, as from grace of God not merit of men,
and he might have glory of all. Secondly, that such as would rejoice, might
rejoice, not in themselves, but rejoice only herein that they know God to be
merciful, praising him for putting into them good wills and power to do good
works, and finally for crowning his own gifts, and all of his mercy, Phil. 2,
13.


Tim. What is the use hereof?


Silas. It admonishes all Gods children to think of themselves and all that
they can do, most basely, and most highly of the rich mercies of God in
Christ, loving them, praising them, and studying to imitate them; also to
depend upon his mercy, for the beginning, proceeding, and end of their
salvation, and to abhor all conceit of injustice in God, in respect of his
eternal election: sithence all being lost in Adam, he might according to
justice have left all to themselves to be hardened in their sins, it being
his most merciful nature (and nothing else) which moved him to exempt some from
that common misery, that being freede from sin and death by Christ, they
might partake in his heavenly glory, to the glory of his grace.


DIAL. X.
Verse 17. For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, for this purpose have I stirred
thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared
throughout all the earth.


Tim. What is the Apostles drift in these words?


Silas. Having cleared God before of injustice Scope.
in respect of his electing some out of lost mankind, No reason why God did
this to Pharaoh rather then to another King. Chrysostom.
because he did it out of the prerogative of his absolute and most free
mercies, as Paul confirms by testimony of Scripture; so now he like-wise
proves by Scripture, that God is not unjust, in the matter of reprobation, out
of Exodus, 9, 16.


Tim. What argument does Paul take out of this Scripture to prove his purpose?


Silas. From a particular example of Pharaoh, whom Paul might by an example of
the Jew have confirmed his purpose, but wisely he did it by an heathenish king.
God did not choose, but reject very justly, as appears two ways: First, from
the quality of Pharaoh, being a man hardened by sin, noted in this word,
raised up, as Paul expounds it in the next verse: for seeing Pharaoh was
hardened and became obstinate before he was destroyed, therefore God could not
be unjust in appointing him unto destruction; for sinners do perish justly,
therefore God is not unjust when he does appoint them unto destruction.
Secondly, from the end which he propounds to himself of his own counsel,
namely, the declaration of his own power and justice, to the praise of his
name. Now that cannot be unjust which is done of God to so good an end, if
withal it be considered that Gods glory is the cheifest good thing, and that he
has an absolute right in all his creatures, to dispose of them as he thinks
best for his own glory.


Tim. But how fitly does Paul gather a general doctrine touching all
reprobates, from this one example?


Silas. Very fitly, because the cause and case of all reprobates is one and the
same, for none of them perish but in regard of their foregoing sin, and God
is glorified in the destruction of every one of them: therefore if God dealt
iustlye in reprobating Pharaoh upon these grounds, he is also just in the
reprobating and refusing all other appointed to damnation.


Tim. What are the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First a preface, and secondly a testimony of Scripture.


Tim. What is meant by Pharaoh?


Silas. It was a name common to the Kings of Egypt and signifies an auenger,
as afterward their Kings were called: And the Kings of Gezar, Abimelech, and
the Emperors of Rome, Caesar.


Tim. What is meant by [Scripture?]


Silas. Generally every thing that is written, but more especially the holy
writings of Moses, and yet more particularly the book of Exodus, and therein
this one sentence. And further by Scripture we may understand God speaking in
the Scripture, as appears by comparing this place with verse 25. as also by
reason, for the Scripture is the word of God.


Tim. What instruction does arise from hence?


Silas. That every clause and sentence of holy Scripture must be spoken of, and
heard and used with all religious reverence and firm belief. The reason
hereof is because the most glorious God is the author of it and has inspired
them, 2 Timothy 3, 16. 2 Pet. 1, 21.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Sil. It reprooues such as fail in excess of reverence to the Scriptures,
ascribing divine force to the Letters and Syllables pronounced, as if God had
enclosed his virtue in them, which is a mere enchantment and sorcery.
Secondly, such as fail in defect and want of reverence, receiving Gods words
as the word of a man, profanely denying authority and obedience to them.
Thirdly, it warnes us in the hearing of the word, to remember that we have to
do with God, whosoever be the Instruments to deliver this unto us, Acts 10, 33.


Tim. What other doctrine will arise from this Preface?


Silas. That the doctrine of reprobation, ought by the Doctrine.
Ministers of God to be taught unto the Church, but warily and with
circumspection, as the minds of the people be not estranged from God by the
rash handling of it. For the doctrine of reprobation, is a part of the holy
Reason.
Scripture, and is revealed therein, therefore it belongs to us, to take
knowledge of it, Deuteronomy. 29, 29. Also this doctrine is profitable and necessary
to be known: for it serves well to commend Gods mercy toward the elect, and
to increase their thankfulness, finee they know that he freely elected them
to life, (...) they were no less corrupt and miserable, then those whom he
refused. Also it teaches all men to judge and speak aright of God, to wit,
that he has absolute power over men to appoint them to what ends it pleases
him, without any unrighteousness at all.


Ti. Is there any other things to be collected out of this Preface?


Silas. Yea, two things: First, that not only the whole Bible, but every
particular sentence therein, is to be accounted the word of God. Lastly, it
confutes such papists as say, that the Scriptures be mute and dumb: for God
speaks in them, it is a speaking Judge. Let Christ judge (says Augustine)
and the Apostles with him, for in them Christ speaks.


Tim. What are we to learn out of the testimony, being the second part of the
Text?


Sil. Three things: First, that God is the author of reprobation. Secondly, by
what degrees and means that counsel is fulfilled. Thirdly, the utmost end of
this decree of God.


Tim. How is the first gathered from this Text?


Sil. Because it is said [I,] that is, I God have stirred thee up, also that
God hated Esau, verse 13. and that God prepares vessels to wrath, verse 22.
Add heereunto 1 Thessalonians. 5, 10.


Tim. What profit of this?


Sil. First, it confutes such as will not have reprobation depend upon the will
of God, but upon the works and will of men. Secondly, such as affirm that
there is no decree of reprobation at all.


Sil. But if God for his will sake reprobate men, is he not herein unjust?


Silas. No, because between the decree of his reprobation, and the execution
of it, there always goes the sin of the party, as the meritorious cause of
their destruction. Also God refuses for most holy ends: and lastly, his will
is the rule of righteousness.


Tim. What is meant by the stirring up of Pharaob?


Silas. It contains those degrees and means, by the which Gods counsel was
performed upon Pharaoh. The degrees be these: First, that he was created of God
just in Adam, but in him suffered to fall. Secondly, that God had advanced him
to the kingdom. Thirdly that amids the great plagues of Egypt, he preserved
him alive when others were destroyed, Exodus 9, 15. Fourthly, that GOD withdrew
grace from him that he could not profit by those wonderful plagues. Fifthly,
that by a secret but just judgment, he inclined his will to rebel against his
Justice, yet without infusing or putting into him any motion of sin, for God
tempts no man to evil, James 1. Sixthly, that for his former wickedness and
malice, he was delivered up to Satan, and his own lusts to be more obdurated;
which God did as a most just Judge, executing wrath for former sins.


Tim. What does all this concern the counsel of reprobation?


Sil. Very much, because all these are so many consequents which follow upon
the decree of reprobation, and therefore strongly prove it. For if God had
chosen him, he could not have continued in his natural blindness and
corruption, but must have had his heart mollified and changed, as Jacob and
Paul had.


Tim. What is the end of Gods decree of reprobation in Pharaoh and others?


Silas. The manifestation of his power in their just destruction to the praise
and honor of his name, that fierce and mighty Kings could not stand, but fell
before him, rebelling against him.


Tim. What use of this?


Silas. It serves to move us to honor God in all his As Pharaoh omitted
nothing which might be for his own destruction, so God left nothing undone
which might be for his correction, (...).
judgments and works whatsoever: withal, we may learn from this example,
that Gods invitation of sinners to repentance, by benefits or corrections is
not of efficacy, saving in the elect alone. For there lacked not bounty in
blessing, and lenity in forbearing and differring punishment, yet they being
not elect, it no whit auailed them to amendment.


DIAL. XI.
Verse 18. Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens.


Tim. WHat is the sum of this Text?


Silas. A conclusion of the Apostles answer, unto the objection of Gods
unrighteousness. He had proved by testimony of Scripture, that though of lost
mankind God choose whom he will, yet he is not unjust; upon this reason, that
in his election and reprobation, he uses his absolute right over his Creature,
which is, to show or not to show mercy as he will, this, he had proved by
two-folde Scripture: and the former reason he now includes in this Text.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: the first concerns the elect, the latter concerns the Reprobate.


Tim. What is meant by [hee?]


Silas. God himself: of whom in verse 16. God shows mercy, and verse 17.
That my power may be showed, etc.


Tim. What is meant by Mercy?


Silas. Both his decreed mercy, and his active mercy, Interpretation.
even the whole work of God, touching his election, calling, justifying,
sanctifying them; their perseverance in grace and glorifying: And all this is
according to his free and absolute will.


Tim. What is the doctrine of this first part?


Silas. That the cause of Gods mercy, touching the saving Doctrine.
of the elect, restes wholly in himself, even in his own good will and
pleasure. This appears by plain Reason.
testimony of Scripture: and first concerning election, we have Ephesians. 1, 4, 5.
where it is thus written, He predestined us according to the good pleasure of
his will. And secondly touching calling, Math. 11, 25, 26. Even so (O Father)
because so it pleased thee. 2 Timothy 1, 9. who has called us according to his
purpose and grace. Thirdly of Justification, Romans 3, 21. We are freely
justified by his grace. Fourthly, of Sanctification, James 1, 18. Of his own
will begat he us. And lastly of glorification, Romans 6, 23. Eternal life is the
gift of God. Finally, the whole work of man's salvation, depends wholly upon
the good will of God, as appears by Ephesians. 1, 11. He works all things
after the counsel of his will?


Tim. What use of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, it instructs us, that the mercy of God is arbitrarie, so as
he may show it or not show it, as he pleases. Also it teaches, that the
right that God has over men, is absolute and independent: so as if he will
show mercy to elect and call some which were as corrupt (as those which he
gives over to be hardened in sin,) as it may and does greatly commend his
goodness, so it does in no wise prove him to be unjust, because in mercy
which is undue there can be no injustice. Lastly, it teaches that our mercy
which we exercise toward men, must not respect their own deseruings and
merits, but be free, after the example of the Samaritane, Luke 11. The reason
hereof is, because we are commanded to be mercisull, as God is merciful,
Luke 6. 36. also the man Christ showed mercy freely, for he prayed for his
enemies, Luke 23. 34. So did Steven, Acts 7. also Paul, Romans 9. 1. 2. Yet this
lets not, but that we ought to deal kindly to such as have been kind to
us, and to pity them that have had mercy on us, so as it be for the Lords
sake, and not for our own sake.


Tim. Come now unto the second part of this text, and tell us what is meant by
haraning?


Silas. Here the consequent is put for the antecedent, hardening the
consequent of reprobation upon which it depends, and also for the means, by
which that decree is effected. That this is the meaning, is apparent by the
opposition of hardness to mercy, which plainly shows that the one word is
taken as largely as the other; that as mercy contaynes election, with all the
degrees and means by which the elect are brought to glory; so hardness contains
reprobation, and all the means by which the reprobate are brought to
destruction.


Tim. In what sense is it said here of [God] that he hardened Pharaoh?


Silas. Not by infusing of hardness nor yet by bare permission, not yet by his
long suffering and patience. But Pharaoh (...) libero arbitrio, Deus indurauit
Pharaonem (...). Aug.
two ways, partly by forsaking his creature withdrawing his grace, as it is
said, Indurat quos non emollit, and as the sun freezeth the water not by
adding coldness to it, but by keeping back his heat, so is God a deficient
cause of hardness, but not an efficient. Secondly, by his just judgment,
punishing former sins with hardness, which is a just thing with God, to
punish sin with sin: Satan hardens as a malicious author, man hardneth
himself as a voluntary instrument, God hardneth as a most righteous judge and
auenger.


Tim. What is the doctrine from henee?


Silas. That a hardened heart is a sign of a reprobate, which must not be
understood neither of natural hardness, which is common to elect and
reprobate; nor yet of actual hardness being felt, which may be and is in the
regenerate, as in the Apostles and in the godly Jews: but of habitual
hardness being total and final, which befalls none but castawayes, when it
is without feeling, and perpetual to the end of ones life.


Tim. What is the note to know this hardness which is peculiar to reprobates?


Silas. There be three special tokens of it; first, obstinate disobedience to
the word and warnings of GOD, when the will of God being known, is resisted
by disobedience, and not in one but in many things, and that constantly from
time to time. Secondly, senseless security when such disobedient sinners are
neither moved with the benefits nor correctio^s whereby they are called to
repe^ tance, nor yet allured by promises, nor terrified by threatenings, having
hearts like brawne, or an adamant and iron. Thirdly, desperate obstinacy, when
after all means used of God, by his word of justice and mercy, instead of
being better and better, sinners grow worse and worse, more careless to please
God and keep his commeandements, and more froward in their behavior toward
God and man.


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it affoords comfort to all soft and melting hearts, which by
the word and judgments of God, are moved to relent and turn from their
sins unto God, by true and serious repentance, such are no reprobates.
Secondly, it teaches the miserable condition of all such men as have stony and
brawny hearts, they be in a fearful condition, and had need to look to it
betimes. Thirdly, it admonishes all men to beware of and strive against
hardness of heart, whereunto the nearer they are, the nearer they are to
reprobation, and therefore let every man examine himself, and with all
diligence use al means to soften their own hearts. See Dialogue on Chap. 2.
verse 4, 5.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 19, 20, 21. Thou will then say unto me, why does he yet complain for
who has resisted his will? But o man who art thou which pleadest against God?
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus,
etc.?


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. A new objection against predestination, with an answer to it. The
first objection was touching Gods unfaithfulness, if he did reject the Jews
to whom he had promised to be their God. The second was of injustice, if he
should elect some and not other some, without respect of any worthiness or
unworthiness in themselves. Now in this our text they charge God with cruelty
and extreme rigor. For if God harden whom he will, and after punish them for
that hardness, this seems unto carnal reason to be cruelty. This objection
is fortified and backed by two reasons closely coucht in this text. The first is
this: It were cruelty in God to be revenged on that hardness which himself
wills, verse 19. But Pharaoh and all wicked men are hardened because God
will, (as before verse 18,) therefore he has no cause to be angry or to
punish, or if he do, it seems to man's reason to be all one, as if a man
should bind his servant, and after beat him because he did not his work, or
as if a Magistrate should bid a prisoner break the Iayle, and yet hang him
when he has done. The other reason is this: that God must be accounted
cruel, if he should punish that which men cannot resist and avoid: but the
omnipotent will of God whereby reprobates are hardened, cannot be resisted,
therefore the hardened without cruelty cannot be reprehended and punished.


Tim. What are we to learn for our instruction from this objection, or first
part of our Text?


Silas. That the will of God cannot be withstood and The will of God cannot be
resisted, because it is most mighty, yet it is by no means unjust, but most
upright. Amb. Origin.
made void. The reason hereof is, because God being himself almighty, there
is nothing to cross and hinder what he wills.


Tim. Yet Steven accuses the Jews, Acts, 7. that they resisted the will of
God, so do the Prophets blame the Jews of brason faces, iron sinnewes,
stiffe-neckt vntamenesse.


Silas. True: the will of God is daily resisted, to wit; his revealed will, his
will manifested in his word and works. But our text speaks of the secret
and hidden will of God. ( De voluntate been placiti, non signi,) as Schoolmen
write and distinguish.


Tim. What use is to be made of this instruction?


Silas. It affoords matter of singular comfort to all the godly, who being
assured by true faith and the fruits thereof, of the good will of God from
everlasting may surely resolve that do Satan, or sin, or the world what
they can against them, yet shall they never perish, (...) Gods will cannot be
resisted.


Tim. What other instruction are we to draw out of the 19. verse?


Silas. That man's reason corrupted, does draw or gather false conclusions out
of true propositions, an example here of we have in this text. For it is true
that God hardens whom he will, and that his will cannot be resisted, but
hereof it follows not that he may not justly complain of and punish
obstinate sinners, which set and willingly settle themselves in a course of
disobedience. Again, as it is true that we are freely justified by faith
alone, but hereof it will not follow that we need not do good works, as
Papists blindly and badly collect. Also because in some Churches the Ministry
or Leiturgy may be faulty, we ought not therefore to conclude that we may not
live in such Churches where such defections be not amended, as if any would
affirm a body to be no body, because it is a lame one, or an eye no eye
because there is a web and pin in it.


Tim. But what error is in the conclusion of this objection?


Silas. First, there is a falsity or error herein, that they put the secret
will of God for the cause of perishing unto the reprobate, whereas none of them
are destroyed but for the contempt of the known and manifest will of God.
Secondly, though there be a necessity that they be hardened, on whom God will
show no mercy, yet no reprobate is hardened against his own will; for they are
so far from avoiding the hardness of their own hearts, as that they rather
contract it by their own voluntary faults, as Pharaoh did, and as the
obstinate Jews did also, John 8, 44.


Tim. What use is to be made of this last instruction?


Sil. That we must diligently beware how we confer with man's unreformed
reason in the matter of Gods eternal predestination, because thereby we shall
be carried into infinite errors and blasphemies against God. Our duty
therefore is with meekness and reverence to stoop to that which God reucales
in the Scripture, admiring with Paul, Romans 11, 33. Or with Mary pondering, what
our dull minds cannot at first conceive, Luke, 2, 51.


Tim. Come we now to the answer of the Apostle to the former objection, and
tell us how he proceeds?


Silas. First, by his Apostolical authority he beats down the malepertnesse
of man in disputing with God, and this he performs by comparing the exceeding
infirmity of man the creature, with the high majesty of God his Creator. ( O
man who art thou that pleadst against God?)


Tim. What is meant here by pleading?


Silas. A saucy ouer-bolde questioning with God, to call him, his decrees, and
doings, unto our account or examination.


Tim. What is the instruction out of these words?


Silas. That it is a great impudency for any man to subject the deep
counselles of God to the blind, poor, and beggarly reason of man. This is
proved first by Deuteronomy. 29. 29. where it is written, that secret things belong to
God, and Proverbs, He that searches the glory, shall be confounded with the
majesty: also Esaias 6, 2. the Cherubins covering their faces before the throne
of God, teach us this modesty, that we should not pry into that which God will
have kept secret from us. This doctrine may be set forth by the comparison of
a weak eye unable to look on the sun in his beauty and strength; or of a
simple or ignorant Boore, presuming to sift and scan the important affairs of
Princes and States: even such madness is it in silly man, to reason and strive
against God, thinking to bring his actions and decrees under our controulement
and censure: as if all without our reach ought to be rejected.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this instruction?


Silas. First, it serves justly to reprove the audacious wickedness of such
men as are too busy to examine God and his ways; why he made the world no
sooner, what he did, and where he was before the world; why he made them
men and women; why he made some poor, and not all rich; why he would not
choose and save all; why he suffered Adam to fall, sithence he might have kept
him from sin, etc. Such persons little consider how easy a thing it is, for
that infinite majesty to confound these curious fools, with his very beck.
Secondly, the godly are here to be exhorted to bridle this wickedness in
themselves by a due meditation of Gods infinite greatness, compared with their
own most pitiful smalnesse, being in respect of him, not so much as a drop
of water in respect of the whole sea, or as a little dim candle to the light
of the sun. How small a portion of that incomprehensible wisdom do we see?
This therefore will be our wisdom to labor in all sincerity and humbly, to
know, believe, and do, that which we by his word shall perceive to belong to
us.


DIAL. XIII.
Verses 20, 21. Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou
made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay to make of the same
lump, one vessel to honor and another to dishonor?


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. The real answer of Paul to the thing objected, to wit; cruelty in
God, if for his very will sake, he should choose some to life, and harden
others. The former answer was personal, beating down the presumption of such
men as would call the works of God to account; now he satisfies the very
matter objected.


Tim. What is the sum of this real answer, which Paul makes to the thing it
self?


Silas. Thus much, that though God show mercy where he will, and show no mercy
where he will not, yet none may repine at him or accuse him of cruelty. The
cause here of is, the most high and absolute power that God has over his
creature, to dispose of it as pleases him, himself being the supreme cause of
all, and independent, all other things rather depending on his pleasure.


Tim. In what manner or form is this set down by the Apostle?


Silas. By a parable or similitude, wherein men are likened to a pot of clay,
and God to a Potter. The substance whereof is thus much; that as a pot may not
find fault with the Potter (howsoever he make it, because he has full power
over the clay, to make what he will with it;) so God has absolute power over
men to dispose of them as he likes, either to death or life, and therefore he
cannot be charged with cruelty, though he reject and cast off some for his
mere pleasure sake. This comparison our Apostle borrows from other places of
Scripture, as namely from Esaias, 45. 9. and Iere. 18. 1. 2, 3.


Tim. Does this comparison hold in all things, does God and man agree in every
thing, as does the Pot and the potter?


Silas. No, they differ in these things. First, the potter has matter (to wit)
clay prepared to his hands, God made man of nothing. Secondly, man has
understanding and will, the clay has not so much as any motion. Thirdly, it
is a greater matter to destroy a man, than a pot of clay. Similitudes (says
Chrysostom) are not of force touching all parts, for the^ many absurdities
would follow, it is sufficient to hold in that for which it is brought.


Tim. In what things does this similitude consist?


Silas. First, as sundry pots be made out of one lump, so all men are made out
of one mass, whether we consider men in the estate of their creation or
corruption, yet the Original and beginning of all men (as touching their
bodies. is all one and the same (to wit) clay or slime. Secondly the power and
right that God has over men, is as great as any potter can have over the pot,
yea, and much greater without comparison. Thirdly, the pot (if it could speak)
may not reason with the Potter, why was I made so and not so: neither may man
reason with God, why he made him thus or thus. Lastly, as the Potter of what
form soever the pot be made, takes nothing from it, so neither does God take
any thing from man, what end soever he appoint him unto. Man was beholden to
God for whatsoever he is or has, but man gave nothing to God.


Tim. To what scope and mark does this similitude tend?


Silas. Not only to check such as repine at Gods eternal decree of election
and reprobation, but to clear this decree from all suspicion of cruelty and
tyranny; because as his mercy is arbitrary, so his right in, and power over his
creatures, is absolute.


Tim. Now tell us what instruction we are to learn from this latter end of the
20. verse?


Silas. That it is not lawful for men to contend or strive with God about-any
thing, which he decrees before all times, or which he does in time.


Tim. How may this doctrine be fitly gathered from this text?


Silas. In this wise (by an argument a minori) if the pot must rest in the will
of the Potter, (without questioning or expostulating why it was made in this
base form, or to such a vile use) much more are men to be satisfied with the
will of their creator without repining or reasoning against it: if it be an
unworthy and unreasonable thing for the pot to question with his Former, much
more unmeet is it that man should question with his Maker.


Tim. What may be the reason of this doctrine?


Silas. First, because God himself being most just, his will is the highest
and most perfect rule of al righteousness; insomuch that whatsoever it be that
is once known to be willed of God, must without ali question and dispute be
held for most upright and just, and cannot be but a most grieuour sin to
quarrel with him, or to answer him again.


Tim. What use is to be made of this first doctrine?


Silas. First, it serves to stop the mouths of all such as cavil at the
doctrine of Gods most free predestination, whereas God expressly faith that he
shows mercy where he will, and shows not mercy where he will not: these
wicked men contend with God, and charge him to be cruel and tyranicall, when
they hear it taught out of Scripture, that for his mere will sake GOD does
reprobate some, forgetting themselves to be vnmatches with God, and pulling
upon themselves worthily that woe threatened to things formed which strive with
their Former. Esaias 54. 9. Secondly, from hence are reproved such as mislike
any of Gods works, as their own estate or condition of life, or of the
weather, or such like works of God; as they which suppose and stick not to
speak that it had bin better for them that they had been made rich, or of more
strength etc. what is this, but for the thing formed to pick quarrel or
prescribe laws to the maker. Thirdly, here is a warning unto all the children
of God, to hold themselves content in all things, with that which pleases
God, do it never so much exceed their reason, or cross their affections;
adoring with reverence and humility such judgments of his, as they are not
able to conceive the true causes; after the example of Job, chap. 1. and of
David, 2. Sam. 15. 23.


Tim. What other doctrine are we to gather out of the 21. ver?


Silas. That the power and right that God has over Esaias 45 (...).
men (as touching their final ends,) is absolute and vndependant, Psalm. 135. 6.
without any respect at all to any thing, or merit Exodus 39, 7.
in man good or bad, either to their sin actual or original; Job. 12, 10.
or to these holiness, faith, and good works. For albeit Duke 12, 5.
it is most true that good works are loved of God, and Ephe. 1, 11.
freely rewarded in heaven; and there are never any condemned in hell, but for
their sins, either of birth (as in Infants) or of life too (as in men of
years:) which is enough to clear God of injustice and cruelty, that he never
executes any justice upon his creature, but for his foregoing iniquities: yet
the Apostle when he looks back to the high and sovereign cause of Gods
decree touching men's final estate: he sets down none other but the
absolute power and will of God, that he may appoint of every man as he
pleases, for God does whatsoever he pleases, both in heaven and earth.


Tim. How may this doctrine be gathered from this text?


Silas. The very text gives power to the Potter, to put upon the pot what
form and use he will, with as good yea and much better reason it stands,
that the like power be ascribed unto God; the reason is, because there is no
proportion between God and a Potter, who is by infinite degrees, inferior to
God. Secondly, the Potter has the clay made to his hands, but Gods hand made
all men; and therefore his right over men is far greater then can be the
Potters over the Pot which is only formed, and not created by him. For as
touching God, his right is such and so absolute, that he might have made man,
or not have made him, having made him upright, he might have brought him to
nothing, as he made him of nothing; and all being corrupt in Adam he might have
reprobated and refused all without any wrong, nay most justly: concerning all
which, none could have controuled him: sithence he did all this not of any
necessity of his nature, but out of the liberty of his will, and absolutenes of
his power; which as it is vnsistable, so it is uncontrollable by flesh and
blood, yea by any creature in earth or in heaven; the greatest men are under
another, God at least is above them, but God is supreme, and has none above
him.


Tim. But what difference is then betwixt God, and such other tyr annicall
rulers, as for their pleasure sake destroy their subjects, as the Muscouians,
the Turks, etc.


Silas. Yes, there is great difference; first, these Princes made not their
subjects. Secondly, their power is limited by law, and conscience or religion;
they be set up by God, and must reign for God. Thirdly, being sinful men
their lust and desire is sinful, whereas Gods will is pure. Lastly, tyrants
respect wicked ends, to satisfy their sauadge cruelty; whereas Gods purpose
in saving or destroying, respects the praise of his (...) and mercy, most holy
and good ends.


Tim. Tell us what use we are to make of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it reproues such as make Gods decree of reprobation, to depend
upon Gods fort seeing sin in men.


Tim. What reasons have we against this?


Silas. First a plain text, verse 9. and 15. Secondly, (...) abridgeth the
absolute will and power of God, and subiecteth his will to men's merits.
Thirdly, then all mon being sinners by nature, must needs be (...) and cast
away. Fourthly, then had there been an cause to object injustice to God: for
every one will confess it just, to reprobate for original sin foreseen, but
without respect of unworthiness to do it, argues iniquity.


Tim. What other use of this doctrine?


Silas. It serves to teach all men patience in (...), and thankfulness in
prosperity; for seeing all which happens, depends on Gods will, it is reason
to be patient, if ought fall out not well, and thankful to God if all be well.


Tim. What other doctrine from this 21. verse?


Silas. That all men are not elect, because there are vessels to dishonor.
Again, the similitude of a pot does warn us of our (...) and britle estate,
howsoever strong we soeme to be, yet we are broken asunder very quickly; even
as a pot is so one quashed, so is man as an earthen vessel; which
consideration should serve to work both humility, seeing we are so feeble and
mortal; and watchfulness also, seeing we know not when the pot will break,
at what hour the thief will come, death being ever at our elbowes, and the
time as uncertain as the thing is certain.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 22. What and if God would to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath, which he has prepared
to destruction?


Tim. IS the reading of this verse full, or is there something lacking to
perfect the reading?


Silas. There must be a supply of a word or two, as thus; (who shall accuse
God,) or (what have thou to object against him?)


Tim. Tell us now the drife and purpose of this text?


Silas. The purpose is to clear the counsel of Gods reprobation from al
tyranny, by rehearsing the true causes and Scope.
reasons why God electeth some, and rejects others, all being equal both by
creation, and coruption of nature: this is the argument; Whosoever has
absolute right, will Sum.
do nothing but upon good causes and reasons, can be no tyrant. Such an one is
God (our celestial Potter,) therefore he is not guilty of injustice or
cruelty, though he appoint some to glory, and others to punishment eternally;
for all his ends be as righteous, as his power is sovereign.


Tim. Declare unto us these final causes in respect of the reprobate.


Silas. There be three mentioned in this Text. First, to show his wrath against
their sins. Secondly, to make known his power by breaking them, not
withstanding their obstinacy against him. Thirdly, the abuse of his long
suffering and lenity. Upon these grounds, and for these ends God rejects
some, and is avenged on them. Therefore his dealing is not tyrannical, but
most just.


Tim. Expound the words, and first tell us what is meant here by wrath?


Silas. First, Gods just displeasure conceived against the Interpretation.
reprobate for sin. Secondly, the pain or vengeance due thereunto.


Tim. What means this, to show wrath?


Sil. First, to ordain them to this punishment. Secondly, in due time to
inflict it upon them most justly.


Tim. What doctrine (...) from (...)?


Silas. That God is most justly offended with the reprobate Doctrine.
for sin, and will most severely revenge it in them. The reason hereof is,
because sin is (...) to the Reason.
nature of God. Secondly, it is the office of divine justice to take vengeance
on sin, else in vain were God called the judge of the world, Genesis 18, Romans 3.


Tim. What use are Christians to make of this doctrine? Use.



Silas. First, it strengthens our Faith concerning the righteousness of God.
For sithence he neither punishes the wicked, nor ever meant to do it but in
regard of their sins deserving it, we are therefore to believe him to be
righteous, whatsoever corrupt reason object against it. Secondly, it stirs
up to repentance, and to hatred of sin, because God so abhors it, that he
will eternally plague it even in his own and most noble creature, Act 17, 30.
Thirdly, it should move all to dread the fearful justice of God: if Beasts
dread the roaring of a Lion, Amos (...). 4. how much should flesh dread that
just and terrible God?


Tim. What is the second end or final cause, why God rejects and destroys
some?


Silas. To make his power known, which is a thing most just, that God should
declare and manifest his power to his own praise and glory.


Tim. But how is Gods power shown upon the Reprobate?


Silas. Herein, that howsoever they be many and of great might, yet God is
mightier then they, being able to put them down, and throw them to
destruction; which turns as to the praise of his justice, so of his power
treading down all things which resist it, as it is written; All the Aduer sar
es of Jehovah shall perish, and none shall stand before him when he is angry, 1 Samuel 2, 10. Psa. 37. And Now is the Axe laid, etc. Mat. 3, 10.


Tim. What is the doctrine which arises from hence?


Silas. This: that the utmost end of reprobation is the manifestation of Gods
power: and not simply the destruction of the Reprobate, which is the nearest
end in respect of the men themselves, and is no further respected of God, then
as it tends to the declaration of his power and Justice. The reason of this
doctrine is, because else in vain had God created the world, if it had not bin
to manifest his glorious properties, whereof his power is one. Secondly, it was
his will by this means to show forth his power, and why might he not?


Tim. What use of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, Gods Children must in the ruin of the reprobate, find cause to
magnify God. As Moses and Mirian did praise God, Exodus 15. for the temporal
calamity of Pharaoh and his host in the red Sea: so the godly must praise
him much more for the eternal destruction of the Reprobate in hell: insomuch
as out of it he works his own praise, Revel. 11, 17, 18. Secondly God being
stronger then man, he is more to be feared then all men. This reproues the
fearful, and iustifyeth Gods judgments against them, and it comfort the
faithful, to consider that they have such a strong patron to uphold them, and
put down their enemies, were they as strong as Pharaoh and all Egypt.


Tim. What is the third cause why God takes vengeance on the Reprobate?


Silas. Because they abuse his suffering and long patience, whereby he spared
them when he might strike them dead.


Tim. What is the Doctrine from hence?


Silas. That God is very patient (not only toward his Children, 2 Pet. 3.)
but even toward his very enemies, Acts 13. Psalm. 103. The reason hereof,
is, to give them space of repentance, and to take all excuse from them, il
they be obstinate, Rom 2, 4, 5. and Romans 3.


Tim. Show us what use we are to make of this point?


Sil. Gods Ministers and Children must by the example of their Father learn
patience toward those that be evil, 2 Timothy 2, 24. Col. 3, 12. So long as
there is any cause to hope, that by our sufferance there is any good to be
done upon them: but if they grow more obstinate by our lenity, then obey that
in Math. 7, 7.


Tim. What other doctrine from hence?


Silas. It is a fearful mark of a reprobate always to abuse Gods patience,
to the hardening of themselves in their evils; because none but they do it: as
none but Gods children can profit by it to amendment of life.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It serves for a trial and examination of our selves, whether we be our
of the rank of reprobates, namely, if we find that we have profited by the
patience and long sufferance of God toward us, to the reformation of our
ways: also it serves for terror unto such as are not made the better by the
patience of God toward them. And lastly, it serves for comfort to such as are
bettered by his long-suffering and kindness, thereby learning more to fear the
offending of such a gracious God. This is a good token, and very comfortable.


Tim. Show us why reprobates are called vessels of wrath?


Silas. Vessels they are called in respect of Gods preordination and creation.
He fore-appointed and made them to some special use, (as vessels be) even to
the setting forth of his power and justice, as was said before. (Vessels of
wrath) in regard of their own sins, whereby they corrupted and made
themselves worthy of his wrath and punishment.


Tim. What is meant by prepared, and by whom are they prepared to destruction?


Silas. To be prepared, signifies to be made fit and meet before hand, and this
is done partly by God, eternally rejecting them; creating them in time,
permitting them to fall in Adam, and justly hardening them for resisting his
will. Secondly, by Satan, soliciting them to sin and inspiring into them
sinne-full motions, obdurating them also in sinful courses. Lastly, by
themselves in regard of their natural corruption and voluntary deprauation,
following the lusts of their ignorance with greediness. Thus in regard of
creation, and the end to the which they are ordained, reprobates are prepared
of God; as also in regard of sin (as it is a means to bring them to that
end:) but respecting sin (as it is sin) which they bring of their own, so
they are prepared by themselves, and by Satan.

Note that it is good divinity taught from God, by the pen of the Apostle Paul,
in plain express terms, that there be some men which be vessels of wrath
and prepared to destruction; and that they know no divinity, which deny this
upon pretense, least God be found unjust and tyrannical. It is a safe thing in
speaking, writing, or preaching, to follow the phrase and speech of the
HolyGhost, rightly taken in the true sense; men may not labor to be wiser
then God, nor think to defend Gods justice by a lie. Such be miserable patrons
of God and his righteousness. Bonum non indiget malo, nor truth has no need
of falsehood to prop and support it.


DIAL. XIII.
Verse 23. And that be might declare the riches of his glory upon the Vessels
of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.


Tim. What is the drift and purpose of this Text?


Silas. To illustrate or set forth the end of Scope.
Gods counsel touching the reprobate (which is, the manifestation of justice
and power in their deserved destruction) by the contrary end, touching his
counsel of election, which is twofold. First, Gods own glory, (this is the
utmost end.) Secondly, the eternal glory and happiness of the elect, (this
is the nearest end.)


Tim. Tell us what is meant by [he] as also by [declare?]


Silas. By [ he] is meant God, as verse, 22. and by [ declare] Interpretation.
is signified to make known to al reasonable creatures, to wit, Angels and men.


Tim. What is signified by [his glory] as also by the riches of his glory?


Silas. By his glory is meant the grace of God, wherein he shows himself
glorious, see Ephe. 3 16. and by the riches of his glory, is meant his
unmeasurable and meruellous great mercy: see the like, Romans 2, 4. Ephesians. 1, 3,
8.


Tim. Who are meant here by the [vessels of his mercy?]


Silas Elect men and women ordained to obtain salvation in heaven, through the
mercies of God in Christ.


Tim. What doctrines arise out of these words thus expounded? Doctrine.



Sil. First, that the elect (as well as the reprobate) are Reason.
vessels or instruments framed of God to special uses; for God makes nothing
in vain: if reprobates be for use, much rather the elect.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It warnes us that whatsoever we are or have, Use.
we hold it of God, and are to refer it to him, even as vessels are what they
are by the will of the Potter, and serve to his pleasure.


Tim. What is the next doctrine?


Sil. That not man's merit but Gods mercy, puts a difference 2. Doctrine.
between vessel and vessel, person and person. The godly in that they are
vessels, this is by nature common to them with the wicked; but in that they are
vessels to honor, this must be ascribed to mercy: whereas yet the reprobates
are vessels of wrath by merit, for their wrath and punishment is not inflicted,
till it be deserved.


Tim. What use to be made of this point?


Silas. It admonishes Gods children that they have nothing Use.
whereof to glory in themselves, seeing all they are or have flows from free
and undue mercy. Therefore let them that will rejoice, rejoice in this, that
they know God to be merciful, Ierc. 9. Whereas God calls, justifies, etc.
he shows not thereby what we deserve, but how good and merciful himself
is.


Tim. What other doctrine from hence?


Silas. That the praise of Gods glorious mercy is the 3. Doctrine.
furthest and chiefest end why he electeth and chooses some. This doctrine
may be proved by plain text of Scripture, as Prouer. 16, 4. Romans 11, 36.
Ephe. 1, 12. to the praise of his glory. The reason of this doctrine is,
because there can be no higher or further end of his own decree, then his
own praise. It is just and equal that he do seek glory unto himself by his
creatures.


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. It stoppes the mouths of such as are ready to accuse Use.
the decrees of God to be unjust, whereas they tend unto most righteous ends,
as they be the decrees of a most righteous God. Secondly, it warns us to
make the glory of God the utmost end of our counsels and actions, even as God
has propounded it to himself for the scope of his own counsels, 1. Cor. 10,
31. Col. 3, 17. 1. Tim. 4, 5.


Tim. May not yet some other doctrine be drawn from the former part of this
verse?


Sil. Yes, this: That the mercy which God shows the elect, is not common and
ordinary, but exceeding abundant 4. Doctrine.
and plentiful: for to forgive them so many sins, Reason.
to deliver them from so great wrath, to fulfill them with such exceeding
graces, to call them to such exceeding and endless joys, to give them his
own Son to purchase all this, and to do all this most freely (passing by
others no worse then themselves) shows his mercy and goodness to be exceeding
rich and glorious toward the chosen.


Tim. What use of this point? Use.



Silas. It affoords an exhortation to the godly, to enlarge their hearts unto
all possible love and thankfulness toward this merciful God, with
continual and great care to glorify him by our obedience unto his word. Thus
far of the first end.


Tim. What is the second end of election?


Silas. The glory of the elect: by glory here is not only Interpretation.
meant the glorious and blessed estate of the Saints in heaven, but all the
means also which bringes them thither, as Calling, Faith, Righteousness,
Sanctification, etc. and finally, the whole work of their Redemption.


Tim. In what sense is it said [That God prepares unto Glory?]


Silas. That is to say, he has made them fit and meet before hand, to be
partakers of this glory: and this God does three ways. First by eternal
predestination. Secondly, by an innocent creation. Thirdly, by an effectual
restoration, restoring them by Christ unto their lost Image.


Tim. Speaking of the reprobate he says of them passiuely (prepared) but of
the vessels of mercy (he prepared,) what are we to learn from this difference
of the phrase?


Silas. That the reprobates bring something of their own to further their
destruction (to wit, corruption of nature, and the fruits thereof,) whereas
the elect having from God alone, whatsoever good belongs to their salvation,
they also have from God both the end, and all the means, both grace, justice,
and glory. The reprobate in respect of nature and end, are prepared of God;
but prauity and naughtiness they have from Satan and themselves.


Tim. What is the doctrine from these latter words? 5. Doctrine.



Silas. That God has unseparably joined the salvation Reason.
of the elect, with the praise of his own glory. The reason hereof is, to make
his own goodness more renowned, and the elect more grateful and obedient; for
all men being alike sinful by nature, if he would have condemned all, it had
been but just; therefore the more was his mercy, that he would save some, whom
he might have worthily refused.


Tim. What use hereof? Use.



Silas. To assure the elect of their own salvation, which they cannot miss
off, since God will not loose the glory of his grace. Secondly, to stir up
themselves to more ioyfulnesse, by considering the gracious end of his
counsel toward them, compared with the fearful end of others; this is more
effectual to move the godly to laud God, then if all men had been ordained
to glory.


Tim. What other thing are we to learn from these last words?


Silas. That the elect in themselves are no whit better 6. Doctrine.
then others; for in that they must be prepared, it shows Reason.
that of themselves they are not apt. Again, this overthrows Use.
the doctrine of free will and merit; for if God must needs prepare us, where
is our power to do any good, or what place for our own deseruings, seeing we
have nothing but what we do receive? Lastly, this does greatly extol Gods
goodness toward the chosen, in that not only God gives them eternal glory,
but prepares them for it, to make them meet inheritours. He prepares heaven
for the elect, and the elect for heaven; yea and preserues the^ to it also by
his power through faith. To him be praise and glory for ever.


DIAL. XV.
Verse 24. Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but of the
Gentiles also?


Tim. What is it that the Apostle performs in this Text?


Silas. After the doctrine of predestination, he now passes on to the
doctrine of calling; and that which he has spoken in Thesis and generally, he
does now make application of in Hipothesis to the Jews and Gentiles, teaching
that in both these Nations such as were predestined to life, are called to
Christ, yet more Gentiles the^ Jews, the rest remaining in their hardness:
all which, he proves by Oracles out of the Prophets in the rest of this
Chapter, to the end thereof.


Tim. How does this treatise of calling fitly follow the former doctrine of
predestination?


Silas. Very fitly; for Paul having proved, that GOD does most freely elect
some and not others, because of his own will, hereof question might be
moved, how we might know who are elected? Whereunto the Apostle secretly
answers, that election is manifested in our vocation unto Christ by the
Gospel. Calling is the manifestation and evidence of election.


Tim. Give us now the sum of this Verse?


Silas. Thus much it is; whosoever he be (Jew or Gentile) Sum.
that is called of God, and obeys the caller thereby he knows and
declares himself to be an elect person, even a vessel of mercy prepared
unto glory.


Tim. What be the parts of this Verse?


Silas. Two: First, it mentions the true sign of election, namely, our
Calling. Secondly, who they be to whom this calling appertains (not the Jews
only, but the Gentiles also.)


Tim. What is meant by Calling?


Silas. Not a general outward calling, but an inward Interpretation.
and especial calling, according to purpose of election, as Romans 8, 28, 29, 30.


Tim. What is that you term a general calling?


Silas. A bare inuitation or inciting unto Christ, by the preaching of the word
sounding in the ear, which draws men no further then to the knowledge and
profession of Christ, and at utmost to a slight reformation of life, without
any sound renewing of the heart, as in Herod, (...), Simon Magus, etc.


Tim. What is a special calling?


Silas. The drawing of the elect unto true faith in Christ, by the mighty work
of the Spirit in the heart, which both enlightneth the mind distinctly to
know the doctrine of salvation, as it is taught in holy Scripture, and boweth
the will to embrace (...) readily, joyfully, and to begin to obey it
unfeignedly, Ephe. 1.


Tim. Why do ye think that this calling is meant here, rather then the former?


Silas. Because the Apostle searching for a true testimony of election, most
needs mean that inward calling which is wrought by the Spirit effectually;
seeing this is proper to the elect, being a certain and necessary fruit of
election. Whereas the outward calling which is by the word only without inward
saving grace, is common (...) to the elect and reprobate, (as it is (...),)
Many are called, few chosen; and as by the parable of the sower appears,
Math. 13.


Tim. What is the doctrine from the first part of this verse? 1. Doctrine.



Silas. That an effectual calling unto Christ by the spirit, is unto the
children of God, a sure (...) of their election.


Tim. How may it appear that this doctrine does arise fom hence?


Sil. Thus, Paul had mentioned, verse 32. [ vessels of mercy,] now plainly by
way of exposition (...) us who they be, (even us who are called,) by our
calling then we are to judge of our election, whether we be vessels prepared
unto glory or no.


Tim. Prove this doctrine by authority of Scripture, and strength of reason.


Sil. First, it may be proved by these Scriptures, Romans 8. (...). Whom he has
predestined, them be has called; also v. 28. and Romans 9. 11. and 2. Pet. 1,
to election, purpose and calling, are often put together, as causes and
effects, roots and fruits. Secondly, reason proves it: for seeing God
effectually calls all whom he, eternally predestinateth, and none others;
therefore calling must (...) be a manifestation of predestination to glory.
Secondly, 2. Reason.
if the Gospel be the (...) of Gods gracious purpose for the saving of the
elect by Christ, 2. Ti, 1, (...). Therefore to have this grace offered by the
Gospel and truly to receive it by an effectual calling of the spirit, must
needs be an evidence and declaration of the good will and purpose of God
toward a man.

Thirdly, the end of a true calling is to bring us unto faith, which is an
infallible note of election, Titus, 1, 1. Similitudes.
Acts, 14. John, 3. Lastly, this doctrine may be set forth by (...), for as
the sap within the Tree is known by the fruit without, and a man's secret
thought is manifested by his voice, and the Sun is discerned to be lightsome
by the beams, so the decree of election is in it self secret, but is opened
by a true calling, which is as it were the beams, the fruit, the
manifestation of Gods counsel toward the elect.


Tim. What is the use of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, it confutes the (...), who teach that no Uses.
man can ordinarily be assured of his salvation, but by extraordinary
revelations. Secondly, it reprooues such as seek the certainty of their
election by diuing deeply into the secret counsel of God, as if they could
know his mind, which is not to be known but by the effects of it. Thirdly, it
checks such as rashly censure the doctrine of predestination as if it drive men
to despair, because men can never find the secret will of God; whereas a
special vocation is a mean whereby to understand it. Fourthly, it reprooues
such as say predestination cannot be known, and therefore ought not to be (...)
whereas our calling is as it were a hand to lead us to the very secret place
of God. Fifthly, this Doctrine serves to admonish all the godly (laying aside
all other means) when they seek for proof of their own election) to go down
into their own hearts, to find out that precious work of Gods grace in their
calling to Christ.


Tim. Yea, but this may (...) us, for Hipocrites and wicked A doubt.
men say they have a calling? And such as have a true calling cannot always
discerue it.


Silas. It is true: therefore there be some few tokens, Solution.
by which a saving vocation is to be discerned from that Marks of a calling,
which is effectual.
which is common. As first, a distinct special knowledge of the word, not
confusedly and generally. Secondly, to believe the promises of the Gospel with
sincere love to them, and joy in them. Thirdly, to take sound delight in the
whole word of God, even the threatenings, reprehensions, and exhortations as well
as consolations. Fourthly, to begin obedience to the Law of God, even from the
heart, and throughout in one thing as well as in (...), though not perfectly.
Fifthly, to have a Spirit of discerning, to put difference between the voice of
Christ which calls us to himself, and the voice of strangers, John 10.
Sixthly, an earnest desire with constant Prayer, to have othere brought to the
participation of this heavenly calling, specially such as be under our charge,
as family, servants, children, wife, etc. Lastly, to love the Brethren called,
because they belong to Christ; and the Ministers and instruments of our
calling, being thankful to them, as to the Messengers of God, and (...) of our
good. To the which, may be added the Prayer of faith, and the testimony of the
Spirit of God and ours, Romans 8, 15, 16, and our (...) for our Fathers glory
guided by knowledge, 2 (...). 7, 11.


Tim. Have (...) her use of (...) former doctrine?


Sil. Yea, (...) for Christian consolation, even to comfort at the heart, all
such weary, heavy laden, hungry and thirsty souls, as do covet above all
things to be certified of Gods love toward them, and to find rest, and
perceive the assurance of their own salvation. Let these never fear their
own estate, if they can find in truth Gods effectual calling to be upon
them by these marks (though in a weak measure:) for thereby any of these
shall clearly and firmly see their own predestination; which being an
unchangeable purpose of GOD that alter not, it cannot be that such should
perish.


Tim. What other instruction arsseth out of the first part of this verse?


Sil. That such as have the word preached must thankfully 2. Doctrine.
receive it. The reason is, because it is the ordinary Reason.
means of an effectual calling to bring men to Christ, such as are ( Adulti)
of years and stature able to hear.


Tim. What use hereof?


Sil. It shows the wretched estate of estate, Papists, Uses.
and profane Atheists, which despise the Ministry of the word: also of
careless worldlings, which regard not such a blessing. Secondly, it warnes
such as live under the word preached, to norish an hope that they are called
according to Gods purpose, and therefore to labor to get an inward spiritual
calling, joined to their common calling.


Tim. Have ye yet any other instructions out of the first part of this?


Silas. Yea, by Paul's putting himself into the number 3. Doctrine.
[ Us,] we learn that his own election was certainly known into him, and
so it may be, and is to every child of God that lives to years of diseretion.
Secondly, that by the work of a true calling, the Apostle was assured 4.
Doctrine.
of his own salvation, therefore not by special revelation only. Thirdly, by
his example he ensturcteth us to 5. Doctrine.
hope well of the salvation of others that be members of the visible Church.
The seasons be, first because they Reasons.
have the Sacraments of Gods grace, whereby they are set apart and sealed up to
God to be his people. Secondly, God inuiteth them by his word, to faith and
repentance. Thirdly, they make profession of God to be their father, and Christ
their redeemer. Lastly, in their lives they do yield outward obedience to the
word. Now charity requires us to think that all this is done in truth, and
therefore to hope well of them, that they belong to Gods election; as Paul does
here by speaking in the plural number of others as well as himself.


Tim. But what may we think of those Christ ans that are apparently wicked?


Silas. Even of such we are not to despair, because we know not what to morrow
will bring forth. Also the parable of the vineyard, shows that God calls at
all hours, even at the last: and the example of the thief, and Paul, being
wicked men, and yet called in the end of their life, instruct us that we must
not cast away hope of any how wicked soever they be; none more wicked then
such as have been called. Also it is as easy for the infinite power to
convert a grievous as a less sinner.


Tim. What then, is there no reprobation in the visible Church? none rejected
which be in Noah's Arc, in the outward Church?


Silas. We may not determine or give final sentence upon any that they are
Reprobates, Romans 14, 10, 11, 12, but leaving secret things to God, who only
knows who be his, and who be not, 2. Tim. 2, 19. we do so out of charity
hope well of all, as yet we hold it for a certain truth, that all in the
visible Church be not elect. That this is so, appears first by Scripture,
Math. 20. 16. Many called, few chosen, also 1. John, 2, 29. Some went out from
us, that were not of us. Again, the Jews being Gods people, it is written of
them that they were not all Christ's sheep, nor given unto him of his Father,
John, 10, 29. nor were Jews within, Romans 2, 29. nor children of the promise,
Romans 9, 4. nor the children of Abraham, John, 8, 39. Secondly, this truth may
be proved by the similitudes of Scripture, which set forth the estate of the
visible Church, for it is likened unto a floor having wheat and chafe, Mat.
3, 12. to a dragge, net having good fish and badde, Mat. 13, 47. to a field of
tares as well as of good Corn, Mat. 13, 24. to a house wherein are vessels of
earth and of gold; to Noah's Arc, wherein were unclean beasts, as well as
clean. Thirdly, it may be confirmed by examples, as of Esau, Romans 9. 12. and
Iudus, John, 6, 70. who were both reprobates, and yet lived in the visible
Church; so of Caine, Ismael, Saul, D. mas. Lastly, this appears by reason,
because Reason.
were all elect, all must be saved, which is not true, Mat. 7, 13, Secondly, it
opens a gap to security. Thirdly, were all elect, then should all have an
effectual calling to Christ, Mat. 13. and 20. We are therefore thus to hold
and believe, that the holy and invisible Church consists only of elect and
none other: But in the visible Church there be both Goats and Sheep, chosen
and refused ones. The infallible distinction whereof pertaines to God alone.


Tim. But how is it then that Paul writing to whole visible Churches, does
(...) them holy, elect, and Saints? as 1. Cor. 1. 1. These. 1, 4, 5.


Silas. I he cause hereof is manifold; not for that euety one were such in
truth, as Israel an holy Nation, yet had many hypocrites among them, but first
because they were all such by external vocation, whereby being severed from
the rest of the unclean world, they are consecrated to Christ.

Secondly, they all had the sacrament of sanctification, an outward seal of
election. Thirdly, because the judgment of certainty belongs to God only, man
is bound to judge by charity.

Fourthly, because the denomination follows the better part, as the soul
bears the appellation of the whole man. Fifthly, to teach the mark that they
that live in the Church must aim at, and strive too, namely, to be holy.

Sixthly, because they were such in their own opinion, and in the opinion of
the Church. Lastly, because the holy things of God, as the word, Sacraments,
etc. were committed unto them.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. First, it is a bar and bridle to rash judgment. Secondly, it is a
spur to quicken Christians to all care, to pass beyond reptobates, in the
practice of Christianity, that they may get a sure testimony of their own
predestination. There is no greater motive to cause us to follow after true
godliness, then to consider that persons baptized and professors, may perish
when they be Christians, not within, but without only.


Tim. What instructions learn we from the latter part of the 24. verse?


Silas. That all the Jews are not rejected, for there were some in whom Gods
election and promise took place. Secondly, that the Gentiles are admitted to
the fellowship of grace with the Jews, since the publishing of the Gospel,
the difference of Nation taken away, by pulling down the partition wall of
Legal and Leuitical ceremonies.


DIAL. XVII.
Verses 25, 26. As he says also in Osee, I will call them my people, which
were not my people: and her beloved, which was not beloved. And it shall be in
the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my people, that there they
shall be called, the children of the living God.


In citing this text out of the Prophet Osee, Paul inuerteth the words, setting
that last, which is first in the Prophet; he also leaves out some words, and
puts in others, partly for breuity sake, and partly to sit it to his
purpose; but changes naught either of sense or scope: all that he retayneth
entire and untouched.

Tim What may the scope of the Apostle be here?


Silas. To show that to be now fulfilled touching the calling of Gentiles,
which was before by Osee (...): Osee had said the Gentiles should be Gods
people, Paul tells us that they now are so, being called to the faith of the
Gospel.


Tim. But to speak this, was a thing like to be grievous to the Jews who
could endure nothing less. See Acts 10. and 11.


Silas. Very true: therefore the Apostle very wisely proves it, not by his
own testimony and report, but by the Prophets, and brings in God, speaking
by the Prophets, to stop their mouths the better, that they should have no
evasion.


Tim. But this place of Osee, is directly spoken for the comfort of the Jews;
how does Paul draw it to the calling of the Gentiles?


Silas. Paul being directed by the Holy Ghost, could not err in his
allegation. Secondly, though the Prophet speak it of the Jews, dispersed for
their Idolatry, telling them that GOD would gather them again; which was done
both temporally at their returned from their captivity of Babylon; and
spiritually by the preaching of the Gospel: yet the Gentiles are meant also,
as deserving properly to be called (not a people,) being strangers from the
covenant; whereas the Jews became not Gods people accidentally, through their
Apostasy, impiety, and Idolatry. Therefore if God would convert those back
sliding Israelites, why not the Gentiles also? both being equally not Gods
people though in diverse manners. Further the case stands thus; Osee diuides the
whole world into two sorts, one which were his people having obtained mercy,
another which were not his people nor pitied; he prophefieth of the former,
that they should be made not a people, and be without mercy for a time: the
other should become a people and obtain mercy; and who can these be but the
Gentiles, to whom therefore Paul fitly applies that prediction?


Tim. Tell us now what we are to learn from this, that Paul says [God spoke in
Osee?]


Silas. That Prophets were but Gods mouth, to utter his mind, and penmen or
Registers, and not authors.


Tim. What are we to gather for our instruction out of the Prophecy it self?


Silas. That the condition of us all before grace is most Doctrine.
miserable; for till we be converted unto Christ, we are not his children, nor
beloved.


Tim. Prove this Doctrine.


Sil. First, all those Scriptures which witness of us that without Christ we
are sinners, ungodly, enemies, children Proof.
of wrath, etc. prove thus much, Romans 5, 6, 7, 8. Ephe. By scripture
2, 1, 2. Secondly, reason proves it. First, because in By reason.
this estate we are without God and all manner of goodness. Secondly, we are
slaves unto Satan, subject unto all evil, sin, and misery. Thirdly, the
comparisons of Scripture not illustrate alone, but prove this truth; for we are
compared to such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Acts, 26,
18. to Birds in snares, 2. Tim. 2, 26. to prisoners in fetters, to captives in
the hands of cruel enemies, Luke, 4, 18. to a child newly and nakedly borne,
Ezekiel. 16. to persons dead and rotten in the grave, John, 5, 25. to an house
built upon the sand, Math, 7, 26. to Thistles, Mat. 7, 16. to winter, Cant. 2,
11. All which shadow out our sinful and woeful estate by nature.


Tim. What use is to be made of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, it serves to humble the godly by the remembrance Use.
of their old estate, that they were once in this dreadful and vile
condition. Secondly, it serves to make them thankful with comfort, that they
are delivered and set free, Psalm 103, 1, 2. 3. being so far unworthy of
grace. Thirdly, it serves to stir up others to praise God for such Christians
as they see to be freed from that woeful estate, after the example of Paul,
Romans 6, 16. and almost in the beginning of all his Epistles. Fourthly, it
serves to confute al such (whether Pelagians or Papists) which do ascribe the
least power to a natural man, either to think well or to merit ought with
Cod; for what good either will or work can be in such as be neither beloved
nor people, til Christ call and change them? Lastly, here is a warning to all
such as do not find themselves truly called, to make haste out of this
doleful estate, giving their eyes no slumber, nor rest to their eyelids, till
they find rest to their souls.


Tim. What other doctrine from this Text?


Silas. That blissful is the condition of such as are called 2. Doctrine.
to Christ Jesus, and endowed with his faith and spirit; because such as be
called to Christ and beloved of God, are exalted to be his people and
Children, which is the greatest dignity and bliss in the whole world.


Tim. How dee ye prove this doctrine?


Silas. First, by Scripture, Psalm. 144, 15. Blessed are Proof.
the people whose God is the Lord. John, 1, 12. To them that believe in him,
there is given this dignity, to be called the sons of God, 1. John, 3, 1.
Secondly by Reason.
by reason; for first Gods children are Christ's brethren, Heb. 2, 12. and Gods
heirs, Romans 8, 18. Secondly, they have their sins fully forgiven them, Romans
4 4, 5. Psalm. 32, 1. Thirdly, they have the blessing of believing hearts. Luke
1. Fourthly, they are led by the Spirit of sanctification, which fills them
with the fear of God, and godly uprightness of life, Psalm. 112, 1. and 119,
1. Romans 8, 9. Fifthly, if crosses and troubles come, they are supported and
comforted under them, and reap much good by them, John 14, Romans 8, 28. Sixthly,
the Angels are their servants, Heb. 1, 14. and all creatures are at league with
them, Hosea, 2, 18. Seauenthly, they are freed from the power of sin, Devil,
death, and hell, and all their enemies, Luke, 1. 74. Romans 6, 7. Acts, 26, 26.
Thirdly, comparisons of Scripture proves this point; as of a tree standing by
the Rivers of waters, planted in Gods house, set upon a Rock; of a Prince and
a king full of riches and glory; of an Olive, and of a Vine, Psalm. 45, and 92,
12, 13, Mat, 7, 24, John 15. Romans 11, 17.


Tim. What profit of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it reproues such as speak basely of Gods children. Secondly, it
warns us of the great danger of such as offer them any wrong in word or deed;
also what blessings are over their heads which kindly entreat them. Mat. 10.
42. and 25, 40. Thirdly, it exhorts Gods children by remembrance of their
great dignity, to bear the cross patiently, to fly sin carefully, to live
holily and justly. And lastly, it must increase and double the praises of the
faithful, who be by grace set in such an happy estate.


Tim. How can it be said of the same persons, that they were a people and no
people, that they were beloved and not beloved?


Silas. The Scripture speaks of Gods elect sometimes according to their
predestination, and sometime according to their present estate. Secondly, their
present estate being two-folde, either in corruption and grace one succeeding
the other; in regard thereof they are sometimes beloved and not beloved,
according to the diversity of times and conditions.


Tim. Why is God called the living God?


Silas. Because God lives of and by himself eternally, and is author of life
to all which live, Acts 17. 28. which shows Idols to be no Gods, and the
Sacrament not to be God; for they neither live, nor infuse life into other, nor
can preserve themselves from violation.


Tim. How comes it that while the Jews were Gods people, the Gentiles were
not; and now the Gentiles be, the Jews are not?


Silas. O the deepenesse of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how are his
ways past finding outfor who has known the mind of the Lord, or to whom
has he told this counsel?


DIAL. XVIII.
Verses 27, 28, 29. Also Esayas cries concerning Israel, Though the number of
the children of Israel, were as the sand of the sea, yet shall but a remnant be
saved; for he will make his account and gather it into a short sum with
righteousues; for the Lord will make a short account in the earth. And as
Esayas said before, Except the Lord bad left us a seed, we bad bin made as
Sodom, and had been like to Gomorrah.


Tim. WHat is the purpose of this Text?


Silas. Having proved the calling of the Gentiles by the Testimony of Hosea,
now he does the like touching the Jews; whose calling to Christ he proves by
the testimonies of Esaias, Chap. 10, 22. and 1, 9.


Tim. What is the sum of this Text?


Sil. That of the Jews some few only were called to Christ, the most part of
them being rejected, according as God had from everlasting determined. For the
Aposile reasons here from the effects to the cause: Few called, therefore
few chosen.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Sil. Two: First, he teaches, that a small number of the Jews were saved,
verse 27, 28. Secondly, the reason hereof, Gods mercy, verse 29.


Tim. What is meant hereby [Crying?]


Silas. A plain and earnest speaking the truth without fear or fainting.


Tim. What is to be learned from hence?


Silas. That the Ministers of Christ must boldly and distinctly declare the
mind of God, Esaias 58, 1. Hence is John Baptist called a crier, Math. 3, 3. It
is a speech borrowed from common criers in Cities, who so speak as they may be
heard of all. Thus Christ spoke, for he lift up his voice, John 7, 37. The
reasons hereof be, first, the commandment of God, Esaias 58. Secondly, the
example of Christ and the Prophets, John 7. Thirdly, this manner of teaching
stirs up and quickens attention. Fourthly, it helps the understanding,
causing things sooner to be understood and perceived. Fifthly, the untoward
rebellion of man's heart, requires such plainness and earnestness to humble
and tame it.


Tim. What is the use of this point?


Silas. It reprooues such teachers as suppress their voices. The other
extreme is, too much to exalt it. Secondly, it warnesh hearers to love such
vehemence, seeing their own dullness needs it.


Tim. What is meant by the sand of the Sea?


Sil. The exceeding great number of the Jews, being for multitude like to the
sand of the Sea, as God promised Abraham, Genesis 15.


Tim. What is meant by [remnant?]


Sil. It is a speech borrowed from Tradesmen, who cut out a whole cloth, till
only a little piece be left, which they call a remnant or remainder: by which
is meant a very few and small number of the Jews, as it were an handful,
shall be called.


Tim. What signifies saved?


Silas. It signifies deliverance from bodily and spiritual dangers?


Tim. Of what times did Esayas speak this?


Silas. First, of the times of Ezckiah, when all Judah being ouerrun by the
Assyrians, only Jerusalem was spared. Secondly, of the times of the
deliverance out of Chaldea, when most of the Jews tarried behind, the fewest
returned home, many dyed in Babylon, others willingly abode there. But the
Prophet has yet a further relation, (namely) unto the times of Grace, when the
greatest number of the Jews spurned against the Gospel, some few only
receiving it. Those external Redemptions and deliverances being Types of the
Spiritual.


Tim. What is the Doctrine from hence?


Silas. That though the Nation of the Jews were full of people, yet the
greatest number of them should not be delivered from eternal destruction. The
reasons hereof be, first their general unkindness and unthankfulness
deserving it. Romans 10, 21. also verse 2. Secondly, God had decreed to call and
save but a few of them; as appcareth by the latter part of this prophecy,
verse 28. For to make his account, and gather it into a short sum, signifies
not only that God would lessen the number of the Jews, but that he did it out
of his foreappointment, his election and reprobation bearing the whole sway and
stroke in this thing. For more could not be called and saved then were
elected, and these were not many.


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Sil. First, that eue^ in the visible Church al are not elect, yea that the
reprobates do in number exceed the elect. Secondly, that we must not be
offended with the fewness of the godly, and great heaps of the ungodly, for
such was the estate of Gods people under the law. Thirdly, it teaches, that
multitudes be no marks of the visible Church: in all societies for the most
part, the best number is the least, and the greatest the worst.


Tim. What is meant by the Lord of Hoasts?


Sil. The mighty God, whose hoasts all creatures be, executing his will, as
Soldiers the will of their Captain.


Tim. What does Seed signify?


Silas. A small number reserved, as a little seed Corn out of a great heap;
that which is chosen for seed, is much less then the whole crop.


Tim. What learn we by this comparison?


Silas. First, that Gods elect be a precious people, as the seed Corn is the
best grain, 1 Pet 2, 9. which must engender in them a love and comfort of
their excellent estate even under the Cross; and in others a reverence toward
them, and it condemns the world which judge basely of them. Secondly, we
learn that the godly are exceeding fruitful, as seed bringes forth some
thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold: a sew Apostles converted whole
nations to Christ, Acts 2, 41. Colos. 1, 7, 8. Romans 1. Thirdly, the number of
the elect, is the smallest number. It is very great considered simply, Revel:
7, 9. but small in respect of the damned, Luke 12, 32.


Tim. What use of this last point?


Sil. It admonishes all men to strive most earnestly to find themselves
amongst this little slocke, and to join rather with a few that live well,
then to do ill with a multitude that join together in evil.


Tim. What learn we from hence, that God is said to have left this seed?


Silas. To hold it for a great mercy of God, that there be any that believe in
him, and fear him in so general an apostacy: as if in a deluge of water or
general fire, one house or two should be preserved in a great Citic.


Tim. What is meant by being [like?]


Silas. Utterly to be wasted and destroyed as they were, whereof read Deuteronomy.
29. Genesis 18.


Tim. What is our Doctrine from hence?


Silas. That Gods own people deserved as grievous things as the Sodomites,
should he deal with them in Justice; because to other sins common to them
both, they do add contempt of grace, and most gross unthankfulness, in that
being trusted with much, they render but a little. Also they have stronger and
more means to keep them from sinning, and so their rebellions be more
grievous. This commends Gods marvelous patience in bearing with his people,
and admonishes them of earnest and speedy repentance, least his anger break
forth, and his fire burn when none can quench it.


DIAL. XIX.
Verse 30. What shall we say then? That the Gentiles which followed not
Righteousness, have attained unto righteousness, onen the righteousness
which is of faith.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To set down more clearly by what means God brings both elect and not
elect to their appointed ends of eternal life or death. Hecreunto the Apostle
is come by these degrees. First he had said, that the promise of God depends
upon his election. Secondly, he had showed the moving cause of election and
reprobation, his own absolute will, and most free mercy. Thirdly, he had
declared the ends of Gods predestination, the glory of his mercy, in saving of
the one, and of his power and justice, in destroying the other. Fourthly, he
had declared that the means to judge of our election is by our effectual
calling. Lastly, that men may discern when their calling is effectual or not,
(by faith or unbelief) which are those two means whereby that high counsel
of God is executed, as in this text is plainly to be seen in the examples of
faithful Gentiles saved, and unfaithful Jews confounded.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First a question in these words, [ What shall Parts.
we say then?] Secondly, an answer in the rest the answer also consists of
two parts, a double proposition, and a double reason: The first proposition is,
that the Gentiles found righteousness when they sought not for it; the reason,
because Method.
they believed in Christ, verse 30. Secondly, the Jews followed after
righteousness, but found it not; the reason, because they believed not in
Christ, but would be righteous by their own works, verse 31, 32.


Tim. What signifies these words [What shall we say?]


Silas. It is thus much: Shall we condemn God of unrighteousness
Interpretation.
for rejecting so many Jews that studied to please him, and were his people,
calling the Gentiles that were Idolators and lewd livers, and none of his
people?


Tim. What are we to learn from these words?


Silas. Two things: First, that man's corrupt reason will 1. Doctrine.
have always something to object against Gods truth: for Paul had firmly
proved both the calling of the Gentiles, and the general reiection of the
Jews by the Scripture, and yet see how reason still goes on, to iangle and
quarrel. Therefore let men pray God to reform their reason, for it is an
enemy of Gods wisdom, till grace have renewed it, Romans 8, 8. and 12, 2.

Secondly, from hence we learn that the Ministers of 2. Doctrine.
Christ must be able to foresee what carnal men can say against the truth,
and to stop their mouths; this being one part of their function to convince
gainsayers.


Tim. Now come to the first part of the answer touching the Gentiles, and tell
us what is meant by the [Gentiles?]


Silas. All the people of the world which were not Jews.


Tim. What is meant by [righteousnes?]


Silas. The perfect justice of works which God requires in his law, or the
performance of all such duties perfectly, as the law commands.


Tim. In what sense are they said not to have followed it?


Silas. They neither loved nor cared for, nor practiced just and righteous
works. This may appear first, in that they could not, because they were
ignorant of Moses law, much more ignorant were they of the righteousness of
Christ. Secondly, as for the law of nature, they were also transgressors of
that, being both lewd livers, and Idolatrous. See Romans 1. 20. 21. 22. etc.
Ephe. 2. 1. 2. also chapter 4. 18. 19. etc.


Tim. Yea but in the 2. of the Romans, Paul says that they did the things of
the law by nature.?


Silas. True, if we respect the outward discipline and government of the common
wealth; for they commanded and rewarded many virtues, they forbad and punished
many vices, as theft, murder, adultery, etc. but tonching their private life,
they were for the most part very virious, and enemies to all honesty, resisting
Christ his Gospel, and Apostles. And this is that which is meant here (even
more then is said) that they followed not, that is, they fled from it and
abhorred it, and strove against it.


Tim. What doctrine from hence?


Silas. First, we learn that all men before grace are Doctrine.
unrighteous, and thereby guilty of wrath. Secondly, that in man's will
naturally, there can be no power to move him to that which is good, for it
carries him directly to that which is against the law, much less can men
before grace merit excongrue. Thirdly, that faith (touching the beginning of
it) is in no wise from man himself, for it is given: for we can make ourselves
no more able to believe, then we can make ourselves to live: for we live to
God by says, and till then we are dead. Lastly, from hence we learn that
predestination is a most powerful thing, because it brings to a calling, to
faith, to Christ, and to salvation, even those which think upon nothing less,
nay even those which do strive against it; as these Gentiles here named, and
the thief on the Cross, and Paul and Manasses, and innumerable others.


Tim. What use is to be made of this last point?


Silas. It teaches us that neither willing nor running, purpose nor endeavor,
can get a man to be a believer: though men must do their parts, yet all
depends upon the grace of God, which we see even without any labor conferreth
grace and righteousness, there where God pleases to give it. Secondly, it
(...) great sinners, and helps them against despair; because neither
multitude nor greatness of sins, nor long continuance in them, nor all the
power of Satan, shall hinder the conversion of any who belong to Gods
election, Thirdly, it stirs up the godly, to consider whence they have all
graces which they enjoy; namely, from Gods eternal and powerful mercy, which
serves both for humbling them, and moving them to hearty thankfulness.


Tim. What is meant by [attaine?]


Silas. To apprehend, lay hold on, and receive some thing given.


Tim. What signifies [righteousnesse?]


Silas. That perfect justice of Christ, which he wrought in his own person,
by his own sufferings and doings, which consistes in remission of sins, and
imputation of his obedience. See Romans 3.


Tim. But is not this absurd, that the Gentiles which were unrighteous should
receive righteousness?


Silas. No, because they had faith to receive Christ, who is the end of the law
for righteousness, to all that believe in him, Romans 10, 4.


Tim. But how can righteousness and unrighteousness meet together in one
person?


Silas. Very well, the righteousness of faith may be found in him who wants
the righteousness of works: howbeit when the righteousness of faith comes, a
man's own unrighteousness is done away, as touching the guilt of it; and the
Spirit begins a righteous life in them, that they may in some measure think
and do righteous things.


Tim. What doctrines are we to gather from these last Doctrine.
words?


Silas. That the righteousness of Christ, and the gift of faith, do differ
the one from the other; for faith is wrought in us by Gods gift, as a hand to
take it, the righteousness of Christ sticks in his own person as in the
subject, purchased by his death and obedience. Also this is perfect appeasing
Gods wrath, the other is imperfect needing Gods pardon. Secondly, from hence
we 2. Doctrine.
learn, that seeing the justice of Christ is received, therefore it is
bestowed as a free gift, not by merit of works. Thirdly, we learn that the
justice whereby we are righteous before God, is no inherent quality in our
selves, because it comes from without us, namely from Christ's obedience imputed
to faith; faith finds none in us, but borrowes of Christ.


Tim. What is the use of this last point of Doctrine?


Silas. It confutes the Papists, who seek perfect righteousness by their own
works proceeding from faith. Secondly, it humbles and gives from us the whole
glory of our righteousness to Christ from whence we take it, as a poor beggar
an (...) from a bountiful rich king.


Tim. What other thing learn we hence?


Silas. Here is a notable place to prove that all elect finners are justified
by grace, even by faith in Christ, without the works of the Law; for it was
given to the (...) who had no good works, only because they believed. Lastly,
such as are endued with a lively faith, may thereby be certain of their own
election, justification, and salvation by Christ. For every beeleeuer knows
himself to be justified, and he that is justified knows that he is elect,
and he that is elect must needs be saved, because Gods decree is unchangeable.
Therefore he that once knows his own faith, may thereby be confident and
sure of eternal life, according to the tenor of the Gospel, every where
promising life everlasting to faith: therefore to him who can truly say, I
believe, the truth will tell him, thou art just by Christ, and must live for
ever with him. The certainty then of election is no where to be found but in
the Gospel.


DIAL. XX.
Verse 31, 32. But Israel which followed the Law of Righteousness, could not
attain unto the Law of righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not
by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law.


Tim. What is the sum of this Text?


Silas. It contains the second part of Paul's answer Sum.
unto the question moved in the thirtieth verse, Parts.
and it consists in two things: First, in a proposition, which is this; that
the Jews though they followed righteousness found it not. The second part
contains the Reasons hereof, which be two: the one is, because they sought
it not by faith; the other is, because they sought it by works.


Tim. What is meant here by Israel?


Silas. The Jews who descended from Jacob, who was Interpretation.
called Israel.


Tim. What is meant by the Law of righteousness?


Silas. The righteousness of the Law, or those righteous works which the Law
prescribes to be done perfectly, and promised life to the doers of them.


Tim. What signifies followed?


Sil. An earnest desire and endeavor to do those works: it is a speech
borrowed from such as run in a race, which strive hard to come to the goal. So
were these Jews very zealous of the Law to keep it, Acts 22, 3. and as Paul
witnesses of himself, Phil. 3, 6.


Tim. What is meant by not attaining?


Silas. It is a speech borrowed from runners, which come not to the Goal
though they strive toward it; so these Jews, though they intended to follow
the rule of the Law, which teaches a perfect righteousness, yet they were
never able to come at it.


Tim. What Doctrine arises from this whole Verse? Doctrine.



Silas. That such as seek to be justified by their own works, shall never
find righteousness: for the Jews here spoken of, sought to be righteous by
doing the Law, and yet could not attain unto the righteousness of the Law.


Tim. But this is strange, that they should not find which seek, and yet the
Scripture promises, that such as seek shall find?


Silas. Indeed it is strange, even a Paradox to natural reason, but the cause
will appear to be, that they sought amiss: as men may pray and not obtain,
because they pray amiss; so men may follow righteousness, and yet not get it,
if they seek it amiss.


Tim. Yet show me why they that endeavor to dee righteousness, should not
have that righteousness that the Law requires?


Sil. Because the Law sets forth such a righteousness as no mere man is able
to perform. It is certain, could any man perform the Law perfectly, it would
make him righteous and give him eternal life, as it written; Do this and
live, Gal. 3, 12. Leuit. 18, 8. but this absolute perfection of the Law, can
no flesh attain unto, no not Gods own regenerate Children when they are at
the best; for if We say we have no sin, we are Liars, 1 John 1, 10. There is
an impossibiltiy of keeping those two commandments, to love with all the
heart, and not to lust. Hence it is, that men easily miss of that
righteousness, which yet they may much sweat for, and take exceeding pains to
have it again. There is yet another cause why they may miss of it, although
they labor much for it; because none can seek to be saved by their own
works, without contempt of Christ, in whom alone true righteousness is to
be found; for if one do but once think that he may be saved by his own
doings, it argues that that man does judge himself to stand in no need of
Christ's doings and sufferings, and so he makes the death of Christ void and
frustrate. Gal. 2. 21.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. First, it teaches how miserable supersticious Papists Use.
and blind Protestants are; for they looking to have Gods favor and
everlasting life by their own deseruings, they are most sure to loose and
forgo it. These are under a double misery; first, that they never get the
righteousness that they strive for; and besides that, they loose that true and
perfect righteousness of Christ. Secondly, it confutes the Papists who teach the
keeping of the law to be possible, for then were righteousness to be
attained by our doing the law. Thirdly, it humbles the godly to consider that
how many or good soever their works be, yet they come far short of
righteousness, and therefore they must be forced to say; Lord enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. Psalm. 143.
2.


Tim. Is there not some other thing to be learned from this verse?


Silas. Yes even this, that the providence of God is wonderful, 2. Doctrine.
bestowing righteousness and eternal life upon his elect ones. The reason
hereof is, because he bestows Reason.
it on such as never intended it; and kept it from such as much labored for it.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It serves exceedingly to extol the grace of God, Use.
of which alone it comes that men are justified and saved. Secondly, it
greatly humbles the pride of man's heart, by thinking that whatsoever they do
for their own salvation, yet nothing is to be attributed unto their own
deeds.


Tim. Yet are not all men bound to do what lies in them, to A doubt.
get righteousness and life?


Silas. Yes verily, both for the commandment sake that Solution.
bids them strive, and for the promise sake which is made to seekers and
knockers. Thirdly, because this is enough to condemn a man, if he sail of
doing his own part in procuring his own salvation. And lastly, because God
does not usually bestow his grace and Spirit upon the secure, snorting and
idle, but upon the painful and careful Christian; as he gives, his earthly
blessing to the diligent hand, and not to the slothful. Notwithstanding all
this, God is not moved by any thing that we do to call and justify us; but
it is only out of his own good pleasure and mercy: and therefore none have
cause to glory or rejoice, save only in this, that they know him to be their
merciful Father, (...). 9. 2. and that themselves when they have done all they
can, are unworthy of any thing. Luke 17. 10.


Tim. What is it to seek righteousness by faith?


Silas. To study and desire to become righteous by believing 3. Doctrine.
in Christ.


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Silas. That the only way to find righteousness, is to seek it by faith:
the reasons be; first the commandment of God. Secondly his promise, The just
shall live by faith, Romans 1, 17. Thirdly, because the perfect righteousness of
the law is not to be found out of Christ, and he is not otherwise to be had
then by faith, by which he dwells in our hearts, Ephe. 3, 17. Fourthly, no man
can live and do so righteously, but that he must need remission of sins,
because there still will be some thing imperfect; and all Scriptures teach
that forgiveness of sin is not to be had, but by faith, Acts 10, 43.
Therefore faith only is that which iustifies the elect sinners before God, as
charity does sit before men.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silaas. It reproues such as dislike the doctrine of righteousness Use.
by Faith only, directly or indirectly, saying it is too much taught, and that
the reaching of it does much hurt: these be ignorant speeches. Secondly, it
teaches us the high and ready way how to seek righteousness, (namely) by
believing, that we are unrighteous in our selves, and no righteousness to be
found but in Christ, and in comparison of him, to judge all our works to be
dung, Phil. 3, 8. That therefore every Christians duty is as he desi es to be
righteous and to be saved, that he get this precious gift of faith, without the
which, no Justification nor life can be had.


Tim. What is meant by the works of the Law?


Sil. The merit and desert of works, as in all places where works are set
against Faith, or Grace, or Christ, there they signify merit, and not barely
the doing of a good work, as a fruit of faith.


Tim. What is our Doctrine from hence?


Silas. That our own works do not merit righteousness 4. Doctrine.
and eternal life. This is true, as well of those works which are done of
grace, as those which are done of natural Reason.
strength. For of all works the Apostle affirms, that he that seeks
righteousness by them, can never have it. Again, even these Jews did not
divide works from grace: as in the example of the Pharisie, who confesses his
works to come of Gods grace, and yet could not be justified by his own
works. For sinners are first justified, before they can do any thing pleasing
to God. Good works follow a person already justified, but they go not before as
cause of justification.


DIAL. XXI.
Verse 32, 33. For they stumbled at the stumbling stone, as it is written,
Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and a rock to make men fall, and every
one that believes in him shall not be ashamed


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To give a reason why the Jews believed not in Christ, which is this:
because Christ became to them a stone to stumble at, that is, they were
offended at him, therefore they would not believe in him, but wilfully refused
him, and crucified him as an evil doer. This is proved by two Testimonies out
of the Prophet Esaias, as Chap. 8, 14. and Chap. 28, 16. in which places God did
foretell this thing, so as it comes not by chance, but by Gods providence.


Tim. What things are we to note out of these Testimonies generally?


Silas. These things: First, who laid this stone, to wit, God, [ I lay.]
Secondly, who is this stumbling stone; Christ Parts.
in whom we are to believe. Thirdly, where it is laid [ In Sion the visible
Church.] Fourthly, to what end it is laid, to stumble at it. Fifthly, what it
is to stumble at this stone; not to believe in Christ. Sixthly, what will be the
condition of such, even shame and eu rlasting confusion, set out by the
contrary; for they shall not be ashamed but saved, which do trust in him.


Tim. Come to the Interpretation of the words, and tell us who are these [They?]


Silas. Such as be called Israelites, verse 3. that is, the people of the
Jews, which lived in the time of Christ and his Apostles.


Tim. What is meant by the stumbling stone?


Silas. Christ as Peter expounds it, 1 Pet. 2, 6. where the prophecy of Esaias
is applied to Christ. Christ is a stumbling stone, not properly of his own
Nature: for so he is a precious stone, a corner stone, a stone of Trial; but
accidentally by the fault of men, which through wilful blindness stumble at
him, and so take hurt; not actiuely to make men stumble, but passiuely, because
men fall and dash themselves against him.


Tim. What is it to stumble at this stone?


Silas. To take offense and be hindered in the way of their salvation, or to
be made the worse: this the Jews did not justly but unjustly, so as it was an
offense not given but taken.


Tim. What things were therein Christ, wherewith they might take offense?


Silas. First, the outward vileness of his person, being to see to a mean
contemptible man. Esaias 53. 2. Secondly, the base condition of his kingdom
being without worldly state and glory. John 18. 36. Thirdly, the poverty of
his Disciples and followers, being Fishers and other tradesmen. Math. 4, 18.
Fourthly his conversation, because he kept company with sinners. Math. 9, 10.
Fifthly, his doctrine, because he reproved their superstition, covetousness,
and hypocrisy, Luke 16. Math. 23. teaching that remission of sins and eternal
life is not to be got by observing of Moses law, but by believing in him and in
his Father. Lastly, they reproched as his humane nature, saying he was a
friend to Publicanes and sinners, so his divine nature too, saying he cast out
Devils by Beelzebub Prince of Devils. Mat. 12. So deep offense they took at
Christ in the former respects, that in stead of believing in him, they
blasphemed him, and rayled against him.


Tim. What doctrine is to be learned from these first words, 1. Doctrine.
[they stumbled etc.?]


Silas. That there are two sorts of offenses, one given another taken, when
men hinder their own salvation by taking an offense, when no just cause is
given. Secondly, 2. Doctrine.
as none must give offense to others, so men must beware Reason.
how they take any offense; the reason is, because a woe is due to such as
unjustly take offense: Woe be unto the world because of offenses, Math. 18. yet
greater punishment belongs to such by whom the offense comes. Thirdly, such
as take offense do hurt their own salvation, and hinder their course of
godliness; as a man which stumbleth at a stone through ouer-sight, which he
might avoid, hinders his race and loses the price: so by offenses taken,
our proceeding in godliness is stayed and interrupted or broken off.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It serves to warn all to get strength and wisdom that they be not
turned out of the way, with every light matter, or with every occasion or show
of offense. Secondly, it serves to reprove such as easily give over their
profession or care of well doing, when no cause is ministered, but like the Jews
are troubled and hindered in their Christian race, for the sewnesse or meanenes
of true professors; or for the simplicity of the ministers, or of their
preaching, or for the doctrine sake which they teach, and because other
Ministers or Magistrates do their duties: to fall at such things as should
strengthen and build us up, is a sign of great weakness: they are in
excusable who cannot resist an offense given, but to draw and pull offenses to
our selves when none are given, this is intolerable.


Tim. What other doctrine from verse 32?


Silas. That the truth must still be urged, though wicked men be offended at
the word, the Apostles did not forbear to preach the Gospel of Christ, though
the Jews were offended at it, and persecuted both Christ and the preachers of
it; so did Christ proceed in his office, though Pharisees, false Prophets and
wicked men weere displeased and urged, so must Christ's Ministers do.


Tim. Who be they which stumble at the doctrine of Christ now?


Silas. Two sorts especially; first wicked livers. Secondly, Popish and
supersticious persons, who bark like dogs against the whole some words of
Christ; as free and absolute predestination, free justification by faith, at
the bondage of man's will to goodness, at the doctrine of the Sacraments, that
grace is not tied to them, but sealed by them.


Tim. Must still Gods Ministers for all this go forward to preach, and the
people to profess these and such like truths?


Silas. They must so, after the example of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles:
also GOD has commanded us to preach, and has put the office upon us; and
therefore woe to us if we do it not. Lastly, whether men stumble at the
doctrine, or meekely receive it, yet it is still a sweet savor to God, even
when it is a savor to death, as well as when it is a savor to life.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It gives admonition to Ministers and people, not to faint or go on
less courageously in their holy religion because of scandals, which be as
rife as stones in the strectes, or blocks in the high way; and thus will God
try our stability.


Tim. But what else is to be learned from hence?


Silas. That the force of incredulity is such as can alter the nature of
things, and make Christ, the word, sacraments, Ministers, creatures, and
benefits, yea God himself (who all be good) to become occasions of the
greatest evil. As nothing is so evil but Gods infinite goodness and wisdom
can draw good out of it, as out of man's fall, and Judas treason, and the Jews
abiection: So nothing is so good but man's sin can make it pernicious and
hurtful to him, even Christ to be a stumbling stone.


Tim. What learn we by this that God laid this stone?


Silas. That nothing falls out in the world or in the Church, but by the
decree and appointment of God.


Tim. What does this teach us, that this stone is laid in Syon, in the visible
Church?


Silas. That more miserable is the case of unbelieving Christians, then of
other Infidels; because by falling on Christ, they deserve to have him fall
upon them with more weight of vengeance: they which hear the doctrine of
Christ, and receive it not, have the greater sin, John; 9, 41. James, 3, 2.
Woe Corazin, etc. and it shall be easier for Sodom then for Caparnaum.


Tim. But was this Gods purpose to make men stumble, by laying this stone in
their way?


Silas. God indeed had set Christ, to be the rising and fall of many, Luke, 2,
34. A stone precious to such as believe, but a rock of offense to disobedient
ones, 1. Pet. 2, 6. But this is to be imputed to the wickedness of men, who
turn to their destruction, that which might have been to their wealth; howbeit
this is certain that howsoever God delight not in the stumbling and unbelief
of reprobates, (as their contumacy is a sin,) yet as it is a punishment of
former sins, and a mean to manifest his justice, he has willed and
determined it.


Tim. What more is to be learned from verse 33?


Silas. That unbelievers are in a most miserable (...), because they refuse
Christ, out of whom nothing is to be looked for, but confusion and death
eternal. Secondly, that most happy are such as have found mercy to believe,
because they shall enjoy the thing in which they do believe, and therefore
shall not be put to confusion. Whereas such as through unbelief make have to
be justified by their own merits, shall miss of true righteousness, whereof
will follow extreme confusion. Men which run headlongly without looking what
is in their way, do stumble and take harm, yea sometime to their undoing. So
it fares with all unbelieving persons. which hasten unto salvation by their
own running and working, not thinking of Christ, to become righteous through
faith in him, they do miss of that they shot and aimed at, and meet with
extreme confusion. Finally, once for all I note it, that in the disputation of
righteousness by works, or by faith, here in the end of this Chapter, and in
the beginning of the next, as in ver. 3. and in the 3, 4, 5. Chapters of this
Epistle, it is at any Note.
hand to be taken heed of, that we understand no other faith but that which
works by charity, Gal. 5. which purifieth the heart, Acts 15, 9. which has
virtue and godliness joined with it, 2. Pet. 1, 6, 7. which has repentance
for a necessary companion and fruit, Acts, 20. 21. which is showed by works,
James, 2, 18. For though we teach that only faith justifies, yet this
justifying says is not alone, but as a Queen, is attended with a train of
Christian graces. As I observe this in behalf of the Papists, which falsely
charge us to set forth to the people in our books and Sermons, a bare,
barren, idle, and dead faith; so in regard of certain other Heriticks,
Seruetus executed at Geneua, and Sorinus, and Harminius, Bertius, who of late
troubled the Churches in Holland and Zeland. I further note that we eschew (as
a Shelfe or Rock) their dangerous (if not blasphemous) conceit, that faith
properly taken, or the act and work of believing, does justify us, and is
accounted to the believer for perfect righteousness with God, as if in his
own person he had done the law fully: which erroneous conceit crosses the
exposition of all Christian Churches and Divines, expounding this proposition
(we are justified by faith) figuratively. (Faith, by a Metonimie or Metalepsis,
put for the object Christ applied by faith) and all those plain Scriptures
which say, the obedience of one man made us righteous, Romans 5, 19. and, Christ
is made to us of God righteousness, 1. Cor. 1, 30. and, we are made the
righteousness of God in him, (not in us, in our faith) 2. Cor. 5, 21. and
Christ the end of Law (not faith) for righteousness, Romans 10, 4. And fights
also with such texts as make equipollent these propositions, a man is justified
by faith, and a man is justified by the blood of Christ, by the redemption of
Christ, Romans 3, 23, 24, 25. Lastly it is repugnant to all sound reason; for
faith (or to believe) it is a work, and all works universally (both of Law and
Gospel) be excluded from justification (as works:) also it is but one part of
legal justice to believe God, ergo not our whole justice; yea it is imperfect
and contaminated with ignorance, doubting, etc. How then can it absolve us
before the most just Judge?


CHAP. X.
DIAL I.
Verse 1, 2, 3. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is,
that they might be saved. For I bear them record, that they have the zeal of
God, but not according to knowledge; for they being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to stablish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God?


Timotheus. WHat is the purpose of this present Chapter?


Silas. To prove his distinction of a double righteousness, first by the law,
and secondly by faith mentioned in the former Chapter, verse, 30, 31. and in
verse 3, 4, 5. Secondly, he intends to prove that the righteousness of the
law does no whit avail the Jews before God, but that it is the righteousness
of faith that does stead us unto eternal life, verse 6, 7, 8. etc. Thirdly, to
show that this righteousness was to be preached and offered no less to the
Gentile then to the Jew, by the Apostolical Ministry, which God appointed to
be the only outward instrument of this righteousness, verse 11, 12, 13, 14,
15. etc. Lastly, to set forth the entertainment which this righteousness of
faith found in the world. The Gentiles through free and effectual vocation of
God receiving it. The Jews through unbelief and obstinacy refusing it; and
therefore being justly refused and rejected of God, verse 18, 19. etc. Into
these sour things as into parts, may this present Chapter be distinguished.


Tim. How does the Apostle prepare himself an entrance and a way to the
handling of these things?


Sil. By a prolepsis or rhetorical in sinuation, protesting his good will
toward them, and preventing of suspicion and hatred toward him in the Jews.


Tim. Was there any inst cause or necessity why the Apostle should use any such
entrance by preoccupation?


Silas. Yea, very just: For in the former precedent Chapter he had proved that
the promises of grace belonged not generally to the Jews, being the most part
of them reprobates; and had said that they stumbled at the stumbling stone,
verse 33. In this Chapter he takes from them all praise of righteousness by
the works of the law, (which were two things they much boasted of, the
promises and the law,) also he directly speaks of their reiection from God.
Now least the Jews should ascribe these discourses unto Paul's hatred of their
Nation, and so become unwilling to entertain his doctrine, therefore it seemed
very behoouefull he should testify his good will toward them, and to pacify
their minds that they be not exasperated with such sharp and harsh things as
the Apostle wrote of.


Tim. What lesson are we to learn from this art and proceeding of the
Apostle?


Silas. That the Ministers of Christ are so to speak Doctrine.
truth, as they be careful to do it, out of loving affections; and the
hearers ought to have a good persuasion of their teachers good will toward
them. The reasons Reasons.
hereof be: First, if all Christians must reprove out of love, much more the
Ministers of the Gospel; because it behooves them to excel in all graces,
for example sake.

Secondly, the Spirit of the Gospel is a Spirit of love and compassion, and
the Ministers ought to be led with this Spirit.

Thirdly, reproves will hardly or not at all profit them, when the teachers
love is suspected, and his person hated. Lastly, it is a very good preparation
for the hearers to be forestalled and possessed with a good opinion of the
Teachers good will toward them, as Physicians by sweetning bitter potions,
make the patient the willinger to take it. And Rhetoritians being to speak of
unpleasant things, wila first mollify their minds, and win their good will by
some artificial insinuation: so ought Preachers to do much more as occasion
and cause requires, by how much it imports him and his flock, the more that
his hearers think well of him. And if the Scorpion will first lay fast hold
on them with his claw, whom he purposes to strike with his tail, then ought
much more they to embrace them by love, whom they must cure by reproof.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this lesson?


Silas. It teaches that Ministers have need of great Uses.
wisdom to discern their (...), and that also which they teach, that they
may know what it is that is likely to give offense, also when to use friendly
admonitions and sharp reprehensions. Secondly, it teaches that Ministers
ought to be endowed with a spirit of singular love, and to express good will
even to such as are contrary minded, so long as there is any hope for to win
them.

Thirdly, that they ought to have an upright heart, that in showing love and
preventing offense, they may not conceal any truth, or smoothe any vice, out
of flattery and desire to please man.

Fourthly, here is a reprchension to such as will be Ministers, and yet
altogether lack these graces, as if a lame man would attempt to run, and a
blind man to take upon him to be a guide.

Lastly, here is an admonition to all hearers, to strive in themselves against
all suspicion, that their teachers exhort and reprove out of hatred of them;
as they would ever desire to take any profit by their labors. For we are
very apt to mistrust, and Satan by his suggestions will drop into us ill
affections, and therefore look to it, and put away jealousy.


Tim. Come we now to the Text, and tell us what be the parts of his prolepsis?


Silas. These four: First, he protests his good will toward them. Secondly,
he proves it by an argument from the effect, (to wit) his earnest prayer for
their conversion (...).
and salvation, verse, 1. Thirdly, he mentions the engendering cause of his
love toward them, (to wit) their zeal of God. Fourthly, he rehearses three
faults in their zeal. First, ignorance. Secondly, spiritual pride. Thirdly,
obstinate contempt of the grace of Christ, verse, 3.


Tim. In what sense does be call them brethren?


Silas. Because they were his kinsmen by natural generation, see Romans 9, 3.
Thus he calls them, that he might both express and excite good will, and
provoke readiness to hear and believe him.


Tim. What is meant by hearts desire?


Sil. Exceeding great pronenesse and readiness of love, Interpretation
or more then common, even singular good will, such as is joined with delight,
and exceeding great pleasure in those which are loved. For the word here used,
is the word whereby the eternal love of God toward the elect, is notified, as
Mat. 3, 17. Ephe. 1, 5. Luke, 2, 14.


Tim. What doctrine is to be gathered from hence?


Silas. That in all the prayers which we make to God 2. Doctrine.
for our selves or others, the desire of the heart must go before. The reasons
hereof be these: First, the commandemenr Reasons.
of God, Prou. 23, 26. My son give me thy heart. Secondly, the nature of
God, who being a Spirit, will be worshipped spiritually, with the desire of
the heart, John, 4, 24. Thirdly, this is the very chief thing in prayer, Psalm.
25, 1. Mark, 11, 24. Fourthly, without this, prayer cannot be fervent and
unfeigned, and therefore cannot be heard. For the promise is made unto fervent
prayers, James, 5, 15. Mark, 11, 24. Lastly, such prayers as come from hearty
desires, are only pleasing and acceptable to God, and they only testify that
we have the Spirit of God, Romans 8, 26, 27.


Tim. By what means are these desires stirred up in the hearts of Gods
Children?


Sil. By the due and godly meditation, First of the excellency of the things
we pray for. Secondly, of the necessity, in that we cannot be happy if we be
without them. Thirdly, of our grievous sins, which deserve things quite
contrary to the things we do pray for.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It teaches that the thing cheifest in prayer, is, Uses.
that the heart be set on work in sending up good desires toward heaven, as
sparkles out of a furnace. Secondly, it shows the true cause why that many
prayers of the godly speed not, even for that their desires are cold and faint,
and slender. Thirdly, it warns that the prayers of the wicked are but
bablings, (vain and abominable,) because they call on God with their lips,
the desire of their heart being far from him, Mat. 15, 8. Lastly, the
distinction of mental and vocal prayer is justified by this place, and indeed
no distinction in divinity is current but that which has ground in the
Scripture directly, or by good deduction.


Tim. In that the Apostle prays for them, what does this teach us?


Silas. That our Christian love one toward another, does no way more firmly
manifest it self, then by praying one for another salvation. Thus Paul proves
the truth and earnestness of his love to the Istaelites by this duty of
praying for their conversion to Christ, that they might be saved. Which shows
it to be a special evidence of love: yea Paul did more demonstrate his love in
praying for the Israelites good, then when he grieved for their evil; because
it is more to be saved, then to be delivered from pain. Also Steven at his
death witnessed his charity by his supplication unto God for his persecutors,
Acts 7. 60. And Christ also manifested his deep love to his crucifiers, by
praying God to forgive them. Moreover, Paul testified his love to all the
Churches, in the beginning of his Epistles, by thanksgiving and prayer for
their faith and love; and it cannot be but a man must love him heartily, for
whose repentance and salvation, he heartily prays.


Tim. Whereunto must the knowledge of this truth serve us?


Silas. First, to reprove them for want of love, which foreslow or forget to
pray for others, or do it not for their being saved. Secondly, to consute them
of error, who think love to consist only or chiefly in good speech or alms,
or other outward works of mercy to the body. Thirdly, here is an admonition
to every one, to prove unto himself, the truth of his Christian love, by his
diligentand earnest prayers for the good of others: namely, for their
conversion and salvation, which is the chiefest good. For whosoever he be that
truly loves another, does ever aim at the good of the party loved, and
especially of that which may do them most good; and that what can it else be,
but the salvation of their souls after Paul's example here?


Tim. But aid this prayer prevail with the Jews, to get them all saved?


Silas. No: these words set forth not the effect, and what fruit came of his
prayer, but what scope and end he propounded to his prayer; which was not
earthly and temporal, but eternal good things.


Tim. But why would Paul pray for them whom he knew to be cast out from God
and salvation?


Silas. All were not so, and for the other he might pray, Romans 11. 1. Secondly,
the nation of the Jews were not cast out for ever, but for a time; and
therefore he might pray for the salvation of such as were to be called, Rom,
11. 25. This admonishes all Christians, what things in prayer they ought
especially to beg for others; and that the event of their prayers, even for
the most exellent good, which ever endures, does depend upon Gods pleasure;
whereof sithence we can take no certain knowledge, in respect of particular
persons, therefore out of Christian charity, we are to wish well to all whom
God vouchsafes the name of his people; or with this limitation, (all whom God
has given to Christ.) John 17, 9.



DIAL. II.
Verse 2. For I bear them record that they have the zeal of God, but not
according unto knowledge.


Tim. What does this verse contain?


Silas. Two things; first, the testimony of Parts.
Paul touching the zeal of the Jews, which engendered his love toward them.
The second is, a correction of his testimony, giving them to wit, that their
zeal was erroneous and void of knowledge.


Tim. What do ye call zeal?


Sil. It is a very earnest love of something, joined with Interpret.
grief for the hurt done to it; as the loving mother or wife do grieve for
the harm done to their child or husband.


Tim. What things are required unto zeal simply considered?


Silas. Three; first, a thing must be vehemently loved, for zeal is love
increased. Secondly, a wrong (true or supposed,) is to be offered to the thing
so fervently loved. Thirdly, thereupon arises a great grief conceived, with a
desire to repel the wrong. This affection of zeal in it self is not good or
evil, but is an indifferent affection, and many times it is found in men both
good and evil; for the Apostles were zealous, and so were the Pharisees;
Christians were zealous, and so were the Jews too; as appears in this Text:
as now some Protestants in their way be zealous, so be many Papists.


Tim. What call ye the zeal of God?


Silas. A great grief of heart for some wrong done to him; his will, doctrine,
worship or glory, or people; with a desire to hinder or repel the same with
all our power.


Tim. What is meant by this, that they had the zeal of God?


Silas. That they had a burning desire in their hearts, to promote the glory of
God, and weere grieved for hurt done to it (as they thought,) by Christ and his
Apostles, and their doctrine.


Tim. Whether was this their zeal sinful, or no?


Sil. In that they greatly affected Gods glory, and were moved with
indignation for that which was done against it, thus far their zeal was
good, and was both loved and commended of Paul: but because it was not governed
by faith and sound knowledge, it was blind, ignorant, and erroneous, and
therefore it was vicious: for it made of Religion, error and ignorance of such
things as we ought to know, and so by sin defiled their affections and
actions, which in their own nature were good.


Tim. What knowledge is needful to zeal, that it may be a right zeal?


Silas. A threefold knowledge: First, of the thing loved. Secondly, of the hurt
done to it. Thirdly, of the end which we propound to our zeal.


Tim. The zeal of the Jews, how did it fail in the knowledge of these three
things?


Silas. First, they did not know the thing loved: for they rightly knew not
Gods worship and glory, which they thought to stand in ceremonies and outward
observations of the Law, and not in the faith of Christ, and obedience to the
Gospel. Secondly, the wrong which they thought to be done to God by the gospel
of Christ was but supposed, and no true real wrong. For, the preaching Christ
(which out of blind zeal they persecuted) did much advance Gods glory, and
the praise of his grace, that in his beloved Son he would freely accept
sinners. Thirdly, they also strove for vainglory and their own praise out
of self-love, which they choked with pretense of Gods glory, and so failed in
the end of their zeal, as well as in the object.


Tim. What Doctrine are we to gather out of this verse?


Sil. We learn first by Paul's example, to love and allow Doctrine.
of the good things which we find even in bad men, although they be joined
with much sin and wickedness. For the zeal which the Jews had to God (albeit
it had no knowledge to guide it) yet seeing in it self it was a good thing,
the Apostle commends it, and bears witness to it. Christ also loved the good
things which he saw in the covetous young man that trusted in his riches, Mark
10, 21. also the Prophet David praised many good things in Saul, 2 Samuel 1, 23.
though he were a most wicked man. The Reasons hereof be, first because every
good thing, Reasons.
(so far as is good) comes of God, James 1, 17. and therefore must be loved
and liked. Secondly, this is a good means to cherrish concord and friendship
among men, and the contrary stirs up strife and hatred. Thirdly, it is
justice to give every man his due praise, unto whom praise belonges, and shame
unto whom shame appertains.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point? Use.



Silas. It reprooues such sour uncharitable men, as for some fault in others,
condemn whatsoever good they find in them, either not being able to
distinguish the work of God and of sin, or by malice and envy shutting their
own eyes, that they may not give virtue the due praise. Secondly, it warns
all men in their judgments and speeches of others, to keep a moderation, so
speaking of their vices (if cause require, as to reprove them for their
amendment) as yet wisely and with love, mention be made of their graces, least
they be driven away from godliness by too much austeritie; after the example
of Paul here, and 1 Cor. 11, 2.


Tim. What other Doctrine of this verse?


Silas. Hence we learn, that there is a twofold zeal, one good and another
evil: the former true, being guided by knowledge; the latter dissembled,
being ignorant and erroneous.


Tim. What be the properties of this true and good zeal?


Silas. First, it greatly loves nothing but that which ought to be loved.
Secondly, it greeueth for wrong truly and indeed done to the thing it loves.
Thirdly, it neither exceeds the bounds of calling and charity. Fourthly, it
ever affects and seeks the honor of God, and not selfe-praise and
vainglory, and opinion or applause of man. Examples of this true zeal we
have in Christ, when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, John 2,
15. and of Phineas, when he thrust thorough both the Adulterers, even as they
were in their uncleanness, Numb. 25, 8, 11. and of Paul and Barnabas, when
they rent their clothes, Acts 14, 19. and Moses when he broake the Tables,
Exodus 32. and Paul for the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1, 11. and for the Galathians,
Gal. 4, 19.


Tim. Is not d ssembled Zeal contrary to the former, in all these properties?


Silas. It is, and ever fails in all or in some of these. For, besides the
Jews named in this Text, we have the examples of diverse other in Scripture,
as Demetrius his zeal for Diana, whom he ought not to have loved, Acts 19.
Iehu was zealous, but failed in the manner, 2 Kings 10, 6. Paul a Pharisie was
zealous, but he loved that which he should not have loved, (that is,) his
own righteousness, as the Jews did here: and he thought Gods glory to be
wronged by that by which indeed it was not wronged, but honored rather, as
the Doctrine of grace and righteousness by Faith, Acts 22, 15. Thus the
Pharisees and many of the Jews, offended in their zeal. Also the Apostles
wishing Fire upon a Town in Samaria, failed in the end of their Luke 9, 34, 35
zeal, which was only to ease their impatient mind, and not out of a pure
affection to Gods glory, nor out of charity to their neighbor.

Lastly, Vzza exceeded his Vocation, when he put his hand to the Ark, 2 Samuel
6, 6, 7. How do the Papists dote and are even mad with love and zeal of their
Strumpet, and her trumpery?


Tim. What use of this distinction?


Sil. It admonishes all to labor for zeal, but (as they desire not to sin
and offend God in their zeal) to rule it acording to knowledge. There are
three sorts of people that do offend about zeal, and are therefore to be
reproved: First, such as be stark cold, having no zeal at all for Gods
worship, doctrine, and glory. What becomes of these things, they are no whit
moved, so they may enjoy their worldly pleasures and profits: such an one was
Gallio, Acts 18, 17. The second sort be lukewarm and indifferent ones, neither
hot nor cold, as the Laodiceans, Revel. 3, 15. and the Israelites halting
between two, 1 Kings 18, 21. The third sort are they, whose zeal is blind,
void of knowledge, and godly wisdom, being rash and intemperate in their
actions, covering their own carnal affections with the cloak and pretense of
glorifying God; yea too too many be hot in public reformation, and yet be
unreformed privately and in their own persons, being no Disciplinarians at
home; but rather do much hurt to the name and Gospel of Christ, and give great
scandal to the Church of God, whilst they leap without the bounds of their
vocation and all Christian duty and discretion, whereof this age and Church of
ours affoords us many lamentable examples, especially in Separists. Therefore,
as it behooves all Christians to be zealous (zeal being commanded of God,
Revel. 3, 19. it being commended as a good thing, Galat. 4, 18. and as a fruit
of repentance, 2 Cor. 7, 11. and as a part of Christ's Image, John 2, 17.) yet
let all men strive by earnest prayer, to get godly knowledge joined to their
zeal, to go before it as a guide to conduct it, and as an eye to direct it,
both in the things to be loved, and in the manner and scope of their love.


Tim. What is the last instruction out of this verse?


Silas. That a good intention is not sufficient to make ones action to be
good. These Jews in persecuting Christ his Apostles, and their Doctrine, meant
well; (for they thought that God his worship and Law, and Moses his servant, to
be wronged by the preaching of the Gospel; and therefore in killing the
Preachers, they should do God good service) yet they are blamed here by Paul
for rash proceeding against knowledge. The reason hereof is, because a man's
intention is never good, but when it is built upon a good warrant (to wit) the
word of God, and referred to a right end namely, the praise of God.


Tim. Can you give us any examples of any who have swerued from this rule?


Sil. Yea, in Vzza, in putting his hand to the Arc, 2. Sam. 6, 7. of Peter's
dissuading Christ to go to Jerusalem, Math. 16, 22. of the Apostles calling for
fire from heaven to fall upon the Samaritanes because they would not receive
Christ, Luke 9. 54. of many Papists, striving for haeresies and superstitions
against the Gospel; wherein they all think they did well, but indeed and
truth were deceived: deeply offending God when they thought to do him best
service.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. First, it reprooues such as think they may do evil that good may come
of it. Secondly it warnes us not to be offended at the preposterous zeal of
many which study to bear out bad courses with good intentions and countenance
their hurt to the truth, and defense of their errors, with fair shows of
burning zeal, to do service to God and his Church: here of Christ forewarned
us, John 16. Lastly, it exhortes us, that that to our good intentions we join
good ends, and to our good ends good means, that all may be good; not making
our own or other men's opinions and affections the rule of our meaninges,
except they agree with the rule of the Scriptures, even with Gods mind
contained therein, without the certain clear knowledge whereof, thorough the
enlightening of the holy Ghost, even out prayers, our preaching, our
thanksgiving and receiving the holy mysteries or other duties of religion and
Righteousness (with whatsoever good meaning we seek to do them) they are
turned into sin, being (I say) not done by knowledge and obedience of the
will of GOD therein, Romans 14, 23. 1 Timothy 4, 3.


DIAL. III.
Verse 3. For they being ignorant of the Righteousness of God, and going about
to establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the
Righteousness of GOD.


Tim. WHat is performed by the Apostle in this verse?


Silas. These two things: First, the Method.
faults of the Jews zeal, are here more distinctly and plainly laid down:
as first, their ignorance of the righteousness of God. Secondly, from thence
did spring pride, out of opinion of their own righteousness. Thirdly, their
pride engendered contempt of the grace and righteousness of Christ. The second
thing, is the 2. maine part of this Chapter (to wit,) the distinction of
righteousness into two parts; the righteousness of God, and our own
righteousness.


Tim. What is meant here by ignorance?


Silas. Not barely the want of knowledge, but the Interpret.
not knowing of such things as the Jews (being Gods people) were bound to
know. For the righteousness of GOD was revealed in Scripture, having witness
from the Law and Prophets; and taught in the Assemblies, and a thing very
needful to be known, as that wherein man's felicity does consist: for
Righteousness and blessedness are always joined and annexed together
unseparably, Psalm. 32, 1. Hab. 2, 4. The lust shall live by Faith.


Tim. What signifies the righteousness of God?


Silas. The righteousness of God is threefold; first, his universal justice,
which requires in Angels and men perfect purity, outward and inward in all
points, according to the exact (...) of the law. Secondly, particular
correctiue justice, whereby he eternally reuengeth and punishes sin and
sinners, without pardon in Christ, Romans 3. 5. Thirdly, that which Scripture
calls the righteousness of Christ, and offaith, Romans 3. 22. and 10. 6. In
all these three sorts of righteousness, the Jews were ignorant, although the
third be here meant principally; which is called the righteousness of God,
because it is given, appoin ted and approved of God.


Tim. What are we to gather for our instruction, from the first words, being
thus expounded?


Silas. That it is a sin to be ignorant of God, or his Doctrine.
righteousness. The reason is, because we have a commandment Reason.
from God to seek the knowledge of him, and that which pleases him. Exodus 20.
3. 1. Chro. 28. 8. Destruction 2 These, 2. 8.
is threatened to the ignorance of the Gospel.


Tim. But is there no difference in this sin of ignorance, are all ignorant
persons alike sinners?


Silas. No not so; their ignorance is the less sinful which want means of
knowledge, as the Turks and the Pagans: but these Jews here spoken off, had
Moses and the Prophets; therefore their ignorance was the greater sin.


Tim. What use hereof? Use.



Silas. It shows them to be deceived, which think to be excused before God,
by their ignorance of his will; Ignorantia excusat non a toto sed a (...).
whereas none, no not simple ignorance can excuse any, (for he must be beaten
who knows not his masters will,) much less affected and wilful ignorance.
Secondly, it exhorts all Christians, as they will avoid the guilt of sin and
condemnation, to labor for the knowledge of God and his righteousness; for
herein stands eternal life to know God and Christ Jesus, John 17, 3. and
Christians should account all things as dung, in respect of the precious
knowledge of Jesus Christ. Phil. 3. 8.


Tim. What other thing collect we from these words?


Silas. That where there is the ignorance of God and 2. Doctrine.
his righteousness, there can be no true zeal for God; for in all right
zeal, the thing which is earnestly loved, must Reason.
be distinctly known of him that loves it.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. It proves the zeal of supersticious Papists and Use.
blind Protestants, to be vicious and dissembled: for whatsoever earnestness
they show (as they can be very holy and earnest) about things pleasing to God,
and belonging to his glory, as they think; yet all that is nothing less then
true zeal, so long as they are ignorant of GOD and his word: also it shows
the cause why nien lack good zeal, to wit, ignorance, it is the mother of an
erroneous zeal.


Tim. What does accompany this their ignorance? Interpretation.



Silas. Arrogance and haughtiness of mind, in that they sought to establish
their own righteousness.


Tim. What is meant by their [owne righteousness?]


Silas. The righteousness of the law, or of works inherent in themselves, and
consisting in their own labors and working, either before grace by strength of
nature, or after grace by the Spirit, whereby they thought to merit Gods
favor and eternal life; as the Pharisie, Luke 18.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, that Pride accompanies ignorance?


Silas. First, the falsehood of that Popish principle, that 3. Doctrine.
ignorance is the mother of devotion; whereas indeed it is the Parent of
error and presumption. Secondly, we see what a dangerous matter it is to be
ignorant of God and Christ; for such do not take themselves to be in that
sinful and damnable estate, and to have need of Christ his sufferings and
obedience, but that by their own works and serving of God, they shall be
saved well enough, as these Jews thought; which is a pride most execrable. The
nature whereof is, to make a man to seek for all felicity in himself, and not
to be beholden to any other for any thing; rather choose to perish then to
receive the righteousness of Christ, as beggars do alms.


Tim. What is meant here by [establishing?]


Silas. To erect, set up, and make to stand; whereby is 4. Doctrine.
employed, that man's own righteousness is very weak, like a dead corpse, or one
that lies bedridden, or a baby made of clouts. For as in vain we go about to
set up these, or to make them to stand; so man's own righteousness by works is
unable to stand before the exact judgment seat of God Psalm. 130. 3. 4. Dan. 9.
The reason is, because the works which men do before grace, are sinful and
offend God, Reason.
seeing they be not done out of says, Romans 14. Secondly, the works which
follow faith are imperfect, and therefore cannot please God and merit his
favor. And lastly, even our best works are but the fruits and effects of our
justification; and therefore can be no meritorious causes of it.


Tim. Whereunto must this knowledge serve us?


Sil. That we beware we trust not in our own works, to have righteousness and
life thereby; least through pride Use.
we fall into the same condemnation as these Jews did, whom if God spared
not for their unbelief, how will he spare us?


Tim. But what did follow the pride of the Jews?


Sil. A wicked contempt of the righteousness of God, for they would not be
subject unto it.


Tim. What is it, not to be subject to the righteousness of God?
Interpretation.



Silas. Not to receive it being offered, but stubbornly 5. Doctrine.
to refuse it, to cast it from us as a thing superfluous.


Tim. What doctrine arises from hence?


Silas. That ignorant proud iusticiaties which trust in Reason.
the merits of their own works, are rebels against God and his grace: for it
is rebellion against God, to resist his will in his promises, as well as in his
commandments. For as rebels will not be subject to their Prince, but rise up
in arms against him, partly because they are ignorant of the Similitude.
Princes power, and partly because they are highly conceited of their own
strength: So Pharisaicall iusticiaries and merit-mongers, because they know
not the perfect exact justice of Christ, and do too highly think of their
own righteousness; thence it is that they only entertain not, but reject the
grace of Christ with disdainesulnesse; a most miserable condition.


Tim. Come we now to the distinction of righteousness, and tell us what it is?
2. Part of Chap.



Sllas. Either Gods righteousness or our own: this distinction was set down
before in cha. 9. in other terms, righteousness of law and of faith.


Tim. What do ye call Gods righteousness?


Silas. It consists in the forgiveness of our sins by Christ's sufferings,
and the imputation of his perfect obedience for our perfect justice before God.
Romans 3. 4. 5. whereas our own stands in working and our doings.


Tim. What further difference is there in this double righteousness?


Silas. They differ in respect of the subject; for the one sticks in our
selves, the other is without us in Christ's manhood. Secondly, they differ in
the form, for our own righteousness comes unto us by our own working; but
Gods comes unto us by free guist, and imputation of it to our faith. Thirdly in
efficacy, for the one merits remission of sins and eternal life, the other
deserves nothing save (in strict justice) eternal death: but is acceptable to
God through Christ, by approbation, not of justice, but by acceptance of grace.


Tim. What is to be learned out of the comparison of this double righteousness?


Silas. That such as stick to their own righteousness, (trusting to their
own works) shall never enjoy the righteousness 6. Doctrine. Reason.
of faith, or of Christ. The reason is, because in the matter of salvation,
there is a flat contrariety between grace and merit, Christ and Moses: so as
by no means they can agree together. See Romans 11, 6, Gal. 2. 21. and 5. 2. 4.


Tim. What is the use hereof?


Silas. That all popish Iusticiaries and merite-mongers, Use.
(which so live and so dye) are in most wretched condition; for that
righteousness of works which they follow, they loose it, because they can
never be able to keep the Law: and withal by having confidence in their own
merits, they never attain Christ's righteousness, and so dye in their sins
without pardon or salvation. Secondly, it exhorts all Christians for eternal
life to depend upon the grace of God, and merit of his Son, renouncing all
self worthiness, even as they covet and desire to be partakers of the
righteousness of God unto absolution for sin, and everlasting salvation in
heaven: for God will save none but such as being humbled in the sight of their
own unworthiness and misery, do rejoice and glory in Christ oncly, Romans 5,
11. 1. Cor. 1. 29, 31. 1. Pet. 4.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 4, 5. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness unto every
one that belesueth. For Moses thus describes the etc.


Tim. What does these two verses contain?


Silas. Paul does here set upon the third part Drifte.
of this Chapter, (to wit) the confirmation of the twofold righteousness,
which he propounded, verse 3. and to show that the righteousness of faith is
that alone which is to be sought after for our justification, and for our
meriting eternal life.


Tim. How does the Apostle prove that we are to follow the righteousness of
faith, rather then of works?


Silas. By two reasons contained in this present text: Method.
the first is this, That Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness; but
it is certain that we do receive Christ Jesus rather by believing then by
working. Therefore we must seek to be justified before God by faith and not
by works. Or thus, The law serves to send us unto Christ, therefore we are
justified by believing in Christ, who is the end of the law by fulfilling it,
and not by the works of the law which we do. The other reason is taken from
the property of the law, which requires perfect keeping of it unto
righteousness and life, verse 5. but the perfect keeping of the law, is
impossible to us, therefore we cannot have righteousness by the works of the
law, but by faith in Christ. Or thus, (...) righteousness is impossible to be
had which promises life upon an impossible condition; but the righteousness
of the law is such; therefore it is impossible and not to be sought after by
us: but on the contrary, the righteousness of faith being possible to be had,
therefore it is to be followed of us, and rested in only.


Tim. What be the parts of the fourth verse?


Silas. Two: First, in what sense and meaning Christ Parts.
is the end of the law. And secondly, how and to whom.


Tim. What is the connection of this verse with the former?


Sil. By a preoccupation making answer to a secret Coherence.
objection of the Jews, who might say and plead that they sought for
themselves no other righteousness the^ that the law requires, and that being
the true righteousness, therefore they could not err in their zeal for it.
Again, they being affraide to be excluded from this true righteousness, if
they admitted Christ, therefore did not they embrace him. Unto this their
objection the Apostle answers, that indeed the Jews did not seek true
righteousness, because they contemned Christ, who is the end of the law for
righteousness to believers; and therefore they had no cause to fear the
loosing of the righteousness of the law by cleaving to Christ, who is the end
of it. Or the connection may be this, to render (...) why the Jews through
ignorance and pride refused the righteousness of God, because they knew not
Christ, who is the end of the law for righteousness.


Tim. What law is meant here?


Sil. By law is meant both ceremonial and moral, but Interpretation.
chiefly the moral law of the ten Commandments.


Tim. In what sense and meaning is Christ said to be the end of the Law?


Silas. This word [End] has four significations in Scriptures: First, it
signifies determination or ending of a thing, as Mat. 24, 3. Secondly, it
signifies the mark whereunto any thing aims, as 1 Pet. 1, 9. Thirdly, it
signifies perfection or accomplishment, as To. 13. Love is the end of the
Law. Fourthly, that for whose sake or cause any thing is appointed. The word [
End] in this text may well bear all these four significations: but the two
last especially. For Christ has determined the ceremonial Law for
signification and practice: and the Moral Law for curse and extreme rigor.
Also he is the mark at which the whole Old Testament (to wit, both Law and
Prophets) aimed; for they bare witness to Christ, To. 3, 21. Thirdly, Christ
is that which is intended in the Law, and for which the Law is appointed.
Lastly, he is the perfection of the Law, inasmuch as he has exactlie in every
point performed it, bearing the punishment due to the breach, and yielding due
obedience.


Tim. But declare unto us more particularly, in what respects Christ is the
perfection of the Law?


Silas. First, in respect of his integrity and purity of his Nature, being
conceived without sin, Math. 1, 18. Luke 1, 35. Secondly, in respect of his
life and actions, being wholly conformed to the absolute righteousness of the
Law, 2 Cor. 5, 21. Thirdly, in respect of the punishment which he suffered, to
make satisfaction unto Gods Justice for the breach of the Law, Col. 1, 20. To
which may be added, that he has purged the Law from the corrupt glosses of
the Pharisics, Math. chapter 5, 6. Lastly, he renews it, causing his members
here to begin, and in heaven to fulfill the obedience of it, Tit. 3, 5. 6.


Tim. What is the sum of the first part of the 4. (...)?


Silas. Thus much: whereas God gave us the Law of the ten Commandments, to be
a Law of perfect righteousness, Sum.
and men thorough weakness are unable to keep (...), therefore Christ is now
made the perfection of the Law, for that Christ has made perfect and full that
which the Law could not: for it could not pardon our sins nor give us power
to fulfill it, but Christ has done both these by application of his obedience,
and sufferings to believers.


Tim. What Doctrine arises from this verse thus explained? Doctrine.



Silas. First, whosoever desires perfect righteousness and eternal life,
must come to Christ, who is therefore called our righteousness. 1 Cor. 1, 30.
2 Cor. 5, 21. The reason hereof is, because perfect righteousness (such
Reason.
as is required in the Law, and to which eternal life is due) is to be found
in the man Christ only, and in no other human creature whatsoever: and this
comes to pass, not by any defect in the Law, which is a word of life, and
ordained to give life, Rom 7, 14. but by our own default, who cannot
thoroughlie obey it, Romans 8, 3.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this Doctrine? Use.



Silas. It conuicteth those of error, which will be Justified The formet
Doctrine teaches, that Faith properly taken, (...) not, but in respect of the
object Christ, from whom it has al virtue and power.
any other way, either in whole or in part, save by Christ only: for since
nothing that men do or can do, before or after grace, can be said to be
Christ, and Christ alone is our righteousness; therefore, to trust in any
thing for righteousness, is to make that a Christ, and so to renounce him.
Secondly, it teaches, that true Christian people be the only happy men, and
only Christian religion to be the only true religion; because it alone
teaches the Doctrine of Christ, and of righteousness by him, therefore all
other professions, besides Christianity, directly leads to perdition,
whatsoever shows they have. Turcisme, Papisme, Paganism, etc. are false and
deceitful religions.


Tim. What is the next Doctrine?


Sil. That the chief office and duty of the Law, is not only to give
knowledge of our sins, and to be a direction for our life and manners, but
to direct us unto Christ, as unto the proper end thereof, in respect whereof
the law is termed our Schoole-Maister to Christ, Gal. 3, 24.


Tim. But how does the Law direct and bring us unto Christ?


Silas. Not directly, and ofit own nature, for so it How the law does bring to
Christ.
threatens us with death for every disobedience; and promises eternal life no
otherwise then upon perfect obedience, which we utterly want: but indirectly
and by accident, namely by showing out sins, accusing and condemning us;
therefore it compels us to despair of our getting righteousness and life by
our own observing of the Law, driving us by that means out of our selves to
seek unto Christ, for the pardon of our sins, and to be accounted perfectly
just, by his obedience imputed unto us. For as a glass by showing us the blots
in our face warnes us to wipe them out, and a sickness being known and felt
enforces us to the Physician for help, and as hunger and weariness compels
us to look out for meat and rest; so the law by opening our guiltiness, and
terrifying our conscience, by denouncing punishments, makes us run to Christ
for remedy, that we may be justified by him laid hold on and received by a
true and lively faith.


Tim. What profit of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it argues all such of great foolishness, as Use.
seek to be justified by the works of the law; for that is instead of a
Schoole-Maister, to make it a father and a redeemer Much more worthy of
reproof are such as be never a whit affrighted and grieved by hearing the
threats of the law, these be (...) from Christ.
unto us. Secondly, it does admonish us how we may become profitable hearers of
the law, (to wit) by learning from the law, being rightly expounded, not our
sins alone and the judgments due unto them, but by considering Christ to be
our redeemer, and deliverer from sin and the curse due to them. Therefore
such are here justly to be reproved, as upon hearing of the law preached, do
stick in the knowledge of their sins, and the fear of Gods wrath due to
them; whereas they should be led forward, thereby to see and seele a great need
of Christ, that they may seek after him to obtain pardon of their sins, also
righteousness and eternal life by him: as a man that is wounded, or one that
is sick, runs to the Physician for relief and help, so the law revealing
sin and death, should whip to Christ.


Tim. Come to the second part of this text, and tell us what doctrines we are
to learn from thence? 2. Part.



Silas. First, that Christ together with his righteousness, 1. Doctrine.
are received not by any works, but by believing, as it is here written, [to
him that believes.] Secondly, we learn 2. Doctrine.
that the righteousness of Christ is offered and given not to the believing
Jews alone, but to all elect Gentiles also which shall believe in him, as it
is written, [to every one that believes.]


Tim. What follows heerevpon?


Silas. These two things: First, that the difference between the Jew and
Gentile under the law, is now taken away by Christ, under the Gospel.
Secondly, here is great matter of comfort for all faithful persons whosoever,
how weak soever their faith be (so it be true:) for unto such their sins
done against the law, shall not be accounted, and the righteousness which
Christ has done shall be imputed unto them as their own, to be full and
true blessedness. Whosoever has found mercy to believe in Christ, he is
freed from the malediction of the law, his sins cannot hurt, Moses cannot
condemn him; nay he is Lord over the law, sin, hell, and death, being
through Christ's righteousness heir of life.


DIAL. V.
Verse 5 For Moses thus describes the righteousness which is of the law, that
the man which does these things shall live thereby.


Tim. FRom what book of Moses is this testimony fetched, and what is the sum
of it?


Silas. The testimony is fetched out of Leuiticus 18. verse 5. The sum where
of is thus much, that whosoever Sum.
perfectly keeps the whole law, shall have that righteousness, unto which as
a due debt belongs eternal life. So as here in these words is a compact
between God and man; God promises eternal life so as men do his starutes
perfectly; this is the covenant of works, made with Angels and men in their
creation, and repeated in Scripture, to force us to Christ.


Tim. To what purpose is this testimony cited?


Silas. First, to prove that there is a righteousness of Scope.
works, as well as of faith. Secondly, to prove that it is impossible for any
mere man to have this righteousness of works; because the condition upon
which the righteousness of the law does depend, is not possible to be
fulfilled: which is this, (to do the whole law in every point,) it being a
thing which far surpasses the infirmity of man's nature; and therefore we may
not seek either righteousness or eternal life by the works of the law, but
by faith in Christ Jesus.


Tim. Now come to the words and tell us what is meant by [describeth?]


Silas. Thus much, to set forth a thing in so plain and Interpret.
clear manner, as that it may be well perceived and understood, as a thing
painted in lively colors to be seen.


Tim. What is meant by the [righteousnes of the law?]


Silas. That (...)ousnesse which the law moral teaches and describes, which
elsewhere is called our own righteousness, or the righteousness of works;
because it sticks in our selves, and stands in working after the law, and
not in believing the Gospel.


Tim. What lesson are we to learn from the first part of this verse, being
thus explained?


Sil. That all such texts of Scripture as do teach works 1. Doctrine.
and promise life unto them, they belong unto Moses; and are part of Moses law
though they be written in the new Testament; as namely those words of Christ
to the young man, Math. 19. 17. If thou wili enter into life, keep the
commandments also Romans 2. 6. 7. and 13. For the Gospel requires Reason.
works as truites of faith, not as merits of righteousness and life.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. It helps us to distinguish between the sentences Use.
of the law and of the Gospel; for the Gospel does often promise life
eternal, and salvation to repentance and good works; but not as they are
performance of the law, but as the tokens and fruits of a lively faith,
whereby the promise of eternal life is apprehended.


Tim. Now go forwards and show us what is meant by doing, [he that does.]


Silas. To [doe] signifies to keep and perform exactly Interpretation.
and most perfectly, without any the least faylings at any time: for here the
sentence is legal; but when the sentence is Evangelical, then to do
signifies no more but to desire, to take care and to endeavor to do what we
may, and what lies in us, as John 13. 17. If ye know these things, happy are
ye if ye do them.


Tim. What is meant in our text by [these things?]


Silas. The statutes and laws of God, as appears by the 5. verse of the 5.
chap. of Leuit.


Tim. Of what life does this text speak?


Silas. Not of a temporal life only, (as some understand it,) but of eternal
life also; which appears by comparing this place with Mat. 19. 17. For as the
law threatens death eternal to every transgressour; so it propounds life,
both temporal and eternal, to the perfect keeping of it; unto which is
required these three things. First, that all the statutes of the law of God be
kept, the little as well as the great. Secondly, that they be kept with the
whole heart, the whole mind, and the whole strength. Thirdly, that they be
kept all our whole life long, until the last gasp and yielding up of the Ghost.
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Math. 22. 37. Gal. 3. 10.


Tim. Tell us now what instructions we are to learn from the latter part of
this verse?


Silas. First, that the righteousness of the law is a performance 1. Doctrine.
of perfect obedience. Secondly, that this 2. Doctrine.
perfect obedience cannot be obtained of any man in this 3. Doctrine.
life. Thirdly, that no man must look to have eternal life by his works of
the Law: for it is written, he that does them shall live thereby; but none
does them, therefore none shall live by them. And note this, that righteousness
and life are denied to come by the law, in respect of us who do it not.


Tim. But how may it be proved that there is none that does the works of the
law perfectly?


Silas. Unregenerate men cannot do them, for they are evil from their youth
up, Genesis 6, 5. and 8, 20. neither regenerate men can fully do them, for in
many things we sin all, lames, 3, 2. 1. John, 1, 8.


Tim. If Gods law be not possible to be kept, then it should A doubt.
seem that the promise of life made unto it, is ridiculous and idle.


Silas. Nay, not so, for it was once possible to obey Solution.
perfectly in our creation. Secondly, the keeping of the law is possible to
Christ, though it be not to us, who yet have title to eternal life by Christ's
fulfilling of it. Thirdly, the elect by grace in this life are made able in
some measure to keep it, and shall be able to do it perfectly in the life to
come, when they shall love God and their neighbor, with all their heart.


Tim. What use is to be made of these doctrines concerning our great
unableness to have righteousness by the Law?


Silas. First, it confuteth such as look for eternal Use.
life by the works of the Law, which indeed can minister nothing but death to
us, sithence we cannot keep it. For as it promises life to the dooers, so it
threatens death to him that fails but in one point; and what man living is he
that sins not?

Secondly, it serves to humble us, in as much as by our own fault we are made
unable to do the works of the law in that perfection that it requires; for
that it cannot give us righteousness and life, it must be imputed The law
hu^-bleth us by showing what we ought to have, and yet have it not by our own
default, also it provoke by prayer to secke it.
to a weakness in our selves, and not to an insufficiency in the law, Romans
8, 3. Thirdly, it sends all men, even the best, out of themselves, and
enforces the^ to go to Christ for righteousness and life eternal, by
believing that he has fulfilled the law for us, by his obedience and death;
and this is indeed the right meditation of the doctrine of the law, when it
schooleth and swindgeth a sinner unto Christ, to fetch from him alone
righteousness and salvation. Now hereby shall we know that the preaching of
the righteousness of the law, has driven us to Christ: First, if we trust not
to the works of the law, to seek life by the merit thereof in whole or in
part. Secondly, if we strive to order our works according to the level of
the law, making it the rule of our Christian life, still suing to Christ, for
pardon of faults. Lastly, learn hence, that if the righteousness of the law
having promise of life, do consist in doing things commanded, in all
perfection; therefore Christ cannot be the end of the law for tighteousnes,
unless beside the passion of his death there be allowed unto believers his
active obedience and integrity of life, that in him we may claim life, as
well as escape death.


DIAL. VI.
Verses 6, 7, 8. But the righteousness which is of faith speaks on this
wise, Say not in thy heart who shall ascend into heaven? (that is to bring
Christ from above,) or who shall descend into the deep? (that is to bring
Christ from the dead,) but what says it, etc.


Tim. What is the scope of this Text?


Silas. As before he described the righteousness Scope.
of the law out of Moses, so now by an antithesis, (out of Moses) he sets
forth the righteousness of faith by the effects, objects, and properties,
plainly showing that it drives away doubting and fear from the conscience;
and leans upon the word of promise, being possible, easy, and certain; and
in all these it is quite opposite unto the legal justice.


Tim. Declare now plainly the sum of this Text.


Silas. It is thus much: that the righteousness of faith Sum.
neither leaves the conscience doubtful of salvation, nor strikes in it any
fear of condemnation but: staying it self upon the manifest and sure word of
the Gospel concerning Christ dead for our sins, and risen again for our
righteousness, it engendereth firm quietness in the hearts of believers, and
draws free confession from their mouth, of Christ's death, resurrection, and
ascension.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Sil. Two: the first negative, showing what faith speaks Parts.
not, or forbids, with the cause and reason why. verse 6, 7. The other
affirmative, teaching what it is that faith faith, and what manner of thing it
is.


Tim. What does faith forbid, and why?


Silas. All doubting about eternal life in heaven, upon this ground, because
Christ is ascended thither for us. Secondly, it forbids all trembling, and
fear of being tormented in hell, upon this reason, because Christ being dead,
has by his death overcome eternal death, not for himself, but for his
members.


Tim. Come we to the words, and tell us what is meant by the righteousness of
faith?


Silas. That which before in verse three is called the Interpretation.
righteousness of God, standing wholly in believing; or the righteousness of
Christ, being laid hold upon by faith, or a person justified by faith in
Christ; it is no matter which of these we follow.


Tim. But how may this righteousness be said for to speak?


Sil. By a figure called Prosopopoia, as Romans 8, 19, 20. Paul puts a person
of a reasonable creature upon the justice of faith, and brings it in speaking
and declaring it self what manner of thing it is, and what it works in
believing hearts.


Tim. What may we learn from these first words?


Silas. That a lively faith is necessarily required as an instrument 1.
Doctrine.
to receive true righteousness before God. Secondly, 2. Doctrine.
whosoever is endued with this faith, has that righ teousnes which God
allows of in justice; not that faith Faith properly taken, is not our justice
before God.
(as it is a quality, a work, or gift, is this justice,) but because God
imputes to faith the justice of his Son Christ, which alone is able to appease
him, and to abide the rigor of his law, which faith as a work cannot do.


Tim. What may we learn by this, that Paul confirms the doctrine of free
righteousness by faith, out of Moses his writings?


Silas. That Paul the Apostle and Moses writings, had good agreement in the
doctrine of the Gospel. Secondly, that the righteousness of faith has
witness from the law and the Prophets. Thirdly, that Moses knew and preached
the Gospel as well as the Law; hence it is that Moses law does oftentimes
signify the whole doctrine of God, as Psalm. 19. 7.


Tim. Why then is Moses accounted a Preacher of the A doubt.
law, and set against the Apostles and Christ, the preachers of the Gospel?
John 1. 17.


Silas. Moses had this denomination of that which he did for the most part,
and that was to publish and expound A solution. Therefore Law and Gos pell to
be destinguished by the nature of doctrine and not by books.
the law to the people: howbeit the promises of grace are contained in his
writings also, and he prophesied of Christ, John 5. 46. For Moses wrote of me:
even as Christ and his Apostle did preach the law and urged repentance, Mark
1. 15. Yet because their chiefest endeavor was to set forth the promises of
grace, they are therefore called the Ministers of grace, and dispencers of the
Gospel.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It serves to draw the Jews the sooner to embrace Use.
the righteousness of faith, since it was taught by Moses, a Prophet whom they
much honored and respected, and yet refusing to believe in Christ, even for
that they thought thereby to be drawn away from this Moses; whereas Paul tells
them that there is no such matter, if they would believe Moses: but
contrariwise they must receive Christ, whom he preached: as John Baptist, so
Moses prepared Disciples for Christ, the one more, the other less clearly.


Tim. But how may it appear to us, that Moses in this testimony Doubt.
did speak of Christ and the Gospel?


Silas. First, out of Moses words, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 11. the Solution.
promises of conversion to God, and circumcision of the heart are parts of the
Gospel; and this was the commandment, and not the legal precepts which that
day he spoke. Secondly, out of Paul, who in this place terms the word which
Moses spoke, to be the word of faith, verse 8. Thirdly, if Paul had used this
text of Moses by allusion, agreement or proportion only (as if such words as
were spoken by Moses touching the law, might fitly be applied by Paul to the
Gospel,) then had they not served the purpose of the Apostle; which was to
confirm by testimony of Moses, that which he had spoken before touching
Christ, being the end of the law for righteousness to him that believes. They
are then deceived which think that Paul alludeth to Moses, citing him by way of
consequence and not directly; or that he does speak of the bare knowledge or
performance of the law, either by natural strength, or as it is made easy by
grace: for then Paul should not have spoken of righteousness by faith, but of
sanctification and newnes of life; which is quite besides his drift and scope,
which is out of Moses to commend the righteousness of faith, as is very plain
in the text.


Tim. But the Apostle does not report Moses words.


Silas. True, not in so many letters and sillables, for something is altered,
also added and taken away; but in sense and meaning he does allege them, and
that is sufficient.


Tim. What is meant by [saying in thy heart?] Interpretation.



Sllas. Thus much: think not doubtfully within thy self, or let not thy mind
be perplexed with wauerings, thoughts and reasonings.


Tim. What is meant by this question [who shall a seend into heaven?]


Silas. Thus much, as if it were said, Who shall go thither for us, to bring
us word, whether God be pacified with us, and means to give us salvation
there?


Tim. What is meant by the other question [who shall descend to the deep?]


Silas. By the [deepe] is meant Hell, as Reave. 9. 1. 11. and 20. 1. To descend
to the deep signifies to go down into the place of torment: the meaning is,
who shall go down thither to tell and assure us that we are free from the
malediction and damnation of hell, and shall never be thrown down into that
deep burning lake?


Tim. What are we to learn from these questions?


Silas. First, that they which stick to their own Doctrine.
works, and think to be saved by their own deseruings, they have wavering
and unquiet consciences, troubled with doubtings, tremblings, and fear; for
that which the righteousness of faith speaks not, that the legal justice
does speak. The reason of this doctrine is, because the Reason.
law which promises life to perfect obedience, gives no power to obey; it
threatens death against every transgression, but gives no remedy against any
such evil and misery. Therefore it must needs be that such as follow the
righteousness of the law, must still be filled with anguish of Soul, because
their conscience witnesses unto them, that they have not done all which the law
commands, but are transgressors manifold ways in many things, and so
remain perplexed and without rest.


Tim. What is the use of this point?


Silas. This sets forth the miserable condition of all Use,
such as seek righteousness and life, by their own deeds; for such can never
have any sound ttanquility; well may they have benumbed dead consciences, but
pacified conscience, they cannot have; because they always lack what is
required by the law, which condemns to death every fault even the least.


Tim. What other thing is to be learned out of these questions?


Sil. That there are two maine doubtings which use to Doctrine.
perplex and trouble me^, that are without faith in Christ, the one is how to
be saved and to attain heaven. The other how to escape hell and damnation. And
these two doubtings are continual and necessary effects of legal
righteousness: for a man that has not wholly kept the law, must needs doubt
whether he shall have eternal life. For it is promised upon no other
condition but of exact and strict performance, and he who knows that he has
done things against the law, must needs be in fear of damnation, because it
is threatened unto every sin.


Tim. Have ye yet any other instructions out of these questions?


Sil. Yea, namely this, that these doubtings are contrary Doctrine.
and repugnant to the nature and property of faith, whose property is to expel
doubting, as heat expels coldness; as appears by James, which tells us that
faith forbids us to waver, James, 1, 6. and by the words of Paul the Apostle,
Romans 4, 20, 21.


Tim. But how then comes it to pass, that believers are often Doubt.
troubled with doubtings?


Silas. This happens through the infirmity of their Solution.
flesh and natural weakness, which wrestles and strives with the assurance
of faith, which though it be certain and firm, yet it is not perfect and
full. And from the imperfection of faith, there comes doubting, as Christ says
to his Apostles, Why doubt ye, o ye of little faith? For the hand shakes
through palsy, or some other weakness, though the property of the hand be to
hold fast: so of the weakness of faith arises doubting; but the property of
faith is to breed affiance and confidence, and to drive away doubtings and
fears, even as the Sun scatters mists, Ephesians. 3, 12. Hebrews 10, 2. 2.
Colossians 2, 2.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. It teaches a maine difference between the Use.
righteousness of the law and of faith: for of this springs tranquillity
through the assurance of Gods love; and of the other trepidation and trembling
through conscience of sin. Secondly, it confutes the Papists, who deny
infallible assurance and certainty to be the office of faith, and destroy the
very nature of faith which is, to assure men. Thirdly, it warnes us to detest
doubting as a thing contrary to faith, and out of an hatred of it to fight
against it. Fourthly, it exhorts all men to seek after faith, by which alone
they are able to get victory over doubtings; which may well assault faith, but
must be overcome by faith, 1. John. 5, 4.


Tim. But from whence fetches faith a remedy against doubtings and fears?


Silas. From the ascension of Christ into heaven, against the doubting of
salvation; for if Christ be ascended and possess heaven in our names, and
there make request for us, then we must needs deny his ascension, and fetch
him back from heaven again, if we make question how to be saved.


Tim. Whence have we the remedy against the fear of condemnation?


Silas. From the faith of Christ his death and resurrection. For if Christ be
dead and raised from the grave, then has he gotten victory over sin, death,
hell, and Satan. Therefore what is it else but to deny his death, and to bring
him back again to the Cross and grave, if we should greatly fear the
torments of Hell? Consider this well.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence?


Silas. That an unbeliever denies the death, resurrection, and ascension of
Christ, whatsoever profession he make. Secondly, that the articles of Christ's
death and resurrection and ascension, be as a fortress against infidelity, To
him who has not the fruit of these, to him Christ is not dead, risen, and
ascended.
doubtings and fears; and serve as notable means and helps to confirm and
establish a Christian heart in faith: therefore they ought to be well known,
and often with good study meditated on.


DIAL. VII.
Verses 8, 9. But what says it? the word is near thee, even in thy mouth and
in thine heart. And this is the word of faith which we preach. For if thou
confess with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart that God raised up Jesus
from the dead, thou shall be saved?


Tim. What is the scope of this text?


Silas. To commend unto us the righteousness Scope.
which is by faith in Jesus Christ, without all respect unto works, by the
certainty, facility and fruit that follows it; and no we affirmatively, Paul
shows what it is that faith speaks.


Tim. How is the certainty of this righteousness gathered?


Silas. From the nature of the object, which is the word of God, not every
word, but the word of faith (even the promise of Christ apprehended by faith)
verse 8. The sum where of is this, that Christ Jesus is dead, and rose again
to justify all that believe in him, verse 9.


Tim. How gather ye the facility of the righteousness of faith, that it is easy
and possible?


Silas. By this, that unto our justification there is no more required then
this, that the heart believe, and the mouth make confession of the death, and
resurrection of Christ.


Tim. What is the sum of this whole text?


Silas. Thus much, he that truly believes, and accordingly Sum.
does profess the promise of God made unto mankind, concerning blessedness
by the incarnation, life, death, and resurrection, and intercession of Christ,
has a ready and certain way to attain righteousness and eternal salvation,
without al consideration of merit of works, either done before or after grace.


Tim. Come we to the eighth Verse, and tell us what parts it has?


Sil. These three: First, a question which is imperfect, Parts.
and must be thus supplied, But what says the righteousness of Faith? This
question serves to stir and quicken up attention. Secondly, an answer; This
it says, that the word is near thee, etc. Thirdly, a declaration what word
he means, not of the Law, but of the Gospel.


Tim. Come we to the Interpretation, and tell us in what Interpretation.
(...) it is said, [That this word is near us?]


Sil. That is to say, it is propounded and offered unto us plainly to be
understood by the ministry of the Gospel, so as we need not cross the Sea,
nor climb up the Mountains, or take any long painful iourneyes to seek it
out.


Tim. How is it said to be [neere in our hearts, and in our mouths?]


Silas. It is near in our hearts, by being grafted or planted in our hearts
by faith; and it is near in our mouths when we make profession of it before
men, when cause requires so to do for Gods glory, or the benefit of others.


Tim. Why is the Gospel called the word of Faith?


Silas. First effectiuely, because it begets faith through the Spirit, as
verse 17. Secondly, obiectiuely, because it is received by Faith, as the proper
and especial object thereof. Also, because it teaches and requires not
works, but Faith only unto righteousness before God. The Papists do err,
which say, that the doctrine of faith and life, is meant by the word of Faith.
Here Paul medleth not with good life, elsewhere he deals about it.


Tim. Let us now know what Doctrines we have out of this eight verse?


Silas. These three: First, that a lively Faith, has the word of God for the
foundation and ground of it, to Doctrine.
build and stay upon: whereby [Word] we may understand either generally that
word which is revealed unto us in the Scripture of the Old and new Testament.
For Faith does believe and assent to all that which GOD speaks in the
Scriptures; because they proceed and come from him who is the God of truth; al
whose words are most true and faithful: howbeit our Christian Faith does more
specially respect the word of the Gospel, the promise of Grace touching the
remission of sins, and eternal life by Jesus Christ; as it is said here by
way of exposition [ This is the word of Faith which we preach.] And wheresoever
we find Faith, and Christ his blood and death coupled together, we are given
to wit, that the Doctrine teaching Christ his person and office, is the proper
object of our justifying Faith, which is therefore by Divines defined to be an
affiance in the promise of Grace.


Tim. What may be the reason that Faith looks in the matter of justifying
only, to the word of promise?


Silas. Because that word alone does offer unto sinners Reason.
the merits of Jesus Christ to be freely enjoyed of them unto remission of
sins and salvation, so as they be embraced and received; and therefore they
be called the word of his grace, and the Gospel of Christ, and the word of
salvation and reconciliation: because both the free love of God, and Christ,
and al his benefits be propounded to the elect in the word of promise.


Tim. What use are we to make of this first doctrine? Use.



Silas. It confuteth the Papists, which make not the word alone, but their
Apocrypha writings, and humane Traditions, to be the Anchor and stay of faith;
which is with the foolish Builders, to lay our Foundation upon the sand, and
not upon the rock.


Tim. What is the second Instruction?


Silas. That Faith is no wavering uncertain opinion, fleeting through
ignorance and fear, but is a firm immovable and sure knowledge, because it
resleth upon Gods word and promise, then the which nothing is more sure and
certain. For it is written, The word of God is true, 2 Samuel 7, 28. His
testimonies are sure and endure for ever, Psalm. 19, 7. 1 John 2, 17. Also,
Heaven and earth shall perish, but one tittle of Gods word shall not perish,
and Romans 9, 6. 2 Cor. 1, 20. 1 Cor. 1, 9. Now then, Faith it self must needs
be a thing immovable, and bring with it an infallible certainty, sithence it
leans on such a firm rock, Mat. 7, 25. as the sure words of the faithful
promises of God, who neither is deceived, nor can deceive us, seeing he cannot
lie, Tit. 1, 2. but is only truth, yea truth it self, To. 3, 3. Hence it is
that ( Plerophorie) or full assurance is attributed to Faith in Scripture, Col.
2. 2. Hence also it is, that godly Christians, rather then they will deny the
doctrine of Christ, or any part of it so ascertained unto their understanding,
and with such firm assent of their minds received, they choose to loose their
liberties, livings, yea and lives also, if the will of God be: examples
hereof, we have in many thousand martyrs of Christ in all ages.


Tim. Can ye give us examples of any, whose Faith has remained stable and
unshaken, by reason of Gods Word and promise?


Silas. Yea, of Jacob, Genesis 32, 9. of Abraham, Romans 4, 21. Gods power and
promises, being the two props of Abraham's Faith, Heb. 11, 17, 19. Of David,
Psalm. 119. In thy word is my trust.


Tim. By what comparison may this be illustrated and set forth?


Sil. Of a good man whose word deserves credit, and Similitudes.
ehaseth away doubting from such to whom it is given: so or much more then so,
ought the word of God to be rested in, and that without wavering and anxity of
mind perplexed with fear: for so much as God is the author of all that truth
and fidelity that is in all good men, and being himself the fountain of all
truth, without mixture offalshood, therefore his word may be taken without
stammering or doubting: and that Faith which leans upon it, must needs be
very firm and strong against all assaults of Satan, whose fiery darts of
doubts and despair are quenched by the Faith of Gods word. If in marriage for
wedlock duties and comforts, we stay upon our mutual promises, how much more
may the spouse of Christ, even every faithful soul, quietly and firmly rest
upon the promise of our husband Christ, for all good things present and
future, both now and in Heaven?


Tim. What profit is to be (...) of this second instruction? Use.



Sil. First, hereby is overthrown the Popish doctrine, which allows unto
justifying Faith, no more but probable or coniecturall knowledge, leaving men's
consciences full of fear and doubting of their own blessedness: wherein upon
the matter they disable the word of Gods promise, and make his word false. For
to teach that men ought still to stick in doubts of their own salvation,
though God have promised it by Christ to such as believe in him: what is this
else, but to play the Butchers of men's Consciences, which are even kept upon
the rack by Romish Divinity; and also to charge the word of God with forgerie
and falshoode, as if he did not mean in good earnest? Secondly, hereby we
see, how slanderous they are, which accuse the affiaunce and confidence of
Faith to be a wicked and damnable presuming, sithence it is duty and Christian
submission, to rely undoubtedly upon the word of God, and not godless
presumption; which rather they are to be (...) with, who have all or most of
their trust in their own innocence and good works, and not alone in the
truth and mercy of God. Thirdly, here is matter of great comfort unto all
faithful souls, who in all temptations stirring them to doubt of their own
happiness, they may enfree themselves from all terror, by having recourse to
the word and promise of God, as David did. I had perished in my trouble (says
he) but for thy promise, thy word has comforted (...). For as the palsy man
in the Gospel, having Christ's word (be of good comfort thy sins are forgiven
thee,) was thereby cheered, and made both quiet and joyful: So the promise of
the Gospel being applied to a trembling Soul, will fortify and stablish it
in tranquillity and peace. This Satan knows, and therefore his practice is to
hide the promises of grace from troubled consciences, or else to suggest unto
them this, as though that such promises were not made to them, or did not
belong unto them.


Tim. What is the third doctrine out of this 8. verse?


Silas. That the preaching of the Apostles, was all one 3. Doctrine.
with the Gospel which was written: for that word of faith first written by
Moses, and afterward by Paul to the Romans, is that self same word which
Paul and other Apostles preached. Therefore it is false which the Manichees and
Papists avouch, that the Apostles taught other things then that they then
wrote; that hence they may have power to join thereunto their Apostolical
traditions unwritten: which error of theirs must be rejected as Apocriphall
and false. If they be not confonant to the Scriptures, they came not from the
Apostles, but are counterfeit.


Tim. Let us proceed unto the 9. verse, and tell us what is meant by
confession?


Silas. An open and plain profession, that Jesus who is Interpretation.
Lord of all, is our Lord also; for that he is Lord, the Diuils know and
acknowledge. Therefore Christians must go further, and believe it with
affiance.


Tim. In what respects is Jesus [our Lord?]


Silas. Both by right of Creation and power over us, and also by grace of
redemption, having as well ransomed us to be his own peculiar people, as
created and governed us.


Tim. What is it to [beleeue in thine heart?]


Silas. It is not only in our minds to see and assent unto the truth of the
history of Christ, (which even wicked men and hypocrites, yea unclean spirits
do,) but to embrace in our hearts, will and affections, with holy confidence,
the benefits of Christ his death and resurrection, even reconciliation with
God, remission of sins, righteousness and life eternal.


Tim. Why is confession set before faith, which is the Doubt.
cause and root of confession? Psalm 116. 10. I believed therefore did I
speak.


Silas. First, because Moses did in this order propound Solution.
them, as in the 8. verse is cited. Secondly, we cannot discern other men's
faith, or other men our faith, but by our outward profession of it before men;
it is declared by our confession and action.


Tim. Why (...) he only name Christ's resurrection, Doubt.
seeing faith respects his birth, life, death, and all which Christ did and
suffered?


Sil. First, because the faith of the resurrection of Christ, Solution.
does distingush Christians from Pagans and Infidels, who do easily accord to
believe that the man Christ was born, lived, and dyed; but they deny his
resurrection, as a thing which exceeds compass and reach of reason; the
Philosophers discerned it not, but derided it rather, saying What new doctrine
is this, Acts 18. Secondly, because all that Christ did and suffered, had
profited us little, unless he had risen again, wherein he obtained a
perfect victory over sin, death, hell, and damnation, for all the elect.
Lastly, the article of the resurrection presupposes all the rest, and knitteth
together as a link, both antecedents and consequents: his incarnation, life,
and death which went before; and his ascension, sitting at his Fathers right
hand, and his intercession which follows after his rising. Under which then by
a Synecdoche all the other passions and actions of Christ, be contained.


Tim. What doctrine arises out of this 9. verse?


Silas. Only this one; to wit, the facility and easiness Doctrine.
of that righteousness, which is by faith in Christ; (...) unto our
righteousness before God, and salvation in heaven, there is no more difficult
and hard thing exacted of us, but with the heart to believe, and with the mouth
to confess Christ: and by this means, Christ will be near to us both in
possibility and efficacy: in possibility, because it is a thing possible which
may be, that elect sinners shall have grace to believe, especially God having
ordained them unto Faith, Acts 13, 48. but it is utterly impossible, that they
should keep the whole Law perfectly, Gods decree and man's corruption being
against it. And secondly, he is near and easy to us in efficacy, because
through the holy Spirit, he is made to dwell in a faithful heart, really and
actually; and his righteousness as a robe or garment, is put upon them, to
cover their sins and unrighteousness.


Tim. Yea, but to believe in Christ, is no less impossible and Aidoubt.
hard, then to fulfill the Law: for we have no more power to do the one, then
the other.


Silas. It is true: but this facility is to be understood, Solution.
not in regard of the beginning and efficient cause of Faith, which is merely
Gods gift without our selves, he working in us both will and deed, Ephesians. 2,
10. Phil. 2, 13. but this righteousness of Faith is easier in regard of the
manner of the work, because the Law requires the full obedience thereof to be
performed by our selves, which cannot be in this infirmity, To. 8, 3. But Faith
refers and sends us to Christ for the perfourming of the Law; and in
regard of the manner of the work, it is far easier to believe the Law to be
done by another, who was able to fulfill it, and was sent for that end, then to
do it our selves. Also much easier it is, to believe and give assent to a true
promise, then to keep strictly, without failing all Gods commandments. If a
King should say to a Subject, Conquer me such a kingdom. and I will give thee
my daughter with large dignities and livings; were it not harder then if he
should say, do but trust my word, and I will do all this for thee. In these
considerations one says, that salvation has but a short cut, it requires no
external labor, but inward belief: and Calvin says that by the operation of
the Spirit, thou may easily believe with thy heart, and confess with thy
mouth. And Lyranus says, here is showed the facility of the righteousness of
faith. And Faius thinks this saying, of being near in the heart and mouth,
to be a Prouerbiall speech, commending the readiness of that which is in the
heart and mouth.


Tim. What use hereof? Use.



Silas. It ministers comfort to Christians, to consider that the means of
passage to heaven be not unconquerable and unable to be attained. Secondly, it
declares how uncomfortable Popish Doctrine is, which excludes and shuts out all
hope of being saved, by tying salvation unto an impossible condition of
fulfilling the Law. Thirdly, it stirs us up to the love and praise of Gods
goodness, in appointing so easy a condition, and giving us power to keep it,
For Faith is the gift of God.


DIAL. VIII.
Verse 10, 11, 12. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness: and
with the mouth man confesses unto salvation. For the Scripture says, etc.


Tim. WHat does this Text contain? Coherence.



Silas. First, a repetition and confirmation also of that which was said
touching salvation, the effect of righteousness by faith; together with an
explication of the persons to whom righteousness and salvation belongs. The
thing here repeated is, that a Christian that believes in Christ dead and
raised to life, and confesses this his faith before men, shall certainly and
without doubt be saved. Wherefore let us Method or disposition of the Text.
observe these things, that faith and confession are coupled together, as the
tree and her fruit, and as the Mother and the Daughter. Also they be set
soorth by their proper subject or seats whereto they cleave, and wherein they
stick and rest, Faith in the heart, and confession in the mouth. Lastly, not
the parts but the degrees of salvation be pointed at. The first degree or
beginning of it, is righteousness, to wit, absolution from sin, by free
pardon, through the merit of Christ his death, and 2. Degree of Salvation.
being accounted just before God, by the worthiness of his obedience to the
Moral Law. The second degree, is perfection of salvation in heaven, and all
the proceedings thereunto, from Justification till Glorification in Heaven,
here called salvation.


Tim. Whence is the Confirmation of this proposition fetched?


Sil. From authority of Scripture, as of Esaias 28, 16, v. 11. and Joel 2, 32.
verse 13.


Tim. What does Paul in the explication of the persons, which shall be
partaker: of this salvation?


Silas. First, he notes them by an universal particle [ Whosoever,] without
difference of Nation, or sex, or age, or condition. Secondly, he particularly
names both Jew and Gentile, which in respect 1. of salvation, 2. and the need
thereof by sin, 3. with the means thereof by Faith, are equal, as he proves
by two Reasons: one from the unity of Gods effence, who is the same Creator and
Jews and Gentiles be equal, wherein and why.
Savior of all the elect, Jew and Gentile. Secondly, from the immensiuenesse
of Gods mercy, which is so large, as that it can suffice all sorts of people
which trust in his Son, and call upon him, verse 12, 13. Therefore by calling
of the Gentiles, naught was taken from the Jews; these were no whit endamaged
by saving them; God is sufficient for both.


Tim. Come we now to the Interpretation, and tell us what is Interpret.
meant by [Man,] As also what is meant [by believing?]


Sil. By man is meant every true Christian, man or woman. And by believing is
meant, not only to assent unto the Doctrine of Christ, but with confidence and
sure affiance to embrace it.


Tim. What is meant by the Heart?


Silas. The soul, with all the faculties thereof, but especially the will and
affections; which are therefore in phrase of Scripture termed the heart,
because the soul keeps her chiefest residence in that fleshie part of man
called the heart, sitting and showing her self there, as it were in her chair
of estate.


Tim. What is it [With the heart to believe to Righteousness?]


Silas. It is the same with that phrase, To. 4, 5. to have Faith imputed for
righteousness; or with that, To. 9, 30 to attain to the righteousness of faith:
or Gal. 3, 14, 24. To receive righteousness, or to be made righteous by Faith.


Tim. What Lessons are we to learn from the first part of the tenth verse?


Silas. First, that unto righteousness before GOD, Doctrine.
(that is, to remission of sins, and perfect Justice by Christ's death and
resurrection) there needs on man's part, nothing but a true and lively Faith.
Indeed good works are witnesses to testify the truth of this faith before
Reason.
men, and unto our selves; but when the speech is of getting and receiving
righteousness (even pardon All that be justified by faith only, are freely
justified, Amb. in 3. ad Romans
of our sins and eternal life by Christ) works are clean to be shut out
and excluded, as having no power to enable us to embrace Christ: and this is
the controversy between us and the Church of Rome, that whereas they do part
the isntrumental cause of our righteousness between Faith and works, we
attribute it unto Faith only, according to the doctrine of the Scripture, God
has Justified us, v. sing thereto no works but says only, cbrys. in 3. Rom
Romans 3, 27, 28, 29, 30. Gal. 2, 16. and of the Fathers agreeable thereunto.
The believing man shall be justified in Faith only. Ambrose on 1 Cor. 1.
Whosoever trusts in Faith only is blessed. Hierom Chap. 3. unto the Gal. By
Faith only shall Christ save the offenders of the Law, Only Faith in Christ
does make us clean Aug.
Chrysostom on the Ephesians. To these might be joined Basil, Theophylact,
Hilarie, Cyprian, and many more, which teach the same truth as we now do.


Tim. What use of this Doctrine? Use.



Silas. First, it instructs us to know how necessary Faith is: for where
this is, there righteousness is; and there is no righteousness where Faith is
wanting. Secondly, it conuieteth the Papists of grievous slanders, in that
they charge Luther to be the first inuenter of this Doctrine touching
righteousness by Faith alone. Whereas Quod primam, id verum: sal. sum quod
posterim.
before him, the learned Doctors of the Church, yea, Apostles, Prophets, and
Christ himself, had delivered this truth to the Church, even from the
beginning. How then can it be an heresy in Luther to teach thus, but it must
be an heresy also in the Penmen of the holy Ghost to write thus?


Tim. What is the next Doctrine? 2. Doctrine.



Silas. That the seat and subject of Faith is not the mind alone, but the
will also, which is more specially signified by heart, Acts 8, 37. Ephesians. 3,
17. For this confidence Reason.
is at least a necessary companion of faith, but confidence has place in the
heart, therefore Faith lodges there also.


Tim. What use are we to make of this Doctrine?


Sil. It serves to teach, that unto a lively Faith, there Use.
is required a double work of the Spirit: First, to enlighten the mind, that
it may certainly see and assent to the things written in the Gospel. Of this
first work it is, that Faith is often in Scripture termed Understanding,
Colos. 2, 2.
and knowledge, and seeing. The other work is to bow John 17, 3.
the affections that they embrace, and fully rest in that John 6, 40.
which the mind has fully assented unto. From this Ephesians. 3, 12.
work. Faith in Scripture is termed trust, confidence, and affiance.
Secondly, this Doctrine serves to confute the Romanists, which place Faith in
the supernal part of the soul only, and will have it to be nothing else but
the assent of the mind to the will of God: whereas it is not written here,
that with the understanding, but with the heart man believes to
righteousness. There may indeed be worthy knowledge and notable assent in
the understanding part, but it is the heart which believes to justification.
Thirdly, here is an exhortation to all Christians (as they will be assured of
this justifying faith,) not to rest content with a naked knowledge of the
Gospel, or that in their minds they have yielded agreement and consent to the
truth of it; but nearly to look unto this, whether faith have taken hold of
their will and affections, to make them obedient to their illuminated
understanding, with some measure of peace and joy; and to resist all contrary
thoughts and motions, with a loathing of them, being ready to make confession
of Christ in our mouths.


Tim. What is signified here by [confession of the mouth?]


Silas. Not only a plain and clear acknowledgement of Christ, to be the
only Lord and Savior of mankind; and of all that doctrine which concerns his
office, natures, persons, and benefits: but the calling upon his name with
trust in him, as in our own Lord and Savior, as it is expounded in the 13.
verse following, wherein vocation is put for consession.


Tim. Wherefore is this work of confession added unto faith?


Silas. To distinguish and put difference between a dead and a lively faith,
by a peculiar fruit of it.


Tim. But why is this work named as the witness of faith, rather Doubt.
than any other work?


Sil. First, because it is easily gathered out of the words Solution.
of Moses before alleged in verse 8. where Moses spoke of the mouth, and
joined it with the heart. Secondly, because it is a principal token of a true
faith, when occasion serves, sincerely to confess the doctrine of Christ, and
to call upon his name faithfully; which no hypocrites do, for they draw near
with their lips only, Math. 15. 8. but this consession which is a sure mark
of faith, comes from faith as from the root of it. Thirdly, because great
promises are made to this duty of confession, Math. 10. 32. and here salvation
is promised to such as confess Christ out of a lively faith.


Tim. But in what sort and sense is salvation annexed to Doubt.
confession? Solution.



Silas. Not as the effect to his cause, but as the way to Confessio est via qua
peruentur (...) Bez Note.
the end; for confession is but the way only by which justified persons do
come to their perfect blessedness in heaven, which is here signified by
salvation, as the highest degree of our happiness. Seeing righteousness is
attributed to faith, and salvation necessarily follows righteousness; therefore
faith is the only isntrumental cause, whereby we be justified and saved; and
not confession, which is but the path only wherein the godly are to walk to
heaven, and a (...) of a saving faith: 10 as vain is that Popish note, upon
these words, that faith without works justifies not: it justifies without
works, but it is not in a Christian without works.


What doctrines are taught from this latter part?


Silas. That a lively faith brings forth good works, Doctrine.
and namely the consession and invocation of Christ; which where they are,
there is true faith, and there is no true faith where they be not; as there is
no fire where there is no light nor heat, for it is the nature of faith to
witness it self upon occasion, as fire sends forth heat. Therefore are
we wronged by the Papists, who accuse us to teach a weak and a dead faith
void of works: and Christians are to be warned to get such a faith as can
show it self by works, and such works as proceed from faith; for we teach
that true faith works by love, and all works which come not of faith, to be
sins. Secondly, we learn that confession is a work necessary to salvation,
and is to be done of all those that will be saved; necessarily, as a duty and
a thing commanded us of God, but not as a meritorious cause.


Tim. But what things belong unto Christian confession?


Silas. First, knowledge, to see the truth concerning Christ. Secondly,
wisdom, to espy the due occasion of confession; to wit, when God may be
glorified, and our neighbor edified. Thirdly, boldness, to do it freely
without fear of man. Fourthly, sincerity without dissimulation and guile.
Fifthly, reverence, as in Gods quarrel and presence. Sixthly, meekness, 1.
Pet. 3, 15. Such as be drowned in ignorance of the Gospel and unbelief; also
rash, presumptious, and vainglorious persons, timorous and fearful ones,
hypocrites and falsehearted men and women, proud and mallepart people, be not
fit and meek to perform this duty of confessing Christ.


DIAL. IX.
Verses 11, 12, 13. For the Scripture says, whosoever believes in him shall
not be ashamed. For there is no difference between the lew and the Grecian,
for he that is Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. To prove by authority of Scripture, what Scope.
he had said before in verse 10. where he ascribed righteousness unto faith,
as to a cause; and salvation to confession, as to a way which leads unto
salvation. The argument stands thus: It is not possible that the scripture
should be broken and untrue; but the Scripture promiscth righteousness and
salvation unto such as truly believe and call upon Christ. This is proved by
these three verses of our Text; touching faith, verse 11. touching confession
in verse 13. Therefore men do believe with the heart to righteousness, and
salvation pertains to such as confess him.


Tim. What may we learn hereby, that Paul proves his doctrine by testimony
of Scripture?


Silas. These lessons: First, that the Scripture is sufficient Doctrine.
not only to teach al needful truths of godliness, but to confirm and
prove it also. Secondly, that the word written, is the infallible rule of al
doctrines, which are to be delivered unto the Church, for direction of faith
or manners, for in that Paul does prove and stablish all doctrines of
Christianity by the Scripture alone (not using any other testimony for that
end:) Thence it follows, that Scripture only is the most certain and
undeceivable rule of all doctrines. The reasons hereof be, first because God
the author of all Scripture, is Reason.
most perfect in knowledge, and of infinite wisdom; therefore his word must
needs contain a perfect rule and direction whereby to judge of doctrines.
Secondly, our faith springs from Scripture alone, Romans 10, 17. Therefore we
must beeleeue that only for sound doctrine, which can be drawn from the word
of God written.


Tim. What use of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it serves to admonish us to try all things Use.
which is taught of any Ministers, by the touchstone of the Scriptures, as the
Christians of Berea did, Acts, 17, 11. receiving willingly what we find
grounded upon and consonant unto the Scriptures, but refusing all that is
diverse from it. The ancient fathers and Doctors of the Church, nay the
Apostles submitted their sermons and writings to this trial, 1. These. 5, 21.
1. John, 4, 1, 2. As we like that Gold only that will abide the touchstone, so
we must hold only such doctrines as agree with the word of God. Secondly, it
confuteth the Papists which make unwritten traditions to be a rule equal to
holy Scriptures; being indeed a leaden rule of deceit, uncertain and subject
to change, and to falshoode and error; yet they will have them embraced with
like reverence and affection as the holy Bible.


Tim. From whence is this first authority fetched?


Sil. Out of Esaias. Chapter 28, verse 16.


Tim. Tell us first what ye do observe in the manner of alleging this
authority, and what ye note in the matter?


Silas. Touching the manner, the Apostle does so allege the place of Esaias, as
withal he does interpret and expound it, which is the best manner of alleging
scriptures, so to cite them as to give some light to them. For whereas Esaias
said (he) indefinitely, Paul writes (whosoever) universally to show us, that
an indefinite proposition is equipollent to an universal. Secondly, Paul
mentions the object of our faith (in him (that is) Christ,) whereas Esaias
said only he which believes. Thirdly, in Esaias it is written (shall not make
have) in Paul shall not be ashamed, (that is, frustrate of his success, being
deceived of that they looked for,) which is a fruit and consequent of have:
for such as are hasty and precipitant, doc their business untowardly, and
naughtily; as Saul did when he made have to offer sacrifice before Samuel
came, wherein he did greatly sin, and was thereby brought to shame. As also
Peter his precipitation, caused shame to him; whereas the true believers
without such shame, shall obtain forgiveness of sin by Christ.


Tim. What note ye in the matter of this sentence cited out of Esaias?


Silas. First, that as the high cause, to wit, predestination or election, is
not restrained to the Jews only, but powered out upon all sorts of men, as
well as Jews, Romans 9, 29. so is faith (the next cause) equally given to all
people, without difference of nation whatsoever. Secondly, that the reason why
many Jews and others be ashamed and confounded is, for that they believe not,
because who-soeuer believes, shall not be ashamed. Thirdly, that the true
justifying faith has no other proper object but Christ Jesus, and him as he is
both dead and quickened; this is that brazen Serpent toward which our faith
looks. Fourthly, that Christ is very true God, because we are bound to
believe in him, see John 14, 1. This confuteth the Arians denying Christ's
eternal and natural divinity. Fifthly, that the universality of the promises
of the Gospel, are restrained and limited to believers and to them also they
be extended, and to every one of them, and to none other; there is an
vniuersallity of believers, as there is of unbelievers.


Tim. But the Jews did appropriate the promises of God to Doubt.
themselves alone, as the true and sole heirs thereof.


Sil. They did so, but unjustly; for now under the Gospel (howsoever before
there was manifold and great difference, see Romans 3, 2. Also 9, 4, 5.) there
is no distinction, but Jew and Gentile are al one. For first, they have all
need of salvation, all being sinners, destitute of Gods grace, and of the gift
of true righteousness, Esaias 53, 6. Romans 3, 23. Or if we look unto the
meritorious cause which is Christ, in him all have like intrest by Gods mercy,
Romans 11, 32. or the means whereby to be made partakers of Christ (which is
Faith) a gift bestowed by God indifferently upon the Jews and Gentiles, Gal.
3, 8. Ephesians. 2, 17, 18.


Tim. In what sense is God said to be Lord of all? Interpretation.



Silas. Because he is the common Creator of all, who made both Jew and
Gentile. Secondly, because he is the iustifier of all, without respect of
country, every one which believes in Christ, shall have righteousness
before God; who is one which does justify the circumcision by Faith, and the
uncircumcision through faith, Romans 3, 30. From whence it does follow, that God
accepts not persons, Acts 10, 30. so as to love one the more because he is a
Jew, or the less because he is a Gentile, but is of like affections to all the
faithful, of what people or language soever: as a Father is well affected unto
all his children which do well, and a workman to all his work made by him: so
is God good to all his people without distinction of place. Therefore a Gentile
though not circumcised, yet if he have faith, he shall become righteous and
live for ever: whereas an unbelieving Jew shall be sent away unjustified,
though he be circumcised.


Tim. What is meant by this, that God is good to all?


Silas. That he is abundantly loving and kind (not to every particular person,
without exception of any singular) but to all men of all sorts, for [Riches]
signify plentiful goodness, as Ephesians. 2, 4, 7. and by [all,] is often meant
some of all kinds, Countries, and degrees, as 1. Tim. 2, 3. Romans 11, 32.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence?


Silas. Not that every man and woman be elect, called, and justified, as some
falsely collect from hence, being the enemies of Gods grace, sufficiently
confuted from this place, where the universal particle (all) is limited to
such as call upon him, which none do in truth but believers only: but that any
which be justified and saved they are beholden to the great and exceeding
goodness of God for it, Ephesians. 2, 7, 8. Secondly, God so loves his 2. Doctrine.
Children, as he is not only (good) to them, but (rich) to them, and heapeth
his grace upon them. See Ephesians. 2, 5. Thirdly, we have no cause to envy other
Christians, seeing God is rich enough to suffice all, as the Sun has Doctrine.
3
light enough for all that stand in it. Therefore, as the Jews are to be
blamed for grutching at the conversion of the Gentile, whereby nothing was
taken from the Jew, so they are faulty and do sin, which frette at the
prosperity of others, either spiritual or bodily. This disease springs from
hence, that they consider not that the goodness of God is bottomless, being
such a fountain as can never be drawn dry, his riches being far unlike
worldly riches, which are diminished by giving.


Tim. Whence is the second authority fetched?


Silas. From Joel 2, 32.


Tim. How may it appear that Paul does rightly apply this to Christ and to
faith in him?


Sil. By comparing this text with Acts 2, 21. where Peter expounds this place
of Ioell touching Christ and salvation by him: such harmony there is in the
holy Scripture.


Tim. What doctrine learn we from this verse?


Silas That whosoever confesses Christ, and calls upon him, is sure of
salvation, because God has so promised. Secondly, that religious prayer is to
be directed unto God alone, because he alone is the searcher of the heart, and
is God alsufficient, Genesis 17, 1. Here falls to ground invocation of Saints.
Thirdly, that there is no true prayers but in the Church of God, (which is the
Sion and Jerusalem,) where the Prophet promises deliverance and salvation.
Fourthly, the people of God never pray to him in vain; for howsoever they are
not heard in that very particular which they request, for that God sees it not
expedient for the^; yet seeing they that call on him are saved, therefore he
is never called on without great fruit and wholesome effect. This is a great
encouragement to diligence, yea and unto constancy in calling upon God through
Christ, considering that they shall be heard unto salvation, though they be not
always heard unto their desire.


DIAL. X.
Verse 14. But how shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? and
how shall they believe except they hear? how shall they hear without a
preacher? and how shall he preach except he be sent?


Tim. What is the purpose and drift of this text?


Silas. Sithence the righteousness of faith is the only true righteousness
and does in common by the promise of God belong to (...) and Gentile, (as we
have seen out of the former text:) The purpose of the Apostle is now to
prove, that the Apostles must be sent of God to preach the Gospel to both
people, to be as the ordinary means to be get faith, and to bring them to
Christ, that through his righteousness imputed to them, they might be saved.
And herein a secret objection is answered; for our Apostle having soundly
confirmed that our true righteousness before God, which brings peace to the
soul, must be had not by working after the law, but by believing the
Evangelical promises of forgiveness of sins and life eternal by Christ
dead and raised, and that these promises equally belong to Jew and Gentile: The
next thing to be required was this, how we might ordinarily come unto and
attain this faith, and the righteousness which it lays hold on? whereunto
Paul now answers, that this is gotten by means of Apostles, and other
Preachers sent of God to preach the word of the Gospel. So as this text of all
other Scriptures does very plainly and worthily commend to us, the singular
excellency, the great fruit and necessity of the word preached, being the
means ordained of God, to convey into the hearts of elect Jews and Gentiles,
that most precious guist of faith, which receives Christ and his righteousness
unto salvation in heaven.


Tim. What argument does the Apostle use to prove his purpose by?


Sil. By a gradation, or proceeding from the effects to Method.
the causes negatiuely, or from the cause to the effect affirmatively. Thus,
God by his Prophets promised salvation indifferently to Jew and Gentile, but
without calling on God or prayer, there is no salvation, and none can pray,
without faith, and no faith without hearing, no hearing without a Preacher, no
Preacher without commission or sending. Therefore it is necessary to all people
for the obtaining of salvation, that God send his Apostles and other Ministers
to preach the word. From the causes to the effects, the argument runs thus
affirmatively; it is by the free and merciful sending of God that men do
preach, such as preach ought to be heard, by hearing Gods word there comes
faith, faith brings prayer, prayer is a sure note of salvation: therefore God
must send some to be Preachers, that others may get salvation. Or thus; Gods
sending causes Preachers, preaching brings hearing, hearing breeds
believing; faith works prayer, prayer obtaines salvation. This serves to stay
the Jews from grudging against the Apostles, because the Gentiles being
appointed of God to faith and salvation, must not be denied the means and
helps, by which God will save his own: therefore no cause to mislike the
Apostles for preaching the doctrine of Christ to the Gentiles.


Tim. After what fashion and sort is this text set down?


Sil. By interrogations or questions, which are negations in force, and must
every one of them be thus answered (they cannot:) how shall they call on him
in whom they have not believed? The answer is, (they cannot,) and so of the
rest.


Tim. How many be the steps or parts of this gradation?


Sllas. They be six; First salvation. Secondly, calling on God. Thirdly, faith
in Christ. Fourthly hearing. Fifthly, preaching the word. Sixthly, the sending or
vocation of God, which are knit together in one chain as causes and effects:
the first being concluded of the last, and the last inferred of the first, as
we have before set down.


Tim. What do ye call salvation, verse 13?


Silas. A deliverance from all sin and all miseries, and Interpret.
the enjoying of most perfect bliss in heaven. This salvation is given the
elect in this world imperfectly by justification, delivering from all guilt and
the whole punishment of sin; and by sanctification, freeing them in part from
the power and dominion of sin: and perfectly by glorification in the world to
come, discharging the elect of all the remainder of sin, of all corruption
and infirmities whatsoever, that they may be like Christ in his celestial
glory and felicity.


Tim. The calling upon God how manifold is it?


Sil. Twofold: first false and counterfeit, when men draw near with the lips
only, as the Pharisie prayed, Luke 18. 11. Secondly true and sound, when with
our hearts we desire of God needful and lawful things, with sure trust to
obtain them through the intercession of Christ. Thus the Publican prayed, Luke
18. 13. and David, Psalm. 25. 1. This latter kind of calling on God, is either
in heart only, as Moses prayed at the red sea, Exodus 14. 15. and Hannah, 1.
Sam. 1. 13. or both with heart and mouth, as David prayed, Psalm. 116. 1, 2, 3.
They are both meant here, vocal and mental prayer, but chiefly the latter.


Tim. What learn we from hence?


Silas. That true prayer is a certain undoubted note of Doctrine.
salvation, even as the want of the guist of prayer is a plain mark of a
wicked man, Psalm. 119. Save me O Lord, for I call upon thee, Psalm. 14, 4. They
call not upon the Lord.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It serves to move such as would be saved, and Use.
lack the gift of prayer, to strive to have it; and such as have it, to make
precious account of it, and to be heartily thankful to God for such an
unspeakable gift: yet we ought not to think that by the work of prayer we
merit salvation, the root and cause whereof, is faith, from whence it has
all efficacy and commendation.


Tim. What may it teach us that we must believe in him on whom we do call?


Silas. That faith in Christ is necessary unto true prayer, 2. Doctrine.
yea so necessary as without it we not only cannot pray aright, with hope to
speed, Mark 11, 24. James 1. 6, 7. but our prayers are turned into sin,
Romans 14, 23. The reasons hereof be; first because it is written, he that
Reasons.
comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that seek him, Heb. 11, 6. Secondly, because trust and confidence of the heart
that God will hear, is that which begets prayer, whereof as of all other
good gifts and good works, lively faith is the mother and root whence they
spring, fetching all their praise and vigor from faith; therefore it was, that
Moses cried for deliverance from the Egyptians, and David from Saul and other
enemies, and the Syrophenissian prayed for her daughters safety, and the blind
man for his sight, and the Publican for the remission of his sins, etc.
because they believed that God could and would grant their petitions. As we in
our necessities when we need other men, do willingly become suitors for help at
their hands, when we have trust to be heard and succored: so it is the
affiance of Gods goodness which does bring forth invocation, and calling on
his name, as David said, We believe and therefore we pray, Psalm. 116.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this instruction?


Sil. First, it does admonish us that when we pray, we bring faith, having
assurance of Gods love in Christ, that for his sake he is our sather, and also
will faithfully keep his promises which he has made to them that call upon
him. Secondly, to reprove such as do offer to pray, having their hearts void
of this holy confidence, without which all prayers be vain and idle. Thirdly,
to comfort such as feel their hearts stirred up to desire of Gods blessings,
with a confidence to obtain, because this is a certain note that they have
faith, without the which they could not have such desires and such confidence,
Ephe. 3, 12. Fourthly, to convict the Papists of error, for their calling upon
Saints departed, in whom because they may not put any trust, (for cursed is he
that trusts in man,) therefore no prayer ought to be made to them, but to
God alone, in whom alone it is that we may put our confidence. Therefore all
religious prayers, to him are only to be made and to none other. Also this
confuteth Bellarmine, who says, that unto prayer it is not needful that he
that prays have faith to assure him of being heard; directly against this
Scripture, and James 1, 6, 7.


Tim. Proceed and tell us what hearing he speaks of, in saying [How can they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard?]


Silas. Not only the hearing which is inward of the mind and heart, but of
the outward hearing by the sense of the ear; neither is it the hearing of
every sound or voice, but the hearing of the word, (even the word of the
Gospel,) which is meant in this place.


Tim. What is the instruction from hence?


Silas. That unto true belief in God, the hearing of 2. Doctrine.
the Gospel with our bodily ear, is necessarilye required.


Tim. But how then shall elect Infantes believe, seeing they Doubt.
are not capable of this hearing, through the weakness of their Organ?


Silas. This text speaks of the means how to come by actual faith, which is
joined with discourse, and is got by institution; and not of that habitual
faith or faculty of believing, whereby insants are endowed thorough the
wonderful secret operation of the Spirit, engrafting them into Christ for
salvation.


Tim. What are we to think of them that are borne deaf, Doubt.
and cannot hear?


Sil. The Holy Ghost, both by his extraordinary motion Solution.
in their hearts supplies the want of outward means in so many deaf ones as
be his chosen; whereof sundry examples both in former, and in this age. Our
text speaks of the ordinary way whereby Christians do obtain the gift of
faith, (to wit) by external hearing, which is as necessary to faith, as faith
is to prayer, or prayer to salvation.


Tim. What reasons can be given why external hearing of the word, should
avail unto faith?


Silas. First, Gods ordinance has appointed it to be so, that by hearing,
faith should be engendered, 1. Cor. Reasons.
1, 21. Secondly, his promise here made unto hearing that there by he will
work faith. Thirdly, actual faith cannot be had without some good measure of
actual knowledge, which we have put into us by such as instruct us in the
truth, whose voice therefore it is needful to hear; for the thing believed is
Gods word, and that is received by hearing. Fourthly, as our first parents were
turned from God and drowned in unbelief, by hearing the Serpent, so it is but
convenient that the elect by hea ring Christ's voice, should be converted to the
faith, and so return to God.


Tim. What use are Christians to make hereof?


Silas. First, it teaches the sense of hearing to be a Use.
great and necessary blessing. The Philosopher Aristotle calls this the sense
of understanding, ( sensus discipline) and Paul calls it the sense of
believing, ( sensus fidei,) Our other senses (especially our eyes) are good
helps of many notable things; for thereby we read in the great book of
Gods creatures, wherein we behold the glory of the Creator, his maruailous
wisdom, his eternal power and Godhead, Psalm. 19, 1, 2. 1. Cor. 2, 21. Romans
1, 19, 20. Yea moreover by our eyes we read in the word of God, and other
good books made and penned for increase of godly knowledge; sithence the sight
of the creatures and works of God is sufficient to leave us without excuse,
Romans 1, 20. but insufficient and effectual to breed faith. And because reading
belongs to a few, and hearing is common to all, therefore even by Paul's own
testimony, it has the pre-eminence, so as better it were to loose all our
senses, then to miss this alone. Secondly, it sets forth the miserable estate
of popish Recusants, which stop their care like the Adder, and will not hear;
also of Atheists, who thereby do bar themselves of the means of faith and
salvation. Thirdly, it exhorts us to diligent hearing, with all care and
conscience, to hear with our best attention, seeing faith is dropped in to us by
the ear. Fourthly, it reproues sleepy, drowsy, and careless hearers, who do
as it were shut out faith, that it should not enter. But let us not look that
God will open our heart, except we keep open our ears. Fifthly and lastly, it
is matter of great comfort for wandering lost sinners to understand that there
is yet a way even, by hearing the word, to recover and save themselves, and
therefore that they ought to live in those Countries and places where they may
be partakers of hearing, and that they hearken unto the saving doctrine of the
Gospel, with desire to understand and obey it.


Tim. Come we now to the first step, and tell us what is here meant by
Preacher?


Silas. It signifies one that is the Ambassador of God to spread abroad his
word, and with a loud voice to declare it.


Tim. What is the office of a Preacher?


Silas. To interpret the word of God, by the word of God, Nehem. 8, 18. and to
make application of the word to the uses of Gods people, by doctrine,
exhortation, and comfort, 1 Cor. 14, 3. Also by a reproof and confutation, 2 Timothy 3, 16.


Tim. What is our Lesson from this word [Preacher?] Doctrine.



Silas. That the Office of a Minister is of great dignity, because it
principally consistes in publishing and declaring Reason.
the word of God, which is a far more high and excellent function (in
spiritual account and respect) then to be the Ambassador of the greatest man
in the world, by how much heaven is higher then the earth, and the counsel of
GOD higher then the will and pleasure of men, and salvation passes all humane
and worldly affairs.


Tim. What use is to be made hereof? Use.



Silas. It must stay men from rash entering into so high and holy a vocation,
before they have fitness thereunto; which were a fearful presumption.
Secondly, it admonishes such as be Ministers, to do the work whereto they are
called, that is, the work of Gods Ambassadors, to preach the word with an holy
importunity, 2 Ti. 4, 2. 3. it conuicts the Popish Church of error, in that
they will have the greatest work of a Minister, to be to minister the
Sacrament of the Altar, to sacrifice Christ again. Fourthly, it reprooues such
as will continue Ministers, and yet are unmeet for this duty of proclayming
Gods word. Lastly, it warns to lay hands hastily on no man, 1 Timothy 5, 22.


Tim. What means this Question, How can they hear without a Preacher?


Sil. It cannot be that one can hear unless the word be preached and made to
sound in his care by lively voice: for there is a relation between hearing and
speaking.


Tim. What Doctrine arises from hence?


Silas. That unto the hearing of the word, the preaching Doctrine.
of it is necessary, even as hearing is necessary to faith and faith to prayer,
and prayer to salvation, so it is necessary that there be preaching that men
may hear. The reason hereof is, because there is a relation or mutual Reason.
respect between the sense of hearing, and the object thereof, which is a
sound or voice. We can hear nothing but a sound, and therefore there must be
some to preach and teach that others may hear. Thus often times are preaching
and hearing in Scripture set down for Correlatiues. Secondly, it is the good
pleasure of God now no otherwise to call his people to his kingdom, then by
Preachers: therefore Preachers of the word are needful, for we cannot be saved,
unless we be called to the Faith of Christ; and there is no way to call us,
but either by God himself immediately, or by his Ministers mediately: but he
has ceased now to speak to us immediately from himself. Therefore, if we
will be saved, we must hear Gods Ministers speak to us out of his word; and
thus much we may gather from such Texts of Scripture, wherein the holy Ghost
does often join preaching and believing together, as in John 17, 20. Acts 8,
12. and 14, 1. And moreover it serves to teach us, that if we desire to
believe and be saved, we must attend preaching and hearing of Sermons: and
this is the reason why GOD would never suffer his people in any age, to want
outward vocation by his Ministers. Noah was a Preacher of righteousness,
Abraham a Prophet. God gave unto the Jews Moses his prophet, and after him the
Priests and Levites, to teach Israel his Law, and extraordinarily raised up
many Prophets; and at last he sent his Son, to declare his will for the
salvation of the world. He gave moreover some to be Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, and others, to be pastors and teachers to the end of the world,
for the gathering of the Saints, Ephesians: 4.


Tim. But cannot God give Faith and salvation, without Doubt.
preaching and hearing?


Silas. Yes: he both can and does it to elect Infants so Solution.
dying, and to many Christian exiles which live in continual banishment from
his Church; but we are to consider not what he is able to do, but what his will
and appointment is, namely, to save us by the word preached, 1. Cor. 1, 18. 1.
Tim. 4, 16. How admirable and gracious is God, who can wrap such power in the
voice and words of men, as shall kindle saving faith in the hearts of the
hearers? Stoop to this holy ordinance.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. This teaches how miserable that people is Use.
which want the ordinary preaching of the word, they must needs fall into the
Ditches which have none but blind or careless guides to lead them, they
cannot but decay which have no vision, Prouer. 29, 18. As the Lamp is
extinguished without oil, so religion and knowledge will decay without
preaching, which is as the oil to the lamp: as grass withers without rain,
and our bodies starve without food, so do our souls without sound doctrine
seasonably given, which is as rain and food to the soul.

Secondly, here is an admonition to all Magistrates, namely Patrons of
beneficies, whom it concerns to provide the people of Preachers, of whom they
may hear instructions to life, as they will answer to God for their souls.
And thirdly to the people, that they do Preaching of the word is as Oil, faith
as the Lamp. As the Lamp without oil goes out, so faith without preaching
earnestly desire and seek to live under the preaching of the Gospel, where
they may hear the doctrine of salvation; for where preaching may ordinarily be
had, God never works an inward calling, without an outward vocation, nor is
known to give faith without hearing. Therefore as men be careful to dwell in
places where there is good air, water, etc. because these things are
healthful for the body: so, as they covet the health of their souls, let them
much more seat themselves where the preaching of the word is to be had, in
constant course from Sabbath to Sabbath. If God would not gine nor increase
faith in the Eunuch, and the Samaritanes but by the hearing of Philip, to Paul
at his conversion, but by the hearing of Ananias, nor to Cornelius but by the
hearing of Peter, Acts (...) and 10. Let not any man then presume that he can
be a believer, if he neglect to be a constant and attentive hearer of the word
preached. Oh that men would believe and consider this truth, and do
accordingly.


Tim. What is meant by [sending?]


Silas. The vocation of God, calling some forth from others, and furnishing
them with gifts to preach his word, Acts 10, 38. as he sent Bezaleel to build
the Tabernacle, Moses, Samuel, Esaias, and the rest to be Prophets, John to be a
Crier, Christ to be a mediator, Paul to be an Apostle, Titus to be an
Evangelist, Epaphras to be a Pastor.


Tim. How manifold is this vocation or sending?


Silas. Twofold: First, immediate from God himself Interpretation.
appointing Prophets in the old Testament, or from Christ the Son of God,
calling Apostles of himself, not by (...), Gal. 1, 1. The other is mediate by
the Church, according to such order as God has set in it, that is (as Paul
says) by the hands of the eldership, by prayer and fasting, ordaining such as
be duly elected and examined.


Tim. What be the marks and tokens of a true vocation or sending?


Silas. Of ordinary and mediate sending the tokens are sound doctrine, godly
life, aptness to teach, patience in afflictions, 2. Cor. 6, 4, 5, 6. 1. Tim.
3, 2, 3. Titus, 1. 8, 9. Mat. 7, 16. Ier. 23, 22.


Tim. What doctrines are we to learn from these words?


Silas. That none must take upon them the office of a Doctrine.
Preacher, unless he be sent of God. The reasons hereof Reason.
be, first because such as preach without authority and sending, God refuses
them as impostors and deceivers, Ier. 23, 21. also their whole message is void
and nothing worth. For as they which usurp the place of Ambassadors without
the Princes command or instructions, declare not their Princes mind but their
own fancies, and so loose their labor and endanger themselves. Likewise it is
with all such as undertake the preaching of the word, without the calling of
the Church of Christ, God will be present to assist and protect such as
himself sends and appoints, Joshua 1. 5.


Tim. In what case are we then here in England, which have no Calling at all,
if we may believe (...) the malicious Papists, or our Brownistes, and
Cenforious Separistes?


Silas. This is sooner said by them then proved: we are able to prove our
vocation touching numbers of us, by the integrity both of our doctrine and
lives, and by the fruits of our labors, in conversion of many souls (...)
Cor. 3, 12.
to God: also for that we are called and chosen by such Governors as the
Church has appointed for that end, and to such offices as be proper to the
true Ministers of Christ. Further mark this, that the Papists deny the calling
Called to preach, not to Sacrifice.
of our Ministers, because it is not after the order of their Romish Synagogue:
yet the Brownists (...) challenge the calling of our Ministers to be corrupt,
in regard they were cast in that popish mould, as they say. Lastly though I
will not defend personal defectes, yet the constitution of our Church for the
calling of Ministers cannot be disproued; for it requires that they be
examined, and not to be admitted to serve the Church, unless they be found fit
for life and doctrine: and that hands be laid on the ordained by such as be
elders, with prayer, and fasting, and exhortation unto the execution of their
duties, many of us being desired of our flocks, before hand, or
approuedafterwardes. Where these substantial things are the want of
circumstances, will not make a nullity.


DIAL. XI.
Verse 15, 16. How beautiful are the feet of them which bring glad tidings of
peace, and glad tidings of good things! But they have not all obeyed the
Gospel, etc.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. It proves two things very needful: First, that the Apostles were sent
of God to preach the Gospel unto the Jews and Gentiles, verse 15. Secondly,
that it is not to be maruailed at, although the most Jews remained
unbelievers, Verse 16. Which is knit to the former by a preoccupatio^; for it
might Coherence.
be objected, if Christ sent his Apostles to preach Christ, and offer peace by
him, how comes it to pass that no more of the Jews did believe and weere
saved? Let not that offend any man (says Paul) to make him think the worse
of the Gospel or of the Preachers of it; for it was foretold by Esaias the
Prophet, that few would obey the word. Others give the reason of the
connection otherwise, as that he should now show, that howsoever hearing was
necessary to faith, yet that faith did not always follow hearing. Some think
that whereas it might be objected, If the Apostles did declare peace, why did
not all the Jews enjoy peace and salvation? The answer is, because unto the
enjoying of peace and salvation, it is required not only to have the message of
peace brought, but to believe also; which seeing numbers did not, as Esaias
prophesied, therefore they obtained not salvation.


Tim. How does Paul prove the Apostlos to be sent of God to preach the word?


Silas. By the testimony of Esaias the Prophet in his chap. 52. verse 7. Here we
may observe that the Apostle does not in all points cite this place as Esaias
has it, for he leaves out some words, as ((...) the mountain) which had
respect to the situation of Jerusalem: also he changes the number, turning
the singular into the plural, because God there speaks of many that should
be messengers of peace.


Tim. But that place of Esaias is meant of messengers sent Doubt.
to publish the deliverance of the people, from the bondage of the Asyrians?


Silas. It is so, yet in this place it is fitly applied unto the Solution.
preaching of salvation by Christ, because it was the foundation of all
temporal deliverances whatsoever: for seeing all the oppressions and miseries
of Gods people, were effects and fruits of their sins, it follows that
their oppressions being taken away, their sins also did cease thorough
forgiveness and reconciliation with God by Christ. Therefore all particular
deliverances, had ever their roots and groundwork, in the redemption
purchased by the blood of Christ.


Tim. But this place might be meant by the Prophets, which Doubt.
did also preach of the sufferings of Christ, and the peace which was made with
God thereby.


Silas. Yet it is not only meant of the Prophets, because Paul here applies
it to the Apostles which published the Gospel: also the Prophets in their
preaching, with gladsome things did mingle very heavy things and terrible
threatenings, but the preaching of the Apostles was most gladsome and wholesome.
We beseech you be reconciled etc. 2. Cor.5.


Tim. What is here meant by [feet?]


Silas. One member is put for the wholeman, so as by Interpretation.
feet is meant the Apostles themselves, and their coming with the Gospel. The
reason why he only mentioned the [feete] is, because they traveled upon
their feet, to spread the Gospel both naked and weary, being poor and needy,
see Math. 10. Secondly, to show thereby that the Gospel should not be spread
abroad by force and strength but by a humble lowly kind of teaching.


Tim. Why are the Apostles feet called [beautifull?]


Sil. To signify that their coming was beautiful and desirable, preaching
most sweet and comfortable matters. Their coming was thus beautiful, first,
in respect of the manner of their teaching, which was with great alluring and
delighting, their words being sweet as honey, and very gracious. Secondly, in
respect of their sweet exhortations and holy life. Thirdly, because of their
powerful miracles, wherewith they confirmed their doctrine. Lastly, in respect
of the message which they brought, which was glad tidings of peace and good
things.


Tim. What signifies [peace?]


Silas. Atonement with God by Christ, who of enemies are made friends to God
by justifying them, Rom.5. 1. Whereof follows a double peace, first of the
conscience, in that sin being now forgiven it can no more vex or torment the
conscience, which cannot now accuse and furiously rail against us as it was
wont to do; neither can our wicked affections so disquiete us being renewed
and led by the spirit. Secondly, a most loving peace with the brethren, having
all one heart in the Lord and one soul.


Tim. What are the good things here spoken of?


Silas. Not earthly and perishing, but celestial and eternal good things, as
remission of sins, righteousness, the holy Ghost, regeneration and eternal
life, the least of them greater then a world.


Tim. What doctrine does arise from the words thus opened.


Silas. First, that the substance of the Gospel is to declare Doctrine.
the enmity of God with man in regard of sin, and that reconciliation is to
be attained only in Christ through faith. Secondly, that the Gospel ought to
be much loved 2. Doctrine.
and respected of us above all other things, because it brings us tidings sure
and sweet of the chiefest good things, as that our sins are forgiven us,
etc. Thirdly, that all outward blessings and deliverances are tokens of God
reconciled to true believers. Fourthly, that all afflictions whatsoever, have
not now the nature of punishments, but are for chastisment unto amendment, and
remembrances, etc. O how joyful tidings are these, especially to contrite and
troubled souls, which are feared with their sins and Gods judgments? How
should we esteem of that Gospel which declares such desirable and gladsome
matters, how dull and heavy be those souls which be not affected? which leap
not for joy?


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. To reprove such as neglect the Gospel, or Use.
prefer ought before it, or contemn it, or do not duly consider the excellency
of it. Secondly, to exhort all men to be much more abundantly thankful for
the Gospel, which offers and opens a treasure of most worthy and rare good
things, living well and godlily, that God may long grant us the possession of
it; least for unbelief and unthankfulness, we deserve to loose it, as the
seven Churches of Asia did, Reave.2. and 3. 5. Doctrine.



Tim. What other doctrine gather you hence? Reason.



Silas. That the true and diligent Minister of the Gospel ought greatly to be
had in reverence. The reason is because they are the messengers that bring unto
us these excellent and needful things; and God has here commanded us to
admire their very [feete] which are their basest members. For if such as bring
us good news though but of temporal things, are welcome to us, and we gladly
respect them: then how much more are the messengers of eternal salvation to be
had in honor: again, if we think them worthy to be esteemed that offer unto
us but a world ly treasure, how much more are they to be accounted off, which
brings us a spiritual and heavenly treasure? Lastly, if in every profession,
the Ministers thereof use to be honored, as the idolatrous Pagans honor
their sacrificing Priests, the Papists their massing priests, the Turks
their praying Priests: therefore a shame were it to Christians, if they should
not honor their preachers, which preach peace to the^, being messe^gers of
reconcilement to the K. of heaven.


Tim. What use of this point?


Sil. It exhorts all godly Christians, to have their Ministers in singular
love, and to acknowledge them thankefully, to provide for them not grudgingly,
to exchange their temporal for spiritual good things, their earthly for
celestial, 1 Cor. 9. Galat. 6. 1 These.5. 12. 13. Secondly, a sharp
reprehension of such as use their well deserving Ministers unkindly, or
irreverently, falsely accusing them, wilfully resisting them, cowardly forsaking
them; these show themselves unworthy of the Gospel, which so badly entreat
the Ministers of it.


Tim. What other doctrine?


Silas. That it is the duty of Gods Ministers to preach good things to the
people, which reproues the insufficient, Ezekiel. 3, 18.
or unwilling, which will not or cannot; there is an 1. Cor. 9, 16, 17.
heavy and eternal weight of vengeance due to such. Also it bewraies the Pope
to be no true Minister of Christ, because he does nothing less then bring
peace and the message of salvation; nay he is a maine enemy to the doctrine of
the Gospel, and disturbes the peace of kingdoms and commonwealths by his
ambition and tyranny: and yet he dares to appropriate this text to himself,
offering his feet covered with Buskins of gold to be kissed of Kings and
Princes, because it is written, How beautiful are the feet that brings glad
tidings? applying that unto his proud pompous shoes, which the HolyGhost
understood of sound and painful preaching, which the Pope flies from as the
Owl abhorres the light.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 16, 17. But they have not all obeyed the Gospel: for Esaias says Lord,
who has believed our report? Then faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God?


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. A cause why we should not marvel that Part.
the Jews did not believe the Gospel, though the Apostles were sent of God to
preach such a worthy and welcome message; for Esaias had foretold that it should
come to pass. Secondly, a conclusion of the former gradation, in verse 14.
showing whence faith in Christ does proceed, as touching the nearest and
external cause, namely by the Organ of hearing, verse 17.


Tim. What is meant by the [Gospell?]


Silas. Generally any gladsome news, but especially the glad tidings of
remission of sins by Christ, as Luke 2, 10, 11. I bring you tidings of great
joy, etc.


Tim. What signifies [to obey the Gospel?]


Silas. To believe the doctrine of salvation by Christ, and thus the word is
used in Acts 6, 7. and Romans 1, 5. whereupon it is termed the Law of Faith,
Romans 3. 27. because it requires obedience.


Tim. For what Reasons is Faith called [Obedience,] and to Obey, put for
Believe?


Silas. Because to believe is the chiefest obedience, and it is commanded us to
believe in Christ, 1 John 3, 23. and our reason and judgment is naturally
repugnant to the Doctrine of the word: for they are darkness, Ephesians. 5, 8.
Therefore to assent to the word, and willingly to believe the truth without
reasoning and gainsaying, it is a very great obedience. Secondly, this
obedience of Faith, brings forth obedience in practice; for faith purifieth
the heart, Acts 15, 9. and works by love, Gal. 5, 6. No Christian shall obey
God by loving him and our neighbor, by slaying sin and doing
righteousness, unless he first believe that the word is from God, and submit
to it by Faith.


Tim. What will follow hereof?


Sil. First, that all unbelievers are obstinate and rebellious sinners against
God, though they think otherwise, and be held for honest men. Secondly, that
such as lack Faith, cannot perform any obedience unto God: it is sin, if
it be not of faith.


Tim. What Doctrine arises from hence [That all which heard the Apostles, did
not believe them?]


Tim. That the Faith of the Gospel is not common to all which heard the
Gospel, as it is written, All men have not Faith. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 2. Also
experience proves the truth hereof, for the Prophets complain that few
believe their preaching, Esaias 53, 1. Also Christ, when he preached the
doctrine of the Gospel most clearly, and mightily confirmed it by miracles,
yet but one here and there did receive it, scarce one man of a thousand: such
also was the success of the Apostles preaching, as this place proves, and
such it is continually.


Tim. But Paul had said, that hearing brings forth Faith.


Silas. It is true, that hearing of the word is necessary to faith, but not on
the contrary does faith necessarily follow of hearing. If any man do believe,
it is thorough hearing as an outward means, but not every one that hears,
proves a believer. Justification presupposes vocation, but vocation is not
always accompanied with Justification.


Tim. What is the reason why all which hear, do not prove believers?


Sil. Because all are not elect, and it is a certain thing, that only such as
are ordained to life, do believe, Acts 13, 48. Thence it is called the Faith
of the elect, Titus 1, 1. and they are said to be called which are
predestinate, Romans 8, 31. Secondly, because outward hearing is not enough to
engender faith, there must be also an opening of the eyes and heart, by the
Spirit, Acts 26, 18. and 16, 14. But this Spirit the world cannot receive, John
14, 17. Such only receive it to whom it is given, Math. 13, 11. And Esaias 53,
1. having said, few believed their report, adds this as a reason, because
The arm of the Lord was not revealed, that is, Gods powerful spirit did not
touch their hearts effectually. Thirdly, in some their pride and ouer-weening,
by conceyuing too highly of their own wit and understanding, leaning unto
their own natural wisdom, is a very great hinderance to faith, Math. 11,
25. 1 Cor. 1, 26. Fourthly, many stumble at the poverty of Christ and his
followers, Mat. 11, 6. To which may be added the wicked examples of preachers
and professors of the Faith, as a great obstacle.


Tim. What use is to be made hereof?


Silas. That we now do not the less esteem the Gospel, though we see it
generally unfruitful, because this has been the portion of other times and
ages; and herewith Christians must arm themselves that they be not offended
to see the multitude of unbelievers: and there is no place so full of
unrighteous men, as where the word is most preached; which is a great occasion
of stumbling, to cause men to think ill of the Doctrine, as if it were the
proper cause of wickedness, or at the leastwise unable to convert sins:
whereas the fault is not in the word, nor always in the teachers, but in the
indisposition and naughtines of the hearers, the seed being good, but the
ground barren and evil. Secondly, it confutes such as think the Faith of the
Gospel to proceed (in part at the least) from the natural strength of man's
free will: whereas this being equal and of the like force in all men, then
should all men have Faith, and equally obey the Gospel. If free will were the
cause of believing, that is, if men did therefore believe and receive Grace
offered, because they are willing to receive it, and might refuse if they
would: if Faith might come after this fashion, who is it but he would be
content to be a believer? But the Scripture teaches us, that Faith is the gift
of God.


Tim. From whence does the Apostle fetch this testimony of Esaias, to prove the
fewness of believers: and what is the drift of that Oracle?


Silas. He does fetch it from Esaias 53, 1. the drift both of the Prophet there,
and the Apostle here is all one, even to complain of the Jews infidelity,
namely, that the joyful message of the Gospel had so hard success and
unhappy end among them, as that the greatest number should still abide in their
unbelief: wherewith seeing men were not moved, therefore Paul turns his
complaint to God, and mourns for it before him.


Tim. What are we to understand by this Question [Who has?]


Sil. This question signifies sometimes [None at al,] as Interpret.
Romans 10, 6. and it is sometimes put for Few, as Psalm. 15, 1. and here
likewise.


Tim. What signifies Report?


Silas. The word in the Hebrew signifies hearing, or the Doctrine which was
heard, not which the Apostles themselves heard of God, but which the Jews
heard from the Apostles: therefore it is said [ Our report,] in which word,
the thing which is the object of hearing, is put for hearing it self.


Tim. What Doctrines from hence?


Silas. That the Prophets by the Spirit of prophesy, did Doctrine.
foresee what effects would follow the Gospel preached to the Jews. God
foreseeth all things of himself primarily: men do it secondarily by the help
of his Spirit. Secondly, we learn that it is a cause of great grief to the
Ministers of God, to see none or little fruit to come of their teaching Heb.
13, 17. wherein they must show patience, considering it was the portion of
Christ his Prophets and Apostles. Thirdly, we learn, that when the Gospel
was first delivered to the Jews, the smallest number did receive it, even an
handful in respect of the rest which resisted it; like to the gleannings in
harvest, or Grapes after the vintage. The cause hereof, was not the prophecy
of Esaias because he foretold it, but the contrary rather being true, that
because they were not to believe, therefore the Prophet so foretold it: but
the true causes were two, 1. secret, viz: that God did not give with his Gospel
his inward effectual illumination of his Spirit, to reueal Christ in them.
The second was open and outward, namely the person of Christ being poor and
mean, and his passion reproachful; which bred in the Jews, a contempt of
him, and of his teaching, Esaias 53, 3, 4.


Tim. What use of this point?


Sil. It teaches God to be no accepter of persons, in Use.
that he denies faith even to his own people the Jews. Secondly, that no
dignity of place or people, can privilege any against infidelity and sin.
For Adam in Paradise, and the Jews in Palestina the Holy Land, yet disobeyed
God. Thirdly, what the Scriptures foretell, must certainly come to pass: the
prophesies of the old, so of the new Testament, must certainly be fulfilled.
Lastly, seeing Faith is not common unto all hearers, let such then as have
faith, see that there is great cause to be thankful to God for such an
unspeakable gift.


Tim. What are we to learn out of the next verse?


Silas. That our hearing is the accustomed occasion of faith by Gods
ordination, through the working of the Spirit. Secondly, that nothing (but the
word of God) must be the substance of our words and sermons, because they alone
contain a persect instruction both of faith and manners: and nothing but it
can satisfy the conscience in the cause of religion and salvation; for the
conscience has no rest till it hear God speak in his word. Howbeit, if by
[word] we understand the commandment of God enioyning teachers to preach, and
Christians to hear it, will well agree with [sending,] spoken of in Scriptures
Mat. 4, 4.


DIAL. XIII.
Verses 18, 19. But I say, have they not heard? Yes verily their sound went out
into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world. But I demand,
did not Israel know God? First Moses says, I will provoke you to envy by a
nation that is not my nation, and by a foolish nation I will anger you.


Tim. WHat is the drift of this text, unto the end of this Chapter?


Silas. It contains a sharp reproof of the affected ignorance of the Jews,
or of their ignorance joined with obstinacy. After that Paul had proved the
Gentiles to belong to the election of God, by the effects, (because they had
been by the preaching of the Apostles effectually called to Christ,) and had
accused the Jews of infidelity, in that they refused to believe the Apostles
being sent of God with such a welcome message: He does now make it plain by
testimonies out of the Psalms and Prophets, that they could not plead
ignorance, and had no excuse thereof left unto them.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First a double objection, the one in verse 18, the other in verse
19. Secondly, a double answer one to each objection.


Tim. What is the first objection, and how is it answered?


Sil. Have they (that is the Jews, or as some think both Jew and Gentiles)
heard? It is an objection made by some Jew in behalf of the Jews to excuse
them, that they could not believe, because they heard not, and faith comes by
hearing. Seeing then they had no faith, it was a sign they had not heard. Unto
which the Apostle answers, that the Gospel was then published to the whole
world, therefore the Jews must needs have heard; for how could the Israelites
be without hearing, seeing the Gentiles (even all the world besides) had
heard? as it is here proved by the Apostle out uf the 19 Psalm, verse 4.


Tim. But David speaks of the creatures, and the naturalk Doubt.
knowledge got by beholding the heavens, as in verse 1.


Silas. It is true, he speaks of the voice or preaching Solution.
of the creature historically, yet by the way he prophesies of the voice and
preacing of the Apostles; for of one and the same sense, (...) may be sundry
applications: or it is but an allusion to that place, thus and in this manner:
as once God taught the whole world to know him by the line, and voice of the
heavens, which was a loud sound to proclaim his eternal Godhead and power;
so now he has universally made himself known by the Apostles doctrine. Or
he argues either (a pari) of the like, thus: As God would have himselse
publicly see forth by the dumb preaching of the heavens, so by the lively
sounding voice of the Gospel: or (a minori) of the less, thus: If the
natural knowledge of God being less precious and profitable, be published
abroad, then much more that knowledge which is by the Gospel, ought to be so,
being far more clear and health-full: this may be received as fittest, yet
all good.


Tim. But how should this be, seeing as yet there be sundry Doubt.
people to which the Gospel was never preached, as Iaponica, Basilica, and
other barbarous people not a few, as appears by their captives which were of
them, and bewray an utter ignorance of Christ?


Silas. These countries in the Apostles time, might either No kingdom of note
in the world, but within 40. years after the passion of Christ, received the
Gospel, says Egisippus.
be undiscovered or not inhabited; but it is certain that even before the
Apostles death, Christ was preached to all nations known, and countries which
were dwelt in, either by the person of Preachers, or by same of their doctrine:
as the same of deliverance of Israel, and destruction of the Egyptians came to
Jericho, for Rahab heard of it. This point may be proved, first by Christ's
commandment, which was not in vain, Math. 28, 19. Go teach all Nations.
etc. also Mark 16. 15. Acts 1, 18.

Secondly, Paul witnesses that in his time this commandment was fulfilled, as
Col. 1, 6, 23. Thirdly, if one Apostle could spread it from Jerusalem to
Spain, Romans 15, 19. how likely is it that all the rest might preach the
Gospel to the known parts of the world. Fourthly, many, yea most of the
Fathers are of this opinion, Hilary upon Math. 24, 14. affirms that the
Gospel was preached in the universal world, before the overthrow (...):
Chrysostom says that in space of thirty years, the Gospel was preached to
all. Eusebius Jerome, Theophylact, and Ambrose teach the same truth; of his
time Jerome says, that no nation was ignorant of Christ.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point? Use.



Silas. It confutes the Jesuits, Pererius, Bellarmine, and Rhemists in Mat.
24. who yet say the Gospel is not generally preached, but shall be before the
end of the world: this is to cross authority of Scripture, and opinion of the
learned; as Augustine read shall be preached, for had been preached. Secondly,
it reproues the popish Historians of falsehoode in writing, that the Britains
received not the faith till Austine the Monks time; whereas they were even in
the Apostles times converted to the faith by Simon Zelotes, as Nicephorus
writes: and in King Lucius time (...) brought in ra there tyrannical subjection
to the Pope, then pure religion Peter Martyr.
(which was two hundred years before Austine) preachers were sent from
Eleutherius the first Bishop of Rome, to instruct the Britains in the
Christian faith; also by good stories it will appear, that Austine brought in
Romish tyrany and superstition, rather then the faith of the Gospel,
perverting the people rather then converting them. Thirdly, it commends
diligence in the Ministers by the example of the Apostles: shall we not attend
our flock, when the Apostles travailed so far? And the great power and esficacy
of the word, by the prosperous power of God; also the goodness of God
illustrating this world, with this new light from heaven.


Tim. What is the next objection?


Silas. Did not Israel know? Where some word is to be Objection.
supplied to make up the sense, as [God] after master Beza, or the general
preaching of the Gospel, or the conversion of the Gentiles depending thereon;
which last, Piscator likes best, because the following Prophesies do speak of
their vocation.


Tim. What is the meaning of the objection?


Silas. That though Israel heard, yet it may be they understood Sum.
not the doctrine nor counsel of God, touching the calling of the Gentiles;
therefore they took offense at their conversion, of mere ignorance.


Tim. How is this objection answered?


Sil. They did grudge and were angry, that the Gospel Answer.
was translated to the Gentiles; also in their hearts they disobeyed, and with
their mouths gaine-sayed the doctrine of Christ, (as is is proved here by
testimonies out of Moses and Esaias;) and therefore the Jews could not choose but
know the Gospel, and that it was preached to the Gentiles, for this was the
occasion of their envy and anger.


Tim. Whence is the first testimony fetched?


Silas. From Deuteron. 32, 22. where God threatens the Jews, that he will
punnish them with jealousy and anger, by preferring the Gentiles before them,
at the sight whereof their hearts should be vexed to behold all their
privileges taken from them, and given to a people whom they accounted most
vile and despicable.


Tim. What is meant by Jealousy?


Silas. It is borrowed from married estate, where a man Interpretation.
is grieved to see his beloved wife either wholly taken away or to see another
admitted to the fellowship of his love. It signifies then the great grief of
the Jews, to see the Gentiles admitted into that dignity which they once had,
to wit, to be the people and worshippers of the true God, from whom they had so
long been strangers. Doubt.



Tim. If jealousy be a sin, how is God said to provoke to it?


Silas. Either by occasion, bestowing benefits to the Solution.
Gentiles, to the angring of the Jews, Acts 13, 44. or accidentally, as the
light of the Sun offends weak eyes, though it be in it self comfortable,
or in respect of the end, that by such anger the Jews might be stirred up to
believe in Christ: as a mother to bridle the wantonness of her own Child, will
cast it off, and call unto her the Child of a stranger, to move it to have the
more grace: but God does that in earnest, which mothers do in jest, or as
jealousy is a punishment of former sin, so it is of God, as is to be seen
by the former place of Deuteronomy. 32, 21. The Jews had chosen to themselves such as
were no Gods, therefore God to vex them, would take to him such as were no
people; they had chosen to themselves another husband, and he had chosen
another wife to be even with them. Now sin as it has the nature of
punishment is a good thing, and comes of God; for it is the execution of his
justice.


Tim. What is the doctrine from hence? Doctrine.



That God in his justice does punish sin by sin, yea in such sort as he
does proportionate the pain to the fault; example hereof in Pharaoh, whose
heart was hardened of God for his former sin, see Romans 1. 26, 28. and 11,
8, 9.


Tim. What profit of this Doctrine?


Silas. It teaches how fearful a thing the justice of God is, in that for
sin he can strike not the body of men Use.
alone; but the very souls of men with new sins, filling them with more
sins, which greedily follow their own lusts; to show himself the Lord and
Governor of the souls, as well as of the flesh of men, and is able to wotke
in them either good things according to his mercies, or evil things according
to men's merits. Secondly, it warns all men above all things to beware, as of
all sin, so especially of sinning wittingly and willingly, after many
instructions, and benefits, and admonitions to amendment, for God will plague
such spiritually, by giving them over unto the power of sin, which is the most
grievous judgment under heaven, and it is so much the more greater, because it
is insensible: for whereas all other judgments be without sin, this alone is
with increase of guilt and sin.


Tim. Why does be call the Gentiles [no people] being so Doubt.
great a people?


Silas. Because first they were such in the account of the Solution.
Jews, Mat. 15, 28. Secondly, they were such in the account of God himself,
who reckoned them for no people, as they esteemed him for no God. Thirdly,
because they were not Gods people, they might as well be no people as not his
people; for as wicked men are said to be dead in sins while they live, so the
Gentiles while they were stta^gers from God, were not worthy to be esteemed
his people, or any people at all.


Tim. But wherefore terms he them a foolish people, seeing there were
amongst them Philosophers and many learned men, Doubt.
Acts 17, 18. Romans 1, 22. 1. Cor. 1. 20.?


Silas. They were indeed wise in the wisdom of the Solution.
world, which is foolishness with God, all true wisdom stands in the
knowledge of God, Iere. 17. They have cast away thy words, what wisdom is
therefore in them?


Tim. But Paul does witness in Romans 1. 20. 21. that Gentiles had the knowledge
of God.


Silas. They had some litterall and superficial knowledge by the light of
nature, through the view of the Solution.
creatures, but no true and saving knowledge by the light of the Spirit,
through the understanding of the Scriptures.


Tim. What is the doctrine from hence?


Silas. That wretched is the estate of all people and persons Doctrine.
which live without the sound knowledge of Christ, because they are without
God, strangers from him, void of his life, full of foolishness and sin, and
subject to eternal destruction.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. It serves to move us to thankfulness for the light of the Gospel,
and to walk in it while we have it, seeing thereby we are delivered from our
former condition of ignorance and unbelief, and restored to such a maruailous
wisdom which makes wise to salvation, see Chap. 9, verse 26.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verses 20, 21. And Esaias is bold and says, I was found of them that sought me
not, and manifest to them that asked not after me: and unto Israel he says,
All the day long have I stretched forth my hand unto a disobedient and
gaine-saying people.


Tim. Whence are these two testimonies fetched?


Silas. Out of the Prophet Esaias, Chapter 65. verse 1, 2. wherein the first
verse which is here by Paul set latter, is the former in Esaias, and the former
here, is latter there: the last words of the first verse of Esaias, being quite
left out, and some words in the second changed, but the meaning kept entire,


Tim. What is the sum of these two texts?


Sil. The one is a consolatory Prophecy, foretelling the Sum.
vocation of the profane Gentiles, how they should be accepted of God unto
mercy: the other is a menacing prophesy, threatening reiection and casting off
to the rebellious and stubborn Jews, or the refusing of the Jews for their
obstinacy,


Tim. What means Paul when he says that Esaias is [bold?]


Silas. The meaning is, that though he well knew that Interpretation.
the Jews would hate and persecute him, for his foretelling so plainly the
abiection of themselves, and the adopting of the Gentiles to be Gods people in
their stead; yet he did not covertly and fearfully, but openly and
confidently speak of it without fear of their cruelty, or respect of danger.
This grace is commended in Paul, Acts 28, 31. and in Peter and John, Acts 4,
13. for where there is no peril proposed, there is no cause of boldness; but
boldness and liberty of speech argues that it could not be said without
hazard.


Tim. What instructions may we learn from hence?


Silas. First, the condition of the Ministers of Christ, that they shall fall
into dangers, if they be faithful and ready to speak the truth freely; as
the Galathians became enemies to Paul, Achab to Elias, Herod to John Baptist,
the Pharisees to Christ, and all because they spoke the truth: this lewd
unthankful world, can afford no better wages to the servants of God.
Secondly, that Ministers of the word may not for fear of da^gerconceal the
truth, because that God who commands them to declare his will without fear,
can and will recompense them with good things, if they do their duty, and with
evil things if they fainte because of men, see Jeremy 1, 17, 18.


Tim. What learn ye hereby, that God was found of them that sought him not?


Silas. The woeful estate of the Gentiles, even of us all Doctrine.
by nature, as we are corrupt in Adam. The reason hereof Reason.
is, because we are naturally ignorant of God, and careless of him, of his favor
and worship: we neither of ourselves seek him, or so much as ask after him.
Such are all men by nature without the Spirit of Christ, as is to be seen in
the example of Paul, Acts 9. and Zacheus, Luke 19. and the Thief on the
cross, and by testimonies of Scripture, Psalm. 14, 1, 2, 3. Romans 5, 7, 8. Gal.
4. 8. Ephe. 4, 18. Titus 3, 3. We do more think of God before our
conversion, then the lost groat on her which lost it, or the lost sheep minds
his shepherd from whom he strayed.


Tim. What use of this point? Use.



Sil. It serves to humble us in our own eyes, when we shall meditate upon
our old estate, and to cause us to extol the love and mercies of Christ,
freely of his own goodness, calling us to him, and seeking us up when we not
so much as once minded him, no more then a dead man minds Doubt.
the things of this world.


Tim. It is elsewhere written, that such as seek God shall find, as Esaias 55,
6. I am found of them that seek me, and Mat. 7, 7. Seek and ye shall find;
how then is it said here, that he is found of them who sought him not? Solution.



Sil. This is understood of the time going before their first conversion, and
calling of the elect which seek not God, till he first seek and find them;
but the other places and texts speak of such as being once converted and
moved by the Spirit of Christ, do henceforth seek him, and by seeking find
him. When God inwardly stirs the elect, then they seek him, John 6, 44. and
by seeking find, but before they be first found of God, they no more seek him,
then a dead man seeks life, or a sleeping man food.


Tim. What does the 21. verse contain?


Silas. It does describe Gods exceeding great mercy toward the Jews, and
their wicked ingratitude in despising it, being lovingly and constantly
offered: but more particularly it does set forth two excellent virtues in God,
and two notorious vices in the Isralites.


Tim. What be the two virtues in God?


Sil. First Gods kindness, signified in stretching forth the hand, which is a
speeech borrowed from mothers, who allure their wanton children to them by
casting abroad their hands, therein showing how ready they are to embrace
them when they come: in like manner God by benefits, threatenings,
exhortations, promises, yea by all means, fair or foul, inuiteth and calls
to faith and repentance, the obstinate Jews, that he might reclaim them. The
second virtue in God, is his patience and perseverance, noted hereby that he
stretched out his hands all the day, with great continuance; even all the time
of the law of Moses, ever since they first came out of Egypt, God took
special care of that people, and never ceased one way or other to provoke them
to come to him, as appears in 2, Chron, 36, 15. 16.


Tim. What is the profit to be made hereof? Doctrine.



Sil. First, it teaches that wicked sinners perish through their own
demerite, and the cause of their destruction can at no hand be imputed to God,
O Israel thy destruction is of thy self. Hos. 13, 9. Secondly, it admonishes
all Christians, but Ministers especially, how to proceed in their rebukes and
exhortations, namely with all manner of kindness, love, and continuance, leaving
nothing undone which may turn to the amendment of others, doing it constantly
without weariness, even so long as there is any hope, 2 Timothy 2, 25, 26. also 2 Timothy 4, 2. and while Ministers do thus, men are to consider, that now God
does spread abroad his hands to receive them; the contempt of which kindness
will draw on remediles and most grievous plagues upon whole Churches, as the
seven Churches of Asia, Reave. 2, and 3. Chapters; and on whole countries, as
Judah and Israel, and innumerable other kingdoms, which for contempt of this
kindness tendered in the ministry of the word, lie under Paganism or
Papisme; by whose example let us be admonished to beware and learn to come
when God calls, to answer when he speaks, to repent when he inuiteth us
thereunto. Thirdly, we are here admonished, that if we lose our pains and
patience, yet not to be discontent, seeing God himself had no better speed,
and it is well, if the servant be as his Lord.


Tim. But what be the two vices in the Jews?


Sil. First, rebellion or disobedience in the heart, in refusing to believe the
promises, and to do the commandments of God. Secondly, their contumacy in
gaynsaying the Prophets, railing at them, and speaking against their doctrine
with their tongues, whereof we have an example in Acts 13, 45. and 19, 9.


Tim. What follows hereupon?


Silas. That the Jews for trampling Gods mercies under foot, and spurning at
his word, did deserve to be rejected, and without wrong were refused of God:
and secondly, that they had no cause at all to be angry, that the Gentiles were
adopted, and taken in to be Gods people in their room, seeing they well
deserved to be quite cut off.


Tim. What Instructions arises from hence?


Silas. First, that unbelief of heart when the word of Doctrine.
God cannot persuade us, is like the sin of Rebellion. For such do in their
hearts rise up and resist God, as Rebels their Prince. Secondly, that
infidelity does bring forth and breed contradiction; therefore men are bold
with their mouths, to speak against the doctrine of the Scriptures, because
they do not understand nor believe it: as faith engenders reverence of the
word, and causes us to glorify it, so incredulity procures profane men to
speak ill of the word of God, and to rail at the true Ministers thereof;
which how grievous and heyuous a sin it is, may appear by the punnishment
God took on the Jews whom he cast off for it. Thirdly, we learn, that both
Ministers and other godly Christians, are to take it patiently when men resist
the truth which they utter, seeing the ungodly Jews did gainesay even God
himself, speaking to the^ by his Prophets: And are men better or greater then
God? Shall God be gainsaid, and do thou so take on and vex, because thy
word or counsel is crossed and controlled? Learn humility, and be content to
be contradicted.


CHAP. XI.
DIAL. I.
Verse 1, 2. I demand then, has God cast away his people? God forbid. For I
am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Benjamin. God has
not cast away his people whom he knew before.


Timotheus. WHat is the drift of this whole Chapter?


Silas. To prove that the Jews (howsoever a rebellious people) yet are not
rejected Scope.
from being Gods people, either vniiersally nor for ever; but that still some of
them were converted to Christ, and many more should be toward the end of the
world; by which discourse he purposes to comfort the Jews against despair,
and to confirm the stablenesse of Gods promises, which failed not toward any
Jew which was elected of God. And secondly, to exhort the Gentiles (which were
admitted into the void room of the refused Jews) to be modest and lowly
minded, to take heed of the contempt of the Jews who were fallen, and of
security; considering Gods mercies toward them in their free adoption, and
Gods severity unto the obstinate Jews, whom yet he had not so abandoned, but
that he could and would gather them again into the fold of his Church. So as
the drifte of this Chapter is two fold: one to keep the Jews from despair,
and the other to preserve the Gentiles from presumption and pride.


Tim. What are the parts of this Chapter?


Silas. They be four: First, Doctrinall, wherein he Parts.
does three things. First, he teaches to the comsort of the Jews, that a
remainder of them were Gods elect, to verse 7. and thence vnro the 11. verse,
Paul confirms by a double testimony, one out of Esaias, and another out of
David, that the most part of the Jews were rejected. Lastly, he opens the
final cause or end of Gods counsel, in casting off the unbelieving Jews (to
wit) that thereby an occasion of calling the Gentiles might be given, unto
ver. 17. The second part is exhortatorie unto the Gentiles, to verse 25. The
third part is Prophetical, foretelling the vocation of the Jews, unto verse
33. And fourthly, a conclusion consisting of an exclamation and of a prayer
unto the end of the chapter.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First, an Objection. Secondly, an answer thereunto.


Tim. What is the Objection?


Silas. This: O Paul, if the Jews be cast off (as thou seem Objection.
to affirm out of Esaias, that for their unthankfulness and contempt of God, they
are of him worthlly shut out) then are Gods people cast off. For the Jews were
Gods people, and if they be cast off, then what becomes of Gods promises made
to that people, and what hope does there remain of their salvation? Thus might
weak ones reason against that which he wrote in the end of the Chapter: but
cauillers will be ready to allege the Adoption of Abraham and his seed, whom
God took of especial favor to be his own people, so as he should be
unconstant if he brake his own covenant. All this is contained in the first
words [ I say then, has God cast away his people,] that is, I see what you
will say upon my former speeches, that Gods people are drawn away from grace
and salvation.


Tim. How is this Objection answered? Solution.



Silas. Two ways: First by denial [ God forbid,] that is I am far from
thinking any such thing, that all the Jews are generally cast out from grace.
Secondly, he proves this his denial by sufficient and strong arguments: As
first, from his own example. Secondly, from the efficient cause. Thirdly, from
the example of Elias his time, applied to the present time wherein Paul wrote.


Tim. How does he reason from his own example?


Silas. Thus: I Paul am a Jew (not a Proselite converted 1. Argument to prove
that all Jews were not Reprobates.
to the Faith) but a Jew by Nation; not of a base, but of a Noble Tribe, even
of Benjamin, who was borne not of the hand-maides of Jacob, but of Rachell his
wife: but though I be a Jew, I am not cast out of Gods favor and covenant;
therefore all the Jews are not rejected from Christ, for then should I be
rejected too seeing I am an Israelite?


Tim. What Doctrine is to be gathered from this first reason?


Sil. That an elect person which is converted, may be sure of his own election
unto life. Paul was an elect man, no cast-out, but a chosen vessel: and Paul
did know himself to be so, as this place shows with Romans 8, 35. Therefore the
elect may be sure that they are of the elect, and consequently that they shall
be saved: for all the elect are to be saved, and all which are to be saved,
be elect, these be Term ni conuertibiles.


Tim. But Paul knew this by some singular and special revelation. Doubt.



Silas. He knew it rather by the certainty and assurance Solution.
of Faith, which wheresoever it is, it is known to be there (as Augustine
says:) and they who know themselves to be (...), do withal assure their
hearts of their own election and salvation, because the promise of salvation
is made to them which are endowed with Faith, and all such are ordained to
life, John 13, 16, 18, 36. Acts 13, 48.


Tim. What Use of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, to confute the Papists who teach, that men ought still to doubt,
and to have only a probable assurance of their own salvation, and cannot be
sure of it, by an ordinary and infallible certainty. Secondly, to exhort all
Christians to endeavor the making sure of their own election to themselves,
according to the counsel, 2 (...). 1. 10. and it is made sure by the fruits
of sanctification, 2 (...). 1, 5 6, 7.


Tim. What is the second argument to prove the Jews to be not rejected from
salvation by Christ?


Silas. It is taken from the efficient cause, to wit, Gods eternal and
unchangeable love, the reason stands thus: whom God from everlasting loves
as his own and electeth them, these he never casts off; (this proposition is
in the beginning of the second verse) but there are some of the Jews whom God
did love and choose from everlasting: this proposition is not expressed but
infolded in these words, [his people] therefore all the Jews are not rejected;
this must be understood as a consequent necessarily arising of the promises.


Tim. What is meant by [casting away] in the 2. verse?


Silas. To repel or drive from God and Christ Jesus, and from eternal life in
heaven: God has done this to every Jew.


Tim. What signifies [foreknowledge?]


Silas. Predestinating, (so Ambrose expoundes it) or whom he loved and
embraced, being elected from the beginning (so Beza expounds it,) and master
Calvin puts foreknowledge for Gods good pleasure. There is in God a twofolde
prescience or foreknowledge; the one is a bare speculatiue foresight, whereby
he understands all things which be and are done in the world. This
belongs not so much to his will as to his knowledge, and is no cause of
things, for things are therefore done, not because they are foreseen, but for
that they be decreed. Secondly, foreknowledge is a knowledge in God, with love
and approbation, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Romans 8. 29. this kind of prescience in God is
the cause of things, and it is all one with election or predestination, which
is a knowing of some persons, from everlasting, and (...) them in his love, as
his own, whom he will save by Christ.


Tim. What doctrine arises from these words?


Silas. These two: First, we are to learn that the first and highest cause of
man's election and salvation is the eternal love, will or good pleasure of God,
as may appear out of Mat. 11, 26. Romans 11, 8. Ephe. 1, 5. Rom, 27, 28. Romans 9,
15, 18. For, what can God have out of himself to go and be before himself?
and who has given God first? Rom 11, 35.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. First, it confutes the error of such as will have the bare prescience
of God to be the cause of election and salvation: this was Chrysostomes error,
who held that as God foresaw men would believe and live well, so he choose them;
also Ambrose was of this mind, so expounding Romans 9, 15. and Augustine
attributed election to foreseen faith, which error he retracted after
Pelagius and his followers did err in this matter grossly.


Tim. How is this error confuted?


Silas. First, because the bare foresight of God is not the cause of the
existence of any thing; for he knew before those things, which shall not be,
as those which shall be. Secondly, Jacob was loved and chosen of God, ere ever
he had done any good thing, from Gods purpose, nor from his bare prescience.
Romans 9, 11. Thirdly, seeing all men were to be alike corrupt through sin,
there was no good thing he could foresee in any; therefore all men should
have been reprobate, if his bare foresight had been the ground and cause.
Lastly, the Scripture expressly denies that man's worthiness is any cause of
man's election, Deuteronomy. 7, 7. See the place.


Tim. What other thing learn we frem the former doctrine?


Silas. That we do owe all thanks and praise to Gods free love, for electing,
calling, and saving us. Thirdly, here is matter of comfort, by assuring us that
now we are, God will not refuse nor destroy us, since he loved so long before
we were. And lastly, here is an exhortation to love all the Children of God,
since they are everlastingly beloved of God; this is cause sufficient to make
us take heed how we hate any upon whom God eternally has set his love, and to
repent of our unkindness toward them.


Tim. What other doctrine arises from the (...) of this second verse?


Silas. That such as God foresaw, and elected before Gods love is unchangeable,
and his election constant.
all worlds, cannot possibly perish. The words of our Text do fully avouch
this truth, God casts not of his people whom he knew before; again it is
written, Mat. 24. 24. that it is not possible the elect should perish, and Romans
8, 30. The predestinate shall be glorified: and lastly, Proof from scripture.
Christ has prayed for all the elect, that they may have his glory in heaven,
John 17, 24. Reason also confirms this truth, for the love of God is
immutable, therefore they cannot perish whom he loves; for then should God
alter and be changeable, if the elect could fall from Gods love and be
Reprobates; but because God changes not, he that is once loved of God, is ever
loved, and therefore cannot be condemned in hell. Hence is the election and
foreknowledge of God, compared unto a seal and foundation, which bsares
things of great stablenes, 1. Ti. 1, 17. Mountains of Brass are not so
strong, as Gods loving purpose and decree is. I am not as men that I should
repent, nor as sons of men that I should (...): again, I am (...), I change
not.


Tim. What profit of this doctrine?


Silas. It confuteth the error of such as say the elect Use.
may lose Gods love by their own fault; this is to make God unable, variable,
and the Scriptures false. Secondly, it teaches the estate of the elect, to be
most stable and permanent, not in respect of their own strength but of Gods
love and counsel. Thirdly, it comfort the poor afflicted consciences of
Gods children, against the fear of damnation: such as once have perceived
their own (...), may be assured of it for (...). Fourthly, it is a
preservative against despair, and a motive to continual thankefulnes, that
God has set them in such an un moveable condition. If we bless God for his
temporal perishing benefits, what praise do we owe for the lasting fruits
of his eternal love and mercy?


DIAL. II.
Verses 2, 3. Know ye not what the Scripture says of Elias, how he makes
request unto God against Israel? saying, Lord, they have killed thy Prophets,
and dug down (...) Altars, and I am left alone, and they seek my life.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. A third reason of his denial, taken from the like example of Elias
days, or from the like estate of the old Church in the time of the Prophet
Elias. The Sum.
sum hereof is thus much: That as it was in the time of Elias, so it is in
the times of Paul the Apostle: then very many Jews were preserved in Israel
from Idolatty, though Elias knew not of them, so now though Paul were ignorant
of it, yet God by his election kept a great company of Jews from infidelity.
In this third argument the Apostle meets with and answers a secret
objection. For some Jew hearing Paul affirm of himself, that he being a Jew
was elect, and not cast away, might easily say and what art thou alone? where
then is that seed which God promises to Abraham, to be as the stars of
heaven, or as the sand on the Sea shore? To which he seasonably replyeth, rhat
there might be and were many more elect and believing Jews which were hid from
him, as Israel had inumerable true worshippers, unknown to Elias. Argumentum
apart.


Tim. Upon what parts does this comparison consist? Parts.



Sil. Upon two: First a proposition or antecedent, in verse 2, 3, 4. Secondly,
the reddition or consequent, verse 5. and in the proposition we are to
consider other two things, first the complaint of the Prophet verse 3. and
secondly, the answer of God thereunto, verse 4.


Tim. What are we to (...) in this, that Paul brings in the example of Elias
time rather then any other?


Silas. The great discretion of Paul, because Elias was highly esteemed among
the Jews, so that his authority could not be gaynsayed, they would not
contradict his witness; it teaches Ministers to study for choice and apt
proofs and examples.


Tim. But with what cautions or conditions, are examples of Scripture to be
alleged in Sermons, or made use of in common life?


Silas. Especially with these three conditions: First, that the examples
alleged be but few, Paul contents himself with one. Secondly, that they be
well suited and sorted, so as the comparison by example be made as touching like
parties, as it was here between the Jews of Elias and Paul his time; for
their blindness in both days was great, yet God still kept his promises unto
his elect, amongst them which were still the least number. Thirdly, examples
must not be repugnant against the common law of (...) to God and man: for
good men are to be imitated in good things only; and we are to follow not
every particular act of the Fathers, but to live according to the law of God.
The (...) thinking to call for fire on the Samaritans, Luke 9. 54. after the
example of Elias, offended against the second caution, for they weere not like
to Elias in Spirit and zeal: and such break the third condition, as will
defend lying by the example of Abraham, and the Midwiues, and (...); or
temporizing by the example of Naaman, or Nicodemus: the infirmities of the
Saints are not written to be patterns to follow, but as cautions to make us
heedfull.


Tim. Come to the words and tell us what we learn (...) by this, that Paul
speaks of this example as of a famous story well known (wot, or know ye
not,) as who should say, ye may Interpretation.
know it, ye ought not to be ignorant of it?


Silas. It commends to us the diligent knowledge of Doctrine.
sacred story, that with all care and endeavor, we seek to have it samiliar
unto us; because it is a shame for a Christian to be ignorant of Gods word,
1. Cor, 15, 34. to be a member of the Church, and not to know the estate of
Gods Church (both as it was before and since Christ) it is as if an Reason.
Englishman should be ignorant of the fashions and customs of England. Also
our knowledge serves much to direct our minds in doubtful cases, and help
others which are perplexed; therefore in any wise be studious searchers, and
wise obseruers, and careful rememberers of holy Scriptures.


Tim. What means this [of Elias?]


Sil. That is [touching Elias] or in the story of Elias.


Tim. What does this teach us, that the Scripture [sayeth or speaks?]


Silas. That the Scripture is not mute or dumb, because Doctrine.
it is the word, voice, and speech of God; who were he to Reason.
speak in his own person, he would use no other words or voice, then that we
find in the Scriptures. Wherefore the Jesuits have small reason to refuse the
Scriptures to be a Judge of controversies, upon pretense that it cannot
speak and give sentence like a Judge; for the Scripture does speak, it is no
dumb letter, for God speaks by it, therefore it is a fit Judge.


Tim. What is meant by Elias (...) making intercossion or request against
Israel?


Silas. The same word is here which is used, Romans 8, 24. 26. but it has not
the same signification: for being spoken of the Spirit, verse 26. it signifies
to stir up or cause us to make request; but being affirmed of Christ, it
signifies the perpetual merit and virtue of his passion, entreating and
pleading with God for favor toward the elect when they sin of infirmity.
But now it notes out the complaint which Elias made to God, to whom he
accused the malice and obstinacy of the Jews, as being sorry for it, and
grieuing at it: not praying for revenge against the^; for it was the office of
the prophet to make request for, and not against the people, as did Moses,
Exodus 32, and Sam. 12. 23. God forbid that I should cease to pray for you,
unless in certain cases, where the people were desperate, so as there is left
no hope of remedy, and the Prophets were stirred up of God to wish their
destruction, whereof we have many examples in the Psalms of David.


Tim. What instructions arise from this complaynt of Elias? Doctrine.



Silas. That the people ought to take heed how they Reason.
ouer-greeue the Pastors with their stubbornness in errors or sins; for this
will cause them with sorrow to power out their complaints to God, who will
regard the sighs of his servants: he who hears the cries of the poor, will
hear his Ministers cries. Again, the Apostle gives an especial warning
touching this matter, Heb. 13, 17. to make the Ministers do their office with
heaviness, is unprofitable, nay pernicious and hurtful to the people.


Tim. What was it that gave Elias occasion of this Complaint?


Silas. The killing of the Priests of Boall, at the direction of Elias, so
kindled Iezabels rage, as she threatened to slay Elias, who therefore fled and
hid himself in a den in the Mountain Horeb; where God finding him, and
expostulating with him, he burst out into this most grievous complaint, 1
Kings 19, 14.


Tim. Of how many sins does Elias accuse Israel in this complaint?


Silas. Of four; First, of cruelty toward the Prophets [ They have killed thy
Prophets.] Secondly, of impiety toward God, [ They dug down his Altars,]
that is, they corrupted his true worship, and set up Idolatry insteade of it.
Thirdly of the paucity or fewness of some woorshippers, which he thought to
have rested in himself alone, [ And I am left alone.] Lastly, of tyranny
toward himself, whose life they sought to take away, 1 Kings 19, 2. That
there might be no more a Prophet in Israel, to teach Godr truth, or to
maintain his glory, or to feed his Church, with instructions of the word.


Tim. What things are we to gather for our instruction out of these parts of
his complaint?


Sil. Sundry things: First, the fury and extreme rage Doctrine.
of Idolaters, who being unable to defend their cause by Arguments, they will
seek to do it by the sword, putting to death the servants of God, under
pretense that they be seditious and heretical: with this weapon did the
Israelites dispute against the Prophets, and the Pharifies against Christ, whom
they would overcome with stones, when they could not possibly overcome with
Scripture. Thus they dealt with the Apostles, and now at this day,
Antichristian Prelates deal thus with Protestants, whose necks they get
under their girdles. The reason of this their savage proceeding is, because
they Reason.
will do the works of their Father the devil; for he is a murderer, and so
be his Children given to blood, John 8, 44.


Tim. What profit serves this instruction unto? Use.



Silas. First, to look for the like bloody measure of our enemies, if they
might get the upper hand. Secondly, not to be offended with such fury when it
happens, as it were some new and strange thing. Lastly, to pour out our
complaints in Gods lap, who can and will right and revenge such wrongs: for he
is the auenger of the helpelesse and oppressed.


Tim. What other Instructions learn we from his Complaint?


Silas. That God suffers his Church and servants to fall into very grievous
afflictions for trial of their faith and patience. Thirdly, in the example of
Elias, we see the infirmity of Gods Saints, how weak they are, and subject
to error, even the best of them. For Elias was deceived, in thinking himself
only to remain: for Obediah had hid a hundred Prophets in a Cave, and Paul
tells us, that a great many (even seven thousand) were reserved by God.
Fourthly, that the actions of wicked Princes are imputed to the people
oftentimes, when they applaude and consent unto them, as these Israelites did:
therefore Paul says, They killed the Prophets, whereas Iezabell acted the
murder, the people only liked of it, and so made it their own: as Achab is
said to have killed Naboth, because he agreed to it. All sins which we
give allowance to, being committed or not hindered by us if we may, are ours, as
if we committed them. 1. Commanders, 2. Abettors, 3. Consenter, 4. Concealer,
5. Cou^sellor, 6. not hinderer, 7. and commender, each one of these seven,
will prove an offender.


DIAL. III.
Verse 4. But what says the answer of God to him, I have reserved to my self
seven thousand men, that have not bowed their knees to Baall.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. The answer of God unto the accusation and complaint of Elias his
Prophet.


Tim. What signifies this word [answere?]


Silas. It has two significations, one proper and strickt, to wit, the Oracle
or answer of God, given in the Tabernacle from the Mercy-seate. The other
general and more large for any divine answer, oracle, or direction received
from God, either in dream, as Mat. 2, 11. or by any other revelation; as Noah
is said to be warned of God, Heb. 11, 7. Thus it is taken here.


Tim. Does Paul rehearse the whole answer of God to Elias?


Silas. No, for the answer had four parts, as his complaint was fourfold:
for first he complains of cruelty, and secondly of impiety; to which God gave
this remedy, that Hazael being anointed King of Syria, and Iehu King of
Samaria, they should be revenged on the Idolatrous and cruel Israelites, 1.
kings 19, 16, 17. Then he accuses them of tyranny to himself, whom they
meant to kill, that God might have never a Prophet; to which God appointed this
remedy, that Elisha should be made Prophet in his place, to maintain Gods
worship and glory. Now the last part was touching the small number of true
worshippers in Israel: to this part God answers, that he had reserved many
thousands besides Elias, which were not defiled with Idols. This part of the
answer because it serves to Paul's purpose, he sets it down alone,
passing by the rest, as impertinent to his matter.


Tim. But Paul has left out some words (as every mouth that has not kissed
Baall.)


Silas. It is true: the reason is because he cites the Scripture as an
Interpreter, and therefore may use more or fewer words as he shall see it most
meet to express the sense and drifte of the Spirit, from which Paul never
takes any thin(...) or adds, or alters; howsoever he use his liberty in
alleging the words of the Text, to teach that Scriptures be in sense, and not
in sillables.


Tim. Come now to the words, and tell us what is meant by reserving?


Silas. To cause to remain and abide free from and untouched by Idols.


Tim. What is meant by seven thousand?


Silas. It is a certain number put for an uncertain, and signifies a
multitude, or a great number, as five foolish and five wise Virgins: see the
like, Mat. 18. 22. Pro. 24, 16. etc.


Tim. What is meant by men?


Tim. Women also, as well as men, even all that continued the true worshippers
of God, the more worthy sex being used for the less worthy, a thing very
usual in Scripture.


Tim. What signifies Baal?


Silas. A Lord or a husband, to show that Image worshippers, make their Idols
their Lords by submission to them, and espouse themselves by love unto them.
Hence Idolators are plainly termed in Scripture fornicators, and Idolatry
called Whoredom, because they forsake their Faith plight to God, and turn
after strange Gods. Also they make their Idols their Patrons and defenders, as
is to be seen in the Papacy, where every Country and City has some Saint
for their Lord and defender, as S. Andrew for Scotland, Saint George for
England, Saint James for Spain, Saint Patrick for Ireland, etc.


Tim. What signifies it [to bow to Baal?]


Silas. Thereby is signified all the adoration and worship which is given to
that Image, by a Synecdoche of the part for the whole: also it teaches the
behavior of Idolators toward their Images whom they bow unto, in token of
subjection, and did kiss them in sign of dilection and love; which
superstitious gesture, is unto this day observed in Popery, where the Images of
the virgin Marie and Apostles, are honored with the bending of the knee, and
the kisses of the mouth.


Tim. Now what Doctrines do we learn from these words so Doctrine.
declared and made plain?


Sil. That when the eye of men cannot, yet God knows Reason.
and sees many thousand his servants and children which belong to his Church.
The reason is, because God knows who be his, and nothing can be hid from his
eyes. Deus est totus Oculus.
Thus howsoever Elias then, and Paul afterward, and after them M. Luther,
Wickliffe, and Calvin seemed to be alone, yet as in Israel and amongst the
Jews, so in England, Bohemia, France, and Germany, there were even amiddest
the Papists very many, which misliked the superstition of Rome, and received
the true Doctrine of Christ, though they were not for a time known and
apparent to the world. Though Elias see much being a Prophet, yet he is blind
where God does clearly see, Doubt.
for Gods knowledge is infinite. If any shall ask how this may be, seeing
either in those times they lacked the public Solution.
Ministry, or had it corrupt: the answer is, that they had so much of the
doctrine of God privately as was sufficient to instruct them, and save them,
through Gods blessing, who can save by weak and few means, as well as by
strong and many. God needs no means, it is man for whose weakness sake
means be provided.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this Doctrine?


Silas. It stops the Papists mouths, who ask where was our Church some eighty
or a hundred years ago. Unto whom we say, it was hid amongst themselves, as a
little wheat is hid in a great heap of chafe, and a little Gold amongst a
great deal of dross: and howsoever men did not or could not mark them, yet
unto God they were all times seen, and in due time stood up to reprove the
great Whore, and to maintain the Gospel.


Tim. What other instruction have we to mark?


Silas. That not men's merits, nor their own free will, Doctrine.
but Gods only grace is the cause why some are sound, when most are corrupt.
Therefore, it is not said they are reserved, or they have reserved themselves:
but (I have reserved) to exclude all power of will and of merit, and to
attribute all wholly unto the grace and free election of God, as verse 6. This
confutes the Papists, which say we bring one part, and God another: parting
stakes between Use.
Nature and grace; for what have we that we have not received? It is God
works in us both to will and to do, and both according to his good pleasure,
Phil. 2, 13.


Tim. What learn we hence, that [to himselfe] be reserueth them?


Silas. That Gods Children must live to his gloric, and be addicted to please
and honor him, who alone saves them. Secondly, that they have much and sound
comfort that cleave to God alone, in that he will ever defend them, as he
has reserved them. As Maistes defend their Servants, Kings their Subjects, and
Fathers their Children which be dear unto them; so will God keep his own
whom he to himself has reserved.


Tim. What other Doctrine may be collected from these words?


Silas. That howsoever in the invisible Church of the faithful, there be
multitudes perfectly and plainly seen unto that God (who knows who be his
and where his be) yet the visible Church of such as are outwardly called, is
oftentimes obscured and decayed, in such sort as the public exercise of
religion fails; the people of God by persecution being driven into corners,
as Conies by vermin are chased into their holes and Doves by the Kite into the
cleft of the rock. The Christian Church which is always glorious within or
inwardly, as a Queen which sits in her chamber clothed with gold: yet she
is not ever glorious and illustrious without to the eye of the world, but is
sometime like a desolate, solitary, and forsaken widow. For the Church once
consisted in two persons Adam and Eve, and afterward in the family of Abraham
and of Lot: also even in Judah the visible Church was sometime driven into
strait and narrow places, as in the days of Idolatrous Ahaz, 2, Kings 16, 17,
also in the reign of Ammon and Manasses 2, Kings 25, 4, 5, 22. when for the
most part they fell to Idolatry, and forlooke the true God and broke his
covenant. Again, how was the Church visible at the time of Christ's passion,
when the Virgin Mary only, and a few others did appear and prosesse him
openly, the rest being fled away for fear of the Jews? Also afterward in the
reign of the beast, when Satan was let loose, howsoever there might many be,
and no doubt were many, which feared God and served him in secret, yet there
was a time when to the appearance of men there seemed to be but one Luther in
Germany, one Husse in Bohemia, one Calvin in Sauoy, one Zuinglyus in
Heluetia, and one Waldos in France, one Wickleff in England, and one Patrick in
Scotland: as here in our Text we find, that among all the ten tribes Elias
did dream or judge himself to be left alone. Thus as the sea sometimes
flows and sometimes ebs, and the Moon is some time in the full, sometime in
the wanc, so the visible Church is by the dispensation of God, some times
greater and more copious; and again, other while it is more lesser and more
slender even according as the doctrine of the word is more or less clear and
pure; for the doctrine and the Church depend one upon the other, and do shine
together, or be darkened together.


Tim. But the Papists write that the complaint of Elias, touching the fewness
of true worshippers, is not well applied by us Protestants unto the decay of
Religion, under the Pope at the first reformation by Luther: and to this
purpose, sundry exceptions are alleged by Master Stapleton, and the Rhemists
in their readings upon this place. The which exception I will here repeat,
expecting your answer unto them severally as I shall propound them. First,
they say the Nation of the Isralites was then no part of the Church of God.
Secondly, that these seven thousand were at Jerusalem, in the kingdom of
Judah; wherein were many more then seven thousand that openly worshipped God.
Thirdly that the Christian Church, rests upon better promises then the
Jewish Church did. Fourthly, that not only seven thousand, but not so many as
seven, nay not scarce one could be found of Luthers belief, at the least not
to consent with him in all points of the faith: These are their maine
objections: show us I pray you what answer may be given unto them?


Silas The Papists have been long observed to be as a very murderous and
bloody, so a lying and very bold generation. If they speak or write any thing
in defense of their errors, which seems but probable, they care not how
little soundness and substance of truth there is in it, as will appear in the
sisting and scanning of these their exceptions particularly. And therefore this
I say to the first, that howsoever the Nation of the Jews weere exceeding
corrupt and Apostaticall, having broken their first faith, plight unto God: in
stead of whom they worshipped Baall, the God of the Sidonians, as sacred story
reports: yet God had not given to them a bill of deuorce, it remained still a
Sinagogue, and part of the visible Church. Had it bin otherwise, God would not
have given unto them his, word and sent them his Prophets, as Elias, Elzeus,
and others to instruct them in his statutes, except there had been in Israel,
some of that people, which he had known before, and loved from everlasting;
and certain it is that where soever there is a Preacher, and some to receive
the word, there is a Church. The Church may consist in one man that receives
the word, as Luther writes of himself, that if he were alone, and did alone
believe, he himself were the Church, yea (says he) if the word of God were in
hell, even in hell there would be a Church: likewise there was a Church in
Israel so long as they received the word, the having or not having whereof,
makes a Church or no Church.

To the second, it is very sure that these seven thousand were not in Judah,
but in the backe-sliding kingdom of Samaria: for there it was that knees were
bowed unto Baal; also there it was that Elias was left alone, and there did
Obediah hide the hundred Prophets of the Lord: as for Judah, Elias had no cause
to complain of it, for he knew very well that there were many true
worshippers of God, the very Soldiers amounting to ten hundred thousand, 1.
Chron. 17, 14, 15. etc. Now to the third exception I say, that indeed the
Christian Church if we respect the promises of salvation, had better (that is
to say) more clearer and full ones, shadows and tipes being now ceased, and
Christ being now come in flesh; but touching (continuance) the Jewish Church
had no less the promise of God to abide till his first coming, then the
Church had for her continuance, till his second coming. And concerning the
outward estate of the Church either of the old or of the new Testament, God
did never promise that it should be always visible. To the fourth it is true,
for besides all such as consented unto him in the kingdoms of Armenia, Gracia,
Slecia, Morania, where 54. noble men wrote to the Council in behalf of
Master John Husse, to justify his opinions and teaching to be Orthodoxe;
there were innumerable in the midst of Popery, which were of Luthers mind,
both in France, England, Scotland, Calabria, Piemont, etc, (See the French
story) who were by nickname called of the Popish route, Waldenses,
Wickcleuians, Lollards, Pauperes De Lugduno, (...), Picardi; and this was three
hundred years before Luther. There was two hundred years between Wickliffe
and Luther, and very (...) so much between Husse and Luther. Also (...) of
Prage was a professor, an hundred year before him. One Sir John Old-Castle
Knight, and Lord Cobham, suffered martyrdom for the truth, about an hundred
years before Luther preached: So did Sir Roger Acton knight, and Sauanarola.
Ioannes Picus Earl of Mirandula, published in Rome the doctrine of the
Gospel, certain years ere ever Luther appeared. What should I speak and
tell you of numbers of the Popes own dearest friends and followers, which long
before Luther, began to distaste Romish superstition, and to foretell by a
spirit of prophecy, the reformation which Luther by preaching the Gospel of
Christ, should bring into the world? As in England one Grosthead Bishop of
Lincoln, and one (...) to a certain young man which came to visit him, said:
Thou shall live See du Pless. his book of the mystery of iniquity.
to see the day when al Divines in a manner, shall abhor and hiss at the Romish
doctrine. One Tilemannus Spendebarge spoke thus on a time to his sons,
saying, Shortly this religion which now flourishes, shall come into extreme
contempt. Also Ioannes Keiserbergius a Preacher at Argentiue, There shall
(says he) come a certain man stirred up of God, which shall restore religion.
Ioannes Hilten being cast into prison, for freely rebuking the abuses of
Monks, did thus say to one who repaired to him, That he had done nothing
against Monastical life, but there would one arise (in the year 1516.) who
should overthrow the Monks, and they should in no wise be able to withstand
him; and that very same year Luther began to preach. A certain ancient Divine
named Andreas Proles spoke thus to some about him: O brethren, the estate of
Christianity has need of strong and great reformation, which (methinkes) I see
now to approach apace. And to one who demanded of him, why he did not begin
to discover and resute corruptions in doctrine and life? he answered, I am
stricken in years, weak in strength of body and mind: but GOD shall raise up
one of an heroical spirit, full of courage and strength, industrious and
eloquent, which shall mightily oppose himself unto errors, and begin the
reformation of the Church; to whom God shall give such an heart, as he shall be
bold to resist even the Potentates of the earth; which thing was afterward
fulfilled in Master Luther.

Finally, those two fore named men, Husse and Hisrome of Prage, uttered these
prophetical words of Luther. Jerome said to the Council of Constance, I cite
you al within one hundred years, to answer to me before the just Judge; thus
in Latin ( (...) and Deo respondabitis,) and at the end of an hundred, years,
was Luther borne. John Husse faide at his Martyrdom; This day you do roast and
broile a goofe ( Husse in the Bohemian tongue signifies a Goose) out of whose
ashes shall arise an Egg, which you shall not be able to break, but it shall
break you all in pieces. This was verified in Luther. Also he said, (...) que
dixi sub (...) super tecta. And again he added, That the Church must be
reformed, and all things made new: also, that (...) would send one after him,
that should be more valiant, and that the power of Antichrist should be
shortened. Now, whereas Papists do say, that none were in all points of Luthers
belief, that is a (...) cauil: for it was enough that they did agree in the
chief matters. Amongst the Fathers, Irencus differed from Victor, Anicetus
from (...) from (...) from Cyrill, Augustine from Ierom, yet they were all
counted to be of one Church. At Rome, (...) and Scotists, Dominicans and
Franciscans, Priests and Iesuires, be known to jar, yet are they still
reckoned of one religion.


Tim. What profit are we Christians to make to our selves of this point?


Silas. First, it confuteth the Papists, which make universality, multitudes,
and visibility, to be marks of the true Church, which may be and often is in
the World without these things: nay these marks belong to Paganish, and
impious profane popish societies. Secondly, it affoords a comfort to Gods
people, when they are brought to a small contemptible number and estate, having
people, Priests, Princes, and the whole World against them: no new or strange
matter, often so heretofore. Thirdly, an admonition to warn us, that we do
not look ever to have such external peace as now we enjoy, and such great
companies to join with us in the profession of Christ and his Gospel, and by
their examples and encouragements to whet us on. Lastly, that we do not think
the worse of the truth and doctrine of God, for the few followers of it; nor
any whit the better of Idolators for their huge multitudes. Neither that we
rashly censure, nor hastily send all to the devil which are not known to us,
nor appear to us to be the Servants of Christ, Romans 14. 4. What art thou that
condemnest another Man's servant: he stands or falls to his own Master.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 5, 6. Even so then at this present time, there is a remnant according to
the election of Grace: and if by grace, then it is no more by works, etc.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. An application of the former example unto the time wherein Paul
himself lived. Secondly, a conclusion drawn out of the application, Gratia
nullo (...) gratia, nisi (...) modo (...) August.
(to wit) that if election be free and come of grace, then not of works: for
merit is contrary unto Grace, which is not at all free, if it be not all and
absolutely free.


Tim. What is the sum of the application?


Sil. This: that as Elias was not alone in that corrupt Sum.
estate of Israel, but even then when all seemed to be gone from God, yet
there were in secret left seven thousand true Worshippers: so now, when Paul
alone amongst all the Jews seemed to prosesse Christ ((...) reigning in
Iewry, and Paganism in all the World besides) yet no doubt but God had of his
favor kept certain believers which were not known to the world.


Tim. Show us somewhat particularly and more plainly Doubt.
wherein the times of Elias the Prophet, and of Paul the Apostle were like: for
it seemed that this should be no good Reason, that it should be so in Paul's,
because it was so in Elias daces. For there is no such necessity as that which
is once done by singular and especial example, the same ought to be done in
every time and age.


Silas. This example of Elias is very fitly applied to the Solution.
times of Paul, whether we respect the thing it self, or the circumstances, or
the causes. Touching the thing it self, as Elias thought himself alone in
Israel, and yet was not (for there were many more:) so Paul might take himself
of all the Jews to be the only professor of Christ, whereas besides him there
was a remnant. For circumstances they do agree: Elias the prophet was raised up
extraordinarily, so was Paul myraculously called to be an Apostle. Again, as
Elias alone was zealous for the worship of God so Paul alone of all the Jews,
was an earnest defender of the Doctrine of God: and as very many resisted
Elias, so not a few persecuted Paul: and as in Elias time Idolatry had
ouerspread the kingdom of Samaria, so in Paul's time Hellenisme and Pharasaisme
prevailed in the world. For the cause, it is the same (to wit) Gods free
election of Grace, which seeing it never fails nor falls, therefore it ever
calls and keeps a certain number unto God in his Church visible, and faueth
a remnant in Paul's time, as it reserved a company in Elias time: election was
the cause of reservation of some then, and of a remnant now. Of these
likenesses and resemblances there issues an argument and similitude, in the
very phrase and manner of speech; for in Elias story God said; I have (...);
and in Paul's text it is said, There is a remnant, to make all things alike,
both in word and matter. And as the Apostle says, according to the election
of grace, so there it is written (I have reserved to my self,) which is all
one in effect, that they were not reserved of themselves, but because God chose
them in his everlasting love.


Tim. What lesson is it that we learn by this comparing of the estate of the
Church, according to several times?


Silas. That it makes much for our comfort, to lay together Doctrine.
the old and present state of the Church, namely in time of afflictions. The
reason is, because God is wont Reason.
for the most part, to use like proceedings in the governing of his Church:
therefore in the afflicted state of the Church it will be very profitable to
look back to former times of persecutions: that as Paul by considering Elias
his time, armed himself against the fewness of professors; so Gods children
by such conference of times, may stay their minds in patience. For no crosses
now happen, but the like or worse have fallen in former ages of the Church. It
is usual with the Papists to boast of multitudes, how many, and how mighty
be their friends and followers, the Gentry, the Nobles, Ladies and Lords,
Dukes, Archdukes, Princes, Kings, Emperors, Learned men, Cardinals, Popes,
are on their side, and walk in their way: whereas for most part, a company of
silly Tradesmen, and silly persons, take part with us. To whom though we might
truly say, that our number is greater by a good many then they would have it,
and that if the truth of religion went by number, then the Turks and other
Pagans should be the true Church, rather then Papists; which come short in
multitude of the Pagans, Jews, and Turks: Yet let us cast our eye back upon
Elias and Paul's times, concluding that as then the multitude of Idolaters and
unbelievers did no prejudice to the truth and worship of God, (which may be
preserved and professed by a few as well as by many;) so now the faith of the
Gospel, if but one only professed it in the world, (whereas God is to be
thanked, many Nations and Kings do receive it,) were not the less wholesome
and sound, though the whole world besides, did go after the great whore, as
sometime it did. But come now nearer Parts.
to the words of our Text, which have two parts. First, that a remnant of
believers were amongst the Jews when Paul preached. Secondly, the true cause
hereof is the election.


Tim. Tell us what is meant by a remnant?


Sil. It signifies the smalnesse of the number of the faithful, that they were
far fewer then such as abode in vnbeliese and perished therein; yet the
number was not so small but it made many thousands. There is the like phrase in
Romans 9. 27, 29. It is a metaphor borrowed from a cloth, or heap of wheat,
whereof a remainder only is left: so but a few in comparison of the rest,
durst openly profess the faith of Christ.


Tim. What may we learn from this word for our Instruction?


Silas. First, that that part of men which perishes, is Doctrine.
far greater then that part which is saved; as the whole heap of corn, is
more then that part which remains for seed: and the piece or web of cloth,
is greater then the remnant: and thus it is written, That many are called, few
chosen, Math, 20, 16. and that few do enter into that narrow way which leads
to life. Mat. 7, 14.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. First, to strive to be of this little stock, of this Use.
poor remnant, whereof not to be, were better never to have been. Secondly,
it moves to great thankfulness, such as are called to be of this remnant,
when such numbers were passed over, which were no worse then they by
corruption, and as good as they every way by creation.


Tim. What is the second instruction?


Silas. That the promises of God touching eternal life, are never void, nor
ever do fall away. The reason is, because in the Church of GOD, there are ever
some to whom they are effectually performed, howesoeuer the most neglect and
refuse them; yet there is a remnant which receive them still, and are saved by
them.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. That the great number of unbelievers and wicked men, should never
weaken our account and credit of the promises of the Gospel; which being
universally rejected, yet still take place in the elect, to whom they are
peculiarly made.


Tim. Tell us what is meant by the [election of grace?]


Silas. The gift of predestination, or the grace whereby men are elected or
predestined; or (by an Hebraisme) a gracious and free election. The meaning
is, that such as are kept free from the pollution of Idolatry and other sins,
they may not thank themselves as if they were worthy of it for their works
sake; but are beholding to the good pleasure of God, who has separated them
from others, according to his gracious purpose. Note that election is not here
put and taken actiuely, whereby we choose grace, but passiuely, whereby men
were chosen of God: for he speaks of such as were foreknown of God, verse
second, of Gods election of men, and not of men's election of God.


Tim. What is the doctrine from hence?


Silas. That election unto eternal life proceeds from the free favor and
grace of God. This is the same with that which is written, Romans 9, 11, 15, Ephesians.
1, 4, 5. To, 15, 19.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. First, it confuteth the Pelagians, who affirm that Use.
men choose Gods mercies, and not that his free mercies chooses them, whereas
this text plainly speaks not of man's electing God, but of Gods electing men
out of his grace, not out of their own merits. Also it overthrows the
conceit of Origin and Chrysostom, which upon this place imagine some men
which believe in Christ, to be saved by grace, and others which besides faith,
have good works, to be saved by the election of grace; dividing things which
are conjoined, to wit, election and grace, faith and works, as if there could
be a justifying faith without works. Secondly, it abateth the pride of all
flesh, to teach that election comes not from themselves, but is wholly of
grace. Lastly, it (...) us up to great love and thankfulness toward God, to
praise him for his free love.


Tim. What other doctrines will flow from these words?


Silas. That if election be of grace, then our justification, sanctification,
and glorification, all be from grace too, as it is written, 2. Tim. 1, 9. Romans
3, 24, 28. The reason hereof is, (...) est causa causae, est causa causati, and
quicquid est causa antecedentis, est causa consequentis.


Tim. But be grace and works at such vartance, as that these blessings and
things cannot proceed from both?


Silas. Yes verily, they are as contrary as can be: when the cause of election
and salvation is to be searched out, there is no conjunction of grace and
works, no more then of light and darkness, as the text speaks If it be of
faith, then not of works. The reason hereof is, because merit of works being
once put and granted, grace is destroyed, as it is here written, then were
grace no grace.


Tim. What is the cause of this consequence, that therefore grace is destroyed
if works be admitted as a partner in the cause of election and salvation?


Sil. The reason is, because grace gives eternal life and whatsoever belongs
to it, as a thing not due, but merit of works craves them all as a debt:
therefore if election, calling, justification, etc. should not be wholly from
grace, but in part also from works, then grace should not remain free, and
therefore should not be grace: see Romans 4, 4, (...). Gal. 3, 18.


Tim. What profit of this point?


Silas. It refuteth such as in the mystery of election, justification, etc. do
mingle grace and merit of works together, ascribing somewhat to grace,
somewhat to works foreseen in matter of election past, or present in matter
of justification; whereas these things by God himself, are pronounced,
asystata, which have no agreement at all together. Secondly, we are taught that
it is impossible that the Church of God should fail upon earth, because it
does spring out of the election and grace of God, which cannot at any time
utterly fail. Thirdly, it conuicteth them of error which here understand by
grace infused grace, the habit of justice powered into man's heart by the
Spirit; whereas the Apostle speaks here of grace, as it is in God
(subiectiue) as in a subject, and does oppose it as a thing contrary to the
works of righteousness which be in men, as to a contrary; and tells us what he
means by grace, to wit, the election of God. Lastly, this must provoke all
believers to joyful thankfulness, seeing God when he could not save them by
works which they had not, did by his frank grace choose and save them: which
deserves at our hands al possible praise both in word and deed, in life and
death. Such as be often mindful of such a free mercy, to glorify God for
it, it is a good sign that they be under this grace, and are even the chosen
children of God.


DIAL. V.
Verses 6, 7. And if it be of grace it is no more of works, or else were grace
no more grace, but if it be of works, it is no more grace, or else were works
no more works: What then? Israel has not obtained that he sought; but the
election has obtained it, and the rest have been hardened.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. These two things: having set down grace to be the efficient cause of
election and of effectual calling, now he excludes works, or denies them to
be any cause thereof. Secondly, he concludes the first part of this Chapter,
touching the casting away of the Jews, in the seventh verse; That all which
were freely elect amongst them, were certainly saved, none perished but the
reprobates, and that through their own default, because they were hardened in
their sins, and namely in their disobedience of the Gospel of Christ, which
they obstinately and rebelliously refused, being graciously and first tendered
to them.


Tim. What signifies Grace?


Silas. [Grace] signifies Gods free favor, or his everlasting gracious love
and mercy; and [workes] do signify merit of works or meritorious works;
for these be contrary to grace, and not works simply considered as duties.


Tim. By what argument does Paul shut out works, from being any cause of
election or vocation, or how proves he that these come not from merit of
works?


Silas. The argument is taken from the opposition or repugnancy of flat
contraries, such as in no wise can stand and consist together, being immediate
contraries. The argument may thus be framed: If election and calling be of
meritorious works, then it is not of grace; but they both come of grace,
therefore not of works.


Tim. But why might not the Jews be elected and reserved Doubt.
to God, both by grace and merit of works?


Silas. That is not possible, for if election were both of Solution.
grace and works, then works were no works; because what does proceed of
grace, that comes freely not of debt; but what comes by merit of works,
that comes by debt; but debt and no debt, that which is free, and by
deserving, be most contrary things. Therefore to say, that men are elected
and called, partly of grace, partly of the merit of foreseen works, that were
to put together things that cannot agree, to make debt no debt, merit no merit,
works no works, Grace no grace, and so to affirm and deny one and the same
thing; which is a most absurd matter, and utterly not possible to make
contradictories to be both true. For as a son that is willed to go on an
errand to Rochester on foot, his father promising him a crown or an angel at
his coming back: if his Father ask him how he will have his money? suppose
that he answer, that he will have it partly by favor, and partly by desert:
the reply to him is ready, Thou can not so have it; for if it be of favor,
then it comes freely, therefore not by desert of the work: and if it be by
desert of the work, then not by favor; for it is due that comes by merit
and desert, and there is no being beholding to favor for that.


Tim. What is the Doctrine to be learned from hence?


Silas. That men's works have no place nor stroke at Doctrine.
all in the election and calling of sinners, neither in their justification nor
salvation. The reason is, because works Reason.
presuppose merit, and merit presupposes debt, debt is flat against grace; but
men are called and elected of grace, also justified and glorified, as appears
verse 5. and Romans 3, 24. therefore election, calling, and the rest, depend not
upon works, which destroy grace, and grace destroys them, when the cause of
eternal life is disputed and debated.


Tim. But good works come of grace, how then are they such enemies?


Silas. This is true, grace is the mother and root of every good work, we
have no power at all to think or will well naturally, 2. Cor. 3, 5. John 15,
5. but grace and works cannot be joint causes of election and salvation. In
this case they fight together, as put and admit the one, and the other is taken
away and shut out; affirm the one, and deny the other. This Antithesis or
opposition, is to be marked against all iusticiaries, whose mouth is stopped
and sealed up, with this one short sentence.


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it confuteth such as will have grace and Use.
works to join together, in the justification and salvation of sinners, which
they say is partly of Gods grace, partly of men's merits. We say with the
Apostle, they be altogether of grace, and therefore not at all by merits.


Tim. But how can such avoid this conclusion of Paul, If it be of works,
then not of grace?


Silas. The enemies of Gods grace have sundry shifts to avoid the force of
this consequence: for sometimes they say that the Apostle speaks only of
ceremonial works Popish cuasions.
of the law, as of Circumcision, Sacrifices, etc. But this cannot be so,
because Paul's words be general, shutting out all works whatsoever, whether
natural, moral, or legal ceremonies. Of them all he says, that if election
to life eternal come of them, then it comes not of grace. Also Abraham and
David had moral works as well as ceremonial, yet in Chap. 4. verse 4, 5, 6.
Paul denies that Abraham or David were justified and saved by any works which
they had done, but by faith.

Secondly, they say that the Apostle speaks of the works of nature, which (say
the Rhemists) do exclude grace, favor, and mercy, challenging of debt, not of
gift: but not of Christian men's works, which come from the Spirit and grace
of God; these works coming from grace may evidently consist with the same,
and be joined with Gods grace as causes of salvation. This shift cannot be
current, not only for that his words be general, but because Paul speaks of
the election by grace, by which all are saved. Therefore the merit of all
works are excluded, by whomsoever they be done, whether by circumcised Jew,
or baptized believing Christian, or unbelieving Gentile, Secondly, in Ephe. 1,
4. good works are said not to be the cause of election, but the end, and
fruit, and effect thereof. Lastly, Ephe. 2, 8, 9. Paul says expressly, we are
saved not of works, but by grace through faith: where note, that grace and
faith may well stand together, but they do shut out all sort of works from
being any moving or meritorious cause of our justification and salvation.

Thirdly, they say that good works are shut out from election to the first
grace, but not from election to the second grace, that is, they say that the
elect are chosen of grace only, and are also freely called and illuminated of
the Holye-Ghost, without all works: but the second grace, that is,
justification, also sanctification, and glorification, these do admit merit of
works to join with grace. Unto this shifte of theirs I answer, that that
Scripture which says that election is of grace, and, we are called according
to grace, 2. Tim. 1, 9. does also say that we are justified by grace, not by
works, Romans 3, 24. that eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6, 23. also
justification and glorification be fetched from Gods eternal love and
foreknowledge, as the first and only efficient cause, as well as election and
calling, Romans 8, 30. Moreover, election is not only to the first grace, but to
all the means and to heavenly glory, which is the end, Romans 9, 11, 23. Lastly,
the Pharisie who ascribed righteousness and salvation partly to grace, and
partly to his good works, went away unjustified. Whatsoever therefore the
Papists can allege to shake and weaken the credit of this text, yet it is
so strong to overthrow the doctrine of popish merits, and justification by
works, as one of themselves Andreas Proles was wont to say in his public
readings, My brethren, sithence holy Scripture attributes whatsoever we are,
or have, al unto grace, whence comes that horrible darkness and
superstition, to ascribe so much to merit of works? Truly the estate of
Christianity needs very great and speedy reformation.


Tim. What other use of the former doctrine? Use.



Sil. Here is an admonition to all Christians, that albeit they are bound to
do good works of all sorts, and to abound in them, yet it is their duty to
renounce the merit of them, and all trust in them, and to stick whollye and
only in the grace of God through Jesus Christ, for all things belonging to
their salvation, least if we put never so little trust in any thing done by
us, we be found the aduersarics of Gods grace. Further we are taught hereby,
that the Romish Synagogue cannot be the true Church of Christ, because most
obstinately and impudently they persist to ascribe man's justification and
salvation partly to grace, and partly to merit of works; and thereby do
overthrow the doctrine of grace, which is the very soul and life of a true
Church: for take away the doctrine of free election, justification, and
salvation, and presently the very foundation of all religion is shaken to
pieces; so far it is off that they can be the true Church, having cast down
the groundworke whereon it rests. Lastly, it conuicteth such of error, as
understand this text to be meant of grace infused into man's heart, whereas
grace being set against works: therefore as works do stick in men as in
their proper subject, so grace here spoken of has no other subject but God.


Tim. What doctrine does arise out of the seventh verse?


Silas. First, that in the Church of God there are sundry Doctrine.
which seek for righteousness and salvation, and never obtain it, as Romans 9,
31.


Tim. How comes this to pass, seeing it is promised to such as seek that they
shall find?


Silas. The reason is, because they seek amiss, and Reason.
not as they ought; whereas that promise is made to such as seek aright. Unto
which, two things are to be considered: First the manner, that we seek these
things by faith: and secondly, that we intend Gods glory as the end of our
seeking: see Romans 9, 30. Many Israelites failed in both these, for they sought
righteousness and life by their own works, and therefore obtained it not, as
it is written, Romans 9, 31, 32. and 10, 3. And they robbed God of the glory of
his grace.


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Sil. It warns us that it is not enough for us to seek Use.
to be justified and saved, unless we take the right course prescribed in the
word; for many pray and never obtain, because they pray amiss; and many
strive to enter and never enter, because they strive not aright: so many seek
and never find, because they seek God not for himself, but themselves, and
for their own benefits and not for love of his goodness, that they may
praise his grace, and set forth his glory.


Tim. What other Doctrine from this 7. Verse?


Sil. That in the bosom of the Church of God, there have always lived two
kinds of people, some elect and called, some Reprobate and hardened. This
division began in Adams family in Caine and Abell, whence did spring two
Cities (as Augustine observes) one of God, another of the world; it was
continued in the family of Abraham, in Isaac and Ismael, the one of them being
the child of the Flesh, and the other the Child of the promise. Also in the
house of Isaac in Esau and Jacob: and Christ says, That at his coming two
shall be in the field, the one taken, and the other refused, Luke 17, 34. And
lastly, Paul writes, that of the same lump of mankind, there are made some
vessels of mercy to honor, others vessels of wrath to destruction. The high
Reason.
and sovereign cause hereof is the will of God, showing mercy to whom he will,
and hardening whom he will, Romans 9, 17. The subordinate cause and second
reason is, that there are two beginnings of mankind, the seed of the woman
Christ Jesus, the head of the elect; and the Serpent Satan, the Prince of this
world, which begets children of differing and contrary dispositions and
qualities, 1 John 3, 8, 9. and John 15, 19.


Tim. What use are Christians to make of this truth? Use.



Silas. It reprooues both such as believe all men are elect and shall be saved,
and such as live so securely, as if none should perish, and warns us not to
stumble though we see many wicked to be in the world.


Tim. What is the next Doctrine from this verse?


Silas. That all the elect shall certainly be saved, for they attain what
they seek for, (to wit) Christ and his faluation; as it is not possible for
the Reprobate to be saved, so it is impossible that any of the elect should
perish. The reasons hereof be, First the election of GOD which is
unchangeable. Secondly, the promises of God Reasons.
which are undeceivable. Thirdly, the Prayers of Christ which can never be
denied. Lastly, the power of Christ, to whose keeping they are committed, which
is irresistable.


Tim. What Use of this point?


Silas. First, they are from hence confuted, which say the elect may utterly
and for ever fall from Gods favor and faith in Christ. Secondly, here is
great comfort to such as have the true marks of their own election, to
assure unto them their standing in grace unto salvation, in despite of Satan,
sin, themselves, and the whole world. For they are by grace of election kept
from being hardened to destruction.


DIAL. VI.
Verse 7, 8. The rest were hardened, as it is written, GOD has given them the
Spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see etc.


Tim. What is the sum of this Text?


Silas. That the rest of the Jews, who^ God had Sum.
not elected, were hardened by the just judgment of God, as he proves by a
testimony and oracle of holy Scripture.


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First, a proposition; The rest were hardened, namely, so many as
not being freely chosen of God, did Parts.
not obtain Christ and his righteousness unto salvation, all the rest besides
these were blinded. Secondly, a proof out of holy Scipture, to confirm the
hardening of the Jews: it proves two things, not only that many Jews were
hardened, because the Scripture had foretold it; but whence this hardness came,
or what was the maine and highest cause of the blindness and hardness of this
Jewish people (to wit) the singular or special judgment of God, so
appointing, so foretelling, yea, and so working it in time: also it shows
what this hardness is, to wit, a spiritual slumber or senseless sleep of
the soul, or a shutting of eyes and ears, that seeing and hearing, they
should neither see nor hear unto their conversion. Lastly, how long this
hardness did continue upon the Jews, namely, even from Esaias his time unto
the present time wherein the Apostle wrote (unto this day) which must be
referred unto the end of verse 7. the rest cited out of Esaias, being enclosed in
a Parenthesis.


Tim. What signifies the [rest?]


Silas. The other Jews which did not belong to the election of Grace, but were
reprobates and rejected of God.


Tim. What is meant by hardening?


Silas. It signifies properly the thick skin of ones hands or feet, with
travel or work, which is so barked or stifned, as if it were pierced or
pinched, yet it is not felt: but by translation from the body to the soul, it
signifies the stubbornness or obstinacy of man's heart resisting in his wit
and will the word of God. This stubbornness is noted in Scripture by sundry
similitudes, as of a stone, of an Iron sinnew, of a brazen forehead, of an
heart of Adamant, Ezekiel. 11, 19. Esaias 48, 4. Zach. 7, 12. Here in Zachary, as
also in that place of Esaias, there is a plain description of an hard heart. Sec
Verses 11, 12, of Zachary.


Tim. How many kinds of an hard heart be there?


Silas. Two: one Natural, which all men bring from the womb, called a stony
heart by Ezekiel in chap. 11. verse 19. for all men from their birth are
inclined to the disobedience of God, being sinners and enemies, ungodly, and
the Children of Gods wrath. Secondly, there is an habitual hardness which is
gotten by long custom of sin, which for a time takes away both the fear and
feeling of sin. This is common both to elect and reprobate, but with great
difference. For hardness of heart in the elect, before their conversion is
total and temporary, it wholly possesses them, but it continues only until
their calling; after that their hardness is partial, mixed with tenderncsse
and softness of heart, as in David and Peter: but in the reprobate it is
total and perpetual, so as they remain wholly obdurate and obstinate till
their death, as did Cain, Esau, Pharaoh, Judas, and these refused Jews here
spoken of. And this last hardness is that which is here meant in our text,
which is both of the whole heart, and final, or for ever. For this only is
peculiar to such as be not elected, as the nearest and just cause of their
destruction; which is inflicted upon them, not so much for sin, as for being
hardened in sin for their impenitency in sin, to the end of their life
notwithstanding al means used to soften and cause them to relent and turn to
God from their sin.


Tim. But it should seem, that few or no men are wholly hardened, because
Pharaoh yielded, and desired Moses to pray (...).
for him, Esau wept, Achab put on Sacke-cloath. Also, of Judas it is written
that he repented, and that Foelix trembled, and Balaam wished, that he might
dye the death of the righteous.


Silas. These were but sudden motions in the wicked, Solution.
which lasted not, like unto flashings or lightnings. Secondly they proceeded
not from a soft and brokenhart, but from slavish fear and dread, or present
smart of divine judgment. Thirdly, that being once over, they return to
their former wickedness and contempt of Gods will, as Pharach did, and Felix,
and the rest of them, etc.


Tim. What is the Doctrine out of these words? Doctrine.



Silas. That final stubbornenesse in sin, when a sinner obstinately continues
till his death in one, or more known sins, is a certain mark of distinction
between an elect child of God which shall be saved, and him which shall be
for ever condemned, as appears Romans 9, 17, 18. Math. 13, 15. John 17, 11. 1
John 5, 18. The Reasons here of be, because it is neither sin, nor the
Reasons.
number, nor the long continuance in them, that makes the actual difference.
For in all these things, many of the elect and reprobates are like; therefore
that which does it, must needs be this universal and final hardness of
heart, unto which reprobates are given over, and so are not the elect. For
whom God elects, into their hearts he puts his Spirit, which changes their
stony hearts into fleshy, being made pliable by his will: but the rest (as our
Text is) they are hardened and left in their natural corruption, to persist in
it to death; and this is the second reason of the doctrine, that the elect have
their natural stubbornness corrected by the Spirit of sanctification, which
alters and renews them unto the obedience of the word, 1 Pet. 1, 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 13.


Tim. What profit are we to make of the knowledge of this Doctrine?


Silas. It may serve to keep us from rash judgment, Use.
that we never give final sentence upon any man, to brand him for a
reprobate; for who can tell if a wicked man will so continue unto the end of
his life? some have been called at the ninth hour of the day, some changed
at the eleauenth, and one (to wit the Thief on the cross) converted at the
twelfe and last hour. Secondly, here is a warning to all Christians, above
all things in the world, to strive against hardness of heart, and to labor
for soft and obedient hearts; for as this latter heart Ezekiel. 11, 19, 20.
(to wit) when it is moved and bowed by God to follow his word, is the
greatest blessing, being the peculiar note of the Child of God, and a special
fruit of the Covenant; so the other (to wit) a stiff and vnyeelding heart, is
the greatest curse, being the mark of cast-awayes and rejected persons; unto
which every man is so much the nearer, the nearer he is unto hardness of heart;
and so much the further off, the more soft and contrite his heart is.

This admonition will be found so much the more needful, if we duly consider
with our selves these two things. First, that we live in times of exceeding
great case, plenty, and prosperity; by which means the hearts of men are most
usually hardened and made forgetsull of God: as it is written, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. of
the Israelites, when they were full and well fed, they forgot the strong God
that made them, and proved like the ungrateful Horse, that spurneth and
kickes at his master that fed him. Secondly, that this judgment of hardness
of heart, has generally ouerspread most men which now profess the Gospel,
all places being full of wilful sinners, which have hearts as hard as the
flint, or the smithes anuell, or the adamant; such as no means, fair nor
soul, either benefits or afflictions, thretnings or promises, can either
break or so much as bend them. The very word it self, which should be the
means of softning them, through their own malice, proves a greater means
to harden them. Therefore in this general hardness of heart, there is the
more cause for all men to take heed to themselves to prevent it in themselves
by all good courses: as namely, besides the constant use of the public works
of religion, prayer, sacraments, the word read and preached: these four things
following, are to be done of all which desire to escape an hardened heart.
First, in time of any affliction to work their hearts earnestly to feel Gods
displeasure in it, and their own sins which procured it, always begging
that every affliction may be effectually blessed, to the humbling of their
hearts. In time of their prosperity, daily to confess their known sins
particularly unto God, with great grief for the offense of God in them all and
every one of them. Then to meditate often and earnestly, of Gods judgments
against sin in this world and in hell: also to meditate of the passion and
death of Christ crucified, of their own mortality and death, of the day of
judgment. Lastly, to inure themselves to mourn as well for their small as
great sins, and to avoid diligently the occasion of all sins. In the third
place here is an exhortation to stir up such to give God thanks, as have
received a soft and sanctified heart, a sure testimony of their election by
grace, when their hearts are so tender, as every word of God can pierce and
prick it, and take place for framing them to the sound obedience of his will. 2
These.2. 13. Acts2, 37.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 8. As it is written, God has given them the Spirit of slumber, eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear to this day.


Tim. What does the Apostle perform here, or how does he go forwards?


Silas. He now sets upon the second part of this Chapter, to show that
the most part of the Jews which then lived, were repelled and cast out of God.
This part is so knit to the former, as it contains the proof of that which
was said in the latter end of the 7. ver. touching the hardening of reprobate
Jews. The proof is a divine testimony: God so appointed it, and the
Scriptures long before prophesied of their hardness. Therefore I have truly
said that the rest were hardened. He does not so much prove the thing, to
wit, their hardness, as to show whence it came, from God so punishing the
contempt of his word, as a most righteous Judge, [God has given.]


Tim. What be the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: first, a preface of Paul, (According as it is written.) Secondly,
the text or place of Scripture, which is alleged out of Esaias, 6. 9. and partly
out of Esaias 29, 10. The sense and meaning is retained, though the words be not
precisely the same in Paul as in Esaias; where it is, God has covered them with
a spirit of slumber, and shut their eyes, Chap. 29, 10. and Esaias 6. 9. Go and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, least they see, etc.


Tim. What are we to learn out of this preface?


Silas. One thing generally, and two things particularly.


Tim. What is the general doctrine?


Silas. That Gods written word is the only perfect rule Doctrine.
and direction for all things necessary to be known to man's salvation, as
appears, Deuteronomy. 12, 32. 2. Timo. 3, 16. John 20, 31. Whatsoever is necessary
(says a Father) is plainly set down in Scripture. The reason of this
doctrine Resaon.
is, because the word is in nature like unto God himself; pure as he is pure,
and perfect as he is perfect: God being infinite in wisdom, his word cannot
afford other then absolute direction.


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. It overthrows unwritten verities, traditions of the Church, as idle
and unneedful. Secondly, it warns all Christians to give over themselves to
be governed by this word; in will, conscience, affections, words, manners, and
conversation.


Tim. What be the two particular instructions from this place?


Silas. A twofold use of holy Scripture. First, that it alone Doctrine.
is sufficient to confirm all doctrines of godliness. Paul and other penmen of
the word, use no other proof of Reason.
doctrine; therefore this probation alone is enough, human testimonies are
too weak to prove, (though they be sound and agreeable to the word,)
because the conscience, in matters of salvation is not satisfied, till it hear
and have the voice and word of God himself, whose word is autopiston, worthy
of credit for it self, and all other men to be believed for the words sake;
the witnesses of worthy men, serves to bewray their consent with us, and ours
with them in the same truth. Therefore we allege them when need is and cause
requires, sparingly; placing them as servants after their Lord, to test, not
to judge; this warnes us to receive no doctrine which will not admit
probation from Scripture. Quod legimus, id credimus, (says Hierome,) we
believe so much as we read: we are forbid by Paul to be wise above that which
is written.

The second use of holy Scripture is, to serve us not only to prove, but to
declare and interpret doctrines. Even as the light of the Sun shows it
self and other Holy Scriptures are so tempered, as that is plain in one place
which is dark in another. Aug.
things, so does holy Scripture, though the Spirit be the principal
interpreter of Scripture, yet the Scriptures be the sovereign and most
certain mean of interpretation, one place which is obscure and hard, being
made more easy by some place which is plain. As for the learned fathers,
whatsoever the council of Trent have attributed to their uniform consent, as
if that were the surest rule of interpretation, yet they are but subordinate
and It is lawful for us to (...) something in men's writings, if they have
otherwise writ ten then the truth will bear. Aug.
secondary means of exposition, and not that neither, further then they speak
and write the truth, and prove their interpretations by the word. Again, how
often are the Fathers found to jar amongst themselves? Further, how shall we
know what is Gods mind, but from God himself declaring it in his word? for
according to it, an exposition is lawful without danger or biasphemy: as here
(hardness) is interpreted by [spirite of slumber,] and this is declared by
eyes, which see not, and ears that hear not, and heart which understands
not. Our senses and enarrations, says Irenaeus, without witness of Scripture
have no credit.


Tim. What things are we now to note out of the second part of our Text, namely
the place or testimony of Esaias?


Silas. Three things: First, the description of hardness. Secondly, that
hardness is a great and heavy judgment as any in the world. Thirdly, that God
is the author or chief cause of this punishment of hardness.


Tim. What is the description of hardness or hardening?


Silas. It is (not a thickness of skin in a man's hands or feet,) but a
spiritual slumber possessing and ruling, and holding fast locked up the eyes,
the ears, and hearts of wicked men, least they hear and see, and perceive and
be saved.


Tim. What is signified by [slumber?]


Silas. It signifies properly a dead and deep sleep, Interpret.
called (Lethargy,) which so binds the senses of men as they cannot be
awaked with pricking and much pinching; such a sleep as Adam was cast into,
Genesis 2. But by a Metaphor it does imply spiritual sencelesnesse or drowsinesse
and blockishnesse in divine matters, which pertain to Gods worship and man's
salvation; it is called in Esaias 51, 23. a Cup of fury and madness, by a speech
borrowed from such as being made drunk, behave themselves like mad and
frantike men. Such a thing is this slumber, it takes from men all sense of
godliness, and makes them even as furious beasts and drunken men, which feel
and fear nothing in the midst of extreme dangers. Whereas some translate that
(compunction or pricking) which is here englished (slumber,) indeed the greek
word signifies so, as Acts 2. 37. Then it does set forth the same thing by a
metalepsis, of the effect for the cause; for they which are overtaken with
hardness, and the dead sleep of sin, they are both pricked with grief, and
even vexed at the heart with anger at the word rebuking and threatening them,
Acts 7, 54. and yet being thus pricked and vexed, they be not awaked out of
their slumber to return to God, and forsake their evil ways, no more then one
in an heavy sleep can be awaked by shaking and pinching, and hollowing or
crying, or blowing an horn in their care.


Tim. What is meant by the [spirite of slumber?]


Silas. Spirit though sometimes it signifies no more but the mind, as Esra 1,
1. Esaias 19, 3. yet here it notes the isntrumental cause of this slumber, to
wit, the evil spirit, or Satan, which God as a just Judge sends into
wicked men in his righteous judgment, to direct and drive their hearts to
wicked thingsas he sends a good Spirit into his Children, to direct and move
their hearts and wills to good things. This is usual in Scripture when the word
(spirit) has put to it epithites good or bad, then it notes the operations
and effects of Gods grace or justice. As Spirit of truth, peace, grace, love,
wisdom, prayer, etc. signifies these good things, and Gods Spirit to be the
worker of them. On the other side, the spirit of fury, giddiness, slumber,
fornication, envy, lying, error, etc. notes these bad effects, and Satan the
evil spirit to be the worker and nearest cause of the same.


Tim. What doctrines arises from these words thus opened?


Silas. First, that wicked men which are under hardness Doctrine.
of heart, are utterly blockish and senseless in respect of divine and
heavenly things, as a man which is in a great slumber, understands nothing of
earthly things. This is that which is plainly said in Esaias 6, 9. and Mat. 13,
15. and Acts 28, 27. that though they see his works, and hear his words, yet
they neither hear nor see, but are without understanding, even like Horse and
Mule, that have no discretion, Psalm 32, 9. so are the wicked very brutish and
stupid in the matters of heaven.

In other matters which belong to this present life, they be (for the most part
of them) quick-sighted, very provident and circumspect, one must rise early
that would deceive them or go beyond them in bargaining; Nay, they have the
slight to fetch over others, and he must have both his eyes in his head that
shall escape them: but come to the things that belong to God and eternal life;
it is a wonder how little understanding and sight, feeling and sense they have
herein. An image hereof we have in Nicodemus, John 3, 4. the Woman of (...),
John 4. the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. Secondly, from hence we may see why the
wicked profit not by the admonitions of the word, even because they are fast
asleep in sin, and inwardly deaf, having their ears stopped, and their eyes
shut up, and their hearts hardened. When they that are liars, backbiters,
promise breakers, Usurers, etc. read and hear that which is written, Psalm.
15, verse 3, 4, 5. When covetous persons, railers, etc. read what is written,
1 Cor, 6, 9, 10. When such as live in envy, adultery, etc. hear or read what
is written, Gal. 5, 19, 20, 21. When ignorant persons read or hear that which
is written, 1 Thessal. 1, 8. and proud persons that which is written, 1 Pet.
5. 5. and worldlings read that which is written, Ephef. 5, 3. and yet are not
reformed, nor once so much as go about to amend themselves: the reason cannot
be, for that they think these things to be fables; (for they know and
confess them to be Gods word) or for that such sayings are dark (for they are
so evident, clear, and plain, as any child may understand them,) or because
they are never told of these things, for their ears are continually beaten
with those sayings. The true reason therefore is, for that they are like the
deaf Adder spoken of in the Psalm, that will not hear the charmer. These
sinners are deaf with the worst kind of deafness, for they will not hear
and obey: and who is so deaf, as he that will not hear They are like unto the
Jews spoken of in Zach. 7, 11, 12. 13. and to such spoken of, Prou. 1, 24, 25.
and to such as God speaks of in another Prophet, I have cried and they would
not answer: even as it fares with them that are in a Lethargy, though a
Trumpet be sounded in their ears, yet they stir not: so it is with these
men, though Gods Ministers to awake them do thunder out Gods judgments lifting
vptheir voices like a trumpet, yet they are no whit moved to Godwards, because
the spirit of slumber is upon them. It is written of Pharaoh, that he did not
hearken to the words of Moses, because his heart was hardened. Likewise the
ungodly, while their souls be senseless cannot but despise all the word, and
their teachers which bring it and set it before them; which is a most dreadful
state. For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, that when they cry to him in
their extreamities, he will hear them, Prou. 1, 26, 27, 28. Zach, 7, 13.
These things, howsoever they are matter of grief unto Gods Ministers, yet are
they still bound to do their duty with constancy and patience, because it
pleases God to execute his judgments upon the wicked through their
instructions, which shall be strong evidences against them to convict their
obstinacy. Gods word is a sweet smelling savor to GOD, even when it is a
savor to death.


Tim. How may it be proved, that the word is still to be preached, to harden
impenitent sinners, to be as a testimony unto them and against them?


Silas. By Esaias 6, 9 Ezekiel. 2, 5. The former place proves, that God uses his
Ministers by them to harden such as have contemned his word; and the latter
proves, that even unto the already hardened, they are still to speak, that
their condemnation may be the more just and dredful.


Tim. What is the next instruction from these words?


Silas. That such as have forsaken God, are given up Doctrine.
unto the wicked Spirit Satan, by his working more and more to be blinded and
obdurated. This appears, Ephesians. 2, 2. The Spirit that works in the children
of disobedience, 2 Cor. 4, 4. 2 Thessal. 2, 10, 11. For it is very just, that
they that will not be governed by the word of God Reason.
should be committed over to the government of Satan, as a Judge delivers a
malefactor over to the hangman. As God threatens his people to set Tyraunts
over them, when they had been unthankful for good Princes: so Tradidit Robo.
am in (...), Sicut Deus tradidit (...) pseudo (...) Aug.
he will give the devil to be their Ruler, that will not be ruled by himself.
And such must needs be driven on to all mischief and hell in the end, as
have Satan to be their Rider, to hold the reins in his hands; as it happened to
Judas, Cain, and Esau, and inumerable others heretofore, and daily.


Tim. What profit is to be made hereof?


Sil. It teaches the miserable condition of such stubborn sinners as hate to
be reformed; for they are under the power of Satan, and held under his snaresat
his pleasure, whatsoever they think to the contrary, 2 Timothy 2, 26. Secondly,
it warnes all Christians greatly to fear God, which has such fearful
executions of his anger. Who will not be afraid to disobey the word of that God
which for the cup of mercy, truth, and sound Doctrine being despised, can give
men to drink a cup of fury, of error, and madness? Not that he powers into
men any naughtiness, but stirs up that which before lay hidden, and which
causes sinners to drink in more sin greedily, and to delight in doing evil,
with continual thirst in such poysonfull and deadly cups.


Silas. Proceed now to the second part of the description of an hard heart,
and tell us what it is to have eyes wherewith one cannot see, and ears
wherewith one cannot hear?


Silas. To have eyes and ears unfit to see and hear, or such eyes and ears
wherewith they were not able to see and hear, as in Math, 13, 15. ears dull
of hearing, and their eyes heavy and shut, as in Esaias 6, 10. and 29, 10. Men
use to say, As good never a whit, as never the better: so as good not to see or
to hear, as by hearing and seeing to be never the better. But this is not
altogether to be meant of bodily ears and eyes, but by a metaphor which
translateth to the soul, that which is proper to the body: and then eyes and
ears do signify here, such a mind so blinded with ignorance, as it cannot
know the true doctrine of salvation, and such an heart as cannot obey the
Gospel. The sum then hereof is thus much, that the reprobate Jews, though
they had ears and did hear Gods word, and eyes to see Gods works, with the
sense of the body (for they heard Christ and his Apostles, and saw their
miracles,) yet not all with the assent of the Soul; which was so far from
taking any profit to amendment and salvation, by that which they saw and heard,
as they became rather blind in their understandings, and in their wills more
perverse and obstinate.


Tim. What are the parts of these latter words being thus opened?


Silas. Two parts or things to be observed. First an undeserved mercy.
Secondly, a just and sharp punishment.


Tim. Wherein did mercy (...) goodness shine forth toward the rejected Jews?


Sil. Four ways: First in this, that their power of hearing and seeing was
not taken from them. This mercy though it be contemptible because it is common,
yet it is a great mercy, as would be well perceived and felt, were any of us
deprived of those corporal faculties. Secondly, there was affoorded them the
best objects of sight and hearing, to wit, the word of God which the Prophets
first, and after Christ declared to them, thereby calling them to repentance
and faith. Also many and most excellent miracles, of healing the sick,
quickening the dead, restoring sight to the blind, etc. Besides innumerable
works of creation and government, (I say) works both of mercy and justice,
ordinary and extraordinary, which were continually before their eyes, to move
and stir them to God-wards. Thirdly, that the things which they did hear and
see, were not only wonderful and singular, but also that oftentimes and not
seldom, they did see and hear them, which is signified by the doubling of the
verb, Math. 13, 14. In hearing, they shall hear. For whenever a verb is
put before, and thereunto is added an infinitive mood, (being turned by a
gerund) thereby is signified an often and vehement action. Lastly, that besides
these external means offering grace to them, they had inwardly engrafted into
them, some judgment of conscience, and there was given them some light of
vnerstanding, which none can deny, but that they are the good gifts of God.


Tim. But alas they had no profit by all these, but hurt rather.


Silas. It is true that they had no profit by them, but it was through their
own default: but as the sun is no less glorious and bright, because weak
eyes are offended therewith, nor a plaster or ointment less precious, because
it preuailes not to health. So Gods good gifts, his good word and works are
not the worse to be esteemed, because they did not benefit such as had them.
For as the vncurablenes of the wound or disease, may make the Physician or
medicine frustrate without verbue, which yet loose not their value: so
obstinate maliciousnes of the heart in wicked men, makes void Gods mercies,
which yet in themselves be such as deserve to be loved and praised.


Tim. What is the doctrine from hence?


Silas. That there be no castawaies so wretched which do not in some sort taste
of Gods mercies, as may appear by Psalm 145, 9, also by Romans 2, 4, 5. and by
Heb. 6, 4, 5, 6. Even such as blaspheme the Spirit by malicious hating and
reproaching the known truth of the Gospel, yet have plentifully and diversely
felt Gods goodness: yea the devils are not without some sense of it, in that
they are spared from their full torments, til the time of fianll judgment. Art
thou (say they to Jesus) come to (...) us, before the time? Mat. 8, 29. see
Ephesians. 2, 2. Also the bodies of the wicked lie in the grave until the day of
judgment, without any pain, which is Gods great mercy. The reason Reason.
of this doctrine is to take from the wicked which shall perish, all excuse;
this reason is laid down in Romans 1, 20. The heathens had some knowledge of
God by his creatures, to leave them without defense and apology, least they
should say; We knew nothing of God, had we not been ignorant, we would (...)
lived better. And secondly it serves to commend the very great kindness of God
to us for our imitation, as in Luke 6, 35, 36. Matthew 5, 45.


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Silas. It does reprove such as do euilly entreat Use.
Gods children, using them without mercy. How far unlike be these to God, who
has mercy even toward such as be not his own, but are ungodly, sinners, yea
enemies, and strangers from him?


Tim. What was the sharp punishment observed in these last words?


Silas. To take no fruit at all, but harm rather, by that which these men
heard and saw, even a far greater Doctrine.
blindenes and obstinacy both of mind and heart, which What a fear fullheauy
punishment it is to have an heart hardened.
are more besotted, dulled, and indurate or hardened by the doctrine and
actions of God. And it is so much the greater, because wicked men feel it not,
it being such a grievous curse and judgment, as there is none to be matched
with it for horror, no not sickness, plague, nor deafness, nor lamenesse,
nor imprisonment, nor banishment, nor dearth, nor languishing death, nor cruel
bodily torment, nor any other judgment whatsoever, can be compared with a
deaf and blind soul, (that is to say,) with an hardened heart, when it is
the punishment of former disobedience and sins. My reasons hereof Reasons.
be, first, because this punishment is spiritual, and has in it the death of
the soul by punishing sin with sin. Secondly, other punishments have with
them desire of release, so has not this. Thirdly, it is an high ready way to
that unpardonable sin, Mark 3, 29. Fourthly, all other punishments may be
and are inflicted though not without pain, yet without sin: but in this,
there is always an addition of sin, both of greater corruption and guilt, and
withal a greater desert of punishment. Fifthly, it is the peculiar mark and
note of the child of perdition, as a broken and contrite spirit, is a sure
note of the child of God, Romans 11, 5. Ps. 51, 19. Sixthly, it does in the end
most certainly bring men, not only to temporal destruction, but to eternal
death, Deuteronomy. 2, 30. To. 2, 5. 1 Samuel 2, 25. Romans 9, 17. Lastly, both some of
the heathens have acknowledged the truth of this, as Sophocles in Ajax, and
some of the Jewish Rabbis, as Rabbi Kimchi, for so much Master Peter Martyr
testifies in his Commentary upon this Text.


Tim. What profit is to be made by the knowledge of this truth? Use.



Sil. First, it teaches, that all good things turn to the hurt and damnation
of the wicked. Secondly, it shows the strange blockishnesse of those wicked
men, which are under such a sharp and bitter scourge, without all sense and
dread of it, like drunken men which are asleep in the top of the Mast, (...)
the ship is ready to be drowned with a great tempest. Moreover, it must move
the godly to compassion toward such as they may suspect or see to be
stricken with this judgment of blindness and hardness: Men pity such
Malefactors as they see drawn upon hurdles to Tiburne: but to see so many
men to be hardened in unbelief and sin, deserves much more commiseration.
Thirdly, it admonishes all Christians to beware of this punishment, to fear
it long before it come, and to shun all such means and ways, by which men use
to fall into it: as first, ignorance of Gods will revealed ln his word,
Ephesians 4, 18, 19. especially where it is joined with careless contempt of
knowledge Prou. 1. Secondly, ordinary and daily disobedience to the word in
such things as are known to men, especially if it grow to a hatred of the
Ministers and admonitions by them given, as in Ahab and Herod toward Elias and
John Baptist. Thirdly, unbelief or distrust of Gods promises, Heb. 3, 12, 13.
Fourthly, covetousness and immoderate desire of riches, Math. 13, 22. Luke 6,
14. Lastly, pride of heart, which where it reigns, it ever causes the sinner
to resist God, as is to be seen in the example of Pharaoh, and Nabucadnezzar,
who would not obey the commandment of God, because they were high-minded.


Tim. What profit is to be made of these things?


Silas. First, it must serve to warn us all, that as we tremble at the
judgment of a hard heart, so especially we labor against these forenamed
sins, even against the very first motion of them, being greatly humbled that
we have so far proceeded in them.


Tim. Let me hear some of those signs by which men may know whether they be
near unto, or within this judgment of an hardened and slumbering mind?


Silas. They arc principally these four: First, to be utterly without feeling
or fear of this punishment: such as never thought of it to fear and shun it,
are undoubtedly caught by it, their consciences are benumbed and blinded.
Secondly, to hear the word without sound affections, as of fear, grief, joy,
hope, love, according to the matter. Thirdly, when after plain and often
warnings by the word, there follows no amendment, Pro. 1, 21, 25. Zach, 7, 9,
10, 11. Psalm. 50, 16, 17. 2 Chro. 36, 15, 16. Lastly, when neither Gods
severity can terrify, nor his kindness mollify the heart, being like the
fool spoken of by Solomon, which though he should be brayed in a Mortar, yet
will learn no wisdom; or like restiue wel-fed iades which spurn against
their feeder, Deuteronomy. 32, 15,


Tim. How may we apply this to our profit?


Silas. If we be stirred up by it to enter into a serious examination of our
own hearts, whether these tokens belong to us, that we may heartily thank God
if we find ourselves free, and speedily repent if they have taken any hold of
us.


Tim. You have told us what hardness of heart is, and also what manner of
judgment it is, but now declare from whence it comes, that the wicked are
blinded in unbelief and sins.


Sil. There be three maine causes of hardness of heart: First, the wicked
themselves. Secondly, Satan. Thirdly, God. The wicked harden themselves as
authors by wilful resistance. Satan hardens as a tempter, by inspiring
unclean thoughts; and God as Judge, by punishing. God when he hardens is
author of the punishment or judgment, but not of the sin. The Devil when he
hardens is author of the sin, but not of the punishment, but man is author of
his own punishment through his sin and contempt of the word.


Tim. How prove ye that the wicked are causes of their own spiritual
blindness and obstinacy?


Sil. First, it is expressly said, that Pharaoh hardened his heart, Exodus 8,
15. When Pharaoh saw that he had rest, be hardened his heart or made it heavy.
Again, it is written in the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 13. verse 9. O Israel, thy
destruction is of thy self; which proves plainly men to be the proper
causes of all the evil that comes to them, either in this world, or in the
next. Lastly, in Mat. 13, 15. and Acts 28, 27. The blame of hardening is laid
upon the ungodly them selves, who winked with their eyes, least they should
see: hereby giving us to understand, that those things which they saw against
their wills, they made as though they did not know them, they saw and would not
see, they were wilfully blinded, their own perverseness and corruption is the
cause of their blindness in soul, and of hardness of heart, Mat. 23, 37.
Heereunto accords learned Augustine, Pharaoh (says he) hardened himself by
his own free will. And again in his book de (...): and gratia, Chap. 4. he
says, man's heart being infected from his birth, whatsoever more hardness
falls out after that first corruption, he suffers it righteously and
deservedly. And again, whenever we read that men were hardened, or had
their eyes shut, or ears made heavy, let us not doubt (says he) but that
their sinful deseruings were such before, as made them worthy of that
punishment which followed in his book de lb. and gratia; This shows this
ancient father to have been of this judgment, that evil men were themselves
the principal and proper cause and procurers of hardening their own hearts.
As an hot burning coal or fiery Oven and Furnace sends forth sparkles, so
the corrupt heart of man sends out those wicked effects in sinful thoughts
and actions, which causes and makes his heart more obstinate and repugnant
unto God.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Sil. First, it cleares Gods justice against such as fasten the blame of their
destruction upon Gods severity, because he hardens and destroys none but
such as by their own malice have deserved it. Secondly, it proves the
Papists, slanderers and false accusers; for they are not ashamed to write of
the Ministers of the Gospel, that we teach God to be the chief author and
proper cause of hardness, even as it is a sin; whereas with one consent, we
all do teach the proper cause of unbelief and sin (as it is a sin) to
lurk in our own nature, and do wholly discharge God of this. God neither
wills, approves, nor works sin, says Philip Melancton, upon the first
Chapter to the Romans. Every one sins willingly (says Peter Martyr,) and
no man is compelled of God to sin; upon the 9. Chapter of Judges. The
original of sin is not in God says Calvin upon James 1, 13. We hold him
for impious and blasphemous (faith Beza contra Castil.) which says there is
iniquity with God; yet both Dureus the Jesuit and the Rhemish Priests do
charge us that we do make God the proper author and worker of hardness of
heart, and the active cause of sin. Yea, hereupon Stapleton the Divinity
reader at Doway, infers, that the God of the Catholics, and the God of the
Protestants is not one. For (says he) the Catholics God is not the cause of
sin, but the God of the Protestants is so; which is a wicked calumniation,
and may be justly retorted, thus: The true God allows no Mass,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, prayer to or for the dead, merits, etc.


Tim. But you said that spiritual blindness and hardness proceeds from Satan,
how prove you that?


Silas. First, from the text which makes the slumber or sencelesnesse of the
Soul in heavenly matters, to be an effect of the evil spirit sent by God
into the wicked, to make them more blind and obstinate then they were before.
Also it is written, 2. Cor. 4, 4. that Satan does blind the minds of the
wicked; and 1. Kings 22, 22. Satan is sent of God with authority, to lead
into error and blindness that wicked King Ahab.


Tim. But how is Satan the cause of hardness of heart?


Sil. As a tempter, and instigator, and inspirer, to breathe and drop in
ungodly and unrighteous cogitations into wicked men's hearts, as liquor is
distilled and dropped into a vessel. Hence he is said to work in the
children of disobedience, Ephesians 2, 2. and to be effectual in the wicked,
strongly to delude them, 2. These. 2. 9. and to have entered into Judas, by his
suggestion to increase his malice against Christ.


Tim. Is this power given to Satan over any which are born of God?


Silas. No, over none of them, but over the reprobate only; for it is written,
that that wicked one touches them not, 1. John (...) 8. also by watchfulness
and prayer, they are kept from falling into his snares, though they be sore
and often tempted, Mat.6, 13. and 26. 41. His tyranny is exercised only upon
and over them, which are addicted and wholly given to disobedience, over the
reprobate in whom he reigns and works even at his pleasure, 2. These. 2.
10. Thereason here of is, because wicked men are worthily committed to Satan
to be governed by him, because they want only and wilfully shake off the
regiment of God, and will not be led by his word and Spirit. Psalm 2, 3.
That which Pharaoh spoke with his mouth, the same all wicked men think in
their hearts, and say in their souls, Who is the Lord that we should obey
him? And therefore they have an evil Spirit set over them, as it did happen
unto Saul, who resisted the good Spirit of GOD, and had therefore an evil
Spirit sent to rule and vex him.


Tim. What is the profit to be made hereof?


Silas. It should teach all Christians willingly to obey God, laboring to
keep his word, and suffering it to govern their ways, lest after their
deseruings, he do put them into the hands and power of Satan, to be by him
carried along unto destruction; for there is no remedy, such as cast off the
yoke and government of Christ, must be put under Satan's rule and dominion.


Tim. Why did you affirm that God was the cause of a blind and hardened heart?


Sil. Because the Scriptures both in this Text, and in innumerable other
places, do attribute it to God, in Esaias 6. 9. God commands Esaias to go and
make their hearts fat, and Esaias 29. 10. the Lord is said to cover them with
the Spirit of slumber, and to shut their eyes, and Esaias 19, 14. the Lord
mingled amongst them the Spirit of error; and often in Exodus it is affirmed
of God, that he hardened Pharaohs heart: and of Sihon King of Hesbon, that the
Lord God hardened his Spirit, and made his heart obstinate, Deuteronomy. 2. 31. also
Romans 1, 24. that God delivered up to vile affections, etc. and 2. These. 2, 11.
that God sent strong delusions that they should believe lies, and John 12, 40.
God has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts. These and many other
texts show, that God has a hand and a work in the hardening of sinners, else
we should deny the word of God, and take from God more then half the
government of the world, if we should deny him to have an operation in the
sinful works of the wicked, whose souls and bodies are subject to God who
made them, and are to be disposed by him.


Tim. Will not this bring in God to be the author and cause of sin, seeing
hardness of heart and blindness of: mind is a sin and if it be of God, then
God does work sin?


Silas. No, not so, this will not follow; he is the author of the judgment,
but not of the sin. There be two things to be considered in hardness of
heart. The first is, apostasia, the repugnancy or aberration from the will of
God: this God neither wills, approves, nor works; but abhors and
punishes it, as coming from Satan and from the corruption of men's hearts, and
being contrary to his image and word. The other is antimisthia, Romans 1, 27.
the recompense or judgment which is executed, when a sinner that was blind
and obstinate before, is further indurate and blinded, as a reward due to his
contempt of God. Of this punishment and due recompense, God is the author and
cause; for it is a just thing with God, to Sin is of God as a recompense, not
as an offense: as a retribution, but not as a transgrescion.
punish sin with sin, lesser with greater, former with latter sins. All
punishment being an act of justice is good. Therefore sin as it is a
punishment comes from God, and not as it is a transgression, for so it
proceeds from Satan and the wicked. Thus Augustine teaches, Pharaoh, (says
he) hardneth himself, libero arbitrio, and God hardened him, iusto suo
indicie: again, God hardens not as an evil auth our, but as a righteous
judge, who though he does not instill any sin into the creature, nor make
his heart hard or blind, which before did see and was soft: yet he does not
tame and soften them; and he is said to harden whom he does not mollify. Yet
he does not only forsake the sinner, which had before forsaken him, depriving
him of his grace, but also delivers him up to Satan and his own malice, to
be ruled thereby; as a malefactor is put over by a Judge into the hands of an
executioner; besides, he both (...) occasion of stumbling unto them, by
presenting many (...) unto them, and disposes their sinful thoughts and deeds
unto the praise of his own Justice, to their deserved confusion: for, as he
works in the hearts of the godly, to incline their thoughts to good works,
according to his mercies; so he works in the wills of the wicked, to incline
and order them unto evil acts, according unto their own merits, either by
secret or manifest, but ever by just judgment.


Tim. What Use is to be made hereof?


Silas. It confutes such, who to excuse God, do therefore say, that he does
permit and suffer the evil of sin to be done, contrary to the plain phrase
of Scripture, which ascribes an active power to God, as a sovereign Judge.
Secondly, it must move all to fear God, who can sinite tho heart spiritually
and dreadfully, Quis non contremiscat (...) has (...) Dei iudicia? faith
Augustine. Who would not shake and tremble at these horrible judgments of
God? at the due consideration of them, it might even (...) our flesh to quake,
and rottenness to enter into our bones, as it is said of Habbakuk. He must
have an heart of flint who is not moved with them.


DIAL. VIII.
Verses 9, 10. And David says, Let their table be made asuare and a (...), and
a flumbling block, even for a recompense unto them; Let their eyes be darkened
that they see not, and (...) their back always.


Tim. WHat is the drift and end of this Scripture?


Silas. To prove the relection of the Jews, Scope.
(...) and their blindness thorough which they did not receive Christ and his
Gospel (...) wilfully contemned it, being wholly possessed with a Spirit of
slumber. And this Paul proves by a testimony out of the Psalm 69, 22, 23.
wherein David bearing the person of the (...) (of whom he was a Type) does
complain of the extreme injuries and oppressions wherewith the Jews (his
own people and countrymen) should vex Christ. Amongst other things, that
they should mingle his meat with gall, and Vinegar with his drink: and now in
this Text, by way of imprecation or curse, he prays for Gods horrible wrath
and punishment to come upon them; and namely, that their minds might be
spoiled of all judgment and discretion, to discern or choose things; and
their bodies of all strength, that they might be able never to attain good
things desired, nor to hurt the godly; and their life to be void of all
comsorts, that al their most pleasant things might be turned to their
destruction. Now the holy King David having by a prophetical spirit prayed for
such miseries to the Jews they must be fulfilled: therefore, the general
unbelief and hardening of the Jews, is no incredible thing to be wondered at.
Note, that though Paul changes some words, yet he holds the sense like an
Apostolical Prophet, keeping and explaining the meaning by alteration of words.


Tim. What things are to be considered in this Text, cited out of the Prophet
David?


Silas. Two things; First, the parts or sever all kinds of Parts.
punishment. Secondly, the equity of the punishment wished unto the malicious
Jews, for resisting and resusing Christ the redeemer of mankind.


Tim. What is the first kind of punishment?


Silas. That their Table may be made for a snare.


Tim. What signifies the Table?


Sil. It is a figurative and borrowed speech, signifying all things where in
the Jews delighted and took pleasure; because men who be rich and great, do
furnish their Table with goodly delicacies, meats, and drinks, pleasant to the
taste and sight: also, for that men come to the table to be refreshed and
merry. Hence it signifies whatsoever is acceptable and delightful unto us,
giving us contentment and comfort in this life; I say, that by a Synecdoche,
the Table imports riches feasts, prosperity, peace, and public estate; yea
all their spiritual and temporal blessings, as Scriptures, Sacrifices,
Temple, or whatsoever they had which was good, prosperous, and glorious, (as
Chrysostom, Calvin, Peter Martyr, and Paraeus expounds it:) he prays that all
this may be turned to their hurt, ruin, and downfall.


Tim. By what comparisons is this hurt and ruin set forth in our text?


Silas. By three similitudes: First, of a snare wherein Birds are taken when
they think to feed. Secondly, of a net or trap, such as wild Beasts are
caught in. Thirdly, of a stumbling block or stone, whereat blind men or
drunkards do stumble and fall. This first punishment, how it is fulfilled in
the Jews, experience of many hundred years, have made it so plain to all
men, as it needs no proof at all. For all men know what was the name,
dignity, renown, glory, riches, privileges and benefits bestowed on that
Nation; and now what calamities of body and soul they are tormented with, being
plagued with extreme infamy and indignity, being vagabonds, hateful to God
and all men: their wealth or whatsoever may make for their welfare, being made
their snare to entangle them, whiles they are banished in sundry countries,
and cruelly slain for their Riches sake.


Tim. What is our Doctrine to be learned from this first Doctrine.
punishment?


Silas. That unto wicked men which are Gods enemies, their most dear and
precious things are made the means of their own destruction: howsoever they
lift up their horns, and exalt their heads on hie, and flourish like a green
Bay tree, and seem to be rooted in prosperity, as though they should never be
removed, yet it is certain, that whatsoever is given for their benefit, shall
be converted to their bane and mifery. The reason hereof Reason.
is, because they do abuse Gods gifts by pride, Wantonness riot, and excess:
or else, by covetousness and usury, cruelty, and oppression. Hence it is, that
God in his judgment will at length destroy them, and bring them to sudden and
horrible desolation; as it happened to these Jews, and to Balthazar in Daniell,
to the rich man in the Gospel: and to Caesar Emperor of Rome, who was slain
in the Senate, where (his Table) his glory was: and to Absalon, who was hung up
in his locks wherein he delighted, as a man does in his table and dainties.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. It teaches the forcible poison of sin, when it Use.
is continued in, changing the nature of things, making that hurtful which is
healthful in it self; as the Gospel to be a savor of death, the Sacraments a
judgment, 1. Cor. 11, 24. Christ a rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2, 7. a Table a
place of safety and security, of mirth and friendship, to be a snare and trap,
and an occasion of ruin. Secondly, it teaches also the condition of such as
live in the service of sin, without turning to God, to be most unhappy; to
whom all things, not sins and afflictions only, but Gods gifts and blessings
also, shall be turned unto their evil both temporal and eternal. Thirdly,
it serves as a bridle to restrain the children of GOD from fretting and
repining at the great welfare of the ungodly livers. If (...), Job, and David,
repined and grieved at the prosperity of sinners, let others fear a fall,
where such Saints so strong did stumble. See Psalm. 37, 1, 2, 3, etc. Let God
alone with them, and be not troubled about them. Fourthly, it makes much for
the consolation of the godly, to whom not only things desirable and good, but
even hard, unhappy, bitter, and deadly things, shall turn and become wholesome
and good; as sickness, weakness, poverty, imprisonment, banishment, infamy,
and death, etc. All things shall work together for good to such as love God,
Romans 8, 28. The reason is, because Christ by his cross, has sanctified the
crosses of the faithful, and pronounced them blessed which mourn and suffer,
Mat. 5. therefore Christ by death was brought to his resurrection and glory, so
his Apostles and other professors by most cruel Martyrdom, have had their
faith tried as Gold in the furnace, and have been translated to eternal
bliss and glory in heaven. Lastly, it warns all men to pray God earnestly to
bless his benefits unto them, that as they are good in themselves, so they may
prove good to the possessors of them.


Tim. Come now to the second punishment, and tell us what it is?


Silas. The blindness of understanding in Heavenly things, [ Let their eyes
be darkened.] This is a speech borrowed from the body, and applied unto the
mind, which is (as it were) the eye unto the soul. The darkening of this eye,
signifies the taking away of understanding from the Jews, making them witless
and blockish, that they might see no more in the matters of God, and of
salvation, then a blind man can see at noone day in worldly matters.


Tim. What is the Doctrine which does ar se now out of these words thus openad?


Silas. To be deprived of the use of understanding in Doctrins.
things pertaining to God, is a dreadful judgment. The proof hereof, is from
Deuter. 28, 28, 29. where GOD threatens the disobedient to his Law, to smite
them with blindness and with astonishment of heart, that plain and easy, and
familiar matters should be as hard and obscure unto them, as the Sun is
darkesome unto him that lacks his sight. Example of this judgment, we have
first in Pharaoh, who having disobeyed Gods warnings, bidding him let the
people go; and after many and most sharp plagues, having hardened his heart
against Gods known will, was stricken justly of GOD with such a spiritual
madness, as he was not able to perceive it to be a sinful and hurtful thing
unto him, to keep the children of Israel still in his land; but after he had
let them go, he would needs obstinately follow them unto the red Sea, which was
the destruction of him and his people. Likewise, the Pharisees had their minds
so darkened of God, as they could not discern any sin or danger, in putting
to death Jesus, though they had often felt that he had done them no evil at
al, but much good, and in their presence had many ways and manifestly
witnessed (by his life, doctrine, patience, miracles) both the innocence of his
manhood, and the truth of his Godhead. A certain shadow of this judgment, we
have set forth in the Sodomites, Genesis 19, 11. who being smit with blindness,
did in the daylight even grope after the door of Lot his house. If we do
account it a very great evil to have the eyes of our body put out, then to
be deprived of the light of understanding, must be a more heavier judgment
and calamity by how much the soul is more excellent then the body, and the
benefit of inward understanding is greater and more necessary then the profit
of an outward and fleshly eye.


Tim. How may Christian; edify themselves by the knowledge and meditation of
this Doctrine?


Sil. First, in respect of themselves, it must stir them up unto
thankfulness, to bless God for clearing their eyesight by the Spirit of
Wisdom. Also to pray unto God for the continuance and increase of it, and to
be delivered from the judgment of a blind heart. Lastly, that to this end they
endeavor always to glorify God by their knowledge, by turning it into
practice and actions. Now in respect of others; to take compassion of such as
are under this judgment. For if we will pity poor blind men which cannot
see their way; and Idiots or fools which lack the use of natural reason:
much more we ought to grieve for such as have lost the use of spi ituall
understanding, not being able to see the way unto salvation: and take it for a
surety, that he has a very (...) heart that cannot mourn for such, or at
least be g^rieued, for that his heart is so hard.


Tim. What was the third punishment?


Silas. The bowing of their backs or loins, wherein there is another Metaphor,
translating that to the soul and the estate of the Jews which is proper to
the body, the strength whereof does chiefly consift in the back or loins, the
bowing whereof imports as much as the weakening or diminishing of this bodily
strength: by all which is signified unto us, that the malicious Jews for the
contempt of Christ and his Gospel, should loose their whole strength, both
spiritual, lacking all endeavor to do that which is good; and temporal,
having their civil authority and government taken from them.

This judgment began to be executed upon them before the birth of Christ,
when Augustus Caesar was Emperor of Rome; and afterward was more thoroughly
inflicted, when the Emperor Titus took the City, burnt the Temple, brake
down their walls, put the people to the sword, and laid all wast, so as there
was not any more any face or form of a Commonwealth amongst them, being
utterly void of all laws and regiment, and being made vassalles and
vagabonds upon the face of the earth, and so have remained now fifteen hundred
years and above, which continuance of this judgment is noted in this word
[alwaies.] When it had lasted, but 3. hundred years, Chrysostom wondered at
this iugdement of God; how then ought we to be astonished at the consideration
of it? Let us learn from it generally the extreme fierceness of Gods wrath
against unbelief, for the which he would so exceedingly and severely plague
his own peculiar people: More particularly let us observe, that it is a plain
and and a sure token of Gods indignation against any Country, to have the
chief props or stays thereof, either sore shaken, or wholly removed, and to
become like a tottring wall or broken hedge, for lack of good laws, wise
Governors, the power of the sword, etc. For proof here of see Esaias 2, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. etc. which should prevail with us, to move us to be thankful to God
both in word and deed, for that little strength that is left unto us, least if
we continue in our unthankfulness and sinful course, we do worthily thereby
provoke God to bow our backs and strike through our loins, and strip us of
all our strength to become not only feeble, stooping, and crooked, but fall
down flat till our enemies tread and trample upon us as on mire and dirt in
the street. If God did thus unto Jerusalem and the Jews which were great
among the Nations, even his beloved people, whom he had honored with fame and
renown above all people; yet if he spared not them for their transgressions,
but made their strength to fall, so as they were not able to rise up, Lamen. 1,
14, 15: then judge ye what cause we have to fear the like judgment whose
sins are so much the more grievous then theirs, by how much the mercies that
we have abused are more and greater then were the mercies bestowed on them.
Wherefore let us speedily repent, and turn to the Lord with all our hearts,
earnestly praying him to heal our Land, which is sore shaken by the loss of
very many worthies in all professions and degrees of men amongst us: let us
beware least we give God cause to take up that complaint against us, which
sometimes he took up against the Jews by his Prophet Esaias Chap. 57; verse 1.
The righteous perishes, and no man considers in his heart.


Tim. We have heard hit her to of the three (...) of punishments wished or
prayed for against the Jews, let us hear what is to be said touching the
equity of these punishments, how inst they be?


Silas. That is pointed at, and noted in the word [recompence] in the end of
the ninth verse, whereby is signified a retaliation and requital to the wicked
Jews, that as they had taken pleasure to afflict the righteous and to make all
things grievous unto them, and especially had perfecuted Jesus the son of
God, giving him vinigar to drink, and gall to eat, to vex him with all: So
it was but rightful that God mete home the Jews with their own measure,
paying them with their own coin, and for a recompense to them, should strike
them with blindness, for sinning against their knowledge, and should make their
most pleasant and prosperous things to prove bitter and dangerous; and finally,
should turn their greatest strength to weakness and feeblenes, because they
had abused it unto wickedness.


Tim. What instructions are we to gather from hence?


Silas. First, that it is a righteous thing with God, not only to punish
sinners, but to proportionate the pain and make it like unto the sin, as it
were eye for eye, tooth for tooth, blood for blood, spoiling for spoiling,
judging for judging, etc. Touching which thing look more upon Romans 1, 25, 26.
This ought to awake sinners, which have iniuried either God or man, that by
hearty repentance they may prevent and turn away Gods righteous recompense.
Secondly, from this word (recompense) we learn another lesson, namely that
blindness and ignorance from God, has not the nature of sin simply and only,
but of a recompense, when it is inflicted as a due requital for former sins:
and in this respect sin is from God as author, (to wit) as sin has the
condition of a recompense, but not as it has the quality of a trangressio^;
for so it proceeds from Satan's suggestion and man's corruption. In sins man's
evil work in offending God by breaking the law, must be severed in
consideration and truth, both from the good work of God, and his judgment by
punishing offenses righteously: which if Papists would confess, (for they
Lutherans also do much wrong us in this matter.
cannot but see it) they would cease to slander us Protestants, by speaking and
writing that we make God the proper cause of sin (as it is sin,) whereas
we teach that in sin beside the anomia, which is from man himself, there is
also antimisthia, which is the proper work of God.


Tim. We have seen what is to be learned from the parts of this text, is there
not some thing to be learned from it being wholly considered:


Silas. Yes, and namely thus much: that sometime, and in some causes, and from
some persons, imprecations and curses be lawful.


Tim. In whom be imprecations lawful, and toward whom, in what causes,
things, and in what manner?


Silas. First, it is lawful in God himself the sovereign Therebe sundry
predictions, which are no maledictions.
and righteous author of blessings and curses, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. For God
being himself most holy, can neither bless nor curse no otherwise but
holily. Also in the Prophets and Apostles which had the Spirit of Prophecy,
and a warrant by a special calling to curse others, it was in the^ absolutely
lawful so to do. Thirdly, in public persons, as Magistrates, Ministers, and
Parents, it is lawful conditionally, that the cause of their curse be not
private, but publicly (to wit) Gods glory. 2. that their affections be not
partial nor maliciously distempered with desire of revenge. Now for the
persons toward whom imprecation must be used, they must be such as show
themselves to be desperate and professed enemies to God and godliness, such
as were Ananias, Simon Magus, Elmas the Sorcerer, the Traitor Judas, the cruel
persecuting Jews. Thirdly, curses must be used only in such matters as do
concern God or his church. And fourthly, not in those things that are eternal
(for no man without peculiar revelation, may pray for the damnation of any man)
but in things which are temporal, so far forth only as they may tend to the
salvation of the parties. Finally, as touching the manner, curses are to be
wished no otherwise then with this affection of the conversion of others,
expressed or understood if they belong unto God, or otherwise that they may be
confounded.


Tim. Whereunto may the knowledge of this doctrine help and further Christians?


Silas. First, to reprove such as rashly out of spleen or choler, do banne or
curse either themselves or others, their children or neighbors; and secondly,
to warn them to take care of repenting for that which is past, and
hence-forward to take heed how they rush thorough indiscretion or impatiency
into such wicked imprecations, least besides the taking of the sacred name of
GOD in vain, contrary to the third commandment, they do puli down upon
their own heads these very curses which they have pronounced with their own
mouths, as it is threatened in that very precept; and as it happened unto one
Charles Duke of Bourbon, who was slain with a Gunshot in the assault of a
Town, as he had wished unto himself; and unto one Henry an Earl of
Schuartzbourgh, who miserably perished, being drowned in a Iakes, according to
his usual imprecations; and unto two women in Germany; whereof the one to get
credit unto her words, did pray that if it were not true which she had spoken,
that she might never speak, and she was made dumb. And the other out of
choler praying that the devil would take her son, was presently possessed.
And lastly unto the Jews, who by imprecation cursing themselves and their
children, Mat. 27, 25. they do most woefully lie under it unto this present
hour: which should be of force to admonish all men to avoid profane cursing;
for such as love cursing shall be clothed with it, and blessing shall be
far from them, as it is written in one of the Psalms.


DIAL. IX.
Verse 11. I demand then, have they stumbled that they 2 part of the Chapter.
should fall? God forbid: but through their fall salvation comes unto the
Gentiles, to provoke them to follow them.


Tim. What does the Apostle now perform in these words, and so following?


Silas. Now, he prepares himself a way to exhort the believing Gentiles to
modesty (not to insult over the castaway Jews) and to comfort the unbelieving
abject Jews, not to despair for their fall, as if they were never to rise and
be restored. And this he does unto verse 33. So as here the Apostle sets
upon the other two parts of the Chapter, the one parenetical, containing
exhortations unto humility: the other, Prophetical, fore telling the
reuocation of the Jews to their great comfort.


Tim. How does Paul pass forwards to this exhortatorie part?


Silas. By a double Prolepsis, or preoccupation, where he meets with, and
answers two objections which a perverse cauilling Jew, might make against
his former matter. The first of them is in this 11. verse, to this purpose.
What, shall the rejected Jew always remain in unbelief, and so perish? Or
has God cast off so many Jews to this end, that he might utterly destroy
them? This question arises out of the former part of the chapter, wherein Paul
had taught two things: First, that some Jews then living, were elect by grace,
and shall be saved. Secondly, that the most part of them were left in
unbelief, and should perish and be destroyed. This latter part was proved by
testimony of Scripture out of Esaias and David, which told before that God would
give them the spirit of slumber, and darken their eyes, and lay a
stumbling-blocke before them. Hereupon one might say unto Paul, Did God this
to the Jews that they might stumble and fall, that is, come to ytter ruin and
destruction? Which question, does not inquire into the intention of the wicked
Jews, what they meant by refusing of Christ, but into the ends of Gods
counsel, delivering them to be hardened, that they might be cast out from
Christ and his salvation. What God did respect herein, is now demanded.


Tim. What do we learn from this Objection?


Silas. That carnal reason thinks man's destruction to be the only and maine
end of Gods reprobation; as if a Tyrant should put out another eye, and then
lay a block in his way to make him stumble and fall, that so he might dash
himself in pieces. Let us not marvel then, if Gods counsel be charged now
with cruelty and in-iustice, seeing it was to then even in the Apostles time.


Tim. How does the Apostle answer this objection?


Silas. Two ways: First, negatiuely, denying this false end of Gods counsel,
[ God forbid,] showing that it Two ends of Gods counsel in rejecting the Jews.
was not their downfall which God intended. Secondly, affirmatively, putting
down the true ends of the same, as first the salvation of the Gentiles: and
secondly, the conversion of the Jews by their example [ But rather, etc.]


Tim. What learn we from the Apostles denying of the thing objected?


Silas. That though the perdition of the unbelieving Doctrine.
Jews, and other enemies of God be the events which follows upon their
eternal reprobation (for they cannot be saved whom God would not choose unto
salvation, and it is a thing decreed of God, otherwise it could not be) yet it
is not the end which God propounded only or chiefly to himself, or at all for
it self. My reasons be, first it is against the nature of God, that he being a
most gracious creator, should delight in the overthrow Reasons.
of his creature. Secondly, it is against the plain word of God which says,
That he delights not in the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18, 31, 31. God
forbids under a curse, to lay a block in the way of the blind, to make them
stumble and fall; therefore it cannot be that God should take pleasure in the
stumbling and fall of the Jews, and to that end should blind and harden them.


Tim. But Paul says, that God appoints some to wrath, 1 Thessal. 5, 9. and
of old ordains men unto damnation, Jude 4.


Silas. Destruction is no end of Gods counsel for it self, and as it is such,
(to wit) the ruin and hurt of the creature, but with relation to some other
thing, and as it has in it respect of good (to wit) as it serves to the
manifestation of his high Justice, and of his power. Romans 9, 22. For though
there be a supreme good, which is so good as at no hand it becomes evil
(to wit) GOD himself; yet there is no extreme evil which has not some
consideration of good, and so it is willed and ordained of God, and none
otherwise.


Tim. What Use hereof?


Silas. It cleares God of tyranny and unrighteousness, Use.
and his Ministers from teaching him to be so, when they teach his
predestination to hang upon his own will as the Sovereign cause, before and
beyond which there is no other: therefore let iniquity stop her mouth, and let
God be confessed to be holy in his ways.


Tim. Come now to the ends for which God rejected the Jew, and tell us what is
meant by Gentiles?


Silas. All people saving the Jews, the world being divided into Jew and
Gentile.


Tim. What is meant by Salvation?


Sil. The doctrine which works faith unto salvation, or which calls unto
salvation.


Tim. What is meant by fall?


Silas. The loss of Christ his grace and glory: a most grievous fall.


Tim. What is meant by jealousy?


Silas. An envy toward the Gentiles, with an earnest desire and longing to be
like them, by recovering their lost estate?


Tim. What learn ye hereby?


Silas. First, seeing the ends of Gods decree, touching Doctrine.
the reprobating so many Jews, were so holy and good (as the calling of the
Gentiles, and the receiving in of the Jews) therefore his decree ought not to
be blamed but extolled rather, because it aimed at most worthy marks.
Secondly, we learn, that out of things most evil, God can draw much good. As
the unbelief of the Jews, and their fall from salvation, is a most grievous
evil; yet by Gods providence, there did spring out of it two very good things,
the vocation of the Gentiles, and the conversion of the Jews; which were not
merely executed by Gods bare permission, as if he only suffered these things
(as a beholder or looker on) whereas nothing happened without his will: but are
the happy effects of Gods gracious providence, so wisely ordering and disposing
their contumacy, as it gave occasion of opening a door of grace unto the
Gentiles that they might come in, and thereby at last provoke the Jews to
seek their own restitution unto their former condition. Thus in the
administration of the world, Gods providence and goodness draws life out of
death, and grace out of sin, and good out of evil, as in the creation he
made light spring out of darkness.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point of doctrine? Use.



Silas. That Christians must study how to convert their How to reap benefit by
sin.
own sins, and the fall of others to their benefit; for seeing God purposes
good to some, by the sin and fall of others, it behooves us to consider
wisely, how to convert our own falls, and other men's ouersights to our
spiritual welfare.


Tim. What good may we take of our own falls, and the falls of others?
show us this more fully and distinctly?


Sil. First, our own sins should be a means to humble us. Secondly, to
cause us to be more watchful. Thirdly, to stir us up more to prayer against
them. Fourthly, to a greater strife against sin, that it prevail not nor
soil us. And lastly, to a greater compassion toward our neighbors which have
fallen by feeling our infirmities. The sins of others should stir us up to
more he edefulnesse that we do not the like; also to take occasion of
exercising charity in prayer for them, and admonishing of them. We had need
to have skill to know how to reap some good of sin, for we have had a
great deal of harm by it, even the offense and displeasure of a good God, the
wounding and defiling of our conscience, hurt to our name and estate, danger of
perishing to our persons, many miseries, and death in the end; which should
cause us to fear before sin, and after sin to be made wary and wise by our
own, and other men's faults.


Tim. What other things to be learned from hence?


Silas. That there is great difference between God and Doctrine.
men in their manner of governing: his ways and our ways are not alike; for
he may use all occasions, means, and instruments of doing good, because he is
a most free agent, and cannot be defiled by partaking with evil; but men are
bound to do good things by good means, Romans 3, 5. We may not do evil that
good may come of it. Moreover Doctrine.
we learn, that where the Gospel is, there comes salvation; for it is both
a message of salvation to sinners, and the power of God unto salvation, Luke 2,
10. Romans 1, 16. Therefore called Gospel, (that is) a gladsome tidings, and so
it is to all afflicted sinners which feel the burden of sin and groan under
it. Lastly, we learn that the prosperity Doctrine.
of others, it is the cause of jealousy, and envy in our selves, the Gentiles
good is the Jews grief; which though it be a sin, yet God can and will make
good to come of it; but tho God in his providence can dispose faults to very
good ends, this must not be any encouraging to offend.


DIAL. X.
Verse 12. Wherefore if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall their
abundance be?


Tim. VVHhat does this scripture contain in it?


Silas. An illustration or larger setting forth of the two ends of the fall of
the Jews, mentioned in ver. 11. viz. the adoption of the Gentiles, and the
repentance and conversion of the Jews; this latter he begins within this
12. verse, and the former he illustrateth in the 13. and 14. verses. The reason
why he first deals with the latter end of Gods counsel by an hysterosis, it
is because it seems to be contrary to the former, and therefore he is
careful to reconcile them.


Tim. How may these two ends seem to fight one with another, as mutual
enemies?


Silas. Thus, as if the Jews were cast out of the covenant and Church, to make
room for the Gentiles to come in; hereof the Gentiles might surmise, that the
receiving of the Jews should be their reiection and cutting off. For it was
likely and might be feared, that as the falling away of the Jews, was the
occasion of the conversion of the Gentiles; so the conversion of the Jew,
should occasion the falling away of the Gentile. Unto which objection, the
Apostle answers negatiuely, denying the objection; he strengthens his
argument from the less to the more, thus: If the diminishing and poverty of
the Jews, be the riches of the Gentiles, much more shall their plentiful
calling be: if their fall do further the salvation of the Gentile, their
restoring shall not hinder but further it more. For if God can do that which
is less likely, to draw good out of evil; much more he can turn that which
is good, to the good of the Gentile. Again, a thing which is good (as the
restoring of the Jew) has a proper inbred virtue, to bring forth that which
is good; but a thing which is evil (as the fall of the Jews) brings forth
good accidentally, not as a cause, but as an occasion only.


Tim. Expound the words, and tell us what is meant by [fall.]


Silas. The casting off of the Jews from Christ in part, Interpret.
and not wholly; therefore called (diminution, or minishing) by which word we
are not to understand the Apostles, which were but few and abject, yet enriched
the Gentiles by their preaching: but the falling away of the Jew unto a few and
small number: for the most of them refusing Christ by unbelief, the residue
were but a few; and therefore fitly called a minishing, or a diminution, which
is not an excision or cutting off the whole, but a decision or cutting a part
from the whole.


Tim. What is meant by [world and their riches?]


Silas. [World] signifies the Gentiles, so expounded in the words following:
and the riches of the Gentiles implies both the great multitude of the
Gentiles called to Christ by the Gospel, and the thing wherewith they were
enriched, even the plentiful knowledge of Christ, and the abundant graces of
the Spirit.


Tim. What signifies abundance?


Sil. Two things: First, the great company of the Jews which shall be called,
toward the end of the world. And secondly, the increase of spiritual graces
bestowed on the Jews in their general conversion: So as this is the sum of
this whole verse, Seeing the Jews being fallen Sum.
away from God, and brought to a little number, did occasion the plentiful and
general vocation of the Gentiles unto grace, therefore the Jews themselves
being generally called, and abundantly blessed with the riches of Christ,
there shall most certainly thereby come great good to the Gentiles.


Tim. Let us now see what doctrines do arise out of this 12. verse thus
expounded.


Silas. First, we learn the exceeding great severity and most sharp wrath of
God, in the great fall and misery of Doctrine.
the Jews, his own and only people, for many thousand years endowed with
innumerable privileges, as in Romans 9, 5, 6, 7. yet the greatest part of the
whole Nation was fallen from God into extreme desolation. The reason Reason.
hereof, is the malice and infidelity of the Jews striving against Christ the
Son of God, and his Gospel preached by himself and his Apostles, and
calling them sweetly unto salvation, see verse 20.


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. It warns all men to stand in awe of Gods severity, Use.
and to keep from sin, through fear of his justice, Psalm. 4, 5. How will he
spare thee, when he did not spare a whole Nation? how will he pity a wild
branch, which did cut off the true Olive? Therefore fear him all ye people,
because he judges without respect of person, 1. Pet. 1, 17. The second use is
to exhort us to beware as of all sin, so chiefly of unbelief, which thrust
Adam out of Paradise, the Jews out of the Church and out of heaven too, and
tumbled them down to hell, Reave. 21, 8. Unbelief most dishonors God, most
hurts men, being the root of all sins, and cause of temporal and
eternal torments: therefore we ought much mislike it, and mightily strive
against it.


Tim. What is the second doctrine?


Silas. That the Jews shall be restored to grace toward, Doctrine.
the end of the world, and that not by two or three, or a few, but by great
companies. As the whole nation in a manner departed from Christ, so in a manner
shall the whole nation return to him: the proof hereof is in this verse, in
the word [abundance,] and in verse 26.


Tim. What profit is to be made hereof?


Silas. It commends the immeasurable mercy of God in delivering such a
rebellious and forlorn people. Secondly, his incredible power, being able to
call unto Christ a people that despised and strongly resisted him, as if he
should raise the dead out of the grave. Lastly, seeing God is willing to pity
them, it behoues us so to do, and earnestly to pray to God for their recovery,
and not to despair either of our selves or others, being very grievous
sinners before God.


Tim. What is the third doctrine?


Silas. That the true riches of a Christian is not in gold Doctrine.
or silver, etc. but in the multitude of the faithful, and plentiousnesse of
Gods graces in them, 1. Cor. 15. Ephe. Reason.
3, 16. Reave. 3, 18. The reason is, because all other riches are earthly and
vanishing, but these are from heaven, and therefore everlasting.


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Silas. It serves to call our minds from corruptible riches, Use.
to fix them upon incorruptible, to labor to be rich in Christ, not to the
world, as Christ counsels, Mat. 6, 19. Lay not up treasure, etc. Secondly,
to strengthen those in their good resolution, which for the riches of Christ
have learned to contemn the world, for they have with Mary chosen the better
part, which shall never be taken from them.


Tim. What is the fourth doctrine?


Sil. That the conversion of one hinders not the conversion Doctrine.
of another, but rather much furthereth the same; as it is written of the
Gentiles, that it should much help their salvation, to see the Jews
generally converted. In the state of this world, the preferring of one often
crosses the preferment of another; but it is contrary in the state of grace.
The reason is, because the more be converted, Reason.
and the more full the body of the Church is, they doc the more abound in
mutual help. As in an army amongst many Soldiers, one succoureth another;
and amongst many trauailers, one encourages another.


Tim. What fruit may we reap by the knowledge of this truth?


Sil. It serves to provoke all Christians to pray and seek Use.
for the turning many unto God, that they may be the stron ger. Secondly, to
praise God heartily for such as be called out of darkness to light, as Paul
often does for the Gentiles, whereof see the proof in his Epistles to the
Philippians and Colossians. Lastly, to take heed we envy not the repentance
of any, but rather to rejoice at it, after the Angels example, who are glad of
the conversion of a sinner. Luke. 15, 10.


DIAL. XI.
Verse 13. 14. For in that I speak to you Gentiles, in as much as I am the
Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnfie mine office, to try if by any means I might
provoke the of my flesh, to follow them, and might save some of them.


Tim. WHat does Paul perform in this text?


Silas. First, he proves the sentence which he put forth before, touching the
salvation of the Jews, by their emulation of the believing Gentiles, verse 13.
14. Secondly, he comfort the Jews, by giving them hope of being restored
to Christ before the end of the world.


Tim. By what argument does Paul prove, that the conversion of the Gentiles
shall turn to the salvation of the Jews?


Silas. By a reason taken from his own example, or from the end of his own
Ministry among the Gentiles, which was, by converting the Gentiles, to provoke
many of the Israelites to follow them. The reason stands thus: The end which
God propounded to his own counsel Proposition.
in rejecting the Jews, and which I set before mine eyes in my Ministry and
preaching, must needs be attained Assumption
unto; But as God in his counsel, so I in my doctrine have propounded this
end, that the Jews might be brought at last to desire grace, and be saved by
means of that grace given to the Gentiles: Therefore it is certain, that at
the last many Jews shall be saved: Otherwise Conclusion.
the end both of Gods decree, and my doctrine, should be frustrate, which
cannot be.


Tim. Upon what grounds does Paul comfort the Jews in the 14. verse?


Silas. Upon this ground, that seeing reconciliation came to the world of the
Gentiles by their fall, therefore howsoever their case seems to be desperate,
as of dead men, yet God will quicken them, that they may be partakers of the
common reconciliation.


Tim. Why does Paul call himself the [Apostle of the Gentiles?


Silas. Because he was of God, appointed to be a Interpret.
preacher to the Gentiles, as Peter was to the Jews, Gal. 2, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 2, 7.


Tim. Wherefore does Paul direct his speech to the Gentiles in this sort?


Silas. By this insinuation to creep into their minds, and the more to knit
their heart to him, as one that was ordained to set forwards their salvation.


Tim. What is the doctrine from hence? Doctrine.



Silas. That Ministers of the word must take all occasions to witness their
lone to their flock. And secondly, that it behooues the people to be
persuaded of the good affection of their Teachers toward them. The reason
hereof is, because the doctrine of godliness will Reason.
more easily pierce the minds of the hearers, if they be well affected
toward their teachers: which made the Spirit of God in the Scriptures to
charge both Ministers to behave themselves mildly, as Pastors, Fathers, and
Nurses amongst the people; and their people to have their teachers in singular
love for their works sake.


Tim. What Use of this Doctrine?


Sil. It serves to warn Christians to beware, least by Use.
Satan's suggestions, their own corruption, or counsel of the wicked, any
sinister bad conceit be either dropped into, or entertained in the minds
concerning their teachers: for by this means their doctrine will become of
none effect, and their salvation will be greatly hindered. These things, God,
Christ, Gospel, Teachers, Salvation, are so linked together, as to despise
one, is to despise all. Honor one, and honor all.


Tim. What does this word [magnifie] import?


Silas. Sometimes it signifies to make known the greatness Interpretation.
and glory of another, Luke 1, 46. but here it is to honor, or to make
glorious his office, that is, his Ministry Doctrine.
of Apostleship. The Doctrine is that it behooves a Minister to honor his
function.


Tim. Wherein does stand the honor and glory of the ministry?


Silas. In sundry things: (...), in faithfulness when How the Ministry is
to be made honorable.
Ministers both live and teach well, 1 Cor. 4, 2. it is the credit of Stewards
to be faithful and trusty. Secondly, in patient suffering tribulations for the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 6, 4, 5, etc. Thirdly, by diligence in preaching the Ministry is
much adorned, 1 Cor. 9. Lastly, by the good success of preaching, when thereby
many are converted unto Christ. This last is meant here, as appears by the
words of the next verse, that Paul's meaning is, that this would be the honor
of his Ministry, that he might so preach to the Gentiles, as he might win some
of the Jews also: as the glory and strength of a King consists in the number
of worthy subjects, so the number of good scholars is the honor of their
teachers: that made the holy Ghost to say in the Acts, that the word of God
grew and was glorified, when many were turned to the Faith by the preaching of
it; for to convert sinners to righteousness is a greater matter then to work
wonders, nay then to make a world: therefore both the word and the preachers
of it are not a little honored, when by sound preaching, many are brought to
repentance and amendment of life.


Tim. What profit may we take to our selves by this Doctrine?


Silas. It confutes such men as place the honor of the Use.
Ministry in pomp, worldly wealth, riches, and glory, stately ornaments, and
precious garments; in which things, the false Prophets most excel. See Revel.
18. Also they be but accidental and sophistical Ornaments, they do not
appertain to the nature and substance of the Ministry, which consists in
preaching and doctrine, and converting souls thereby to Christ. Such as do not
this, whatsoever they have or do, they bring no dignity to the Ministry, which
is magnified not by titles and shows, but by doing the work belonging to it.
Secondly, it warns Ministers to keep their office from contempt, by flying
licentiousness, idleness, covetousness, etc. by preaching painfully, and
living honestly. Thirdly, it rebukes such hearers as will not be reformed by
preaching, for they are a blot and blemish to the word and the Ministry
thereof, as much as in them is, as if it were of no might to save. Fourthly, it
exhortes all men, even as they tender the credit and honor of Gods blessed
Ministry, to submit unto the Doctrine taught them: by this means they shall
magnify the Gospel, and cause it to be highly esteemed of.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence, that Paul being sent to the Gentiles,
yet labored to save the Jews too?


Silas. That Pastors and Parents, having first and chiefly looked to their own
charge, may lawfully endeavor the salvation of many others, by public and
private teaching, provided it be no prejudice to the^ over whom we are
specially set.


Tim. But will not this example serve to justify such as commonly leave their
own charge to teach others abroad?


Sil. No, it will not; for these Jews whom Paul taught were mixed with the
Gentiles, so as in teaching them he neglected not his own charge; and his
commission was to teach all Nations.


Tim. But seeing it is God only that can save, how does Paul write that he
will save some?


Silas. God saves otherwise then Ministers do, he as efficient chief working
cause of salvation, being both author and blesser of the ministry. Ministers
save as his voluntary instruments, whom he uses not of need but because he
will, and to whom that is communicated which is proper to the chief agent: to
teach all men to reverence the ministry; and to see the great necessity of it.
1. Tim. 4, 16. James 5, 20. Romans 1, 19.


Tim. What else learn we here?


Silas. That in seeking to save, our greatest care must be for friends and
kinsmen, Luke 22. 32. Acts 10, 24. For charity is limited and ruled, iit
begins at our selves and those next to us, and so stretches it self to
others, both in temporal matters, and in spiritual. 1. Timotheus 5, 4, 8.


DIAL. XII.
Verse 15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world,
what shall their receiving be but life from the dead?


Tim. What does this 15. verse contain?


Silas. The 2. argument whereby the believing Gentiles are dehorted from
insulting or proud disdaining of the unbelieving Jews: it is taken from the
hope of the restoring of the Jews to the Church of God, who therefore ought not
to be contemned. The first argument was from the end of Gods counsel, in the
reiection of the Jews, whereof we heard out of verses 11, 12.


Tim. Of what parts does this text consist?


Silas. Of two parts: The first is a proposition. The second Parts.
is a proof: the proposition or matter propounded is this: The Jews which be
now as dead men by their unbelief, shall be revived and quickened again by
grace. This proposition is illustrated and set forth by the similitude of the
last and general resurrection, when the dead which lie buried in their graves,
shall arise again, even as possible it is for God to raise the Jews out of
the grave of their sins. This proposition is confirmed by an argument a
minori, from that which is less likely, to that which is more likely, as thus:
If the calamity of the Jews brought forth so great a good to the world of the
Gentiles, as reconciliation with God, then what shall their felicity be, but a
reviving of the whole world, when both Jews and Gentiles shall receive the
Gospel; then not Jew alone shall be restored to life, but the whole world shall
be totally received to God-wards.


Tim. Now expound the words of the first part of this sentence.


Silas. [Casting away] signifies the same with fall and Interpretation.
diminishing, as before verse 14. [World] by a Synecdoche, signifies the
Gentiles which be the greatest part of the world. And reconcilement is put for
salvation, whereof our atoneme^t with God by Christ is the chiefest part,
because a sinner enters then into the estate of salvation, when sins are
pardoned through Christ.


Tim. But how may the casting away of some, be the reconciling Doubt.
and saving of others, seeing evil must not be done that good may come of it?


Silas. First, the casting away of the Jews, as it comes Solution.
from God, had the nature not of an evil but of a good work, because it was
the execution of his Justice upon them for their unbelief. Secondly, it was
not properly the cause of the Gentiles salvation, but accidentally, insomuch as
the Jews being cast out, by that occasion the Gentiles were called to Christ;
who could not be called till they were rejected, by reason that the Jews
malice was such as made them to contemn the grace of Christ, and to envy that
the Gentile should be partakers of it. Neither would they enter, nor suffer
others: as a Dog in the manger, which neither eats the Hay, nor suffers
the Oxen to eat it; therefore, as by tumbling down the dog, the beast comes
unto the food, so by casting off the stubborn Jews, the Gentiles found
entrance both into the estate of Grace, and Reconciliation with God.


Tim. What instructions have we from the former part of this Verse?


Silas. First, that God can turn the greatest evil to much good for his
children: the reason is, his most admirable wisdom and goodness; even as
Satan by his very great malice and subtilty, can so poison the best things, as
they prove hurtful to the wicked.


Tim. What is the use to be made of this point?


Silas. First, to move us to love, praise, and admire Use.
the most singular love and wisdom of God. Secondly, to labor, after Gods
example, to make benefit of all evils which happen to our selves or others,
even of our own sins, and of the transgressions of other men, to make us
more humble and watchful thereby, for the time to come.


Tim. What other Lesson learn we from the beginning of this verse?


Silas. That the sum of the Gospel is to preach reconciliation Doctrine.
with God (to wit) that of sinners, enemies, and ungodly, being without God and
true life, subject to wrath and death for sin, we are received to favor and
become friends, children and heirs of life through Jesus Christ believed in.
See 2 Cor. 5. what Paul says of God, in verses 18, 19. and of the Apostles and
other Ministers, verse 20.


Tim. What be the parts of reconciliation?


Silas. Two: First, remission of sins, or not imputing our faults, with
imputation of Christ his perfect justice in keeping the Law unto believing
sinners. Secondly, Sanctification, in killing the strength of sin, and
quickening the soul by works of righteousness in the Spirit, Romans 6, 2, 3, 4.
Remission takes away the guilt and pain of sin: Sanctification remoues the
dominion and kingdom of sin that it reign not, Romans 6, 12. and is a
necessary companion of remission, and fruit of reconciliation with God, 1 Cor.
1, 30.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this point?


Silas. That Preachers ought diligently to teach this Doctrine of
reconcilement, and the people to learn it, that they may be thoroughly
acquainted with Gods mercies, to their comforting after heaviness for sin
and their own miseries; and to their humbling after grace bestowed on them. For
as nothing will so cheer up a troubled spirit, as the declaration of the
sweet and sure mercies of Christ, unto firm and full atonement with God; so
nothing is more auailable to humble them the^ the remembrance of their unhappy
condition, in being strangers from God.


Tim. Come to the latter part of this verse, and tell us what is meant by
[receiuing,] as also, by [life?]


Silas. Here the effect or consequent, is put for the cause or antecedent,
which is an effectual calling or receiving of the Jews into the Christian
Church; and by life is meant the quickening by grace to live to God, being
before dead in trespasses. Thus Oecumenius expounds this place: What (says
he) shall be their assumption but this, that we may say of him that assumeth
or receives, that he reuiueth them being dead in sins? This speech is
borrowed from the last great resurrection of the body, whereunto the Scriptures
do often resemble the restitution of the Jews, both from their bodily and
spiritual calamities. See Esaias 26, 19. Hos. 13, 14. Ezekiel. 37, 11, 12, etc.
(...), 11, 12. to teach us, that the restitution of the Jews (being
spiritually dead) to the faith of Christ, in the end of the world, shall be as
certain and sure, as that the corporally dead shall be raised out of their
graves at the last day; which is an Article of our faith.


Tim. What else are we taught from hence?


Silas. That in all men naturally, there is no more strength to do a good work
(no not to think a good thought) pleasing God, then there is force in a dead
man to do any worldly work, John 15, 5. 2 Cor. 3, 4. 1. Cor. 2, 14. This
confuteth the counsel of Trent, which teaches, that we have power (if we
will) to receive grace offered, to believe and repent when we are exhorted.
Session 6. But this is false, because God must draw us to Christ, John 6, 44.
also, work in us both the will and deed, Phil. 2, 13. and because of our will
being dead, God is not only to help it, but to revive us by putting (as it
were) a new soul of grace into us. This must stir us up to give the whole
praise of our new birth to God, as Col. 1, 21. Ephe. 1. 1, 2, 3. Again, from
hence we may learn, that we may not despair of the salvation of any, either
of others or our own, how hopeless soever. For if God can revive the Jews,
now sixeteene Ages rotten in the grave of sin, then how much more others
also? see John 5, 25, 28.


Tim. What Use of this last point?


Silas. This must nourish a charitable opinion of the greatest sinners, and
preserve men in hope of themselves, so they do not defer, but betimes
endeavor to turn from sin, and seek to God, who is rich in mercy and
power: whose example should teach us not to be cruel and rigorous (as many
Christians are,) being far unlike to God, who enclineth to pity, pardon, and to
save even most for lorne offenders (...) Whereas many (thorough
hardheartednesse) be so implacable, as nothing will appease them; no (...) and
confession after crimes yea, sundry Parents be herein wodrthy to be blamed,
that as some are too indulgent, so others too too severe, refusing to take to
favor their relenting and repenting children. Oh, what would become of
themselves, if God so deal with them. But there is much mercy with God, and
plentiful compassions, so ought there also to be with men.


DIAL. XIII.
Verse 16. For if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump; and if the
roate be holy; so are the branches.


Tim. What do these words perform?


Silas. A proof of the former reason touching the universal restoring of the
Jews unto grace, before the end of the world, where Paul meant both to
comfort the Jews, and to warn the Gentiles that they do not proudly contenme
the Jews. This proof is taken from force of the league, and promises made to
Abraham, and to other antecessors of the Jews, who be beer compared unto the
first fruits and root; and the Jews which came of these antecessors, unto
the lump and branches. The proof stan death thus; The Jews are an holy nation
by the promises made to their Fathers, therefore God will not cast them away
(...) but as the first fruits and root being holy, do make the lump and
branches holy, so Abraham and the forefathers of the Jews, being holy by
virtue of Gods covenant to be their God, will cause holiness in Gods good
time to be derived to their posterity; for there is like condition of causes
and effects, of root and branches.


Tim. Upon what parts does this Text consist?


Silas. Upon two comparisons: the first whereof, is taken from the observation
of the Mosaicall Law, touching first fruits: the other, from natural
experience of the root and the branches. It is the nature of the root to draw
good sap out of the ground, and to disperse it into the stock and branches to
make them fruitful. Therefore what the root is, such will be the branches; if
the root be sappy, and full of good juice, it will cause good nourishment to
the tree, and plentifulnes of good fruits.


Tim. What was the Law to be observed by the Jew touching first fruits?


Silas. This: of all the increase of the earth, God commanded the first fruits
to be given him, as Number. 15, 20. Leuit. 23, 10, 11. Also, when they made a
mass of dowe, there was a part for God, whereof were sweet cakes or
Shewbread made to set before the Arc: and this done, the rest of their fruit
and their bread was sanctified unto them, (that is) the use and eating of their
fruit and bread became holy and wholesome.


Tim. For what causes did God ordain this Law of first fruits?


Silas. For sundry good purposes and causes. First, that by such a ceremony,
the Jews might know and acknowledge that it is God to whom they owe thanks for
all their fruits, as being his free gift; as worldly Princes will have their
servants to pay some penny a year for some great Lordship bestowed on them,
only to testify their dependence upon their Sovereign, and not to enrich
themselves; so it it here. Secondly, by such Oblations the holy Ministry of
Priests and Leuits with their families were maintained: and there is such
great, manifold, and necessary use of the Ministry of the word, as men are to
uphold that, though unto their great cost, Gal. 6, 6. 1 Corin. 9, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. Thirdly, in all their first fruits were represented Christ, the first borne
of every creature, and the first fruits of them which tise again from the
dead, whereby all the faithful are sanctified to an happy resurrection, 1 Cor.
15, 20. Lastly, the first fruits were a type and figure of the estate of the
Jewish Church: wherein the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other godly
Fathers, were like unto the first fruits, to convey the holiness of the
covenant made with them, to the remainder of the Jews which came of them. And
also in this respect they are resembled by a root, which imparteth all the sap
it has, to branches; so the godly Patriarks impart the grace of Gods covenant
unto their of spring; where upon it is not to be doubted, but the Jews which
ly now as men dead, abject, and without hope to see too, yet shall be received
to be Gods people, and revived; albeit they are as it may seem desperate, as
men laid in the grave and buried.


Tim. Now that we have seen to what purpose Paul used these two metaphors and
similitudes, pass forwards to the dectrines, and tell us what they be?


Silas. First, we learn that whenever we reap the fruits of the earth,
we ought to show thankfulness to God, by giving the first to him; that is,
to our teachers, and to the poor in his name: for the equity of this law is
perpetual, although the ceremony be ceased. Secondly, from hence we learn that
the couena^t-graces of the parents, belong to such children as are borne of
them.


Tim. But how may this be, since the Patrierkes were holy, but many of the
Jews were rebellious; and experience teaches, that of the best Parents come
the worse childeren? In one people some be called only, some be elect and
believers also?


Silas. It is true, that the personal and inherent holiness of the Parents (to
wit,) the godly habit of their minds, as faith and hope, do not pass from
the parents into the children, as if virtuous and believing parents should
always bring forth such children; for these qualities come not by generation,
but by regeneration. (...) many outward privileges and qualities do descend
from Fathers to children, as freemen be get freemen, Jews beget Jews,
Christians Christians, by the blessing of the covenant which is made both to
parents and their Children.


Tim. But if we be all conceived in sin, how does the holy root make the
branches holy?


Sil. The Jews are spoken of as they come from Abraham, and not as they come
from God: howsoever natural corruption be contradictory to the grace of
regeneration, which does qualify and take it away, yet it may well agree and
stand with the grace of the covenant. For as one may be borne leprous, and yet
be a free man, when the Parents be such: so one may be borne a sinner by Adam,
and yet be borne a Christian and a member of the visible Church too, because
he and his parents be within the covenant of grace; which covenant though it
bring with it, forgiveness of that sin which we draw from our first father
Adam, yet when it shall have force, we are ignorant. And Scripture does not
teach us, whether original sin is forgiven to the Infant in the womb, or at
birth, or presently after, or at baptism, or afterward; for it is not given to
all men at one time, as they teach which tie grace and forgiveness unto the
Sacraments. But for that Infants belong to the covenant of mercy and
forgiveness, we do verily believe that they are holy, and shall be pardoned,
so many as are elected, howsoever they come sinners from Adam.


Tim. If only such branches be holy as come from an holy root, what is this
unto us Gentiles, which are no branches of this root?


Silas. The Gentiles be branches grafted in, though not natural; therefore the
blessing and virtue of the covenant reaches unto us, though not by hereditary
right, yet by free insition and planting in; which made the Apostle say of the
Corinthians, that their children were holy, because themselves were holy: holy
by a couena^t-holines, so as to be reckoned Gods people, and to have the seal.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this doctrine to our selves?


Silas. First, it teaches us what a great worthiness it is to descend from
Christian parents, because to such, all the prerogatives of the covenant, all
the immunities and privileges of the Church belong unto them: even as the
Children of the Jews had right by Gods covenant unto circumcision and other
sacraments, to the sacrifices and promises. Likewise now such as be borne of
Christian parents, have title to baptism, the Lords supper, to the word of law
and Gospel, and all other privileges of the Church; which is a favor wherein
in no wise do partake either Turks, Pagans, or Jews, as they stand at this
present. And in this confidence it is that we offer our Children to be
baptized, being branches of an holy root, by blessing of the Covenant.
Secondly, this serves to confute the Anabaptists which deny unto Christian
children the benefit of baptism, as if our condition were worse under the new
Testament, then the Jews under the old, or as though the sign must be holden
from them, to whom the covenant it self appertains. Thirdly, it affoords
matter of great comfort unto all such Christians as at any time shall be
afflicted in mind for theirsinnes, to remember that they are under that
covenant which promises remission of sins to parents and their children.
With this very argument did Peter cheer the hearts of the Jews when they were
pricked with sorrow, for the killing of the Lord of glory. Acts 2, 38, 39.

Fourthly, it confirms our faith and persuasion touching this maine mystery
and truth of the restoring of the Jews, in as much as they springing from
Abraham and Jacob, as from an holy root, and from the other Patriarchs, as
first fruits sanctified to God; it is therefore without all doubt, and a thing
of certainety, that the blessing and prerogatives of the Covenant made with the
parents, shall flow and break forth at last to the making of very many of them
true members of the invisible Church, as now it causes all our children to
become members of the outward visible Church; for who^ is God to be prayed,
that they may not only assent firmly unto and lay hold upon the promises of
eternal life by faith, but bring forth also the fruits of good works by
love, without the which the parents piety will but little profit the children.


DIAL. XIIII.
Verse 17. And though some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a
(...) Olive tree was grafted in for them, and made partaker of the root and
fatness of the Olive tree; boast not thy self etc.


Tim. HOw does the Apostle Paul proceed?


Silas. He brings forth a third argument to dehort the believing Gentile from
despising and reproching the rejected and unbelieving Jew. He had first said
that their casting off was to the great commodity of the Gentiles, namely the
vocation of them to God by the Gospel. Secondly, he gave hope to the Jew of
their repairing, because they were an holy people, and separated from all other
Nations, by the promises and covenant of life which was given them. Now thirdly
hereasoneth from the condition of the Gentiles, both that which is past (they
were a wild Olive,) and that which is present, (they were grafted into the
true Olive,) whereupon depends a double grace; one, that the Gentiles are made
partakers of the root of the Olive: and secondly, that they do enjoy the
fatness that comes of the root, that is, they have communion with Christ,
the Church and the Gospel. The sum of the argument is thus much: Ye
Gentiles being once like a wild Olive, are now planted into the true Olive;
therefore do not proudly boast your selves with the reproach of the Jews. This
argument is wholly contained in the text, and has two parts both expressed.
One is the antecedent part in verse 17. The other is the consequent, in verse
18. which is enforced by a new reason drawn from that which is absurd or
dishonest, because we Gentiles bare not the Jews, but their root does bear
and sustain us; now it were an unthankful and dishonest part to disdain that
which does support us.


Tim. But how is this Scripture knit and coupled to the former?


Sil. By a prolepsis or preoccupation, thus: The Gentiles might say, What did
it profit the Jews to come of an holy root, seeing they are cut off from the
stock of the holy Patriarchs? To which Paul answers, What though they were
once holy branches, and now indeed broke off? yet not all but some only;
whereas you Gentiles were a long time unholy, a wild Olive, strangers from
God, and now of free favor are grafted into their place; therefore be not
proud, but modest and humble.


Tim. What is meant by [broken branches?]


Silas. The Israelites which were like unto branches broken off from a tree,
and are good for nothing but to perish and wither: So the Jews were cast out
from grace and salvation as rotten branches.


Tim. Why does he say [some] and not many or all, seeing the greatest number of
Jews were refused in Paul's time?


Silas. Paul speaks not of one age of them, but of the whole nation in all
ages, ever since they were separated in Abraham to be Gods own peculiar
people, and so from thence to the end of the world: and then who perceives not
that the Apostle might well say [some] seeing so very great a part were saved?
for there were many Patriarchs, Kings, Prophets, Priests, and innumerable
private men and women, all dear to God, and we read of five thousand
converted at the beginning of the Gospel by Peter and other Apostles, Acts 2,
and 4. And toward the consummation of the world, in great heaps they shall be
drawn to Christ: So as Paul did well to say, a certain number only were
broken off.


Tim. But if many of the branches be broken off, it may seem the elect may
perish, for what are the branches but Gods own elected people?


Silas. It is impossible that the elect should perish, Christ has said it,
Mat. 24. 24. For the gifts of election, faith, and justification, etc. are
without repentance, such as God never changes and takes away; but if the
elect perish, the^ must God change, Romans 11, 29. Paul therefore speaks not
here of right and true branches, such as elect and faith full persons be,
which cannot be cut off; but of counterfeite seeming branches, who be such in
their own opinion, and in the account of the Church, but not being indeed
elected and called to Christ; and these may and do fall away. The ground and
proof of this difference we have in John 15, 2, 3, 4. also Romans 9, 7. where is
a plain odds between the children of Abraham: and Romans 2. 31. where is
mention made of Jews inward and Jews outward, in the Spirit and in the
letter. And 1. John 2, 19. it is said that some were of us, and some were among
us; the former remained in the Church, the other did not, but plaide Apostataes
and reuolcers, running to the enemies camp.


Tim. These knots being loosed, show us the instructions we have from these
first words.


Sil. The doctrines from them be two; first, the promise of grace and salvation
is not fixed or tied to fleshly generation: the reason is, because grace
comes by regeneration at the pleasure of God, and not by generation at the
will of man, John, 1. 12. 13. Godly parents do convey their corrupt seed to
their children, but not their sanctifying Spirit: else all that descend of
faithful parents should be saved, which is not so, as in Ismael, Esau, Cayne,
Absolon, etc.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. It warns all children which come of godly parents, to strive to be
like them in faith and virtue; as Christ exhorts the Jews, John 8, 39. to
do the works of Abraham; and Paul, Romans 4. 12. to tread in the steps of his
faith: otherwise the piety of progenitors will not help: for, not springing
from good parents, but being like them makes us happy; the Jews were of
Abraham, and yet were broken off.


Tim. What is the second doctrine?


Silas. This breaking the branches teaches us, that it is not enough to
profess God, for so did these Jews; nor to know him and have the Sacrtments,
for so had they; but to labor to be well grounded and rooted in Christ by a
lively faith working by love. For all they that be not Reason.
thus, seem they never so holy and glorious, may and shall fall and be broken
off, either at death, or when the winds of temptation blow, Math. 7, 25.


Tim. What use of this instruction? Use.



Silas. It serves to reprove such as rest in external things, never trying
themselves: their end is to be deceived at last; as they which trust in a
cracked Title, or lean on a broken staff.


Tim. What is meant by the wild Olive tree?


Silas. The wild Olive is put for a branch or grift: for Interpretation.
whole trees use not to be grafted, but branches; and these branches of the
wild Olive signify all the Gentiles which served Idolles for the living God;
because they were as the wild Olives, namely herein, that as the wild Olive,
though it have the form and shape of a true Olive, yet lackes the generous and
fruitful juice of a true Olive, and therefore yeeldes no pleasant fruit: so
the Gentiles being without the faith and profession of Christ, and true piety,
had shadows of many Virtues, and shows of goodness, yet indeed were very
unclean and accursed, as Ephesians 2, 1, 12. and 4, 17; 18, 19.


Tim. What do we learn from hence? Doctrine.



Silas. The miserable condition of us al without Christ, that howsoever we may
be commended for very honest men, and have some appearance of the Image of God,
and some show of faith and godliness, yet before our incorporation into
Christ, we lack his Spirit utterly, and bring forth fruit which is bitter,
even fruit to death, such as be reckoned up, Gal. 5, 19, 20, 21. The Reason
is, because Reason.
all is sin and death, which is estraunged from Christ.


Tim. What profit is to be made by the knowledge and meditation of this
condition?


Silas. It serves to instruct and stir us up unto modesty Use.
and humility, unto which end it is here presented to the Gentiles, even to
suppress their pride and arrogance. Also it provoke us to thankfulness for
the benefit of deliverance from it, when it is compared with the contrary
condition wherein men did lie before such deliverance, as Ephesians. 2, 4, 5. And the
benefit when it is perceived in the worthiness of it (which without such
comparison cannot be) causes an higher esteem and sweeter sense of it; and
that kindles the more love toward the giver God, and more rejoicing in his
bounty, whence flows all Christian and true gratitude.


Tim. What other matter do ye observe here?


Silas. The difference which is between natural and Doctrine.
spiritual grafting. For in natural grafting a good and sweet science or
branch, is grifted to a sower crabbed stock, by slitting and pricking the
same: the bad sap whereof, is changed into the good juice of the good
branch: but in the spiritual in grafting it is quite contrary; for then wild
branches (which are wicked unnatural men) are grafted and joined to the good
and noble stock Christ, by whose spirit and grace, they are altered and made
new creatures like himself, Ephe. 4, 24. otherwise both kinds of planting
agree in this; that they make the branch and stock to be one.


Tim. What is this root into which they were grafted?


Silas. It is Abraham, in regard of the covenant made with him, and as he was
joined to Christ. And to be Interpret.
grafted into this root, is to become one people of God with the Jews,
growing up into one church with them, as if they had been derived from Abraham
by carnal generation, and so to be made members and parts of the body of
Christ, which is the fellowship of al faithful people.


Tim. What is meant by Olive?


Silas. The Church of the Jews, whereof Abraham was the root and father: so
called for resemblance sake unto an Olive. Which Metaphor, we find in Ier. 11,
16. and Psalm. 52, 8. and Judges 9, 9. And it is like those other Metaphors of a
Vine, John 15, 1. and of a Fig tree: all which fitly represent the estate of
the true Church of God, in respect of the conjunction which is between the
root and the stock; and in regard of their great fruitfulness, and sweet
pleasantness.


Tim. What is meant by the fatness of the Olive?


Silas. The Doctrine of the Gospel, all the benefits of Christ, all the
graces of the Spirit, with the privileges of the Church, called in the Psalm,
the marrow and fatness of Gods house, Psalm. 63, 3.


Tim. What learn we hence?


Silas. That we bring no merits to our own justification, no more then a
branch can help to graft it self, or a man to beget himself. Secondly, it is
a great excellency to be a true member of Gods Church: for such be united with
Christ, as the branch and the olive be. Thirdly, that they which are such,
ought to abound in all the fruits of the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5, 22, 23.
Fourthly, the Jews before Christ, and the Gentiles which now do believe in
Christ, have the same root, the same Spirit, and faith, the same Church and
Sacraments, with some difference in outward signs and rites: Contrary to their
wicked Doctrine, who teach, that the Jews had but the figures only of that,
whereof we have the truth and substance; a Popish fantastical conceit,
crossed by many hundred places of Scriptures.


DIAL. XV.
Verse 18. Boast not thy self against the branches: but if thou boast, thou
bear not the root, but the root thee.


Tim. What is the drift of this Text?


Silas. The same which was of the former, even to exhort the Gentiles unto
modesty, and to suppress their pride, least they insult over the Jews, as
over broken branches.


Tim. What he the parts of this Text?


Silas. Two: First, the consequent or latter part of the former reason, taken
from the condition of the Gentiles. Secondly, a new reason drawn from that
which is absurd and dishonest [ but if thou boast.]


Tim. Return to the interpretation of the words, and tell us what is signified
by [boasting?]


Sil. To strout or to stretch out the neck, which is proper to al proud
persons to look high and lift up their necks: the meaning is, they should not
proudly contemn or reproach the outcast Jews, rejoicing in their sins and
miseries.


Tim. What is meant by [thy self?]


Silas. It is an Apostrophe or turning of his speech unto the Gentiles, whom
he speaks unto in the singular number, as if they were but one man.


Tim. What are we to learn from these first words [boast not?]


Silas. That it is not lawful for Christians to rejoice for the sins and
calamities of others, and to reproach them being fallen. The reasons hereof be,
first, it is a thing displeasing to God, which has forbid us to joy in other
men's evils. Secondly, it is contrary to the example of Christ, who wept over
Jerusalem, and prayed for his (...), Luke 19, 41. and 23, 34. and of the godly,
who lament the sins and harms of others, as Job 31, 29. and Paul, Phil. 3,
18. Thirdly, it is against charity, which is pitiful and rejoices not in
iniquity, 1, Cor. 13. 6. Fourthly, it is against common experience, which
tells us that the evil which happens to one, may, and oftentimes does happen
to another. Therefore we should in much meekness pity others, considering
our selves, Galat. 6, 1. A certain godly person hearing his Christian brother
had committed adultery, mourned, and said, He fell to day, I may fall
tomorrow. Lastly, it is against piety to rejoice for any man's fin, seeing it
killes the soul of thy brother, which caused Christ to shed his blood, and
grieueth the holy Spirit of God, also breeds scandal in the Church, brings
plagues upon whole nations and Churches. What a wickedness were it to take
delight and insult for that which causes such things.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this first instruction?


Silas. It reproves such as are glad, because they see others offend, and take
hurt by sin, making it their sport and table talk, to prattle of other men's
faults and losses, either speaking of it without all grief for their brethren,
and fearc for themselves, or glorying in their fall, and boasting proudly
against the^; which men, do show hereby, that not only al Christianity is
quenched in the^, but are without any drop of humanity, by which one man
should relieve another, even because he is a man. Many heathen which with
grief have felt the evils of other men, as Acts 28, 2, 10. shall condemn such
christians which scornefully look upon, and speak of their neighbors evils.


Tim. What may we learn from this, (...) Paul speaking to many, yet uses the
singular number (thy self?)


Silas. It may teach us two things: First, that it is the office of the
Minister particularly to apply the word to every one, because things generally
spoken may instruct, but does not so much affect and move, as when it is fitted
to every person, like a plaster laid to the sore, or a portion of meat meet
for him that eats it. Secondly, we learn that when the word of God is
preached, every one ought to attend and think all that is spoken is spoken to
himself; for while we post it off to others, it makes the word of God
unfruitful to us. Godly, David went into the Temple to hear what God would
say unto himself. Psa. 85, 8. Acts 10, 33. The word is compared to medicines,
meat, wine, etc. which will not at al profit us except they be of every one
received.


Tim. Proceed to the second part, and show us what is meant by the [roote] and
kow the root bears the Gentiles?


Silas. By the root is meant Abraham the father of the faithful, who is said
to bear the Gentiles, because their salvation depends upon the covenant which
was made with Abraham and his seed. The sum is, that salvation came from the
Jews to the Gentiles, who conferred no dignity at all upon the Jews, but
received all from them. Therefore it were very absurd and dishonest to boast
against the Jews, which were to insult against Abraham the father and root of
the Jews; for in despising that by which a thing stands, that thing must needs
fall, and it is very wicked unthankfulness to insult over them, from whom we
take so much good.


Tim. What is our doctrine from these words?


Sil. That it is a very unreasonable thing for Christians to deride the Jews;
for that is even as ridiculous as if an house should boast against the walls
that bear it up, or the walls against the foundation which vpholdes them, or as
a man's head or arms against the legs which carry them, or the coach against the
wheel that supports it. Secondly, we learn that unthankfulness against
Benefactours, is a very uncomely and filthy thing. The reasons heercof be,
first we cannot abuse and scorn the^ by whom God has done us good, but that
we must needs scorn and deride God himself. Secondly, it is a blockish thing
not to acknowledge them from whom we take good, and a wicked thing to requite
them evil for good. Thirdly, it is a dangerous thing so to doc, for God has
threatened that evil shall never depart from the house of such. God will
certainly plague unthankful persons, as he did the Jews for their
ungrateful doings to the house of Gideon, and toward the Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles; and Pharaoh for forgetting Joseph's kindness. Lastly, it
makes men worse then beasts, for the Storke will nourish her Damme, and the
Dog will fight for his master which feeds him.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point?


Silas. First, it reproves such as either forget their Benefactours, Use.
or foreslow to render due and meet recompense, if they may and be able.
Secondly, it exhorts al Christians to be careful, thankfully to repay good for
good: such as be otherwise affected, it makes them worthy to loose all the good
they have, But on the contrary, God is well pleased with grateful persous, and
does ever bless them; whereof we have an notable example in Joseph, whose
thankfulness to his parents God much allowed and prospered; as he did also
the Israelites for using kindly the posterity of Iethro, who met them as
they came out of the wilderness: the like was done to Rahab, who entertained
the Spies: also in Dau d for the kindness to Jonathan, and Paul to
Onesiphorus, etc. Wherefore as we desire it should go well with us, let us
remember and consider them, by whom God has at any time showed any mercy
either on our souls or bodies, name or goods; for he can never be truly
thankful to God who is unthankful to the means by whom God does him good.


DIAL. XVI.
Verses 19, 20. Thou will say then, the branches are broken off, that thou
mighst be grafted in; well, because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
stand by faith.


Tim. What does this text contain?


Silas. Two things: First, an objection on the behalf of the Gentiles, why
they ought to boast, verse 19. Secondly, the answer of the Apostle thereunto,
verse 20.


Tim. What do the Gentiles object and allege for themselves?


Silas. That they might boast and rejoice against the Jew, because they were
more worthy then they; for, for their sakes (that they might be called to be
Gods people) the Jews were broken off and destroyed: as if they should say,
The Jews are broken off and cast out for my sake, they give place unto me; but
the less worthy do give place to the more worthy: therefore I excel them and
may glory against them, for he is of more worthiness for whose sake a thing is
done, then is that which is done for his sake.


Tim What does this objection teach us?


Silas. This lesson, that human reason is exceeding proane to pride and
arrogance; which appears hereby, that not only no argument can be so sound
and strong as to call it back fro^pride unto modesty, but it will rather take
occasion to strengthen it self in arogancy, by that which is brought in to
humble and take it down. This happened here unto Paul the Apostle, using this
firm reason, to prove the Gentiles ought not to be proud, for that they had bin
once as a wild olive, strangers from Christ, but were now planted into the
true olive, and become Gods people in stead of the Jews.

This reason does but the more lift up the Gentiles in pride, who attribute it
to their own worthiness, that the Jews were rejected and they received. This
shows the wicked pride of man, (to wit) how hard it is to reclaim it and
bring it unto humility: for as other sinners have their defense, the covetous
pretend thrift, care of wife and children; the drunkard good fellowshippe, the
wanton youthfulness, the revenger injuries of others provoking; so the proud
person pleads his own excellent parts and worthiness. And hence it comes to
pass, that few proud wits are reformed and cured, because they are drunken
with opinion of their own worth and goodness; which must be denied and
renounced, ere they be pleasing to God, who loves the humble.


Tim. What other things do ye observe in the words of the objection?


Silas. The great difference which is between worldly grafting, and that which
is spiritual, whereof Paul now speaks: they are both like in this, that
there is in both an uniting and conjunction, between the stock and that which
is grafted into it, they become one and have a communion, the root and
branches. Christ and his Church be most nearly conjoined, so as the Church
has the appellation and name of Christ put upon it for his union sake, see 1.
Cor. 12. 12. howbeit these two kinds of grafting do disagree in these two
things. First, in the manner of grafting, a good science and graft is taken and
set in a wild and barren stock, as a pipping or pearemaine, on a crab-tree:
but in the spiritual it is clean contrary; for there branches of the wild
olive (as the Gentiles were,) are taken and grafted into the true tree, the
body of the Church and society of the godly, this is good: but the grafts are
unfruitful, barren, and wild olive trees, (that is) wicked and unclean men:
and indeed it cannot be otherwise, for whosoever is found without Christ and
his Church, (his body) he can be no other but ungodly and accursed. Secondly,
in natural grafting the branch communicates sap to the tree, that by the fat
and fruitful sap of the good graft, the barrenness and wildnes of the tree
might be amended: but in the spiritual planting, the branch and graft give
not, but receive juice from the tree. So elect sinners by the grace of Christ
to whom they are grafted, be changed to be like to himself, holy and
righteous as he is: and this to be the end of their incorporation into Christ,
namely, to be converted and bear his Image, is proved by Ephe. 4. 23. 24.
Col. 3. 10.


Tim. But were all the Gentiles that weere grafted into the tree of Christ and
his Church, transfourmed into his Image?


Silas. No verily; some were grafted into the Church of Christ, by profession
of the mouth only: some also were planted into it by faith of the hearre;
which distinction is proved plainly by Romans 2. 28. by Math. 7. 21. 2. Tim. 3.
5. The former be not altered from their wild and barren nature by Christ, and
therefore may be broken off and perish; but the latter not so, because they
pass into Christ, and by his Spirit are renewed to his own glorious likeness.
2. Cor. 3. 18.


Tim. What be the parts of Paul his answer?


Silas. Two; first a concession, granting the thing objected so far as it was
true; Well says he, it is true, the branches (that is) the Jews be broken
off in great number, and this was done, not because God delighted simply in
their fall, but he uses their reiection as a means to further the grafting
in, and calling of the Gentiles; this Ideny not, says Paul.

The second part of his answer is a negation, wherein he does deny that the
worthiness of the Gentiles was the true cause why the Jews were rejected, and
the Gentiles planted in; but infidelity, (because of unbelief) as if he should
say, not for thee nor thy sake, but for their unbelief are they cut off, even
because they proudly refused the faith of the promses and of the Gospel,
(seeking to be justified by their own merits of works, and not by the faith
of Christ,) as before Romans 9, 31 32. and 10, 3. And the cause why the Gentiles
were ingrafted into the body of the Church, was not any dignity of their own,
but their faith whereby they rested upon Christ alone for righteousness and
salvation, as it is said of them Romans 9, 30. and here [ Thou stand by
says.] Thus in few and plain words are laid down the right causes of the
destruction of the Jews, and of the vocation of the Gentiles; whereof the one
(to wit, unbelief) is natural and might befall both Jew and Gentile, being
both borne in sin and unbelief. The other, to wit [faith] is a free gift of
God, depending upon mercy alone, and from the hand of mercy given to the
Gentiles, who therefore had no cause to be high minded, but to fear and be
humble.


Tim. What is the doctrine which ye gather from the former part of this
answer, [they are broken off through unbelief?]


Silas. First, that God is just and most righteous in condemning and casting
away the reprobate, because howsoever no man in Gods eternal counsel is
refused for sin, yet God in time does not destroy men but by reason of their
ignorance, unbelief, and sin: so as man bears in his own bosom the root
of his own ruin, he may blame nothing but his own unbelieving heart rejecting
Gods promises most wickedly. Secondly, we learn that unbelief is a sin most
odious unto God and dangerous unto men in whom it reigns. For as it cast Adam
out of Paradise, and kept Moses from entering into the promised Land: So it
deprived the Jews of the covenant and promises of salvation. The reason why
God does so detest it, is first, because it robs him of his glory, quite
taking from him the praise of his truth, power, and mercy, which in effect is
to make no God at all, but an Idol. Secondly, unbelief does reproach God, and
makes him a liar, which is to make him not a God but a Devil, who is the
father of lies. 1. John 5. 10. Thirdly, because as faith is the mother of all
good works, so infidelity is the mother of all evil: for from thence it is
that we run into all evil, because we do not believe the word of God;
whereas other sins spoil God of his authority, the unbelief strips him of his
efsence and very being. Lastly, unbelief is such a sin as does violate and
deface the whole doctrine of the Gospel, whereas other sins are committed but
against some one part or parcel of the word of God.


Tim. What profit are Christians to receive from the knowledge and meditation
of this doctrine?


Silas. It serves to inform us in what miserable case the members of the
Church of Rome live and dye in; in so much as they do fly to the merit of
their own works for life and salvation before God, rejecting the grace of
Christ by unbelief, even as these Jews did. Secondly, it serves to exhort us
Christians, that we never seek otherwise to be justified and saved, then by
the faith of Jesus Christ. For if the Jews fell from the covenant of God, and
lost all their dignity temporal and eternal, because they set up their own
righteousness by works, and would not seek to be justified by believing in
Jesus Christ; how may we look to keep our dignity, degree, and standing, if
we shall refuse Christ through infidelity, and trust in our own merits.

Lastly, it warns us above all other sins, to strive against an unbelieving
heart: for whatsoever sins we have, yet they destroy us not, so we have
faith to believe the remission of them: and wicked men are damned not so much
for committing sin, as for unbelief, because they refuse mercy and pardon
offered. Not but that the least sin has in it the merit of eternal death,
Romans 6. verse last: much more the greatest. But as the smallest sin shall be
imputed to him which is an unbeliever, so not the foulest shall be laid to his
charge, which truly repents and believes in Christ; as we learn from
Mark 16. 16. John 3. 16. 18. 35. Acts 10, 43.


DIAL. XVII.
Verses 20, 21. And thou stand by faith, be not high minded but fear, for
if God spared not the natural branches, etc.


Tim. OF what kind be these words?


Sil. They be extraordinary, stirring up the believing Romans unto Christian
humility and godly fear: and they be dehortatory, dehorting them from pride,
arogancy, and security.


Tim. What be the parts of these words?


Silas. Two, first a proposition, [ be not high minded] set forth by the
contrary [humble reverence of God, or reverent humility.] Secondly, the
rendering of reasons to confirm the duty propounded. These be two, the one is
taken from their present good condition, to wit, their free insition, or
grafting into Christ by faith, [ thoustandest by faith.] The second is drawn
from their future danger, if they should grow proud and carnally secure, then
they also should be broken off as the Jews are. This reason should be thus
amplified by an argument ( a minori,) for it is less likely that God would
cast away and cut off the natural branches and true Olive (the Jews, his
first and peculiar people,) then the wild branches the Gentiles, which were
afterward planted in. Therefore if he have done that, he will also do this,
except they fear the offense of God, and be humbled by the due sight of their
unworthiness. The sum and scope then of this Scripture is, to persuade the
believing Gentiles in regard of Gods free and great mercies, also in respect of
very great perrill, that they be not puffed up with Gods benefits and so wax
proud and careless; but rather be careful, laboring day and night in godly
fear to preserve their faith, and to keep themselves in that gracious estate
wherein they are settled by the faith of Christ.


Tim. Come to the words and tell us what is meant by [thou?]


Silas The whole body and congregation of the Gentiles of what country soever,
and namely the (Christian Romans) which had received the religion of Christ;
which are here spoken unto, as if they were but one man, that every person
might think himself spoken unto, and so apply it.


Tim. What signifies [standing?]


Sil. Sometimes the certainty of faith and grace, Romans 5, 2. sometimes
constancy, 1. Corint, 15, 1. and 16, 13. but here it signifies the state and
condition of a Christian, or of a member of a Christian Church, [ standing] is
the same with grafting, verse 19.


Tim. What signifies [faith?]


Sil. Either the profession of faith in the mouth, if we refer this unto
such as be hypocrites (which are known to God only,) or the gift of true and
lively faith in the heart, freely apprehending Gods grace in Christ, if we
refer it to true believers. The summary meaning is thus much, that our
condition and estate, as we are Christians and members of Gods Church, does
consist wholly and only by the mercies of God embraced by faith in Christ,
either seemingly, as by counterfeit Christians, or truly and indeed, as by
right Christians, which are so indeed as they be named.


Tim. What is the doctrine out of these first words?


Silas. That the state and very being of a Christian depends Doctrine.
on faith. For as before Paul laid down [infidelity] to be the true and
proper cause of the breaking off and destruction of the Jews, so now he
signifies faith to be the very cause of ingrafting the Gentiles into Christ.
Faith is it then that makes us to be Christians and members of Gods Church,
Galat. 3, 26. We are made the (...) of God by faith in Christ; and again, We
are made righteous by faith. And herein is a maine difference between faith
and all other graces and works of the Spirit, as hope, love, repentance, etc.
that those do not make us, but declare us to be the children of God, as it is
said of love, that thereby we are known to be Christ's Disciples, John 13,
35. 1. John 3, 23. but by faith we are made and constituted members of Christ,
and are planted into the tree of his Church, to become branches thereof. As
good fruit causes not a tree to be good, but is a witness of the goodness
of the tree: So good works, and all other good gifts do testify us to be
Christians, but faith only makes us to be such. For by faith we live, Gal. 2,
20. Romans 1, 12. Whereas both our English Divines and others, do write that we
are ingrafted into Christ by baptism, it must be meant that it is a sacrament
and a seal of that faith, which regenerateth and ingrafteth into Christ, Romans
4. 11. for which purpose, read M. Fulke on Acts 22. 17. and Romans 6; 4.


Tim. What reasons are there to prove this, that faith only makes us to be
Christians?


Silas. First, we are Christians by that which quickens Reasons.
us to God; but it is faith alone by which we are quickened to Godward; for
before faith be come, we were dead in sin, Ephe. 2, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8. Secondly, we
are not the members of Christ, till we be united to him as to our head: but
this union is wrought by faith, Ephe. 3, 17. Till we be adopted by grace, to
be made the Sons of God, and have Christ's righteousness imputed to us, we
are none of Christ's: but both our adoption and justification are done by faith,
Roman. 3. 28. Galat. 3. 26. therefore it is by faith that we are the branches
of the true Olive, and do please God.


Tim. What profit are Christians to make to themselves of this doctrine?


Silas. It confutes both the Papists who teach that the very act of Baptism
makes us to become Gods children, and so does justify, regenerate, and
sanctify us: as also the fantastical spirits, which taught that we are the
sons God before we believe. Secondly, it warns us of the miserable estate,
that the Pagans, Turks, Jews, and all Infidels which be without the Church,
do live in; as also all wicked men and hypocrites which are within the Church;
who having no faith rightly to ingraft them into Christ and his body, therefore
they partake not in the root nor fatness of the Olive, but wholly want Christ
with his Spirit, grace, and salvation: in which regard they are much to be
pitied of us, and God is earnestly to be prayed, that such among them as
belong unto him, he would in graft them into his Son by faith. Thirdly, it
exhorts all men that have not the blessing of a believing heart, above all
things to labor for it, that they may be made one with Christ, and be blessed
by believing, Gal. 3, 9. For albeit faith be a gift freely bestowed out of
Gods mercy to whom he will, yet God uses not to give it to the snorting
Christian, but to such as labor and seek for it. Lastly, we are by this
doctrine called from pride and arrogance, unto humility of heart: for seeing
we become Christians and Gods children by faith, and faith comes not from our
selves, but it is the gift of God; we ought not to boast as if it were not
freely given us, Ephe. 2, 8. 1. Cor. 4, 7. If faith both do spring from and
wholly rely upon mercy, then the faithful have no cause of glorying, but to
rejoice rather in this, that they know God to be merciful, Iere. 9, 24.
Further, seeing faith finds nothing in man to make him accepted to God, (but
sin and death) and does send men out of themselves to fetch righteousness
and life from another: Therefore the faithful have great reason to walk
humbly before God and me^, Romans 3, 28. Romans 4, 1, 2.


Tim. Proceed and tell us what is meant by [high minded?]


Silas. Some refer this to the wisdom of the mind, and expound it thus: Be
not wise in your selves, or be not wise in your own conceit; whereupon the
Papists build their absurd implicit faith against Scripture and reason. But
they do much better which refer it to the affections of the heart,
expounding it thus: Be not haughty in heart, or be not proud in your thoughts.
The word [feare] which signifies humble reverence of God, shows that thus we
ought to take the word [high minded.]


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Silas. That pride of heart or high mindedness ought to be far from such as
be professed Christians. The reasons hereof be these: First, it is forbidden
of God, and makes us odious to God and men. Secondly, it takes Gods glory from
him, and gives it to men; and this is an abomination, to give his glory to
any. Thirdly, it is an absurd thing to be proud of that which is none of ours;
for we have nothing at all, no not a crumme of bread or a drop of water but of
free gift. Mat. 6, 11. James 1, 17. If it be a senseless thing that a stage
player should be proud of another apparel which he borrowed, and must by and
by put it off; how void of sense should we be to be proud of such things as
come without us, nay for such things as God might condemn in us, and us for
them? because we either abuse or corrupt Gods gifts, and thereby have cause to
be humbled in our best estate. Lastly pride is a very dangerous thing; for it
pulled down Gods judgments upon Angels, and upon Kings, (as Nabuchadnezar and
Herod,) upon nations, (as the Romans and Jews,) upon Apostles, as Peter:
therefore pride is by all means to be eschued and striuen against, both by good
meditation, and earnest prayer, to have it mortified by grace, if we will
please God, and prosper now and for ever.


Tim. Have we here any present need of this admonitiou?


Sil. Yea very much and greatly, because all manner of pride abounds among us,
it was never more rise both outward and inward pride, and in all sorts and
degrees: as our apparel, words, looks, gate, title, hunting after dignities,
striving for precedence, our boasting in our knowledge, and disdaining of
others; all this does testify to our faces, that we are proud, and therefore
have need to repent, least we do perish.


Tim. Tell us what is here meant by [feare?]


Silas. It is set as contrary to high mindedness, and Interpret.
signifies humble reverence of God, or reverence of God joined with humility;
for as pride and presumption of heart stirred up by Gods gifts, has for
companion carnal security, which is the greatest enemy to grace and faith: So
humility arising from the sight of our great unworthiness and manifold
infirmities, is ever coupled with a reverent awe of Gods displeasure, which is
a special conseruer of faith, or of a Christian in the estate of faith.


Tim. But how agrees this precept of Paul (but fear) with Doubt.
that commandment of Moses, Exodus, 20, 20. Fear not, and with that of Christ,
Luke 12, 4. Also that of John, 1. John 4, 18. Charity casts out fear?


Silas. The fear forbid in these places is either the Solution.
immoderate fear of mighty men driving others to forsake true religion and
their duty to God, or else a slavish fear of Gods terrible justice and
vengeance because of sin, driving men to perplexity of mind, and despair of
Gods mercies. Both these kinds of fear be evil in their own nature,
howsoever the latter is oftentimes occasion of good to Gods children, through
the wisdom and mercy of their heavenly Father, making it a means to prepare
their souls for grace; like as a needle or a bristle makes way for the thread
to enter and to go through, and then the bristle is cast away: so is this
seruill fear expelled where faith and charity toward God has once found
entrance.


Tim. What [feare] then is it which is here commanded?


Silas. An ingenuous, godly, and humble fear, breeding continual care not to
offend God by any sin, as much and as far as frailty will suffer; and to
deserve to loose his favor, and to be deprived of our faith, and other his
graces bestowed on us. Such a fear as uses to be in good childeren toward
their parents, whom they are very loath to displease for their love and
kindness showed unto them: So this filial fear of God, causes the faithful
to avoid the offense of God, not so much for punishment, as because of his
mercies and goodness, and for love of righteousness. Oderunt peccare mali
formidine poenae.
Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.


An example to illustrate these two sorts of fear, good and bad, may be this,
in the Son of a Judge, and a malefactor, both at once standing in the Judges
presence, sitting on the seat of justice, they both are afraid: the malefactor
hating the Judge fears him, because he has a sword and power to punish him:
the child out of a love of his Father, does reverence his presence, and dare
not by any misbehauiour provoke his Father to wrath. Of this latter fear, Paul
speaks here: and also all other texts which contain commendation of fear,
are thus to be understood, as Exodus 20. 20. Deuteronomy. 6, 13. Psalm. 112, 1. Job
1, 1. Acts 10, 2, 35. Psalm. 25, 14.


Tim. Whence arises this good and child like fear, whereby the breach of the
law is more feared then the curse?


Silas. From a particular and due knowledge of our own natural weakness and
pronenes to fall into sin, Math. 26. 41. The flesh is weak. As young
children through feeling their own weakness, and readiness to stumble, are
afraid and become more careful to get them a stay, so it fares with Gods
children. Secondly, from the malice and strength of Satan, who as a roaring
Lion, goes about seeking whom he may devour, 1. Peter 5, 8. Therefore we
have great need to be sober and watchful; as many fear him too much, so we
may do it too little. Thirdly, from the often and earnest consideration of Gods
presence, whose eye is ever over us. Also of his great power, being able to
kill body and soul, and to cast them into hell, Luke 12, 5. and of his most
terrible wrath and upright Justice, judging and chastening sinners, without
respect of persons, 1 Pe. 1, 17. Lastly, from sense of Gods sweet mercies in
Christ, Psalm. 130, 4.


Tim. What reasons are there to enforce this exhortation, and to persuade
Christians to have GOD always in fear?


Silas. Very many and strong reasons: First, the commandment of God, very
often enioyning us to fear him; as here, so in many other places. Secondly,
the great praise which God himself gives to this grace, as that it is the
beginning of wisdom, Prou. 9, 10, and 1, 7. The wellspring of life, Prou.
14, 27. Our Treasure, The instruction of wisdom, Prou. 15, 33. See Prou. 14,
26. and 16, 6. and 9, 23. and 28, 14. Thirdly, the precious promises made to
them which fear to sin against God, that they shall be blessed, that they
shall be preserved. See Psalm. 112, 1, 2. 3, etc. Also Psalm. 128, 1, 2, 3, etc.
Fourthly, such also are pleasing and accepted of God, Acts 10, 31. Fifthly,
great profit comes by the fear of GOD, it constrains to good, it restrains
from evil: example in Joseph, Genesis 39, 9. and the Midwiues, Exodus 1, 13. Also
by means of this fear, Christians stand in the Faith, escape breaking off and
destruction; whereas proud secure Christians lose that faith which they have,
and their other graces, and at length the happiness: For from him which has
not, shall be taken away even that which he has. Such as live awfully, and in
lowly reverence of God, do maintain their faith, and preserve themselves unto
celestial blessedness, as Paul here not obscurely tells the Romans, that
unless they did fear, they should be broken off (which indeed is come to
pass) as all the world now perceives) as the Jews were for their proud
contempt of Grace.


Tim. But seeing Gods Children are bold as Lions, Prou. 28, 1. and blessed
with confidence through Faith, Ephesians. 3, 12. How is it that they do fear?


Silas. Gods faithful children consist of a spiritual regenerate part, and of
a carnal unregenerate part. In the inward regenerate part, there is good
confidence, by reason of Gods goodness in Christ apprehended by Faith, yet the
flesh or unregenerate part, suggesteth continually doubtful or fearful
thoughts and carnal infirmity, putting the godly in dread and trembling,
which yet is subdued by the strength of Faith. For, as a little child which is
set aloft on horseback behind or before his father, when he looks toward
the ground and remembers his own weakness, is made affraide of falling; but
yet he over comes this fear, and is in good heart, when he thinks that his
loving father has him fast tied to him by a Towell, or holds him in his
hands: Or as a man set on the top of an high Tower, whiles his mind runs
upon nothing but the height of the Tower, or what a deep way he may fall, and
that his fall will be with certain danger of death, it is not possible but
his mind being upon these things, must be smitten with horror. But when his
eyes are turned toward the bars and battlements which firmly staieth him,
then he takes spirit to him, and puts away fear: even so likewise the (...)
Believers, when they consider with themselves how weak they are, being very
prone to evil; and also do think upon the naughtiness of their bad works,
and the imperfection of their best works, and the severity of Gods Law,
requiring their uttermost obedience threatening destruction to the least
disobedience; finally, how irresistable the power, and horrible the wrath of
God is against sin: these considerations being vehement, cannot but deiect
the mind, and cast it down with fear. But on the other side, when they cast
their eyes upon the mercies and exceeding clemency of God, his most constant
promises, and the infinite merits of Christ, communicated with them by faith;
then their fear is either laid aside or lessened, and they are much comforted
and wax bold in God.


Tim. But seeing a true Faith brings with it assurance, and an infallible
persuasion of Gods love; and it being once had, Doubt.
can never be lost again, in respect of Gods power, and Christ's intercession,
how is there any place for fear at all in the faithful? Or if believers must
fear, then how is there any certainty in Faith, for there is nothing so
contrary to Faith, as fear and doubting?


Silas. Fear, and perplexed doubting, comes from Solution.
the weakness of faith; Faith in it own nature, being a most certain
persuasion: but we are to note that this is not spoken to this or that true
believer, for whom it is impossible that they should loose their faith wholly.
For it is a gift whereof God repents not: also, God never tempts his above
their power: But this is spoken of whole congregations, wherein some do falsely
persuade themselves to be true believers, and be not so indeed. Thirdly,
howsoever that fear that engenders perplexity of mind, and breeds despair
of Gods goodness, cannot consist together with Faith, the one destroying the
other; yet that fear which breeds a reverence of God, may well stand with the
assurance of Faith, being a means ordained of God, both to continue and
increase faith, because it moves us to earnest constant Prayer, by the which
faith is nourished and strengthened. Howsoever then, a believing person need not
fear condemnation, yet he may and must fear transgression, Psalm, 4, 4. He
cannot fear falling away into perdition, but he ought to fear falling into
sin: he must have the fear of humility to make him watchful, but not the
fear which arises out of infidelity, which makes distrustful.


Tim. What profit is to be made of this instruction touching Use.
the fear of God?


Sil. It acquits us from the slander of the Papists, who accuse us that we do
teach men that they may live securely, See (...) notes on 1. John 4. 18.
and need not fear God. Secondly, it conuicts them of error, which say we
cannot be certain of forgiveness of sins, because we must fear; whereas fear
being a fruit of sanctification and a mark of our adoption, Acts 10, 35. the
more we do fear God and his word, the more we are sure to be blessed,
which is every where promised to such as fear God. Lastly, it exhortes all
Christians which lack this fear, to seek it, and those which have it to be
thankful for it, and grow up in it. For blessed is he which fears
continually: therefore if ye call God Father, pass the time of your dwelling
in fear.


Tim. Come now to the 21. verse, and tell us what is meant by the [naturall
branches?]


Silas. The Jews Gods own people, who because they were borne of an holy
root and believing parents, (who by a free covenant were of God separated from
other people) are therefore called natural branches, though they were conceived
in sin as al others are, and by nature had no more holiness then others. And
whereas it is said of God that he spared not them, the meaning is, that he
punished them and brake them, as it is expounded, verse 17, 19. see also Romans
8, 32. Less is spoken the^ is meant, which is usual in the Scripture, see 1.
Cor. 15, 58. Heb. 6. 10.


Tim. What is the lesson to be learned from hence? Doctrine.



Silas. The impartial severity of God against the obstinate unbelievers, which
are contemners of his word; in that his ancient people which had stood so many
years under his covenant, and were so long before us in possession of religion,
and had so many great promises and favors done them; yet when they despised
and abused Gods goodness so far, as publicly to deny and reject his Son,
they must be no longer borne with, at any hand. How then, may we which are
branches by grafting in, descended of infidels and heathenish parents, and but
adopted children, look to escape Gods fierce wrath if we contemn his word?
when the very natural branches and such as come of the holy Patriarchs were
disinherited and cast out, but not before God had chastned them with rods and
sometimes sent them into captivity. This may therefore serve as a pattern for
parents, how to proceed to disinheriting their children: and for superiors how
to deal with inferiors, with much patience and long suffering, waiting long,
being ready to receive with their Father in the Gospel, lost and returning
children; and resolved not to shake off and use extemity, till there be no
remedy, and that all hope be gone.


DIAL. XVIII.
Verse 22. Behold therefore the bountifulnes and severity of God: on them which
have fallen, severity: but toward thee, bountifulnes, if thou continue in his
bountifulness: or else thou also shall be cut off.


Tim. Show us what these words import and mean?


Silas. The Apostle goes forward in his exhortation of the Gentiles to
Christian humility; and drawing toward the conclusion of it, heapeth up many
reasons in a small room, which he would have all believers ever to have
before their eyes; this one verse contains four motives unto modesty and
lowliness of mind. First, from the example of Gods severity in cutting off
the Jews. Secondly, from the efficient cause of the vocation of the Gen tile,
(to wit) Gods bounty or goodness. Thirdly, from the condition upon which they
hold this bounty, namely, if they continue in this estate wherein his
goodness has set them. Fourthly, from a commination of destruction, if
through pride and security they forsake the Gospel and loose their faith;
which is spoken to the whole nation, not to any singular person, which cannot
be cut off, yet this caution is profitable.


Tim. Now to the interpretation, and tell us what does [bounty and seuerity]
signify?


Sil. Bounty signifies the clemency of God, and his great readiness to do
good unto, and to pleasure men. Severity signifies that extreme rigor in God,
whereby he deals with his enemies precisely and exactly according to their
descruings, or the cutting off of his enemies according to extremity of
justice.


Tim. What may be meant by [behold?]


Silas. It is as much as to muse upon and diligently to consider in our minds,
till they be so plain and clear to us, as things which we do see with our
eyes.


Tim. What doctrine are we to learn from these words thus declared?


Silas. That goodness and justice, mercy and severity, are both to be sound in
one God, see Exodus 20, 5, 6. and 34 6, 7. Romans 2 4 5.


Tim. But are not mercy and seuexity contrary qualities, how then can they fall
into the nature of God? Is God contrary to himself?


Silas. These qualities agree together, and are not repugnant in God, but are
contray only in their effects upon men. One and the self same God is
merciful and severe in respect of diverse persons upon whom he works, but is
not contrary to himself, no more then a good Governor is contrary to
himself, when he severely punishes evil doers, and praises such as do
well. Also one and the (...) same sun softneth the wax, but hardens the
clay, yet has in it no repugnant qualities, though it bring forth contrary
effects, according to the nature of the subject, or matter on which it works.


Tim. What use are we to make of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it confutes those ancient heretics the Manichees, Use.
which feigned two Gods, the one good and the author of blessings; the other
severe, and the author of punishment; whereas Paul calls one self same God
both good and rigorous. Secondly, it warnes all which have any authority
public or private, to bear this image of God in their government, neither to
be altogether remiss or wholly rigorous, but to mix kindness with
extremity, according to the condition of persons and crimes.


Tim What is the next Doctrine?


Silas. Out of the word (behold) we learn that Christians are bound to bend
their minds to think and meditate upon, both the goodness and wrath of God.
For God does here enjoin it as a duty [ Behold.] A gain, Moses in Deuteronomy. 32.
and David in Psalm. 78, 11, 12, etc. rebuke the Jews, because they let Gods
goodness slip out of mind. So does Ezra in Neh. 9, 35. and in Hag. 1, 5. the
people are charged to set their hearts upon Gods severity, and elsewhere often.
Moreover, the consideration of Gods goodness and rigor, is many ways
beneficial to Christians, which are carefully and religiously occupied
thereia. For this consideration will provoke and stir us up to faith, to put
our trust in God, whom by good and long experience, we have found most good
and faithful in his promises, Psalm. 4, 1. 2 Timothy 4, 17, 18. Secondly, to
praise God and to be thankful for his gracious favor, which is a thing of God
much set by. For he loves thankfulness and praise, Heb. 13, 15 16. Thirdly,
to love him again, who has done us good, and to labor to render much
obedience unto him, of whom we receive much, Psalm. 116, 1, 2. Fourthly, to
walk in reverence and awe of offending him, because of his mercies, Psalm, 130,
4. Lastly, to be humble, seeing we are beholden to his bounty for all,
receiving of his goodness whatsoever good we have.


Tim. What commodity comes to us, by thinking on the severity of God?


Silas. It may make us to pity others which are fallen into misery. Secondly,
to be watchful, and to take good heed to our selves, striving continually
against carnal presumption, and worldly security; yea and to leave every sin
which kindles Gods anger, and draws down his severe judgments, and to hold
us in a constant course of wel-dooing, that we may escape his sharp rods.


Tim. Let us proceed to look a little further into his severity first, and
afterward into his (...) toward them which felt severity: tell us who be they
which be meant by fallen?


Silas. The Jews which for their unbelief were cut off from the Church and
Kingdom of Christ, as Verse 20. This severity toward them, appears two
ways: First, in the good which they lost, whereof read Romans 3, 2. and 9, 4,
5. they lost the covenant and all the benefits thereof, even temporal and
eternal happiness. Secondly, it appeared in the extreme evils under which
they now so long (that is, a thousand six hundred years) have lien. These
evils are bodily, as banishment from their own Land also infamy and reproach
intolerable; and spiritual. As the Israelites being in (...) do complain in
the Lamentations of Jeremy, Chap. 1, 12. That there was no sorrow to their
sorrow; so may I say, that there was no severity like to this severity, so long
to forsake a people, that so long time had bin his people, and so much blessed
by him, and renowned before the world, to be made now a byword, a Proverb, a
gazing and looking stock to all the world, so as the name of the Jews, which
was once a most glorious name (...). 2, 17. is now grown to be most odious.
Let all men behold and consider this severity with astonishment and fear.


Tim. What Doctrine are we to learn from this part of our Text?


Silas. That God never (...) and shows forth his extreme rigor, but upon
desperate enemies, which by obstinacy in their unbelief and sin, make
themselves worthy of it. God indeed was very severe, but toward whom? Even
toward such as fell by infidelity, and had long despised his corrections and
goodness, and at last openly defied and murdered his only Son, which came to
work their redemption. Generally thorough the whole Scripture, where the
severity of God is menaced, or any effect of it is mentioned, there is withal
the cause set down (to wit,) the rebellion of ungodly sinners. See Psalm. 1,
1. and 2, 12. and Psalm. 11. and 37. Also Exodus 20, 5, 6. and Ier. 5, 9. and 7,
14. 15. And in very many other places Gods vengeance is limited and restrained
unto the impulsive and meritorious cause, even man's iniquity, to teach us, that
God strikes not blindly at all adventure (as Poets faigne of fortune) but with
justice, wisdom, and great patience.


Tim. What profit should Christians make by the meditation of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, it must serve to reprove such as are too severe, or cruel
rather, grievously punishing without any desert at all, as Iezabel who slew
innocent Naboath, Hered who beheaded John Baptist, the Jews who killed Christ,
the Apostles, and Steven, etc. the Papists who burned the godly for consession
of their faith, and constancy in it. Secondly such as punish for a fault, but
are more severe then the fault merits, using utmost rigor, where as pain
would be inflicted with moderation: many Parents, Masters, and Rulers are
ouerseene in stretching the smart beyond the harm. Thirdly, them who do (...)
great offenders whom they ought to condemn: they which thus proceed, are
unlike the most (...) God, who as he (...) not destroy the good with the bad,
so he will not let the transgressors go free, nor hold them innocent, Exodus 34,
7. Let all such repent and fly to Christ for pardon. Secondly, it serves to
exhort all rulers, as they desire to tread in the steps of God (the just Judge
of the world) so they (...) earnestly to it, to draw out the sword against such
as do ill, Romans 13, 2, 3. remembering Ely his lenity, and what end it had, yet
so as they never proceed to extreme and last punishments, (such as be
excommunication in the Church, death in the Commonwealth, disinheriting in a
family) but as Chyrurgeons do proceed to cut off a member (as an arm or leg,
when there is no other remedy, and all other means be unavailable, so these
capital and grievous pains would not be inflicted and laid on men, but when
the great good of the weal public, and incurable naugh tinesse of the
delinquents do require it. This is to be just as God is just for quality; for
no creature can be so for equality, an endeavor to come as near him as we
may, is all we are to do. Lastly, an admonition we have, as we would not
drink of the dregs of his wrath, and feel his bitter severity, to be very
careful not to drink in sin with greediness, going on in evil with
contempt of God and his word.


DIAL. XIX.
Verses 23, 24. And they also if they abide not still in unbelief shall be
grafted in for God is able to graft the^ in again. For if thou wast cut out of
the Olive tree, which was wild by nature, etc.


Tim. HOw does Paul proceed?


Silas. Now he adds a new argument, to beat down the pride of the believing
Romans, and to teach them humility. It is taken from the hope of the Jews
reparation, whose restoring to Christ (how desperate and forlorn their case
may seem to be,) he proves to be possible in verse 23. also to be probable
and very likely, verse 24.


Tim. Upon what condition is it possible, and by what reason is it confirmed to
be so?


Silas. By a reason taken from the power of God, who by his almightines is able
to engraft them into the Church on this condition, that they did not remain in
their unbelief. As the Gentiles if they fall from the faith may be cut off,
so the Jews might be planted in, and recover their dignity of being Gods
people, if they did not still continue unbelievers and contemners of the grace
of Christ. Where of it does not follow, that to do so is in their own
liberty, but it must come from God, who works both the will and deed.


Tim. What are we to learn from these condition all words, [if they abide not
in unbelief?]


Sil. First, the sin of unbelief (in the obstinate refusing of Christ and
his grace offered so kindly and freely,) was the true cause why the Jews were
cast out from being Gods people; which shows what an horrible sin unbelief is,
of which a certain Divine has truly written, that it is the grand-witch
which works all evil and mischief M. Perkins.
both to the body and soul of men in this life, and in the world to come. For
it shuts the hands of Gods bounty, that he cannot give good things; as it
is written in the Gospel, that Christ could not do any great work because of
their unbelief, Math, 13, 58, also it opens the hand of his justice, and
draws down even eternal vengeance as well as temporal; as it is said
before, verse 20, Because of unbelief they are broken off, and Reuela. 21, 8.
which must cause men to hate this sin, as they abhor a Witch or a Serpent,
and to strive against the same as against death hell, and destruction.
Secondly, we learn that though the Jews being very grievous offenders, as
also very sore and very long plagued; yet their conversion is not to be
despaired of; so they return, repent, and believe, they may be saved, though
through unbelief they crucified the Lord of life. And withal we are taught
generally, that we ought not to cast away hope, either of our own or of the
salvation of other, (howsoever great transgressors, and of a great time and
standing in sin,) so we do not abide still in our iniquity. The reasons
hereof be, first, because Reasons.
Gods mercies, and Christ's merits, do far exceed men's trespasses, for
they be absolutely infinite, so be not our sins. Secondly, God has promised
grace and salvation to such as return to him, without exception, either of the
kind of sin, or of the number, or of the time, but at what time soever, as
the Prophet Eze. speaks chap. 18. also, O house of Israel return and thou
shall live Eze. 18, 20. Repent that your sins may be done away, Acts 3, 19.
Lastly, if the Jews were the greatest offenders that ever were, (for they
killed that just one, and desired a murderer to be given them,) are not left
without hope, so they return: what good hope may other conceive whose sins are
not comparable to the Jews, if they will repent of that is past, and hencefore
live godlily?


Tim. What use is to be made of this knowledge? Use.



Silas. It confutes the Nouatians and other like heritikes, who denied
repentance unto such as after baptism did fall into any (...) crime, though it
were of fear or other infirmities. Secondly, it serves to teach and instruct
us touching the largeness of Gods kindness and love, that it is exceeding
rich and deep, even as a bottomless sea, being indeed without either
bottom or banks. And thirdly, it gives comfort against final despair, to
such as are out of heart with conceit and horror of their sins, because they
may be many and manifold, being also most ugly; or for that they have long
lived in them: whereas these Jews after abiding in their infidelity now a
thousand years and a half, yet are raised up to a comfortable hope. Lastly,
here is an admonition to such as have either committed (...) great notorious
sin, and do live in ignorance, (...), security, hypocrisy, prophanenes,
worldliness, etc. that they make haste to repent and to get out of their
sin, (as a man would with speed leap out of a quagmire, or out of a deep
dungeon, or hot furnace) for it is not the fill thinesse of their sin that
shall be able to condemn them, so they do not abide in it. Sin damneth a man
when it is abiden in and lived in without remorse or hatred against it, or
eschuing occasions, and purpose of amendment: but such as turn unto the Lord
with all their heart, shall not dye in their sins: the mouth of the Lord has
said it.


Tim. But it seems impossible that ever the unbelieving Jews should be
grafted in and restored to Christ, and his Church: for how can they leave their
infidelity, no more then an Ethiopian can change his skin, or a Leopard his
spots? or how can they give to themselves faith, no more then an evil tree can
again make it self good, or a bough broken off, graft it self into the tree,
no more can unbelievers convert themselves and become faithful ones?


Silas. It is true, yet that which is impossible both to Solution.
our selves and others, it is possible with God. God that by his own power
could make the world of nothing by his word, which could divide the sea and
make it stand by his power as a wall, and stay the course of the Sun, and
open the earth, and ouerwhelmne the world with water, and cause the deaf to
hear, the lame to go, the blind to see, the dumb to speak, the dead to
live; which could cast out Devils and dispossess unclean spirits by his
commandment; why should not he be mighty enough to make an unbelieving Jew to
become a believing Christian? did he not make Paul of a bloody persecutor and a
raging wolf, to become a sheep, yea a a shepherd and teacher of the flock?
and why then can he not change a blind obstinate Jew, being an enemy to
Christ, into a faithful member of Christ? for God is able to graft them.


Tim. Yea, but there be many (...) which might be done of God in respect of
his absolute power, and never were done nor Doubt.
shall be done. God could of stones raise up children unto Abraham, and have
sent leg ons of Angels to his Son to deliver him from the hands of the Jews
yet did neither the one nor the other. Do we not find fault with the Papists
for reasoning a posse (...) in the matter of the Sacrament, because there be
sundry things which God never will do, nor does though he could do them?


Silas. It is true indeed: from the power of God severed Solution.
from his will, we cannot firmly reason; for so we might conclude that there
be many worlds, that the world should last always, that men should not dye,
that a man has two souls, etc. because God can do such things. Therefore it
is foolish in the Papists to infer that Christ his natural body is locally
present in the Sacrament, because God is able to do i:, unless they could
prove that it were his will to have it so. We doubt not of Gods power if once
we see any sure evidence of his will out of his word. It follows by good
consequence, God is willing to do this or that, therefore he can do it, and it
shall be done indeed. We have the^ to consider Gods almightines, not simply in
it self as it is infinite and unlimited, but as it is limited and bou^ded by
his word and will. The Apostle then reasons well, that seeing God by his power
could convert the Jews to the faith of Christ, therefore it should be so,
because Paul was assured by the prophesies of the word (see verse 26, 27.) and
by good sound reason, that it was the will of God to have it so, verse 24.


Tim. What is then our lesson from hence?


Sil. That in those things that God wills and promises, we must strengthen
our faith by the meditation of Gods power and might, after the example of
Abraham, Romans 4. 21 also of Paul, 2. Tim. 1, 12. 1. Peter 1, 5. John 10, 29,
30. Gods power is the maine prop of his childrens faith. Secondly, seeing the
conversion of the Jews is attributed to the power of God, hence we learn that
to repent lies not in our hands. Therefore they do err which ascribe it to
the power of their own will, in whole or in part: also such as be converted,
owe all praise unto God for such a wonderful work: and such as be not, to
their own endeavor must join prayer earnest and constant, and wait upon God
in reverent and diligent use of all good means.


Tim. But how may it appear to be a likely matter that God is willing the
Jews should be restored to Christianity?


Sil. Thus; God did graft the Gentiles being wild Olives, into the true Olive;
therefore it is more then likely, that he will plant in again the Jews, being
natural branches: (the Jews being so called, because they came and were born
of parents to whom the promises did belong, and so were not the Gentiles.) Now
in reason it is an harder matter to graft in a wild branch, then that which
was once a true branch, because that is beside and against nature: but this is
agreeable unto the order of nature, therefore more easy. Also there is more
agreement between a graft or science which was broken off, and his own
stock, then between a strange branch and the tree. Lastly, if we regard Gods
counsel, there was nothing in the wild Olive amiable, which might induce God
to graft it in, or to take such pains, and be at such cost (as I may speak)
as to take boughs from the wild Olive, to knit them to the true Olive, that
is, the holy Church of Christ. If then he did this, why may we not judge that
he is willing to replant the Jews into their own olive? Let all Christians
then heartily pray to God that he will hasten this happy work, and take heed
lest by their dissolute and wicked lives, they be an hinderance unto it; woe to
us if we be so.


DIAL. XX.
Verse 25, 26. For I would not Brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this
Mystery (least ye should be arrogant in your selves) that partly obstinacy is
come to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in; and so all
Israel shall be saved.


Tim. HOw does this Text agree with the former?


Silas. It has the same drift, namely to keep the believing Gentiles, from
despising the unbelieving Jews; touching whom, Paul having already taught that
their conversion to the faith of the Gospel is both possible and easy, such
as may be and also easy enough: now he tells us, that their grafting in, and
joining to the Christian Church, is not only credible and probable, but that
indeed it certainly shall be (it being a thing which God will have to be, and
none can resist his will, for it is unchangeable and omnipotent: and this he
does prove by sundry reasons, as first by an Apostolical oracle, or by his
own testimony, or rather by the testimony of God manifested to him, which is
gravely set down in verse 25. Secondly, by a prophetical authority, or by two
Scriptures cited out of the Prophet Esaias, verse 26, 27. Thirdly, from the
dignity of the Jews, being borne Gods dear and chosen people, ver 28. also
from the nature and condition of Gods gifts and calling, verse 29. Lastly,
from comparison of Jews and Gentiles, and from the common end of their
miseries, wherein through sin both were plunged, that God might have occasion
of showing mercy to the elect of both people, verses 30, 31, 32. etc.


Tim. What is the sum of the first reason, in verse 25?


Silas. This: Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ (by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, being himself first taught, that the Jews should in great number
turn to Christ before the end of the world,) does affirm and propound it to
be known of the Church; therefore certainly and without all fail it must be
so. For whatsoever the Apostle wrote or spoke to the Churches, by the direction
of the Spirit, is the word of God, 1. These. 3, 13. and one title thereof shall
not fall to the ground, or be unfulfilled.


Tim. Why does he call them brethren?


Silas. That by declaring his love he might draw them to attention: for the
same purpose he calls and commends this truth for a (mystery,) now men
do willingly hear and mark secrets or hidden matters. Of which mystery the
Apostle sets down the end or use (least they be also wise in themselves,)
see Pro. 3, 7. Romans 12. 3. In which places (wise) is used in the worst part for
proud or arrogant; for arogancy is an effect arising from a great opinion of
a man's own wisdom and gifts, as if they were gotten by themselves, and their
own strength.


Tim. Rehearse the parts and members of this mystery?


Silas. First, that blindness is happened to Israel in part only. Secondly,
that it shall last till the fullness of the Gentiles come in. Thirdly, that at
length all Israel shall be saved.


Tim. What are we to learn by this, that Paul would have them to know this
truth, touching the reuocation of the Jews?


Tim. The duty of Gods Ministers, not only to teach the people that they may
know still more and more, but to do it with affection and desire to free them
from ignorance, and still to make them wiser. To this end, God gives them
knowledge to show others the way. Secondly, the duty of Christians, to be
careful still to learn and know more, adding knowledge unto knowledge, as men
heap riches and goods together, Colos. 3, 16. 2. Peter 1, 5, 6, 7. As Plants
grow to be trees, Lambs to be Ewes, and Infants to be men: so Christians,
of Babes in knowledge, must increase still more and more to perfection.


Tim. What does this word [Mystery] signify?


Silas. It comes of a word, which signifies to shut or close the mouth or
eyes; and so it signifies a thing kept secret, or not commonly known, or
which cannot be known, or which exceeds human reason, and is contrary to
humane hope.


Tim. How many things do you find in Scripture to be called Mysteries?


Sil. First, the union of two Natures in Christ, his humane and divine nature
united in one person, 1 Timothy 3, 16. Secondly, the conjunction between Christ
the head, and Christians the members, Ephesians. 5, 31, 32. These two are
wonderful great secrets, for reason cannot comprehend them, either how the
divine Nature of Christ being immortal and infinite, and the humane nature of
Christ being finite and mortal, should be joined together to make but one
person, without any mixtion of substances, or how Christ and the faithful
should be so knit together, as to be truly one body, flesh of flesh, bone of
bone; there being so much distance between them, as between heaven and earth,
and yet we believe both these secrets, because the words teaches us so.
Thirdly, the Gospel is called a mystery, because in whole it is hid from the
natural man, and in part it is hid from the regenerate man, 1 Cor. 2, 7.
Fourthly, the vocation of the Gentiles. To. 16, 25. and the resurrection from
the dead; how they which live at Christ's coming shall dye, 1 Cor. 15, 51. are
called secrets, because they cannot be known until the events declare them. In
the same sense, and to the same purpose is the restitution of the Jews in this
place called a secret, because howsoever the word has now revealed it, yet
till then it was secret. Also in what manner they shall be restored, in what
time, in what numbers, these things are hid, till by the event they be
learned.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this, that the calling of the Jews is
called a Mystery?


Silas. First, to teach us, that therein nothing shall fall out by chance, but
all things shall be ordered by Gods providence. Secondly, to stir up
Christians to thankfulness toward God, in that he will manifest to them the
very secrets of his heart, as Kings open their secrets to few, such as be
beloved and trusted. Thirdly, to reprove curiosity and keep men from
searching the reasons of Gods counsel and doings, contenting our selves with so
much as God will have us to know, not desiring to learn, when God will not
teach. Lastly, to bridle the arrogancy of the Gentiles, least they should
insult over the Jews rejected, rejoicing imoderately in their own election,
and in the Jews reiection. A better remedy of this pride there cannot be,
then to know and consider this secret, that even the Jews shall again in
mercy be visited and converted to God, and therefore are at no hand to be
despised, but pitied rather, and prayed for.


Tim. What is the first member of this mystery?


Silas. That blindness has happened unto Israel in part.


Tim. What is meant by Israel?


Sil. Israel is put for those which come of Israel or Jacob, that is, the
Israelites or Jews. Here is meant not spiritual, but natural or literal
Israel; not the Church collected out of Jews and Gentiles, but only Jews for
whose peculiar consolation, this was written by Paul.


Tim. What is meant by blindness?


Silas. Their hardness of heart, or their hearts hardened, obstinately
refusing, yea and resisting Christ and his grace out of deep ignorance and
unbelief; which is as a veil to hinder, that they cannot see into the
doctrine of the Gospel: this is called unbelief, verse 20, 30, 32. This
happened unto them by the just judgments of God, inflicting it as a punishment
for their former sins, as was before written, Verses 8, 9, 10.


Tim. What means this [in part?]


Silas. It does signify, either that obstinacy in their unbelief was not
total of al Jews, but particular, there being ever and every where, now and
then, some of the nation that believed in Christ; or else that it should not be
perpetual, but for a time only, at length to have an end. And this latter
seems better to agree with the word [Mystery,] for it was no secret, that
some Jews were faithful, and received the Gospel, Paul before had taught
that by his own example, Verse 1. and by the prophecy of Elias, as verse 4,
5. and had said that the Jews were diminished only, not abolished, verse 12.
that is, a few of them only were elect and believers. But that of their
general and great blindness there should be once a term, end, and
conclusion: this was not until now that Paul showed it to be a secret, having
himself first learned it of God.


Tim. We have seen that the Jews shall be called in at length, declare now
unto us at what time they shall be called, and how long it will be before it be?


Silas. Even until the fullness of the Gentiles shall become in.


Tim. Tell us the meaning of these words?


Silas. [Comming in] signifies the Gentiles free access or entrance into the
house of the living God, which is the Church of Christ; and by (fullness) is
signified the whole body of the Gentiles, or an appointed multitude of nations,
which are here called fullness; (as before verse 12. the Jews are called
abundance) because the number of believers among the Gentiles should arise to a
great company, so that publicly among the Gentiles there should be gathered a
great company unto Christ, there being no nation or habitable country past by,
which should not embrace the Gospel, at least for a time, according to that
prophecy in Psalm. 19, 4. and that of our Savior, Mark 15, 16. and that
testimony of Paul Col. 1, 6. and that Oracle of Christ, Mat. 24, 17.


Tim. But shall there be any time wherein the Gentiles shall be so universally
called, so as every one shall be saved?


Sil. Not so, for then the Church of God should want enemies, and the
prophesies of Antichrist should be untrue: but hereby their abundant access
to the Church in greater heaps then ever since the Apostles time, is noted;
which when it comes to pass, then the blindness of the Jews shall cease,
that they may believe and be al taken unto Christ: as both Ambrose, and the
greek Scolia do declare upon this place, and as the Apostle says plain in
the next words, that all Israel may be saved, which is a third part of this
mystery.


Tim. What is here meant by [Israel?]


Silas. Not spiritual Israel, the whole people of God, consisting of Jews and
Gentiles, as the word is used, Ps. 124. 1. and Gal. 6, 16. for then were it no
mystery, (for it is well known that the Church shall ever consist of both
these peoples,) neither were it any consolation to the Jews; which Paul here
intends to give the^ from the hope of their future and full conversion, but
according to the letter it signifies the nation of the Jews as in the former
verse.


Tim. What is meant by [all Israel?]


Silas. Not every particular amongst them, but a great determinate number,
namely the better and greater part of them, as 1. Tim. 3, 2. John 6, 45. It is
usual in Scripture by this particle [all] to signify sometime the better, and
sometime the greater sort.


Tim. What is the doctrine from hence?


Silas. That toward the end of the world, the nation of the Jews shall be
converted unto Christ, that they may believe in Christ, be justified by faith,
and be saved. This appears first by the testimony which Paul cites in the
two next verses, which plainly foretell it. Secondly, by Revel. 7, 4, 5. etc.
Which prophecy is literally to be understood of the Jewish conversion after
Chrysostomes mind, because they are distinguished from the other nations,
mentioned verse 9. And this prophecy is of things not already done, but to be
fulfilled afterward, as ye find it written, Chap. 4. verse 1. Thirdly,
heereunto we may join that other prophecy in Re. 21. which would be expounded
of that most pure Church that toward the end shall be gathered of Jews and
Gentiles, joined in a most sincere profession of doctrine, and excelling in
such piety and virtue, as if the world were to be created anew: and not of the
celestial blessedness of the Saints, in the world to come, as may appear by
these reasons drawn from the circumstances of the text. First, he speaks of
Jerusalem, (not glorified in heaven) but coming down from God, and by his
graee mightily purified in earth. Secondly, she is likened not to a wife whose
marriage is already accomplished, as it must be in heaven, but to a Bride
preparing and addressing her self to meet her husband, as it uses to be in
earth. Thirdly, tabernacles belong not to blessed Saints, which have ended
their warfare, but to Pilgrims, which as strangers, are to abide a certain
time the combat with such lusts as fight against the soul. These reasons are
taken from verse 2. and 3, now the verses 6, 7. and 24. affoorde us more
demonstrations, for in verse 6. there is a promise to the members of this new
Jerusalem, which are athirst. Now the Jews indeed being converted shall have
a very fervent desire after the sweetness of Christ, in whom they shall
believe: but in heaven where all fullness and rest shall be enjoyed. How can
there be any thirsting or yet any fighting, where al shall be crowned with
victory and triumph? And how shall Kings bring their riches unto heaven: as
verse 24. These with sundry other the like arguments out of the text, do
sufficiently convince (in my opinion) that this Chapter is not to be construed
of the glorious condition of the godly in heaven, but of a Church which for
doctrine and manners shall be illustrious in earth; not infected with such
errors and corruptions in life, as was under Antichrists reign, nor somolested
with persecutions and torments which caused sorrow, and cryings, and tears,
and death, as in verse 4. of which there shall be a cessation in the days of
this renewed Church, being blessed with great purity and happy peace. The
consideration and belief of this doctrine should move all Christians to help
forward this glorious work, especially by earnest prayer to God for it, and
speedy repentance for those their sins, which hitherto have been bars and
obstacles to hinder it. For as the execrable and most palpable idolatry of the
superstitious Romanists, crouching and bowing most basely before the works of
their own hands, adoring dead stocks, Images, bread in the Sacrament, have
caused the Jews to abhor our religion and faith; the rather for that the
Papists being nearest to them, and the greater number, they measuring the
whole by that large part, think us all to be as great idol seruers as they be:
So the most lewd and loose manners of Protestants abounding in schisms,
factions, herisies in religion, being miserably rent one from another in matter
of faith, and in matter of fact, being full of murders, thefts, rapines,
rapes, adulteries, periuries, vsuries, oppressions, inhumanity, tyrrannies
toward them, and among themselves; prove great stumbling blocks to keep the^
back. For which scandals very many have an heavy acount to make.


DIAL. XXI.
Verses 26, 27. As it is written, there shall come a deliverer out of Sion, and
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; for this is my covenant with them,
when I shall take away their sins.


Tim. What does Paul perform in these words?


Silas. After his own testimony or prophecy touching the vocation of the
fullness of the Jews toward the end of the world; he now proves it by a
double testimony of the Prophet Esaias; whence arises a second argument, to
confirm that secret of the Jews conversion, even by Prophetical authority,
which is a most sure word that cannot fail nor deceive. The Prophets have
foretold the Jews conuerfion, before the restoring of all things, therefore
certainly it must be so.


Tim. Here are two knots to be loosed, first show us how Paul calls that a
secret, verse 25, which beer in these verses he says was written before by
the Prophet? if it were written and revealed then it is no secret.


Silas. Doctrines of the word are secrets to some when they are not to others
which know them; also they be secrets in part, when in the whole they be not
secrets. So it fares with this particular doctrine, touching the future and
full restoration of the unbelieving Jews: though it was written in the
Scripture of the Prophets, yet it remained as to others, so to Paul himself a
secret and hidden thing, till it was taught him, yea and after he had learned
it yet still to others which knew it not, it did abide a mystery, yea and to
himself in some sort, as in what manner, at what particular time, and by what
means this vocation should be fulfilled. Thus what is not absolutely a secret,
may yet be called a mystery in some respects.


Tim. But was it not sufficient for the credit of this mystery, that Paul had
affirmed it from the inspiration of the Holy Ghost? what needs he to bring
Scripture to confirm it, his own assertion being an Apostle was abundantly
enough?


Silas. It is true, Paul his own assertion might have sufficiently authorized
this doctrine, but for two or three especial Reasons why the Apostles do
prove their doctrine by Scripture of the old Te stament.
reasons, he does now (as aften heretofore) appeal unto Scriptures,
repeating his wonted words (as it is written.) His reasons be these; First, to
manifest and make good that which in his defense before King Agrippa he had
spoken, that he did witness no other things then those which the Prophets
did say should come, Acts 26, 22. Secondly, to prevent and put by the offense
of the Jews, that they might not be scandalized and grieved with the doctrine
of the Gospel, wherein they should apparently behold a great and full
agreement between it and the Gospel. Thirdly, to commend the use of the
Scriptures, that it alone is a perfect rule of faith and manners and
all-sufficient alone to demonstrate and prove all doctrines touching salvation;
so as we need not for this purpose authority humane, or traditions of the
Church and unwritten word.


Tim. What are we then to learn from this constant customs of Paul, still
provoking to the authority of the old Testament, for proof of points and
articles of religion?


Silas. First, the great proportion and harmony or consent which is between
the Prophetical and Apostolical writings. Nothing in the new Testament is
taught to be believed unto salvation, which is not foretold and foreshewed in
the old; nothing promised in the old, which has not the acomplishment in the
new, so as the books of Evangelists and Apostles, be as it were commentaries
of the Prophets, as the Prophets be interpreters of Moses. The new Testament is
the illustration of the old, as the old is the shadowing of the new: both be
but one word, and one Scripture, as there is but one faith, one Church;
whatsoever, fanaticall and fantastical men, as Marcionites, Manichees and
others do dream. Secondly, we learn that neither preachers publicly, for
doctrine and matter of faith do teach ought which they cannot avouch and make
good by authority of Scripture; nor the people embrace as truth of God unto
their salvation, ought, which cannot be showed them to be contained in the
written word, either for words expressly, or for matter and meaning. If any We
must otherwise judge of the canonical Scripture, then Catholic authors.
thing in the matter of Faith and salvation be said or alleged without
authority of Scripture, it may be rejected with the same facility as it was
alleged, says an ancient Father. Whatsoever is necessary, is manifest (says
Augustine.) Again, If I read it not in the Canonical Scripture, I will not
believe it.


Tim. From what Chapters of Esaias, are these two authorities drawn and fetched,
and how are they fitted unto Paul his purpose?


Silas. Here be two Oracles of Esaias the Prophet contracted Interpretation.
into one, as was done before in verse 8. The former Text or sentence, taken
out of the Prophet Esaias, chapter 59. v. 20, there is a little alteration in the
words, for in Esaias it is, [ The deliverer shall come to Syon:] in Paul
(following the translation of the Septuagint) it is, [ Shall come out of Syon.]
This difference may thus be reconciled, either (...) is by the Notaries and
Coppiers fault, crept into the Text for heneca, as the Septuagint rendered it [
For Syons sake,] or if we read [ out of Sion,] then it has relation unto the
progress of the Gospel, as if Paul (doing the office of an Interpreter)
should say, that out of Sion (that is, the Church of God, signified by Sion,
where the Tribes assembled to worship) should come the Gospel, which should
convert the Jews to Christ: whereas Esaias respecting the very time and instant
of the first coming of the Messiah, said ( Unto Sion.)

There is another alteration in the words, though no change in the sense; for
whereas Esaias says (unto them which turn from iniquity) which implies
repentance, Paul rising higher, names the very cause of their repentance,
namely remission of sins by faith in Christ. For none can turn away from
sin by repentance, exGod turn sin from them by free remission: Or else,
with Master Iunius we may say, that for his coming (whereof Esaias makes
mention) Paul sets down a beneficial consequent of his coming, which is
remission of sins.

The second authority is fetched, the one part of it, [ This shall be my
couenaut] out of Esaias 59, 21. and the other part out of Esaias, Chap. 27. verse
9. This is all the fruit, the taking away of sin. Some think it an allusion
to the words of the covenant, Ier. 31, 34. The Apostle applies this place to
his purpose after this sort. Seeing God means by free covenant to be
reconciled to the Jews, (forgiving them their sins) and has foretold it by
his Prophet, therefore there is no doubt of it, but it should be: in which
regard, the Gentiles have no cause proudly to despise and insult over the
Jews, but in fear and humility to preserve themselves in the estate of grace.
If we will hear the application of these Scriptures more at large, thus it is:
What God has promised by covenant, the same must be fulfilled, because God is
faithful, and cannot lie or deny himself, 1 Timothy 1, 2. Shall he promise, and
not do? But by promise he couenanted to give a deliverance, not temporal
from Babylonish captivity, but spiritual unto remission of sins, and
eternal life: which covenant, he has made not with Gentiles only, but with
Jews; not with one or with a few, but with the whole people signified by [
Iacob] opposed against [ In part] verse 25. This Covenant of sending Christ,
who is the deliverer here spoken of, to convert the whole Nation of the Jews,
and to save them by forgiveness of sin, is not yet accomplished. Therefore
in time to come, even before the Conclusion of the world, it must be fulfilled:
for one title or jot of Gods word, may not fall to the ground. This is like the
prophesies of Math. 1, 21. Mich. 4, 7. Luke 1, 33. which are not yet done,
therefore must be. For the Jews being the chief part of the people, are but
in small number yet called to the kingdom of Christ.


Tim. What is now the general Doctrine of these two Verses? What is taught out
of them?


Sil. That there shall be a general calling of the Jews to the faith of the
Gospel, before the second coming of Christ, as the Prophets have fore-tolde
it. It is not meant that every one shall be saved, so as there shall not
Explanation of the doctrine.
be any one believer in the whole nation, but as the fullness of the Gentiles
are said to come into the Church because the most and greatest number shall
embrace Christ; so all Israel must be saved, and whole Jacob shall have sin
forgiven them, because this shall be done to the cheifest part, whereof the
whole uses to take denomination.

For further proof hereof, see the 21. Chapter of the Revelation, which is a
prophecy of this last and great Ezekiel. 37. 1, 2. 3, 4. etc.
vocation of the Jews, as has been proved before. Unto which we may join
Ezekiels vision, touching the restoring (by certain degrees) unto life,
strength, beauty, and proportion, the dry bones which he saw scattered in the
field; which howsoever some by allusion do apply to the resurrection of the
dead at the general judgment, yet it is plain by the text to be meant of
Israelites being (in respect of spiritual life and grace, like dry bones and
dead bodies,) unable throrough unbelief to stir toward God, but through the
great and rich goodness of God to be raised again by the Gospel, and made
alive to God through Christ, not all at once, but by some degrees, whereof
their coming out of their desperate captivity of Babylon might be a type and
figure. For it is Gods manner in types of temporal deliverances, to teach
spiritual and heavenly things, concerning eternal redemption by Christ.
Beside these things the counsel of the most wise and almighty God in the
wonderful preservation of the Jews, ought diligently to be considered and
waighed of the godly: whereas sundry very ancient people and famous, as
Persians, Chaldeans, Assirians, Trojans, Vandales, Lombards, Goths, Saxons,
Picts, Hunnes, etc. are either quite extinct and destroyed, or else being
severed and scattered, have not so held their own, as to keep still their
own ordinances, and to be able to show their original and historye in sure
record, and preserve themselves, for their civil life and religion, unmixed
with other people whither they came: (yet behold a strange thing and markeable)
the Jews only, notwithstanding their great and long dispersions, and manifold
calamities, desolations, and death in sundry countries, where they have been
butchered like sheep, as in England here at London and York, (by hundreds
and thousands,) and elsewhere in other Countries, knocked down by heaps, and
others cruelly spoiled, do for all this not only remain in very innumerous
multitudes, chiefly in Asia and Aphrica, (as M. Beza, and M. Grineus upon
certain knowledge do report,) but do keep their Tribes distinct and
unconfounded, and their religion, all without commixtion as much as they may,
reading and searching the Scriptures, but with very corrupt construction; yet
with this fruit and commodity, that both their pedigree and descent from
Abraham and the Patriarchs may appear, and eke by their witness of our
books, (out of which we derive our holy Christian faith,) may be justified and
cleared from suspicion of imposture and fraud, which the heathenish
Philosophers and other profane Atheist-like persons cannot now charge us with,
seeing that people still remains as preseruers of those oracles of God, which
be the fountains of our religion. Of all which what other thing are we to
deem and judge, but that they are reserved thus miraculously of God against
the time of their conversion and salvation to come hereafter, in Gods
determinate season. Of this judgment and opinion finally are many both modern
writers, M. Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, Iunius, Piscator, Pareus, and our
learned industrious countryman M. Doctor Willet, who has written an whole
tract of this argument: and diverse of the ancient Fathers and Schoolmen, as
namely Hilary, and Chrysostom, and Thomas Aquinas, whose words are these:
Vniuersi Iudaei, etc. all the Jews shall come to the Faith, not particularly
some, but universally all; as many believed in the beginning when the Gospel
first was published, so very many shall believe hereafter. The Meditation
whereof, should warn us 1. of courtesy and charity toward the Jews. 2. of
humility in our selves, that we despise not them whom God will honor. 3. of
sound amendment of our lives, that we be no longer any occasion of their
stumbling and auersion from Christianity, and that with daily and most fervent
supplication we do help their conversion, that God may be glorified in the
free and mighty salvation of that forlorn people, and the kingdom of his
Son enlarged: a dear thing unto all which love Christ.


Tim. Ye have now finished this general instruction: Tell me what particular
Lessons ye have to commend out of these two Verses?


Silas. Both what be the benefits of Gods Covenant of grace, and in what
order: Christ himself the deliverer or Redeemer, whom except we receive and
embrace (being made one with him by Faith) we can have no part in his merits;
as an house cannot be borne up and supported by a foundation, except first it
be close laid upon it, nor a member takes motion from the body, if it be not
knit to the body. The next benefit is remission, or taking away sin, both
guilt and punishment, by the death of Christ, whereunto is annexed imputation
of Christ his active obedience, in keeping the whole Law for our righteousness.
For it is not enough to be freed from condemnation and curse of sin, but there
must be title and interest given us unto glorification and life eternal, that
we may be fully blessed, and Christ may be to us no half, but an absolute
redeemer. Lastly, repentance or turning from sin unto holiness, which is
sanctification, and is an inseperable companion of justification, a necessary
fruit of faith, and a spiritual benefit of Gods free Covenant, so as they do
in vain boast of having Christ and remission of sins by him, which have not
forsaken their iniquities, and begun to lead a new life. Obstinate sinners
which still abide in their wicked lusts, without amendment, have nothing to do
with Christ as a deliverer and Savior, but as with a fierce Judge. Secondly,
we are taught that we have pardon of sin and sanctification by the virtue of
Gods covenant and free promise, whereupon all good benefits depend, but this is
effectual only by faith. For as no Christ, no reconciliation with God without
the promise concerning Christ, the promise is vain to us, till we believe.
Therefore the Papists teach corruptly, which say, that the parties baptized,
are purged and sanctified by the work done, whether they do believe or not.
Moreover, if remission of sins be by free Covenant, what becomes of merit
of Works? For, if our Salvation stands in remission, then not in perfection of
Virtues: if in the prerogative of Christ the Redeemer, and of Gods free
Covenant, then not in the glory of our Merits.


DIAL. XXII.
Verses 28, 29. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sake, but
as touching the election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake. For the gifts
and callings of God are without Repentance.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. Two Arguments to prove the former secret about the universal
restoring of the Jews. The first is taken from the dignity of the Jews being
his ancient people, set forth by the efficient cause Gods election, and his
Covenant with the Fathers. The second is from the nature of GOD, who is
evermore firm and unchangeable, and will not frustrate his own election and
calling. Therefore it is most certain, that one day the Jews must be
converted unto the Faith, because God cannot for ever leave and forsake a
people so dear unto him, being his chosen people, partakers of his promises
and election.


Tim. How does Paul pass on, and come unto these two arguments?


Silas. By a preoccupation, wherein there is a secret objection answered. The
objection is this; The Jews are enemies to the Gospel, they hate and hinder
the preaching and spreading of it, God hates them; and how then may we think
he will save them, as you avouch? Unto this the Apostle answers by a
distinction, thus: They are hated indeed for the Gospel sake, unto which they
are enemies, and for your sake whom they love so little, as they think the
worse of the Gospel, because you profess it. But in other respects they are
beloved of God, because of the promises made to their Fathers and because of
Gods election, which cannot be made void by their present unbelief and
resistance of the Gospel, because the gifts and calling of God never changes.


Tim But how is it possible, that the self same persons should be both enemies,
and be beloved: to hate and to love, are contraries, and cannot at one time
be in a Man, much less in GOD?


Silas. Sundry answers may be fitted to this question and doubt, to satisfy
it. First, the selfsame Jews may be hated and loved of God at sundry times;
hated, whiles they continue in unbelief; beloved, when they be converted to
the faith, as in verse 23. Secondly, it may be meant of diverse sorts of
Jews, such as spurn against Christ, are enemies and hated; but the remnant
beloved, which belong to Gods election, and do believe. Thirdly, it is true in
diverse considerations: in regard of their present mind to the Gospel, hated;
bur in regard of their elect Fathers, beloved and precious: but the fittest
answer heereunto is, to understand this not of particular men and women among
the Jews, but of the whole Nation which was rejected and hated for infidelity,
yet not utterly cast out, because of the Covenant made with their Fathers: as
the River is still the same, although the water which runs by, be not the
same: so it is the same Nation of the Jews, because of lineall descent, though
consisting of diverse generations, and of unlike conditions.

Thus then the answer of Paul may summarily be collected: that if God look
upon the Jews, according to their present estate; as they do not admit, but
kick against the Gospel, he hates them, and worthily abandoneth them: but as
he considers his people, not after their evil deseruinges, but according to
his own free election, and that promise which God has made to Abraham and his
seed, God so loves them, and in his time will vouchsafe his grace unto them;
because howsoever all men be liars, yet God remains constant, and alters
not his will and counsel, verse 29.


Tim. But is not God changeable, seeing he sometimes loves, and sometimes
hates?


Silas. No verily, God still remains one and the same, ever like himself,
howsoever things and persons are often changed, such as he will have to change,
and at such time as he appointed their change. What God has decreed to be
perpetually, shall be so; and what he has ordained to be mutable, shall be
altered; but himself varieth not, with him is no shaddowe by turning, James 1,
17.


Tim. Come now to the words, and tell us to whom the Jews are enemies?


Silas. First, to God, whose enemies they are, hating him, and hateful to him.
Secondly, unto all godly persons, Paul and others; for Gods enemies are our
enemies, and his friends must be our friends, Genesis 12, 3. Psalm. 139 21, 22 And
this Paul does prove by two Reasons. First, because they believe not the
Gospel, but strive and fight against it. Secondly, for the Gentiles sake,
which may have a double sense, either that the Jews for their unbelief being
cast out, the Gentiles might be called in, and enter into their void room:
or else for your sake, that is, because they see you embrace the Gospel, even
therefore they resist the Doctrine of Christ, and abhor you for making
profession of it: and thus I judge it should be taken.


Tim. What Doctrines are we to learn from these words thus declared?


Silas. First, that God is an enemy, and hates such as Doctrine.
be adversaries to the Gospel of his Son. The reason Reasons.
hereof is good, because the Gospel proceeds from God himself, as author;
also, it entreats of his grace and man's salvation, and is the word of his
Wisdom, wherein he has uttered his counsel for man's eternal happiness,
being a word of truth and reconcilement. Therefore such as oppose and oppugn
this word, cannot be but odious to God.


Tim. What is the use that we are to make of this first instruction? Use.



Silas. First, it shows the most miserable estate and condition of all
Heretics, Papists, Jews, Atheystes, scoffers, profane worldlings; of which
Paul says, Phil. 3, 18, 19. they be enemies to the cross of Christ, that is,
to the doctrine of Christ crucified; and therefore God abhorres them, and their
end must be damnation, without hearty repentance. If God will take vengeance in
flaming fire of them which be ignorant of his will, and do not know the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 1, 8. how will he torment such as by word, false opinions,
writing, or sword and persecution, be enemies to the Gospel? Secondly, this
admonishes us whom we must account our enemies, and how far forth, namely,
not for our private profit or pleasure, but for the Gospel and men's salvation
sake: with such as hurt these, we must have irreconciliable difference, so
long as they set themselves against the Gospel, and do not repent. Which
reprooues men-pleasers and time seruers, who for lucre and worldly case and
dignity, are ready and forward to have unity with Gods enemies, to compound
light and darkness, to set agreement between Popish Idolatry and Christian
religion, between Christ and Antichrist, as if they would endeavor to accord
fire and water, a (...) matron and an arrant strumpet, heaven and hell: see
Deuteronomy. 13. 5, 6, 7. 2, Cor. 6. 14. 15.


Tim. What is meant by [beloued,] and of whom is it meant?


Sil. Beloved signifies dear unto God, not to the faithful only; of which
love there be two causes rendered. First, the election of God; Secondly, their
Fathers and the covenant with them.


Tim. What is meant by [electing?]


Silas. The external grace of the covenant, whereby Interpret.
God choose this people from amongst all other nations of the earth to be his
people, Deuteronomy. 32, 8, 9: Secondly, eternal election whereby he chose many of
them in Christ to be heirs of eternal life; this covenant and election are
perpetual and not temporary.


Tim. What Fathers are these he speaks off?


Silas. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the other Patriarchs, to whom God made
a solemn promise to be their God, and the God of their seed. The sum is,
Seeing the election of God has such force and vigor in this peo ple of the
Jews, and God did love their Fathers, and gave them a promise to save them and
their posterity: therefore God loves their children, and will in his due time
convert them, because he has set his love upon them; for his nature is such,
that he repents not nor changes his holy purpose, and heavenly calling.


Tim. But what will it help the Jews, being themselves unbelievers Doubs.
and unholy, to descend of holy and faithful Fathers, more hereafter, then
heretofore it has done?


Silas. First, the covenant which was given to the Fathers, Solution.
makes all such as come of them to be holy, though not with personal
holiness, yet with federall, so far as to be counted Gods people, and to
have right and title to the word and Sacraments, as before. Secondly, he speaks
now of such as are not only under the covenant, but under Gods free election,
and therefore such as must be called in time, and made to walk in the steps
of their Fathers says, who shall be loved and received, not so much for their
Fathers, as because of Christ in whom they believe, as their Fathers did
before them.


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Silas. That God extends his love to the godly parents Doctrine.
and to their issue, which imitate their faith and goodnesle; even as amongst
men, the friendship and kindness of parents, we often see is conuayed to their
children; as David loved Jonathan the Father, and Mephiboseth his Son. So God
deriueth his love to the children, which be like unto their good and righteous
parents, Psalm. 112, 2. and we read that God remembered Isaac for Abraham's sake,
and did good to Solomon for David his fathers sake: see the 2. commandment,
Exodus 20.


Tim. What should this teach us?


Silas. First, it warns us all herein to imitate God, to Use.
continue our love in a constant tenor from Father to the child, there being
no just cause to the contrary; as David loved and honored Chimham, when he
could not do his Father Barzilai any good, by reason of his old age, 2. Sam.
19, 38, Secondly, not to hate the wicked longer then they abide in their
refusal of the Gospel, but as God and Angels receive, love and joy at sinners
when they convert, so ought we men, Luke 15. Thirdly, that Children which have
had godly parents, shall be inheritours of the same grace and love, so as they
be followers of the piety of their parents. If they degenerate, God will hate
them as he did the Jews which grew out of kind, but if they be like to their
believing progenitors, they shall taste of the same love. Lastly, seeing God
loves many of the Jews, let not Christians hate them, neglect or despise, or
be discourteous or hurtful to them; but daily and earnestly pray for the
conversion of such amongst them, as pertain to Gods election and covenant,
provoking them by our Christian and godly conversation to come unto, and to
like of the Gospel and not drive them more backwards from Christ, by
superstitious vsages and corrupt manners, for which the Idolatrous Papists and
carnal professors have much to answer to God, who will be a severe revenger
of such scandals.


Tim. Go forward to verse 2. which has a new reason from the nature of God, to
prove his unchangeable love to the Nation of the Jews, because God himself
cannot change his own counsel. Tell us what is meant by [guifts and calling,]
and by [without repentance,] and what is our instruction from this whole verse?


Silas. By [guifts] he means not either corporal good things, as health,
strength, beauty; nor yet natural gifts of the mind, as wit, memory, etc. nor
worldly goods, as riches, honors; nor all spiritual good things, as knowledge,
gift of preaching, prayer, etc. for these may be, and are lost, and taken away
from many. Whereas Paul speaks of gifts which be irreuocable, and once had, are
no more lost; as election and the special fruits thereof, viz. remission of
sins, justification, faith, repentance, sanctification, hope, love,
perseverance in grace, and glorification; these peculiar gifts which flow out
of Gods eternal predestination and love: Also that calling which is according
to Gods purpose, which is ever effectual to the change and renewing os the
heart; and of these it is written, they be without (repenrance,) that is,
immutable without any alteration. Repentance the cause of change, being by a
metonymie, put for mutation which is the effect: for therefore men change
because they repent; not but that these guists and others, failing in
themselves, as things created be subject to change, (God alone being absolutely
without change, being simply and infinitely eternal,) but seeing God who besto
weth them, will never call them back, hence it is they are not altered, and
free from change. For that which causes repentance and change, is either want
of counsel and foresight to understand things thoroughly; or of power, not
being able well to effect what was well considered. Now in God there lackes no
wisdom nor power, for he knew al his works, and none can resist his power;
therefore such Jews as he knew before, and whom he gave to his Son to be
redeemed and delivered, cannot fall from these gifts and calling of God. This
word then (without repentance) must not with Erasmus be referred to the gifts
and things themselves, nor with Stapleton and other popish Sophisters be so
taken as if God had no cause to repent of his rejecting the Jews, for that
thereof came such a good, as the conversion of Gentiles; it being Paul's purpose
by this assertion, to prove the calling of the Jews: but this must be
referred to the fixed and most good and wise counsel of God toward his elect,
such as he had spoken of, Romans 8, 30. Whom he predestined, them he called,
and justifies, and glorifieth. In these the gifts and calling of God be
without alteration, insomuch as neither Devils with all their malice and might,
nor the Saints with all their weakness and inconstancy, can bereave them of
their gifts, and inward calling, because God the author and worker is
constant, and so prescrueth what he bestows, as neither he takes them away,
nor suffers his children to cast them away. Of which matter read the
Dialogue on Romans 5. 2.


Tim. But howsoever there be no repentance and changing Mal. 3, 6.
of purpose with God, and therefore seeing according to his everlasting Numb.
13, 19.
purpose he promised that the seed of the Fathers, as of Esaias 46, 11.
Abraham, etc. shall be holy, he will stand to his promises, and 1 Samuel 15, 29.
out of the Jews will gather all his elect, (for this is his proper Psalm. 110,
4.
nature, not to repent him; his gifts and calling are without Iam. 1, 17.
changing) yet God remaining constant, men through their default may shake off
their calling, and cast off their (...), and so fall away from God, and from
belief in him.


Silas. For answer heereunto, first, this does imply a contradiction, that the
Saints should loose their gifts and their calling prove temporal, and yet
God abide constant. For he has by promise bound himself to the elect, that he
will hold his hand under when they fall, that they fall not from him, Psalm.
37. 24. and that none shall pluck his Sheep (the faithful) out of his
hands, John 10. 28. They shall never perish but have life everlasting, Ioh. 3,
16. That he will not tempt above strength 1 Cor. 10, 13. Of which promises it
follows, that God being faithful and constant, the believers cannot by
their own folly and vnheedfulnesse quite loose (no not for a moment) their
election and faith; for then the temptation should exceed their strength, and
they were plucked out of the Shepherds hand, and they cease to live unto God
(Faith which is souls life, being extinct) and so not everlasting.

Secondly, albeit our corrupt nature is so made, as it would go back, and
easily of it self would fall away, yet the elect being vpheld by the power of
God, the believers cannot have a will to reject their calling, nay their will
is confirmed to perseverance: also faith brings with it a persuasion, that
God being our Father in very deed, will be our God and Savior to the death,
and for ever. And therefore, though of weakness we often take sore falls, yet
he will not suffer us to fall away from him. Lastly, sithence without
perseverance in Faith to the end, Gods calling cannot truly be said to be
without repentance (for calling and faith be so knit, as they stand together,
or fall together) therefore lively Faith cannot be lost, no not by our own
default. For none wholly can forsake God, save such as be wholly forsaken of
God, who has promised the righteous never to fail and forsake them. Josh. 1.
Heb. 13, 5. And to shut up (because this point has been elsewhere largely
spoken of,) it is not in vain that the elect being weak, are commanded to
watch and pray, and be sober, to preserve themselves; to fear with humbleness
of mind, Math. 26. 1 Peter. 4. 1 John 5. Romans 11. For by these and such
exhortations as instruments of grace, they are of the holy Spirit stirred up to
great and continual fear, to keep their faith and other graces, and by the
mighty blessing of God upon the ministry of the word and Sacraments, they are
stablished and made strong to abide in the Faith. Of the false which they take
by oversight or force of spiritual assaults, they have a sight, sense, and
sorrow given them, and so rise again by true repentance to walk on more
steadily and heedily; for afterward being converted, confirm thy Brethren.
This Doctrine, that our election, calling, and faith cannot fail, is very
comfortable to all such as be well assured of their own election and calling
by the worthy fruits of faith, and testimony of Gods Spirit, it makes them
joyful in Tribulations, and to glory in God, even when Satan, sin, and the
world do most rage against them; because they know, that these spiritual and
spightfull adversaries do imagine but a vain thing; they shall be no more able
by all their wrestling and fighting, to break off from salvation any whom God
has chosen to his kingdom of heaven, then could Saul with his Courtiers,
hinder David from attaining the promised kingdom of Israel; and therefore with
his words in their chiefest conflictes of conscience may say, O ye gates of
hell, how long will ye love vanity and seek after leasing? Assure ye, the
Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself, he will hear me when I
Psalm. 4, 2, 3.
call upon him.


DIAL. XXIII.
Verses 30, 31, 32. For even as ye in times past have not believed God, yet
have now obtained mercy through their unbelief, even so now have they not
believed through the mercy showed unto you, that they also may obtain Mercy.
For God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have Mercy on all.


Tim. What may be the contents of this Text?


Silas. It contains the two last arguments, to prove the conversion and
salvation of the Jews, ascribing it neither to chance nor their own merits,
but wholly unto the mercy of God, as the head-spring of all good gifts. The one
of these arguments is drawn from a comparison of equals, or from the example
of the Gentiles, being matched with a like example of the Jews, ver. 30, 31.
The other from the common end of that misery, wherein both Jews and Gentiles
were wrapped through unbelief: which is, not that they might perish, but to
minister occasion unto God to express his mercy.


Tim. What is the sum of the former argument?


Silas. Thus much; as ye Gentiles were not forsaken of God, when ye were
unbelievers: so though the Jews be now unbelievers, yet do not ye think that
they shall be forsaken for ever, for they now are not worse then you have
been. Or thus, If the unbelief of the Jews was occasion of beeliefe to you
Gentiles; then the mercy of the Gentiles shall likewise be occasion of showing
mercy to the Jews, that they may believe and so be saved. The pith and
sinews of the argument consists herein, that there is as much, or rather
more force in that which is good, to produce a good effect, then there is in
that which is evil, to bring sorth a good end. Therefore if the blindness of
the Jews (though it be a sin,) yet being Gods work had so good an end as
the conversion of the Gentiles, why may we not think that the calling of the
Gentiles, should help toward the calling and salvation of the Jews, by
provoking them to emulation and earnest desire after the same grace to enjoy
it? as verse 11.


Tim. In this example what things are compared together?


Silas. Three things with three things: First, the unbelief of the Gentiles
past, with the present disobedience of the Jews. Secondly, the present mercy
upon the Gentiles with the future mercy to be showed upon the Jews hereafter.
Thirdly, occasion with occasion, the unbelief of the Jews, as occasion of
belief to the Gentiles, and the mercy extended to the Gentiles, as an occasion
of mercy Jews unto the.


Tim. Come to the words and tell us, whether it were better to read unbelief,
or disobedience?


Silas. Though it skill not much, yet [vnbeliefe] is the better reading, for
none are worse to be persuaded then unbelievers; and the word here used,
comes of a word signifying to persuade. Also Paul in this chapter makes
unbelief the cause of the Jews reiection from God, as verse 20, 25.


Tim. What is here signified by mercy?


Silas. The cause is put for the effect, mercy for the gift of faith that
comes from Gods mercy; so to obtain mercy, is to obtain faith through the
mercy of God: and [your mercy] in ver. 31. not that whereby themselves were
merciful, but that blessing of faith which Gods mercy had given unto them; as
before in verse 22. [goodnesse or bounty] does signify a lively faith, the
fruit of Gods goodness.


Tim. What instructions are we now to take from these two first verses of this
text?


Silas. That the elect of God (be they Jews or Gentiles) do obtain to believe
in Christ, not by fortune or by their own merits, but freely through the
mercy of God. The proof hereof is first, Romans 9. 16. where election and faith,
which depends upon it, are denied unto, and taken from our own merits, and
attributed wholly to God and mercy; add hereunto Ephe. 2. 8. Furthermore,
unbelief comes from the free will of man being corrupt, therefore it cannot
engender faith, for out of one fountain comes not sweet and sour water.
Lastly, if faith come from our selves though but in part, then might we have
some rejoicing in our selves, but we must wholly glory in God, and not in our
selves, 1. Cor. 1. 31. Therefore faith in them by an effectual calling, is the
only work of his grace and mercy, Tit. 3. 4. 5. 2. Tim. 1. 9.


Tim. What is the profit we are to make to our selves by this doctrine?


Silas. It teaches where to beg faith when we lack it, and whom to thank
when we have it. Thirdly, it conuicteth such of error, as in matter of
salvation, part stakes and divide between Gods mercies and man's free will; as
if it had some power to believe the promises, and only needed some help of
grace. Thirdly, it humbles the pride of man, to consider that all that is
pleasing to God and tending to eternal life, does come without our selves
wholly by the grace of God, 1. Cor. 1, 29.


Tim. Will not this weaken our endeavor after the getting and increasing of
faith and other saving and heavenly graces?


Sil. No verily, it may quench arrogance, but it will quicken our industry,
because the more merciful God is unto us, the more we are bound to do what
lies in us to please him, Psalm. 130. 4. Romans 12, 1. Secondly, though faith
come of God, yet our duty is to seek, ask, knock, labor and strive to
attain it: and the promise is to such.


Tim. What other things may we learn from the two former verses of this text?


Silas. That the unbelief and contumacy of the Jews, has well deserved their
breaking off from the Christian Church, so as God is just, and they have no
cause to complain. Secondly, why the Jews and the Gentiles might not believe
both together, but by courses one after another, is a secret to be adored of
us, and not to be inquired into, verse 33. Thirdly, the conversion of the
Gentiles, followed the unbelief of the Jews, not as an effect of the proper
cause, (for the Jews in their disobeying, intended no mercy to the Gentiles,)
but as an event and consequent of Gods providence and counsel, so purposing
and disposing matters to the praise of his name. Elsewhere (that) notes the
event, and not the moving of the final cause, 1. Cor. 12. Acts 1, 2.


Tim. Now proceed to the 32. verse, and tell us the sum of the argument
contained therein?


Silas. God has equally shut up both Jew and Gentile (as it were in a prison)
to this end, that the elect among them might equally obtain mercy unto
salvation.


Tim. In what sense may it be said of God that he shuts up men in unbelief?


Sil. Not by dropping and pouring unbelief into their hearts, (for God is not
the author of sin,) nor yet only by suffering men to be blinded with
ignorance, and to become unbelievers, or by withdrawing the Spirit and word of
faith from men, and by declaring and conuicting men of infidelity, in which
sense the Scripture is said to shut up men under sin, Gal. 3, 22. because
sin is revealed by the law, Romans 3, 20. But God as a righteous Judge
delivering men up to blindness and hardness of heart, does hold the^ fast
fettered in the ghiues of their unbelief. Like as a Judge does inflict
imprisonment upon offenders, and restrains their liberty; so all men (till
the time of their effectual calling) are kept in the prison of incredulity by
the justice of God, their sin so deserving to have it. This is therefore a
metaphor or speech borrowed from earthly affairs, and applied to spiritual
things.


Tim. What is our lesson from the first part of the verse?


Silas. That God uses to punish one sin by another, wherein yet he is not
the author of the sin but of the punishment, the judgment is from God, the
fault is from men; therefore let all men stand in fear of him, who can strike
the Spirit as well as the flesh.

Secondly, that the condition both of elect and reprobates by nature is alike,
all being incredulous, disobedient to God, and miserable: and therefore none
ought to be puffed up above another, our case being all one; and the elect
being no better then others by birth, have the more cause to praise Gods
goodness for caling them to the faith, and leaving others in unbelief, which
were no worse the^ themselves were.


Tim. In the next part of the sentence, what is meant by the world [All?]


Silas. Not every particular person, but some of all sorts, as Augustine
expounds it, some Jews, some Gentiles, even all the faithful of every nation.
This may appear to be the sense, by comparing this place with To. 10 11, 12.
Gal. 3, 20, 22. where that is called [sin] which is called [vnbeleefe] here:
and that termed the [promise] there, which is here termed [mercie,] and the
universal particle [All,] restrained or limited unto believers.


Tim. What instructions have we from these last words? Doctrine.



Silas. That we are not to despair of the conversion of any, be they never so
great unbelievers; for Gods power and mercy are greater then men's sins;
therefore, none must cast away hope of others, or their own salvation.
Secondly, it is God alone that is able to open the eyes of such as are blinded
by unbelief: as none delivers the offender out of prison, but the Judge
which commits him, so none can escape out of the Fetters of unbelief, but
through the mercy of God which shut them up in that prison. Therefore, let all
pray unto him, to pardon their unbelief, and to give them Faith to believe in
his only begotten (...) our Redeemer: for they only are free, whom the Son
makes free; al others remain fast tied and bound in the chains and manacles
of natural blindness and infidelity, having not so much by any strength of
their own will as to desire liberty.


DIAL. XXIIII.
Verses 33, 34, 35, 36. O the deepenesse of the Riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out? for who has known the mind of the Lord, or who was his
Counselor? etc.


Tim. What does this Text contain?


Silas. A conclusion of the former argument, touching election and reprobation,
but especially of the mystery touching the rejecting and calling of the Jews:
at the consideration of which things, he as one stricken with amazement,
exclaimeth that they are too high or deep for him, either to understand or
utter, being worthy to be admired and adored, because of the admirable wisdom
and justice of God in them, and so shuts up the Chapter with glorifying God for
them.


Tim. What be the parts of this present Text?


Silas. Two: First, an exclamation in three Verses: and secondly, a petition in
the latter end of the thirty six verse.


Tim. What is the sum and substance of the exclamation?


Silas. The Apostle by his own example, teaches all men to wonder at the most
wise counsels of God, in disposing the ends of them; but especially, touching
the final estate of elect and reprobate men, forbidding either curiously to
search them, or wickedlie to murmr against them, upon these three Reasons.
First, for that they are unsearchable, (that is,) such things as neither
ought to be searched after, neither can they be found, Verse 33. by way of
interrogation; and in verse 34. by the testimony of the Prophet Esaias, Chapter
40. verse 13. Secondly, because they are most just without any wrong done unto
the creature, Verse 35. Thirdly, in respect of their end, because God who is
the beginning of al things, has deereed and done al things to his own glory.


Tim. What is signified by [deepenesse?]


Silas. The abstract is put for the contract, deepenesse for deep, as Romans
11, 6. Election for Elect, 2 Peter Interpret.
3, 13. righteousness for righteous persons. And by riches, is understood the
immense or unmeasurable abundance of any thing, as Romans 9, 23. Riches of
Glory for his most plentiful glory, Ephesians 2, 7. Riches of his grace, for
his most abundant grace. See Romans 24. This phrase is much like unto that in
Colossians 2, 3. All the Treasures, etc. In both places there is a comparison
from earthly riches and treasures, which are so deeply hid in the very
bowelles of the earth, that they cannot be come at, and dug up: even such is
the knowledge and wisdom of GOD, touching the end of man, they be
inaccessible, far above and beyond the reach of our capacity. If Paul such a
worthy Apostle perceived it to be so, how much more ought others to think it
so?


Tim. What may be meant (By Knowledge and Wisdom?)


Silas. These words are sometimes put passiuely for that knowledge whereby God
is known of man, as 1. Cor. 12, 8. But they are here used actiucly, for that
whereby God does perfectly behold himself and all other things to be done, or
not to be done, and most wisely disposes of his creatures to most due ends. So
the words be used, Col. 2, 2. as attributes in God, not as affects in us.


Tim. What Doctrine have we to learue from hence?


Silas. The wisdom of God in his purposes toward Doctrine.
men, and in the administration or government of men and their final estate,
cannot thoroughly and perfectile of us be perceived and seen into. As why God
would elect this man, and not that man, Peter and not Judas, both being alike
corrupt: why for many years he would make the Jews his people, and not the
Gentiles, and then the Gentiles and not the Jews, by courses, and not both
together, etc. These things were such as even Paul himself found too high for
him. The Reasons hereof be first, because Reasons.
cause the knowledge of God is infinite like to the wide and unbounded Ocean,
like the treasures which are many thousand fadomes shut up in the earth, and
cannot be fetched and drawn out.

Secondly, our understanding is finite and limited. Look what a spoone is to
the holding of the whole sea, or a spanne to the measuring of heaven: or ones
fiste to the griping of the earth, that is man's knowledge being compared with
Gods knowledge. Gods knowledge is most excellent, and not only first, for the
immensity and largeness of it, knowing himself and all things, but 2. for the
perfection of it, knowing all things perfectly; and thirdly also for the
manner, needing no means of knowledge at all: and fourthly, for the celeritie
of it, in a moment knowing all. Fifthly, the certainty, it cannot be deceived.
Sixthly, the eternity. Seauenthly, the efficacy, being the cause of all, and
enlightening all. Thirdly, there be many things which God keeps and reserues
Reason.
as secrets in his own bosom, and cannot be known of us, no more then we
know another thoughts or the reasons of others doings, especially of the acts
of Princes, whose ways are like a great deep, says Solomon; which if we
cannot always look into, how much less into all Gods matters? As our bodily
eyes, howsoever quicke-sighted, yet are not able directly to look upon the
sun shining in his brightness: so the perfect wisdom of God by many
degrees, does exceed the most perfect and profound wisdom of man.


Tim. Tell us what duties this Doctrine may put us in mind of?


Silas. That we are bound most reverently to think Use.
and speak of those words and works of God which we do not know, as being
assured they proceed from most excellent knowledge, and infinite wisdom.
Secondly, it may move us to consider with humility, the weakness of our own
knowledge, which we shall never perceive how poor and simple it is, till we
put it in the balance, and compare it with Gods knowledge. As Peter the better
saw his own vileness, when the majesty and divine power of Christ, appeared
at the draught of Fishes; and Abraham beholding the unspeakable glory of God,
was the more easily brought to perceive his own baseness, that he was but
dust and ashes: and as the most piercing and sighted eye, will prove dull, if
it be set against the beams of the Sun: so the best and greatest knowledge
of any man (howsoever it may seem much,) when he compares himself with
others that are far more ignorant then he, yet in respect of God it will be
found mecre ignorance and blindness, even as darkness is in comparison of the
light: let every man therefore as he feels knowledge to puff him up, so beat
it down with this thought: O Lord, how little a portion of wisdom have I in
regard of thee.


Tim. What do Judgments and ways signify?


Silas. Some take them to signify one thing, the counsel of God touching
mankind, and the events of those counsels, but the best is to distinguish
them, and to expound judgments of the means which God uses in the
disposition and government of mankind, acording to his eternal counsels: in
which sense the Hebrews do use to take this word for Gods administration, as
Psalm. 9, 7. and 67, 4. Judges 7, 26. John 5, 22. By [ Wayes] are meant the
purposes and decrees of God, touching all persons, and touching their eternal
condition, together with the reasons why he does this to that man, and not to
that. And whereas his ways be two-folde, either those by which we come unto
him, which are his precepts and promises, Psalm. 112, 1. and 119, 1. (for as by
the way we are led to the City, so by the word of promise and commandment
we are brought to God:) or those by which God comes to us, which are the ways
of his providence and decrees of mercy and justice: These latter are understood
here, and these are termed [vnsearchable,] because they ought not to be
searched nor enquired into, and [vntraceable and past finding out,] because by
no search they are to be found; as the way of a ship in the Sea, and the way of
an Arrowe in the air, so the ways of God cannot be known as touching the
cause and manner of them, and until they be revealed. That Joseph was so
exalted in Egypt, and David so advanced in Israel, and Ismael not chosen when
Isaac was, and Christ sent to redeem the world by death: these are Gods
judgments which we may search, because they are known by the word. But why
Joseph and David exalted, rather then any of their other Brethren: Why Jacob
taken and Esau refused, (both being every way equal:) Why Redemption by
Christ, was rather wrought by Judas his treason, then by any other means:
Finally, why the Jews a long time having been Gods people, should be broken
off, and that in the time of grace; and the Gentiles at that time planted in,
when they were gross Idolaters, and why the calling of the Jews is deferred
so many hundred years; these and such like are the ways of God that cannot
be known nor ought to be searched, but are to be thought upon with great
admiration and silence, after Paul's example.


Tim. What instructions have we from these last words of the 33. verse?


Silas. First, it is the duty of Gods children (avoiding al Doctrine.
curiosity) to adore and wonder at the secrets of God, as did Mary, Luke 2. and
the Evangelist John, Reave. 5, 4. And the reason hereof is, both because strange
things deserve Reason.
to be admired, and ignorance is ever a just cause of wondering, for no man
wonders at what he knows, but at what he knows not; therefore God never
wondereth at any thing, and wise men wonder less then fools, because they
know more; and yet both fools and wisemen must wonder at somethings which they
cannot know.


Tim. To what profit serves this doctrine?


Silas. It serves to rebuke blockishnes in such as are not moved to wonder at
the admirable ways of God. Secondly, the curiosity of others, who in stead of
wondering and being amazed, break out into murmuring and blaspheaming of the
things which they understand not; as many Papists, Palagians, and Lutherans
use to do about the matter of predestination and other high points, condemning
what by the^ is notconceiued. Thirdly, the prophanenes of some who deride and
jest at things which they cannot perceive: the world is too full of such
Atheistes and mockers; all such must be sent to school to sober and godly
minded Paul, to reverence and adore things which be above them.


Tim. What other instructions from hence?


Sil. The cause and reasons of Gods eternal counsel cannot be sought out nor
found; which instruction admits 2. ex ceptions. First, (of the blessed Trinity,
of which each person knows the hidden things of God. 1. Cor. 3. Secondly, of
such things as are manifest by the works and word of God, 1. Cor. 2, 16. Mat.
11. So much of Gods ways as Christ has taught, we may, nay we ought to
learn, but we may not be learners where God is no teacher; nor have ears to
hear, where God has not a mouth to speak. Learned ignorance is much better and
safer then proud and curious knowledge; for he that searches the glory shall
be consounded of the maicsty; and secret things belong unto God. Deuteronomy. 29, 29.


Tim. What profit are we to make our selves of this point?


Silas. First, it condemns such curious persons which like Adam, Genesis 3. and
Peter, John 21. neglect to search what they may well find and know, and desire
to pry into that which they cannot know; these lose their labor and themselves.
Secondly, it exhorts us all unto Christian sobriety, to content our selves with
things revealed, and letting pass that part of Gods mind, which he has
reserved to himself, because he needs none to be the men of his counsel, as
Esaias well speaks. For as he knows all the counsels of all his creatures,
and is sufficient to himself to be his own Councellor, having none to advise
him when he purposed to create and how to govern the world: so it boots not
for any man to look after those counsels of his which he will have kept
secret; there is no more dangerous madness then not regarding that which we
ought, and may know, to molest our selves in hunting out what cannot be known.


DIAL. XXXV.
Verses 35, 26. Who has given him first and it shall be recompensed to him
again? For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be
glory for ever, Amen.


Tim. HOw does this text agree with the former?


Silas. Having said we cannot pierce into Gods secrets, he gives a reason,
because they depend not upon us, but we rather depend upon God as the first
beginner of all things; he conferres all upon others, none confers ought to
him; withal he now quitteth God from accusations of injury to any creature, by
a reason taken from his Justice, because he is a debtor to none, but all are
beholden to him for all that they be or have. Also, he has both made all at
first, and still governs all things unto his own glory, therefore he
cannot be unjust in his ways.


Tim. Does Paul allude to any place of Scripture in saying, [Who has given,
etc.]


Silas. Yea, to a place in Job, Chap. 41. verse 2. and such an interrogation,
has the force of a negation or denial, as if it were said; None has ought
given unto him to bind himto make recompense to them.


Tim. What is signified by [First,] and by [recompence?]


Silas. First, signifies before: and recompense, signifies due reward by debt.


Tim. What is the Doctrine from these words?


Silas. That God has absolute right and power in, and over all men, so as he
owes nothing to any, or takes ought of any; he may do to them, or not do,
what he will, give or not give, what, and to whom, and how much, as he
pleases, being independent upon any creature, and free from all obligation
which might oblige or tie him unto any of his creatures. No Potter over his
clay, or Lord over his vassals, can have more absolute right and jurisdiction
then God has oueral things created: Adam in Paradise, or the good Angels which
be in heaven did not nor could demerit God, or make him in least degree bound
to them, they giving or adding nothing unto him, but taking all their
goodness, wisdom, integrity, and whatsoever excellency from him; and that
freely out of his own good will and pleasure; as being himself of himself a
most full perfection, and an absolute most free Agent, himself before all
things, cause of all things, vpholder and sustainer of all things, end of all
things. As the Sea has nothing from the Rivers, but they from it, nor the Sun
takes any light from the moon, but it borrows all from the Sun; nor the
soul borrowes any life from the body, but the bodies life is from the soul,
so is it between God and all his creatures. No Monarch in the world, Emperor
or King, is or can be so absolute and independing as the sovereign King of the
world is; for they cannot subsist without their people, (as a King in royal
authority) who by their multitude, strength, and riches, do maintain the
safety of their Kings and Rulers, and by their submission do honor them: but
God had no need of his creatures, he did and can for ever have subsifted, and
been perfect and all-sufficient to himself, and of himself without them: and
so not they without him, of whom they have being, when they were not; and all
things when they had nothing. This made Job to say, that as man's wickedness
hurt not God, so his goodness did not profit him. And David, Psalm. 16, 2. that
his goodness or liberality did not extend to God, but to the Saints, which were
of excellent Virtue, it might do them some good, and none can give God any
thing. Whereas God calls for our affections, Give me thy heart, Prou. 23. and
for our goods, Offer thy substance unto God, and he looks for our-thankes
and praises, Render unto me praises, Psalm. 50, 14. We are to know that we give
God nothing, but what he first gave us. Also by our gifts he may be honored,
but cannot be enriched, being an infinite perfection. And lastly, in our gifts
to him, we express our duty, but make him no debtor; for we owe unto him
more then we do or be.


Tim. Unto what profit and use are we to turn this doctrine touching Gods
absoluteness?


Silas. First, it serves for instruction, to teach that God cannot do wrong, or
offer injustice to any, seeing he is in debt to none, and might do with his
own what he would: therefore, though he have no mercy on Cain, Ismael, Esau,
Saul, Achab, Judas, or others, yet herein is he not unjust, for he owes them
nothing: nay, had he denied mercy to all mankind, and appointed all the
sons of Adam to endless and remediless misery, (as he did the Angels which
fell) this plea would have freed and quitted God, that none gave him first;
and therefore how can any complain of him, sithence all was in his own power
to dispose of them as he himself listed? Let then all mouths be stopped.
Secondly, this exhorts the elect and godly, to great and continual love and
thankfulness toward God, because of his gracious favor, they hold
themselves and whatsoever they enjoy; they enjoy it not only besides and
without their own deseruings, but indeed directly against their merit, as
being by guilt of sin worthy of the same condition with the reprobate; it is
the mere goodness of God, who has separated them and allotted them a better
estate; for they gave him nothing, they prevented him not by any merit or
desert on their part.


Tim. Yet the Scripture often affirms, that Godrendreth Doubt.
to the godly, according to their works, Romans 2. 6. and that he does this as
a righteous judge, 2 Thessal. 1. 6. 7. 2. Tim. 4, 8. Therefore it should seem
God is not just, except he recompense the godly for that which they have given
him, see Luke 14. 14.


Silas. Whatsoever works the faithful have, they be Gods gifts, who works
in them both the will and deed according to his pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. they be
no otherwise called our works, but as our bread is termed ours, Mat. 7, 11.
because it is given us; we are they which receive it, to use it by Gods
liberality, and as his blessing upon our industry. So good works being
wrought in us and given us by Gods holy Spirit, are therefore named ours; and
not because they proceed from our will: which made Augustine to say, Lord look
not upon my own works, but upon thy works which thou have done in me: and
again, God crowns in us his own gifts, not our merits: and again, He
does us a double mercy, first he gives us power to do well, and then
recompenceth and crowns that work which we did well by his grace. Now God
having freely promised a reward to good works; hence he is called just and
righteous, not because he owes any thing to any persons, but for that he
keeps his promise, which is the part of righteousness. Wherefore popish
hypocrites and iustitiaries are little better then mad, which presume to make
God obnoxious and a debtor to them by their works, as if they gave him
something of their own, and so were unjust, except by order of justice (not of
clemency) he did requite, even for the worthiness of the work. See Rhemish
notes on 2. Tim. 4, 8. Heb. 6, 10. Lastly, here is confuted predestination
upon faith and works foreseen, which binds Gods fore-appointment to the
quality of the creature, as if it (being the supreme cause of al things) did
depend upon something in men which they should (as ye would say) give unto him.


Tim. What does the last verse of this Chapter contain?


Silas. A proof of that which went before, that he is debtor to no man,
because he is the beginning of al things; and that he cannot do unjustly with
any, because his glory is the end of al things: for it is rightful that every
thing be referred to his own end, but God himself is the end for which some
men are elect, and others reprobate; therefore whether he do elect or not
elect, he cannot wrong any man, for it is just that God should promote his
own glory as he list.


Tim. What is meant in this sentence by [him] thrice repeated?


Silas. Some understand it of the three persons in the Trinity, without any
ground, therefore the best is generally to expound it of God.


Tim. In what sense are all things said to be [of God?]


Silas. Not as of the matter where of they are, (for then al things should be
deified) but as of the first cause and beginning: for he gives being to all,
all things made are of him by creation; all persons elect be of him by
predestination; all the Saints that are believers, are of him by regeneration;
there is nothing in them cyther of nature or grace, but it is of God: original
sin being an evil thing is not of God, but of the malice of Satan, and of
man's corruption, though sin be of God passiuely; for he suffers it; and
deficiently, for he does with-drawe his grace: yet not from God as efficient
and original working cause, it is by him, being by him turned to good, and for
him, because it tends to the praise of his justice.


Tim. In what meaning are all things said to be [by or through him?]


Silas. They are [through him] by administration, because he gouerns all
things, even the least, to a sparrow on the house top, Math. 10. 29. Secondly,
they are through him by preservation, because he vpholds all things in their
being so long as they be; for God is the preserver of man and beast, and
sustaines all things by his mighty word, Heb. 1. 3.


Tim. In what meaning is it said, that all things are through Christ, and do
consist by him? 1. Cor. 8. 6. Colos. 1 17.


Silas. Not as by an instrument, and one inferior to the Father, as the tool
is inferior to the crafts-man, (as the Arians would have it) who are confuted
by this our present text, where it is said of God the Father, that all things
are (through him) yet he is very God; in which sense it is elsewhere of Christ
written, that all things are thorough him: as by a working cause, or as by the
wisdom of the sovereign creator of the world, see Pro. 8. 27. 28. 29. as an
Artificer exercises his art by his wisdom, so God rules all by his Son,
John 5. All judgment is committed unto the Son.


Tim. What is the doctrine from these words thus expounded? Doctrine.



Silas. That the same God who is the maker of al things, is both the ruler and
supporter of all things, disposing of all things as he will, or sustayning them
so long as he will, for he does whatsoever pleases him, Psalm. 115, 3. and
works all things after the counsel of his will, Ephesians 1. 11. hence he is
called the judge of the world, Gene. 18. 25. the King of nations, Icr. 10, 7.
because he has all things subject to his direction and beck, both within
and without the Church: he turns the hearts of Kings, as the rivers of
waters, Prou. (...), 1. The answer of the tongue is from God, Pro. 16, 1. and
verse 33. Though the lot (says Solomon) be cast into the lap, yet the
disposition is from God, and he is termed in scripture, The God of battle.
Now, if the issue of Lots and wars be through God guided by his providence,
then other things that are further off from chance and fortune, must needs
be ordered by his will.


Tim. What profit may we draw from the knowledge hereof?


Silas. It instructs Christians to depend on God alone for all good things,
and in the use of means by prayer, to seek unto him for a blessing; for as
his goodness gives us the means, so his providence must make it effectual to
our benefit. Secondly, it exhorts all men that receive any good, spiritually
or bodily, thankfully to acknowledge it to come from God, and in evil things
to be patient and wel-pleased with God, because they are sent of him after the
example of Job 1, 21. and of David. Psalm. 39.


Tim. Wherefore does the Apostle say, that all things are [for God?]


Silas. His meaning is, that all things are of him, and of no other moving
cause, and by himself none other helping him; so they are only for his own
glory, and for no other end, for he made all things for himself, Prou. 16,
4. Revel, 4, 11. he predestinateth, adopteth, and justifies men to the praise
of his glorious grace, Ephesians. 1, 5, 6. Hence our duty is to give him glory in
and for all things, 1 Cor. 10, 30. as the rivers which flow out of the Sea
return thither again: so God is to be praised for all good things, because
of him alone they proceed: and herein true children are discerned from
Bastards, who have no affection toward the glory of God; whereas his adopted
children make it the scope of all their actions.


Tim. What may we learn by the last words, [To him be glory, etc?]


Silas. That all must effect and approve Gods glory upon all good occasions,
desiring it with all our hearts and gladsomnesse, willingly ratifying it:
which is a very sure token of an adopted child of God, to wish and approve
his Fathers honor, with griese to think of the hurt done to it by blasphemies
and other wickedness; and with much joy studying how to promote it in their
lives and callings, by prayers and praises, good practices 1 Cor. 10, 30.
especially: where there is this good mind in any measure after the hallowing
of Gods name, it is a good mark of one, who in truth says (O our Father.)


CHAP. XII.
Exhortation to moral Duties.
DIALOGVE 1.
Verse 1. I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye give
up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable soruing of God.


Timotheus. Show us how this Chapter does depend upon the former?


Silas. In the former Chapters Paul had handled doctrinal points of Faith, as
Justification, Sanctification, Predestination, unto the end of the eleauenth
Chapter. Here at the 12. Chapter, he begins the next part of his Epistle
which is pareneticall or exhortatorie, for he exhorts all Christian
professors in the person of the Romans, unto duties moral in this chapter.
Secondly, unto civil in the next. Thirdly, unto charity, about things
indifferent in the 14. and part of the fifteenth Chapters, and then descends
unto familiar things, Chapter sixteenth.


Tim. What Method and Order does the Apostle keep in this Chapter?


Silas. He exhorts unto general duties belonging unto all Christians
affirmatively in the first verse, showing what they should do; and negatiuely
in the second verse, warning what they should not do: after that, from the
third verse, until the ninth verse, he persuades unto particular duties, which
are to be done in respect of some degree or function ecclesiastical. Lastly,
in the ninth verse, he returns unto common duties, which appertain unto al
professors, unto the end of the Chapter.


Tim. Tell us what is the sum of this first verse, which we have chosen for
our Text?


Silas. It is an earnest exhortation to stir up al christians whatsoever,
with all their power to study and endeavor to lead their lives holily and
justly. In this exhortation, there are to be noted two things chiefly: first
the matter, which is to become a living sacrifice to God. This Sacrifice is
qualified with five conditions, and confirmed or urged with two reasons. Of the
conditions Properties of our Christian Sacrifice.
the first is to be voluntary in these words [the ye present.] Secondly, that
it must be of the [body] that is, of the whole man by a Synecdoche. Thirdly, a
[liuing] one. Fourthly [holy.] Fifthly [reasonable.] Now the reasons of the
exhortation be two, one from the moving cause, [ Gods Mercies,] the other from
the final end [ That GOD may be pleased.]


Tim. What is the other grand or maine thing to be considered in this verse?


Silas. The manner of the exhortation, which is by a Manner.
sweet obtestation [ I beseech you,] and by a loving compellation Interpret.
[ Brethren] that is, all Christian professors which have one common faith and
religion.


Tim. What instructions may we take from this mild manner of exhortaion?


Silas. That the Ministers of Christ must not always stand upon their
authority, nor always use severity, but sometimes deal by mild entreaties
and persuasions, Phile^. 8, 9, 10. For Ministers be fathers, who be mild and
deal gently. Secondly, the Spirit of the Gospel is the spirit of love.
Thirdly, the Children of God being of an ingenuous spirit be more easily led
then drawn, and do better like of meekness then fear. Lastly, admonitions
are like a bitter potion that must be sweetened with kind words (as it were
with Sugar.)


Tim. What use hereof? Use.



Silas. It serves to admonish the Preachers to pray for a meek and loving
heart, and for discretion to know toward whom to use their mildness, 2.
Tim. 2, 25. Jude 22, 23. Secondly, hearers also by this are to be admonished,
to be bowed and won with their pastors beseeching voice, least they deserve
to hear his chiding and threatening voice; remembering what he loses or
binds on earth, according to the word, shall be loosed and bound in heaven.


Tim. What may we observe by the illatiue particle [therefore?]


Silas. It has respect unto the doctrine taught formerly; as if he should fay,
Seeing the Jews are cast out of the Church for their (...), and you Romans
are elected of God, and called to the faith of Chirst in their room; even for
this cause you must bethink your selves what service and thankfulness you owe
to God, how deeply ye be engaged and obliged to him.


Tim. What is the lesson we are to take from hence?


Silas. That Christians are to be moved unto duty toward God and man, after
the doctrine of his grace and love toward them be manifested. For as the eye
guides the body, so doctrine gouernes duty; and what a foundation is unto an
house, that the doctrine of grace is unto an holy life, even the ground work,
root, and spring of all good works.


Tim. What use of this instruction?


Silas. It confutes them which hold the doctrine of Use.
grace to be an enemy to a good life, and to open a window or gappe unto
liberty in sin, from which it recalleth rather. Also it serves to reprove
them that teach duties without doctrine; or do not lead their lives answerable
to the doctrine of grace which they do know and profess.


Tim. Come now to the matter or thing exhorted unto, and tell us what is meant
by [sacrifice?]


Silas. The word [sacrifice] is not here put properly Sacrifice twofold,
proper and improper Of proper sacrifices, two ends and two kinds.
for some outward sensible thing (as beasts) offered unto God by a leuiticall
Priest properly taken, to testify man's subjection to God, and Gods dominion
over man; whereof some were gratulatory to give God thanks after some special
benefit received. Others were propitiatory to make atonement with God after
certain sins committed; for Paul expressly speaks of living and reasonable
The improper spiritual sacrifice here meant.
sacrifice: and he writes unto all Christians to offer them, not to Priests
and Ministers only. Therefore Bellarmine does dote, who in libro de missa 10.
Chap. 20. would build the sacrifice of the Mass upon these words, as if
sacrifice were here used in a proper sense; which if it were so, yet would it
not make for the sacrifice of the Mass, wherein no external oblation is said
to be given to God: for Christ's body was once offered of himself, and is now
in heaven, there to remain till the end: but it is used here improperly for
the mortification of our sinful lusts, sticking in our corrupt reason, and
will, even after regeneration.


Tim. For what reason does the Apostle choose to call this crucifying and
killing of our lusts a sacrifice?


Silas. First, to meet with an offense of the Jews, who Reasons why Christian
obedience is called sacrifice.
misliked the Christian profession, because it had no sacrifice, as now the
Papists except against our religion, for that we have no Altars, no Priests,
no Oblations; whom we do answer, as here Paul does the Jews, that the
Christian faith has (sacrifices) but spiritual ones, as good duties of all
sorts, Psalm. 141, 2. Secondly praises, Heb. 13, 13. Thirdly, Alms, Heb. 13,
16. Fourthly, a contrite heart, Psa. 51, 17. Fifthly, works of our calling,
Romans 15, 16. Sixthly, martyrdom, Phil. 2, 17. Seauenthly, mortification, as in
this text: but external sacrifices we want indeed, because their date was out
at the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, John 18, 30. Heb. 7. Secondly, to
set forth the dignity of Christians, being now by Christ advanced, to be
themselves both the sacrifices and the priests, (even as himself was) a
royal priest-hoode, 1. Pet. 2, 9. Priests and Kings to God, Reave. 1, 6. which
should warn us of our duty, in being careful to live well. Thirdly, to put us
in mind that the mortification of our corrupt nature, and the desires thereof,
is as grateful to God as sacrifices under the law, yea more grateful:
sithence they without repentance and faith, were always displeasing unto God:
see Esaias 1. Psalm. 51. outward sacrifices being severed from internal worship,
offended God: which ought to encourage Christians very much to be conversant in
this inward service of faith. Fourthly, it instructs us that the exercise of
Christianity, is unpleasing to our nature, and very painful, insomuch as it
requires a death and slaughter, even of our dearest affections, that we may
live to God: for there can be no living to God, without the sacrificing and
killing of sin; as the bodies of beasts were first killed and then offered:
and as Christ's body on the cross was cruelly murdered: So (if we will be
true Christians) must the body of sin be used, even mangled, cut apieces,
pierced, tortured, yea the heart-bloud of sin let out by the exercise of
repentance and mortification.


Tim. To what use may this knowledge serve us? Use.



Silas. It reproues such as think it an easy thing to be a Christian, Math.
7, 14. 1, Pet. 4. 18. or that they can be current Christians, when they never
strive to kill and destroy their lusts, such do but deceive their own
hearts. James 1, 22, 26, 27. let men take never so much pains in prayer,
reading, hearing, etc. yet if they suffer pride, covetousness, malice,
fornication, hypocrific, and other affections unmortified, they be no
Christians indeed, though they be in name. Secondly, it exhorts all which
will have any comfort or fruit of their profession, to set a work the Spirit
of grace, which is in them to crucify the flesh; that is, their remaining
corruption, and to this end to take to them the sword of the Spirit (Gods
word) and to strike through the heart of sin, by applying the threatenings of
the law to it, and give themselves to earnest prayer and often fasting, to
unfeigned confession of daily sins, avoiding occasions of every sin, not
sparing nor pitying our darling sin: be it sin of nature, of custom, of
trade, bring it never such sweetness of pleasure, or profit, or worship with
it, yea though the revenues of our sins, were 500 pound a year: let not your
eye pity it, nor your hand spare it, take it by the throat, strangle and kill
it, that it kill not thee. As Agar the bond woman was cast out of Abraham's
family, so cast all thy slavish vices out of thy Soul. Remember what God did
to Saul for saving some of the Amalokites Cattle alive, he deposed him of his
kingdom: so will he banish thee out of his celestial kingdom, if thou
suffer but one sin to reign. As the host of Israel had peace and safety
when Achan was found out and executed: so search thy heart for that hidden and
dear sin, which as yet lives and is mighty, and slay it, or else thou shall
never have peace to thy Soul, or safety from destruction; for he that bears
but with one sin is guilty of all, James 2, 10, 11. The obstinate
transgressors of one known law, despise the whole authority of the law maker,
and Satan can enthrall and draw to hell by one sin served, as well as by forty.


Tim. You have spoken of the Christian Sacrifice, it is now time we heard the
cond tions opened unto us?


Silas. First, it must be free and willingly offered, noted in this word
(present, or give up) a speech borrowed Properties of our Sacrifice.
either from sacrifices of Beasts freely presented at the Altar to be given to
God; or from servants willingly presenting themselves in their (...) presence,
ready to do them service; so ought our Christian duties to be performed with a
good will, Romans 6, 16. Psalm, 119, 14. That which Paul says of giving to the
poor must be applied to other, good works, they are not accepted, unless
they be cheerfully done: for God loves no compulsion or necessity in his
service, but a cheerful doer. Secondly, it must be of the whole man (body)
put for our selves, as Romans 6, 12. 1 Cor. 9, 27. both body and souls, with
the affections in them both. Body is rather named then mind, because sin
entered into the soul by propagation from the body, and are showed forth in and
by the members of the body.


Tim. What are we to learn from this second condition?


Silas. That God requires the whole man. First, he created the whole.
Secondly, the whole was redeemed by him, 1 Cor. 6, 20. Thirdly, the whole must
be glorified. Fourthly, the whole was given to sin before new birth. Fifthly,
God gives himself wholly to his Children, therefore they must not give him a
part: and indeed we give nothing except we give all, for God deseructh, and
is worthy of all, even the whole heart, soul, mind, and might.


Tim. What use hereof?


Sil. This doctrine reprooueth Nicodemits, which give their bodies to Idols,
and keep as they say their heart to God, God will not be served with the one
half, offer to him all or none. Secondly, such as outwardly worship God with
their bodies, but keep their hearts and affections for the service of sin,
as hypocrites do. Thirdly, it exhorts all Christians with all their
faculties of Soul and body, to decline from evil of all sorts, and to do all
good duties of all kinds, toward God and man: let their judgment stoop to
the wisdom of the word, and their affections bow and yield obedience to the
authority of the word: let their bodily members be no servants to sin, but
instruments of right cousnes, Romans 6, 13.


Tim. What be the next conditions of our Christian sacrifice?


Sil. It must be (living) that is, of our selves which live and not of dead
bodies of beasts, and to show the chief part of this our sacrifice, to be
(Faith) whereby our souls live to God. Also the more we do live to God, the
more sin is killed: righteous persons alone are fit to offer this sacrifice,
for they alone live to God, Romans 1, 18. Gal. 2. 20. unregenerate men cannot
sacrifice themselves to God, for they be dead in sin, Ephe. 2, 1. they do
not live by faith.

Fourthly, it must be holy, that is, pure and separated from all earthlinesse
and sinful corruption, so is this sacrifice in part: the sanctification of the
Spirit, which causes the faithful to offer up pure hearts to God, in a good
measure separated from mixture of sin. This was represented in the spotless
Sacrifice of the Law: therefore wicked men cannot offer this sacrifice, for
they still live in their (...) without holiness, and so themselves and their
offerings are abominable, Tit. 1, 5.

Fifthly, it must be reasonable, that is, spiritual, so expounded by Peter, 1
Pet. 2, 5. Our Sacrifices may not be Massing, popish, or Mosai call outward
ones; but inward of the Spirit and mind, John 4, 24. For this is reasonable,
because a reason of it may be given out of the word, for God is a spirit; and
they be of our selves which are reasonable, and offered to Christ our redcemer,
as a reasonable thing. More particularly our reasonable service be our
Theological virtues, faith, Hope, love, 1 Cor. 13, 13. The oricall gifts,
knowledge, wisdom, etc. Our moral gifts, (...), mercy, chastity; our
political virtues: all these are reasonable sacrifices.


Tim. What is the first reason whereby this sacrifice is confirmed and (...) to
us (...) text?


Silas. From the mercies of God, even his spiritual mercies, which are called
mercies in the plural number, because they are many (to wit,) election of
grace, calling to Christ, justification by faith, sanctification by the spirit:
by all these mercies (which are every one of them more worth then a thousand
worlds) he beseeches them to obey God by mortification of their lusts.


Tim. What is our Doctrine?


Silas. That the meditation of Gods mercies in Christ are a most effectual
motion and sharp sputre to a godly life. As if a Mother should beseech her
child to do something by the womb that bare him, the paps which sucked him,
the knees which dandled him, and all her entire compassions toward him; how
(...) should his heart be, not to yield to her? so we should show our selves
more then stony hearted if we yield not to God, when he that might condemn,
does beseech even by those tender mercies whereby he begat us, pardoned us,
called us, renewed, and saved us. For this is the main end why he bestows his
mercies: see Psalm. 130, 4, Also Luke See Psalm. 136. whole.
1, 73, 74. Secondly, whatsoever we are or have, bodily or spiritual
blessings, it is al of his mercies. Thirdly, there can be no sound obedience
given unto God, but that which springs from the (...) of his love and mercy:
for that which is constrained by fear is hypocritical.


Tim. What Use are we to make of this Doctrine?


Silas. It condemns such as by Gods mercies are the more emboldned to offend:
it is a fearful sign of a desperate wicked man, when by the kind usage of
God he is made more wicked: as he is a bad son which is worse by his parents
love. Secondly, such as forget his mercies: whereof good Christians ought to
keep (as it were) a register, that as they are tempted to any sin, they may
check it with remembrance of some mercy, as Joseph did; or as they become
dull and slow to good duties, they may quicken themselves with meditation of
some merciful kindness, and with thoughts of some mercy, always resolving,
that the more deeply they have drunk of the mercies of God, the more they be
bound to live well and godlily: as our Savior says, God will require much,
where he has given much. It is by Ezra to the Jew, and by the Prophet Esaias to
Ezekiah imputed as a fault, that they forgot his mercies, and rendered not to
God according to his great goodness.


Tim. What is the second reason?


Silas. It is taken from the effect of this sacrifice, because GOD accepts
such a sacrifice so well qualified, for they are after his own heart. For God
being a spirit and holy, cannot but delight in holy and spiritual (...), being
offered up in the name of Christ, 2 Pet 2, 5. and proceeding from faith and the
Spirit of God, Heb. 11. 5, 6. Gal. 5, 22, 23. A great encouragement to every
Christian to labor hard in the denial of himself and mortification of his
lusts, to know this to be accepted with God. Must wives study to please their
husbands, 1. Cor. 7. 34. and servants their Masters, Ephe. 6, 5. even their
discourteous masters? 1. Pet. 2, 18. How much more then ought you to please
God, your Lord, husband, father, and redeemer, who has forgiven you all your
sins and called you to an inheritance immortal in the heavens? 1. Pet. 1, 4.
These two reasons can be of no force with an unregenerate or evil man or woman,
which never were partakers of his saving mercies, no not of one crum of them,
nor yet ever had their hearts framed by the Holy Ghost to any sound care of
pleasing God; but the godly which have received but one drop of Gods mercy in
Christ, and are led by his Spirit, these will be mighty persuasions to make
them more upright and zealous in Gods service.


DIAL. II.
Verse 2. And be not conformed unto this world: but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your minds, that ye may prove what is that good, that
acceptable, and perfect will of GOD.


Tim. WHat is the matter and method of this Text?


Silas. It contains the second general precept Coherence.
concerning all Christians of every degree and sort. For the form of it, is
set down negatiuely, and then amplified by the contrary affirmation. We are
forbid to follow the fashions of this world, and (...) enjoined (if we will
please and serve God) to make the will of God (revealed in his word,) the rule
of our life and manners: which will is set forth by three especial qualities.
First, good. Secondly, acceptable. Thirdly, Sum.
persect. This verse then has it in the explication of the former, expressing
plainly what was there figuratively set down, teaching us the manner how
Christians may offer themselves to God, namely, if they avoid the corrupt lusts
of the world, and endeavor thorough the regeneration of the Spirit (which
begins at the change of the mind, the principal part of man's soul) to
allow and do the things which God wills and approouerh, being good,
acceptable, and perfect.


Tim. What is meant by the world, and by being conformable Interpretat.
unto it?


Silas. Men unregenerate and merely natural, and all which is contrary to
Gods will, which is here called the world, as often elsewhere, John 14, 17. 1
John 2, 14, Why natural men be called the world.
15, 16. and chapter 5, 19, etc. because such persons do still stick in the
unclean and filthy mire of worldly lusts, which they obey with greediness.
Also for that they wholly mind earthly things, loving them, and caring for the
things of this life, neglecting heavenly things. The conforming to these men,
is to like and allike them, and to be like them in their conditions, to follow
their fashions, form, and guise of living, shaping our courses semblable unto
theyrs, putting on their form and shape in our behavior. What the fashions of
the world be, see 1 Cor. 6, 9, 10. Galath. 5, 19, 20, 21. 1. Pet. 4, 3. 1 John
2, 14. Ephesians. 4, 18, 19, 20.


Tim. What is our doctrine from these words of the Text thus explained?


Silas. Gods children must not in any wise make the manners of worldly and
wicked men, the rule and pattern of their life and action. The proof hereof
see Psalm. 1, Proof by scripture.
1. Walk not in the way of the wicked [ etc. and Prouer. 1, 10. and Chap. 4.
14. we are forbid to go after sinners; whereunto agrees that of Mat. 7, 13.
forbidding to enter into the broad way: and that of 1. Pet. 4, 4. that we
should not run with the wicked unto the same excess of riot, nor to be
companions with the works of darkness, Ephesians. 5, 7, 11. All which do teach us,
that in framing our conversation, we may not imitate the fashions and deeds of
evil men. The Reasons here of be these: First, Gods Reasons.
people are a kingly Priesthood, Pet. 2, 9. therefore the fashions of worldly
men do not become them. For, since the elect are made Priests unto God, it
behooves them to have the whole life, and all the parts of it well ordered
(says Chrysostom.) The Priests under the Law might not touch any unclean
carkas of men or Beasts, neither may Christian Priests meddle with polluted
rotten lusts, such as carnal men wallow or welter in. Secondly, the lusts of
the world are not of God but of the devil, John 2, 16. But Gods children in
their baptism have by solemn promise renounced the Devil and all his lusts,
and therefore may not follow them, without running into the guilt of
perfidiousnesse, and promise breaking.

Thirdly, the faithful have put on Christ Jesus, Gal. 3, 27. and have him
dwelling in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3, 17. Therefore they may not put on
the sinful affections, and foolish fashions of this world; for what communion
between Christ and the world, from which he has redeemed us? Also his Gospel
and grace teaches us to deny worldly lusts, Titus 2, 11. Fourthly, God and the
corrupt custom of sinners, cannot both be loved; for if we love the world and
the things thereof, the love of God is not in us, 1. John 2, 15. James 4, 3.
The amity of this world is enmity with God, but Gods children are bound to love
God above all, yea alone, all things be for him and in him, therefore they
ought to abhor the world. Fifthly, it is dangerous even in this life for the
godly to do after the customs, or to delight in the company of sinful men.
Peter among worldly men learned to deny and sorsweare his Savior: Iehosaphat
was forbid familiarity with Achab, Will thou love him whom God hates? 2.
Chron. 19, 1. and Josias by conuersing with, and conformining himself unto an
heathen king, lost his life, 2. Kings. 23, 29. The Israelites by framing
themselves to the Egyptians in idolatry; Exo. 32, 1, 2, 3. and to the Moabites
in adultery, Number. 25, 1, 2. pulled due and just vengeance from God upon their
own heads. David amongst the Philistims learned to dissemble, and was in
hazard: see the title of Psalm 34. Sixthly, the end of the children of this
world, and such as fashion themselves like to it, is damnation, Phil. 3, 19.
also see 2. These. 1, 9. 1. Pet. 4, 5. Lastly, the fashions, delights,
pleasures, and lusts of worldly persons, do in a short time vanish and pass
away, as smoke or as a shadow, 1. Cor. 7, 31. Therefore even in this text
they be likened to a figure or image, (as also Psalm. 73.) which has
insolidity, or unsoundness in it. Now true believers which are borne of God
unto eternal glory in the heavens, 2. Pet. 1, 3, 4. must not embrace things
which be fading and withering, of short continuance; it is not for such as be
called to a blessed immortality, to glue themselves to vanities which have no
certainety nor durance.


Tim. But have the godly any need of this debortation which you have so
strengthened with Scripture and good reason? it should seem they have, seeing
Paul writes this to the faithful Romans.


Silas. Yea very much, for God does nothing superfluously and in vain, he
would not give such an exhortation but on just necessity: also by nature we are
prone to fall into that from which God disswadeth us. Moreover the lusts and
fashions of the wicked be deceitful above measure, and exceeding pleasant to
the flesh and corruption of nature, which seeing the godly have not wholly put
off (for they are partly flesh, and partly Spirit) therefore they had need to
be warned, and by many reasons (as by bits or bridles) to be held in from
running after the manners of this world; especially, seeing they cannot (there
is a necessity in it) but live together with me^ of this world, therefore not
without great heed and labor, prayer and pains, can be kept pure from the
infection of this world: as it is no easy matter to keep them from being
besmutted, defiled, or burnt and pricked, Similitudes
which touch and handle Colliars, pitch, hot coals, or thorns. And besides
all which has been said, to preserve the children of God from partaking in
the fashions and spots of this world; this is not the least motive, because the
truth and power of Religion and Christianity stands herein. See James 1, 27.
Let any person have never so great knowledge of Scripture, and make never so
godly a profession, yet if he ftriue not against the corruptions and spots of
the world, but communicate in them and in his lusts (being like the vain
and wicked of the world) there is not a dram of true Religion in him.


Tim. Unto what uses and profit may the meditation of this doctrine serve us
Christians?


Sil. First, it serves to reprove and utterly to condemn Use.
their course as unchristian, who make the fashions and con ditions of worldly
men, the chief or only square of their behavior, thinking they do well when
they do as they see others do, and in their words, apparel, diet, actions,
are like the most and worst men: but if they have some or many, learned, rich,
wise, and worshipful persons for their precedents and guides; then they bless
their souls in their evil ways, and no body must mislike or speak against
them. Herein they be like those Jews mentioned in the Gospel, who fashioned
themselves in their opinions, traditions, and actions unto their rulers: yea so
far as they cried against Christ, Crucify him, crucify him, only because
the Scribes and Phacisies did hate him. So the ten Tribes would be
Idolatrous, because Jeroboam their king served Idols. Thus examples of great
men do great harm, Such masters such servants Regis ad exemplum (...)
componitur (...).
and as a violent floude or (...) do carry the common people after them, such
as Princes be, such people will be. Therefore it is to be marked, that the
Apostle does not say, ye may fashion your selves like unto such in the world
which be famous for wisdom, knowledge, authority, wealth; but for bids us
to be like the world, without all exceptions. It mattereth not what sinful men
be for those things, though they shine in honor, and be renowned for wit and
policy, yet if they be secure and worldly livers, we may not at any hand
conform our selves to them: but when any of you have taken leave to
transgress this precept of the Apostle, it will be but a poor plea at the day
of Gods wrath to say; thou thoughtst that thou might have done and said, as
such and such men gave thee example. Therefore, do not deceive your own
hearts, but be wise, do not look what others do which be evil, or what great
men do which bewray themselves by their talk and doings to be of this world.
Walk not thou in their ways my son: do not tread in the same steps: for
they shall suddenly and horribly perish, sinking down unto hell in a moment,
therefore choose none of their ways: and albeit others will admire and imitate
them, yet fear thou that God, whose mercies has elected and called thee to
Christ, and does now beseech thee not to conform and fashion thy self like to
the world. Secondly, here is an admonition for all good Christians, to fly al
unnecessary and causeless fellowships with unclean livers, and profane
worldlings, least by living familiarly with them, we do learn their fashions
and manners: such as will fly a sin, must fly all the means thereof. Reason
and long experience does assure us, that our fashions and courses will be such
as theirs be with whom we daily converse. Hardly or not at all shall we be
held from following and allowing their practices, whose persons we do like and
live with. This is that whereof the word of God so often warns us: that as we
shall learn uprightness and wisdom of them that be wise and upright, so we
shall be perverse, if we be companions with the perverse and wicked. Such is
the strength of sin, as it easily poisoneth them that come near it, even
like the pestilence.

Moreover, our sinful nature is so apt to take the contagion of sin, as flax
and tinder to take the fire. Hence came those protestations of David, Psalm. 26.
and 119. and that admonition of Paul, Ephesians. 5, 11. which should provoke all
men (as ever they do mind to obey this precept of not conforming) to avoid
voluntary company of vain and ungodly persons. Think with your selves, if
such godly persons, so wise and well mortified as David was, durst not join
himself to corrupt and carnal company, upon fear to be like them: then how
much the more are others to look to it, which by many degrees are not so
strong as this holy King and Prophet was? Oh, that you would once believe, that
there were great hurt and hinderance unto godliness, in the conversation with
ungodly and unrighteous men, whose words and works show them to be of this
world, as Peter's language descried him to be a Galilean.


Tim. What other lessons from this Verse?


Silas. Whereas the Apostle does not write, that ye Doctrine.
should go out of this world, and leave it quite, and shut your selves in
Monasteries and Cloisters, John 17, 15. Neither says he, use not this world,
for we be commanded so to do, 1 Cor. 7, 31. and God has given many things
both for necessity and comfort, which he would have used in his fear: but
saying thus (fashion or conform not your selves to this world) Hence we
gather, that whatsoever is a property, guise, fashion, behavior, custom, or
practice of sinners and corrupt men, (as they be such) this is even cause
enough why the children of God are to decline it, and to follow the quite
contrary course. Diogenes thought that he should do best when he did least
what the common people did: but sure that course of life is most commendable
and acceptable to God, which is most contrary to the fashion of the world. The
more and further that in our speech, gesture, attire, condition, or works, we
go from the world, the nearer we come unto true godliness. As Christian
religion is the more pure and sincere the less it does partake with the
superstition of Antichrist: so our Christian conversation is the more holy and
unblameable, the further it is removed from the customs and fashions of
unregenerate persons. Finally, seeing Paul writes to men already justified by
faith, and sanctified, yea in a great measure: this puts us in mind that
this lesson is fit for the best Christians to learn and take out, and that it
is a work not of a day, week, month, or year, to fly the conformity and
likeness of the world, but such as men ought all their life long to be
occupied and busied about; all time and care is here too little.

This precept contains one half of our repentance touching leaving of our
sins, and is like those other precepts of ceasing from evil, Esaias 1. 16.
Psalm. 34, 14. of destroying and crucifying the body of sin, Romans 6. 6. of
mortifying our earthly members, and putting off the old man, Col. 3, 5, 6, 7,
8. of denying worldly lusts, Titus 2, 12. of departing from iniquity, 2. Tim.
2, 19. All these differ not in substance of matter, but in terms; affoording
business enough and enough again to him that should live Methusalems age. For
what a work and a do about for saking of one foolish and sinful fashion (I
mean not of apparel, yet even that way we can be foolish and fantastical
enough, and as froward in retaining, as forward in receiving them, but wicked
doings,) how long ere one naughty usage will be left? what time and travail
will it ask trow you, to rid our house of so many noisome cumbersome guests,
as have now long time haunted us: our sins of nature, custom, trade
especially?


DIAL. III.
Verse 2. But be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what that good, acceptable, and perfect will of God is.


Tim. What is the matter and method of this text?


Silas. An exhortation to the transformation, or changing of our minds, that
is, to pray God and earnestly to endeavor to have our minds changed by his
Spirit. This exhortation is enforced by an argument from a necessary effect,
because unless our minds be renewed we shall never be able to allow and follow
the will of God which is here commended by their Epithites or qualities. First
good. Secondly, acceptable. Thirdly, perfect.


Tim. What is meant by [transforming?]


Silas. Not such a Metamorphosis or change as Ovid did dream of, by passing of
one substance into another, but an alteration or change of judgment, purpose,
will, and affections from evil to good, which the Apostle himself calls a
renouation or renewing; such a work of the Spirit whereby old and corrupt
qualities (which still stick in us, after new birth) be corrected and
resormed, till they be extinct and destroyed.


Tim. What is signified here by [minde?]


Silas. Both the faculties or powers of the soul, to wit, the understanding
and will, the daily decays whereof in holiness, we are here exhorted to
seek by prayer and all means to repair. As a garment or an house when they
wax old or worn, are to be patched and helped, so the godly when through
oldnesse of sin or corruption, any breach or waste is made in their mind or
manners, they are not to despair or faint, or cast away all care and hope; but
by sorrow, tears, repentance, to rectify and remedy that which is amiss and
otherwise then well. This is the sum of the Apostles exhortation.


Tim. What Doctrines do arise from this short exhortation?


Silas. First, that even the noblest part of man's soul, Doctrine.
(his mind and reason) is corrupt and depraved with ignorance, vanity,
unbelief, errors, doubtings, and heresies, etc. This truth has testimony
from other Authorities Authority.
and places of Scripture, 2 Cor. 3, 5. 1 Cor. 2, 14 Reason.
Ephesians. 2, 3. and 4, 18. Colos. 1, 21. And also, reason to prove it, namely,
that the mind has need to be renewed, therefore it is corrupt and old; for
old and corrupt things only need renewing. That which is whole, sound, and
perfect, craves no renouation, which ever is of a thing decayed and wasted.


Tim. What Use is to be made of this Doctrine by Gods Use.
Children?


Silas. First, it confuteth such Philosophers and Popish Sophisters, who
vehemently contend, that the mind remains still sound and vncorrupt, always
enclining unto good things, as Aristotle speaks in his Ethickes; whereas the
sickness of the mind may be easily bewraied by these things, namely, that in
those most notable things that the heathen were stirred up unto by the
direction of their mind, they had regard neither unto the will nor honor of
God, but were led with ambition and vainglory, being greedily desirous of
fame and praise amongst men: and as their intent and end were both naught, so
they failed in the manner, because the love of God and of their neighbor, did
not bear any sway in their actions. Secondly, this serves to humble man, for
that he wants all power to apply his mind unto good things, being
altogether blind in spiritual matters. Thirdly, it shows the great
infection of sin, poisoning, defiling, and corrupting not the body alone, but
the soul; not the inferior, as the will, affections, and perfect senses, but
also the superior and principal part of man, the mind, judgment, memory,
and conscience. Lastly, it shows how much the elect are beholden to the grace
of Christ, by whom the whole hurt taken by sin, is cured and healed through his
grace and Spirit.


Tim. What other Doctrine arises out of these words?


Silas. Blessed Paul, directing this exhortation to such Doctrine.
as were already faithful and regenerate, does hereby teach us, that the
godliest persons are in this life renewed and sanctified, not fully, but in
part only: for there should be no cause of exhorting believers to be renewed
Reason.
in their minds, were it not that still there sticks in their souls some
blindness and perverseness, which would be corrected and enlightened. This
imperfection Paul acknowledges himself, Phil. 3, 12. 1 Cor. 13, 9. and David,
Psalm. 119. and all the Apostles praying for increase of Faith. Finally, what
cause were there daily to ask pardon of sins, if there were here an
absolute freedom from sin? whereof the best of Gods children have in
genuously accused themselves. The Scriptures also universally proclaiming, that
there is no man living, which sins not in thought, word, and deed, and that
continually.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. It confutes such as vainly and falsely dream of Use.
perfection, as the Libertines, Familists, Anabaptists, and Papists, which
hold the Law possible to be kept, and that men may be without any mortal sin,
and do more then is commanded, or have an absolute holiness and freedom from
sin by the holy Ghost. Secondly, it exhorts all Gods children to see and
feel their own wants and weaknesses, and in the sight and sense of them to
lament and strive toward perfection, Phil. 3, 12, 13. to confess our
imperfection, is our best perfection. In remission of sins, not in perfection
of virtues, consistes our blessedness.


Tim. What other lesson from this part of the verse?


Silas. That the renewing of a man, begins at his mind, not in his body and
outward members and actions, The mind is first to be made good.
but first in his understanding part, which beginning so, it must spread
abroad into the will, affections, and members of the body: as man's sall began
at the tainting and abusing his mind, through unbelief to the word of Gods
threatening, so his restoring must take beginning thereat, being Queen and
mistress to guide all the rest. Knowledge of Gods will is the first work of the
regenerating Spirit.


Tim. Let us go forward to the second part of this Text; the Exhortation, and
tell me what is meant by [The will of GOD?]


Silas. Not that faculty of power that is essential in Interpretat.
God, whereby God purposes and decrees all things from everlasting, Romans 9,
16, 18, 19. but the things which God wills. Of which, the Law is one part,
requiring duties to be dove toward God and man: and the Gospel another part,
requiring men to beleoue in Christ, and repent of their sins, John 6, 4. 1
John 3, 23. 1 These. 4. 3. The revealed will then is meant here, namely the
promises and precepts of the word, and not his secret will. In our common
speech we use to say, this is my will, who^ we mean not that part of the
soul, by the which we will and desire things, but the things themselves which
we do desire, so here it is taken.


Tim. To prove what this will is, what does it signify?


Silas. First, plainly and distinctly to know it. Secondly, to try and discern
it from that which is not Gods will, John 10, 4, 5. Romans 2, 18. 1 These. 5, 21.
Acts 17, 11. Thirdly, with sound judgment to allow, and heartily to love
things agreeable to his will, Phil. 1, 19, Psalm. 119, 14, 16. O how do I love
thy Low, it is deerer to me. etc. Lastly, with choarefulnesse and diligence to
perform it, and to conform our whole life, according to the rules of it, John
10, 14. Iam. 1, 22, 23. 1 John 2, 4, 5.


Tim. What Doctrine are we to learn from these words thus expounded?


Silas. Seeing that the approouing of the will of God, Doctrine.
is a special part, fruit, and effect of our renewing, as this particle [
That] does imply: it does teach therefore, that none but regenerate persons
(borne anewe by the holy Ghost) can love and embrace Gods will by Faith and
obedience to it. All unregenerate men, either thorough ignorance they do not
know it; or if they know it, through malice of their hearts they hate and
abhor it, as heretics and profane men: or thorough hypocrisy they may
speak and profess well of it, yet they refuse to frame themselves according
to it. As very many which are called Christians, are very forwards to hear the
word, to commend the doctrine which is taught, to condemn things which are
contrary to the will of God, and to praise the Preacher of the word; to make
great show of zeal, both toward the word of God, and them that bring it, like
to Herod, Mark 6. and Simon Magus, Acts 8. too like others which live after
it, and to join in fellowship and company with them; and yet being
transported and clean carried aside by some wicked affections, as
uncleanness, covetousness, wrath, pride, or the like; they never submit to
the will of God to do it, but most miserably fail in their practice,
preferring and taking part with their own corrupt will, against Gods will.
Whereas the truly regenerate person, as he has his eyes open by the
illumination of Gods Spirit, to see in part what the will of God is, so he
strives earnestly to perform what he knows, to believe that which God
does promise, to do what he bids, to leave undone what he forbids, to
fear what he threateneth, to rejoice in his comforts. At a word, to order and
guide his thoughts, words, and deeds, by the sound rule of his word, as he may
please God in them all; as the Prophet David professes of himself, that he
was purposed to keep the righteous statutes of God, and had sworn to observe
his testimonies, Psalm. 119. And the blessed Apostle Paul (as he witnesses of
himself) desires to keep a good conscience, and to live honestly, Acts 24,
16. Heb. 13, 18. So every one of Gods children, according to the measure of
grace, received in their new birth, it is their hearts desire and constant
endeavor to express in their actions that knowledge they have of the will of
God, and by their own obedience to Gods will, as by a sure token and mark,
their regeneration is sealed and made known to them, 1 John 2, 4. I am thine
Lord, save me, for I keep thy commandments, says David. Thus may every godly
man conclude, that God is his Father and will save him, because he labors to
please him, by living according to his word: For not every one that says Lord,
but he that does shall enter into the kingdom, Math. 7, 21. Such for their
firmness in the state of grace and salvation, are likened to an house built
upon a rock, which never shall be removed, Math. 7. 25, 26.


Tim. What other lesson may we take from hence?


Silas. The only rule of faith and manners, is the will of God revealed in his
word. The Shepherds voice is that which the sheep are to hearken to and
follow, and Gods will is that only thing which his people must approve
Reasons.
of, believe, and practice. The reasons hereof be: First, because the will of
God only is good, it commends all good things, it condemns all evil
things; the will of all other creatures is so far good, as it accordes with
this: also, it makes men of ill to become good, for it conuerteth sinners,
Psalm. 19, 7. The second reason is, because this will of God is acceptable;
there is nothing that we either think, speak, or do, which is acceptable or
pleasing to God, if it swerue from his will: to the which, whatsoever is
agreeing, that, and that only, he likes, blesses, and rewards: as it is
written, Great is their reward that do thereafter, Psalm. 19, 11. Thus Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Elias, Zacharias, Elizabeth, and whosoever else were accepted of
God, it was therefore because they believed, and did his will. Cain, Esau,
Achab, Judas, and others, that have been rejected of God, it has bin because
they rejected and refused his will. As parents and masters accept such children
best which strive to do their will, so it is with God.


Tim. What profit may come to us by the meditation of this doctrine?


Silas. It must serve to stir up all good Christians more to love and follow
the will of God, which is so good, so holy, so perfect. Secondly, it must warn
all such men to look to themselves, and betimes to repent, which care not
either to know what his will is, or to govern or guide their ways by it; for
the more excellent the will of God is, the more just and heavy will their
condemnation be which neglect it. Thirdly, it sharply reproues such as make
either their own corrupt lusts, or the sinful customs, or the examples of
the times, or commandments of men, the pattern and rule of their
conversation, Mat. 15, 15. Lastly, it confutes the Papists, which charge the
will of God with imperfection, as if it were only given for such as are rude,
and not for the strong and perfecter men. Also which equal to it, and match
with it apocryphal writings, and traditions of the Church, as things to be
received with like affection and reverence as the very perfect will of God it
selse: as Tridentine council blasphemously has decreed and written. Here also
is an argument for the fullness and perfection of Scriptures, because in them
only is found the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God. When I go from
the Scriptures, who shall tell me what is the will of God? says one of the
Fathers.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 3. I say then through the grace that is given unto me to every one that
is among you, that no man presume to understand above that which is meet to
understand: but that he understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith.


Tim. What is it that the Apostle does now perform, and how does he proceed?


Silas. The Apostle having already given us his general exhortation (in the
two former verses) that we should serve God, first by studying how to please
and obey him, by mortifying of our lusts: And secondly, by not studying how to
frame our selves like the children of men: he does in this verse descend to
particular duties, whereof the first is an Apostolical sanction, or
proposition, touching the right use of spiritual gifts, and the due
administration of ecclesiastical functions, until verse (...).


Tim. What is the sum of the special exhortation in this third verse
contained?


Silas. That no man carry himself proudly in respect of Sum.
his gifts, having an ouerweening opinion of himself, as if he knew more then
he does know; but to think modestly of his own knowledge and gifts, and to
apply them with discretion to the good of others, according to the measure of
them, and the meaning of God the giver; which was not for ostentation and
contention, but for mutual edification.


Tim. What be the parts of this present exhortation?


Silas. They be two: First the exhortation it self. Secondly, the explication,
with certain reasons annexed, to give an edge to the exhortation. The
exhortation has a preface and the matter. The preface points at Paul's
Apostolical authority, enabling him to command; and puts on the Romans and
all other Christians, a necessity to yield obedience. The matter of the
exhortation consists of two precepts: First, that we be not arrogant,
presuming to understand more then is meet, or to be too wise. Secondly, to
understand according to sobriety, that is, modestly to esteem of our gifts;
the reasons are these: First from the author, because God is the giver.
Secondly, from the measure, no one man has all, but each his portion. Thirdly,
from the universality of receivers, every one has his proper gift, there is
none which has not his talent. Fourthly, from the nature of the gift, it is
no temporal but a spiritual gift, therefore no man ought to be insolent to
despise others, but each to be content with his own grace and to use it well.
The cause which moved Paul to this exhortation, was great emulation which burst
out into contention, the Jews would be preferred before the Gentiles, and the
Gentiles despised the Jews; such as had more worthy gifts disdained their
inferiors.


Tim. What things are to be observed in Paul's preface?


Silas. First, that he gives not a counsel but a commandment, for [ I say]
signifies as much as if he had said (I bid,) I command, I enjoin, as the
manner of the Latin is to put ( dico for iubeo,) so as this is no indifferent
thing Deus dixit, Genesis 1.
which men may do or not, but a necessary precept which may not at any hand be
omitted without sin. We are further to mark, that whereas the Ministers of
Christ may sometimes speak mildely out of love, as in verse 1. so sometimes
they may command precisely out of that power which Christ has given, as here
and 1. Tim. 6, 17. 2. Tim. 4, 1. The second thing to be noted, is the
universality of this precept, that it is to all and every one; it reaches
throughout to every member or officer of the Church whatsoever his office or
gift be, there is none exempted, be he high or low, learned or unlearned, they
are bound to submit themselves to this precept, concerning humility in using
rightly their gifts and offices. If they be inferior persons and have mean
gifts, they have need of it for to keep them from envying them which have
better: If superiors and have more excellent graces then they have need of it
to keep them from pride, and disdaining them which have less. Lastly,
whatsoever they be they shall never turn their gifts to the profit of
others, and of public good, unless they be modest and sober minded. The next
thing to be noted in this preface is, that Paul does bring forth his
Apostalicall calling and function to warrant his precept. For (grace) in this
place signifies neither the gift of holy eloquence, or power in speech, nor
yet the gifts of wisdom as some think, but (by a Metonymie of the cause for
the effect) it is put for the Apostolical vocation, as also Romans 1, 7. and 15,
15. which is therefore called (grace) because he received it freely, being put
into this office when he thought not of it, yea he was a blasphemer and
persecutor of the Church, Acts 9. 1. Tim. 1, 19. And this he does to show he
was no intruder or ambitious usurper, which thrust in himself, doing more then
he might well do, in giving precepts to Churches; as also to draw the Romans,
and in them all Christians to yield unto the practice of this precept with all
good reverence and submission, that they be not found to strive and fight
against the Lord Jesus speaking to us by the Apostle Paul, whom to hearken to,
and to reverence, is to receive and hearken unto Christ, Mat. 10.


Tim. Now to the exhortation, what is the first part of it?


Silas. Not to understand above that which is meet, or not to presume to be
wise over much.


Tim. But how can any be wise overmuch, seeing none can have too much
wisdom, nor can understand enough? how the shall any offend by understanding
above that which is meet? for we are bid to be wise as Serpents, Matthew 10,
16. Ephesians 5, 15.


Silas. It is true, therefore here is not condemned the excess of wisdom,
(for God will have his children strive to perfection) but the proud opinion of
such men as challenge to themselves all wisdom and knowledge, who both are
proud of that which they have, and also arrogate to themselves understanding
and gifts which they have not, to the contempt of others, thinking themselves
to know all, and to be the only wise men, none to be like them, or fit to be
compared with them. This attributing too much to our own conceit, and
detracting from others, is the maine vice here forbid and condemned, out of
which (as out of a noisome root) there do spring 3. noisome branches, all
comprehended under this part: as first an itching desire to invent new
doctrines, forsaking the beaten path, and simplicity of the known and received
truth, to run into new and strange opinions. And that this pride and
ouer-weening of wit, is the Mother of heresy and damnable errors, both
Scriptures, 1 Timothy 6, 3, 4. and lamentable experience have confirmed to us,
that some to be thought wiser then others, have hatched errors.

Secondly, a too great confidence of our understanding, as if it were sharp
and quick enough to pierce into the most secret things of God, which are
vntraccable and past finding out. Whence it is, that many have neglected things
necessary to be known, and fruitful; to search out things which cannot be
sought out, and tend not a whit to edifying. Of these men Solomon says, that
such as search the maiesly shall be swallowed up; it is the wisemans counsel
to content our selves with that which God has commanded and taught, and not to
seek unto high things above our capacity. It is a needless matter (says
Augustine) to define that with danger, what we may be ignorant of without
danger: and better it is still to doubt of things hidden, then to contend
about that which is uncertain. The third branch is curiosity, when a man
thrusts his sickle into other men's harvest, rushing beyond the bounds of his
own calling, to run into and intermeddle with the matters which appertain to
the vocation of other men, intruding upon other men's gifts and functions; as
King Vzza did usurp the Priests function, 2 Chronicles. 26, 16. and another Vzza
put his hand to the Arc: as Romish Prelates not conoent to meddle with their
own Churches and affairs, would curiously busy themselves with other men's
Churches and charges, and secular matters, till they did arise unto this height
of tyranny which now they are grown unto: To be short, as all busy bodies do,
which leave their own places and matters, to intermeddle with that which in no
wise belongs to them, contrary to the precept of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 11.
Study to be quiet, and to do your own business. This curiosity draws with it
infinite contentions, and much waste of time, which might be better spent: as
Seneca says, Men spend much time amiss in doing nothing, but more in doing
evil things, and yet most of all in doing other things which be not proper
to us, but appertain to our neighbors; and this is most properly meant here.


Tim. Now we see what it is (to understand above that is meet:) let us hear
what it is (to think soherly) which is the second part of Paul's exhortation.


Silas. There is a sobriety of the body, which is properly Double (...).
briety.
temperance, and consistes in a moderation of our appetite about pleasurable
things of this life; as meat, drink, apparel, generation, etc. Secondly, a
sobriety of the mind, which is modesty or humility (the mother of all virtues,
and the preserver of the mind in soundness and temper:) as on the other side,
pride is the oouerthrower and ouerturner of the mind, leading men oftentimes
to folly and madness. This humility stands in two things: First, the sight
and acknowledgement of our own infirmity. Secondly, in a contentment with our
own gifts and condition of life, without being puffed up through our gifts,
or thrusting our oars into other men's boats, by being busy in other men's
callings. This is to be wise according to sobriety, as the next verse opens
it, when we judge or think of our selves, according to the measure of our
own graces and degree, esteeming meanly of our selves, and much better of
others, then of our selves.


Tim. What be the reasons whereby Paul persuades us to the exercise of this
Christian modesty?


Silas. First, because it is God, who is the distributer of our gifts, 1 Cor.
7, 7. 2 Cor. 12, 6. Now it is certain, that God administreth his gifts both
most wisely and most justly; therefore, let not such as have greater gifts,
be insolent, seeing nothing is their own, but all received, 1 Cor. 4, 7. nor
men of lesser gifts repine at others, for this were to neglect Gods
administration. Neither let any man hide his talent in a Napkin, or bury it in
the ground, with the naughty servant in the Gospel, remembering that God will
have an account of his gifts, how they are used or bestowed. The second reason
is, because God has distributed a gift to every man; there is not a person in
Gods family, but has a talent committed to him: one has the gift of teaching,
another of exhorting, another of ruling, another of being ruled: one has a
public gift, another has a private gift: as in the natural body each member
has a faculty, so in the mystical body of Christ's Church, 1 Cor. 12, 6. 7,
8, 9, etc. Therefore let no man imagine that himself has all, but let him
know, that each has his gift and function too, and by this means, none shall
despise nor yet hinder others, but each shall employ his proper gift unto the
common good of the rest.

The third reason is, that to every man is dealt out a measure of Faith. Here
(by Faith) we are to understand first the sound knowledge of Christ. Secondly,
the effects thereof, namely, the infused habit of justifying belief. Thirdly,
those gifts of the Spirit, which accompany this habit of faith, which are
therefore called by the name of (Faith,) both because Faith is the gift by
which all other are attained (Be it done to thee according to thy faith, Math.
15, 28.) Also because these gifts are conferred upon the faithful which
believe in Christ. A measure of this Faith, is set against fullness or
perfection, which no mere man in this life can have, because God gives it unto
none, Phil. 3, 12. but deals to every man a certain portion of faith, to
some more, and others less, as he himself pleases, 1 Cor. 7, 7. Heereunto
appertains the parable of the Talents, whereof five were committed to one,
and ten to another, and one to another. Like as in our fleshly bodies there is
great difference of gifts, our more excellent members, having more excellent
faculties: so it fares in the church, which is the body of Christ; there is
grace given to every member of that body, but it is according to the measure of
the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4, 7.


Tim. What use here of?


Silas. First, it must be a bridle unto arrogancy, and a motive to humility,
to think that no one man either has al gifts, or those gifts which he has in
full perfection, but a certain measure meated out to every ma, not by our
deserts, but as it seems good in the eye of the giver. Here also we may
observe, how the Pope does walk by this rule, or how may we judge him to be the
servant of Christ, who being but one man, yet arrogareth all to himself? he
will have the whole power of the Church, yea, and he will do all in the
Commonwealth too, he alone will be both a temporal and spiritual Monark, he
in grosseth all knowledge into his own breast, nothing must be divinity and
truth which he says is not so. At a word, according to the Latin Proverb, he
alone will be Dominus Fac-totum: and after our common English saying, He alone
will have all the Pipes. This is far from contenting himself with his own
portion and measure, as other fellow-seruants do: he may very well and
worthily be termed Antichrist, being so contrary to Christ, who himself was
so full of humility, as Phil. 2, 6, 7. John 13, 5. taught his disciples to be
humble and meek, Mat. 11, 29. whereas this Lucifer is the child, nay the King
of pride nay pride it self. Moreover, seeing the measure of Faith is dealt of
God, hence it follows that faith is Gods gift, and comes not by man's will in
whole or in part, Ephesians. 2, 10. Also the measure of Faith is diverse: there is a
little or a weak faith; again, there is a great or a strong faith. Let not
the strong in faith be lifted up, but think of profiting and increasing their
measure, after the example of the Apostles (Lord increase our Faith:) neither
let them of little faith despair, for GOD that dealt their measure, will
maintain and augment it, so they do their part and endeavor. Finally, when
Paul requires us to be wise according to sobriety, he condemns in all
Christians both blockishnesse or foolishness, and slothfulness; requiring in
them both wisdom in the knowledge of universal things both divine and
humane; and prudence in the choice of particulars, about things profitable to
the Church and our selves: likewise industry in applying their understanding
unto the most benefit of our selves and our brethren.


DIAL. V.
Verses 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. For as we have many members in one body, and all members
have not one office, so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one
members of another. Having then gifts, etc.


Tim. HOw does the Apostle Paul go forwards, and how does this text hang upon
the former?


Sil. Now he btingeth a new argument from the communion Coherence.
of the faithful, to prove his last exhortation, to wit, that every one
without pride ought to content himself with his measure of gifts, and to use
them to common edification in all humility and charity; and this he does by a
comparison of a natural body, which comparison Similitude.
our Apostle uses also in 1. Cor. 12. 12. and Ephesians. 4, 4, 16. It is very fit
and of great force to draw men from curiosity and arrogance, unto humility and
unity; for as in a body natural, albeit it be one, and the members many,
distinct the one from another, in place, order, use, office, and gifts; yet
one member does not invade the room, or usurp the duty of another, but each
member keeping in his own place and rank, confers his own proper gift and
does his own office to the safety and good of the whole body in all peace and
concord, without disdaning or envying one another: So in the Church (which is
Christ's mystical body) it is meet that each member endeavor it self with
quietness and modesty, to serve and benefit others, without intruding one
into another calling. What efficacy to hold men in concord this similitude
has, may be perceived by the example of Menenius Agrippa in Liuye, when the
people in a faction and discontent, were tenting themselves from their Senators
and Rulers, he reduced them to good agreement by this comparison: also the
Holy Ghost has often used this similitude to persuade union amongst
Christians, as especially in 1. Corinthians. 12. and Ephesians 4, 4. and in our
present text.


Tim. What be the parts or things chiefly to be considered in this similitude
contained in verses 4, 5?


Silas. The first thing to be considered here is, that the union or society of
believers is called a body: a matter usual to give the name of a body to a
fellowship in all languages: thus a College is termed a body Scholasticall, a
City, a body political: so the Congregation of Christian professors, both 1.
Cor. 10, 17. Ephe. 1, 22, 23. for resemblance and likeness sake which is
between a society and a body: for first in a natural body, the body is but
one, and the head is but one; likewise the body of the Church which is but
one, has but one head, and that is Christ, Ephe. 1, 22. Col. 1, 18. Should
therefore the Pope be a head to the Church? it would be a monstrous body The
Pope no head of the Church.
having two heads at once, either principal or subordinate, yea four heads at
once, when besides Christ there were Christ gave some Apostles some Prophets,
etc.
three Anti-Popes actually, one at Auinion, another at Rauenna, a third at
Rome: also Peter himself was but a member of the Church (as other believers
were) how the^ can the Pope (suppose he were Peter's successor) be an Ephesians
4, 11. but he gave no head.
head? for thirty eight years together from Pope Euaristus unto Pope Pius the
sea of Rome had no Pope, therefore so long was a body without a head; yea were
the Pope head, so often as the Pope dies, the Church also should dye. But what
can a Pope do, which an head ought to do, either for external direction
(being an heretic,) or for internal vivification and motion (being but a
creature) and therefore no head of the Church, which is the body and spouse of
Christ; therefore the Pope no husband, no head of it, no not so much as a sound
member, but he is head rather of the Antichristian body, and Captain of that
apostasy from the faith, 2. These. 2.

The second thing to be considered in this comparison, is, that although the
body of the Church be one, and the head one, yet the members be many, all knit
to Christ their head, and among themselves, by the inward glue of Faith and
Christian charity, and by the outward band of the word and Sacraments; as our
fleshly members by sinnewes and arteries are joined to our head, and one to
another: and this is that communion which is among the Saints. Unto which,
nothing is more repugnant then pride and strife. Let nothing (says Paul) be
done through contention or vaineglory, if there be any communion of the
Spirit, or comfort of love, Phil. 2, 1. Where we learn, that contention and
arrogance cannot stand with Christian communion.

The third thing to be observed in this similitude, is, that the faithful
which are as many members, have every one a several function, and a particular
gift for ordering and doing their function. As in our natural body, there is
no member but has his own office peculiar to it self, the eye to see, the
ear to hear, the mouth to speak, the feet to walk, etc. and to every one
belongs his own gift and faculty, as of seeing to the eye, etc. So amongst
the faithful, some have one function, some another, one was a Doctor, another
a Pastor, one Ephesians. 4, 11.
an Elder, another was a Deacon; one a superior and ruled, Phil. 1. 1.
another obeys as an inferior; and every one of 1 Timothy 3, 8.
these have singular and special gifts for the performance of their work.
Here is moreover to be observed, that as in our natural body, no one member
incroacheth upon the gift or office of another, so in the church of God, one
Christian should not usurp the office of another, each is bound peaceably to
do his own duty without hinderance unto, or disturbance of others, by proud
curiosity and busy meddling.

Lastly, as the head, or eye, or ear, do not proudly insult over meaner
members which have less graces and offices in the body, so a man of great
gifts may not contemn one of a lesser; but every Christian with humbleness
turn his gifts unto the common good. As all the members in the body labor
together jointly for the preservation and good plight of the whole. The want of
this has brought such Schisms and factions as we now see with much grief,
to be too rife both in Common wealth and Church of God.


Tim. What does the Apostle perform in Verses 6, 7, 8?


Silas. He amplifieth that part of the comparison touching diverse members, and
different gifts and functions. As in a natural body there be many members, and
these have sundry faculties and operations; so amongst the faithful, they have
gifts and duties one diverse from another, (Seeing we have gifts which are
diverse) that is; We Christians (which be as many members) have diverse gifts.
Some the gift to teach, some the gift to exhort, some to rule, some to
distribute, some to show mercy, each have their proper work, and proper
gift. Let every one in the use of his gift be wise unto sobriety, (for this
must be added to supply the sense) and not, let us be conuetsant (as Beza
would have it) or, let us attend and wait, as the Syrian Interpreters, and
Gwalter do think: but the words in the third verse [ Let us soberlie think,
or Bew se to sobriety] must in common be applied to all these parts and
branches following, which do all depend upon that precept, and serve to expound
it by the particulars.


Tim. But what are those gifts spoken of in Verse seventh? And what is meant
by [Grace given,] and by the [proportion of Faith?]


Silas. Paul speaks not of myraculous and extraordinary gifts, such as he
reckoned up, 1 Cor. 12, 6 8, 9, 10. for then this exhortation should not be
perpetual and pertain to the present Churches which lack those myraculous
gifts. Secondly, the functions and gifts here mentioned, be ordinary, such
as the Church of Christ has need of to the end of the world. As man
consists of soul (which has understanding and will) and a body: God
willing to have the whole man saved, appointed for the understanding part,
Doctrines to teach it, and for the will exhortations to quicken it, and for the
body certain other officers, to look to the welfare and carriage of it before
men.

The word [Grace,] leads us unto the fountain of these gifts and callings,
the free favor of God: and by (Analogy of faith) is understood not as Faith
has deserved; but as every one has the measure of Faith. The holy Scriptures,
which be a certain rule of Doctrines and Canons of all saving verity, are
here understood by Analogy of faith, as some think, (or heads of Faith)
gathered by the Apostles from out of the Scriptures; according to which, the
teaching and exhortations of doctors and Pastors ought to be examined, and to
be allowed, being consonant to that form or proportion, or refused if it be
found dissonant and disagreeing from it. The Papists wickedly dote, and dream
foolishly of a certain unwritten rule by Traditions, delivered to the Church
to try and prove by it, even the writings and Books of the Apostles and
Evangelists which yet themselves will be the Canon whereby to judge of all that
which is taught in the Church.


Tim. What be the kinds of offices and functions unto which these ordinary
gifts belong?


Silas. They be summarily these two: First, Prophesying: Prophesy or Ministry.
Secondly, Ministry. Whereof one contains instruction, which he calls
here Prophesying, not in a special for prediction of things to come, but in a
general sense, in which the word prophesying is used, in 1. Cor. 14, 13. This
is named first, as the most noble and excellent So Origin and M. Peter Martyr
take it generally for Doctrine and exhortation: also (...).
function; the other, pertains to discipline and manners, and is here called
[Ministring,] not in a particular sense, as agreeing to Deacons, but in a
general meaning, as comprehending other kinds under it, which were to be
conversant about the body, and temporal things. Unto prophesying there be two
Offices belong: First [teaching] which is the office of the Doctor: and
secondly, Prophesying subdivided.
[exhortation] which is the office of the Pastor; for Thus Peter Martyr,
Oleuian, and M.
these two offices are divided, (though sometime their gifts may and do meet
in one, Ephesians. 4, 11.) and have their several gifts; the one has the gift
of knowledge, Doctor Willet do distinguish them.
the other of wisdom, 1. Cor. 12, 8. and several operations or works, for
the one teaches and interprets Differing guists verse 6.
Scripture, lays out the sense and doctrine soundly, consuting errors, which
is the Doctors part; whereof we have a practice in our University professors
which read divinity Lectures in the Schools, as also in our Cathedral
Churches, to exhort the hearers unto godliness, and to comfort and
strengthen the infirmities of faith in the Saints, as also to minister
Sacraments, this is the part of the Pastor or exhorter.

Now-[ministring] which is the second general head, has Ministry subdivided.
three gifts, or is subdivided into three functions, one, of such persons as
are set apart to distribute the treasury or Acts 6, 3, 5.
Church goods to the poor, as every one had need. These goods came first by
free sale, Acts 4, 34, 35. then by collection, 1. Cor. 16, 1, 2. And for the
right disposing of the public alms, there were appointed Officers, Acts 6, 5.
whose gift was (simplicity) without fraud, vainglory, covetousness, or
frowardness to give out the alms. The Thus Martyr Olcuian, Orinaus, and
Paraeus do judge: Piscator also. Like to our Churchwardens and Side men.
second Ministers were they which were joined as assisstants and helpers to the
Pastors, for good government of the flock, to prevent scandals and offenses,
1. Cor. 12. 28. 1. Tim. 5, 17. These Mc Calvin calls Seniors, Osiander
censors of manners, Tertullian presidents, which observed and attended manners
and outward behauior only; there gift is diligence, which contains both a
resolute purpose and great endeavor, with delight to do the business and
charge committed to them. The third and last Thus Faius, and Gualter, and
Paraeus expound it.
Ministers (be mercy-shewers,) not such as be spoken of Mat. 25, 35, 36. for
these works be common to all Christians; but such merciful works as be
mentioned 1. Tim. 5, 10. Their guist is (cheerfulness,) which contains in
it three things, first alacrity of heart, secondly, gentleness in words,
thirdly, pleasantnes in countenance: they which were to be employed in this
service of mercy showing unto sick, aged, impotent, strangers, exiles,
orphans, as their work was such as might breed lothsoinnesse to attend sick
and feeble; so they were to be old widows and aged men, who naturally are
sour and testy, therefore needed this precept of cheerfulness.


DIAL. VI.
Verses 9, 10. Let love be without dissimulation, abhor that which is evil,
cleave to that which is good. Be affectioned, etc.


Tim. WHat is beer performed by Paul?


Silas. After particular duties in respect of a gift Coherence.
and a function in the Church, now he turns unto general duties, and
commends unto Christians certain general graces pertaining unto common
conversation; whereunto he exhorts them, namely to continue in the practice
of them: for being believers they already had begun to exercise these virtues;
as namely love, courtesy, diligence, feruency, hope, patience, prayer,
liberality, hospitality, humility, mutual affection and simplicity; forbearing
of revenge, and such like godly grace, as ornaments of our Christian
profession, and fruits of charity. Of this love here be in our text sundry
Six properties and effects of charity.
good precepts: First, that it be true without dissembling. Secondly,
discreet, abhorring evil. Thirdly, firm in adhering and sticking to
goodness. Fourthly, universal to all the brethren without partialnesse.
Fifthly, fernent and earnest without coldness. Sixthly, humble without ambition.


Tim. Wherefore does be begin with love? why is this first Doubt.
named of all other virtues mentioned in this Chapter?


Sil. Because it is the chief gift above other, and sountaine Solution.
of all the rest, which do spring out of love, as headspring and mother of
them all. Before in former Chapters, whiles Paul discussed the doctrine of
grace, and entreated of free Justification by Christ, he never mentioned Note
this.
love, for that it had nothing to do in matter of forgiveness of sin, either
to merit it, or to receive it: It does only declare (as a sign) who be
justified and pardoned by faith. But now he gives exhortation to manners and
good life, he names love, as the chief and principal grace which swayeth
most in the matters of a Christian life and conversation, being ringleader
unto, Doctrine.
and breeder of the rest: for therefore do men behave themselves justly,
meekely, peaceably, chastely, and courteously, because they do love.


Tim. By what Reasons may it be proved that charity is a chief gift of the
spirit?


Silas. Not only because Paul names it in the first place, as here and
Galath. 5, 22. and for that it is the Reason.
root of all the rest, as Faith is the root of love: but thirdly, because it
is the sum of the Law, Romans 13, 10 And fourthly, it makes al graces
profitable, which are of no use without charity, 1 Cor. 13, 1, 2. and fifthly,
it is the band of perfection, which knits all Christians, and holds all duties
together, as sticks are made fast by a band. And sixthly, it is the maine
badge and cognizance of true Christianity, and a certain note to discern a
true Christian from a counterfeit, John 15, 35. 1 John 3, 14. Lastly, it is
perpetual, and remains after other gifts, when Faith and hope cease it
continues, 1 Cor. 13, 13.


Tim. What Use is to be made of this Doctrine, touching Use.
the excellency of love?


Silas. First, to inflame our hearts more and more with the love of this lovely
grace, more earnestly to seek after it, also more heartily to praise God for
it. I exhort therefore (as Paul Col. 3, 14.) that above all things we put on
love.


Tim. Of what quality is that love we are exhorted unto? 1. quality of love.



Silas. Such love as is without dissimulation, that is, it must be true,
sincere, from the heart, without fraud, guile, deceit, false shows or
wrinkles.


Tim. How may a Christian judge of himself, that he has this undissembled and
upright love?


Silas. There be three rules by which it may be discerned Three Rules whereby
to judge sincere love.
to be void of hypocrisy. First, when one does heartily love God, and that
which is pleasing to him. A good rule: for then we cannot choose but in our
love to our neighbor to be sincere, because sincerity and truth is a thing
highly pleasing to God. The second rule, when we are ready to do toward our
neighbor, as we our selves would be dealt withal by others. This rule is
commended in Math. 7, 12. for no man will dissemble or deal falsely with
himself. The third rule is, not to love in word and tongue only, but in truth
and indeed, 1. John 3, 18. not as they are spoken of, in James 2, 15, 16. but
as God loved mankind, to whom he promised his Son by word, and afterward
sent him at the sulnesse of time, Gal. 4, 4. or as Christ, who showed his love
not only by kind speeches, but by giving his life, 1 John 3, 16. so our love
must be expressed in actions, and then it is sound and undissembled. Lip love,
is lying love.


Tim. To what profit may we turn this doctrine?


Silas. It serves for just and due reproof of all such as make show of love
and mean it not: such as give sugared for words to hide the gaul of the heart,
and the bitterness of the hand, speaking fair when they mean foul, as Caine
did speak to Abell, Ioab to Abner and Amaza, and Judas to Christ. These had
honey in their lips, and swords in their hearts. Secondly, such as show love
out of servile base fear and dread, as Malefactors and Offenders do to severe
Magistrates, bad servants to their discourteous Masters, and the poor to the
mighty who^ they could wish in their graves, yet by speeches and gestures,
pretend much reverence and love. Thirdly, such as love others for profit. which
they hope to suck out of them; so long they make much of them, give kind words
as Felix did, Acts 4. At a word, all such are here condemned, as do not love
their neighbors out of a pure heart, the seat of love, unfeigned Faith the
cause of love, a good conscience the companion of love, 1 Timothy 1, 5. Secondly,
beside reprehension, here is exhortation to all to strive for unfeigned love
in all their dealinges with men by word or deed, to declare the truth of their
love, secming to be in kindness what indeed they be, and being what they
seem: for God hates hypocrisy, it is odious in his sight, and unto all good
men. Also dissimulation, as it is contrary unto the nature of God: so it is
hurtful to our neighbor: it makes us like a broken bow, whereof the shiuers
are ready to run into his hand which leanes upon it, or a broken staff which
fails him that trusts thereunto, or unto a loose tooth; for so is a false
friend.


Tim. What is meant by the next precept of (abhorring evil, and cleaving to
that which is good?)


Silas. It may be generally expounded of the nature of The 2. words in the
original, signify an hatred with vehemency, and to be joined unto that which
is good with a strong and indissoluble bond, Pet. Martyr out of Chrysostoms.
true and perpetual repentance, taking evil for filthiness of sin, and good
for holiness and goodness: and then the meaning is, that unto true
repentance, is required not only to fly sin, and to love righteousness,
but to loath and detest sin, and have in abomination whatsoever is evil in
his eyes: also not coldly to aproue good things commanded of God, but fervently
to embrace them, striving to be glued to them, to become one as it were with
that which is good, which is meant (by cleaving to it.) Hereof we have David
an example. Psalm. 139, 22. but more especially it may be restrained unto love,
whereof we spoke in the former Aphorism: and then by good and evil,
understand not only that which is honest and dishonest, but that also which is
profitable and hurtful, and by abhorring and cleaving is meant extreme
hatred, and singular desire.


Tim. What lesson from the words thus interpreted?


Silas. First, that our love to our neighbor, must not hinder us from
abhorring that which is evil and sinful in him, though he be never so dear
a friend: nor from liking and eagerly embracing that good and virtue which is
in him, be he never such an enemy unto us. As the love of men's persons must not
make us love their faults, or flatter them, or wink at them, or defend them:
so the hatred of men's vices must nor draw us from the desire and earnest
delight in that which is good in any man. Furthermore, it is the property of
true love to be exceeding loath to iniure or hurt over neighbor, or suffer him
to be hurt in any thing which is precious unto him; as his name, person,
goods, wife, salvation, etc. but rather very earnestly to study how to
pleasure and help him in all and every one of these: to think, and speak,
and do him good, being so bent unto the profit of our Neighbor, as to our own
welfare, according to the saying of our Savior Christ, Love thy neighbor as
thy self.


Tim. In the next short sentence, what is meant by (affections, and by
brotherly love?)


Silas. The first word signifies such natural affections and tender love, as
is in parents toward their Children, Interpret.
whereof see Jacobs example, Genes. 37, 35. and Brethren, because they
communicate in one and the same thing, then ore thoy love one another by good
right, (...).
Mary, Luke 2. and the latter word implies such love as is between Brethren
borne of one and the same Parents, whereof Joseph is a President unto us. Moses
and Paul's love unto their Kinsmen, was vehement, Exodus. 32, 32. Romans 9. 1.
Christians are Brethren by profession.


Tim. What learn we from hence?


Silas. That their love amongst themselves one toward another, must not be
common and ordinary, but singular and very great, like unto that which
Parents do bear to the children of their womb, and wherewith Brothers affect
one another: and no manuaile, seeing our love must extend even unto the
spending of life, and not of our substance only for our Brethrens sake, Romans
16, 4. 1. John 3, 16. see like precepts, 1. Thessa. 4, 9. Hebrews 13, 1. 1.
Peter 1, 22. 2. Peter 1, 7.


Tim. Are Papists which profess and believe the doctrinc of the council of
Trent, our brethren? and be all our brethren to be loved alike, with the same
degree of love?


Silas. Such Papists be not our brethren (namely if they The (...) Church
neither sound Church, nor sound member Rainold.
be learned and have knowledge,) for they do not profess the same doctrine,
nor the same religion with us, (which is the band of brotherhood) but raze the
foundation of faith and works. Secondly, they have not the same Savior, but a
disguised one, such a one as shall save The faith of (...) now, (...) of old:
Rome is not even.
them by their own merits, at least in part.

Thirdly, they have the great whore mentioned, Revel. 17. and 18. for their
mother, and we have the chaste spouse of Christ to our mother. Fourthly, they
have no true sacraments The great Antichrist no where but at Rome.
but bastard ones; for the Lords supper is al corrupted and depraved with their
inventions, they turn the Communion into a private supper, and they ouerturne
the doctrine which baptism should seal. Fifthly, they confidently hold, and
pronounce peremptorily all us to be in the estate of damnation, judging
(though falsely and rashly) us to be Heretics, Schismatickes, etc. So we
ought to deem of them which live and dye in the papacy: how can we be
brethren, which be so miserably divided? Now toward such as be our brethren
(by joint confession of the same holy faith) we are commanded to love all
these with the same kind of love that is sincere and great, but not in the
same measure: for as any of the brethren be more (...) linkt unto us by bands
of nation, or nature, or of affinity, or be more plentifully endowed with
grace, so we are to declare the force, and bring forth the fruits of our
love, rather toward them then others, howbeit we are to love all which are of
our Christian religion, with a brotherly love, according to those many and
plain exhortations of the word before set down.


Tim. Now for the last precept, what does [honour] signify? and what is it to
go one before another in giving of honor?


Silas. Honor signifies a good opinion conceived of others, What honor is.
and outwardly testified by words, gestures, deeds, How ingen dered.
etc. The grounds or begetter of this opinion be these 4. First, authority,
public in Magistrates or Ministers, private in parents or Masters. Secondly,
dignity, or any thing wherein another excels, as to be a creature, a man, a
Christian, a child of God, a member of Christ, etc. and to each of these there
belongs honor and cerraine reverence. Thirdly, gifts outward of the body,
or inward of the mind, either natural, civil, moral; or spiritual, and
theological, as faith, hope, love, repentance, etc. Fourthly, merits, when
any deserve well, of Schools, or Church, or Commonwealth, by public
benefits, as that Centurion did, Luke 8, 4. These be the causes of a good
opinion: many be the signs of it, to show it by, amongst which vailing the
Bonnets, bowing the knee, sla^ding before them, rising up, relecuing them, Mat.
15, 6, 7. It is first to have a lowly opinion of out selnes. Secondly, What it
is to go before other in giving honor.
to think better of others, then of our selves. Then we go before others in
giving honor, when inferiors do both in heart and action begin first to honor
and salute their superiors: when equais strive whoc shall prevent and begin,
first provoking to reverence and honorable respects. Lastly, when superiors do
so take the honor due unto the^, in regard of their place, as they could be
pleased to prevent even their inferiors out of an humble affection; might they
do it without offense, and breach of good order; whereof in societies there is
a special care to be had.


DIAL. VII.
Verses 11, 12. Not slothful to do service, fervent (...) spirit, serving
the Lord, rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing in prayer.


Tim. What do the first words of this text contain?


Silas. An exhortacion to industry and diligence in doing all duties both
toward God and men; which are not to be performed slothfully, because God does
not love such as do their work grudgingly and negligently. Also such shall
hear at the last day, Take that slothful servant, and bind him hand and
foot: but to the faithful (where of diligence is a part) it shall be said,
Come good and faithful servant. Therefore whatsoever is in our hands to do (as
Solomon says) we are to do it with all readiness and industry, if we will
please God and avoid his judgments. Example of this readiness in business,
we have in Abraham, Gen, 18, 6. and Genes. 24. in his servant, who in the
business of Isaacs marriage was diligent. Also in Mary, Luke 11, 39. and
Christ the Lord, and in the Apostle Paul, who most industriously did the works
of their calling. Here we are to take heed of two extremes: the one is of
too much diligence, when 2. Extremes of diligence.
we busy our selves much in things not pertaining to us. This is curiosity,
condemned by Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. the other is too much slownesse or
sluggishnesse in our own duties, when we do our things as it were sleepingly,
like that idle servant in the Gospel, that hid his Talent in a napkin: or like
that sluggard mentioned, in Pro. 26, 13. that sought vain delays and excuses
to keep him from his duty, There is a Lion in the way. Some are slow, being of
an heavy mould, and dull by nature; others through unwillingness to do any
good, these be the worse.


Tim. What is commended to us in the next sentence?


Silas. Feruency in Spirit: in which is a precept contrary to the former, and
inioyneth not readiness alone, Feruencie or zeal.
but earnestness too, both in Religion to God, and charity to man: and
withal it teaches whence this earnestness or feruency comes, namely, from
the Spirit of God, kindling it in our hearts, and (...) us with love in a great
measure. Whereof we have example in Moses, who out of zeal brake the two
Tables: in Elias doing the service of God with much power and feruency, as
appears in destroying the Idolles, and killing Eaals Priests. Also in John
Baptist, who trod in the same steps of Elias zeal, Luke 1, 17. in Paul and
Barnabas, Acts 14, 14, 15. and in Christ, John 2, 14, 15, 16. and generally in
all the Prophets and apostles. They walk not according to this rule, who are
cold in their profession. Also those who be neither hot nor cold, but luke
warm in their Religion, being indifferent, not caring which end goes
foremost. Nor they who be temporizers and neuters in the confession of their
faith: also by this rule Gods children are exhorted to a godly feruency and
zeal both in profession and practice of religion. For zeal is a fruit of the
Spirit, and of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7, 11. and here by we become like Christ
and the apostles, Lastly, it is good to be zealously affected still in a good
thing (says Paul, Gal. 4, 18.) Note here, that these words import a continual
act. Christians are to be diligent and earnest, not by pangs or fits, but all
their life long, and in one thing as well as in another, and according to the
quality of the matter, that will show our zeal to be wise and good, and
proceeding from God. Such as are zealous at the first, and afterward become
cold, or be less zealous in the chiefest business; or be forward in some
matter of profit or pleasure to themselves, and not so in the things of God,
give suspicion that their zeal is fleshly and carnal.


Tim. How do you read and understand the next Aphorism, or short sentence
and proposition?


Silas. Some read it thus, serving the time, and then the meaning is either to
watch opportunities or occasiof doing our duties, and to observe what is
fitting for time and season, according to that in Romans 13, 11. or to consider
what belongs to the time, after the example of Paul, at one time circumcising
Timothy, when he would not circumcise Titus at another, Gal. 2, 3, 4. And
herein there is great wisdom to consider what is meet and fit to be done,
according to time and place (yet without departing from truth and honesty) for
all good things are not to be done at all times. Howbeit the other reading
(serving the Lord) is much better, as warranted by diaers Greek Coppies, and
directing us to the right and true end of all our actions, namely the service
and glory of God, whereunto they must aim as at their utmost mark, Cor. 10,
31. and this does distinguish Christian So M Beza affirms
duties from the works of civil men, who never respect the worship or honor
of God, but their own pleasure and praise in all things, whatsoever they
pretend to the contrary. Also this precept may further teach us whom we are
to serve, namely, not the world nor men, but God, because he is our Lord,
Psalm. 2, 11. Gal. 1, 10. 1 Cor. 7, 23. and 1 Cor. 6, 20.

Lastly, it may teach great men modesty, that they swell not by opinion of
their own power and might, remembering that they are under God, as a servant
under his Lord, and therefore not to abuse their inferiors, Col. 4, 1. for they
serve one common and most just Lord, who is no respecter of persons.


Tim. What be the graces we are exhorted to in the 12. verse?


Silas. Unto these three, Hope, Patience, and Prayer, Hope patience Prayer.
which are so many remedies against afflictions of al sorts. The first of these
graces is set forth and declared by an effect of rejoicing. The second, by his
Object, which is ttibulation. The third by the adioynt, which is perseverance.
When any affliction happens, private or public, inward or outward, for Christ
or sin, Gods Children thorough hope of deliverance from them, faint not in
their hearts, but rejoice and are glad, because they certainly look for
salvation in the end; for their hope makes them not asnamed, Romans 5. 5. and by
hope they are saved, Romans 8, 24. But if their afflictions continue upon them,
and wax more grievous, then to hope must be joined patience, which enableth to
endure with submission unto, and waiting upon the pleasure of God, as we are
admonished in many places, Math. 24, 13. Romans 5, 4. Heb. 10, 36. 2 Pet. 2, 9.
To hope and patience must be joined prayer, which is a notable armor and
Weapon against troubles, because it gets wisdom how to carry our selves in
afflictions; and divine help how to come out of it, that we may ouercom, Iam.
1, 5. Ps. 50, 15. Our prayers may the^ be said to be continual, either when we
call upon God by offered occasions, and necessities bodily How our prayers be
continual.
or spiritual; or when by no means we intermit the set hours or times of
prayer; or else when we are instant in prayer, asking earnestly, Ia. 5. or tho
we be not heard presently, when we continue to ask without ceasing, Lu. 18. or
else we may understand this not of moving of the lips, but the desires of the
heart, which when they are continual, our prayers be continual, for a
continual desire, is a continual prayer; God will hear the desires of them
that fear him, Psalm. 145. It was an heresy condemned in Eutiches and the
Masstlians, that thought Christians ought all their life long to do nothing
else but pray: abusing this and the like Texts to this end. Whereas besides
Prayer, the works of our general and particular vocation are to be followed,
yea in Gods service there is preaching, and Sacraments must have time allowed.
It is a grievous sin in many Christians at this day, which contenting
themselves with public prayer (which is a good thing) neglect set Prayers in
their families, or foreslow the just occasions to turn unto God by prayer, or
in their prayers do behave themselves coldly or carelessly: such as these, they
both fall into many evils, and are left in their evils without comfort, because
they seek not unto God fervently for his aid and protection. Finally, remember
unto all these precepts, and to the rest following, to knit these first words
of this Chapter [ I beseech you] at a general and most forcible motive, to
stir us up to practice them, as we would not cast from us, and make our selves
unworthy of the mercies of God, whereunto not all the world is to be compared,
no not to the least of his special and saving mercies in Christ.


DIAL. VIII.
Verses 13, 14, 15. Distributing or communicating unto the necessities of the
Saints(...) giving your selves unto hospitality. Bless them which persecute
you, Bless I say; and curse not: Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep
with them that weep.


Tim. What is requirtd by the first of these precepts?


Silas. Liberality or mercy to the poor, that we be ready to give them alms
acording to their need. The word translated [necessities,] signifies [vses] to
teach us, that as we may not minister to the delicates of the poor, so we may
not stay til extreme necessity urges them unto this duty of mercy in giving.
There be many exhortations in the Scripture, upon sundry and great Reasons,
as Heb. 13. 16. where it is called a Sacrifice, and God is said to be well
pleased with it. In Phil. 4, 18. it is called an Odor of sweet smell, a
Sacrifice acceptable to God. And Acts 20, 35. it is said, that it is a more
blessed thing to give then to receive: and Luke 16, 9. we are charged to make
friends of unrighteous Mammon, by giving to the poor, that they may receive
us into cuerlasting habitation: and 1 Timothy 6, 18, 19. of distributing to the
poor Paul says, it is the laying of a good foundation against the time to
come.

Again, Christians be stewardes, and it is required, that stewards be
faithful, to dispose their goods to the mind of their Master, and his mind
is, that such as have much, should give to such as have little; and that the
abundance of some, should supply the wants of others. 2. Cor. 8, 13, 14.
Further, by being merciful to the poor, we are like our heavenly Father,
which is merciful and gives liberally, Math. 5, 45. also we express love and
kindness to Christ, by doing good to his members, Mat. 25, 35. 36, 37. We
witness to our selves and others the truth of our faith, which works by love,
Gal. 5, 6. and comforts the heart of our Brethren, Phile. 7. and brings glory
to God and our profession. Besides al these forenamed reasons, there be three
reasons more in our text, to persuade unto this duty, as the love of Saints,
because poor christians are [Saints] purged by the blood, and sanctified by
the Spirit of Christ.

Secondly, the compassion of their necessities and wants which we are bound to
pity. Thirdly, liberality in communicating. By which word of communicating, we
are put in mind, in that the Apostle says rather communicating then giving;
that the poor have an interest in the goods of the rich, as touching the use
by virtue of Gods commandment: and that the rich ought to communicate with
them in affections and simpathy, by releeuing them, as if they felt their
wants, and suffered with them, Heb. 13, 3. And lastly, that between rich and
poor, there is a kind of spiritual traffic and merchandise, the rich
communicating temporal things in making the poor partakers of their
substance, and the poor spiritual, in making the rich partakers of their
prayers. The examples of such men as have performed this duty, is first
Dorcas, Acts 9, 39. making coats to give to the pore: the brethren of Antioch
sending relief to the pore Saints at Jerusalem, whom also the Church of
Macedonia did relieve even beyond their power, 2 Cor. 9, 2, 3. Now as for the
manner how beneficence is to be performed 2 Cor. 8, and 9. chap. not grudgingly,
or of necessity, or sparingly, not of compulsion, but out of a Christian
compassion, of a ready mind with cheerefulnes, for the love and sake of Christ,
and as to him; for God loves a cheerful giver. For the quantity, it must be
much where much is, 2 Cor. 9, 8, 11. 1 Timothy 6, 18. no certain stint or rate,
but according to thy ability, and thy neighbors necessity.


Tim. What are the vices contrary to this duty.?


Silas. They be covetousness and prodigality; for by excess in apparel, eating
and drinking, Christians are made both unable and unwilling to do this duty,
as they might and ought, if they were temperate, and kept a seemly moderation
and measure in the use of Gods blessings bestowed on us: and covetousness does
quite choke the affection of liberality, it hardens the heart of the rich
against the poor, and binds up their hands, so as nothing comes from the^,
unless it be wrung out by great entreaty, or by authority, as seises. Lastly, in
giving, christians are to beware both of opinion of merit, which poysoneth
Popish liberality, and of vaineglorie, which spoils the bounty of many
Protestants giving, to be seen and talked of.


Tim. What is the next duty here exhorted to?


Silas. After beneficence, Paul exhorts unto hospitality, Hospitality.
by being ready to entertain strangers and exiles, such as were driven from
home for the Gospel; where of great store were in the primitive Church, when
both Apostles and other Christians were forced to travel from Country to
Country for their safety, through the heat of persecutions, See Heb. 13, 2.
Note in our Text, that he says not embrace, but be given: which signifies to
pursue and follow it with eagerness and earnestness, as if it were not enough
to inuit strangers, and to receive them, but that we ought also to entreat and
urge them to come to us; after the example of Lydia, Acts 16, 15. and of
Abraham, Genesis 18. and of Lot, Genesis 19. which while they received strangers,
unawares entertained Angels, Heb. 13, 2. See Deuteronomy. 10, 18, 19. God loves
strangers, and your selves were strangers, therefore be kind and beneficial
to them.


Tim. What is the meaning of the next precept?


Silas. As before Paul taught what our behavior should be toward friends, and
the household of Faith, so Bless, what it is.
he now teaches duty toward them which are without, which are enemies, whom
he wills us to [blesse,] that is, both to wish well unto them, and to speak
well of them (as far as we may with matter of truth;) both to pray for, and
to praise them according to their worthiness, yea and to do good unto them
also, if they need it. In that Paul repeateth the word [ Blesse] twice, and
then sets it forth by the contrary word [ Curse] he puts us in mind both how
hard a work this is, being a work of the Spirit, and not of the flesh, as
being contrary to our corrupt nature. Also, that we should not do it by
fittes, but be constant in blessing. Paul borrows this precept from the words
of Christ, Math. 5, 24. We have Christ himself a pattern of it, Esaias 53, 12.
and Steven, Acts 7, 6. and 1 Pet 2, 22. all Christians are called to imitate
the example of Christ's patience toward their enemies.

The practice of this duty, is the very touchstone and trial of all Christian
charity. For to speak well, and do well unto such as love us, is no singular
matter: it is common to Gods children with Publicans and sinners; but to love
and bless an enemy, is the peculiar work of a godly Where were patience, or
experience, or hope without these persecutions of wicked men? says
Chrystostome.
person: see Mat. 5, 43, 46. Luke 6, 27, 35. This forbidding to curse, must be
meant of private enemies. Again, from this precept we may learn, that Gods
children must make account, that there will never want wicked men to persecute
them both with their tongues by raylings, slanderings, and calumnies; and with
their swords or hand, by loss of goods, imprisonment, death, etc. and that
for truth and righteousness sake. Here of Christ forewarned his Disciples,
Math. 5, 10. The best remedy we have in such cases, to break the malice and
cruelty of wicked men, is by patience and wel-doings, 1 Pet. 4, 19.


Tim. What is required more in the next precept?


Silas. Mutual affection between Christians in both Mutual affection.
estates, adversity and prosperity, to rejoice together in the one, and to
mourn together in the other. And it is to be noted, that this precept reaches
more unto spiritual, then unto temporal cases; for we are bound more to
lament the spiritual decays of our brethren, then for their worldly losses:
and also more bound to rejoice for their graces, then the riches of our
Brethren. The Reason of this Sympathy, is that which is rendered of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12, 26. because we are members one of another; and if one
member suffer, all ought to suffer with them; and if one rejoice, all to
rejoice with them: so it must be amongst Christians. Examples hereof we have
in the kinsfolks of Elizabeth, Luke 1, 58. and in Paul, Phil. 1, 3. Colossians
1. 1. These. 1. 2. John 1, 2. Romans 16, 19.


Tim. What use of this point?


Silas. It serves to reprove such envious persons which fret and repine at the
good and happy estate of their brethren, as Caine envied Abell, Saul David, and
the Pharisees Christ; and the malicious also, who in stead of mourning together
for the losses of others, are well pleased and make themselves merry and
sportfull with the miseries of their neighbors; this is a wickedness against
which Job does protest, Chap. 31, verse 29. and for the which God threatens
the Edomites in Obadiah, verse 12, 13. It is the part of all Christians to be
unlike unto both these, and by simpathy and fellow-feeling of other men's both
joys and sorrows, to express our own love to our brethren, and to show that
we are void of envy, and to enlarge their love again toward us, when they
shall see us ready to communicate with them, both in their gladness and
heaviness: and finally somewhat to ease and lessen the grieses and afflictions
of our neighbors, by helping the^ to bear the borthen in a common affection.
But here is to be observed, that if in the sorrow of our neighbor there be
either an error, mourning when they ought to rejoice, or being glad when they
ought to mourn, or an excess in either of these, that then our duty is to
correct them by admonition and not to communicate with them in such unruly
affections. Also here is the effect put for the cause, weeping outwardly for
lamenting inwardly; yet tears would be shed and poured out in any great
calamities of our brethren, after the example of Christ weeping over Jerusalem,
and Paul for carnal and worldly Gospellers, Philppians 3. 18.


DIAL. IX.
Verses 16, 17. Be like affectioned one toward another. Be not high minded,
but make your selves equal to them of the lower sort. Be not wise in your
selves, recompense no man evil for evil, procure things honest in the sight
of all men.


Tim. What does the first of these six precepts co^taine?


Silas. An exhortation unto concord, which has in it these two branches:
First, consent of mind in matters of faith, to think the same things in
respect of doctrine. Secondly, the knitting of the heart and affections in the
actions and counsels of life. Thus the Apostle Phil. 2. 2. having generally
exhorted to concord by the same phrase used here in the text, ( he ye like
minded) does presently subdiuide it into conjunction of love and affections,
and agreement in mind or judgment. An example of this What (...) there is in
contention about religion, on the examples of Jews and (...), of Arrians and
Christians, of Papists and Hugonites, of Lutherans and Protestants, of
Formalists and (...) (as they be called) do witness.
concord we have in Acts 4, 32. a contrary example of contention in 1. Cor. 1,
11, 12, There is nothing so much an enemy to love, to destroy it as division of
minds, about things to be believed, and of affections about things to be done;
for there is nothing so able to uphold and continue love, as to embrace a
mutual consent in faith and actions. But because there will still be
imperfections in the best men this way, as appears by Acts 15, 39, therefore
we must strive the more to obey this precept, which enjoy nesynity, forbearing
one another, and forgiving one another, as Col. 3, 13. and doing according to
that which is written Phil. 3, 15, 16. Let us mind the same things.


Tim. What is the next precept, and how do they cohere and agree with the
former?


Silas. In the next three precepts two hindrances of mutual concord are
removed, and one furtherance thereunto is commended. The first hinderance is
pride, that is to say, when in disdain of others, whom we do not take to be
so good as our selves, we have too lofty a conceit of our own gifts and
sufficiency; and out of a haughtiness of mind, do aspire to higher place and
matters, then we are made or (...) for: this is to be high minded, even to
bear a Iosty heart, and to aspire in our minds to high things which be above
our capacity and calling.

Hence is pride in Latin, called Superbia, even as one would say Superire
alies, and in Greek hypsilophronia, that is, Iosty mindedness, when men look
on high matters out of a great conceit of their own strength, with despising
of others. Of this disease was Absolon sick, when he ambitiously aspired to his
Fathers kingdom: and the Pharisie in the Gospel, Luke 18. when out of too
great opinion of his own merits, he disdained the poor Publican: yea, the two
Apostles of our Savior, James and John, were somewhat infected with this
disease, when they strove to be greater then their fellow Apostles. There were
sundry such high-minded persons, both in the Church of (...), and of the
Romans, who were too much lifted up with a conceit of their own Learning,
and of the magnificence of their City, being the Lady and Mistress of the
whole world, and seat of the Empire.

Hence it is, that the Apostle so much beats down pride, both here and in
the third verse of this Chapter, and in the eleaueuth Chapter, verses 18, 20.
For he saw the believing Romans, to be lifted up against the dejected Jews,
whence much dissension followed; and therefore desires them not to be
highminded: but were Paul alive now, to see the pride of Rome in Popes and
Prelates, both spiritual and bodily pride, oh how would he thunder against it?


Tim. What is the other let that hinders concord amongst Christians?


Silas. Arrogance, to be wise in our selves, that is, to have an ouerweening
conceit of a man's own wisdom: Effect of Arrogance.
this is the very roore and first cause of pride, and brings (...) effects:
as first, it causes men to set at naught the counsels of others, and to think
them sufficient for themselves: whereas God has compassed us with many
imperfections, that we might one have need of another, as it is in the
members of one natural body. No man sees all: and as our English Proueibe is,
Two eyes see better then one. Experience also teaches us, that the simple may
give counsel to the wisest, as Iethro did to Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. Abigail did to
David, 1 Samuel 25, 25. and thus has God ordained it for the best preservation
of love and concord, as also to nourish humility and to kill pride.

Secondly, such as be wise in themselves, turn their wisdom altogether to
their own profit, and not unto the good of others, contrary to that of the
Apostle, Cbarity seeks not her own things, 1 Cor. 13, 5. Thirdly, such
regard not the will and pleasure of GOD, which is true wisdom indeed,
contenting themselves with worldly wisdom, which is foolishness with God, 1
Cor. 3, 19. Such men as they, do not consult with God in his word, so they do
not ascribe the praise of their wisdom to God, the author of their wisdom,
but to their own wit and industry.

Lastly, this arrogance and outreaching opinion of our own wisdom, is by
long experience proved to be the mother of error of all sorts, whether in
doctrine, or worship, or common conversation: for on the one side, the cause
why men give over themselves to gross sins in their lives and actions, is
this, that in arrogancy of spirit, they hold scorn to be taught and
admonished of others: they know as much as any man can tell them, and let men
meddle with themselves. Such as these, God delivers over to a reprobate mind,
and to great evils, as is plain in the example of Cain and (...). So on the
other side, whence comes it, that diverse men have devised new opinions in
Doctrines, and new worship in practice of religion, but for that not resting in
the plain and simple truth of Scripture, they take themselves to see more then
other men, yea to be wiser then God himself, see 1 Timothy 6, 3, 4. Vainglory or
(...) lucre (...) heresies, Augustine. Hence do arise rents and divisions in
Gods Church, between Teacher and Teacher, Pastor and Flock, to the great
disturbance of peace and concord.


Tim. What thing is that which is such a furtherance unto concord?


Silas. Humility, when we condescend to men of low estate, or submit our
selves to the lowly or humble. These words, if we understand them of the
persons which be lowly and humbled, then the meaning is, that we must apply
our selves to persons of low degree, descending to their baseness, as if we
were base with them; not despising their company, but living humbly with those
that are humble, consenting with them, loving them, and imitating their
humbleness: but if we refer [lowlie] unto things, rather then unto persons
(as the opposition between high and low things will bear this sense,) then
the meaning is, that we must not refuse the meanest and basest service to do
good unto others, after the example of Jesus, who washed his Apostles feet,
John 13. But the best way is, under this word, to comprehend both things and
persons, that for charity and concord sake, we should embrace humble persons,
and base things, out of a lowly mind, in imitation of our Saulour, who
conuersed with Publicans and sinners, Luke 15. See Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
and abased himself unto most shameful things out of love to us, Phil. 2, 7, 8.


Tim. Proceed to the next precept, and tell us what is meant by recompensing
evil for evil?


Silas. By evils here are meant wrongs and injuries, which we are commanded to
suffer patiently; and not to requite the^. It is like that precept of Christ,
Mat. 5, 39. It is a corruption of our nature, that we are prone to return
wrong for wrong, one ill turn for another, and men think they have a goodly
pretense for it, because others began with them, and provoked them: but the
truth is, that whereas it is no small sin, to infer and do hurt to another,
in his person, name, or goods, by word or deed, secretly or openly; for such
do offend first against God, forbidding wrong doing Secondly, against charity,
which does no evil to her neighbor, 1 Cor. 13, 5. Thirdly, against Justice,
which measures right to every man, and condemns all injuries: yet to refer
and requite one evil with another, is a far greater sin, not only because
they do add sin to sin, but for that a man may do a hurt suddenly and
unadvisedly, not perceiving that he does evil, but offending through ignorance
or oversight; whereas they that recompense evil for evil, do it purposely,
maliciously, and wittingly, knowing that they do evil, and yet will do it:
contrariwise they that patiently and meekely suffer injuries, as they keep
themselves pure from sin, so they declare themselves to be led by the Spirit
of God (which is the Spirit of meekness) and to bear the Image of Christ,
who when he was reviled, reviled not again; and when he suffered, threatened
not 1 Pet. 2, 23. Here it must be observed, that this precept of retaliation
reaches not to the Magistrate, whose office it is to render evil for evil,
tooth for tooth, eye for eye, blood for blood: see Rom: 13. to render evil to
an evil doer, is a work of justice, and therefore good. It checketh only
priuare injuries between a man and his neighbor, in such we may not carry a
mind desirous of revenge, but be willing to bear.

Moreover if it be evil to recompense evil for evil, it is far worse to
recompense evil for good. This is not only an humane error, but a diabolical
naughtiness and the very height of all unthankfulness, to deal unkindly with
such as have used us kindly: the just GOD has threatened that evil shall
never depart from the house of such as so do: let the Jews be an instance for
proof hereof, for the wrath and vengeance of God lies heavy upon that nation
until this day; because unto the Prophets, unto Christ, unto the Apostles,
which did good to them by instructing them, and calling them unto the kingdom
of God, they wretchedly recompensed much evil, beating some, reuiling some,
and killing others. Lastly, note that evil must be requited to no man; neither
to a friend and a Christian, for he is our brother; nor yet to an enemy or
Infidel, for he is a man as we are, made after Gods own image.


Tim. Come now to the next Aphorism, and tell us the sum of it?


Silas. The sum is, that we ought to embrace innocence Innocence of manners.
of life, even in the sight of men, that evil men may have no cause to
reproach us as evil dooers, 2. Pet. 2, 12. and good men may be edified by our
example, 1. Cor. 10, 33. and be moved to glorify God, Matthew 5. 16. 1. Peter
2, 12.


Tim. What is meant by [bonest things?]


Silas. Just and holy things whereby the praise of God is advanced, and the
salvation of our neighbor furthered. Secondly, such things as cannot be done
without offense though they be lawful, 1. Corinthians. 10. 23. When he says these
things must be (proved) he thereby shows very manifestly, that these things
are not to be done carelessly and at all adventure, but with great diligence
and providence or forecast: so the word in the original imports, as if in
our minds and thoughts we should study before hand, and provide that nothing
be done but what may be approved of God and al good men: and it is to be noted
that these terms (before all men) may either be opposed unto God, as if it
were said: Be very careful that the things ye do be honest and good, both in
the sight of God and men. This opposition is expressed in 2. Cor. 8, 2. or else
also the antithesis is between man and man; as who should say, Both to this
man and that man, to the Jew and to the Grecian, to one as well as another,
friend or stranger, carry your selves honestly, whether they be pleased or not
pleased, yet let all that is done before them be honest. Hereby be reproved
such who procure things honest, only before men, neglecting God, as hypocrites
who look alone to their reputation among men, Mat. 6, 1. Secondly, they which
do honest things before God, but are rechlesse in giving satisfaction to men,
or if they justify their doings to some men, it is with contempt of others.
Lastly, they which exercise honesty neither before God nor men, but are without
reucrence of God, or care of men, like the Judge in Luke 18, 3. Many such lewd
and notorious evil liueis there be, which have shaken out of their hearts the
fear of God, and the shame of the world, the love of heaven, and the dread of
hell; not caring what be thought or spoken of them in earth, or what evil
happen to them from heaven; forlorn persons addicted to evil courses.


DIAL. X.
Verses 18, 19, 20, 21. If it be possible, in as much as in you is, have peace
with all men. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves, but give place unto
wrath; for it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord:
Therefore if thine (...) hunger, etc.


Tim. What virtues does these last verses of this Chapter exhort us unto?


Silas. Unto these two: the first is peaceablenesse, or love and care of a
peaceable life. The second is meekness, in forbearing revenge, upon this
reason that Gods office is to take vengeance: which is confirmed by authority
of Scripture, verse 19 20, 21. and set forth by the contrary of doing good for
evil, in stead of taking revenge. This is amplyfied by the event, (so thou
shall heap coals) all is shut up with this worthy Alphorisme, (be not
overcome with evil, but over come evil with goodness.)


Tim. How does this precept of embracing peace differ from that which enioyneth
concord of mind, verse 16, and why are we to follow peace, and toward whom?
and with what conditions?


Silas. In the 16. verse, inward concord amongst Christian brethren was
commended (as a thing simply necessary,) now the study of retaining peace with
strangers from the faith, and infidels or heretics (as well as Christians) is
required, as this clause shows (with all men.) First, because Reasons of a
peaceable life
God commanded it to be so. Secondly, he delights in peace, thence he is
called the God of peace, Romans 16. Thirdly, he has pronounced them blessed,
that keep and make peace, Mat. 5. Fourthly, many and sweet are the benefits of
peace, but bitter and sundry are the fruits of contention, vexation of mind,
waste of substance, etc. We are to follow this peace upon two conditions,
wherein this precept differs from the next before it, for we must absolutely
at all times, before all men provide for things honest; but peace cannot be had
but with certain men, therefore he adds conditions to limit and restrain
this exhortation.


Tim. What be those conditions, and what is the meaning of them?


Silas. These conditions are not all one (as some think) but diverse: the
former (if it be possible) she weth that in some cases and with some men peace
cannot be had, name ly when question is of religion, that God is to be offended
by partaking with Idolators or heretics, or when by our silence the truth is
to be betrayed, and our neighbors salvation hindered. In these cases with
good conscience peace cannot possibly be retained; we cannot have society with
men in evil things and wickedness, for our duty is to resist and oppugn such
things according to our vocation, gifts and means, though peace be broken: a
godly dissension is better then a wicked peace; peace must be followed with
holiness, Heb. 12, 14. We ought so to have peace with men, as we do not make
war with God. Hence Apostles and Apostlo like men have chosen to contend by
writing and preaching against errors and superstitions (see Paul to the
Galathians, Augustine against the Manichees and Donatists,) rather then by
holding their peace, to forsake Gods truth and the edification of the Church.
The other condition is (so much as lies in us) which is put in, in respect of
such contentious quarrelsome persons, as (...) one what he can to appease and
please them, they will have no peace, being like those of whom David in the
Psalms complains, that made them ready to battle when he spoke to them of
peace, Psalm. 120. Toward these we shall do our duty when we are in our
selves peaceably disposed, neither giving them, nor hastily taking from them
occasion of dissension, but by all means provoking them to quietness, that
there be no fault in us. Finally, bearing good will to their persons when we
are driven to hate and rebuke their vices, praying earnestly for their
conversion: this is all that lies in us to do.


Tim. Where unto tends the next precept?


Silas. To persuade unto meekness and moderation of anger toward such as
offer wrong unto us; albeit the Apostle had forbad us before, not to recompense
evil for evil, yet knowing the pronnesse of our corrupt nature to take
revenge for injuries done, under pretext that we may be dastards and cowards:
and to show how hard and excellent a thing it is, meekely to suffer: therefore
in other words he repeateth again his exhortation, saying [ avenge not your
selues] which is set forth here by the contrary duty (give place unto wrath:)
this is by some and may be understood of the wrath of our enemy, whereunto if
men give way, they do oftentimes purchase peace, their wrath being mollified
by patience. For as thunderings makes a great noise, and breaks down strong
things when they hit upon things that resist them, as Oaks, etc. so do guns
also overthrow walls and towers: but meeting with things soft and yielding, they
do very easily penetrate and pierce through; they loose their strength and do
no harm. Likewise, the wrath of men is much assuaged, and sometimes quenched
by yielding, and silence, or soft answers, but it is made more hot by
resisting. This sentence also may be understood of our own anger, which
every one is to bridle and to moderate. But Paul means this especially of
divine anger and revenge, which we must suffer to show it self forth against
our adversaries, and not prevent it by our impatiency and fury. This to be the
most natural sense appears by that which follows; for it is written (
Vengeance is mine,) a text fetched out of Deuteronomy. 32. 35. where God threatens
that in his due time he will take vengeance upon wicked livers.


Tim. But how may we be assured that God will be avenged Doubt.
upon them which hurt us, and upon what reasons are we to leave vengeance to
him alone?


Silas. First, because it is his office [ Mine is vengeance,] Solution.
now he will neglect nothing that pertains to him. Secondly, Gods children
are dear unto him, even as the apple of his eye, so precious in his fight,
that he will not forget their injuries. Thirdly, there is no hurt done unto
any, but first there is injury done to God by transgressing his Law. In all
wrongs to our neighbor, God is first wronged, which he must punish. Fourthly,
GOD is the Judge of the world, and it belongs to him to do every man right.
Fifthly, he can be avenged without perturbation or passion, and so cannot we.
Moreover, God will do it more sharply, and with more severity then we can do.
Lastly, if we do it our selves, we do not only spoil God of his right and
authority, (as if a subject should wrestthe sword out of his hand, and deprive
our selves of his protection and defense;) but whereas in taking wrong we were
mere sufferers of evil, in the auenging of wrong, we become the doers of
evil, and sinners; and so liable to Gods auenging hand as well as our enemies.
And lastly, we show our selves unlike to Christ, and like to Satan; therefore
the only way is to leave and commit our enemies only unto GOD: not that we
are to desire his vengeance upon our neighbors, or to take pleasure in it: but
having prayed heartily for their conversion if they continue malicious, and he
punishes them, we are to delight more in Gods Justice, then in their pain.

Finally, this precept binds private men's hands, and not Magistrates, whose
duty it is to take vengeance. To. Magistrates be lawful auengers.
13, 2. not for himself, as this Text faith, but on the behalf of God, whose
Minister he is, and of his neighbor who is offended. Also, it is no breach of
this precept in our extreamities, to fly to Magistrates for succor, so it be
not with a revenging mind to make him the instrument of our hatred, but with
an honest purpose to preserve our selves and others whom we have charge of How
we may use Law and authority.
from dangers.

Secondly, to have the wrong dooer brideled and amended by moderate corruption.
Thirdly, to have scandal removed from among Gods people. Fourthlie, to have
others feared from evil doing by example of their punishment. For these ends,
it is as lawful for us to use the Magistrate, as to use the Sun, or air, or
any other creature or ordinance of God. Paul appealed to Caesar, and called for
help against those which had vowed his death, Acts 23, 23, 24.


Tim. What is meant by the next exhortation?


Silas. By hunger and thirsting is meant necessities of all sorts, and by
giving bread and drink all duties of humanity (by a Synecdoche) which for
charity sake we are to perform even to an enemy (after the example of the
Augustine understands by coals of fire, the burning gripes of Repentance,
making anenimy relent, being mollified by benefits, as Ierom says. Others, of
burning charity, and fire of love as Martyr and Lyra. Others of both, as M.
Calvin, etc.
Samaritan) if he be in want, and that by our kindness we do not maintain
him in his sin, or against God and his King and country. This is the
greatest trial of our Christian love, Math. 5, 44. Luke 6, 35. By coals of
fire, is meant divine plagues and punishment which hang over the heads of such
malicious men as will not be conquered by our beneficence and weldealing with
them, (thus M. Beza, and most rightly.) And here is showed not the purpose of
the doer, but the event: that this is the best sense, appears by comparing
this place with Pro. 25, 22. whence it is taken, and by other places where the
same phrase is used in the Psalm. 18, 13. and 120, 4. to note the kindling of
Gods wrath and judgments. [ To be overcome by euill] is to be impatient for
wrong done to us, and to study revenge. To overcome evil with goodness,
signifies to show mercy and kindness where we receive evil. This is a more
noble victory to conquer our selves, then if we overcame a City. Fortior est
qui se quam qui fortissima vincit. Nobile vincendi genus est se vincere posse.

This is it which we are mightily to strive unto, as a most excellent degree
of perfection. Be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect; for he is kind
unto the unkind, and suffers his Sun and rain to fall upon the ground of
good and bad. In these step pes of God, did walk Moses, Christ, David, Paul,
and Stephen, all doing good against evil.


CHAP. XIII.
Of Magistracy.
DIAL. I.
Verse 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no
power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.


Timotheus. What is the Argument and subject of this Chapter?


Silas. Having in the former Chapter exhorted us to many moral duties, he now
commends us unto political and civil subjection; and withal exhorts us
unto mutual charity, and holiness of conversation, so as the parts of this
Chapter are three. The first of obedience to Magistrates, to the end of the
seventh verse. The second, of love due to our Neighbor, to the eleauenth
verse. The third of purity and sanctimony of life, to the end of the chapter.


Tim. Show us now more distinctly the connection of this Chapter with the
former, and what reasons might move the Apostle to treat of duties to
Magistrates?


Silas. Paul having before forbidden to recompense evil, and to avenge our
selves, lest he might be thought to take away all power from man to avenge our
wrongs, he now teaches that Magistrates are set up of God to be his ministers
to take vengeance of evil dooers.

Secondly having said that we must do good to such as hurt us, he now very
fitly infers, that we ought much more to reverence and obey Gouerners which
are helpful to mankind. Now the reasons which moved Paul to make a set
treatise touching the honor due unto Rulers are these: First, to stop the
mouths of such as affirm the Gospel of Christ, to be an enemy to authority
against Kings and Princes, for thus the Christians were accused in the Apostles
time. Secondly, in respect of the Jews who being borne of Abraham, free borne
and Gods peculiar people, did seek to shake off the yoke of the Romans, who
were now become their Lords. Thirdly, because it might be judged far unmeet
for the faithful which are governed by Gods Spirit, to be ruled by
heathenish Governors, and such they all were at that time.

Lastly, to meet with such as imagine that Christian liberty and civil
magistracy could not stand together, and that we need not to be subject to
politic laws, because Paul had written before that we are not under the
law. Upon these considerations it seems the Apostle does now very seasonably
urge civil obedience: and as all the precepts in the former Chapter from the
ninth verse to the end, are branches of the sixth Commandeinent (Thou shall not
murder,) so this that he speaks now of subjection to Rulers, belongs to
the fifth commandment, whereof it is a part; for what else be Magistrates but
Parents of their Country, raised up of God with a fatherly affection to defend
the laws and public peace, and to procure the common good, and to be
honored of the people under them with child-like reverence and obedience?


Tim. Lay forth now the method and disposition of that part of this Chapter
which concerns men in authority?


Silas. The general members of this treatise are two: first a proposition,
secondly the reasons thereof.


Tim. In what words is the proposition contained, and what is the meaning
thereof?


Silas. The proposition is in the first words ( Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers) the meaning hereof is, Let every man and woman be in
subjection to the Magistrate. In the word [ soule] there is a Synechdoche, as
the flesh or body (which is put apart) is sometimes put for the whole man, as
in those sayings of Esaias, all flesh is grass, and again, all flesh shall see
the salvation of God: so the soul does often signify the whole man, as in
Genesis 46. Jacob went down into Egypt with 70. souls, and Acts 27, 37. and
so in this place the whole man is denominated from the soul which is the
principal part: and in the Psalm. (Soul) is sometimes put for the man
himself, but yet the Apostle uses rather the word [soule] then man, for these
reasons, as namely first of all to teach us that the subjection he requires,
must be voluntary, not upon compulsion but willingly. Secondly, to show that
inferiors not in substance only and body, but must be subject also even in
their very souls, in such things as they may do with a good conscience,
otherwise they ought to obey God rather then men. Thirdly, to declare that all
mortal men without exception of any, (even as many as have souls) must yield
their subjection to Rulers.


Tim. Is not this last thing further confirmed by this universal particle
[euery soul?]


Silas. It is so, for the meaning thereof is thus much, that all men of what
condition, sex, or age soever (none exempted) must be subject. Therefore
foolish and very false is that collection of Origin, that such as be utterly
spiritual and do not follow the affections of the flesh, are not to live
under Princes, because Paul wrote thus [ Let every soule] not let every
spirit, this is more subtle then sound, for none were more spiritual then
Christ and his Apostles, and yet none were more subject then they; wherefore it
is better to say with Chrysostom, that this universal particle [all] does
comprehend all without exception of any, and that this precept is given not to
secular men only, but also to Priests and Monks, as Chrysostom says,
Whether he be an Apostle or Prophet, or Evangelist, or whatsoever he be, let
him be subject, for this subjection (says he) does not overthrow religion.
Heereunto accords Bernard, in an epistle of his to the Clergy of Rome, Epist.
42. Si omnis anima subyci debeat, quis eos excipiet ab hac vniuersalitate?
quisquis conatur clericos excipere, tentat decipere: yea Christ himself did not
plead privilege against this precept, neither did grant exemption unto any.


Tim. What use is to be made of this point, touching the generality of the
persons who must be subject?


Silas. It reproues diverse sorts of persons: First the anabaptist who will not
admit Christians either to bear Magistracy, or to be subject unto authority;
as if it were fit for Insidels but not for the faithful to be subject to
powers; under this pretense, that being Christ's sreemen they may not live in
servitude, or be bound unto any: whereas Paul directs this precept to the
believing Romans, who were Christians by profession, whose spiritual freedom
from sin, Satan, and damnation is not repugnant unto corporal subjection,
due to civil Magistrates. There is nothing in the Gospel against this but
rather much for it, that a man may be both a Christian and a subject, as well
as a wife, a master, a servant and a child. The second kind here reproved,
are certain irregular and exorbitant persons amongst our selves, who though
they be in judgment convicted, and cannot but confess that this precept is
given to all Christians, and touching all powers, yet they make themselves a
disperisation, and take liberty to do what they list, without all due regard
to that which is by superiors commanded. Herein joining with Anabaptists and
Libertines, that as touching their practice they strive to shake off from their
necks the yoke (though not of supreme) yet of subordinate Governors, as if
they were too good to obey some powers.

The third kind is the Pope and his Clergy, who do not only plead for an
exemption, but also do practice it with such manifest and gross wickedness,
as that the Pope does not only withdraw subjection from Emperors, but has
lifted up his throne, above the Throne of Emperors and Kings, whom he takes
upon him to set up and pull down at his pleasure, to dispose their kingdom,
and despise, nay destroy their persons (upon imputation of heresy) and is not
only not subject to them, but causes them to bow down their necks under his
feet, and most filthily to worship him by kissing them, under this pretext,
that the soul is better then the body, and therefore spiritual Governors,
which teach the soul, are to be preferred before temporal, whose charge it is
to look to the body, and worldly things. It was the argument of Pope Baniface
the eight, whereas in truth, it is not the fashion of Popes to preach the
gospel, therewith they little trouble themselves; but to Lord it, and live in
pomp and pleasure. And say, they did teach the word of God, yet as Kings (how
great soever their dignity be) must subject their understandings and wills to
be governed by the word which the ministers propound (for Gods word must rule
the highest Rulers,) so Ministers, though their function be very high and
excellent, yet cannot free themselves from subjection unto civil Magistrates,
because it is here imperatiuely commanded. Let every soul be subject: As the
Highpriests were subjects, Aaron to Moses, Abiathar and Zadock to Solomon, and
Romisn bishops to the first Christian Emperors.


Tim. What may be understood by the word [Subiect?]


Silas. This word imports as much as to be put under Subject, what it imports.
another, or to be brought in order, and it insinuates to them that are
governed, that there is a certain order, orderly disposing between the ruler
and the ruled, by consideration whereof, the inferior which is set under, must
give place to the superior which is put above. This emphasis the learned
observe in this word. As it is in nature Similitudes.
Bees, Cranes, and Fishes, have one above them, under whose conduct they go
forth to feed, and return from feeding: and among the Elementarie bodies, the
more heavier and more massy, are subject and put under the lighter and more
subtle, the earth under the water, the water under the air, the air under the
sky, the sky under the starry firmament, and that under the third heavens,
which are the seat of the Angels. And as in humane bodies, the other
members, as hands, arms, and legs, etc. do by nature acknowledge the head
as chief, and are subject unto it, so in policy or worldly estates, there is
such an order settled, that some should be above to command, others beneath to
obey, and that they which are placed as inferiors, should submitthemselues to
such, as by rank and order are their superiors. Again, it is more
significant to say ( be subject) then if the Apostle should have said, obey,
reverence, resist not, honor, etc. For subjection as a general word,
comprizeth all the rest as particulars under it, (namely) acknowledgment of
their power, taking laws and coin from them, arming at their commandment;
reverence, love, prayer, and thanksgiving for them; thankfulness in
maintaining them, obedience in doing and suffering, al these appertain to
subjection.


Tim. What are we to understand by powers?


Silas. By [powers] are meant here, not Ecclesiastical Governors, as
Apostles, Evangelists, Doctors, Pastors, Powers.
Teachers, but such as take tribute, and bear the sword, which Ministers are
forbid to do, and civil rulers may do; and therefore the Papists err, which
from this place would set up the preheminency of Pope and Bishops above
politic Rulers (who by a Metonymie of the adioynt) are here named [powers,]
because they are endowed with great power and might above other men, to
suppress the wicked and defend the good. Also to show that they bear the
Image of God, not in respect of his essence, but in respect of his power, and
thence it is, that not Jehovah, the Title of his Being; but Elohim the Title of
his power, is attributed to the Magistrate, Psalm. 82 1, 5. Observe also, that
subjects may not examine by what way or mean Princes get their power, whether
by right or wrong, for Paul knew that the Romans had by great force made
themselves the Lords of the world, yet he will have the present powers obeyed.

Lastly, Paul speaks not of the persons, but of the functions, which must be
respected, be the Governors good or bad. Men's deformities cannot extinguish
Gods ordinances; nor can divine functions be less honorable by humane
frailties: it is a gross malice or blindness not to distinguish the sins of
the man, and the worthiness of the Magistracy.


DIAL. II.
Verses 1, 2. For there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.


Tim. HOw does our Apostle proceed?


Silas. In these words, and the verses following, he renders sundry and
weighty reasons why we ought to be subject to Magistrates, whereof the first is
taken from the efficient cause and author, which is neither fortune, nor
chance, nor men, nor Angels, good or badde, but only God himself, whose
ordinance we are bound to reverence, and be subject to it; but powers or
magistrates are Gods ordinance, therefore we must be subject to them. This is
the first argument which may be thus further pressed and urged. It is a comely
and an honest thing to submit our selves unto that order which comes from God,
who is not the author of any thing that is evil: therefore, seeing
Magistracy is a thing which God has set amongst men, it is a seemly and
honest thing to submit our selves unto it.


Tim. May we not gather from the first words, that there Doubt.
are sundry powers, and that they are all of GOD one and other?


Silas. Yea, this Text implies, that there are sundry Solution.
kinds of powers, and that they come all of God their first Author, because he
says in the plural number (the powers that be) are ordained of God, which
proposition being universal, shows that the former exclusive proposition (no
powers but of God) comprehends al, and is as much in effect, as if the Apostle
had said al powers, both high, middle or low, Private or public, civil or
The kinds of power.
Ecclesiastical, or whatsoever powers it be, have God for the ordainer
thereof. Here let us observe for distinction sake, that from the very
beginning of the creation, God gave unto man a threefold power. First, over
himself, which is the rule of vncorrupt reason over our senses and appetite in
the soul of man, and may be likened unto that government which the Master
has over his Scholars: of this it is written, Eccle. 7, 23. That God made man
righteous. And in Ecclesiasticus 15. He left him in the hands of his own
counsel: and as Moses speaks Deuteronomy. 30, 19. He set before him life and death,
good and evil. Man is not like a stone or block (which cannot move but from
an external cause moving it) but has in himself the beginning of motion,
whereby he could by the power of his will, apply himself unto good or evil,
to choose or refuse, til by abusing his free will, in not refusing to eat the
forbidden fruit, he lost both it and himself. The second power given to man
in his first creation, was over Beasts, and Fowls, and Fishes, according as
it is written, Genes. 1, 26. Let him rule over the fishes of the Sea, etc.
Here unto accords that in the Psalm. 8, 6, 7. 8. This was lost by Adam, but
restored by Christ.

The third kind of power was that which he gave to Mariti (...)
man over man: of this there be sundry sorts, the first of all was the power
which the husband had given him over his wife, Genesis 2, 21. and 3, 16. The next
unto this, was the power of the Parents over their Children, which Adam Patria
(...).
and Eve exercised over Caine and Abell, and of the which the fifth
Commandment speaks expressly. Also Paul, Ephesians. 6, 1, 2. Now as families did
increase, there arose the power of masters over their servants, whereof Paul
Ephe. 6, 5, 6, 7. Col. 4, 1. after this did spring up the power of the
Magistrate over subjects, when the world was multiplied: this was established
in Genesis 9, 5. which power being to be exercised not rashly by every man,
(which would breed a confusion (whereof God is not the author) does argue that
it is appropriate to certain men whom God has ordained to be Rulers over
others: see Exodus 18, 21. and 20, 12. Deutero. 1, 15, 16, 17. and 16. 18. Now
this public power of the Magistrate was either of one over a kingdom, called
a Monarchy; or else of some chief and choice men for wisdom and goodness put
over the rest, called an Aristocracy; or exercised by a multitude called a
Democracy. In these several kinds of power and authority, howsoever the
acquisition or assuming of it, be not always of God, as in Tyrants and
usurpers, which by violence and force do intrude themselves into government
without a due calling, after the example of Nimrod, and the first Roman
Emperors, and Richard the third in England; and though the abuse of the power
being carried not after the will of God, but after the lust of man, and being
used not for the weal, but to the hurt of the subject, be not of God but from
Satan and wicked men: yet the very power it self considered alone, is
certainly a divine ordinance erected and appointed of God for the common good
of mankind; as riches and marriage be good though often they be ill gotten
and ill used: therefore our Apostle not speaking of the person nor of the
abuse, nor of the manner of getting the authority, but of the very thing it
selse, says it is of God. This being generally true of all powers, yet is
here especially meant of the political public power, as appears by that
which is afterward said of the sword, and of tribute paying.


Tim. But why does God say in Osee, 8. 4. They have set up a king but not by me?


Silas. This is spoken of Jeroboam, who had the regimet over the ten tribes
which were rent from Rehoboam: his rule is said not to be of God by some,
because God only permitted it, and was not the effectual cause of it; which
is false, as appears by the words of God himself, both before the division,
1. Kings 11, 31, 35, 36. and in the very time of the peoples rebellion against
Rehoboam, 1. Kin. 12, 15. Al which prove, that the translation of the kingdom
from Salomons race unto Jeroboam, was not only suffered but acted of God, as
it was a judgment upon Solomon and his children: now every judgment being an
act of justice, has the nature of a good thing, and therefore has being from
God, not by permission only, but as his own action; yet Jeroboam is said to
be set up not by God in respect of some circumstances, and the manner of the
fact; because the rebellion of the people against (...) their rightful king,
and their defection to Jeroboam a vile intruder, without asking counsel of
God, these things were not from God, but from their wicked and rebellious
minds. Neither was it from God that Jeroboam being king set up Idolatry, and
swarued (...) the revealed will of God in his government, to follow his
beastly affections; yet the power it self which he exercised was Gods
ordinance; so was Cyrus his power over the Assirians, and Alexanders over the
Persians, and the Romans over the Grecians; the power was of God, though the
getting of it by (...) war proceeded from the Devil, and from their own
ambitious, greedy and insatiable lusts.


Tim. Why then does Peter say that powers be humane Creatures or the
Ordinances os men. 1 Peter 2. 13?


Silas. This must not be taken causually, as if that men were the first
inuenters and finders out of civil government, but powers are named humane
ordinances, either subiectiuely, because that man is the subject by whom it
is exercised; or obiectiuely, because humane affairs are the only object, or
the thing about which it is conversant. Lastly, also in respect of the end,
because it is appointed, and does serve for the great good of men. Moreover,
howsoever diverse forms of government be found out by man (as every King in
his Kingdom, for necessity of his kingdom, may create new officers) yet the
original institution of Rulers and Governors is from God, who has ordained all
sorts of Civil powers, John 10, 35.

So then to conclude, those powers are from God, not as plagues, sickness, and
other evils where with GOD scourges the wicked only in his fury, but as an
wholesome order, tending to the benefit of good and bad, to reclaim the one
from evil, and to retain the other in his goodness.


Tim. What Use and profit are we to make of this point?


Silas. First, an admonition to such as have any power Use.
to use it rightly, seeing they both have it from God, and they must be
countable to God how they use it. That which Paul says of Masters, must be
applied unto all Magistrates, Col. 4, 1. They have a Master in heaven, and
therefore must deal equally and justly. For power, being a thing which God
has ordained, it must needs therefore be bounded within the limits of reason,
honesty and right; without the which, it may in no wise pass without offense
to God the ordainer.

Secondly, it puts subjects in mind, as to thank God for setting up such an
order, so to be subject unto it in all quietness, even for that reverence and
respect they bear to God the author of it. It cannot be but a thing exceeding
pleasing unto God, when for his sake his ordinance is acknowledged, received,
and regarded. Lastly, it rebukes such as will obey none but higher powers
only, whereas subjection is here called for to al powers (which we do live
under) because their institution proceeds from God.


Tim. What other reason does our Apostle give, why we should be subject?


Silas. His next reason is drawn ( a turpi,) for it is a thing very unseemly
and dishonest, to strive against God, and that which he ordaines: therefore, it
is very 2. Reason.
filthy and uncomely to resist Magistrates, for they are How Magistrates may be
resisted.
Gods ordinance. Now Magistrates may be resisted these three ways. First, by
subtilty and craft, when by evil reports, and miss informations of servants
and officers they are drawn to do against Justice, as David did against
Mephibosheth by the false accusation of Zhiba. This is the misery of Princes
(as one says) that they have neither eyes nor cares of their own, but are
forced to see and hear by other, who abusing them by untruths, A good wary,
and wise prince is oftentimes sold.
carry them to wrong and oppression. Another was wont to say, that honest simple
Princes are often sold by their own servants, who take Bribes to corrupt rheir
Masters with lies: this is a cunning resistance; under pretense of pleasing
and humoring, they do much wrong to Rulers and people both.

Secondly, there is a resistance by disobedience or contumacy (for resisting is
opposed unto subjection) when the lawful commandment of Rulers, is not with
ready submission fulfilled, their good I awes and statutes about things
lawful, be broken through contempt and negligence: this is a stubborn
resistance.

Thirdly, there is a mutinous resistance by seditious persons and rebels, which
openly strive against authority, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram did; or bear
armor against them, as Absolen and English fugitives have done. Lastly, they
do resist, which are as bellows by word or writing, to persuade others to
Rebellion, as Parsons, Sanders, Cardinal Allen, and other Seminary Priests
have done. At a word, all authors, abettors, counselors, fauo, rers, and
consenters unto sedition and rebellion, or contempt of Rulers, be resisters of
God in Magistrates.


Tim. What is our doctrine from this second reason?


Silas. That such as resist authority, are resisters not of men, but of God, as
the Poets feign of the Gyantes that raised up a mount to heaven, to pull down
Jupiter from thence; so al resisters of powers are fighters against God. The
reason of this doctrine is, because they that strive against the order that God
has set up, strive against god the author of that order, and it is a sign
that they would not have God reign over them that will not obey such Rulers as
he has appointed to be in his room and place. As Kings do take themselves to
be abused, when their deputies are abused: so the abuse of Gods Vicegerents
and Officers extends even to God himself, as it written of Corah and his
accomplices, that they murmured not against Moses and Aaron, but against God,
Numbers 16. And they have not cast off thee, but me (says God unto Samuel,
when the people refused him to be their Ruler, 1. Sam. 8, 7.) Howsoever men
list to think otherwise of the matter, yet rulers being in Gods stead set up
at his own command, clothed with his name and power, it cannot be, but they
which resist them in any degree, resist God himself in violating a divine
order: yet let this be noted, that when rulers are oppressors subjects may (by
honest means) preserve themselves from coming into their hands, as David did
from Saul; and also make appellation from inferior rulers, abusing their
places, to superior rulers, as Paul did to Caesar. Neither must we think
disobedience to rulers in things that are unjust and impious, to be any
resistance of power, when subjects are ready with patience to endure the
punishment, though wrongfully inflicted, as Paul and Silas, and the other
Apostles did, Acts 5, and 4. and 16. also the Martyrs in the Heathen Emperors
times, and in our Kingdom.


Tim. To what Use are we to turn this doctrine?


Silas. First, to settle our minds the better to submission of all kind of
authority by this meditation, that we shall show our selves thereby to be
lovers and friends to God, and to his own order, and enemies unto confusion.
Secondly, to condemn such of folly and madness, which withstand rulers in
things lawful or indifferent. For this is all one, as if one should rise up
against GOD, the creature against the Creator, the pot and the thing made
against the potter and the maker, then which what can be more sottish and
foolish? and yet this they do, which strive against mightier and better then
themselves, which must needs in the end turn to their own ruin, as the
Apostle reasons in the third place.


Tim. What is the third reason why we must be subject? Reason.



Silas. It is this, that they that resist, purchase to themselves damnation,
that is, either eternal damnation in hell, or temporal punnishment in this
life; either from the hands of the Magistrate, or immediately from God
himself, as it happened to Corah consumed with fire; to Dathan and Abiram,
swallowed up by the earth; and to Absolon who was hanged by the hair of the
head, and innumerable other traitors at home and abroad: unto all which, did
befall an unhappy and fearful end: as in our Nation, even in our memory (as
well as in former ages) very many of all sorts, have for their disloyalty and
treasons, left their lives at Tower hill and Tyburne, being denied most of
them the honor of burial, their bodies hanged up for the Birds of the air to
feed on. It were to be wished these harms might be other men's warnings. In
judging some, an admonition is given to al, De. 18. that the rest may hear and
fear. If men would not believe the comminations of judgment by the word, yet
their own experience and sense should convict them, and assure unto them such
an evil end as others have, whose steps of disobedience they follow. Neither
is it for the capital disloyalties only, but contempts of a lesser degree and
nature, use to draw down vengeance from God and his lieutenants by
imprisonment, banishment, pecuniary mulcts, according unto the quality of the
crime. Wherefore, let men fear God and the King, and Take heed my son, thou
do not join with the seditious, for his ruin comes suddenly, and who
knows when? Prou. 24, 21, 22.


DIAL. III.
Verses 3, 4. For Princes are not to be feared for good works, but for evil.
Will thou then be without fear of the power? Do well, so shall thou have
praise of the same. For he is the Minister of God for thy good.


Tim. What is the purpose of the Apostle in this text?


Silas. To persuade subjection to Magistrates, which he does by a new Argument
( (...) fine) from a twofold end of powers which were ordained of GOD; First,
for the punishment of the evil, or to restrain wickedness. Secondly, for the
praise of wel-dooers, or to cherish and protect virtuous and obedient subjects.
Because he had threatened judgment to such as disobey, he therefore first
begins with the former end, and then proceeds unto the latter, which he
amplifieth being of more weight then the other, whereunto he returns in the
end of the fourth verse.


Tim. Expound the words, and tell us what is meant by Rulers, and by good and
evil works?


Silas. Rulers or Princes, and chief Leaders Archontes, is the same with
powers, which name is given to Magistrates to denote their might; and this of
Princes to signify their pre-eminence and excellency above others which are
under them: and as before he meant all high, low, middle, private, and
public, so here like wise by good and evil works, are understood not works
which be such Theologically, (as a Divine would speak of works, who calls
them good, which being commanded of God, are done in the faith of Christ's name,
unto Gods glory: and them evil which come not of Faith, or be forbidden in the
Law.) But ciuilly good or evil, that is, virtuous or vicious actions, as be
enjoined or prohited by the good Laws of that kingdom or City where we live.
Works done according, or against humane Laws, either natural and common to
all, or national and positive, be here named good and evil works.


Tim. How become Rulers a terror and fear to evil works?


Silas. In respect of punishment, whereof there be diverse kinds; first in
words, rebukes, or threatenings. Secondly, in deeds, as stocks, imprisonment,
banishment, pecuniary mulcts; and corporal pains, as whipping, loss of
members and limme, of good and life: all which be painful and dreadful,
striking a terror both into good men to hold them in the course of obedience,
and into evil men to draw them from disobedience.


Tim. But how? can any fear be to (works) either good or evil?


Silas. True, evil works do not fear, but by reason of evil works men are
caused to fear, or terror belongs to men which do evil: works (by a
metonymie) are here put for the workers, or doers of them.


Tim. What doctrines do arise from the words thus opened?


Silas. First, that such as live well and obediently to good laws, need not
to be affraide of Magistrates, or of his punishments threatened by laws. The
truth is, good men must still fear Governors and laws with a reverent fear
such as children have toward their parents, Prouer. 24, 21. Romans 12, 7. But a
perplexed and servile terror pertains not to them; this is the benefit of
their obedience to good laws, to enfree their minds from such a fear as
malefactors have, whose fear is a continual tormentor: and to make Rulers not
terrible, but amiable to them; yet fear of punishment is not profitable for
them.

Secondly, we learn that if vile persons be punished for their disobedience
and disorder, they have cause to blame themselves and their ill doings, but may
not accuse the Ruler of the harms which they suffer: for all men by light of
nature do know, that to evil deeds, evil and pain is due, and that society
of men could not continue where rewards be not given after men's deserts.
Therefore if they run into known crimes, and have demerited punishment for
disobedient resisting Rulers, they must thank themselves, and acquit the
Ruler who does but that which is equal and just, to maintain laws and
public peace, and to bridle the enemies thereof.

Thirdly, hence Magistrates may learn the bounds of their power, which is not
indifferently to terrify all good and evil, or to wink at offenders, and
afflict well-doers. For this is the abuse of power, and they which do thus
shall purchase judgment to themselves, from the hand of supreme power, who is
terrible even to earthly powers if they abuse their office by beating the just,
or bearing with the unjust. For it is equally abomination unto God to condemn
an innocent, or to absolve and justify the wicked, to whom the Ruler must be
terrible. Hence it follows, that sithence Rulers must suppress evil dooers,
they must be men of courage, because evil men with their malice have both
might and friends oftentimes. Hence they are called oppressors, Psalm 72. 3.
and lob 29, 17. Also that in Rulers there is required diligence in searching,
and judgment in discerning of men's persons and causes which come before them,
to be able to know who do well according to right and law, and who do ill
contrary to equity and honesty, and what penalties belong to several offenses,
which are brought to their hearing and examination.


Tim. But if the Rulers be fearful and breed terror, will Doubt.
not this cause them to be hated and abhorred? for men hate whom they fear,
and what is such an enemy to virtue as fear, or such a spur to wickedness?


Silas. The Apostle meets with this exception, and Solution.
gives a good remedy to expel terror of Rulers out of al men's minds, namely a
study and care of doing such works as are agreeable to good laws established:
such shall be so far off from terror, or expecting punishment from Rulers,
as contrarily they shall receive praise from them.


Tim. What is here to be understood by praises?


Silas. Even all that good which from Magistrates is due unto honest subjects,
for that is called [good] in the next verse, which is here called praise; also
praise being opposed to terror and revenge, shows that under it is
comprehended freedom from condemnation and punishment, absolution from crimes
falsely objected, approbation of their obedience, with some public reward and
recompense, for their encouragement, and for exciting others to duty: moreover
defense and protection, quiet possession of life, goods, estate: and finally
praise and commendation; all this is contained under praise, and is the fruit
of subjection.


Tim. But it often happens that obedient good subjects do miss of all these,
and meet with the quite contrary?


Silas. That is a fault not in the powers, but in the persons which abuse the
power: again, Paul sets down not always what is done by Rulers, but what
should be done. Lastly, if well doers miss praise from men, they are sure to
have it from God: and evil Rulers when they do not praise good men causally,
by giving them their due commendations, yet they do it occasionly, whilst by
punishing good men unjustly, they minister occasion to them, to show forth
their patience to their praise and glory. Power to hurt is given to devils and
wicked men, that the patience of good men may be proved to their praise.


Tim. What is our lesson from hence?


Silas. That praise and all good is due from the Magistrate unto such as do
well; the reason hereof, is that which follows in verse 4. The Magistrate is
the minister of God to them that do well, that is, he serves God by
commanding good, and forbidding evil things, touching faith and manners.


Tim. Of what [good] does the Apostle speak?


Sil. Both natural good for the preservation of life to themselves and others,
and moral good to keep men from vice and in the exercise of virtue, and civil
good by maintaining their estate and liberty; and spiritual good by making
laws for religion, and against idolatry, by upholding preaching and preachers,
and the right use of Sacraments, maintaining schools, and universities, with
professors: for religion is our chief good, the care wheroflies on the powers
civil who be the preseruers of both the Tables of the Law, whereof is a
precept, Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19.


Tim. In what sense is the magistrate called the minister of God?


Silas. First, because they are ordained of God. Secondly, set over us by God.
Thirdly, they are Gods in earth, to exercise his judgments. Fourthly, in Gods
behalf, in his stead, in his name, and by his power and authority, they reward
the righteous, and punish the evil, as well concerning Religion as Justice: as
the Kings of Judah did defend public peace and honesty, discipline and good
order, so as God may be served, and the tranquillity of the State preserved.


Tim. But wherein do Pastors differ from Magistrates, for they are also called
Gods Ministers?


Silas. They have only one beginning (to wit) God; and one end, the good of
the people: but they differ in the object, which, is the soul and divine
things for the Preacher, but body and goods for the ruler: and in the means
which be external, force in the Ruler; but instructions, and exhortations, and
ecclesiastical discipline in the Preacher.


Tim. What Use of this instruction, that rulers are appointed for the praise
and great good of the people?


Silas. It is a great spur to subjection, to hear that such as do well,
shall receive praise, and so much good: for all men do desire good things, and
covet to be well spoken of. Secondly, it reprooues such Rulers as look to their
own private ends, and not to the public good; such as waste the common
treasure, spoil and waste the subjects, neglect the observation of good Laws,
and the encouragement of virtuously disposed persons, giving heart by remission
and conniuence to the evil, and disheartning the good. Thirdly, it admonishes
al rulers, with all care and conscience to answer their high authority; as
they are Gods Ministers, so to do Gods will, and to approve their doings to
God, to seek his honor in their office, remembering that to him they must
render account, and above all to uphold the purity of doctrine and divine
worship, after the examples of Joshua, David, Josiah, Iehosaphat, Ezekiah, and
other godly Emperors and Kings. Lastly, it must provoke us to the greater
reverence toward them, being Gods officers and Vicegerents: in respecting,
loving, obeying them for Gods sake we must declare our reverence, love, and
obedience to God himself.


DIAL. IIII.
Verse 4. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid: for he bears not
the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God to take vengeance on him that
does evil.


Tim. WHat is contained in these words?


Silas. The second and latter end or use for which Rulers were appointed of
God, (for the punishment of evil doers) as Peter styles it, 1. Pet. 2, 13.
From whence the Apostle argues thus to confirm the principal matter in hand
touching subjection: We ought willingly (not for fear only) be subject to
them which are helpful to all mankind. This proposition is not expressed, but
understood. But Powers or rulers are beneficial to mankind, not only for
praising and defending the good, but for brideling and punishing the evil,
verse 3, and 4. Therefore, not for fear of wrath only, but for conscience
sake we ought to obey them, verse 5. for it is against conscience to resist and
grieve such benefactors as governors be. The proof of the assumption or minor
is, because to powers is given authority to bear and use the sword, both for
protecting the innocent by lawful wars, and revenging the malefactor by
corporal pains, and death if need be. This power was granted to man, Genes.
9, 5. And afterward oftentimes confirmed in Exodus and Deuteronomie.


Tim. Come to the words and interpret them.


Silas. By doing evil is meant, trespasses and crimes committed against
positive and politic laws. For there are many evil deeds sorbiden in Gods
law, which Magistrates can take no knowledge of, or cannot call unto an account
to punish, as evil thoughts, and many totten words and vain actions;
therefore criminal and capital faults be meant. They which be guilty of such,
may well be affraide of powers, for they have power to strike for such deeds.


Tim. What is our lesson from hence?


Silas. That innocent persons are dreadlesse and bold, but breakers of Gods Law
do go and live in continual terror, as Thieves, murderers, traitors, dare not
look out. The reason is, because innocence is as a bulwark and fortress to
the good, and the Laws also and powers are for their safeguard; whereas the
guilt of an evil conscience, is as a tormentor to the evil doer, who knows
powers and laws to be ordained for scourging and curbing them. Hence it is,
that the wicked and disobedient livers do fear and fly, and hide their
heads, and seek the darkness to cover them, as Cain did and as with us
Fellons and Malefactors do; when guiltless persons are fearlesse and
confident, and shun not the light, because they have not done evil against
laws. The three servants of God, being conuented before the King, and sore
threatened, said; O King we are not affraide to answer thee, Dan. 3, 16. John
and Peter (Acts 4, 13.) being brought before the Rulers, so stoutly answered
(out of the goodness of their cause and conscience) as the Elders and Priests
admired to see unlettered men so bold; whereas evil men commonly shake and
tremble in the presence of the Magistrate, and look pale as if death were in
their faces, because guilt is in their conscience. This serves to be a notable
spur to subjection, to cause us to walk obediently toward Rulers in all ready
subjection to Laws and orders well established for public good, that we may
enjoy that freedom from perplexed and slavish fear, which as a Ghost or fiend
does follow evil doers, to disquiet and vex them, living in continual fear
and dread of the sword, and severity of Justice.


Tim. What is meant here by the [Sword,] and in what sense is it said not to
be [borne in vain?]


Sias. This is not spoken of an ecclesiastical or spiritual sword, which is
by the hands of God himself put into the hands of Church officers, whereof
Paul entreated before, Chap. 12. verse 7, 8. Here he speaks of civil
officers, to whom custom and tribute are paid; and therefore this must be
understood of a material sword, by which he means (Mctonymically) the right
and power of drawing the sword for good subjects against evil ones, and
(Synecdochically) armor and weapons of all kinds, together with all coactiue
and coercitiue power whatsoever, is to be exercised for the safety of the body
polliticke, and the suppression of all enemies thereof, either domestical and
intestine, or foreign. In the term of bearing the sword, he has respect
without al question, unto the custom of Princes and great Rulers, who as
Ensigns of their authority, and for the moving terror in the minds of
rebellious ones, use to have scourges or rods, Axes and swords, carried before
them by Sergeants and officers. This sword is said not to be [borne in
vaine] in two senses. First, he bears it not rashly. Secondly, or not
without cause or end. The former has relation to the beginning or first cause
of the sword, which the Magistrate has not caught or snatched to himself by
violence, nor comes it to him by fortune or chance, but it is put into his
hands by divine ordinance, to be weilded and used not blindly, according to
his own private lust, but by reason and public Laws: the latter sense aims
at the uses and ends of the civil sword, which be three. One for the
protection of the good: secondly, for suppression of evil: thirdly, for
execution of Justice.


Tim. What Doctrines from these words thus opened?


Silas. Two: First, the power and use of the sword does belong, yea it is
proper to the civil Magistrate to who^ it granted of God (and not to the
Minister of the word) to be as it were the very sinnews and strength of his
authority. A Minister may wear, but not bear a sword. Peter may show the
sword, and offer to strike with it, but Christ will both command him to put it
into his sheath, and tell him further, that he shall perish with the sword if
he take it. [Take it] shows that the sword in the Ministers hand is taken and
usurped. It is not put there and given of God, and therefore without their
peril, yea, without peril of perishing, cannot be assumed of them. For all
this, and notwithstanding Christ have in Lu. 22, 25. plainly distinguished
between civil and ecclesiastical power, as touching external rule and
regiment, saying ( but you not so,) that is, shall not use such manner of
Titles and Regiments as Kings do; yet the Pope and his Prelates intrude upon
this right of civil Rulers, and challenge to themselves the power of both
swords, yea and execute temporal jurisdiction, as well as spiritual. On the
other side, the Anabaptists offend in the other extreme, denying unto
Christian Rulers all power and use of the sword. Wherein they cross the
manifest Scripture, and also what lies in them overthrow humane policy, and
so deserve punishment, as violaters and disturbers of Gods order, and man's
society, by denying such a necessary help, as without which, any good laws
cannot be made nor executed, neither in peace nor war; the evil docr cannot be
restrained, nor the obedient subject and Citizen maintained without the sword.


Tim. What then is the second doctrine from these words?


Silas. Such as have the power of the sword, they must not have it in vain,
and for nothing; they are bound to make use of it, and to convert it to the
right ends for which God did ordain and give it. Whereof one reason is, that
it is the will of God that it should not be borne idly, being suffered to
rust in the sheath. Secondly, it stands with the office of the Ruler, upon
occasion to draw it out on Gods behalf, and in his stead (whose ministers and
servants they be) to take vengeance and punishment on such as do offend: so as
not to use it, is to frustrate Gods institution, and to do against their own
duty. The Church, the Families, the Schools, have their swords to fight
withal: the Church has the word of God, that two edged sword, Heb, 4, 12. The
sword of the Spirit, Ephe. 6, 17. The chastising rod is in stead of a sword
unto the Father, and Schoole-maister. As all these are bound to make a right
use of the sword, by right Censures and corrections, without conniuence or
cruelty; and if they should by remiss or slack use of their power, suffer
sin and vices to grow and increase in church, house or school, they should
deserve blame, and were worthy themselves to be beaten, because they do not
what they may to hinder the breed and multiplication of iniquities: so much
more (as his power is great, and the hurt more) the Magistrate is blameworthy,
if he be careless and will not, or fearful and dare not convert his power of
punnishing, to the hinderance of enormities in the Commonwealth. For by
impunity sin will wax impudent and fruitful. It will boldly spread it
self in all places where it is not checked and controuled, like a shameless
Strumpet; and it will fall out in the reckoning, that Rulers will be found
culpable and guilty of such crimes, as by his softness and sufferance be
committed. For with God it is much one, whether one be a dooer of evil, or no
hinderer, and so a consenter and a fosterer. On the otherside, by the diligent
and conscionable use of the sword, not only the Ruler is discharged, but there
is a terror stricken into the hearts of evil men, which stays them from
running headlong to vice, as Solomon says, The blewnesse of the wound drives
out evil. And Deuteronomy. 18. Crimes must be punished by the Judge, that the rest
may fear and do no such evil. Also 1 Timothy 5, 24. scandalous Ministers must be
openly rebuked, that others may be terrified: so as there is a double benefit
comes by correcting vices, according to their quality. One, the reformation of
the offender, as the these on the Cross was reclaimed by his pain: and
secondly the restraint of others that would offend, were they not feared by
example of punishment.

Thus as the body by purging out noxious humors, the garden by weeding, the
flock by tarring scabbed sheep be kept sound, clean and heathfull: so the
commonwealth is purged of much evil, and preserved from infection of vices by
severe punishments. To these we may add a third commodity of the sword, that
(as Chrysostom says) it makes the ways of virtue easy, when to the virtuous
life of the Ruler there is added the impulsion and force of laws well
executed. This brought many Donatists from that wicked sect to embrace the
Catholic truth, whereupon Augustine corrected his error, touching the not
punishing of heretics. Lastly, in that they are entitled the Ministers of
God: let this help to nourish reverence toward them, to have them in good
reputation for the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2, 13. Secondly, let it assure Rulers
they shall not lack Gods assistance and protection, see Joshua 1, 5, 6, 7. If
kings will maintain their Judges, Sheriffs, Justices, and these do bear out
their Under-officers doing but their duties, yea to the punishing of such as
resist or make rescues: How can it be that God should cast off the care and
defense of his Ministers and servants, executing but his judgments? he will
certainly be a shield and a bucklet to such shields of the earth (so the
Psalmist calls Rulers) as be found upright and valiant.


DIAL. V.
Verses 5, 6, 7. Wherefore ye must be subject not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake. For this cause ye pay also tribute, for they are Gods
ministers, applying themselves for the same thing: give to all men therefore
their duty, etc.


Tim. What be the contents of this text?


Silas. It contains a conclusion of the former exhortation touching
subjection unto Magistrates, wherein we are to observe these three things:
First, a repetition of two maine arguments, the former ( a metu poenae) because
of wrath. The second ( a metu Dei) for conscience sake, that is, least we hurt
our conscience by offending God who sets Rulers over us and commands us to obey
them. The second part is an addition of two new arguments, first from
necessity, (ye must be subject,) the second from cquity (render to every man
his due,) this is regula aequitatis and iuris.) The third and last member of
the text is an enumeration of the parts of subjection, which be these four,
1. fear, 2. honor, 3. tribute, 4. custom. Of the last two, there are two
reasons yielded in the text, why they ought to be paid, fust ( a testimonio)
because they be secret witnesses of subjection ( for, this cause ye pay
tribute.) Secondly, ( ab honesto) because it is an honest thing to give
recompense to the Magistrate for his labor and pains (applying themselves to
this purpose.)


Tim. Let us proceed to the words, and tell us what is here meant by [wrath,]
and for conscience sake?]


Silas. Wrath signifies that punishment or revenge mentioned verse 4. because
it proceeds from the wrath or an ger both of God and the Magistrate, which
because men can no otherwise avoid then by subjection, therefore here is the
necessity of subjection. But especially [ for conscience sake,] which words
have sundry interpretations all true, but not all fit to the text: Some by
conscience understand the light of natural reason, which teaches us to reder
every man his due, as Liranus. Or the conscience of such sins as disobedient
persons may fall into, through their disobedience, as Tolet thinks. Or the
conscience of other men, that it be not hurt by example of our obstinacy
against Rulers, as Erasmus. Or the conscience of such benefits as we receive by
the means of Rulers, whereof in verse 4. Or thus, it is against conscience to
resist such Benefactors as protect the good, and punish the evil dooer, as
Chrysostom. Or the prick that does (...) the conscience of rebellious
persons. Now there be two things which do (like furies) sting the conscience
of such: First, the contempt of the good ordinance of God. Secondly,
ingratitude toward Rulerss which made all mankind beholden to them. Thus
Peter Martyr: but Master Beza and Piscator do interpret it, De metu Dei and
conscientia praecepti, because God has ordained Rulers and commanded
subjection, therefore we cannot with a good conscience despise or resist them.
Albeit I would not willingly cast off any of these interpretations, yet for
diverse circumstances of the text, I do rather incline to that of Chrysostom,
and this last of Master Beza, as the rightest and fittest, because he had
spoken of Gods ordinance, and the good use of Rulers, in regard whereof, there
is conscience to be made of subjection to the Magistrate.


Tim. Let us now hear what Doctrines arise from the words thus opened?


Silas. That to give subjection to Rulers is no indifferent thing to be done
at our pleasure, as a thing at our own election: we are bound to be subject,
as either we will escape punishment, or keep our conscience unto Godward
unspotted. If we be not subject, we incur Gods wrath, we make shipwreck of a
good conscience, two of the greatest evils, and therefore we must needs be
subject, by which means, we shall enjoy Gods favor, and the peace of a good
conscience, which are two of the chiefest good things. Secondly, were we sure
to avoid both the wrath of God, and the punnishment of the rulers, yet we
ought to be subject unto them, that we may preserve an vncorrupt conscience,
which is a far greater benefit then to avoid corporal pain. Thirdly, our
external obedience is not sufficient, unless it be joined with subjection of
conscience: not to speak evil with our tongues, nor with our hands to resist
the Magistrate, is then a Christian action, when in our conscience we reverence
rulers. As this reprooues such people that are subject not in singleness of
heart, but with eye-subiection, so it exhorts us in performing subjection, not
to set our members aworke only, but to do our duty to superiors of conscience
to God; otherwise there may be fruit of our subjection unto Rulers, but none
to our selves before God.


Tim. But may it be rightly collected from this text, that the Doubt.
Laws of men do as truly, absolutely, and (...) bind our conscience, as do
the Laws of God?


Silas. No verily: this is the prerogative of God, that Solution.
he is alone the Lawgiuer to the conscience Iam. 2. There is one Lawgiver,
even God. God alone is the Lord of the Conscience, 1. for he made it, 2. he
gouernes it, 3. and he alone is able to save or destroy it, for breach of his
laws: and therefore his laws have absolute and proper power to bind the
conscience of such as break them, to sin and damnation. Whereas men's Laws do
bind our conscience, it is not through any power of themselves, but by virtue
of Gods Law, commanding us to be subject unto them; and of the things
commanded, being agreeable to divine Laws.

Secondly, if men's Laws should properly bind (as they be man's) then the
Midwiues disobeying Pharaoh, Exodus 1. and the three Hebrews disobeying (...)
about falling down to the Image, Dan. 3. had sinned against Conscience: whereas
their example is in Scripture commended for our imitation. Also then, Peter
James, and John, had not given a sound answer unto the Rulers, forbidding them
to preach, saying, It is better to obey God then men.

Thirdly, both the Ministers and the people of Christ, should be equally bound
to study humane Laws, as divine, which were an absurd thing: also then
humane Laws should be as perfect as divine, whereunto as nothing is to be
added, so nothing is to be taken therefrom.

Lastly, there being no Tribunal seat, saving that of God in heaven, higher
and greater then that Tribunal which is set up in our conscience on earth: If
the Law of man (as it is of man) could bind the Conscience, then it would
follow, that inferior power might prescribe and ouerrule the superior.

These things serve to discover the intolerable pride of that man of sin,
the Pope of Rome, challenging to himself that which is peculiar unto God, even
a Sovereign rule over the conscience, which he will have as much obliged unto
his Ecclesiastical Laws, as unto Gods moral Precepts, so as men shall sin
mortally, and become worthy of eternal death, if they break any Papal
constitution, even therefore because they be his constitutions. Thus Pererius
the Jesuit affirms: but Bellarmine in his Chapter de pontifice goes yet
further, that if the Pope should commend for virtues such things as are vices,
men are as much bound in conscience to obey them, as if they were lawful things
commanded of God: and no marvel, seeing they ascribe unto the Pope
omnipotency, and acknowledge him to be a God. But what is this, but to fulfill
the prophecy of Antichrist by Saint Paul, 2 These. 2, 2. to sit in the Temple
of God, as God; and to lift up himself above all that is called God? For the
Conscience is Gods Temple, and subject unto none but to God, according to that,
Give unto God the things that are Gods, Mat. 22.


Tim. But do not the Laws of man bind the conscience in Doubt.
any respect? Or if they do, how, or in what respects?


Silas. Yea, we are in Conscience bound to obey humane Solution.
Laws, or else we run into the offense of God, and so offend our Conscience.
This is the very meaning of our Text; for if we must obey for Conscience sake,
then Rulers and Laws do in some sort bind our conscience. Again, this
Commandment [be subject unto higher powers] cannot be broken with a good
Conscience. Therefore we are in conscience bound to do such things as are
enjoined us by rulers, with this condition, that the thing enjoined be not
contrary to common honesty, equity, reason, and religion. For further
explanation of this point, observe that the Law of civil Magistrates, do
forbid and require sometimes the selfsame thing that Gods Law does forbid and
require; as Usury, drunkenness, perjury, theft, murder: and then we obey not
in respect of men, but for divine precept sake, the things commanded being such
as we cannot but embrace, unless we would wound our Conscience: but if the
things enjoined, be indifferent of a middle Nature, neither prohibited by Gods
Law, nor exacted, yet then we are to obey in Conscience, not of the things
themselves, but first of the general precept, Honor the King, submit your
selves to Principalities, be subject to powers, etc. Se condly, in respect of
the end which the ruler propounds unto himself, and that is external peace,
order, comeliness, honesty, which being morally good things, we are therefore
in Conscience bound not to violate them. Thirdly, in regard of certain
accidents which do acompany the breach of human laws, as disloyalty, contempt
of Rulers, scandal to our neighbors; which being things morally evil,
therefore when any of them do issue for our neglect of civil Laws, then the
conscience is hurt and sin is committed, though the things whereon the Laws
were made, be but indifferent.

Finally, if humane laws be such, as do determine of circumstances, which be
means the better to maintain and observe Gods moral Law, as touching time and
place of divine worship, and concerning the not wearing of Dagges, Swords,
Gunnes, to avoid murder; or moderation in meats, drinks, apparel, etc. to
avoid intemperancy: in these things, it behooues us to make Conscience that
we do not offend, because God himself has bound us to the exercise of all
means and helps, whereby any virtue may be exercised, or any Vice eschewed.


Tim. Proceed to the next verse, [For this cause ye pay tribute,] and tell us
what is meant by these words?


Silas. Now Paul reasons from their own testimony, as if he should say, in
that you pay tribute, in this you witness, that you do owe subjection to Rulers,
even (for this cause) that you may avoid wrath, and keep a good conscience. By
Tribute, is meant such paiments as the people contributed to their Rulers, and
were brought into the Kings Exchequer (as one would say, for commodities
exported or imported) thence called, Phoros apo tou pherein, or prospherein.
Tribute herein differs from customs, which are imposts and payments, either
paid by the polle, man by man, or according to men's several substances,
immoueables, things, lands, or mooueables, as Merchandise. Note further, that
he says not [ye giue] but [ye pay] tribute, to teach, that Tributes are not
gifts but debts; not things freely bestowed, but of duty performed; as it is
written in the beginning of the seventh verse, Render to every man his duty.
And whereas our Apostle, writing to all believing Romans (whereof some were
Ministers, some were people) and universally says to them all, ye pay
Tribute: This shows, that no persons Ecclesiastical or Civil, be exempted
from this part of subjection of paying Tribute, unless where there is immunity
granted by the bounty of the King.


Tim. What is our doctrine from this sixth verse? Doctrine.



Silas. That it is a duty by God himself laid upon all sorts of subjects,
willingly to pay usual customs and tributes unto their Princes. The Reasons
of this duty be Reasons.
these. First, to testify and declare our subjection toward powers, that we
acknoledge them to be our lawful Governors, and that we have them in singular
account, as men set over us by God, for whose sake we pay them tribute,
subsidies, and customs. Secondly, to maintain and uphold the public charge
that Princes are put to, about the public tranquillity. Whence it is, that by
Vlpian, tributes are termed neruireipublica, for that no more a body can be
preserved without sinnewes, then a Commonwealth without tribute. Now reason
would, that every man should be burdened about the upholding of that, wherein
every man has an interest and public charge to be defraid by public purse,
every man his share according to his means; many hands will make light labor.

Thirdly, tributes are to be paid as a recompense unto Maistrates for their
great pains, for they must apply themselves (as the text says, verse 6.) to
this purpose, that is, with all their study, care, and might they must serve to
take vengeance on the evil, and to recompense the good, to use the sword for
making of laws, for maintenance of peace, execution of justice, and waging of
wars: these be matters of great weight, charge, and difficulty, of much pain
and peril, which made the Emperor Maximilian to know that the life of a
Rusticke is to be preferred before the life of a Ruler, who is a servant to
all, to watch when other men sleep, to travail abroad when other men stay at
home, to purchase other men's ease and safety with their own disquiet and
danger. Which made a certain wise man to say, that if a Crown lay on the
ground, he would not stoop to take it up, it had so many cares annexed to it.
In respect whereof, Queen Elizabeth spoke it openly in the Parliament house,
that she had rather be a milke-woman then a Queen, were it not more for her
subjects sake then her own. And of a certain Roman we read that long
aspiring to be Emperor, he was not so forward to have it, as feeling the
burden he was willing to cast it off, yea moaned and complained of the burden
of it, that it was heavy. If this matter were thoroughly considered, it may
restrain many men from aspiring to places of govern meant, which are joined
with so many and so great encumbrances and troubles, if their duty be thoroughly
done: also it would prevail with subjects to encourage the^ without grudging
and murmuring, willingly, yea cheerfully to bring in all such payments which
are reasonable and necessarily imposed upon them for the public good, or for
the sustentation of public persons: Such as are compelled to pay, do hereby
deserve rebuke. Withal hereby are reproved our Romanists which both ( de facto
and iure) exempt the persons of the Clergy in criminal causes from civil
trials, and their goods from civil payments, according to a decree of Boniface
the 8. and the corrupt opinion of Bellarmine, that the Clergy is exempt in
person and goods by donation of Princes: and of Thomas Aquinas that the law of
nature has freed the Clergy, though Princes had not cleared them. But all this
is quite contrary to the law of God, who requires every soul to be subject, v.
1. and tribute is a part of subjection, verse 6. Secondly, to the example of
Christ and his Apostles, who paid polle money, Mat. 17. Thirdly, to the law of
reason and nature, which teaches that members of a commonwealth and such as
partake of the benefit of Governors, should in common maintain gouernemnt, it
being unreasonable that when others are burdened, Ministers should be eased,
having money, lands, and possessions as well as others, (always excepting such
immunities as they enjoy lawfully,) and some where in that proportion, as were
they exempted, Princes should loose the third part of their kingdom, as now in
Spain, and was sometime in England.


Tim. What is signified by [feare] and [honour?]


Silas. Not fear after a crime committed, which is of an evil conscience, but
an awe to offend and do a fault, which is of a religious heart, bearing
reverence to Gods order, and careful to observe good laws without giving
offense. Honor is the testification of inward fear by outward signs, as
vailing the cap, bowing the knee, rising up because of their place and dignity,
keeping silence before them, speaking well of that they do well, covering their
infirmities, not as Cham blazoning the faults of Rulers; coming to them upon
command, answering them with good reverence and meekness, attributing to them
their due titles. etc. All which belongs to the honor of our superiors may be
brought to these few heads, 1. love to their office and Gods ordinance in it,
2. reverence of their dignity and power, 3. thankfulness for their care and
labor, and the benefits which come thereby to all. 4. charity in construing
well their actions, interpreting doubtful things to the best part, 5. prayer
for Gods assistance and protection, 6. obedience to lawful commandments, 7.
patience in suffering even unjust punishment, without resistance.


DIAL. VI.
Verses 8, 9, 10. Owe nothing to any man but to love one another, for he that
loves another has fulfilled the law. For this, thou shall not commit
adultory, etc.


Tim. HOw does the Apostle proceed? and what agreement has this with the
former?


Silas. This is the second general part of this Chapter containing an
exhortation to mutual love. It has this coherence with the former matter,
wherein having exhorted to render Magistrates their due particularly, he now
generally persuades all Christians to pay unto all sorts of men whatsoever they
owe them, not ceasing till they be quit srom all debts: by which occasion he
stirs us up to pay the debt of charity; for if all debts must be paid, then
must charity be exercised, because that is a debt, and profitable for us to the
keeping of the law; which he proves by these two reasons, one by the
enumeration of particulars, verse 9. as thus: The particular precepts of the
law are these, Thou shall not commit adultery, etc. but love inableth us to the
keeping of these precepts, therefore is love the fulfilling of the law: the
assumption and conclusion of this argument are in the tenth verse. The second
reason is, love does none evil, therefore it is the keeping of the law. Of
these 2. reasons the former is drawn from a profitable effect of love, and the
latter from removing of the contrary effect.


Tim. What is the doctrine we learn from the first words of the text, [Owe
nothing, etc?]


Silas. That it does behooue every Christian to have an honest care for the
payment of his debts of all kinds both civil and moral. This proposition
needs explanation, confirmation, and application: I explain it thus: it is a
part of every wise man so to live if it be possible, as he may free himself
from all pecuniary debts: First, that he may not be obnoxious to others, and
the less be his own man. Secondly, the more a man's debt is, so the less is
his substance. Thirdly, debt is a disquiet unto an honest mind, and has some
appearance of discredit. Some, by debt hurt their name, their profession, and
their posterity.

The best means to avoid debts are these. First, frugality and moderation in
expenses, ever keeping under, rather (...) at any time going above our degree
and ability. For whereas diverse there be, who go over shoes and Boots, yea
and over ears too in debt; that falls out by ouer-eating and drinking, or by
over building, or by over purchasing, or over clothing themselves and theyrs.
Secondly, wariness in contracts and bargains. Thirdly, by avoiding rash
suretiship, when we know neither the men, nor their estate for whom we become
pledges. In this there is much folly, and oftentimes the end thereof is beggary,
as Solomon in many places teaches; so does debts which comes by gaming, and
ryotous living.

Fourthly, by eschewing to take money upon Usury; for that biteth (as the
Hebrew word signifies) and gnaweth estate of many a man to the bare bone at
last. But sithence it sareth so with many men, as it is hard for the^ to trade
in the world without debt, in this case we are charged by the Apostle, to make
due and timely satisfaction.


Tim. But what if my neighbor will forgive the debt? Or what if he be not able
to pay it? Or what if the debt be small, or the creditor be dead, and none
appointed to require it?


Silas. Though the debt be forgotten, and never demanded, yet art thou bound to
pay, if thou be not forgiven and quite discharged. If thy debt be so great,
and thy self so poor as thou be not able, then after the counsel of the
holy Ghost in the Prou. Chap. 6. verse 3. Go humble thy self, etc. purpose
restitution, promise to pay it when thou shall be able: and if the Creditor be
dead, and the debt small, and no order left to exact it, yet remember, that
there is as good right to a penny, as to a pound, and what cannot be rendered to
the creditor, pay it to his children, or the next of his Kindred, or in defect
of such to the poor; for a Christians care must be, not to owe any thing to
any man.


Tim. By what Reasons may this duty be confirmed and urged?


Silas. The lesser light of nature, teaches us to give unto every man that
which is his own. Secondly, the greater light of the word, instructs us to
deal justly, and it is a maine part of Justice commutatiue to pay debtes.
Thirdly by paying of debts we shall please God, and find him ready further to
bless us. See the example of the Widow, 2 Kings 4, 1, 2, 3. Fourthly, by this
means we preserve our credit with men, and the peace of our conscience with
God, and escape the danger of Laws humane, and divine Justice. Whereas on the
contrary, by living in debt carelessly, we offend God whose Law we break, we
wound our Conscience by injustice, we hurt our own estimation, and slander our
profession, causing men to speak hardly, not only of our selves, but of the
Gospel for our sakes. Lastly, we also incur the penalty of the Law (to wit)
imprisonment, and the paincs of eternal death (to wit) hellish torment for our
unrighteousness, 1 Cor. 6, 9.


Tim. What use are we to make of this instruction?


Silas. First, it serves for reproof of such as run in debt by borrowing,
and do not mean to restore. Secondly, Use.
of such as in payment of debtes are partial, satisfying some, and not others,
when as they have wherewith to satisfy all. This is the case of many
Bankerouts, which break, that they may escape by paying by quarters or halfes.
Thirdly, of such as do pay, but it is grudgingly, driving their Creditors to
recover by Law, what was lent them in love. All these are worse then Paganes or
Jews. For the Heathen Romans so abhorted loose debtors, as they made a Law to
cut them in pieces, and to satisfy every Creditor with a quarter. Whereunto the
Gospel alludeth, in allotting punishment to the unfaithful Steward, Math. 24,
51. The Jews though somewhat milder, yet severe enough against wretchles
debtors, who by their Law must be sold, and themselves, their wives and
children, become slaves, to satisfy their Creditors, 1 Kings 4, 1. Secondly,
here is an exhortation unto all persons, as tender either Conscience or
credit, and regard either God or man, either present or future hurt, to be
willing and ready, according to their means and power, to answer unto every
man that they owe them, even to the utmost farthing, yea, although it cannot be
done but to their own impouerishing; considering two things especially, 1.
that a little with righteousness, is better then much with iniquity 2, and
what happened to the widow that was careful to pay her debts, her Oil (by Gods
Blessing) was increased, till she had enough for the Creditor, and a remnant
and remainder for her self and children to live on, 2 Kings 4, 7. Howbeit let
this be done not for reputation to keep credit, or for profit sake, that ye
may be trusted again: but of conscieace and obedience to that God which has
said, owe nothing to any man, that you may be sure to be comforted and
blessed in your deeds, as the Apostle James speaks in another case, James 1,
25.


Tim. But does this sentence reach no further then to pecumary debts alone?


Silas. Yes, it is to be extended to debts both natural and moral, even
whenever there is any obligation or bond, either of nature, as between
Father and children, Husband and wife; or of religion, as between all other
inferiors and superiors, whether Magistrates or Ministers, etc. all these are
debtors one to another. What Paul says of himself, Romans 1, 14. I am a debtor
to you Romans, etc. is true of all Superiors. And what he affirms of
Philemon 19. verse, Thou owe thy self, etc. belongs to all inferiors in some
sort. This consideration that mutual duties are so many, debts should much
provoke us unto serious performance. What man is there, that has but common
honesty, but will take care of his debts to pay them, and till the Book be
crossed, and the bills canceld, will give himself no quiet? Now, if we take
not to heart our mutual duties to do them because they be debtes, what may
this argue, but that we are worse then honest civil men, having lost both the
shame of the World, and also the reverence of Almighty GOD?


Tim. What other debt is there yet behind for Christians to look unto?


Silas. The debt of love: for when the Apostle says, [ Owe nothing unto any
but love,] it strongly implies that love is a debt, yet such a debt it is, as
in sundry things differs from civil debts, which are due but to some persons,
whereas love is to be exercised toward all, friends, enemies, Infidels, and
Christians. Secondly, other debts being paid, our substance is diminished,
but love by paying it to others, increases in our selves reddendo
multiciplicatur, as one says. Thirdly, other debtes may be paid while we
live, but this of love cannot be satisfied in this life; it is due in heaven,
both to God, to Angels, and to Saints, 1 Cor. 13, 13 Fourthly, debts of money
are to be paid at certain times and places, but the debt of love is due
always and every where. Fifthly, other debts may be dispensed withal, and
forgiven: but the debte of love not so. Men cannot, and God will not discharge
us the practice of our love, though he will forgive the (...) of our loves.

Lastly, other debts being once paid, are no more debts: but love, although
it be paid, is still due, it is always in paying and ever owing because the
grounds thereof be perpetual. First, the precept of GOD, Love thy Neighbor
as thy self, Math. 22. Secondly, our common Nature, every man being another
flesh, Esaias 58, 7. Pro. 11, 17. Thirdly, the image of God imprinted in our
nature. Lastly, common profession, having all one Savior by grace (to wit)
Christ, as we have all one father by nature (to wit) Adam. Now fithence
charity is a debt, and such a debt as we are all bound to pay, it stands every
man upon that has any conscience of this debt, to look unto all the
particulars thereof, which being sundry and many, some things being due to the
soul of our brother, as to comfort, exhort, rebuke, etc. Other things due to
his body, as to cover his nakedness, feed his hunger, etc. also we being
debtors to the dignity, life, chastity, substance, and name of our neighbor,
in none of these to impair him, but in all to increase and preserve them what
we can. This must move us both to pray for greater measure of grace, to be able
to perform this better hereafter, and instantly to beg pardon of God through
Christ for our failing heretofore; for the debt of charity being neglected,
does increase the debt of sin: and look how much we come short of paying
the debt of love, so much we multiply the debt of sin; and therefore stand in
need both of faith to believe the forgiveness of that which is past, and of
repentance to amend our lives for time to come, to walk henceforth in charity,
doing all our things in love.


Tim. Come now to the reason of the Apostle, why we should love one another,
and tell us what is meant by the [law, and by the fulfilling of it?]


Silas. Among sundry acceptions of the word [lawe] as first for the books of
Moses: Secondly, for the whole doctrine of the word: Thirdly, for the moral
precepts given in Mount Sinai, etc. here it is put for the second (...)
because he discourses of the duties to our neighbor, the love whereof being
coupled with the love of God (as an effect with the cause,) therefore it may
well comprehend the whole moral law. By fulfilling is meant here not the
exact keeping in every point without any swaruing, but the careful endeavor to
do one commandment as well as another, without baulking any of them. The drift
of the Apostle here being this, to teach that the law is generally kept by the
exercise of love, which is therefore said to be How love is the ulfilling of
the law, and why.
the fulfilling of the law: First, because it is the end of the commandments,
1. Tim. 1, 5. Secondly, for that it is the motive to stir up to every duty
both to God and man. Thirdly, because it is the sum of the law, Math. 22. 37.
38. 39. Finally, because it is the perfection of the law, and were it perfect
in us, would make us perfect keepers of the law.


Tim. What is the doctrine we are to learn from hence?


Silas. This ought very much to kindle our love, seeing it is such a help to
the fulfilling of the law, then which there is nothing except faith in Christ,
either of more honor and beauty, or of more profit and benefit then to be
keepers of the law: by which first we have (...) with God, whose image of
holiness and righteousness is most absolutely and lively purtrayed in the
law; the nearer therefore we come to the law, the liker we are to God. Again,
our study to walk in the law, is both a sign of a blessed man, and the way to
blessedness, Psalm. 119, 1. and 112, 1. If the keeping of the law be so
beautiful and beneficial, judge how behouefull it is to embrace love, which
inables us to keep the law here in some measure, and in heaven perfectly. As
Paul says of love, if we had all graces, without it they were nothing; so may
I say, if we could keep all the commandments, and not do them in love, it
were nothing. Wherefore let all men that have their hearts endued with love,
think they have a great blessing, and thank God for it: and as the Apostles
prayed, Lord increase our faith, so let every good Christian pray Lord increase
my love; for the more we love, the more we fulfill the law; and the more we
fulfill the law, the more we resemble God the giver of the law; and the liker
we are to God in holiness, the more we are to be like him in happiness.
Besides all this, though love be not the form of faith, yet it is a necessary
effect of justifying faith which works by love, Gal. 5, 6. and a fruit of the
Spirit, Gal. 5, 22. The bond of perfection, Col. 3, 14. The badge of a
Christian, John 13, 35. Touching the properties and works of love, also for the
excellency and continuance, read 1. Cor, 13, 4. to the end.


Tim. But whereas many pretend love, and have it not, how Doubt.
shall we know when we have indeed the gift of Christian charity?


Silas. First, by the object of our love (if it be right) Solution.
that is, if we love every one that is (our neighbor) loving one man as well
as another, without partiality, The Trial of Love.
though some men more then others: being well affected unto all, howsoever
others be affected unto us, as Christ loved his enemies, so must we. This is
one and the best trial of our love. Secondly, by the measure or manner rather
of our love, that we love our neighbor as our selus, that is, as constantly
without fainting, as sincere without dissembling, being as careful through
love to be helpful to the bodies and souls of others and to every thing
that is dear unto them, as we would have it done to our selves.

Thirdly, by the quality and nature of love, which stirs us up to respect one
man as well as another (though not so much) so to tender him in one thing as
well as in another: for what God ioynes, no man may separate, and that God
which commanded love to our Neighbors persons, has enjoined charity toward
all the things of our neighbors, not to hurt him in any of them, no not so much
as by a thought, much less by disgrace or cruelty, or uncleanness, or
oppression, or slander. For if we do keep that Law of not stealing, and doing
wrong, and break the other which forbids adultery or incontinency, or keep
this, and trespass by false witness, being full of lies, and evil reporters,
or false accusers of others: or untouched in all these, yet be cruel,
unmerciful, and fierce, offending against that Law which prohibits murders:
or at a word, caring somewhat to observe one, and being loose and licentious in
transgression of some other, not doing many evils against our neighbors, yet
stiffely and obstinately culpable in some one or few; certainly, our love is
not that christian godly love which looks to every precept, and preuenteth
the evil and harm of our Brethren in every thing, as much as lies in us: for
love does none evil unto our neighbor. Touching these singular and particular
Precepts, note, that that of honoring Parents is omitted, because they might
be contained under powers also, in an other Commandment: the Commandment of
Adultery, is prefixed unto the Commandment of Murder.

Lastly, this of fulfilling the Law by love, is ill wrested of Papists to
prove Justification by works: for this is not here the Apostles purpose: and
when they shall prove that any mere man has perfect charity, such as the Law
exacteth, we will then confess, that righteousness before God may come by
love. Mean while, we dare not cross the doctrine of the Spirit, teaching in
so many plain texts, righteousness to be attained by faith without the works
of the Law, which yet we may in some sense be said to fulfill; both because
in our head it is perfectly kept, and that is allowed to such as believe in
him. Also with Augustine we say, Quicquid (...), idquasi non factum deputatur.
Lastly, the Saints keep it in desire and endeavor, with care and study to
observe it in perfection of parts, though not in perfection of measure and
degree, which to us in this our pilgrimage is impossible, Rom, 8, 3.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
sleep: for now is salvation nearer, then when we believed.


Tim. WHat is the contents of this Scripture, and what is the Coherence and
dependence of this Text with the former?


Silas. For the Contents, this Scripture has in it an exhortation unto an
holy conversation generally, and more particularly unto some special virtues
of Christianity, as temperance, sobriety, chastity, peace, with an express
grave dehortation from the contrary vices, as excess, riot, wantonness,
strife; things common, yet very odious sins: all urged and pressed from an
argument of the circumstance of time, and the present condition of Christians,
who being graciously thorough the Gospel delivered from the night of ignorance
and unbelief and restored to the light of knowledge and faith, ought
diligently to fly the works of darkness, and to do the deeds of light,
agreeing unto the state of Grace wherein they are set. For the connection or
dependence upon the former Scripture, that is touched in the very first words
[ And that,] as if he should say, Unto the former exhortation to Christian
charity, I do further add this concerning an holy, sober, and chaste life.
Here is therefore not a continuation of the former matter (as some do think
the duty of mutual love, to be now pressed with new reasons:) but a transition
rather, from a persuasion to charity, to an exhortation to sobriety and
chastity.

The like exhortation unto this, we find in Ephesians. 5. 8. and 1 Thessalonians. 4, 5, 6.
Wherein we have a very plain exposition of this our present text, interpreting
both what is the armor of light, and the works of darkness, and what is
meant by the day and by the night, and what by sleeping, and what by waking.
All these places concurring in the same scope and drift, which is, to raise
up Christians from the sleep of sin, and carnal security unto Christian
watch fullness and sobriety.


Tim. Touching the Method of the Text, tell us what it is, and of what parts
does consist the rest of this Chapter?


Silas. For the Method, the text has a proposition, which is, that we awake
out of sleep; unto which there is joined a confirmation taken from sundry
arguments, whereof the first is from the opportunity or circumstance of time,
which bears a great sway in all things, [ Knowing the time.] The second, is
from that which is profitable (to wit,) the nearer we come to the goal, to
run more cheerfully, that we may obtain the prize, [ Our Salvation is
nearer.] The third, from their present state, being past from the night of
ignorance, to the day of knowledge; and therefore, the deeds of the night are
to be let pass, that the deeds of the day may be done, verse 12. The fourth,
is from that which is comely and honest, verse 13. a strong motive unto all
honest minds, and ingenuous dispositions, which are more led with honesty,
then with vtility. This is amplified with an enumeration of the contrary works
of darkness, as ryoting, drunkenness, etc. which are directly repugnant to
the armor of light, which is not here particularly reckoned up, but wrapped in
a new Metaphor of a garment [ Put on Christ:] which comprehends the graces of
Christ, opposite to the former works of darkness. All is shut up with an
answer to a secret objection: What then, shall we allow no delight to our
flesh and frail nature? Yes (says the Apostle) so it be not filthy lust, and
to serve lasciviousness, verse 14.


Tim. What is meant by the time, and by knowing of the time?


Silas. By [ Time] is signified the season and opportunity Kairos.
to do any thing fitly. By [ Knowing] is meant so to see it as to observe and
mark it, and so with such earnest endeavor to look to it, as not to let it
fly and pass away. Knowledge is used for all such things as do follow
knowledge, love, care, consideration, labor, etc. so is the word used, Psalm. 1.
last verse, Romans 11 2. Also 8, 29, etc.


Tim. What is our Lesson from these first words?


Silas. Hence arises a general instruction, that all our actions are to be
done seasonably in a due time. As for example, to use the instances of the
Apostle, if we will sleep to do it in the night, for that is the season fit
for sleep; but if we will awake and work, let us do that in the day, as
nature has ordained as meet for such a purpose, as it is written Psalm. 104.
The Sun arises, and man goes forth unto his labor. There are sundry things
which being done in their season, are well done, and praiseworthy, but being
done out of meet time they are faults and blameworthy.

Instinct of Nature has taught the Swallow and Crane to know and keep their
seasons, as the Prophet Jeremy says, Iere. 8, 7. and it is the counsel of the
Heathens to take hold of occasions and seasons. The Poets did feign Time to
have a bush before, and to be bald behind, whereby they mean to teach, that
opportunities and fit times to do things is not to be ouerslipped. Christ has
given us an example in his own person, for he duly observed occasions of
Doctrine and Miracles. This wisdom our Apostle would teach us here, when he
says, [ It is high time.] And unto the same discretion, does James call us,
James 5, 13. To pray when we are afflicted, to sing Psalms when we rejoice.
Esaias complains of such as gave themselves to pleasure and mirth, when Gods
judgments called them to mourning. It is great indiscretion securely to follow
our carnal pleasures, when God calls us to serious repentance. Solomon says of
God himself, Eccl. 3, 1. That GOD has an appointed time (that, is a season)
for all his Works. Let Gods Children labor to imitate their fathers wisdom,
for that which is written of speeches and words spoken in season, they are like
Apples of Gold, with Pictures of Silver, may be said of works done in season,
they are precious and pleasant. It were a shame for us to be worse then
senseless creatures, and godless Heathen, yet it is the common sin of
Christians, as in their particular actions, not to mark offered occasions of
God to do good: so in their general course of life, numbers are asleep when
they should wake, contrary to the Apostles counsel here, It is high time that
ye did awake out of sleep.


Tim. What is meant here by sleep, and by waking out of sleep?


Silas. [ Sleepe] by a metaphor signifies sin; it is a speech Sleep natural
and spiritual.
translated from the body to the mind, for (sleep) properly, is a natural
thing belonging to the body: it is occasioned A natural and a spiritual waking.
by euaporations of nourishment, whence fumes rising out of the stomach into
the head, thereby the senses being bound, a man is unable to hear, or see, or
smell, or to perform the common functions of natural life. A waking out of
sleep is the liberty of the senses, that they may perform their functions, as
Aristotle describes it in his book ( de somno and vigilys.) Spiritually by
sleep is signified [sin] which being securely lived in, disableth the soul
from doing the duties of a godly life, whereof men have no care so long as they
be careless and senseless, without the knowledge and fear of God, no more
then sleepy men have care of their ordinary affairs. Further, our spiritual
waking implies a knowledge of the will of God, and a study of a godly
conversation: at a word slothfulness of the mind drowned in worldly cares,
carnal security, ignorance and contempt of God, are the sleep here spoken
of, which causes unregenerate men to be dead, even while they are alive, as it
is written of the Ephesians being unbelievers, Ephesians. 2, 1. and of those wanton
widows which were given to their pleasure, 1. Tim. 5. and of the Church of
Sardis, both Pastor and people, Revel. 3, 1. For as for the time of [sleepe] it
little differs from death: so secure sinners are spiritually dead; but on the
contrary, faith in Christ, accompanied with hope, love, fear of God, and
repentance, is the waking out of sleep here spoken of, which causes men
though dead to live; for such as live godly in this world, are sure to live
happily in the world to come, for the lise of gtace is eternal ending in
glory which never has an end.


Tim. Yea, but these Romans were converted and did believe, therefore why does
he say to them, It is time to awake out of sleep? as if they were dead unto
sin, and not alive to God?


Silas. It is true, that the Romans for the most or best part, were indeed
regenerate persons and believers, such as were already wakened out of the
sleep of sin, as appears by the testimony that Paul gave them. Romans 1, 6,
7, 8. and 6, 17, 19. yet this admonition is not unfit and unmeet for them,
because still there were amongst them such as slept in sin, being drowned in
the pleasures of this life, not minding God nor their own salvation: and even
the faithful themselves were but in part awaked out of sin, Math. 25, 1, 2.
The five wise Virgins slumbred no less the^ the foolish, and the Church Cant.
5, 2. confesses that howsoever her heart waked, yet she was asleep. Thirdly,
Christians have still some drowsinesse and sluggishnesse about heavenly things
hanging upon them: this exhortation then (to awake out of sleep) is always
needsull, as to leave the reprobate without excuse, and to lead the elect
which are not yet borne anew, to a consideration of their estate, that they may
turn and live: so to quicken the souls of true believers, unto a far
greater care of holiness then ever yet they expressed. And this is the very
lesson which we are all here to learn and take out, that such as have done
well go forwards with all alacrity and courage. It is not enough to enter into
the estate of christianity, but we must still go forwards till we have
finished our course. Christians must seek to grow in grace, as worldlings in
riches, in honors, etc. a progress in true piety is the scope which Paul
here aims at.


Tim. What reason may be rendered of this lesson?


Silas. The very same that Paul renders here, because our salvation (that is,
eternal life in heaven,) is nearer the^ when we believed, which compares (not
the law of Moses with the Gospel,) as an obscure light with a more cleerer,
but the increasing of our faith with the beginning, (for he writes not to
Jews only, but to Gentiles,) by an allusion to such as run in a race, who
run the more swifter the nearer they come to their races end; least if they
be slothful, others ouerstrip them and get the goal from them: So Christians
the longer time they have been believers, and the further they have proceeded
in the way of godliness, they must run with the greater diligence and
earnestness. The motion of a Christian life must not be like to a violent
motion, which is slower toward the end: but like to a natural motion, which
toward the end is the swifter. Hitherto belong all those promises, Math. 10.
He shall be saved which continues to the end: and the threatening of being
shut out of the kingdom, if we look back after we have set our hand to the
plough, Luke 9, 62. and those reprofes, Will ye end in the flesh after ye have
begun in the Spirit? Galath. 3, 3. and those exhortations, Remember Lots wife:
again, So run as ye may obtain, 1. Cor. 9, 24. and, Keep faith and a good
conscience, 1. Tim. 1, 19. and, Strive lawfully, and lay hold on eternal life;
and whatsoever places do persuade us to increase more and more, and to grow,
and to hold fast what we have received, and to continue in the bountifulness
of God. He that is a watchman may not wake one half of the day and sleep the
other, so he may loose his head; nor a ru^ner in a race may give over before he
come to the goal, then he loses the garland, and such as faint in wrestling
loose the crown; therefore quicken your hearts, and encourage your selves to
profit and proceed in your godly course, whereof a great part being already
run, and there being peril by slacking and giving over study of piety, and
such fruit and benefit in perseverance, it behooves you so much the more
cheerfully to finish the rest of the race, knowing there will be an end, and
your hope with your labor in the Lord will not be in vain.


DIAL. VIII.
Verse 12. The night is past, and the day is at hand, let us therefore cast
away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light.


Tim. What is done here by our Apostle?


Silas. Here is the third argument, taken from the circumstance of time, or
of the Romans present condition, concluded in these two Sillogismes: First,
when the night is gone, the works of the night must be laid aside; but when
we believe, the night is gone: therefore we are to cease the works of
darkness. Secondly, when the day is come, we are to do the works of the day,
but the day does shine upon us; therefore we are to do the works of the day.

The sum of the whole Argument is, that seeing the night of ignorance is past
(which is the season of living in sin and security) and the day of the
knowledge of God is appeared (which is the season to awake in,) let us
therefore endeavor to frame our lives suitable unto the time and present state
of grace wherein we are placed, by putting on the armor of light, and casting
off the works of darkness.


Tim. Show us now more plainly what is meant by the night and the day, and by
being far spent?


Silas. Night properly is the time which follows the setting of the Sun, when
darkness couers the earth, and men give themselves to sleep and rest: but
here Metaphorically it signifies that time of ignorance and unbelief, which
goes before our effectual calling. And (by being far spent) is meant not
being quite past over, for then it should not be said, the day is at hand
(for it should be present:) but the word signifies, that it is well gone
forward and proceeded in, and near spent, growing toward the day (as one
would speak.) Thus the Greek word imports, according to which, it is
translated by the Latins, not Praererist, but processit nox.


Tim. What Doctrine may we learn from these first Words?


Silas. These two: the first is, that even the elect of God before their new
birth, are couerd with the night, and oppressed with the darkness of
infidelity and sin. They do no more see the way to eternal life, then men in
the dark see the way to walk in: they grope even at no one day, even like the
Sandom tes at Lots door. So they do not see what they are to do that they
may please God, as they in Acts 2. For they which are in darkness, know not
whither they go. In this respect, being like the man borne blind, John 9.
whose eyes Christ must open before he can see: so must he enlighten our minds
before we can have sound and saving knowledge of God.

The reason is rendered, 1 Cor. 2, 14. This miserable estate of the chosen
before faith is called darkness, Ephe. 5, 8. and the power of darkness, Acts
26, 26. and night in this text: and themselves abiding in this estate, are
called children of the night and darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 7. Therefore as Paul
being blind, must have the scales taken from his eyes, that he may see, so the
elect can have no knowledge of God unto salvation, till they are delivered by
him from their natural ignorance, which is the first work of grace in them,
called illumination of the Spirit; who begins the conversion of the elect at
the enlightening of their understanding, Romans 12, 2.


Tim. What profit are we to make of this Doctrine?


Silas. It confutes the Popish opinion, touching liberty of will to turn our
selves to God; for how can we turn our selves to that which is good, since we
are not able to see what is good? If we cannot perceive the things of God,
much less are we able to embrace and follow them, for Voluntas sequitur
intellectum. Secondly, it must move the chosen which are called and enlightened
both to joyful thankfulness, that they have escaped the night of ignorance,
and are become children of the day, saying, I praise the Lord, who has turned
my night into day; And unto hearty sorrow in behalf of such as do yet stick in
their gross darkness of sin and ignorance, pitying them, and not
vpbraiding them; remembering our selves that we were once such as they be Galat.
6, 1. And lastly it teaches, that al wicked impenitent sinners be in darkness
to this hour, whatsoever knowledge of God they seem to have.


Tim. What is the second doctrine?


Silas. That they which are regenerate, are not wholly freed from ignorance and
unbelief, whereof still they have the remainders, though they reign not now
as before their calling. Paul's confession touching himself, Phil. 3, 12. and
touching all the Saints, 1 Cor. 9, 25, etc. sufficiently teach, that there are
imperfections still sticking to our knowledge. If in his, how much more in ours
so far inferior to him? As it is in the twilight, so it fares with the
godly in this life, much darkness mixed with their light. Hence it is, that in
the next words he writes not, that the day, (that is,) the knowledge of
Christ by the Gospel is present and come, but approaching, and at hand only.
It shines not forth fully, but is in part light, some in part dark: as at the
dawning or break of day, so is it with the godly in this life, they are
somewhat illuminared, but not wholly enlightened. Indeed their knowledge now
after their new birth, being compared with their ignorance before, may be
termed day, but it is not so; rather like a night, in respect of that
knowledge they shall have in heaven, for then they shall see him as he is, 1
Cor. 13, 10, 12. Distinguish these three times: First, night before our
calling: secondly, day after effectual vocation: thirdly, full day at our
glorification.


Tim. To what Use must Christ ans labor to turn this doctrine?


Silas. That we marvel not when we see some learned godly men overtaken with
some errors, yea and whole Churches also, as the Galathians erred about
justification, the Corinthians about the resurrection from the dead. Chrysostom
was tainted with an opinion of free will, and Peter's primacy: Origin maintained
universal salvation of men and devils: Cyprian held rebaptization: Augustine
wrote doubtfully about purgatory, and held (for a while) confidently, that
Children could not be saved without the Lords Supper: Illyricus failed about
Original sin: Hierom immoderately extolled virginity above marriage:
Ensebius was an Arrian, also defended Peter's abiuring his Lord: Luther held
consubstantiation. At a word, as the fairest face has a wart, so the learned
men have their errors, because the night of their ignorance was not whollye
spent, nor the day of their knowledge wholly come, their remaining ignorance
brought false expositions and opinions. Secondly, let this warn and exhort al
Christians more earnestly to pray God to keep them from errors, and to that
end, that he would increase their knowledge and judgment, Col. 1, 9, 10. 11.

Also, let it admonish us never to content our selves with any measure of
understanding in heavenly things, but use all good means, that we may grow
more and more in all knowledge of Christ, joining knowledge unto knowledge, as
worldly men add riches to riches, and as the Sun increases in brightness
till high noon, so let the word of Christ dwell in us in all wisdom. Finally,
let it move us both to be modest in our assertions about divine things: not
hardy and bold to affirm that whereof we doubt, but suspecting our own
ignorance, be more ready to hear then to speak, to learn then to teach: and
the things to be known many (and deep some of them) being humbled, that our
ignorance is so much, and our knowledge so little, duly considering, that as
we have no knowledge but what we receive, so that which we do know, is far
less then that which we do not know; which all holy men have both felt and
confessed.

Note further, that how much the day is above the night, so much does
knowledge excel ignorance, Eccl. 2, 13. Also the necessity of knowledge
appears by this metaphor: the day not more needful to do worldly works,
then knowledge to a Christian, to do the works of salvation. This condemns
such of extreme folly, as care not for knowledge, but do despise
understanding: and serves as a spur to quicken our minds unto the search of
the Scriptures, that our sight in Gods matters, may be clearer and greater then
it is.


Tim. Tell us what is meant by the [Workes of darkness,] and whereof it puts
us in mind, that we are willed to cast them off?


Silas. Works of darkness signify all vices, but such especially as be named
in the next verse: which be termed Interpretat.
[Workes of darkness,] First, because they come from blindness of mind.
Secondly, because the dooers of them seek after darkness, For he that does
evil hates the light, John 3. and the Adulterer loves Twilight (says Job.
Thirdly, because they lead to utter darkness, and To cast off, what.
eternal misery, such as live and die in them. And by the [casting them off,]
we are warned of these three things. First, that with speed and have we turn
from our sins, as a man that awakes out of sleep, makes have to cast away his
night garments. Secondly, that we do it with detestation, as one does with
loathing cast away and throw from him his tatterd rags which he abhorres.
Thirdly, that we cast them so from us, as we never mean to take them up again,
as we never resume our ragged apparel.

The contrary Garments rehearsed, Gal, 5, 22. and Ephesians. Armor.
5, 9. are here termed [Armour,] both because they offend our spiritual
enemies, and defend us against their assaults: they be not Garments to cover
our sins, but armor to help us in our fight against sin. Now these Of light
why.
graces be called [ Armor of light,] because they flow from and follow the
light of Christian knowledge: and secondly, cause us to shine before men by
good works, and at last lead us to the light of heaven. We are said to put
on this armor when we do good works with such delight, as we do take in
clothing our selves, and so put them on, as we never mean to put them off any
more; and as we cloth our selves entirely from top to toe, so to endeavor to do
all good works which concern us. Cheerfulness, diligence, constancy, and
integrity in well-doing is here required.


Tim. What learn we from hence?


Silas. First, that there be two parts of a renewed and daily repentance:
First, to put off works of sin; secondly, to put on the graces of Christ.
Again we learn, that in these two parts of repentance, we must be exercised
continually all our life long till death. Thirdly, that in the practice of
repentance, we must begin a casting off, departing from iniquity, ceasing from
evil, etc. Fourthly, that this is not enough that we endeavor to abstain from
sinful works, there is also of al repentant Christians, further required to
do good things commanded.


DIAL. IX.
Verse 13, 14. See that ye walk honestly, as in the day, not in gluttony, and
drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, neither in strife and
envying, but put you on the Lord Jesus, and take no care for the Flesh, to
fulfill the lusts of it.


Tim. TEll us what is meant by walking, and honestly?


Silas. By walking (after the ordinary phrase) is meant living or leading our
course of life. [Honestlic] Interpretat.
that is, decently or in a comely fashion, which Paul expounds by three
aduerbs, godlily, justly, soberly, Titus 2, 11. The Apostle still follows the
allegory of night and day, sleeping and waking; as the custom of men is, when
Sum.
the time of a waking draws on, not only to leave the Bed and night clothes
behind them, but to do such works as use to be done in the day, having care
of their habit and actions that all be decent and fit: so for christians which
are awaked out of sins sleep, and are escaped the night of ignorance, it is
not enough to be no more secure, and to cast off evil works, but to busy
themselves diligently, as may become the day of the gospel. It will not suffice
to be void of evil works we must be exercised in good works: as for a man
to arise out of his bed, it is not sufficient, he must address himself to
some duty of his calling.


Tim. What is the doctrine of these first words?


Sil. They be 2. First from the word [walke] we learn that Christianity is no
idle profession. As men of this world when they be rising in a morning out of
their beds, must address themselves to some labor: thus God, nature, reason,
laws, and religion do teach that none may live out of a vocation, or idle in
his vocation. Bees, Birds, and Beasts do work: should men live at ease? So
Gods children when they once know Christ, and that the day light of knowledge
does shine, they must ever after be doing, to knowledge they must join
action, unto talking add walking. As sparkles fly upwards, so men be borne to
labor, and so the elect which be borne again, they are to work the works of
God: see John 6, 27, 28. Luke 13, 24. 2. Pet. 1, 6. The Church of God is like a
Vineyard, Mat. 20, 1, 2. also to husbandry, 1. Cor. 3 9. and a Christians life
is likened to a warfare, Christians be soldiers. These be painful trades,
and courses of life full of labor, which shows that in Christianity there is
no place for sluggishnesse and security.

Also Christians be a brood of travelers, their country is above, the way it
is long and narrow, therefore that they may come to their iournies end, there is
no standing still or sitting down, but there must be a walking and a going on.
Mark that Paul puts himself in the number, ( Let us walk:) an Apostle may
not live at ease in Gods Church. Christ himself went and walked about, doing
good: My Father works hitherto says Christ, John 5, 17. and I work: the
Spirit also works; is it meet that we be exempted from walking and
working?


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Silas. First, to inform our judgment about the condition Use.
of our christian calling, that it is coupled with much difficulty, contention,
and labor, contray to that which most think, that to be a Christian is a
matter of nothing, but to say the Lords prayer, the ten Commandments and
Creed, to come to Church Sundaies and Holy Days, etc. These are deceived, for
we are taught that our profession is full of peril, (we must forsake our
goods and lives for Christ,) and of pain, and travail. The virgins which will
enter in with the Bridegroom, must be watchful, and they shall be blessed
who walk in the ways of Gods commandments.

Secondly, it serves to reprove such as sleep still in security and careless
living, yet bear themselves in hand they be good Christians; they will spare
no pains for back and belly, for profit and pleasure, but will not lift a
foot nor stir a finger toward the work of their salvation: let such
remember that the five foolish Virgins were shut out for this cause, for that
they were negligent to trim their Lamps. If that these slothful Christians
will not be reformed by that voice of Christ, Mat. 20, 6. Why stand ye here
idle all the day? nor by that of Solomon, He that loves sleep shall surely
go in rags, and come to pouery: yet let them be affraide of being shut out of
the kingdom, and cast into extreme darkness, which must be the portion of
all such as love their ease, and snort in their sins: For such as live like
droanes devouring the honey gathered by the industrious Bees, what will be their
ends?


Tim. What is the other lesson from this word [honestly?]


Silas. That our works must be honest, and such as become the day of
knowledge. Common ciuility teaches men to go decently, and to do honest
things in the day when al men see and observe how they go and what they do:
Likewise let Christians think that now the daylight of the Gospel is come,
they must do only such works as may become the Gospel, and are worthy of
the light. Men are drunk in the night, says Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 7. and when ye
knew not God, ye served dumb Idols, Gal. 4, 8. And he tells the Ephesians that
when they were in ignorance they committed sin with greediness, Ephesians. 4,
19. but now that they know Christ, they must no more have fellowship with the
works of the night, the unfruitful works of darkness: For the light which
has appeared teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
godly toward God, justly toward our neighbor, and soberly in our selves. If
a man would do such works in the day as many will do in the night, what a
shame were that? so it were a dishonesty now that Christ the day star is
risen, still to lie, steal, deceive, etc. and do the other works of
darkness. As Paul exhorts, Ephesians. 4, 28. and 1. Peter 4, 2, 3, 4. so I exhort
you not to do the evil now which in your ignorance ye were wont to do, but
to think it sufficient, that so long ye have followed the lusts of ignorance,
henceforth applying your selves to please God by doing godly works. Now seeing
there must be a ceasing from evil works that we may do the works beseeming
the day: what may we think of such as since the day appeared, continue still
in their former vices, their uncleanness, usury, covetousness, oppression,
cruelty, railing, slandering, swearing, to whom may we compare these? They are
like unto certain infamous and unthrifty gamesters, who contrary to the order
God has set in nature, turn night into day, and day into night, sporting and
playing al night time when they should sleep, and sleeping in the day when
they should work: So it sareth with numbers of us who still delight in, and
exercise our selves in works of corruption, now in the clear and bright day
of grace: these things which without red cheeks one cannot do, no not in
secret, and which a Christian should be ashamed to speak of, yet are commonly
practiced without blussing, in this broad day light of knowledge: a most
lamentable case, and will cost full dear to walk still in darkness now in
the day of the Gospel.


Tim. What be those duties which do most defile our honest conversation, and
which every man must avoid that has care to live honestly?


Silas. These six especially: First gluttony, or rioting, which properly
signifies night reuellings, all untimely and unmeasurable eating, and more
generally it imports all excessive feasts by day or night, when men eat till
they glut themselves to the dulling of their spirits, the silling of their
bodies with diseases, the wasting of their substance, the stirring up of
Concupiscence. And note, that Paul forbids not eating, whereof there is great
necessity, or feasting, whereof there is lawful use, so the occasion be just,
and care be had of fit time, of our estate, degree, and ability; also that
moderation be used: but immoderate, dishonest feasting is here prohibited, such
as the Heathens used, and the Prophets condemn, Amos 6, 3, 4, 5. Esaias 5, 12,
and 22, 12. The second vice is drunkenness, this is excess in drinking, taxed
by Esaias, 5, 11. Prou. 23, 29, 30, etc. it causes much woe to body and mind.
For wine and women takes away a man's heart, (or wisdom,) Hos. 4, 11. and by
Peter, 1 Pet 4, 3. Ephesians. 5, 11, 12. in wine is excess, otherwise a little wine
for infirmity sake is allowed, 1 Timothy 5, 23. It is reckoned up among the sins
which bar men out of Gods kingdom Gal. 5, 17, 18. and 1 Cor. 9, 10. This
vice being so sweet and agreeable to our corrupt nature, is hardly repented
of. Laws of God and men will not bridle it. Such as suffer it, when it is in
their power to hinder, or do not what lies in them to hinder it: they are no
less guilty before GOD, then they that committed it.

The third vice is Chambering, the sourth is wantonness, that is, all
uncleanness about the act of generation, or bed meeting by fornication,
adultery, etc. Non prohibet cum mulieribus miscere sed scortari (says
Chrysostom) these be continual companions and fruits of the two former. For
vagrant and unchaste desires about sex, do proceed from excess in meats and
drinks. This may appear by the example of Lot, Noab, David, all which upon
much drinking and full stomachs did sin by incontinency, Sine Cerere and
Baccho friget Venus. Looking upon wine, and lust after women, are joined
together by Solomon, Pro. 23, 33. Rioting and harlotry met in the prodigal
son: and who sees not most Bastardes, where there is most liberal drinking and
feeding?

The fifth vice is strife, which is a falling out and contending about matters
of Faith or affairs of life. The sixte vice is envy, which is a repining or
grief at the prosperity of others. See the Dial. on Romans 1. verse 29.


Tim. What are we generally to observe touching these six Vices?


Silas. These six things: First, they be such vices, as a man which has no
further care but of his honest reputation he will not do them, many Heathens
have shunned them, and have bin free from them touching outward act.
Secondly, observe that he names some few vices in stead of all: see more of
this bad brood, in Gal. 5, 19. 1 Cor. 6, 9, 10. Thirdly, these were named
because they were national, or more natural, or sins most used, therefore
most to be striuen against. Fourthly, a great fountain or sink rather of
sin is stopped and dammed up, when either christians do repent of excess in
eating and drinking, or when governors do repress these vices; whereas by
sufferance and practice of them, a flood gate of iniquity is set wide open.
Fifthly, observe that godly persons after their new birth be subject to these
dishonest sins, else Paul would not have dehorted the believing Romans from
them. Therefore Gods people must watch and pray, and his Ministers must warn
the people continually of them. Lastly, to be free from these vices, is
required, that Christians avoid all occasions, means, causes, and prouocations
unto them. Sin cannot be eschewed, whiles enticements unto sin be
cherrished: Who will no evil do, must do nothing that belongs thereto.


Tim. What is done in verse 14?


Silas. The maine exhortation is repeated, only the form of words is varied.
Also now he expoundes the armor of light (as he had by particulars declared
the works of darkness) by a new Metaphor of a Garment, How and why Christ a
garment.
to which Christ is likened [ put on,] because as a Garment hides our corporal
nakedness, so by Christ our sins are covered from the sight of Gods Justice.
Also a Garment, compasses in our body above and below, from top to toe, so
all the corruptions of believing sinners, be covered under this Mantle of
Christ's righteousness.

Lastly, a Garment serves not for covering only, but for comeliness and
ornament too; so the Spirit of Christ does deck and adorn Christians souls,
even as his death does hide our spiritual pollutions: Christ is our wedding
Garment, and our long white robe, Revel. 3, 18. Aarons Garment is a type
hereof, the glorious apparel, of the High Priest under the Law; was a figure
of this spiritual raymenr, and taught Gods people, that as never the High
Priest might appear before God without his Ephod and fine linen garment, so
sinners cannot with liking and allowance come unto God otherwise then by
Christ, by whom alone there is access made to God, Romans 5, 2. Jacob put on
Esaus clothes when he got the blessing, and for the obtaining of heavenly
blessedness, it is very necessary that we put on Christ.


Tim. But seeing Christ is put on by Baptism, Gal. 3, 27 how are the Romans
being already baptized, exhorted to put on Christ?


Silas. Christ is put on two ways: First, Sacramento tenus. Secondly, reipsa:
either in the Sacrament only, or in truth also. Thus the Master of Sentences
distinguishes out of Augustine, who writes thus, Indu mus Christum aut ad
Secraments perceptionem, aut ad vite sanctificationem. The former is common to
good and bad; the latter is peculiar to the Saints: many of Gods Children do
live even in the estate of sin and death without Christ till they come to
years of discretion, as Zacheus, Paul, the thief; these till their
conversion receive no more but the Sacrament without Christ, who is the thing
signified; and reprobates do never put on Christ otherwise then Sacramentally,
and by profession of him before the Church. Paul writing here to persons both
baptized and converted, and grown into years, and grafted into Christ,
exhorts them unto the latter putting on of Christ, to wit, in deed and
truth, and that more and more unto further sanctification of (...) Fob this
phrase Christ is truly (...) two ways.
[ put on] in the present time, notes a continual act, which endures and
must be done al our life long Christ is truly put on after two sorts. First,
when the elect thorough a lively faith, do as certainly possess Christ, as
they do their own Garments; whereof they are still the more assured, the more
they stir up their Faith, and do increase in good knowledge of the Gospel.
Unto this putting on, belongs two actions, one of Christ, that he put on all
our sins and wretchedness, (...) Cor. 5, 21. the other of the believing
heart, to lay hold more firmly on Christ his righteousness and life, to
make them our own as our clothes be.

The second way of putting on Christ truly, is when the fruits and graces of
the Spirit, are plentifully given, or more largely powered into the Christian
soul, to deck and beautify her as a rich Garment: there being two uses of
apparel, first to cover, and secondly to adorn: this latter, is here
respected principally at least. For howsoever Paul would have Christians to be
clothed with the Sacrifice of Christ's death, as Adam covered his naked body
with skins of dead Beasts, yet because he does not here entreat of
incorporation into Christ, and apprehending him to Justification, and this
phrase of putting on Christ, being opposed unto the works of darkness,
mentioned verse 13. Therefore this would be understood chiefly of growing and
increasing daily in the graces of the new man, such as be rehearsed, Col. 3,
10. Galath. 5, 22. 2 Peter 1, 5, 6. but especially in sobriety, chastity,
charity, peace, and meekness, which are contrary unto these vices mentioned
in the former verse. So then, the meaning is, that as the body with Jewels and
outward Ornaments, so our Christian souls should be beautified plentifully
with such temperance, tinency, sober and chaste living, purity of thought and
body, with that love and comfort as comes unto us from Christ, and were in
all abundance in the manhood of Christ, whom the Scripture sets before us as
a pattern and sampler, to follow in these and other graces, John 10, 27. 2
Pet. 2, 21. 1 John 2, 6.


Tim. What instructions may we gather from hence?


Silas. That all Christians that do endeavor themselves more to resemble
Christ in these good works, then they have done before, being more studious
of a temperate, peaceable, humble, and chaste behavior, they do fulfill this
precept of putting on Christ. Again, whereas these graces are called [Christ,]
we are taught that we must have Christ himself, before we can have any gift
of grace. Whereas Origin says He that has all graces, has Christ, it were
better to say with Chrysostom, He that has Christ, can lack no Virtues: for
the treasure of all graces are in Christ, and himself is given ere his
benesits and graces can be gotten.

Also where Christ is, there is the Spirit of Christ, which is a Spirit of
knowledge, of the fear of God, of chastity and righteousness, etc. Moreover,
here we are to be admonished, that as our apparel is seen, and makes us
known to them with whom we live: so Christ must appear in all our words and
works. We are to live as Christ lived, that we may be known whose we are.

Furthermore, as they which put on their apparel, put on one part as well as
another, and with delight; so Christians must chearefully imitate Christ in all
his virtues, so far as concerns them: and this they ought to do, not for a
day or two, or a few months, or a year, but continually, all the time of their
pilgrimage, striving how to abound in the works of the Spirit. For as we
cannot have worldly riches all at once, so neither may we look to enjoy all
good gifts in a moment, or in a short time, for we are full of imperfections,
and have many temptations and hindrances to wrestle with: therefore our whole
life must be nothing but a profiting and increasing in spiritual and
Christian graces, a putting on of Christ.

Lastly, this exhortation being universal, directed to all members of the
Church, therefore Magistrates, Ministers, people, old, young, learned,
unlearned, men, women, must make it their study to follow and imitate Christ,
being daily more like him in all parts of honesty and holiness. For certain
it is, that they never put on Christ unto Justification, who labor not for the
graces of Sanctification. He has not Christ's death to forgiveness, who does
not tread in the steps of Christ his innocence and obedience.


Tim. What is contained in the last clause, which is the closing up of the
exhortation?


Silas. It contains an answer to a close Objection. What then (might some
say,) shall we cast off all care of our flesh and body, and wholly mind the
furnishing of the soul? To which he answers, Not so; we may be provident
for the health and welfare of the body, which is the tabernacle and
instrument of the soul to dwell in, and to work by, so as we do not
forecast to fulfill our sinful desires and affections by immoderate use of
the blessings and pleasures of life. A sober use of earthly creatures and
pleasures is allowed, such as may not hinder but help us, making us fitter in
all pureness to serve and honor God.


CHAP. XIIII.
DIAL. I.
Verses 1, 2, 3, 4. Him that is weak in the Faith receive unto you, but not
for Controversies of disputations. One believes that he may eat of all
things, and another which is weak eats herbs. Let not him that eats, etc.


Timotheus. WHat is the coherence of this Chapter with the former? Also tell us
the contents and general parts thereof?


Silas. The occasion of this Chapter, was a difference between the believing
Jews and Gentiles, about meats, drinks, Feast days, and such like indifferent
things; in the use whereof he now teaches, that charity ought to govern, and
the end thereof to be the peace and edification of the Church. As tofore he
handled things necessary, being commanded or forbidden of God; and laid down
duties belonging unto all sorts of persons, friends, enemies, Brethren,
Magistrates, private and public persons, both to our selves and others: so
now he passes unto things of a middle Nature, neither required, nor
prohibited in Divine Law; about which, there was hot strife and contention
between the stronger professors, which were persuaded of their Christian
liberty, purchased by Christ, and published by his Gospel, and the more
infirm and feeble Jews, which were yet very ignorant of their liberty,
exhorting those of more perfect in knowledge to have a charitable regard of the
others weakness, and the weaker not hastily to judge the stronger as aposlates
from Moses; that brotherly love and concord might be maintained, and scandals
avoided. The whole Chapter may be divided into two general heads; one is a
proposition of a duty, verse 1. The second is the explanation and enlarging of
it, to the end of the Chapter.


Tim. What may be the method and order observed in the four foremost verses?


Silas. In these verses we have a precept of meekness and love laid down in
verse 1. Secondly, the thing is named about which the dissension did grow, to
wit; meats and days, verse 1. Thirdly, the evil effects of this disscation,
the strong despised the weak for their ignorance, the weak condemned the
strong for contempt of Moses law, verse 3, 4. Fourthly, the reason whereby Paul
persuades unity, first a beneuolentia and (...) Dei, God has received him.

Secondly, a iure gentium, from common equity, none may judge another man's
servant. Thirdly, a potentia Dei, God is powerful and able to establish the
weakest, therefore contemn not one another. Now the precept in verse 1. is
this, They of greater knowledge ought lovingly to instruct, and patiently to
bear with the weak in faith, not troubling them with vain disputation above
their capacity. In this verse we are to note four things: First, the persons
spoken too, (the strong in faith.) Secondly, the persons toward whom love is
to be showed (the weak.) Thirdly, the actions to be done, (receive.) Lastly,
the thing not to be done, (not to dispute to make them doubtful.)


Tim. Interpret the words that we may gather doctrines from them?


Silas. By faith is meant not donum but doctrina fidei, that is, not the gift
but the doctrine of faith, the doctrine touching Christian liberty propounded
to be believed. They are said to be strong in faith which were more perfectly
instructed in this doctrine, as verse second shows, such as were more rude
and ignorant in this particular doctrine, (having yet not learned it) are
termed weak.


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Silas. In the Church of God militant, there is great difference Doctrine.
between Christian and Christian, as touching the measure of their knowledge,
and other of their graces which depend thereon. The Church is like a body, a
family, and an Orchard; and as in the body some members be more excellent and
stronger then others: In a family there be persons of different ages and
statures: In an Orchard there be some old trees, and young plants: So in the
Church some have more knowledge and faith, and some have less, some be
totally strong, believing firmly all the points of Christian doctrine, (as
Abraham) and these be called perfect and spiritual by Paul; others be strong
in part, whose understanding in enlightened in some special point, wherein
others doubt, as the Romans here: so some are wholly weak, as new begotten
Christians, others in part only, as these Jews. The reason of this difference
is, because some come sooner to Christ, some later. Secondly, also some have
more illumination given them in their new birth, and some lesser. Thirdly, some
are more studious in the Scriptures, and give more time and diligence unto
knowledge and godliness then others do.


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it serves to reprove such as condemn the Church, because all
be not a like wise and holy, as if we would blame God because he made some
greater lights and some lesser. Secondly, to admonish us not to be offended
with this inequality, being the constant estate of the Church by the most
prudent administration of God so ordering it for most excellent ends, that the
stronger may have greater matter of praise for their greater measure, and more
ability to show love in instructing the ruder: and the weaker have more cause
both of humility and industry, striving to overtake better learned Christians.
As in the creation the variety of Gods works, so in the regeneration of the
elect, the diversity of his gifts do much commend the manifold and maruailous
wisdom of almighty God.


Tim. What is signified by receiving the weak?


Silas. To receive, is to take one to us with an affection of love, to the end
to cure his weakness, and as a friend to care for his strengthening: In this
sense is this word attributed to God, verse 3. Also to Philemon, verse 12, 17.
see Galath. 6, 1. where the meaning is expressed in other words. It contains
three things, or actions of charity. First, to join them unto us, and not to
separate our selves from them. Secondly, with patience to bear them. Thirdly,
with better instruction to confirm them.


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Silas. That it is the part and duty of such as have better profited, to be
very careful to help, tolerate, and restore the weaker: as in the body the
better and more worthy members do guide and succor the more feeble, and in
the (...) the greater lights lend shine unto the stars; in a family the elder
nourish and cherish the younger: thus it ought to be in Gods house as we are
commanded, Gal. 6, 1. Romans 15, 1. As Christ has given an example in his own
person, Romans 15, 2. The reason is, the communion of Saints, each has a right
in common, both in the benefits of Christ, and each in others gifts as fellow
members.


Tim. What is the use to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. It reproues the proud which disdain their inferiors, secondly, such
as instead of bearing with, and building up, do by subtle questions and
contentious disputes labor to discourage and pull down: therefore we are
willed to take heed and avoid such vain brablers, 1. Tim. 6, 4. 2. Tim. 2,
23. Titus 3, 9. and here: for howsoever all reasoning by arguments and moving
of questions be not unlawful or hurtful, yet in all idle (...) and
quarrelsome disputes to show wit, and to strive for victory, there is no
charity or edification; much pride, bitterness, and wrath, whence issues much
offense and pertuibation.


Tim. In the second verse, which lays down one instance about which the
Christians strove together: give us first the meaning of the words and then the
doctrine.


Silas. By believing is meant no more but knowledge or assent, being persuaded:
see verse 14. It is set against ignorance, denial, and doubting. By all things
is meant meats of all kinds, either allowed by the law of Moses, or
prohibited. That in the end of (eating herbs) would be understood
comparatively, that these weak ones had rather eat herbs then offend their
conscience, by eating things offered to Idols, or flesh forbidden in Moses law.
The sum wherofis thus much: whereas there were two sorts of Christians in the
Church of Rome, some more, some less skillful in the Gospel; the former
thought all kinds of meats to be lawful, the other would not do so, but
choose to eat herbs rather then some kind of flesh.


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Silas. That the Church of God is sometimes divided about small and light
things, which are besides the foundation: who is ignorant what iarres and
stirs were between the Eastern and Western Churches in Victors time, and
all about keeping of Easter day? also afterward whether the Lords supper
should be celebrated with bread leauened or unleavened: and of late at home,
what hot contentions about Cross, Surplice, and ceremonies, like this at Rome,
for meats and days, but that these once had the express commandment of God?
The reason hereof is man's infirmity, which cannot endure to be crossed in our
opinions, to which we are too much wedded. Secondly, Satan's malice,
delighting in the contention of brethren, being much for his own advantage,
and to the hurt of Christ's kingdom; for a house divided cannot stand. Lastly,
Gods righteous providence, ordering and disposing both humane weakness, and
Satan's rage to the trial of his Children, and manifestation of hypocrites.


Tim. What use hereof?


Silas. It must warn al not to think such things strange when they happen, or
absolutely to condemn that Church where such dissentions be, which rather is a
sign of a true Church, whose portion is to be exercised with intestine
debates, Matthew 10, 34, 35. Also to be watchful, and stand on our guard, that
we be not drawn into strife by ouerweening or pride in opinion, as many good
men have been overtaken.


Tim. Concerning the effects of those contentions at Rome in (...) and setting
at naught of the weak, and their condemning of the strong, verse 3. What are
the lessons to be learned and practiced of us?


Silas. Whereas such believers as know their liberty in things indifferent
through the Gospel preached, did despise and deride others which yet saw not
the abolishing of the Leuiticall and Legal rites, we learn, that knowledge
separated from love is dangerous. For by our own corruption and frail
nature, spiritual pride will creep in (if we do not look well to it) and
make us set light, and account as nothing, all who think not as we do. 1 Cor.
8, 1. Knowledge puffs up. As in earthly things, such as have a faculty or any
cunning, are apt to be lifted up by it, and to scorn others which have not the
like: so it is in spiritual respects, commonly such as see more then others,
disdain others in comparison of themselves, which ought not to be so, because
all we have, is borrowed, and it is none of ours: As if a Stage player should
be proud for his hired attire. Also, if we excel others in some things,
others may excel us in better things, and we may al confess (with Augustine)
In holy Scriptures there be (says he) more things which I know not, then they
be which I do know. Again learn moreover, that ignorance makes men rash to
judge and condemn others. Ignorant persons censure others very headily which
do differ from them, and do condemn every thing they cannot reach unto. As
here the Jews weak in (...), accounted the believing Gentiles which used
their liberty in meats and days, violaters of Moses, rebels unto God,
gluttons given to their belly, etc.

Let this kindle in us a great detestation of ignorance, not only because it
is a part of the devils Image, a prop of his kingdom, a transgression of the
first Commandment, requiring the knowledge of the true God, without which we
cannot love or fear, or trust in him. Also it is a darkness of the mind,
leading us to the darkness of hell, being the root and mother of error and
many sins; for the blind eats many a fly, as it is written, Ye do err
because ye know not the Scriptures, Math. 22, 29. But even for this cause let
us so much the more hate it, for that it makes us hasty in condemning,
uncharitable in judging, and precipitant in our censures touching men and
matters, which is an iniquity very severely taxed and threatened by our Savior
Christ, Math. 7, 1, 2. Finally, seeing of contention there comes such evil
fruits as mutual contempt, and hard censures, let us beware how we entertain
any occasion of strife, especially in causes of Faith and Religion. For
whereas all contention is like worme-wood, even a bitter thing, and brings
forth bitter fruits, yet division in matters of doctrine is most violent and
sharp. Therefore, Ere the strise be meddled withal, it is good to cease and
leave off, as Solomon in his Proverbs counsels upon this reason, because
none knows what will be the end of it. This may not be forgotten, that for
indifferent things the knot of Brotherhood, is not to be dissolved, nor
communion forsaken; yea although some be so transported with a strong
affection to them, as to hold them necessary. As these weak Jews (which
believed in Christ) did esteem of difference in meats and days, that a
conscience was to be still made of them; and that without contempt of Moses,
and sin against God the Lawgiuer, they could not be omitted. Howbeit Paul
would have Christian Charity nourished, and brotherly society between them and
the believing Gentiles. How far then be the churches of Lutherans in Germany
deceived, which break off society with the Churches of Caluinists (as they are
termed for distinction sake) because of dissension about the Bread in the
Communion, whether it should be eaten whole or broken? The Churches of (...)
and Galatia (thorough craft and seduction of false Teachers,) held some
fundamental errors, yet he honors them still with the Title of the
Churches of Christ, and saluteth them as Brethren, because they sinned not
obstinately and with an high hand, as Rome does.


DIAL. II.
Verses 3, 4, 5. For God has received him, who art thou that iudgest another
man's servant? he stands or falls to his own Master, yea he shall be
established, for God is able to make him stand. This man esteems, etc.


Tim. WHat do the third and fourth Verses contain?


Silas. The three Reasons before spoken of. The first whereof is in these words
( For God has received him.)


Tim. What is meant by Receiving, and by Him?


Silas. Receiving, signifies the taking and adopting some to be his people,
which were not his people. By [ Him] is meant the Gentiles, who being enemies
and strangers from God, and Infidels and seruers of idolles: by the love and
favor of God, were taken into the Family of the Church, to be members of
Christ thorough faith. Albeit these words do belong also unto the Jew, weak
in faith, for even Him also has God graciously adopted in Christ; yet the word
(judging) which immediately goes before, and follows after, shows it does
more fitly belong to the believing Gentile, by the Gospel brought near, and
received to be a people; for it was the Jews fault to judge the Gentile, as
they despised the Jews. The sum of the Apostles reason is this: Seeing God has
so dearly loved the Gentiles, as to make them his people, therefore the weak
Jews were too blame to condemn them, for using their Christian liberty in
meats and days.


Tim. What doctrine are we to gather from these words?


Silas. That all believing people (be they Jews or Gentiles) are dear unto
God. The reason hereof is, because they are his children by grace, and the
members of his Son, having their sins forgiven them, and his image imprinted
in them, being heyrs of God, and fellow-heyres with Christ; also believers are
the spouse of Christ, and his flock the husbandry and vineyard of God. This
must cause us to receive and make much of those whom God has taken into his
love. In Kings Courts, they are loved of all, which are loved of the King. When
the King would honor Mordechai, even Hamon must do him honor: so it is our part
kindly to affect and entreat all them whom the King of Heaven is kind unto.
There are no earthly Parents, but account themselves contemned or loved, by the
contempt or love of their children: so God holds himself respected or
despised, when we respect or despise his children; for they be as dear to him
as the Apple of his eye, as the Signet upon his right hand. As God will bless
them which bless his people, so he will curse such as curse them. This may
strike a terror into all such as hate the righteous, and exercise tyrany
toward such as be Gods friends: and must serve to keep all Christians from
rash uncharitable censuring, and judging one of another, least we be found
among those who do injury unto such as GOD has accepted of for his own.
Lastly, it does instruct and inform us all, what reckoning we are to make of
such as be their even brethren, (namely) that we are to account of them as
persons received of God into his special favor. For, howsoever we cannot
infallibly be assured, yet we are to be charitably persuaded of other
Christians, that they are adopted of God, and received into his special
favor, if we see but the least argument of their effectual calling. Upon
which grounds we must speak and think lovingly of them and of their actions,
as far as we may do it with truth and reason, tendering all that we have to do
withal, as men partakers of one nature, but much more as Christians partakers
of the same grace.


Tim. Come to verse fourth [Who art thou] and tell us what it contains and
means?


Silas. It has in it the second reason drawn from common equity, thus:
Believers are servants of God, but we may not condemn another servant;
therefore we may not judge one another in things indifferent. The assumption
is set down by way of interrogation, which has the force of an affirmation.
It is the Law of Nations, that they which be equally servants to one Lord, may
not judge one another (but by their Lords appointment) without injury to their
Lord. No Prince will take upon him to punish the servants of another Prince: and
that made David to be angry, when he heard how Hanun King of Ammon had abused
his Servants, 2. Sa. 10, 1, 2, 3. etc. We our selves would take it as a great
prejudice unto us, if any should censure or chastise our Servants. Common Law
of the land punishes such as strike other men's servants: there lies an action
of bartery in that case. The knowledge of this equity kept Paul from retaining
with him Onesimus, because he was another man's servant, without whose
knowledge and leave be would not keep him. From this natural and National
Law, the Apostle here persuades peace, inasmuch as it behooued the servants of
one and the same Lord, with kindness and love to embrace one another.


Tim. What instructions are we to take from hence?


Silas. First, hence we learn what is the condition of Doctrine.
all Christians, (namely) to be the servants of Jesus Christ who has bought
and purchased them with a price, 1. Cor. 6, 20. Howsoever they are set free
from Satan and sin, yet they still have a Lord to whom they owe homage and
(...). Christ has in such wise set the elect free, as they still (...) the
servants of him that delivered them from the hand of their enemies, Luke 1. As
in war such as were taken prisonners were ransomed, became servants to them
that redeemed them, 2. Kings 5, 1. So it fares with (...).


Tim. What is the use of this instruction?


Silas. As it is the part of (...) servants to study how to please their Lord,
as the servants of the Centurion, Luke 8. and to please one another, every one
being ready to help and comfort his follow, so it is the duty of Christian
servants to labor in all things to please Christ, and for his sake to please
one another in that which is good for peace and edifying. For as it is (...)
thing and must needs offend the Master to see his servants mutually to
contomne and condemn one another. So it cannot but much (...) Christ, and
discredit Christians, when they do not in charity kindly and lovingly respect
one another, but (...) judge and despise for light matters. But we are not so
to take it, as if all judging were forbidden to Christians, to whom God has
given the use both of public and private judgments, of things and persons; so
our judgment be guided by truth, charity, and equity, 1. Cor. 6, 1, 2. Deuteronomy.
1, 16. Psalm. 82, 1. But that itching desire in things of a middle nature to
think and speak hardly and headily one of another, is here prohibited, not
only upon this, that every servant stands or (...) to their own Lord, but
because God is able to make him strong which is weakest.


Tim. What may standing or falling signify?


Silas. To stand or fall, is to do a thing rightly, or otherwise, strongly or
weakly: to stand or fall to his own master is to be approved or disalowed of
God for things do^e, rightly or otherwise.


Tim. What doctrine from hence?


Silas. That about actions indifferent it belongs to God only to give
ascertaine sentence of them, that is, either to allow or disallow. The reason
is, because in middle things, it is the intent of the doer, that makes that
good or naught which is done. For the things in their own nature be neither
good nor evil: and of the inward intention, God alone is the discerner, for
he is the searcher of the heart, so that in these he alone is to be the
Judge. Therefore abstain thou from judging, least thou be found to usurp
Gods office.


Tim. But my Brother being weak, having no firm footing, Doubt.
being ready to fall and perish, may not I recover him?


Silas. Yea, there is no charitable office, but uncharitable Solution.
judging forbidden here. Thou may not take thy Brother for a forlorn
desperate man, because in every thing he does not as thou would have him, or
he should do. And if he be weak (as thou say) he shall be set up and
supported, but not by thee, but by another (namely) by God his Master, he can
make him stand: which is as a curb to the strong, and a comfort to the weak.


Tim. But how does the Argument follow (a potentia Dei) from the power of God
(ad esse and effectum) unto the effect? God can do many things which he never
does, as creating more worlds, saving all men, etc. and then the Papists shall
reason well in saying, the Bread is turned into the Lords body, because God
can do it.


Silas. It is a rule in Divinity, that in all promises and comforts, the will
of God is never to be separated from the power of God, and when his will is
once known, there is no question of his power. Now Paul had said, verse 3.
God has received him, to show his will to uphold his weak children: hereupon
he might conclude strongly from the omnipotency of God.


Tim. What may be the contents of this fifth verse?


Silat. First, a new instance of the difference amongst those Romans (to wit)
about Jewish days and seasts. Secondly, the counsel and judgment of Paul
touching the same [ Let every man.] For the former, to understand it of
fasting; as if some in the primitive Church, did eat every day of all meats,
and others fasted certain days. This is clean besides the Text, which
speaks of legal seasts under Moses, and not of superstitious popish fasts;
all things being free to eat, or not to eat, many hundred years after
Christ. As appears by the Epistle of Ireneus to Victor Bishop of Rome in
Eusebius, and by Isocrates and Augustine affirming that Lent was diversely kept,
some three days before Easter, some seven, some more, some fewer, but al was
free among Christians, there being no commandment of Christ or his Apostles
to tie any to a prescript time of abstinence.


Tim. What may we learn from the first words of this fifth verse?


Silas. The same thing as we did from the first and second verses, namely that
there be degrees of knowledge among Christians, some more perfect which know
the legal difference of days to be taken away under the Gospel. Some be
less perfect, which were ignorant for a time of that liberty brought by the
grace of Christ. And secondly, that Great (...) between (...) and West
Churches, about observation of East. r. between Luther and protestants about
breaking the bread.
controversies will arise among believing Christians, upon very slender
matters, as days and meats, round and square, leauened and unleavened, broken
and unbroken. Which must make us mistrust our weakness, and watch over it,
that we be not rent apieces about chippes; And more earnestly to pray for the
peace of Gods Church, that Satan may not have power to disturb it neither for
great matters nor small.


Tim. But what may be Paul's counsel in these cases of differences?


Silas. Let every one be persuaded in his mind, which some ill translate, Let
every one be satisfied in his mind, or let every one abound in his own
fence, whence they raise a doctrine suitable to the interpretation, (both
naught) that it is free for every man to choose his own religion, and to do
what he list, as the Libertines grossly fancy; whereas the word in the greek,
signifies to be fully assured, like as it does Romans 4, 21. Col. 2, 1.


Tim, What doctrine follows of this interpretation?


Silas. That a Christian ought not to believe or do (in case of Religion) any
thing doubtfully or waueringly, but upon certain knowledge, that he pleases
God in that which he does and believes. The reason is, because as no person,
so nothing which is not of Faith can please God, Heb. 11, 6. And it is sin,
whatsoever is done out of a doubtful mind, Romans 14, 23.


Tim. What is the Use to be made of this Doctrine?


Silas. First, it serves to reprove such as teach, that we ought to be
doubtful, and can have no certainty whether we or our works please God, but
ought ever to be in suspense, hoping well as they speak. Secondly, such as
boldly adventure to speak and do such things as they be not resolved of, that
they are good and true. This is a sin contrarying this advise of Paul: but
they especially do cross it, which dare teach others for truth, that which
themselves be not well persuaded of: and such as content themselves to believe
as Church-beleeuers, and know not what.

Finally, this therefore exhorts us all to labor for more knowledge of the
word, without which, no Christian can have assurance, except together with
understanding of the word, he do attain judgment to be able to discern. And
if a Christian ought to have an assurance even in things indifferent, much
rather in things necessary, which be commanded or prohibited, and most of all
in matters of Faith and Religion, wherein every one ought to be so well
grounded, and so certainly persuaded, not by another Faith, but by his own,
as he will be ready rather to dye, then to deny the known truth, as Paul, and
the other Apostles and Martyrs of Christ were.

Unto which constant resolution there is required no general and confused, but
a distinct particular knowledge of the revealed will of God, and that in a
great degree, having ready some sentence or place of holy Scripture, well and
clearly known and perceived of us, both for words and matter, whereon to
ground our Faith and practice. Otherwise we proceed like blind men which This
kind of Carbonarie faith, Cardinal Hosius requires in all which die well, and
holds it sufficient for their salvation.
know not where they be, and whither they go: and have no better faith then the
Colliars faith, who gloried that he believed as the Church believed, and the
Church believed as he did, being utterly ignorant of the Churches Faith: this
is not to be persuaded in his own mind.


DIAL. III.
Verses 6, 7. He that observes the day, observes it to the Lord, and he that
observes not the day, observes it not to the Lord. He that eats, eats to
the Lord, for he gives GOD thanks: and he that eats not, eats not to the
Lord, and gives God thanks. For none of us, etc.


Tim. What does this Scripture contain? What be the parts?


Silas. Two new Reasons to persuade the believing Romans to peace, about
things indifferent. First, from the end unto which both strong and weak do
look in their particular actions concerning indifferent things, verse 6.
Secondly, from the universal end of all our actions, both in things necessary,
and of a middle Nature, (to wit) the glory of Christ, who being the sovereign
Lord of all, and that both in our life and death; therefore in our whole course
his glory ought to be the only mark of all our doings. Now, if God be
glorified both by weak and by strong, let not one uncharitably censure another.


Tim. Come to the Interpretation, and show us the meaning of the Words, what
signifies [obseruing a day, and to the Lord?]


Silas. To regard a day, is to keep it holy, and to worship God in it, as he
appointed to be done by Moses. [Not to obserue] is not to worship God in the
day, nor to keep it holy. [ To the Lord,] has three significations given it.
First, that the judgment of these indifferent actions whether well done or il,
belongs to the Lord, and to none other. Secondly, that both weak and strong
studied and sought not to offend but please the Lord, in that which they did,
or did not. Thirdly, that they referred what they did, or what they omitttd to
do, to the Lords honor. This last sense is both truest and fittest because of
the words following, namely, that both the one and the other gave God thanks,
that is, honored God. The stronger thanked God both for the abundance of his
creatures, and their liberty in the use of so many blessings. The weak gave
thanks for their slender diet, because it was to them a pledge of Gods love,
and fruit of Christ's redemption. Note further touching the sense of the words,
that these (Indicatiues) he regards, he gives thanks, he lives, he dies,
verse 7. have the force of (Imperatiues,) and are to be understood rather ( de
iure) showing what ought to be done, then ( de facto) telling what was done:
like unto that saying, 1. Tim. 3. A Bishop is the husband of one wife, that is,
let him be the husband of one wife, and Heb. 13, 3. Marriage is honorable,
that is, it ought to be: And Mal. 2, 7. The Priests lips preserve knowledge,
that is, it ought to do so, Mat. 5, 13, 14.


Tim. Now that ye have given us the sense, let us hear the doctrines of this
sixth verse.


Sil. The doctrines of this sixth verse are these four: First, there be some
actions indifferent, such as in their own nature be no sin, but may be done,
or omitted and not done without fault: As there be somthings simply good, or
good absolutely, which be commanded or forbidden in the word; so some be
neither good nor evil in respect of things done, but be of a middle quality.
The proof of this Doctrine is out of the Text: for seeing to observe a day,
and not to observe it; to eat, and not to eat, be actions directly contrary,
yet our Apostle says of them both, that they pleased the Lord, and tended both
unto his honor: Here of it plainly follows, that some actions and things be
of an indifferent nature, which may be done and God pleased; or not done, and
yet God not offended.

A second proof, is out of 1 Cor. 8, 8. whence I reason thus; That which being
done or not done, makes us neither better nor worse, must be indifferent.
Thirdly, in this Chapter from verse 17. I argue thus: That certainly is in
different, which neither furthereth or hinders Christianity and salvation:
But such things are meats and drinks (because the kingdom of God is not
meats and drinks,) therefore meats and drinks be indifferent. It is very
true, that the abuse of these things by excess and riot, is not indifferent,
but sinful. Also where there is no such abuse, yet the intention of the doer
may be sinful: as if one forbear meats, with a purpose therein to do an
holy and meritorious act. Likewise, to eat and drink, etc. without faith,
makes such actions sinful, yea, though the things or actions about the^,
simply considered in their own Nature, are not evil nor good. Which as it
rebukes such as do deny Adiaphora, holding all things to be evil or good; so
it instructs us to know, that where Gods word has not ouer-ruled the case by
precept or prohibition, there we do not sin, if we avoid opinion of merit,
superstition, scandal of the brethren, and contempt of good order and decency.


Tim. What other Doctrine from this verse?


Silas. It teaches, that even in indifferent actions (as eating and drinking)
the honor of God ought to be our end of them, and mark to aim at; much more
in actions necessary and commanded, 1 Cor. 10, 30. Math. 5, 16. Romans 11, 36.
Col. 3, 16, 17. Besides these Scriptures good reason enforces this lesson.
First, God is the beginning (all things are of him,) and he ought to be the
end of all (all things are for him.) And Prou. 16, 4. For himself (that is,
for his glory) he made all things. As all Rivers come of the Sea, and return
thither; so al things ought to redound to his honor, as the end, seeing all is
derived from him as the beginning. We have will and power from him to do that
which is pleasing unto him, Phil. 2, 13. the praise of all therefore belongs to
him. Secondly, Christ has bought us, our God gave Christ a price for us;
therefore all our actions maine and mean, religious and righteous, ought to
glorify him, 1 cor. 6, 20


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Silat. It reprooueth such as be so far from intending Gods honor in every
action, as generally they think not once of the Lord and his glory. Secondly,
such as directly and purposely seek their own praise or pleasing of others or
themselves, having no further drift, but as profane worldlings and blind
Papists. Thirdly, such as do not that they do, to, but against the lord to
dishonor him, and not for his honor, as wicked Epicures and Atheists.
Moreover, from hence all are very earnestly to be exhorted, that whatsoever
they take in hand, they do look to the pleasing and honoring of God in it.
For, seeing God in his actions toward us, does chiefly respect his own glory.
Romans 3, 2. also 9, 24. Ephesians. 1, 6, 11, 4. therefore in all our duties toward
him, this should principally be seen unto, that he may be magnified by our
godly life. For there are three things required of them, which will be
acceptable to the Lord: One, that it have the word to warrant it, or not
against it. Secondly, that it proceed from the root of faith, being done with a
persuasion, that both action and person please God through Christ. Thirdly, to
these must be added an affection and sound desire, to have God honored, loved,
and praised, by our means; without this our best doings are defiled.
Therefore, as good servants have care of the credit of their Lord; and
natural children do study how to increase the reputation of their parents,
such ought to be the disposition of all Christians, who are bound to strive
hereunto, even to have the testimony of their conscience to witness, that in
all vprightnes they desire and seek this more then their own wealth, credit,
life, yea, or salvation, that their loving father and gracious Lord, may reap
praise and honor by their obedience to his will. This will give more peace and
true comfort to the soul, then all the world will do.


Tim. Is there any other Doctrine behind?


Silas. Yea, that it behooves all Christians, especially Ministers, by Paul's
example, to walk very wisehe toward them which differ and be at variance
among themselves. For sometimes he names the strong before the weak, as verse
2. and here verse 6. the weak are put before the strong. Also, he makes them
both equal in this, that they intended Gods honor in omission, as well as in
fact; passing by the infirmities of both, that he might not seem partial,
and have more hope to win them to concord.

The reason hereof is: If among Christians which do contend in matters of
Religion, any respect of person or inequality be used, more being yielded to
the one then to the other, unkindness will be taken, jealousy kindled, peace
hindered, and the edge of all good exhortations blunted: therefore, an even hand
must be carried without leaning to any side. This rule holds, when
differences grow through weakness, and this will require much wisdom and
prayer: but with those which err of malice, and are obstinate impugners of the
truth, after lawful instruction, Paul deals more roughly and roundly. See
Gal. 5, 3, 4. and Chap. 4. also Phil. 3, 2. 2 Epistle of John verse 10. Tit. 3,
10. Romans 16, 17. Here mark, that the Apostles are peremptory without favor
or indulgence toward such as maintain evil opinions in Religion, with an
evil mind to deprave the truth, and to corrupt their Brethren.


Tim. What is the fourth and last Doctrine from this sixte verse?


Silas. That Gods creatures and blessings ought to be received with giving of
thanks to the Lord. See 1 Timothy 4, 3, 4. Col. 4. 2. and 3, 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 18.
To which, add the example of Christ, John 6, 11. and of Paul, Acts 27, 35. The
reasons of this duty (besides former precepts and examples) are first thanks
giving, which is a part of Gods service, Psalm. 51. It makes to his honor and
glorifying of his name. Again, without it we have not a pure and conscionable
use of the creatures and benefits of God: also unthankfulness is odious to
God, it hinders the act of faith, and so turns our eating and drinking into
sin, Romans 14. last verse.


Tim. What use of this instruction?


Silas. This reprooueth such as foreslow this duty, and deride such as do it,
or do it only of custom for fashion, not as of duty and conscience to the
word. Likewise such as turn it over to children in their own presence, being
themselves more able for gifts, and most bound for Gods bounty and benefits to
them: and the excellent God looks and deserves to be served with most excellent
graces. Lastly, it prouokes both our selus to frequent will lingly and often
this duty (there being nothing wherewith GOD is so pleased and honored, as
with hearty Thanksgiving) and to teach our Children, and to see them do it on
their own behalf; but not to make them our mouths, so long as we have an
heart and tongue to praise our God. Although Christ's Disciples were men grown,
yet he put not them to say grace in his presence; he always gave thanks in
his own person, leaving a pattern for all Householders to look upon, to do
the like, for his moral actions are our instructions.


DIAL. IIII.
Verses 7, 8, 9. For none of us lives to himself, neither does any die to
himself. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die
unto the Lord: whether we live therefore or dye, we are the Lords. For Christ,
etc.


Tim. What is it that Paul does in these Verses? How do they suit and sort
with the former?


Silas. Paul resumeth and enlarges the argument put down in verse 4. that all
being servants to one common Lord (who with like good will, embraces and
rules over all his servants with equal dominion, purchased by so great price
as his own death) therefore they ought to dissent no longer, or mutually to
condemn and judge one another, especially seeing the glory of the Lord is
sought for by his servants.

The scope and drift, is to teach and confirm all believers, Scope.
to whom and to what they must live and die; not to themselves, and to their
own private purposes and praise, but to Christ their Lord, that he in our
life and death may be glorified. He confirms and comfortes the godly that live
in all ages, that they should be very full of comfort and joy, seeing they
have a lord, who takes more care of them in life and death, then they could do
of themselves, being both able and willing to preserve them during their life,
and being dead, to restore them to a neuerdying life. For his power is
omnipotent, ouercomming death in himself, being universal Judge of all; and
for his will, he is so affected to all faithful ones as to his own redeemed,
dearly purchased to be his peculiar.

The order of these words is this. First, a proposition that no man lives or
dies to himself, verse 7. Secondly, a reason, because our life and death is
to another, even to the Lord Christ, verse 8. Thirdly, a cause of this in the
same verse, because we are the Lords in life and death, therefore must live and
dye to him only. Fourthly, an answer to a secret Objection, if one should
ask, How came Christ by this right and power in us, and over us? it is
answered verse 9. By his death and resurrection, the end whereof, was to give
him Lordship over his church. In his death was paid the ransom, in his
resurrection he possessed his dominion. For being dead so long, he could not
be Lord and Conqueror, but by rising again he obtained it: and that he might
for ever exercise this dominion, he must both rise from death and revive, or
continue alive to continue an eternal Lord, as it is written, I was dead, and
am alive; and Behold I live for ever and ever. Revel. 1, 18. Romans 6, 9. Christ
being dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. The sum of all
is, that not only in indifferent things, but in all our Christian actions we
must like good servants seek the honor of Christ our general and rightful
Lord, and therefore must lay aside our divisions and discords, which are
neither after his pleasure, nor to his praise and glory.


Tim. Interpret the words, and tell us what it is [to live to our selves and to
dye to our selves?]


Silas. To live to himself has a twofold signification, first civil, which
is double: First, to depend on no man, but to live of himself, without help
from others, to be beholden to no man: as Abraham would not take a shoolachet
from the four Kings which warred with him, Genesis 14, 23. Elisha would not at
any hand take a guist from Naaman the Syrian, 2. Kings 5, 15, 16. Also in a
civil sense it may import to care for none but for our selves, only to mind
our own benefit, with neglect and contempt of all others: As in covetous
misers, many unmarried batchellors, and all worldlings do, having a care of
themselves and theirs alone, as if they were borne for none other.

The other sense wherein the Apostle uses these words, is theological and
Gospell-like, namely to live after our own mind, lust, and pleasure, doing
our own will, and seeking our own praise, like to that Romans 8, 5. 1. Cor. 10,
2. also 2. Cor. 5, 15. Our life when it is referred not to Christ, but to our
own commodities and honor, then we live to our selves. Also when there be
none to grieve, mourn, and lament our death; which is the case of many
widows, single persons, sole livers, poor people, with whose death no^e is
affected; this is ciuily to die to himself: but euangelically one dies to
himself, when he finds himself desolate, and there is none to care for him
being dead, as if he were forelorne and cast off of Christ, this is the meaning
here.


Tim. What may now be our lesson from hence?


Silas. First, all wicked and unregenerate men live and dye to themselves, to
their own pleasure and praise. When Paul says none of us, he means that
others do so: the reason hereof is, first, they have no other ground and
beginnings of their actions, but their own will or lust, nor other end of them
but their own glory, or the pleasing of themselves and other men.


Tim. Tell us the use of this point?


Silas. It serves to reprove not only heathenish people, but among Christians,
the covetous, usurers, Cornemongers, oppressors, extortioners, etc. which mind
their own profit only, without respect of pleasing God or their neighbor:
Also idle Ministers which seek their own things and not Christ's, Phil. 3. and
Magistrates which refer their authority to their private use, soreslowing the
weal public: Also it is a check and a sore one to our young gallants,
swash-bucklers, Tauerne-haunters, gamesters, etc. which wholly intend their
pleasure, ease, and carnal delight; they do what they ought not, and as
godless men do, living to themselves, let these look to dye to themselves.
For as they neglected God in their lise, so it is right that he neglect them in
their death, and leave them without comfort on their death bed, who in the
days of their health and strength forgot and forsook him.


Tim. What other lesson from verse 7?


Silas. All believers are taught their duty not to live to themselves, after
their own lusts, and for their own praise and purposes; for how can they live
to themselves which have in baptism and profession denied themselnes, even all
carnal affections (which are as dear to men natural as themselves?) better
never to have vowed this then not to keep our vow, Eccle. 5, 7.


Tim. What is the use hereof?


Silas. It serves to warn the faithful to stop their ears (as a Serpent
does) against the voice of sinful pleasures, and profits, self-love, and
vain glory, charm they never so wisely: And to suffer themselves to be led by
the inspiration and the government of the holy Spirit by which they are Romans
8, 5.
sanctified; then ye shall dye not to your selves, but find God in your sickness
ready to make your bed, and to take care (...) you dying, sithence living ye
did think and study how to please and glorify him. How can he leave you in
your death, which did cleave to him in your life? How can he not refresh you at
the last dying hour, and receive you at the last dreadful day, whose chief
intent and endeavor was to renounce your own desires and ways, for his will
and glory sake?


Tim. Proceed to the eight verse, and show what it is [To live to the Lord,
and to dye to the Lord?]


Silas. Each of these contain these four several distinct What it is to live
to Christ
things: [ To live to the Lord] is first to acknowledge our selves not to be
our own, or under our own power at our own hands (as Iourneymen and Freemen)
but to be Christ's, as his proper and peculiar. No flock is so much the
Shepherds, or inheritance so much the Owners, or Servants their Lords, as we
Christ's. Secondly, it signifies, to render up our selves to him, to do not our
own, but his will. As servants do his will which has ransommed them and
freed them; with whom they have made a Covenant, and from whom they have taken
wages and protection, 1 Samuel 22, 7. so we are bound to attend and obey the will
of Christ, to whom we are bound by solemn covenant, and from whom we have had
already many good things, and do look for more and greater, whose will also
is most holy. Thirdly, as servants make their Lord their refuge, so to fly to
Christ in all our distresses and dangers: so Jacob, so David, so Ezekiah, so
Peter fled to Christ, Save Lord or (...) perish, Mat. 14. Lastly, What it is to
dye unto the Lord.
to seek his glory to the utmost end of our life. Now, [ To die to him] is to
confess him to be the only Lord of death, having it in his own hand and
power. Secondly, to submit with patience to the decree of death, after Christ's
example, Math. 26. Thirdly, to study how to glorify him in our death, by hope,
patience, contentment, repentance, and fervent prayer to God, for our selves
and ours, and his whole Church; and by our counsels and comfortable speeches to
such as stand about us, (namely) our Children, etc. as Jacob, David, Christ and
others have done. Fourthly, to give up our spirits to God, as Steven, Acts 7.
in a good hope and assurance of a bessed resurrection, after the example of
Job, Job 19, 23. I know my Redeemer lives.


Tim. What learn we from hence, that we are the Lords whether we live or dye?


Silas. First, that we have matter of much comfort in whatsoever kind of
death we dye, for we have a Lord that will in death look to us, our tears
are put up in his bottle, Psalm. 56, 8. Our death is precious to him, Psalm. 116.
15. Let all men neglect, nay dishonor us in our death, cast us out, drag us
through streets, hang our bodies on (...), give our flesh to be meat to the
Fowls of the air, as they complain in the Psalm 79, 2. As the two
witnesses, Revel. 11, 8. And as the Admiral of France was dealt withal in
Paris, and Marlorate at Roane in Normandy: Yet Christ is their Lord and will be
their Patron and auenger. Secondly, let such as live to the Lord by obedience
to his will, and zeal of his glory, free their hearts from fear of Purgatory
feigned fire, yea and of truly tormenting hell fire, sithence they being
purged by the blood of their Lord, are delivered thereby from all torments, and
restored to life eternal.

Lastly, see the wonderful dignity of a true Christian by faith joined to
Christ; he has a good and a great Lord. If they be happy which might always
be about Solomon to hear his wisdom; how blessed are they rather which
belong to a Lord greater then Solomon? who are in such sort the Lords as they
be lords, even freemen, friends, and brethren to Christ, fellow-heires, Priests
and Kings to their God, through Christ, Reueh 1, 6.


Tim. From the ninth verse which (as you said) does set down the acquisition,
or how Christ got his universal dominion oner all the faithful, what things
do ye collect thence for our instruction?


Silas. I collect these doctrines: First, that Christ dyed truly and indeed,
having his soul for a time violently separated from his body, whereof as the
Sacrifices and Sacraments of the old Testament, namely the Paschall Lamb was a
Type, 1 Cor. 5, 7. So the Lords Supper a Sacrament of the new, is a lively
representation in distributing the bread apart from the Wine, and in the
breaking of the bread, there is a signification of his painful passion.
Secondly, it was not so necessary that he should die to satisfy divine Justice,
according to Gods eternal appointment, and most just threatening, Thou shall
dye the death, Genesis 2, 17. and to fulfill the prophesies and types of his death,
and Legal sacrifices: but it was as needful he should raise himself from the
dead, because his death had not otherwise profited us, either by merit or
efficacy. For by this means he both declares himself to be absolved from our
sins, which he bare that he might iustisy us, Romans 4, 25. and to be
conqueror of death and grave, yea and to become fit to exercise that dominion
and victory which his death had purchased. For being dead, he could not be
victorious, so long as himself seemed to be conquered, neither could he rule
over the living, except he had been made alive; and he lives for ever, that
he may for ever govern his people, which are here distributed into two sorts
or ranks, 1. [the dead,] that is such as had departed this life from Adam unto
Christ, and 2. [by liuing] such are understood as then did live, or should live
from thenceforward to the end of the world.

Now, albeit Christ being risen, have absolute power which he practices
generally over all men good and bad, even over the devils, as it is written,
All power in heaven and earth is given me, Math. 11, 27. and 28, 18. which
agrees with Phil. 2, 9, 10. yet Paul extends his dominion in this place, no
further then to believers, over whom Christ does rule for their salvation in a
peculiar manner by his word and Spirit, as over his own peculiar people,
whose comfort and instruction the Apostle in this Text purposely intends.

Here is then the third Doctrine of this verse, that Christ dyed and rose not
in vain, but to this end, and to this very cause, to get a sovereignty over
all the Elect, which either had lived, or did then, or should afterward live
in the world; all which, by good right, are subject to him, as to their Lord,
to be ruled and kept unto salvation in heaven. Which as it teaches the Church
of both Testaments to be but one, under one Lord of both: and that it
comprehends universally the Saints before the law, under the law, and under
grace; all which make one body, and one family, whence the Church is entitled
Catholic: so withal we learn, that the benefits of this Lord, as remission
of sins, righteousness, adoption, salvation, etc. reach no less to such as
were before Christ, the^ to them, who since Christ do live, To. 3 25. Hebr. 9,
15. And moreover, that they which be already dead in his Faith, shall
certainly be raised to heavenly glory, for so much as Christ is not Lord of the
dead (as they be dead) but as they are appointed to be alive, for he is the
Lord of all the living, Math. 22, 32.

Furthermore, that there is great comfort unto all the true servants of God,
inasmuch as both in life and death they have a mighty and loving lord to care
for them, to preserve and safeguard them till he have crowned them. And
finally, by this consideration they ought to keep themselves from mutual
discords and dissentions, living together in a peaceable and brotherly fashion:
which as it is agreeable to the mind and will of their Lord, so it will tend
much to his honor, and to the credit of our Christian profession: and that
especially, if remembering that they are under his authority and rule, they take
not leave to live as they list, but to his will and honor who has brought
them out of the power of darkness, to who^ for sin by the righteous judgment of
God, they were enthralled and captiuated, Acts 26, 16. Let them study to serve
him whose they are, after Paul's example, Acts 24, 23. and follow his counsel,
2 Cor. 5, 5. He died and rose again, that henceforth we should live, not to
our selves, but after his will that dyed for us.


DIAL. V.
Verses 10, 11, 12. But why do thou judge thy Brother? Or why do thou
despise thy Brother? For we shall all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ. For it is written, I live says the Lord, etc.


Tim. What is the drift of this text?


Silas. To persuade the Romans and in them all other Christians to concord
about indifferent things by three new Arguments. First, from their condition,
in that they are equals, being all Brethren; and equals may not mutually judge
each other: this argues superiority. Secondly, from the office of Christ, who
is the universal judge of all, confirmed by a Text out of Esaias 45, v. 23.
Therefore, we have no need to censure others, but to look to our own
account, verse 12. Thirdly, from the event, which follows the unseasonable
abuse of our liberty, which is the scandal of the weak, verse 13. The last
reason concerns the strong, the two former both weak and strong.


Tim. In what form of speech, are these Reasons propounded?


Silas. By way of interrogation, [ Why do thou? etc.] Which has the very
force not only of a strong denial, [ Thou ought not,] but also of a
reprehension, as who should say, Have you no more-grace, wisdom, and charity,
then to despise and judge one another? Whence we learn, that Ministers of the
word are to take care, not only of the matter, but of the very shape and
fashion of their speech, that they use a most piercing and moving form of
words, as circumstances may require: for there is much force to make a thing
gracious and powerful, in the very form of words which be used.


Tim. Now for the matter, what be the actions here reproved? and upon what
Reasons?


Silas. Two: one is (to despise or set at naught:) this was the fault of such
as had more knowledge of their Christian liberty, they esteemed vilely and
lightly of the weaker sort, and disdained such as had less understanding. What
is meant by Judging.


The other action is (judging) which pertains to the weak in faith, and
thereby is neither meant the public sentence which the Magistrate gives from
the seat of justice against evil doers, nor yet that private sentence which
Christians pass either against actions simply bad or good, or against persons
already judged of God in the word, or with condition of their continuance in
evil, (if they be not such as the Scripture has fore-iudged;) but the rash
uncharitable judgment touching the final estate of Christians for middle
actions, as to pronounce peremptorily and absolutely of any that they must
perish, or be past grace or cannot be saved, because they are not of our
mind in every thing. That this is the meaning of the word (Judge) there be two
circumstances in the Text which fully preoue it: First, by that which went
immediately before (of living and dying to the Lord, and being the Lords in
life and death,) which shows that these Romans took upon the^ to determine
what should be the end and death of each others, and what should (...) come of
them, as if they were Lords one of another life and death; also by mentioning
the last judgment, and ascribing the same unto Christ, it appears that they
did usurp his office in giving heavy doom of each others destruction: As at
this day the Lutherans do against such Churches that differ from them in things
indifferent, as about breaking the bread in the Communion: and some of our hot
brethren at home, have had their finger too deep in this fault of judging
their brethren too rigorously.


Tim. What is our instruction from hence?


Silas. That it is not lawful for Christians to pass their doom touching the
everlasting estate of any man, of who^ it is not apparent that he has
committed that irremissible sin: 1. For we know not what a day may bring
forth. Also we see many wicked men suddenly and mightily called and changed.
Thirdly, we read of one standing in the market, called at the eleventh hour
to work in the vineyard. Also of the thief converted at the instant of his
death.

Fourthly, we are even Brethren, one of us no better then another, and
therefore we should not usurp this superiority, as one to judge and condemn
another. This is a against Brotherly charity, and Christian love, which hopes
well of all men, so far as there is any cause or reason to induce us.
Finally, it is against the honor and dignity of the son of God, whom the
father has advanced to this honor to be the Judge of us all.


Tim. What Use of this Doctrine?


Silas. It calls to repentance, such as have been too free Use.
and forward in judging others peremptorily, and ought henceforth to stay us
from such wickedness. Secondly, it reprooues such as would take away from
Christians all liberty of judging, under this pretense, that we may not for
mean things judge our Brethren finally: for that which is utterly unlawful in
some case, is, and may be lawful in some other cases; when circumstances
vary, the matter it self is varied.


Silas. Concerning the Reason drawn from the judgment of Christ, show us
after what sort the Apostle does handle this point? or how many things he does
consider about it?


Silas. The things considered about it, are very many 7. things confiderable
by this text, about the last judgment.
and weighty, which follow here in order. First, the universality of this
judgment [ all we shall stand] weak and strong, learned and unlearned, none
are to be exempted from his judgment, the judge is impartial, he will
dispense with none. Secondly [ we shall stand] or we must give account, verse
12. This judgment is unavoidable. First, Gods decree has purposed it, his
word prophesied of it, his Justice requires it, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 6, 7. Thirdly,
the manner how we shall appear, Be presented or made to stand forth, every one
naked, himself and his cause both before the Judge, each one in his own
person. Fourthly, the person, of the Judge (to wit) Christ; not as he is God
only, but as he is man and Mediator, who though at this presont he be Judge
of all, and reign over all, Acts 17, 31.
Math. 28, 29. yet it is amidst his enemies; they are not abolished, the Church
is not fully delivered, which shall perfectly be done at this last and general
judgment. Fifthly, the manner of his coming to judgment, it shall 1 Cor. 15,
25, 26, 27, 28.
be glorious and full of Majesty, for he shall have a Judgment seat, even a
throne very high in the clouds, Mat. 25, 31. and a white Throne, Revel. 20, 11.
to note the innocence and uprightness of the Judge, one to be corrupted with
no bribes, or blinded with ignorance, or respect of persons.

Sixthly, the things which he shall do when he is come to judgment, which are
these. First, he shall make enquiry of all men both their persons and actions;
then he shall lay them open, and manifest them what they have been, and what
they have done. After that, he shall give a righteous sentence upon every one
according unto his works (which are as evidences and witnesses of Faith or
unbelief. Upon which, shall follow speedy and mighty execution, the wioked
being cast down into hell, shame, and torment: the righteous carried up to
heaven, there in bliss and glory to abide with Christ for ever: for this order
of the judgment, see Math. 25, from verse 31. to the end of the Chapter.


Tim. Is there yet any further thing considerable about this last and general
judgment?


Silas. Yea, the authority and right that he has to this Office of a Judge,
and to the work of judgment, because Howthe place of Esaias, cited by Paul, is
to be understood
he is that everlasting and mighty Jehovah, of whom Esaias the Prophet spoke
before, Esaias 45, 25. where the people of God oppressed by Tyrants, are
exhorted to make the Lord God their refuge, and to fly to him for salvation
and suecour. I have sworn by my self (says God) that unto me every knee shall
(...), and every tongue shall swear.

Here we must note, that Paul as he leaves out some words being
vnpertinent to his purpose, so instead of swearing, he puts here confession,
being a more general word, for a more special. For an oath is a solemn
profession of God, that he is the searcher of the heart, the just Patron of
truth, the severe auenger of salshood. Also observe that (bowing of the knee)
by a metonimy of the sign, is put for that whole subjection and divine homage
and worship which belongs to the majesty of God our Lord, as in Phil. 2, 9,
10. and Ephesians. 1, 21, 22. is expounded. The corporal superstitious bowing of
the knee to the letters and (...) of Jesus name, (for they do it not to the
Lord, or to Christ, or to Emanuell,) is not to be proved by this Text. Devils
have no material keees, yet they also must bow.
Now these things spoken of Jehovah first by Esaias, and after by Paul, applied
here to Jesus Christ, this evidently shows that he is that Judge and
sovereign Lord unto whom all knees must bow, in token of subjection, and
before whose tribunal all must appear, and be driven willingly as Angels and
men elect, or unwillingly as reprobate men and Angels, to confess him to be
the very true God and universal (...) of the whole world at what time the
Arrians, Samosatenus, Seruetus, Jews and all other heretics which baue denied
directly or by consequence the everlasting divinity of the Son of God, shall
have their mouths stopped with perpetual contempt and shame, yea and all
ungodly sinners which either have not regarded to know, or refuled to obey this
Christ, speaking and commanding in his word, shall then be filled with horror,
when they shall see him to be God and Judge of all, whom by their disobedience
to his voyee they spurned against. It were therefore a happy thing if now
disobedient impenitent sinners would often think of this, that they must al
stand before the tribunal seat of Christ; which is not so terrible to the
vngody and contentious, that love not peace and holiness, but it is as
comfortable to such as study to live peaceably and holily; for they shall stand
to be absolved and crowned, as the other shall stand to be condemned and
confounded. Therefore let every Christian not so much look to others what they
be or do, as to their own life, how they themselves lives for every one must
give an account of himself and his own doings, and not of others, and every
one shall receive according to that (not which another) but which himself has
done, 2. Cor. 5, 14. Repent therefore (as all other secure sinners, having this
dreadful day ever in your thought, as a whip and Scorpion rather to drive from
the love and service of your sinful lusts) especially ye busy medlers,
curious priers and obseruers of other men's actions and ways, presumptuous
Critics of other men's persons, whose holiness and goodness is to think and
talk how profane and bad other men be, being henceforth to accuse your
selves, examine and judge your selves, and what ye find evil and out of
order at home, speedily without delay, and sincerely without dissimulation
redress that, that when the Judge comes, (and he is even at the door,) ye
may have rejoicing in your selves. Hold it for a grand policy of Satan,
(abusing our natural curiosity) to convert our eyes unto the persons and
ways of others, that we and our own works being foreslowed, we might place
our comfort in this, that we can see how evil others be, and that we are not
so ill as they be, as the Pharisie in Luke. To remedy this always remember,
(and let it never be forgotten,) at thy rising up and lying down think of
it, that thou must be countable for thy self, to answer thy own
cogitations, words, and actions; Every one shall bear his own burden, then
every tub shall stand on his own bottom, every fish hang by his own gril.
This makes nothing against wise and charitable care of thy neighbors good,
but to draw thy eyes to look to thy own field, to see it be not too much
ouergrowne and rest unpurged, whilst thou art foolishly and maliciously
occupied in weeding another man's garden; at a word, sithence the meditation of
the judgment of Christ is a strong preservative against security and
curiosity, therefore enter into covenant with thy self every day to consider
it till thy heart be thoroughly awakened. Imitate blessed Paul, 2. Cor. 5, 11. 2.
Tim. 4, 1.


DIAL. VI.
Verses 13, 14, 15, 16. Let us not therefore Judge our another any more, but
use your judgment rather in (...), that no man put an occusion to fall, or a
stumbling block before his Brother. I know and am persuaded, etc.


Tim. Show us the Coherence, Scope, and Method of this Text?


Silas. His general exhortation both to strong and weak in the first v. is now
closed; and he passes to a special dehortation to the strong and more skilful
Christians, that about meats and other indifferent matters, they offend not
their weak (...). So as the scope is, to stay the strong from being on offense
to them of less knowledge by the abuse of their Christian liberty. As for the
Method, here is a proposition dehorratory, be circumspect and heedfull, that
ye (...) not (...) Brother; which though it be meant of meats, yet it is put
downo in the Thesis, to teach that about all things (not meats only) of
indifferent Nature, scandal is to be taken heed of, that none be given, v. 13.
In v. 14. there is a secret objection in Paul's person, I believe that nothing
is unclean, why then should I abstain from any meats for my Brothers sake? To
which Paul answers two ways; First, by a distinction thus, By it self, or in
it own nature, nothing is unclean but it becomes unclean to him that so
judges of it. Secondly, it becomes unclean, when it is eaten with offense and
grief of a Brother, verse 15. where three reasons are rendered (...) dissuade
from offending or making sad our Brother. First, it is against the rule of
charity: secondly from the hurt which may come to our Brother, who is in
danger of destruction by the offense given him, yea, a wrong is done to
Christ, in spilling the price of his blood, verse 15. Thirdly, from an evil
effect, it will cause so great good as Christian liberty, (yea, God the author
of that good) to be reproached, verse 16.


Tim. Now hasten to Interpretation and Doctrine, with the uses and duties which
we are to follow. Begin first with v. 13.


Silas. The meaning is, secing every one must give account of himself to God,
let us no more judge others, but take heed and look unto our selves and our
own ways, that they be not offensive. Whereas Paul may seem with one breath,
to speak contraries, Judge not, but Judge: it is an elegancy of speech, one
selfsame word used in several senses. First, in il part, for condemning
others uncharitably, then in good part, for examining our selves, and pondering
our own actions, so to order them, as no offense come thereby; we may not
judge others, but we may and ought to judge our selves, these be not contrary,
1 Cor. 11, 31.


Tim. What is our Docrine from these words thus expounded?


Silas. That after our conscience is by good reason convicted Doctrine.
of any sin, we must strive to leave it, and use it no more: so Paul speaks
here [ Let us no more,] though ye have been bold to judge and condemn one
another for these indifferent matters; yet now that ye have heard so good and
manifest reasons against it, from the dignity of your Lord, and his office of
Iudgeship, henceforth do it not. The reasons hereof are first, when we live
in sin after knowledge, it is the greater sin, John 9, 41. James 4, 17.
Secondly, it draws greater wrath and punishment, both temporal and eternal,
Prou. 1, 29. Luke 12, 47. He that knows his Masters will, and does it not,
shall be beaten with many stripes. God bare with the Israelites in their
ignorance; but when they had sinned stubbornly after sundry warnings by his
strange works, he sent strange plagues amongst them, 1 Cor. 10, 5, 6, 7. The
examples of Gods judgments against the Old world, Sodomites, (...), the sons
of Ely, against Corazin and Bethsaida, all of them warned by Noah or (...), by
Moses, by Ely, and by Christ, do confirm this truth, that it is dangerous to
continue in sin after warning.

Thirdly, sins against knowledge, are the highway to the sin against the
Holy Ghost; for though every sin after knowledge, be not that unpardonable
sin (which has knowledge joined with malicious hatred of the known truth
of salvation by Christ) yet it is a step and degree thereunto.


Tim. What is the use of this instruction? Use.



Silas. To exhort every one to beware chiefly of such sins, whereof he has
been admonished and clearly convicted. For, if our love to our bodies be
such, that we carefully avoid such things as we know are wont to hurt them,
how much more ought we to show forth this care for our souls? For if civil
Justices, Masters, and Parents, will more severely strike where their warnings
be despised, let not us think that God will forget such as neglect his
admonitions, but will wound them deeply first or last that go on in known
sins, as himself threatens, Leuit, 26, 21, 24. I will walk stubbornly
against them, that walk stubbornly against me. Oh, that this in time might be
considered of such as have been often and many ways advertised of their
faults, yet are so far given over, as they use no endeavor for the forsaking
of them, and do not enter into any care or course of amendment.


Tim. What is here meant by [a stumbling block, and occasion of falling?]


Silas. They be speeches borrowed from earthly things, and translated to
spiritual, as from highways, wherein Interpretat.
stones and blocks do lie to make men stumble and fall, or from snares and
nets of Powlers and hunters: they signify every thing that hinders in the
course of godliness; either quite turning us away from religion (which is meant
here by falling,] or causing us to go on less chearefully, which is called
here [stumbling block:] and when the Apostle says [ put not,] the meaning
is, that we give no manner of offense, neither small nor great to our Brother,
either to make him fly whollye from Christ, or to trouble him never so little.
For this place speaks not of a passine offense, which is taken where none is
given, as the Pharisees and Scribes which were offended with the doctrine and
miracles of Christ, Mat. 15, 12. and as worldlinges now are grieved with
Magistrates, Ministers, and others for doing their duties, for their zeal
against vices; which being good things, ought not to scandalize any, and do
offend none but ill minds; But of an active scandal, which is an offense
given, when some evil is not secretly either spoken or done, but openly
contrary to Gods Law, or when our liberty in things indifferent, is
unseasonably used, by the which others are made the worse, less godly, and
honest. For as a stone or block, so an offense must appear. An horrible crime
whilst it is unknown, it is an offense to God, and hurts the committer, but no
offense to others to hurt them, till it be manifested.


Tim. What is our Doctrine from this place?


Silas. That all Christians must carefully look to this, that they never be a
just occasion of sinning to any man, either by words or deeds, to hurt the
salvation of any, or by building them up unto sin by our evil examples in
our sayings or doings. For first, this is against the commandment of God, 1
Cor. 8, 9, 10. and 10, 32. Secondly, it pulls down heavy judgments on our
selves, Math. 18, 8. Better a Millstone were hanged about our neck, etc. The
world is full of examples of such as have been grievously plagued of God, for
being authors and occasions of sin to others, as Genesis 3. the History of Adam
and Eues fall, the Serpent punished more then Eve, and Eve more then Adam.
Iezabel more plagued then the Judges and false witnesses, which accused and
killed Naboth. Jeroboam for making the Israelites to sin, more punished then
the Israelites themselves.

Thirdly, it is against the example of the blessed Apostle, 1. Cor. 8, 13.
Fourthly, by offense given we break the rule of charity, which shunneth the
greeuances and hurt of every man, and studieth how to foster, help, and
strengthen even the weakest. As in a natural body the stronger member
succoureth the feebler, or as a Physician or Surgeon tenderly handles a
diseased or pained party: so love is maruailous chary not to trouble or do the
least harm to the soul of any Christian brother, Romans 14, 15. Fifthly, by
offense giving, we sin against our neighbor while we beat, nay wound his
weak conscience, (which is great cruelty) procuring him by our example to
allow or do some thing whereof in his conscience he was not resolved, or
which he knew he ought not to do, had not we made him to stumble, 1. Cor. 8,
12. Nay by our offense we destroy our brother so much as lies in us, and
become very butchers and murderers of our brothers soul, (either wholly
driving him away from the faith, or discouraging him:) and what a matter is
this, for so slender a thing as meats and drinks and days, or such like
indifferent things, to be the death and slaughter not of the body but of the
precious souls of men? Romans 14, 15. Lastly, this reaches not to our brother
alone, and to his destruction, but even so high as Christ the head and Lord,
against whom we sin in wounding or hurting any member or servant of his, 1.
Cor. 8, 12. There is that straight conjunction between Christ and the
faithful, that the good or the evil offered to them redounds to him. Mat. 25,
45. Also how can we by our offense given, make void the fruit and force of
Christ's death, toward our brother offended by v, (so much as we may, and no
thanks to us if it be not so) what other thing (I say) can this be then to
sin against Christ, by plucking from him one whom he has so dearly bought?
Which ought not to be understood as if any effectually redeemed by the death
of Christ, and by faith ingrafted in him, could indeed perish, (as Huberus and
many Lutherans teach) for this is most firmly to be held (as Augustine says,)
That none of the predestinate can utterly fall away from grace, for then Gods
election should be frustrate, and Christ untrue, who says, It is impossible,
Mat. 24. And his love changeable, John 13, 1. His covenant broken, Iere. 31,
32. Christ's intercession unavailable, John 17, 15, 20, 21. Gods wisdom
decelued, his power and goodness overcome and vanquished by man's sin: all
which are not only absurd but impossible, howbeit in respect of man's
weakness, ready to fall, even as a young child, or a sick person soon
ouerturned: and the extreme power and malice of Satan, that like a Dragon is
able to shake and pull down Cedars, even strong ones, if God permit. And
lastly, in regard of the great and dangerous temptations and scandals which
sore tempt us; it is true that the believer may be destroyed, and when any
offense is given them, then what lies in the party that put the block in his
brothers way, he casts his brother down headlong to eternal destruction:
but the mighty God with his hand vpholds all his, not from falling but from
falling away.


Tim. What duties may this doctrine of offenses teach us?


Silas. It instructs us to know that such things as in respect of their
nature be not evil, and which otherwise we might do, yet if they prove
scandals and hurts to our brethren, we ought to shun them as things sinful and
unlawful: for that meat which may be eaten if no offense follow, to eat it
with offense is evil to him that does it, Romans 14, 20. and the like we are to
judge of all other indifferent things, that accidentally by the scandal
annexed to them, they cease to be indifferent, and pollute him that does them
with offense. Secondly, here is an admonition to all Christians which openly
commit gross sins, and by their example teach others to do the like. Also
to parents, Masters and all Governors, which in the presence of their
inferiors have spoken or done wicked things, or foreslowed good duties, as
prayer, reading, etc. edifying them in iniquity by such naughty practices, and
by sins of omission, that betimes upon the former reasons they move themselves
to hearty repentance, for the scandal and offenses they have set before
others. For seeing Christ has said it, Woe must be to such by whom offenses
come, except such as give the^ be truly humbled, turning to God, and desiring
forgiveness of his mercy, fully purposing to walk without offense hereafter:
for certainly they shall feel the curse of God, which do give occasion of
harm to the souls of heedelesse men, seeing a curse is threatened, Deuteronomy. 27,
18. Will God pour his curse and vengeance on them who make the blind stumble
to the hurt of his body, and will he not much more do this to soul destroyers?


Tim. Now that we have done with the doctrine of offenses, and proved it by
reasons both foreign, and bred in the Text, let us hear what we are to
learn from the objection in the 14. verse, and first what it is (to be
persuaded through the Lord Jesus?)


Silas. Through the Lord Jesus, signifies not the merit of his death (as some
think,) for before the time of his passion, nothing was unclean in his own
nature, but either 1. generally through Adams sin, which polluted all, or 2.
morally by intemperancie and riot, or 3. Ceremonially prohibited, as certain
Beasts under the Law, or 4. scrupulously and superstitiously of such as doubt
of the lawfulness of lawful meats. It signifies therefore, by the teaching
and instruction of Christ, by whose spirit he knew and was persuaded (not
probably and couiecturally, as the word is used when the Scripture speaks of
other men's faith and constancy, as Romans 15, 14. 2 Timothy 1, 5. Heb. 6, 9.) but
certainly, infallibly, and assuredly, so as he knows it could not be
otherwise. In which sense, the word is used when a man speaks of his own
Religion and salvation, as Romans 8, 20. For every man knows best his own
heart, and those things that himself has received of God. 2 Cor. 2, 12.


Tim. What is our Doctrine hence?


Silas. That Christian faith is not a bare opinion or a 3. Doctrine.
doubting, thinking a thing to be so, but an undeceivable certainty of that
we do believe, containing in it these three distinct things. First, a sound
distinct knowledge of the thing believed, [ I know.] Secondly, a firm
persuasion, strongly assuring the heart. Thirdly, a confidence, resting and
rejoicing with satisfaction unto our minds, surely looking to enjoy that we
believe.


Tim. What Use is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. That ignorant Christians, who do either hate Use.
knowledge, or seek not for it; also the wavering minded, which do not rest
with any gladness in the promises of Christ, they are quite destitute of
Faith, what socuer they think of themselves. And they do falsely teach the
doctrine of faith, who deny to it infallible certainty. And lastly, it is a
good token both of the being and growing of faith in a Christian heart, the
more firmly and strongly it does apprehend and stick to the word. Moreover,
from the 14. verse we are taught, that the Papists defile and pollute Gods
creatures to themselves, because they judge them to be unclean, for meats be
as they are esteemed, unclean to him that thinks them so. Of the purity and
impurity of meats, we shall say more in verse 20.


Tim. Then in the mean time, expound and collect the instructions from verse
16. the last verse of our text.


Silas. It has a new argument to dissuade from giving offense to the weak in
our christian liberty about meats, thus. We may not do ought which may cause
our Christian liberty to be evil spoken of; but for the strong to eat with
offense to the weak, it will cause our commodity to be evil spoken off:
therefore offenses ought to be avoided. For exposition of the words, howsoever
by your good or commodity, some understand their faith, or hope of glory, or
godliness; yet the matter in hand which is to direct to the right use of
christian liberty in middle things, and the comparing this Text with 1 Cor.
10:29. where that is styled Liberty which here is phrased Good, does clearly
open this place to be meant of this liberty which might be (blasphemed,) that
is, reproched and evil spoken of, and Christ also by it, of two sorts of
persons. First, of our infirm and weak Brethren, who (not knowing but that
Moses Laws, touching certain meats prohibited, and difference of days, were
still in force) might by the undue and untimely use of this liberty (by such as
had better instruction, and knew that Jesus in his death, had abolished those
Leuitical shadows) be brought to mislike Christ and his Gospel, as contrary to
Moses, and to open their mouths to reproach this Christian liberty taught by
the Gospel, and so to fall off again from the Faith which they had before
submitted unto.

Secondly, by strangers who were without the Church, and might say; Lo these
are the Christians, they cannot agree, one holds one thing, another the
contrary, what concord is this? what a Religion is this? As our Papists by our
home divisions, take occasions to blaspheme our Religion, forgetting their own
domestical contentions in more and waightier mttters. See M. Doctor Halles
Book entitled the Peace of Rome, which is nothing less then at unity in it
self, yet vpbraids division to us.


Tim. What may we learn from hence?


Silas. This teaches, that Christian liberty is a blessing, seeing it enfreeth
us from the yoke and bondage of ceremonies: therefore we owe thanks to God
for it, that we may freely and lawfully feed on such creatures, as Solomon in
all his glory, might not touch without sin. Secondly, such as do strive and
differ about things indifferent, do open and loose the tongues of friends and
enemies, to reproach our good, and our Gospel, and our God. Oh that Gath and
Ascalon had never heard of the divisions of Epbraim and Judah.


DIAL. VII.
Verse 17. For the kingdom of God is not meats and drinks, but righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.


Tim. What contains this Text?


Silas. A new argument to dissuade the strong from striving about the use of
meats, and such things to the offense of the weak. The argument is more
forcible then any of the former. It is this, the kingdom of Heaven stands not
in these indifferent things, therefore we may not with the scandal and
destruction of our Brethren contend about them. In which reason, the Apostle
seems somewhat closely to insinuate unto the rebuke of the: strong, as if
they had been too eager and earnest in these external matters, placing piety,
and pleasing of God in them, as if all our good and happiness had depended on
them; not so (says Paul,) the kingdom consists in more weighty things, as
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Spirit; and not in such outward indiffrent
matters, as meats and days, and the like, which in no whit appertain to Gods
worship and man's salvation. The parts of this 17. verse be two; the one
affirmative, the other negative. In this latter, it is denied, that the
kingdom of God is meat and drink; in the other, it is affirmed, that it is
in righteousness, peace, and joy. The holy Ghost (who as an efficient cause)
distinguishes worldly righteousness, peace and joy, from that which is both
Religious and Christian, coming not of the Flesh, but from the Spirit, being
in spiritual, not carnal things; and therefore, the fit and meet matter of
the Kingdom of GOD, which consists not of this world.


Tim. Interpret the words, what signifies the [Kingdome of God?]


Silas. Amongst sundry acceptions, there be two especially, whereof I now
make use. First, the estate of grace, whereby Christraigneth in our hearts by
his Spirit: this is called [Kingdome,] because it is the entrance into, and
the way unto the Kingdom above. Secondly, Kingdom signifies the estate of
glory and bliss in heaven, where because God shall fully reign in his
Saints, and immediately; not as here imperfect and by means of the word:
therefore it is termed also, and more chiefly the Kingdom of God. I see
nothing against it, why the Text may not be expounded in both these senses,
without wrong to phrase, or circumstance, or scope. For following the first
sense, putting kingdom for that grace whereby we are reconciled to God, or
able to please him, then the meaning is; that since there is no necessity of
meats to this purpose, as to bring us to Gods favor, and make us acceptable
to him, 1 Cor. 8, 8. (which teaches, that meats nor drinks make us neither
more nor less acceptable unto God;) therefore there ought to be no difference
about them, to the scandal one of another (especially if we embrace the
latter sense) our salvation is neither hindered nor furthred by meats and
drinks: therefore a folly it is to contend about these things which shall not
be necessary in the kingdom of heaven, as one says; nor of any use in our
celestial conversation, (as Origin writes) nor the things that must bring us
to heaven, as Chrysostom speaks, nor the cause of our reigning there. There is
a Synecdoche in these terms of meats and drinks, for they are put for all
other things of a middle Nature; whatsoever they be, they do no whit at al
belong to Gods worship now, or man's felicity hereafter, being simply
considered in themselves.


Tim. What are the Doctrines to be learned out of the first part of this verse
thus opened?


Silas. Even this, that things that be indifferent, are of no necessity unto
the service of God, or saving of our souls. The proofs hereof, first from
authority of Scripture, Mat. 15, 11. 1 Cor. 8, 8. Heb. 13, 9. 1 Timothy 4, 4. 8.
According to these Scriptures, our English Church has judged these meats,
etc. to be unnecessary in their own Nature, either to holiness or happiness,
the clear light of the word having taught us: as the words of the statute be,
An. 3. of Edw. 6. that one day, or one kind of meat of it self, is not more
holy, pure, or clean then another; and that no meats at any time, can defile
any Christian, and that all meats are lawful, so they be not used in
disobedience and vice, but be received with sobriety and thanksgiving to God,
and sanctified by the word and prayer: therefore, howsoever with a civil
abstinence at certain seasons is well commanded, and ought accordingly to be
practiced: yet no Religion is to be placed in such abstinence from meats:
whereof this reason may be rendered, that by meats neither is the heart
strengthened in grace, or polluted with sin, made neither wiser nor better,
holier or happier.


Tim. How then does the Apostle reck on up gluttony and 1 Cor. 6, 9.
drunkenness amongst the sins which bar us from Gods Gal. 5, 21.
kingdom? and on the other side, seeing murder is a Capital sin, and men
may commit it upon themselves by Fasting and Abstinence, how may it then be
truly said, that the kingdom of God is not meats and drinks?


Silas. It is true, that by excess in meats and drinks, the Kingdom may be
lost, 1 Cor. 6. 10. Galat. 5, 21. but meats and drinks themselves taken, or
not taken, do not exclude vsfrom in the kingdom, nor give us enterest unto it.
Howsoever the abuse, by the defect, not using the^ at al, or in the excess,
using them intemperatly, may and does deserve damnation, and will certainly
draw it upon the heads of all such which repent not of their immoderatenesse
about these external things, yet a man does not please God, or shall be saved,
because he eats Fish rather then Flesh, and drinks Beer, and not Ale.


Tim. Show us what use Christians are to make of this doctrine.


Silas. It serves for confutation of the Manichees, affirming Use.
some meats in their own nature to be evil, as Flesh, Eggs, Milk, and
Wine, saying of Wine, that it is the gall of the Prince of darkness;
dishonouring the Creator, and (...) this Text, which plainly faith The Kingdom
of God is not meats. Also, the (...) their (...). fellows, who defend, that
it were as good to eat and devour a soul, as to eat things that had blood
and life.

These put sin and damnation in meats even directly: and so do the Papists
indirectly, and by necessary consecution. For whilst they do avouch in word
and writing, that howsoever no creature is impure by creation, but so confess
all to be good which God has made: yet that to eat flesh or white meats at
certain time, as Lent, Ember Weeks, Fasting days, etc. is a matter against
Religion displeasing to God, yea a mortal (that is, in their construction) a
heinous sin, and no less fault then to kill a man: holding them for best
christians, which do put most Religion in abstinence from meats, which they
reckon as a thing not acceptable alone, but meritorious and satisfactory to
Gods Justice, both for themselves and others; and all upon this pretense to
tame the flesh, which in the mean time they pamper with manifold delicacies,
great prouokers of lust. What is this else, but to fulfill the prophecy of the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 4, 2. in hypocrisy and colored words to make all meats
unclean at some time, and to some men at all times, as if meats were the
Kingdom of God, or if the kingdom were to be won or lost by meats or drinks?


Tim. What other Lesson from these words?


Silas. That meats and whatsoever other indifferent things are more slight,
then that Christians ought to contend about them: for seeing they are no parts,
either of Law or Gospel, what reason have Christians to dissent for them?
Indeed for such things that please or displease God, as precepts of the Law,
promises of the gospel, faith, and obedience, toward God, we are strongly to
stand, and earnestly to contend for such things, Jude 3. whereof we have Paul
for example, Galat. 2, 11. What may we judge then of those Papists and
Protestants, which chafe and fret for neglect of a humane Ceremony, being cold
and careless about Christian duties, tything Mint, and Annice, and neglecting
greater things of the Law, stumbling at strawes, and leaping over blocks? Also
what folly to make such adoo about titles, precedencie, and such other toys,
as if Heaven did lie upon it. This very distinction of things unnecessary to
the kingdom, and necessary, well and duly considered, would cut off division
and debate among brethren; who howsoever there may be some reason for
differences, about the inheritance and their fathers goods, yet for chips and
feathers to contend, may argue lack of wit or good will or of both.


DIAL. VIII.
Verses 17, 18, 19, 20. But righteousness peace and joy in the holy Ghost. For
whosoever in these things serves Christ is pleasing to God, and approved of
men. Let us then follow etc.


Tim. WHat does this text contain?


Silas. First, the condition or parts of Christ's kingdom, which consists not
in meats or in other external things, bur in things inward and spiritual,
(to wit) righteousness, peace, and joy, such as come from the Holy Ghost and
are not carnal, nor can be lost, verse 17. Secondly, a reason from the
effects, thus; In these things we serve Christ and please God, but the kingdom
of God does stand in service of Christ, and pleasing of God; therefore
righteousness, peace, and joy, are necessary to the kingdom, and not meats,
verse 18. Thirdly, a conclusion, that sithence peace is one part of religion
and of the kingdom, therefore by all means Christians are to embrace that,
and to put away strife about other unnecessary things, verse 19. But least we
should think that every kind of peace should be followed, he adioyneth
thereunto edification, verse 20. An edifying peace is to be followed, and
whatsoever belongs to it, as charity, forbearing, concord, forgiving one
another, meekness, and all other furtherances of peace be diligently to be
sought for. Unto this edifying peace there is set against it, as opposite,
destroying contention. Fourthly, an answer unto a secret objection: But seeing
all meats are pure, created and granted of God as lawful to use, why should
it not be good for me to eat of all meats, whatsoever become of other men?
Not so says Paul, for though al meats be good, yet they be not good to him
which eats with offense to his brother, verse 20.


Tim. Now expound and tell us what is meant by [righteousnesse, peace, and joy?]


Silas. Righteousness signifies justice imputed, or of the Righteousness
person being absolved from sins, and accepted righteous through faith in
Christ. Secondly, inherent justice, righteousness of works, or that which the
Scripture calls sanctification or holiness of life, begun in such as are
Peace.
justified by faith. Peace signifies inward peace of conscience, quieted in
respect of reconciliation with God, and remission of sins: also outward
concord with the brethren; this being a fruit of inward peace of the soul,
as that follows justification by faith, Romans 5, 2. By Joy.
joy is understood the sweet motion of a Christian soul cheered up and made
glad, partly by present sense of Gods love shed into the heart, and partly out
of hope of the reward to come, Romans 5, 3, 5, 6. Of this joy Christ says it is
not taken away, John 14. And Paul, that it makes joyous in tribulation, Romans 5,
3. Of these three ye may read at large before, namely in the Dialogue upon the
beginning of the fifth Chapter. The Holy Ghost is added here, both to note the
efficient cause of Christian righteousness, peace, and joy: also to distin guish
Christian righteousness, peace, and joy, from that which is worldly and carnal,
grounded upon earthly things, and being also unconstant.


Tim. What is the doctrine from these words?


Silas. That things which be necessary to the kingdom Doctrine.
(that is, to religion and salvation) they be spiritual and inward things,
such as by the Holy Ghost are wrought in the soul, as namely justification by
faith, peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost: which is not so to be
taken, but that charity, repentance, godliness, meekenes, patience, temperance,
truth, goodness, fidelity, etc. do belong to the kingdom. But these three
are here named, as chief, and cause or ground of the rest, which be
unseparably linked to these. For justifying faith as a glorious Lady, after her
does draw a train of Christian graces, which always be where faith goes
before, as Ruth would be whersoeuer Naomy was: and righteousness of works
contains all virtues in it. Also the ministry of the word, prayer, and
Sacraments, though external things, yet they have relation to these spiritual
things, whereof they be the helping causes or instruments to beget or increase,
and so belong to the kingdom. The reasons why the kingdom stands in such
spiritual things is, God being a Spirit, John 4, 24. the things of his
kingdom must be spiritual, and suitable to himself who is the King.
Secondly, his kingdom is not of this world, John 18, 36. therefore not in
worldly but in inward and heavenly things his kingdom consists.


Tim. What is the use of this doctrine?


Silas. It serves to provoke all men with all endeavor to seek after
righteousness, to have their sins forgiven them, to be partakers of Christ's
justice, and to work righteousness, leading a just life, to get the blessing
of an appeased and pacified conscience, and a joyful heart under hope of
glory, without which we have no fellowship with the kingdom, no part in
salvation: and let all such as have received grace to believe, and by their
faith do receive the justice of Christ to be their own, and are regenerate
to live justly, having peace with God and men, rejoicing under the hope of
glory, though but in a weak measure and with much imperfection; Let them I
say, much comfort themselves, and continually praise the God of heaven, which
has imparted to them such things that are so necessary to true religion and
eternal salvation. Thirdly, here is a reproof to such as be earnest in
external slight things, and neglect the chief matters, yea of such as rest in
general knowledge, profession, outward reformation of life: some delight in
the word and in the brethren, in a certain zeal against superstition and
prophanenes, in the co^mnuication of the mysteries, etc. which be good things
yet such as others have had and very many have, who never set foot within the
threshold of the kingdom, whereof a man or woman shall never become a true
member so long as they lack regeneration, and the fruits thereof,
righteousness, peace, and joy.


Tim. What other encouragement to labor for these things?


Silas. That not by these things (as if we could merit by them: for they are
effects of grace, not causes of the kingdom) but in these things we serve
Christ and please God: to serve Christ is by faith and obedience to cleave to
him. After this manner Christ will be served, and God will be pleased, and both
we and our doings will be accepted of him, if we fetch righteousness from
Christ alone, drawing from him and his promises matter of sound tranquillity and
in ward cheerfulness, indeuouring to live uprightly and godlily. Now what
should we study rather to procure, then that we may serve Christ our Redeemer,
and please God our Creator and preserver? for it is the end of our creation,
redemption, and conservation, to serve and glorify Christ, and to please God.
Therefore how earnestly should these things be striuen for and searched after,
which do enable us to honor and please both God the Father, and Christ the
Son? See how much they are deceived, which in popery do place the service of
God and pleasing of Christ for the most part, in outward rites and ceremonies
devised by themselves, whereas the Sacrifices of the law, and the ordinances of
the Gospel being severed from these inward things, are abhorred of God, Esaias
1, 13, 14, 15. Mat. 7, 22, 23. Gods own holy institutions are no whit
available to serve and please Christ, nay they be an abomination if they be
not joined with faith, etc.


Tim. But why does he say they are approved of men which have these things,
seeing the world hates Gods children, and think the worse of them because they
love and obey Christ, as Caine hated Abell, and the Jews and Pharisees in the
Gospel for that reason condemned Christ and his Disciples?


Sil. Yet even wicked men are compelled to approve and sometime to honor them
which are crowned with these gifts of the Spirit, as the Philistims and
Hittites, Abraham and David; and the Egyptians, Joseph: and Herod, John the
Baptist; and Pilate and the Centurion, Christ: and Foclix reverenced Paul:
Howbeit in our Text, are meant men of sincere judgment. These will always
accept and commend, and give good testimony to the faithful, as Enoch had a
good report, so had all the faithful, Heb. 11. Learn hence, that we may not
utterly contemn the judgment and witness of men, Romans 12, 17. Howbeit in
order, we must begin at the approbation of GOD, to seek that most and first,
Math. 6, 33. and asterward the allowance of men. He is not the servant of God,
which either pleases men, rather then God, or God without all care of men: God
first, and for himself; Men after, and for God.


Tim. What are we to learn from verse 19?


Silas. First, that we must pursue peace with our Brethren, that is, seek it
with vehement desire, not coldly nor carelessly, seeing peace pertains to
Religion and salvation, it must needs be eagerly followed after, after the
example of Abraham, exercising and hunting after peace with Lot, and of David,
who sought to live peaceably with all men, Psalm. 120. whose counsel is, we
should follow peace, Psalm. 34, 14. Have peace with all. See Romans 12, 18.
Secondly, as we love peace, we must get and look after such things as belong
unto peace, even all graces which be Parents to breed, or Nurses to foster
peace, as mild speech, courteous behavior, forbearing revenge, pardoning
errors, passing by offenses, interpreting of doubtful things to the best
part, soft aunsweres, direct silence, or whatsoever else may cause or confirm
peace.

Thirdly, we must beware of the quite contrary, of all things which may be
hindrances to peace, as hatred, envy, desire of revenge, fierceness, busy
meddling, debate, strife, whispering, backbyting, and tale-bearing, etc. as a
sword point, or as a Scorpion, so are these to be avoided of them that love
peace. Fourthly, Christians are to embrace such peace as tends to edification.
We are Gods house and Temple, 1 Cor. 6, 19. 1 Cor. 3, 9. 2 Cor. 6, 16. As in a
natural building, many workmen join their labout together, to perfect one
building; so Christians must with joint care, diligence, and study, do such
things as make men better, more godly and religious, more strong in Faith; and
this is to edify, which principally pertains to the Ministry, Ephesians. 4, 11,
12. yet reaches even to professors, who as living stones, must strengthen and
help one another to Godward.

There is a peace in evil, when persons agree in superstition, heresy, in
unrighteousness, theft, and cruelty: as Note this.
Simeon and Leui brethren in evil, Herod and Pilate against Christ, the false
Apostles against Paul, agreed. This is a wicked peace, it tends not to edifying
in godliness, but to destruction, and makes men fall from God, and become worse
and worse, and therefore is to be abhorred. Zachary joins peace and truth.
Zach. 8, 16. Peace and holiness put together, Heb. 12, 14. Peace and
edification in this text. Thus the Scripture sets our bounds for peace which we
may not pass: a necessary and holy contention, is to be preferred to an
impious peace.


Tim. What are we to learn out of the 20. verse?


Silas. Namely, that our Brothers faith and salvation, (which be the work of
God) ought to be so dear to us as we ought not to overthrow it by our
offensive eating. For howsoever all meats be pure and lawful in their own
nature, and by Gods ordinance, yet our eating is evil if the peace of the
Church be troubled, or edification hindered, or offense given to such as be
weak. Where indifferent things cannot be used, but with disturbance of
Christian concord, with loss of peace amongst Brethren, with hurt and
destruction to the infirm, with scandal and offense, then they cease to to be
indifferent, and the use of them is evil, as Illyricus and Paraeus teach from
this place.


Tim. Whether are we to abstain from eating flesh, if we be in the presence
of a superstitious Papist, who makes conscience of it, least we offend him?


Silas. If such a Papist be simply seduced by others, and has had no means of
knowledge by instruction and doctrine of the word, then there is the more
regard to be had of him: he is first to be showed in good fashion, that all
creatures are good and lawful at all times, and nothing in it self unclean,
but to them that thinks it so, or which eats with offense against his
conscience; these make meats which be pure, to be vnpure for use to
themselves.

Secondly, if it be an understanding Papist, then the case is altered: for
there is great difference between a weak Jew, and an obstinat Romanist.
First, because such an one is not to be held a Brother, as I have proved
before, chap. 12. and we are commanded to avoid giving offense to such as be
brethren. Secondly, these meats, as flesh of all kinds, and white meats were
never forbid by Moses Law, as those were which the unskillful Jews made
conscience of. Thirdly, these Papists have had time enough, and means enough
also, to have learned Christian liberty; it has been demonstratiuely proved,
that there is no religion in difference of meats, but they wilfully shut their
eyes against the light that shines in their face; and therefore offend not out
of ignorance and infirmity as the Jews did, but out of malicious stubornnesse,
which we are by no means to cherish.


Tim. But what shall we say, if a Protestant well instructed in his liberty,
yet ready to take offense to see flesh eaten of them which are healthful,
being done against the Kings Laws?


Silas. Better never to eat flesh, then to eat with scandal of thy Brother.
For if he now be moved to eat against his conscience, by seeing thee to eat,
then he is destroyed by the untimely use of thy liberty. Howsoever we have
learned, that we need make no Conscience of the thing it self, being
indifferent; yet the Princes commandment in a thing of a middle nature,
especially being given for good ends, profitable unto the commonwealth, binds
the conscience by virtue of that general precept, Honor the King: and let
every soul be subject. Contempt of authority, breach of wholesome laws,
joined with evil example to imbolden others to transgress, are faults which
displease God, and defile the conscience, and deserves punishment both temporal
and eternal. How humane laws, bind unto sin, see Dial. on Romans 12, 5.


DIAL. IX.
Verses 21, 22, 23. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink, nor any
thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. Have thou
faith, (or thou have faith) have it to thy self before God, happy is he which
condemns not himself in that which he allows. And he that doubts, etc.


Tim. What is contained in the 21. verse?


Silas. The conclusion of the former exhortation to the strong, that in the use
of meats they give no offense to the weak, and so generally in the use of all
indifferent things; which in themselves are good and lawful, but being done
with offense are evil, tending to destroy the work of God. Having said this
in the former verse, that eating with scandal is evil, now on the contrary he
concludes, that to forbear eating or drinking or doing any thing else which
may offend is good, as that which makes to edification and peace.


Tim. What is meant here by good?


Silas. The positive is put here for the comparatiue, good for better; as if
he should say, it is more pleasing to God, and more to the edifying of our
neighbor, and for the peace of the Church, to abstain rather then to eat
with offense.


Tim. Why does he mention here not only flesh, but wine and every other
thing?


Silas. First, to make the instruction more general and large, also to teach
that in things simply necessary to life, we are not to forbear them, though
others be offended; as if one should take offense at our eating bread or
drinking beer, whereby our life is maintained: but for some kind of flesh and
wine, or whatsoever else it is which we may be without and yet live, we are
bound in case of offense to refrain such things, at least for a time, till
such as do stumble be better persuaded by instruction.


Tim. Is there any difference between stumbling, being offended, or being
made weak? or (...) they signify one and the same thing?


Silas. Howsoever some distinguish them and understand (by slumbling) that
which elsewhere is called the wounding of the weak conscience, being troubled
and not knowing what to hold or do, 1. Cor. 8, 9. and (by being offended) a
quite falling away or breaking off from the faith or Gospel, which is called
before to be destroyed, yerse 15. and to perish, 1. Cor. 8, 11. and (by being
made weak) that which before in verse 15. was in other terms said to be
grieved. (Of which distinction there may follow this good observation, that so
soon as we see the conscience of our brother begin to waver by our actions,
it is our duty to cease and give over ere it come to be wounded and wracked;)
yet for my part I do rather judge that one and the self same thing is
signified here by the heaping up of diverse words, namely thereby the better to
insinuate that great heed, care, and circumspection be taken, (as he said
before verse 13.) that no stumbling block or occasion of sinning be put in
our brothers way, which might be either by making them do that which they saw
others do with a wavering mind; or causing them to detest the faithful, as
prohaneners of Moses law, by going against his prohibitions in use of days and
meats.


Tim. What instructions may we take from this verse thus opened?


Sil. Here is laid forth the condition of weak Christians, which lack the
knowledge of the word: such are apt to stu^ble like blind men, and like sick
persons they be weak, ready to trip and to fall upon every occasion. This must
serve to humble the infirm and weak of judgment, and stir them up to seek
for more store of grace, and light of knowledge, to be able to walk more
firmly.

Secondly, it is much better in case of offense, to sorbeare our liberty in
things indifferent, then to use it, as the salvation of a Brother, is a far
more precious thing then the nourishing of our flesh or body. Also, thereby we
prefer peace and edification to our pleasure.


Tim. In the 22. Verse, what is meant by Faith, [Thou have Faith,] for with M.
Beza, I had rather read these Words by way of concession, then by
interrogation, Have thou faith?


Silas. Faith signifies the knowledge and persuasion of our liberty in
indifferent things, as verse 14. in his own example he expounds it. These
words contain another secret objection, in the behalf of the strong, thus. I
know and believe my liberty which I have by Christ, that nothing is vnpure to
me, why should not I prosesse it in words, and express it in act, without
respect had of others? This Objection the Apostle answers first by granting,
Thou have this Faith, I yield it unto thee. Secondly, by distinguishing thus:
Have thy faith unto thy self, in thine own Conscience, but express it not to
the hurt of thy Brother, (for this must be understood necessarily) enjoy thy
knowledge to thy edification, but use it not to another destruction.


Tim. What then, shall my Faith lie hid and be smothered?


Silas. No (says the Apostle) have it [before God,] approve it unto him, use
it so, as one that knows he must give an account of it before God, and comfort
thy self in it in his sight; and be thankful to him for that knowledge which
he has given thee, and that is fufficient in this case. Thou need not make
any ostentation of it to the hurt of thy brother: let it even be enough to thee
that God knows thy faith. This is like unto that precept of Christ, Math. 6,
6. Thy Father that sees in secret, shall reward thee openly, As in some cases,
and sometimes, we may hide our Prayers, so the profession of our faith, lest
we boast unto the danger of others.


Tim. What then, is it lawful for Christians to dissemble their Faith and
profession of it? Will it be sufficient in time of persecution, to have Faith
in his heart before God? How then has Christ commanded us, to confess him
before men? Also see Romans 10, 10. where both faith and confession, are required
unto salvation.


Silas. Our Apostle here speaks neither of general Faith by which we
believe the whole word both of Law and Gospel; nor yet of justifying Faith,
whereby we receive Christ, or the promises of Christ unto salvation, but of a
particular faith, whereby we believe something to be lawful. Secondly, even
this particular faith (which is a persuasion of our liberty in indifferent
things) is the^ only to be concealed, when it cannot be professed and
practiced, without offense and scandal unto our weak brother. Not the
profession then, but the unseasonable hurtful profession of this faith, is
here prohibited. Heerewith a greeth the judgment of Chrysostom upon this
place: This text (says he) is not to be understood of the faith of doctrine,
but of that which appertains to the argument in hand, namely, the Faith about
things indifferent. Touching the former faith (says he) it is written, With
the Mouth confession is made to Salvation. Again, He that denies me before
men, before my Father will I deny him. This faith is oppressed, if it be not
expressed; but the other faith about middle things is then subverted, when it
is unseasonably showed.


Tim. Tell us now what the Apostle does in the rest of the Chapter to the end
thereof?


Silas. He gives three short and pithy rules to direct both strong and weak,
in the use of things indifferent: The first concerns the strong only; the
second the weak only; the third them both: The first is set down by way of
acclamation, O blessed is the man which condemns not himself in that which
he allows. Touching the understanding of which rule note, that Apostle speaks
first touching a man's condemning himself, and not being condemned of others,
or making themselves worthy to be condemned of others. Secondly, he speaks of
condemning and allowing in the same person, not of disallowing in another what
he persormes in himself. Thirdly, he is to be understood of one and the same
instant whereby one man in his judgment condemns, and in his practice
allows one and the same thing. The sum then of the rule is thus much, that
he is indeed a happy man whose practice in outward act agrees with the
inward judgment of his conscience. More plainly thus: In conscience to be
persuaded, that a weak brother is not to be offended by undue and untimely
exercise of our liberty, so to allow this, as by no contrary deed to condemn
it, it is the happiness of a man not to be accused of his heart. Let all men
strive for this happy condition, after the examples of Job, chap. 27, 6. and of
Paul, 2 Corinthians. 1, 12.


Tim. What is the second Rule which belongs to the weak?


Silas. He that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith,
that is, not believing so in his heart, as he shows in act. The rule more at
large is thus much: that such a one is guilty of sin, hurts his conscience,
and offends God, which either eats or does any thing else with a wavering
doubtfulnesse, and not being well persuaded, whether they do well or ill,
please God, or displease him. A Christian which will please God and keep his
conscience pure and unspotted, must be able to discern of that which he does,
whether it be lawful or unlawful, according to that which is written before,
Let every man be persuaded in his own mind: to do a thing which is good, and
yet do it doubtingly, (the mind being tossed too and fro with diverse reasons)
does pollute the action to him that does it, and makes it to be sin, lacking
right rule, and end: for it is neither governed by knowledge of the word, nor
done to Gods glory. Let men therefore learn to resolve of their deeds before
they act it, and enterpise nothing so long as ones conscience and mind is
doubtful, what he may do: for so long our deeds cannot be referred to Gods
praise, and this very thing is enough to make it sinful; for it is sin
whatsoever misseth of the due end.


Tim. What is the third rule?


Silas. That it is sin whatsoever is not of faith, where He means by faith
an undoubted certainety of mind, (...) of the truth of God, (...).
the word [faith] cannot be interpreted of conscience, for this interpretation
is against the beginning of the 23. ver. for if there faith were alone with
conscience, the meaning then should be, have a conscience in thy conscience,
which is absurd. Secondly, wicked men and (...) have a conscience but no faith;
also heretics faith is no faith, yet they want not conscience. Thirdly, weak
ones eat without faith, for to the strong only is faith ascribed, verse 22:
but not without conscience, 1. Cor. 8. and 1. Cor. 10, 29. therefore faith and
conscience are not all one. I expound it therefore both of that special faith
which is the knowledge of our liberty, but chiefly of Christian says, or the
faith of Christ, without which neither our persons nor actions please God, Heb.
11, 6. This is the faith which is grounded upon the word, and gives certain
direction both what we are to believe and do: the works then of all Infidels
and natural men are sinful, though glorious for show, and good for substance;
because they come not from faith, and whatsoever comes of (...) will is good
morally, but not spiritually. Also this admonishes all Christians as they will
keep sin out of their works, to undertake all things by the level of the
word; be sure it be written and found there, and then have trust and affiance
of acceptance by Christ, do it that God may be pleased and honored. Wicked
men (says Chrysostom) delight in that which themselves invent, but the
faithful measure all by the word, whether they think, speak, or do. They
show themselves to be but hickscorners and cauellers which to overthrow this
wholesome doctrine of governing our whole Christian course, and every step of
our way, to heaven, by the word of Faith, do most childishly allege, that
then for the taking up of a chippe or a straw, etc. we must have our warrant
from the Scripture, which we say is our mistress to teach us Religion and all
manners, both faith and life, 2 Timothy 3, 15, 16.

Any thing that is of salvation to be believed, as an Article of Faith, or
practiced as a service of God, or done as a duty to God, to men, or to our
selves, we are to have our warrant either from the express word, or by some
necessary deduction and consequence from it: for it teaches all truth of
godliness, it conuicteth all error in religion, it reprooueth all vice, it
instructs in every virtuous way. The ways of the young man (to whom for his
youth some liberty might be allowed) yet be not clean and pure, except they
be purged and ordered by the word, Psalm. 119, 9. which how is it a Lanthorn to
our feet, and a light to our steps, if there be any part of our Christian
faith and conversation, for which it gives not direction? For if it be so
perfect, as it has sufficiency to enable the man of God to every good work of
his calling how much more men of other vocations? Worthily then have the
ancient Doctors of the Church (as I have tofore showed) honored the word of
Scriptures with this commendation, that it is Regula Religion is and morum;
Magistra Fidei and vitae: norma Controuer siarum and canuersationis. For what
imperfection can be in that word which has bin inspired by a Spirit of
infinite wisdom? Would the most wise and good God leave to his Church but
half a rule, a lame and maimed Canon? which should be supplied by decrees and
traditions of men, by good intentions of our own (as they are called,) by
direction of reason, by suggestion of every man's conscience? As our Romanists
would have [Faith,] in this text, to be understood of the persuasion of every
man's conscience; so as an Heathen and Infidel doing that which in reason and
conscience he judges right, that cannot be sin: but whatsoever any does
(believing it in his conscience to be lawful) that is a good work, and
pleases God. If this were spoken of a conscience, and of reason grounded on
the word of God, it were well; but being generally vttred, it is not well: for
the very Gunpowder Traitors made conscience of their doing.

The conscience is made good by the knowledge and Acts 15, 9.
faith of the word, without which, there is no right and Titus 1, 15.
godly use of our reason. By benefit whereof, howsoever we may do things
naturally or morally good, yet not spiritually good, so as God be pleased. For
it cannot be, that any work of ours be pleasing to him, till the person be
reconciled and pleasing: and this is not done otherwise, then by being
engrafted in Christ by Faith, in whom God is well pleased, Math. 3. verse last.
Heb. 11, 6. Though we do not say, that the making and ministering good Laws,
education of Children, reverence of Superiors, succouring of Parents, speaking
truth, keeping promises, defending their country, etc. in Paganes and profane
Christians be sinful, but rather virtuous acts, An Infideil is (...) of sin,
because he does his works not of faith, or to the end for which he should,
and he does them with an ungodly will.
(if we respect the substance of the thing done,) yet if we regard
circumstances (as that they were done not unto a due end, or out of a good
mind, and for the persons of the dooers were not of Christ) so they were sins,
and displeased God. Thus Origin: it is turned into sin, whatsoever good the
wicked do, because they are not done in faith. And Augustine: Virtues must be
judged not by actions, but by ends; and unbelievers do nothing to a right end.
Again (says he,) There is no good work, where there is no faith. Aug.



CHAP. XV.
DIAL. I.
Verses 1, 2, 3. We which are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please our selves. Therefore, let every one please his
neighbor in that which is good to edification, for Christ also would not
please himself, but as it is written, the rebukes of them which rebuked thee,
fell on me.


Timotheus. WHat Coherence has this Chapter with the former, and of what parts
does it consist. Also what be the Contents and sum of this Chapter?


Silas. After a grave exhortation in Chapter 14. unto strong Christians which
were confirmed in the Doctrine of the word, to apply Order and parts of the
Chapter.
themselves to such as were weak in knowledge, by taking from them matter of
offense by the untimely use of their liberty in things indifferent: Now in
the 15. chapter, he so knitteth and shuts up that persuasion, as he passes
from the particular to the general, exhorting the stronger sort lovingly to
bear with the weaknesses of their brethren in all those things, wherein they
had need to be supported; after Christ's own example, who out of his deep
love succored both Jew and Gentile. After this done, he excuses himself for
writing unto them with such freedom of speech, showing that he did that for
good ends, and according to his office of an Apostle, which he diversely and
greatly magnifies. Then he promises to come unto them, telling them what had
let him hitherto, namely, his weighty business, and a charge put upon him
by the Churches, to carry alms to the poor Saints at Jerusalem. Lastly, he
earnestly requesteth their prayers to God for him. These be the Contents of
this present Chapter, and coherence with the former. Now the parts of the whole
Chapter be two. First, an exhortation, continued to stir them up unto
Christian love, patience, and concord, unto ver. 14. Secondly, the conclusion
of the Epistle, which contains three things. First, an Apology of his
writing, to v. 22. Secondly, a promise of his coming, unto verse 30. Thirdly,
a petition for their prayers, unto the end of the Chapter.


Tim. What is the scope of this our Text?


Silas. To persuade brotherly charity toward the weak, to bear with all their
infirmities both in Faith and manners. This duty of charity, is first
propounded in two precepts. The first, to bear with the infirm: the second
not to please our selves. This is negatiuely set down, the other affirmatively.

In the other three Verses following, he confirms his precept by two
reasons: one by the end of our gifts, which is, to strengthen the weak, verse
2. the other, is from the fact of Christ, who pleased not himself, but us in
bearing our infirmities, which is proved by a Testimony out of the Psalm 69,
9. and verse three: And least this authority might seem not to be fitly
alleged, or to belong to us, therefore in verse 4. he lays out the
general use of Scriptures to be for our learning and life.


Tim. Interpret the words, and tell us what is meant by strong and weak;
Also by infirmities, and bearing with them?


Silas. Strong or mighty, signifies Christians of better knowledge and more
pure life, such as were better taught, and of greater holiness. Note that he
puts himself into the number of the strong [ We,] not out of ambition, but
in truth as it was (for he had extraordinary gifts and revelations) to set
himself for an example of his own doctrine, the better to move others to do
that which they perceiud him to do before them. As Gedeou in the Judges 7, 17.
said to his men: so every Minister should say to his flock, What ye see me
do, that do ye. There should be a sweet harmony between the words and
works, teaching and doing of a Pastor. See Acts 1, 1. Phillippians. 4, 9. By
weak are meant the feeble, not in body but in mind, being inferior to others
in knowledge and godliness. And though the word Englished (infirmities,) do
reach to all weaknesses both in state by want; in sex, as of women; in body,
as by sickness and old age, all which we are to bear with others in pitying
and releeuing them as we may; yet here are to be understood spiritual
weaknesses (not great vices and open crimes, murder, perjury, adultery, etc.)
as errors in Doctrine, which be not against the foundation, ignorance in some
truth, forgetfulness, etc. also sudden passions of anger, grief, etc. and
faylings or slips in life which do not ouerturne honesty of manners, as some
rash and idle speech, etc. these be called infirmities, that is, the sicknesses
and maladies of the Christian soul, which is showed to be weak by them. To
bear these infirmities, it is a speech borrowed from the frame of man's body,
where the bones (which be the strongest parts) do bear up the flesh and other
weak parts; or else from buildings, where the pillars do bear up the burden
of the house. See 1 Kings 5, 17. and Revel. 3, 17. where believers are called
pillars.


Tim. What is our Doctrine from this first precept thus opened?


Silas. First, that all spiritual weaknesses are weighty and heavy burdens to
be borne: as young children and sick persons are burthenous and troublesome to
such as attend them: so infirm Christians which have errors and fraileties,
are unto such as live with them; they are such a burden as one takes up with
grief, and lays down with pleasure: such as have much to deal with them,
feel it to be so to their great molestation.

This doctrine serves both to humble the weak to walk Use.
in more lowliness, and to labor for more strength, that they may be less
irke some and grievous. Secondly, it warnes the stronger sort, that they have
cause to pray for much patience and power, to be able to bear such cumbersome
burdens.


Tim. What is the next doctrine from these first words? Doctrine.



Silas. That it is a duty (not a gratification, curtefie, or indifferent thing,
which need not be done) for such as be more fully instructed, to sustain or
bear the unskillful, and persons of mean gifts. This duty of bearing has in
it these sour actions: First with patience to suffer. Secondly, with
compassion to pity and pardon imperfections. Thirdly, with wisdom to
admonish. Fourthly, with love to correct and reprove, that they may be healed.
The reasons of this duty be these: First, we are members one of another.
Secondly, we have one need of another in some things, as in other things they
have need of us. Thirdly, we must do as we would be done too. Fourthly, law
of nature teaches stronger to help weaker, as it is done in a natural body.
Fifthly, the law of God commands to lift up our neighbors sheep being fallen
into a ditch, much more is this to be done to a feeble brother that falls
into any sin. Sixthly, the weak in faith, are like to the sick in body, and
who would not pity and help such as cannot help themselves? They are like to
little children which stumble and fall, and such who would not take up? Did a
Samaritane kindly entreat a wounded Jew, and should not we kindly respect a
weak brother? Oh let us then in love consider one another, and with true
repentance for that which is past, let us henceforth with all our might strive
against self-love, impatience, fierceness, pride, cruelty, and
uncharitableness.


Tim. Come to the second precept, and tell us what it is not to please our
selves?


Silas. Not wholly or only to seek our own commodities with neglect of that
which may be pleasing or beneficial to our brother. Hence we learn that it
is a sin for a man to satisfy himself with contempt of others, to foreslow
what may be profitable unto others, being altogether given to attend that that
pleafeth our felues. For first, this is against the nature of charity, which
seeks not her own things, 1. Cor. 13, 5. Again, it is contrary to the
practice of blessed Paul, who pleased not himself, that he might profit and
please others, 1. Cor. 9, 19, 20, 21. and Chap. 10. verse 33.


Tim. But what reasons does the text afford us why we should satisfy and
please our neighbor as well as our selves?


Silas. One is from the end why God has given more knowledge and greater
gifts unto some: (which is the good and edification of our weak neighbors,
(that is, to make them stronger and better in faith and piety) therefore has
God given to some greater and more graces, to direct and support such as have
fewer and lesser. As in a natural body the gifts of the most excellent parts
are given the^ to conduct and comfort the more feeble members.


Tim. What is the use to be made of this lesson?


Silas. First, to exhort the strong, as they desire not to Use.
miss of the right end and use of their gifts, in all meekness and love to
accommodate themselves to the more ignorant, to instruct and amend them. Also
it warnes the weaker, not to look that others do condescend and yield unto
them further then will tend to their good and edification, either to bring them
to Christ, if so be they strayed from him, or to confirm them in his faith and
religion, if they stand and abide in the truth.


Tim. Come to the argument taken from Christ's example verse 3. What is meant by
not pleasing himself?


Sil. Here is an (ellipsis) it would be supplied thus: not himself but us,
(and not us but his Father.) The meaning is he spared not himself, to do good
to others, he refused no shame nor smart to procure us eternal case and
glory: being in his estate poor, in his name reviled, rayled on: in his body
whipped, pierced, wounded, crucified: in his soul filled with anguish, sorrow,
heaviness, astonishment, horror: he being Lord of all, yet servant to all,
most blessed, yet made a curse for sinners. This was foretold in Psalm 69. 9.
which to be well fitted to Christ, appears by comparing this text with John
2, 17. By rebukes or blasphemies are meant not only reproachful words cast
upon God, which no less grieved Christ then if they had been laid upon
himself, his Fathers contumelies were as grievous to him as his own: but by a
Synecdoche of the part, one heinous sin of blasphemy or reproach is put for
all kind of sins, which are so many contumelies, reproaches and ignominies
against the majesty of God: these all fell upon Christ by the eternal decree
of his Father, who so appointed it, 1. Peter 1, 20. and the voluntary obedience
of the Son so willing to have it, so submitting to his Fathers pleasure and
command, Phil. 2, 8. He had all the sins of all the elect in the world laid
upon him alone, that he as a common pledge and surety might bear them, and by
bearing be made a propitiatory sacrifice to purge them, and satisfy Gods
justice for them, as it is written, Esaias 53, 4, 5, 6, 7. The iniquities of us
all were laid on him, also John 1, 29. This is the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world, also John 10, 15. He laid down his life a
ransom, 1. Pet. 2, 24. He bare our sins etc. which is all one with our text,
verse 3. The rebukes of thee sell on me.


Tim. What is our doctrine from hence?


Sil. That Christ in Scripture is set out not only as a redeemer, but as an
example of good life, as of beneficence, 2. Cor. 8, 9. Of forgiving trespasses,
Ephe. 4, 33. Of mutual love, Ephe. 5, 23. Of a free and constant confeision, 1
Ti. 6, 13. and 2. Tim. 2, 8. Of suffering the Cross, Heb. 12, 2. Of fidelity
in his function, Heb. 3, 2. Of meekness, 1. Pet. 2, 21. and 3, 18. Of
lowliness, Phil. 2, 5. and in our text of patience and charity in bearing
reproaches. Our Lesson then hence is, that it is Christians duty to tread in
the steps of their Savior Christ, and walk as he gave example, 1 John 2, 5.
For we are un worthy to be counted Christians, if we profess him in name, and
be not like him in works. If he be our Lord indeed, like worthy servants we
must strive to do, as he gives us example, John 13, 15.


Tim. What Use to be made of this point?


Silas. This reprooues such as will protest they believe in Christ, and are his
servants and followers, yet do not conform their actions after his pattern,
never thinking to live as Christ lived; forgetting and neglecting such a
perfect and noble president, to whom the more nearer men do come in holiness
and love, more like they be to God, and nearer unto perfection. Also, it
condemnts such heretics, as made of him but an exemplary Savior, to give us
example to live so, as we may at last come to salvation. For he is so to us a
pattern, as he is our Highpriest too: he suffered, and by his pains and
death redeemed sinners, giving himself a price, his blood a ransom, to set
free such as were under sin, death, and Satan. By our Text it is plain, that
then he became an expiation to cleanse our greatest sin, even our
blasphemies (not lesser sins only,) when he also showed forth a worthy
example of loving and patience, who being creator and King of glory, yet bare
so much and heavy things, would teach us (being his servants and creatures) to
bear a little, and some smaller matters in our neighbor. Let us shame with
our mouth to call him Lord and our Redeemer, except we find our hearts willing
to do as he has done. Nor ever let us look to have him our Savior, except we
make him our Sampler.


DIAL. II.
Verses 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. For whatfoeuer things were written
before time, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of Scripture, might have Hope. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant
you to be like minded one toward another in Christ Jesus, that ye may with
one accord and one mind, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us unto the
glory of God.


Tim. Show what be the parts of this Text, then interpret the words of every
verse severally, with the Doctrine and use of them.


Silas. This Text contains first a secret objection with the answer. The
Objection is thus: Yea, but the place in the Psalm, belongs to David, or
Christ, and not to us. Unto which he answers, that it is a bad consequence.
For it so concerns them, as it was delivered to writing for our learning
also. Secondly, a petition unto God for unity or agreement in doctrine and
wills, verses 5, 6. Thirdly, the first exhortation in verse 1. is rehearsed with
the two Arguments from Christ's example, verse 7. which example is applied first
to the Jews, verse 8. then to the Gentiles, verse 9, 10, etc. whose vocation
is proved by many Oracles of Scripture, unto verse 13.


Tim. Now return to verse 4. what is meant by things written before time, and
to what Uses serve they?


Silas. The Books of the old Testament, Moses, Psalms and Prophets. The uses
to which they were ordained, are particularly many, but generally two. First,
doctrine or learning, which is the foundation or root, whereon the other
fruits do rest and grow. Secondly, life or practice of manners, as (patience)
by which Christians in their warfare and wrestling against their enemies, are
armed and enabled to endure without being broken in mind, or fainting through
evils.

The next is Consolation, which stays their mind in the full confidence of
Gods assistance, and a good issue. Thirdly, Hope, which is an expectation of
heavenly glory. There be other ends of Scripture, as to work all graces, to
reprove, to exhort, to convict: but these be the chief named here, to
confirm men in faith, patience, and hope of eternal life. Now because the
Scripture as an instrument works these gifts, therefore here they be called
patience, comfort, and hope of the Scriptures, teaching them and causing them:
To which purposes for so much as the new Testament serves as well as the old,
being all inspired by one Spirit, therefore the Apostoticall writing howsoever
not then extant, yet this sen tence reaches unto them also.


Tim. What he our lessons from the words thus opened?


Silas. First, we learn that there is nothing in the whole Scripture idle or
superfluously written, but the whole and every part has fruit and edification
in it, not only to such as lived under the old Testament, but to such as live
in the Church in all ages; neither only is it written for the profit of
Nouices, (as some heretics avouch,) but of the most perfect: all men one and
others may learn from thence, and be the better for it. The reason is, because
the Reason.
counsel of the most wise God, his treasures of knowledge are opened therein,
so far as concerns man's salvation. Also it was ordained and inspired for the
profit of the whole Church, 2. Tim. 3, 17. Every sentence of Scripture has in
it matter of some profitable instruction.


Tim. To what use serves this first instruction?


Silas. First, it serves to distinguish these sacred books from all other
which have some vanity, superfluity, or curiosity in them, something to be cut
off as needless. And again, though they teach other behouefull and lawful
knowledge and sciences, yet help not to instruct unto salvation; whereas the
Scriptures have nothing which may be rejected, but is all necessary and
wholesome, informing men sufficiently in things of eternal life, John 20, 31.
2. Tim. 3, 13.

Secondly, it checks the arrogance of such as held the old Testament to have
only temporal promises, and of the Manichees which reject the old Testament
as vain and vnpertinent to us: likewise the Saduces which admitted only Moses
books: likewise of Libertines, which stick to certain pretended revelations,
despising Scripture as written for nouices and weak ones. And of the Papists,
who affirm that there was an higher doctrine (then the Scripture has any) to
feed perfect ones, (their Church traditions forsooth:) whereas the Apostle Paul
puts himself in the number of such as may learn from the Schoole-Maister
(the Holy Ghost) who indicted the Scriptures, though he had been rapt into the
third heavens. Thirdly, it reproues such profane persons, which either read
not at all, or else read Scriptures to pass away time, as they read Liuy or
Chronicles for story, without consideration of further sruite thereby to be
gotten.

Lastly, it exhorts all Christians to read them with this mind, to be
edified, asking still of themselves, what may I learn by this, or how does
this appertain to me; oh that every one would do it. It were greatly to be
wished that as God has given his written word for spiritual soul instruction
and comfort, so every one would study, read, hear, and preach them with this
sincere heart to see and observe what makes for the making of them wiser or
better. For certain it is, that such have the kindly and saving use of
Scriptures, as turn every branch of it to the furthering of them in godliness
and doctrine, or in good life and manners. The end of Scripture is practice as
well as doctrine, we read and hear to learn, and we learn to know, and we
know, to the end to live thereafter. Practicke knowledge is the very mark and
end of Philosophy which would have speculation to end in action; much more it
would be so in divinity, where blessedness is promised (not for doing) but to
dooers. More especially, let Gods messengers which are to teach scriptures to
others, be here warned, that their part is in handling Scripture, (if they will
be free from the grossest sacrilege) not to convert the Scriptures to serve
unto vain glory, ambition, worldly preferments, carnal ostentation, placing
either themselves or other men, (a thing too common, and common (that is
unclean) even a great and horrible pollution of the sacred word, to
accommodate it to such profane purposes) but to the edifying of the hearers in
faith and piety, to that end denying themselves, and delivering the word in
that simplicity in which it was left us by the holy Ghost.


Tim. What other thing do we learn from this 4. verse?


Silas. The difference between the patience, comfort, and hope of the
Heathens, Papists, Worldlings, and true Christians, who have these graces from
the Doctrine and faith of Scriptures, which is the mother and Wellspring of
them. Christians therefore be patient, comfortable, and hopeful, because they
believe the doctrine, which teaches God to be the author of afflictions, (not
fortune or the will of men:) and that as the causes be just and equal to
correct, humble, and mortify his Children, so the (...) will be glorious, in
declaration of his own special goodness and power, helping in extreamities,
and working for best to his, and for the advancement of the eternal salvation
of his own, according to his own promises, and the experience of innumerable
Saints, (as in Abraham, Job, David, and Christ's case,) which by proof have
found how faithful and good God is in his chastisements, doctrines, examples,
and promises, being their worthy pillars. Whereas all unbelievers, whatsoever
show of these graces they make, yet they are but mere shadows, having (for
the ground of patience,) their own natural reason and carnal respects. But
of these 3. graces, and the general use of Scriptures, read more on the
Dialogue on To. 4, 23. and 5, 3, 4, 5, 6.


Tim. Proceed to verse 5. the second part of our Text, and tell us what God of
Patience and comfort means, and what we are to learn from this Prayer of the
Apostle?


Silas. As he is called in the next Chapter, ver. 20. God of Peace, so here he
is called God of patience and comfort; because he is the author, approouer, and
rewarder of patience, hope, and comfort. And from this prayer we are to learn,
that howsoever patience, hope, and Christian consolation do come to us by the
means of Scripture instrumentally, yet effectually they are from God, as
Father of lights, and giver of every good gift, James 1, 17. Which must warn
both Preachers in expounding, and Christian professors in hearing Scriptures
(renouncing all affiance in their own (...), capacity, sharpness of judgment
or wit) to pray unto God earnestly, after the example of humble David, Psalm.
119. Lord teach me, Lord give me understanding, Lord open mine eyes, etc.) to
make his word efficacious and powerful, to work in their hearts such graces
as it commends and exhorts unto. For Paul which planteth, and Apollos which
waters be nothing, but God which gives the increase, 1. Cor. 3, 6. Herein
is the cause, that many without all fruit; nay with much hurt, do study
Scriptures: because they seek not to God by faithful hearty prayer for his
blessing; as if the work done, would make them believers and good followers.


Tim. What is the thing in this 5. verse prayed for?


Silas. It is agreement or consent in wills and affections, each desiring and
seeking others good and edifying as verse 2. for it is God alone that makes men
to be of one mind: of which concord, Christ Jesus is made the glue, Cement,
and band. As all means of peace without God are in vain, so all agreement
which is not founded on Christ's Faith and religion, is rather conspiracy, then
a concord; like to the agreement of Simeon and Leuy, brethren in evil, Genes.
49, 5. or of Absolon and Ach (...), banding against David. Such is the
agreement of Heretics, Idolators, Papists, Turks, Jews, Pagans, and wicked
men which meet in malice to do mischief, not in charity to build one
another. Of this matter, see Dial. in Romans 12, 16, 18.


Tim. What does the sixth verse teach us?


Silas. That the union of Christians must be in profession outward, as well as
inward in affection, in mind and mouth. Also that such unity is the rather to
be embraced with all readiness, because it tends to the praise of God,
whose pleasure and honor it is, when his children live lovingly and peaceably,
as it is to his dishonor greatly, that such as be called brethren and children
to God, do hate and strive one with another.


Tim. Give us a briese touch of the 7. verse?


Silas. To receive, signifies charitably to judge, patiently to bear, lovingly
to affect one another, that is, the weak, the strong, and the strong the
weak. The particle [ As] notes quality, not equality; for what proportion
between Christ's infinite love, and the finite charity of men? The sincerity
then is pointed at, not the degree and measure, as in John 17, 21. and Math. 6,
12. In the last words of this seventh verse, lies an Argument perswasorie
from the more unto the less, thus; If Christ received us unto the glory of his
Father (even to make us partakers of so great a benefit as of glory and
immortality in heaven) with his Father: (this is the better sense then to say,
that Christ either propounded his Fathers glory as his end whereby he received
us, or that we should receive one another for the glorisying of God: which
both are true, but not so fit as this, that he did love us so far, as to make
us partakers of his Fathers glory) therefore it follows, that much more we
should receive one another to peace and concord; which is the fruit of our
receiving to the benefit of his: and therefore if he did such things to
enemies, how should not we be ready (if we will approve our selves good
Christians) to receive friends and Brethren?


Tim. How does Paul proceed in verse 8. to v. 13?


Silas. Paul proves, that Christ has received us in this excellent manner,
by a distribution of [ vs] into Jews (meant here by circumcision) to whom he
ministered by preaching and dying to perform the truth of God, that is, that he
might be found true, who had promised unto their Fathers, Isaac and Jacob, etc.
to send them a Messiah. And secondly into Gentiles, vpou and toward whom he
fulfilled the mercies meant them of God, and mentioned in sundry Testimonies
which are here set down till verse 13.


Tim. Now with like breuity observe the cbiefe doctrines which arise from the
eight verse to the 13.


Silas. First we have a singular example of rare humility in Christ, who being
the Son of God equal to his Father, yet by taking our nature, subiecting
himself to circumcision and the whole law, by his diligent teaching,
miracle-working, his passion painful and reproachful, his resurrection
victorious, did minister unto the Jews his enemies: being made their servant
whose Lord he was, yet servant to all being Lord of all. Which should admonish
us of his love to mankind, for whose love and sake he was so abased, coming
not to be ministered unto, but to minister: so of our duty in bearing the same
mind as he did, (...) no service how servile or abject soever, to express
zeal to God or our brethren, Phil. 2, 5, 6, 7. Secondly, Christ may be a
pattern as of low linesse to all, so of diligence and fidelity to Ministers of
the word, whose dignity stands not in titles, solemnities, Robes, pompes,
processions, papal massing, etc. but in teaching the people constantly and
soundly; also in fervent prayer for them, and example of an holy blameless
life: for thus Christ in his own person ministered to the Jews and afterward
to the Gentiles by his Apostles.

Thirdly, here is a proof of that glorious property of God, (to wit) his
truth, that he is most true and faithful of his word, namely because such
promises as upon the fall he made to Adam touching the woman's seed, and
afterward to the Patriarchs, concerning the same to come out of their loins,
to make all Nations blessed, were in due time accomplished by sending Christ,
borne of a pure virgin, to be a common Savior of elect Jews and Gentiles. Let
this move all Christians to put confidence in him, being so merciful and true
who will not deceive. Secondly, to imitate his properties, being faithful in
their words, bargains, covenants, vows, and promises. Thirdly, to praise and
magnify him for his free and gracious calling of us Gentiles to the grace of
Christ; whereof unless he had made us truly partakers, we could neither
celebrate and confess him, as it was sorespoken of by David, Psalm. 10, 50. 2.
Sam. 22. Neither rejoice together with his own nation the Jews, called by the
Gospel, as was foresaid, Deuteronomy. 32, 45. Nor have praised God as we are
commanded, Psalm. 117. 1. Nor have hoped or put our trust in him, as Esaias 11,
10. except he had become our Savior and redeemer: To whom therefore for his
unspeakable mercies in visiting the Gentiles, and being their light, be all
joyful praise and thanks in all the Churches of the Saints.


DIAL. III.
Verses 14, 15. Now the God of peace, fill you with all joy and peace in
heleeung, that ye may abound in hope through the power of the Holy. Ghost. And
I my self am persuaded of you brethren, that ye also are full of goodness,
filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another: now therefore
brethren I have written unto you somewhat more boldly in some sort, as putting
you in mind of the grace which is given me of God.


Tim. Show us what is done in these verses, begin with the 13. and so go on to
the verses following.


Silas. In the 13. verse Paul finisheth his exhortatory speech touching love
and concord amongst the Romans with a short pithy prayer; wherein he so
declares his ardent desire of their salvation, as withal, he insinuates
that neither they could perform by any power of their own what he had moved
them unto, nor yet he enable them to do what he taught: But of all his
instruction the success depended wholly in Gods blessing and help; and
therefore but requisite that Sermons and exhortations should begin and end with
prayer to God, as to assist speaker and hearer to do their duties well, so to
make all prosperous when they have done. In seeking and suing to God alone, it
so checks the invocation of creatures, as it teaches the faithful to resort
to God alone for every good gift. God alone does both know and fulfill the
desires of his children, and it is an honor peculiar to him to be trusted in
and called on, Psalm. 50, 15. The matter of his prayer is that wherein he said,
Chap. 14. ver. 17. That the kingdom of God stood: so now he prays not, That
they might be filled with meats and drinks, but with peace with God, in
themselves, toward their Brethren; and joy, that is, increase of peace, even
spiritual gladness of the heart, freed from terrors of Gods wrath, and
cheared with the sense of Gods love in Christ, and hope of glory. [ All Ioy]
signifies solid and firm joy, such as lasts; not like the vanishing joy of
worldlings, who rejoice in prosperity, and are sad, even heavy to death in
calamity, as Jonas gourd grew in the day, and dyed in the night: but durable
joy which will not be taken away or quenched with the sharpest crosses. Of this
peace and joy, he notes the true causes and the nearest (to wit) Faith, or the
righteousness of Faith, a sure ground of all Christian peace and comfort; and
Hope, which is a sure expectation of all good things needful for us, and
namely of eternal life. Of which infallible expectation, the mercies and truth
of the Father, the regeneration of the Spirit, the merits of the Son, be
both the fountain and props. Note further, that of these graces he sets down
the hiest cause, the holy Ghost, by whose power (that is) mighty working, they
are given and increased unto a great measure, which is here expressly begged, [
God fill you, and that you may abound in all joy.


Tim. What is the Doctrine of this 14. verse thus interpreted and analyzed?


Silas. The first is, that it is God alone in whom Christians Doctrine.
are to fix all their hope and trust: for he is called the God of Hope, not
only with respect to the verse 12. or for that he is the author of Hope,
engendring all lively hope, as he is termed God of patience, 1 Pet. 1, 3. but
especially for that he is the object of hope, being he in whom alone all hope
is to be placed, and that for these Reasons. First, God not only commands to
trust in him alone, but threatens a curse to such as have hope and affiance in
men, 1 Timothy 6, 17. Ier. 17, 5. Secondly, examples of holy Patriarchs and Kings
which hoped in God, and were not confounded but delivered. Our Fathers trusted
in God, and were saved (says David.) Thirdly, God besides his mercies,
fidelity, and omnipotency, has infinite means to succor his which rely on
him. Therefore let all men trust strongly in God, and renounce all other hopes,
either Popish in their own merits (a rotten post to trust in) or worldly, as
in horses, friends, riches, etc. which are but vain things to save a man, Ps.
20, 7.


Tim. What is the second Doctrine from this 13. verse? Doctrine.



Silas. That godly Christians must labor after the greatest measure of Faith,
hope, peace, joy, and other graces: never contenting themselves with any
portion, till they be filled and do abound. The reason is, because Reason.
such is Gods will, else Paul would not have asked fulness and abundance of
God. As covetous men never think they have Gold enough, so let Gods child
never think he has graces enough: for he is bound to wax spiritually, as
plants and young children do naturally, and the more grace he has the more and
better service shall he do to his God. Also, it is a sign of saving grace,
when it grows and abounds.


Tim. What use is to be made of this doctrine?


Silas. First, it reprooues such as sweat and take pains Use.
to thrive in the world, but do not so to thrive in grace; Such also as rest in
beginnings, and covet not perfection: Also such as go backwards and fall away.
And encorageth all Christians, by all good means of reading, meditation,
hearing, prayer, and conference, keeping a good conscience, by right use of the
Lords Supper, to labor after increase in spiritual things.


Tim. What is the last thing which we learn from this 13. Verse?


Silas. That Faith is the parent of hope, and both together bring forth sound
peace and joy, and of them all the holy Ghost is head, cause, and worker. And
lastly, that Pastors must pray effectually for their people.


Tim. Pass to the 14. verse, what observe you therein for edification?


Silas. Paul passes forwards to the conclusion of this Epistle, wherein first
he praises them verse 14. and then defends his writing to them, verse 15.
From his commendations of them, Ministers and others learn, that we are not
always to exhort and reprove our hearers, there is a time for praises also;
namely, when the parties upon our knowledge deserve praise. Secondly, when the
thing praised is excellent. Thirdly, if the persons be capeable, (to wit) such
as will not be puffed up thereby, but excited more to their duty. Fourthly,
when Gods praise is chiefly aimed at without base flattery, then it is
wisdom to praise: for praise is a spur in the praised to piety, and
witnesses the charity of the prayser. Our Apostle might have been thought to
have been sharp, considering former and round admonitions, and somewhat
suspicious of the Romans, having so fervently and often prayed for them, as if
all had not been well, but far amiss; but by his present praises, he
quickens them to godliness, and quitteth himself from sinister and uncharitable
suspicion, whose example is to be followed of Ministers and other Christians.


Tim. But what is the subject or matter of his praise which he gives the
Romans?


Silas. After he had lovingly saluted them by name of Brethren, to intimate his
own love, and inciteth theirs, and shows that he spoke not by hearesay or
any idle report, but of a strong persuasion, grounded only upon the
profession and effects of their Faith, which was very famous thoroughout the
Christian world, Romans 1, 8. then he prayfeth them in three respects:
First, because of their great goodness, [ Full of Goodness,] that is,
enriched with piety toward God and men, and namely, with mercy and kindness
toward the brethren. Secondly, their excellent faith and skilfulnesse in
divine things, wherein they had attained such a perfection (not absolute which
had no want, for then they needed not mutual admonition, but such as in this
life may be attained unto in comparison of others:) they were perfect in
knowledge [ All knowledge,] but far from that perfection which is now, and
shall be among the celestial spirits at the last, 1 Cor. 13, 7, 8, etc. The
third part of their praise, is ability or gift to admonish each other, being as
so many Monitors or masters, such as could see what was convenient to be done,
(a wise man's part,) and put others in mind of their duty.


Tim. What is our Doctrine from these words thus expounded?


Silas. That it is a duty very praiseworthy in a Christian to be able and
willing to give admonition. The Reasons hereof are, first it declares our
obedience unto God requiring it, Leuit. 19, 17. 1 These. 5, 11. Secondly, our
charity toward the Brethren which want admonition, whereby they are preserved
from sin and destruction, and won to righteousness and salvation if they
hearken and obey, Math. 18, 15. which made David desirous to seek it, Psalm.
141, 5. Thirdly, it is one of the right and holy uses of our understanding and
wisdom in the word to apply it to the warning of others, as Col. 3, 16. Such
then as cannot, or list not, or care not to admonish others, loose a special
praise, bewraying want of the fear of God, and of love to men: and such as do
admonish, let them go forwards the more cheerfully, the more commendable this
duty is, which Paul had not so praised but that it is much to be esteemed and
exercised.


Tim. What are we to learn further from verse 14.


Silas. That there be two graces behoouefull to them, who shall well discharge
this duty of admonishing. The first is goodness, the second is knowledge: for
without goodness or integrity of life our admonitions will be of no force,
whilst it may be said to us, Physician heal thy self, and, Hypocrite pluck
the beam out of thy own eye. Secondly, when a man himself is blameable, he
cannot freely and boldly admonish another: see Romans (...), 21, 22. Thirdly, he
that would have hope of doing good in reproouing others, had need to be
vnreprooucable, else what hope has he that God will bless his admonitions?
The other grace required heereto, is a good measure of knowledge to guide us to
see and know wherefore to admonish; and when, and where, and whom, and by whom,
our selves or others; and in what manner, out of love and pity, roughly or
mildely, directly or indirectly, openly or privately, and to what end, and how
long till we have hope, that we cast not pearls before Swine; and in what
words, even in the words of Scripture, for they have most authority, and there
is no exceptions against them. To these purposes it is no mean wisdom will
serve: therefore Paul requires in such as shall admonish their Brethren, that
the word of God dwell richly in them in all (that is, much and manifold)
wisdom, Col. 3, 16. And if to this one duty, such and so great skill be
needful, then judge what cause there is for Christians to search and study the
Scriptures diligently and religiously, having so many other more weighty
offices to do in their general and particular callings.


Tim. What use are we to make of this truth?


Silas. Hence is matter of exhortation both to the admonishers to furnish
themselves with store of knowledge, as they may admonish with power and profit.
And unto the admonished to take in good worth good warninges from their
brethren, yea, although not always given with such wisdom and love as were
meet: for God is not bound to set a discreet godly person aworke to warn
thee, not always to send an Abigail, a Iethro, etc. but sometime by a poor
silly maid or man servant, our Inferiors both in place, 2 Kings 5, 3, 13. As
thou will not refuse rich treasure, because it comes through foul hands: so
cast not away reproof and counsel for the folly or faults of him who gives it.
Hear afoole, a knave, an enemy, if he bring truth and reason; as well as a
friend, an honest man, or a wise man. Balaam must hear his Ass, else he had
dyed for it.


Tim. But seeing the Romans were so full of knowledge and goodness, wherefore
did Paul so largely and boldly write unto them, as if they had been very
obstinate and ignorant ones?


Silas. He answers to this objection in verse 15. that he did it not to teach
the^ what they knew not, but partly to the end to remember them of things they
knew already and might forget: and partly for his function sake which he
sets forth by the efficient cause [Grace,] because his Apostolical
authority and gifts were of favor given him being a persecutor. Upon these
causes he had written, not (somewhat) that is, some thing, and left out others
as necessary, by tradition of Church to be supplied (as the great Jesuit
dreamed;) for the Scripture is perfect: but somewhat must go with boldly, and
then the meaning is, that with some liberty and freedom of words, befitting
the gravity of the matter, and of my calling. Wherein ye see Paul confessed no
fault, but justified rather his act, as good for them to be put in
remembrance of necessary things, and meet for him being their Apostle and
minister: therefore Bellarmine unskillfully and vnconsideratly matcheth this
with the excuse of the author of the Machabees in his 2. book, chapter 15, ver: 39.


Tim. What Doctrines gather ye hence?


Silas. Two: the first is, that boldness, admonitions and reproves become
well Gods messengers. First for the commandment sake, Es. 58, 1. Cry aloud,
spare not, tell etc. Earnestnes and freedom of speech, is here enjoined to
Gods messengers. Secondly, a Messenger is not only to do his Lords message,
but in manner and form as he is required. Thirdly, if sin (like a strumpet) be
bold to appear, why should not Gods Servants be bold to control it? Fourthly,
there is great danger if we fail herein, both to the sinner, Ezekiel. 3, 18, 19.
and to the Minister, Ier. 1. 17. Speak to them, or I will destroy thee. It is
true, the performance of this, will cause such as love and live in the service
of sin, to account their reproouers enemies; as Achab did Elias, and the
Galatians Paul; and observe all his ways narrowly, to see if they can have any
occasion or advantage to accuse or to hurt him: as those places can testify,
where Ministers do with this holy liberty testify against evils and sins:
but better to have all men our enemies, then to have God alone to be against
us; and if we cannot save others, yet it stands us upon to deliver our own
souls.

The second Doctrine is, that Gods Ministers are Gods remembrancers, to put the
people in mind. For men, even the best, are forgotful, yea of common and
commonly known duties: by which means they run into great evils. Did not
David in his fury against Naball, forgette that he ought not to kill or
revenge, till Abigail remembered him? And Peter in his fear forget Christ's
premonition touching the thrice denial of him, till a Cock awakened him? How
easily then may others let slip out of memory necessary principles and
instructions, since a godly Prophet and an Apostle did it? And therefore, if
there were no other benefit to be reaped by the public Ministry, neither for
teaching our ignorance, or conuicting our errors, or informing us in duties, or
reproouing our vices, or comforting our faint-heartednes, yet herein were
cause enough why to love and use assemblies where the word is preached, to
have our remembrances stirred up. As David blessed Abigail, for remembering him,
and Peter wept when he remembered his fall by the crowing of a bird: so it is
every ones duty to embrace and bless God and his Ministers, for this office
done to them.


DIAL. IIII.
Verses 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ
to the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the
Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost: I have
therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ, in those things which
appertain to God, etc.


Tim HOw does the Apostle proceed in these verses, and what connection have
they with the former?


Silas. Having maintained his bold writing to the Romans by an argument
drawn from his Apostolical function, (which being graciously bestowed on him,
as ver. 15. imposed upon him a necessity to write freely and boldly to them, as
being commanded of God so to do toward them, being a part of his charge:)
Now in these present verses he describes and magnifieth his Ministry sundry
ways, to make it gracious and glorious to the Romans and other believers: and
first it is set soorth by the authority of it; the author of it is God or
Christ Jesus, who immediately and extraordinarily called him, Acts 9, 3, 4. to
be his servant, Gal. 1, 1. and his public Minister: Not as Magistrates be,
Rom, 13, 6. but to minister the Gospel, where of God is the author; to give
attendance unto holy things, and to work in the holy service of the Gospel,
toward the Gentiles, ( as Peter was enjoined to do toward the Jews. Which
makes much to the commendation of his function, that he enjoyed it with a
large commission, as to preach to all the Gentiles, and also to have the
[Gosspell] that is, the glad tidings of peace and good things to be the
subject of his preaching, as the Gentiles were the object of it: but herein
especially his ministry was exalted, that the elect faithful Gentiles were as
a sacrifice offered by him unto God, and the Gospel as it were the sacrificing
knife, himself as an holy Priest to kill, to cleanse and to offer (not beasts)
but faithful men unto God. And finally, the oblation or sacrificing to be his
preaching, doctrine, and admonitions, for the conversion of souls through the
Spirit, sanctifying and changing the hearts of the elect, among the heathen.


Tim. What are we to learn by this comparison or likeness between the
Ministry of the Gospel, and Leuiticall Priesthood?


Silas. First, it warnes us of the great dignity of the ministry, that it is
sanctified and consecrated unto such an holy end as the conversion of sinners;
which as it is the greatest good, so the function which effects it must be of
singular worthiness: Let men honor it as they love salvation. Secondly, hence
we learn that God is much desirous of, and greatly delighted with the
salvation of men, for that he does account it for a very acceptable sacrifice
or offering. Which should serve not a little to encourage both Preachers and
professors with exceeding joy of heart to travail, the one in preaching and
setting it forth; the other in hearing and receiving the word of God, being
employed in such a service so pleasing to God, so profitable to themselves.

Thirdly, we are taught here that as the Sacrifices of the law were then
pleasing unto God, when they were pure and offered up according to rites of the
law; so Christians do become an acceptable sacrifice through the sanctifying
of the Holy Ghost, working repentance from their sins, and induing them with
a lively faith, that being pure and bolye, they might please God through
Christ. Though holiness as a fruit of the Spirit do please God, yet it is
Christ the Mediator which makes it, and the person in whom (...), to be
acceptable.

Lastly, from this 16. verse we have wherewith to stop the mouths of the
Papists, and profane worldlings. As for the Papists which object unto us the
want of Priesthood, and seem to lament that we have no sacrifices, etc. we
say for our selves that we have both in our Churches: for our Sermons are
oblations, our people be sacrifices, our selves Priests, (not properly taken,
for so they ceased in Christ's person, being the only proper Priest and
sacrifice of the new Testament) but improper and metaphorical, who yet truly
and effectually do by the sword of the word slay men's brutish sins, to make
them a sanctified host to God. Rather we have just cause to lament their case,
that having thrust out this kind of sacrifycing by the doctrine, and preaching
of the holy Scriptures, warranted by the authority of God himself; they
wickedly usurp in their Mass, to sacrifice Christ properly every day, after
his example at his last supper, wherein yet he made no oblation: and thus of
being the Ministers of Christ, they prove the murderers of Christ, and the
successors of Judas, rather then the imitators of Paul. Now touching the
profane persons which mislike and murmr at the plain and bold admonitions
of the Ministers: Let this satisfy such, that as never any did find fault
with the Sacrificers of the law for killing and dressing of beasts appointed
to be sacrifices, so it should be imputed as no blame to Preachers by the
sacrificing knife of the word, to slay and mortify men's brutish lusts and
vices: which if they be suffered to live and reign, it cannot be we should be
an holy and acceptable sacrifice to God, Romans 12, 1, 2.


Tim. In the verse 17. and verses following unto the 22. what does the Apostle
perform?


Silas. He continues to commend his Apostolical function by the effects, in
the subduing of the Gentiles by his ministry unto the obedience of the Gospel,
both by his words and works, verse 18. whereof he reckons first the kinds,
(signs and wonders) and the efficient cause, the power of the Holy Ghost, the
author of miracles, verse 19. And for so much as the Romans might object, Why
do thou O Paul chiefly begin with us Romans, and so earnestly deal with
us, passing by other nations? Thereunto he answers, verse 19, 20. that he
had spread the Gospel by his preaching in many other regions, yea where the
name of Christ had not sounded, or been known before; whereof he notes the
end in verse 20. Least I should build on another man's foundation, and in
verse 21. he shows his warrant and commission out of the Prophet Esaias, Chap.
52. verse 15. In regard of these things he does profess that he had occasion
of rejoicing and matter of glorying, yet not in himself but in Christ and his
grace, (in which alone there is true glorying with God) and not in honor,
riches, and wisdom of the world, but in the things pertaining to God, (to
wit) in matters concerning the worship of God, and the salvation of the
Church, wherein his ministry did consist, verse 17.


Tim. What especial doctrines can ye observe from the verse 17. to the 21.
verse, whereof the method and meaning you have now breefely unfolded?


Silas. Out of verse 17. we have these instructions: First when God prospers
the work of our vocation, (namely by blessing the ministry to the working of
faith and obedience to Christ) therein is just cause of rejoicing. The reason
is, because in such effects God is highly glorified in his mercies, and souls
converted and saved, whereat men and Angels ought to be glad, Luke 15, 7. Such
therefore wrong God and his Church much, which neither themselves labor to
win men to Christ, and do envy others which do it. Also here is more cause
of encouragement and joy by the happy success of his ministry to a Preacher,
then of disheartning by the unthankfulness of the world. Lastly, it reproves
such as by disobedience and unprofitableness, do grieve their Ministers, whose
heaviness is the peoples unhappiness. Heb. 13, 17. Secondly, we learn that
Ministers in their rejoicing must retain this modesty, as not to be puffed up
with their gifts, or to despise others whom God does not so grace and bless,
but ever to remember they are but Organes and instruments of Christ, to effect
what he will do by them, 1. Cor. 4, 1. All the force working in the conscience
is of Christ, who both ordained the Ministers, and furnished them with gifts
and zeal, and blesses their endeavors.

The third instruction is, that the subject of their ministry be (the things of
God,) that is, his service, Heb. 5, 1. A Minister is a middle person between
the people and God, to report Gods will to them, and to offer and utter their
prayers to God, to preach from God glad tidings of peace and good things; and
on the other side to bring the people to God. We will attend the word and
Prayer, Acts 6, ver. 4. Ministers be the mouth of GOD to open his mind, and
of the peoples to put up their request: thus their service is wholly about the
soul.

The reason is, that as Christ's kingdom is not of this world, so his Ministers
are over the people in things not belonging to this world, but to the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 12. Hence is a just reproof to such, as neglecting to employ
themselves in the things of God (which are the things proper to their calling)
do spend it in following their carnal pleasures, or worldly profit, doing
nothing less, then that whereunto they be of God ordained and elected of his
Church, whose end will be fearful, by the parable of the evil servant in
the Gospel, which in his Masters absence, gave himself to sensuality, and
forgot his proper service.


Tim. From the 18. verse what Doctrines collect ye?


Silas. First, whereas Paul made a religion and Conscience, as one that neither
would nor could speak of ought [ I dare not,] which Christ had not wrought in
him, and done by him in the function of his Apostleship: Hence we learn, as
the duty of Pastors, to acknowledge the whole fruit of their ministry to come
from Christ as author. Paul which planteth is nothing, but Christ which gives
the increase: so the deity of Christ, that he is true and very God, whose sole
and only work it is to make the preaching effectual, to bow men's hearts
(naturally stony and obstinate) to become pliable to the doctrine of the
Gospel to receive it by faith, which is the chiefest obedience, and mother of
al obedience inpractise and con uersation; but Christ did this by the Ministry
of Paul, as here he confesses. Therefore, he is the true and mighty God which
changes the hearts, yea, even of the Gentiles, perverse Idolaters, and wholly
estranged from God and goodness. To make these by faith and obedience to
embrace the Gospel, must needs argue in Christ which did it, an omnipotency
and divine virtue. For to give a new heart and a new Spirit, is Gods
prerogative royal, Ezekiel. 36, 26.

Moreover, inasmuch as Christ wrought in Paul by two means ( words) that is,
public preachings, private exhortation, disputing, Epistles, and writings:
and secondly ( deeds) that is, his great labor and travail, his godly life,
his many and manifold miracles, 1 Cor. 15, 10. it affoords this Doctrine; That
there be two notable signs and marks of a faithful Minister of Christ, and
two especial means whereby he may benefit the flock of Christ. First
Doctrine, that he be able in a good measure to teach truths, and to confute the
gainsayer. Titus 1, 9. Secondly, examples of life and manners to shine as a
light, Math. 5. as Christ both said and did, Acts 1, 1.

Far hence from this calling be all such, which are given to their ease and
commodity, be either scandalous in life, or unable and unwilling to teach and
labor in doctrine and doing good. Let such know as have their tongue or hand
lame and maimed, and be defective in words or deeds, that they are so much
short of that they ought to be. Also let such people see, that they have God
come so much the nearer to them, and have the more means to draw near to him,
or to be left without all excuse, whosoever enjoy teaching and working
Pastors, which build with both hands. Some allege for defense of their
ignorance ot wickedness that their Minister is ignorant and teaches them not.
Others, that their guides, though seeing ones, yet offensive ones, say and do
not: but such have no exception at al to make, whose Pastors speak and work,
and give light by sound doctrine and godly life.


Tim. Do ye note in the words or matter of the 19, 20, 21. verses, ought to
our edification in piety?


Silas. In the words I note, that the greatest works which Paul did work, are
called by two names. First, Signs, because they serve to show and prove his
calling and doctrine to be of God; and therefore, such as ought to be
reucrently received and submitted unto. Secondly (wonders or miracles) drawing,
or rather driving (...) to admiration and wondering, by the strangeness of
them, because they exceeded both course of nature, and capacity of
vndorstanding. And it is usual with men, to wonder at things which be above
reason or nature. Also the word [ might or power] in the first place, signifies
the efficacy, which these great works had in the hearts of the Gentiles before
whom they were done; and in the latter place, it declares the chief cause of
that efficacy, to wit; the might of the holy Spirit, working with the Apostle.


Tim. What are we to learn from hence? What matter of instructions in these
words thus opened?


Silas. That in the beginning of the Gospel, when the Doctrine thereof was yet
new, unwonted, or unknown, and the Church yet being as a tender plant, or as
a child in the Cradle, it pleased God to accompany the publishing of his
truth, with the gift of woorking miracles, the better to countenance and
confirm both doctrine and the Church, Mark 16, 20. These Tokens and wonders
which at the first did ratify the Doctrine, (as seals establish covenants)
are still to this day of force to give credit to the same doctrine (taught now
in the reformed Churches) to be divine and from heaven. So as he which without
a miracle will not now believe it, (when all the world believes it) he
himself may be accounted a wonder. We do use to water plants when they are
newly set and but tender: afterward being grown up to be trees, we cease
then to water them; so the Church and doctrine of grace, when it was new,
needed confirmation by miracles; but now it is grown old and universally
received, there is no such use of Miracles. Let us rather suspect the Popish
religion to be the new Religion, and their Church no Church of Christ, because
they build the truth and credit thereof upon wonders, which are no perpetual
nor effentiall notes of true Prophets, and true Church, but common to all
Prophets both false and true. See Deuteronomy. 13, 1, 2. Mat. 24, 24. 2 These. 2, 9.
and Revel. 13, 13. False Prophets, false Christ's, yea, that Antichrist shall be
permitted (for the probation of the faithful, and perdition of the
unfaithful) to work wondrous works, which are called lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 9. both because they be many of them but iugling tricks, packed by
the cunning of Friars, and for that they tend (suppose they should be done) to
deceive men, to establish their lies, superstitions, and heresies of Popery:
also, because oftentimes they are done or do proceed from Satan the Father of
lies. Whereas, all true miracles (as our Text teaches) for their end does
serve to confirm the truth of the Gospel: and for their beginning, they
always be wrought by the mighty Spirit of God, who alone can alter the course
of nature, and do wondrous things. Satan and his imps do some things to be
wondered at of such as cannot perceive the causes of those things which
impostures cunningly hide.

But if that miracles were necessary, we are not utterly destitute. The
strange proseruation of Luther and Q. Elizabeth, against many deadly enemies,
is maruailous if not myraculous: also the discovering of the Gunpowder
Treason, in so strange a sort. Master Hawks clapping his hands thrice for joy
in the fiery flame: Cranmers heart whole in the fire, his body being burnt, as
it happened to others, are not these wondrous matters?


Tim. What may we observe from the end of the 19. verse, with the 20. and 21?


Sil. It commends to us these few instructions. Whereas Paul had filled with
the Gospel (that is, had brought to the faith of Christ by plentiful and
diligent preaching the Gospel) so many people and provinces as were mightily
distant one from the other, as I Hyricum (which is thought to be that which at
this day we call Slauonia) is distant from Jerusalem the Metropolis of Judea,
which in a right line is judged to be about 350. Germain miles, but was much
larger space going by circuites, and fetching compasses, as it is known he
did. In this example of the Apostle (I say) carrying the word to such
Barbarians, and superstitious places, with such extreme labor, and both
manifest and manifold dangers (whereof we read in the Acts, and in 2 Cor. 11.)
we have the Image of a faithful Minister, filled with love of Christ his
Kingdom and man's salvation, to the reproof of such as with far less pains,
and no perrill at home, may and ought to preach Christ every Saboth, and will
not: and it gives due encouragement to all such as do the Lords work with
fidelity and industry, to persevere in their godly course, whereof they have
Paul such a noble president and pattern. As God will look for much of them to
whom he commits much; so they which do improoue their Talents, and increase
them until they come to be ten Talents, such shall be set over ten Cities,
and enter into their Masters joy, when the sloathfull shall hear, Take him,
and bind him, etc.

Furthermore as Paul in few words ran over an heap of Miracles, and an infinite
company of Cities, in ver. 19 to set forth his infinite labors to the example
of others; so in that he studied, and did even in an holy ambition (as men
strive which be greedy of worldly honor) contend to fulfill the prophesies,
concerning the carrying the name and Gospel of Christ, where it had never been
preached by any before him, yea, where the sound of Christ never came. Herein
first he did approve himself a true Apostle, whose office was, to call
ignorant heathnish people to Christ, and to constitute Churches, which they
might leave to others to build forward, as Paul did in Ephesus and Creta, 1.
Timothy 1, 34. Titus 1, 4, 5, 6.

Fair unlike to that which Jesuits boast to be done by them in India; for
neither be they commissionated for the whole world, as the Apostles were,
neither preached they the truth of the Gospel, but their own errors, the
traditions of Rome: and gathered Churches not to Christ, but to Antichrist, to
increase not Gods but Satan's kingdom, making them an hundred times worse then
they were before, yea by their extreme cruelties making the name of Christ
odious to those Pagans.

Secondly, in that Paul sought as well to instruct such as were converted, as
to gain to Christ such as were strangers from him, we see again his affection
to Christ's glory and kingdom; which should be a spur in the sides of all
Christ's true Ministers to quicken them to al care and labor for the enlarging
of Christ's flock, and getting to themselves testimony of their calling from
God, by the zeal of their hearts, and fruits of their endeavor; as Paul had
from the accomplishment of prophetical Oracles, whereby his extraordinary
Apostolical function was warranted to him self and the Churches of Christ.


DIAL. V.
Verses 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Therefore also I have been let often to
come unto you, but now seeing I have no more place in these quarters, and also
have (...) desirous many years ago to come unto you: when I shall take my
journey into Spain I will come to see you, etc.


Tim. What is contained in all these verses?


Silas. The hope and promise of Paul's coming to the Romans, which he sets
forth by the moving cause, (to wit) the vacancy of his business in these
parts where he was. Secondly, by the feruency of his desire which he had a long
time to see them, in verse 22, 23. then by the circumstance of time when he
would come, (to wit) when he had visited Spain, verse 24. Thirdly, by naming
the hindering cause which withheld him that he came not presently, namely the
ministration of alms, (according to the trust put in him by the Church of
Macedonia) sent to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, partly to express the good
will of the Grecians which sent it, and partly to recompense a debt, verses 25,
26, 27, 28. Lastly, by the final cause of his coming, which was their greater
edification in the faith of the Gospel, verse 29.


Tim. What be the doctrines which we may learn between Doctrine.
the 22. verse and the 30?


Silas. From the 22. verse we may learn that the ways of man are not in his
own hand; for God disposes what man purposes: Therefore as Paul could not
come to Rome when himself desired, so neither shall we do what we will, but
what God is pleased to have done: upon whom therefore we must depend for
success and rest in it, with contentment though it be contrary to our desires
and hopes; not taking on, murmuring, seeking unlawful ways to compass our
purposes, as if we were Lords of our own actions.


Tim. What learn we out of the 23. verse?


Silas. We learn that Paul removed not from the places where he begun to
plant Churches, till he had finished what he came for, being herein the
pattern of a faithful Steward, who is found to discharge the whole trust till
the time that he must render an account of his Stewardship.

(...) of this verse. I collect, that the Romans were called to the faith and
prosession of Christ, not long after the ascension of Christ: for the 20. year
after it, did Paul write this Epistle, but he had a desire of seeing the
Romans, many years before he wrote unto them, therefore many years before
they were converted; not by Peter as Bellarmine affirms, of whose being at
Rome all the learned do doubt, nor by Peter and Paul jointly, as others think,
but rather by the preaching of Barnabas the Apostle, as Clement reports.


Tim. What do ye observe in the 24. verse?


Silas. Whereas Paul writes that he trusts to see them in his journey into
Spain, we gather that this iourny was not directed by special impulsion and
motion of the Spirit, (as sometimes it was done, Acts 16.) but by humane
purpose; therefore he says (I trust) and indeed we read not in sacred writ
that ever he came at Spain: for this place which only mentioned his mind
herein, gives us no light of a certain judgment. He speaks only of a
purpose, not of a performance: Paul doubtless meant it, yet with reverence to
Gods will, which so ouer-ruleth the events of men's intentions, as in a special
manner he governed the Apostles in their administration.

Secondly, we learn that for future things which be contingent, we are to
depend upon Gods good will and providence, without all rash and peremptory
presumption. We are obliged not only in the judgment and purpose of our
soul, to refer all to his most wise and just disposition, but to signify
the same with the words of our mouth, saying, I trust to do this or that, I
trust to have such a thing, etc. Thirdly, it is a good fruit of love and
reverence, which we owe unto the Ministers of Christ, (which are true and
faithful) to be their companions of their journey, to set them forwards on
their way, namely when they are to travail through unknown and dangerous
ways: if the people must lay down their necks, much more tread three or four
steps for their Ministers. Howbeit, it is like Paul expected this kindness
from the Romans, not so much for his own conduction and safety, as to impart
holy and whole some things to such as went along in his company, which they
might communicate at their return to their brethren at Rome, for the greater
benefit of the Church: which should advertise teachers to take all occasions
of profiting their people, and to convert received kindnesses to their good
which show and do them.


Tim. What may we learn from the 25. verse?


Silas. It affoords us these two instructions: First, he calls the poor
(not any kind or special sort, as such which had forsaken all for Christ,)
but generally such Gospellers as were afflicted with want, and lived in worldly
necessity, these he calls [Saints] because they were such by profession.

Secondly, by the Sacrament of holiness; to wit, Baptism, which dedicated
them (as holy) to Christ. Thirdly, by sanctification of the Spirit, purging
their consciences by the blood of Christ, and renewing their hearts to
sanctimony and godly pureness by his Spirit: Al, rich and poor which believe
in Christ, be Saints while they live in earth, and must mind and practice
sanctity as ever they will see heaven.

Secondly, that it is a good and holy duty to minister and be helpefull to such
poor Saints, either in giving, collecting, or carrying alms to the godly
poor, which are ever to be relieved, and with our best affections, Gal. 6, 10.
The honest and holy poor which follow godlineste and their vocation, have
most interest in our mercy.


Tim. What may we learn out of the 26. verse?


Silas. Seeing the Grecian Churches (such as were planted in Macedonia and
Acbaia) did succor the needy brethren at Jerusalem, we ought by this example
to extend our charity, (when ability suffers) beyond the seas to foreign
Churches, when they need us; as our English Churches have often and liberally
done both to diverse afflicted Grecians, and chiefly to the Saints at Geneua,
being afflicted and distressed through wars between them and Sauoy. The
reason is, the straight conjunction which is between the faithful (as
between brethren, fellows, members, coheires, etc.) which no difference of
language, no distance of place can dissolve; such then straighten their charity
too much, which restrain it to their own parish or nation, etc.

Again learn, that contributions must not be extortions and compulsions as
coming of necessity or for any by or sinister respects, but voluntary
oblations, (it pleased them) they gave because they would, they were not
forced, see Acts 11, 29, 30. 2. Cor. 9, 5. and 8, 9. To give because we are
asked, or for that they would not be held niggards, or out of fear of danger
if we deny a stout beggar, or only to discharge sesse, may profit receivers,
but does not benefit the giver, who has no fruit of his gift except it come
of benevolence and good will.


Tim. What learn we out of the 27. verse?


Silas. These things: First, it behooves to return thankfulness where we
receive a benefit: for a good turn has the force of an obligation, and
binds to a recompense; debtors they were to the Jews by the law of charity
and equity, it is very equal that few and small things be repaide for great,
and many kindnesses temporal for spiritual things, their goods for the
Gospel, comforts to their bodies from whom our souls receive food of
eternal life. This insinuated to the Romans, that being enriched as much as
the Grecians, and indebted no less to the Jews, from whom they received the
doctrine of Christ by the Apostles; therefore they ought to follow the example
of Macedonia and Achaia, of whom Paul witnessed, 2. Cor. 8, 1. 2. 3. that their
extreme poverty abounded to their rich liberality, being willing, even above
their power; so as the Romans being better able, and alike engaged, (the
Gospel also coming to them from Sion) it behooved them at least to be as
francke as the Christians of Macedonia were: of such a matter Paul very
artificially and wisely does here advertise them, when he commends this duty in
others, he does excite them unto it.


Tim. The verses 28, 29. are yet behind, will not this fountain also send out
some sweet stream?


Silas. Yes, as namely first that alms or works of mercy be likened to
[fruite] for they are the fruits of the Spirit, Gala. 5. they spring from
faith and charity; also they do please God, as pleasant fruit does our palate.
Thirdly, a fruit, because alms was profitable both unto the giver, as
witnesses of their profession, and to the receiver, whose necessities are
relieved and bowels comforted; yea to God himself, who reaped thereby the
fruit and calves of men's lips.

Lastly, commodious to others for example sake: Let al Christians hereby take
more encouragement to abound in this fruit, which is so delightful to God as
an odor of sweet smell, and so very and manifoldly beneficial to themselves
which are bountiful giuers, by increasing even their earthly store. Give and
it shall be given abundantly, good measure pressed down shall men give into
your bosom, Luke 6, 38. Because rich men believe not this, therefore they are
either illiberall and handfast, sparing too much; or prodigal and wastefull,
spending too much, choosing the one to fill their chests, and the other their
lusts, rather then to be fruitful in works of charity, public and private.

Secondly, note here Paul's fidelity, that as a treasure signed and shut up in
a close place, or as letters sealed, which others may not look in and read:
so he was careful that this alms might safely come to their hands, to whom
it was meant, therefore would not commit and turn over the care to others, but
himself would perform, (that is) discharge the trust placed in him. This it
is which is meant when he says, [ when I have sealed this fruit.] Such as
deal falsely or fradulently in Orphans goods, or alms given to the poor, or
in revenues of Hospitals, are condemned by this example of Paul, which calls
upon all which have trust reposed in them to declare all good faithfulness:
the want whereof hinders mercy, and makes love of many to be cold, who dare
not exercise liberality because there is so little fidelity. Woe be to them by
whom such offenses come; repent or perish.

Finally, whereas Paul promises to bring with him an abundant blessing of the
Gospel, (that is, the Gospel which abundantly publishes the eternal and most
free grace of God in Christ, by whom all nations are blessed, through faith in
him) he does herein like affectionate parents, which going afar off into
strange countries, do kindle in their children a longing desire of their
return, by large promises of some special gift at their coming again: so the
Apostle does quicken the desires of the Romans after his presence, with
promise of the greatest good which he could bring, such as was able to make
them partakers of all Gods spiritual blessings, and of blessedness everlasting.
Of this he was sure [ I know it,] because he had it by revelation, Acts 19, 21.
After Paul's example, let preachers much rather seek to do, then to receive
good in places where they come or travel, it being a more blessed thing to
give, then to receive, Acts 20, 35. How is the spirit of Paul differing from
the spirit of Romish prelacie, whose coming is more pompous and chargeable
then profitable and commodious to others? Let godly Pastors also imitate his
godly wisdom, in stirring up and increasing the good will of their flocks
toward them, delighting in their love, and provoking them to love, purposing,
promising, and perfourming whatsoever may tend to make their people truly, and
for ever blessed, though (if need be) with their labor and loss of liberty,
living, and life. So Christ, so the Prophets, and so Apostles have walked.


DIAL. VI.
Verses 30, 31, 32, 33. Now I beseech you brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's
sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that you do strive together with me in
your Prayers to God for me, 31. That I might be delivered from those which do
not believe in Judea, and that my service which I have for Jerusalem, may be
accepted of the Saints. 32. That I may come to you with toy, by the will of
God, and may with you be refreshed. 33. Now the God of peace be with all, Amen.


Tim. LEt us have the meaning method, and matter of these 4. verses with most
perspicuous breuity.


Silas. They contain the last part of this Chapter, his commending himself to
their prayers, with an exceeding religious obtestation (even as Christ or his
Spirit be dear unto them) so that they be ready (not to help) but to fight
together with him in prayer to God the author all good, the protector against
all evil, verse 31. Then in verse 32. the subject of their prayer, or things
to be prayed for on Paul's behalf are two: First, to be set free from the
unbelieving and cruel Jews which maligned Paul most of all other Apostles and
disciples of Christ.

Secondly, that the poor Church of Jerusalem, might as thankfully accept the
alms brought them by him, as it was freely and voluntarily given them.
Afterward he notcth the effects and fruits of their mutual prayers; one was,
that he might come to them, being saved from the fury of enemies; and the
other, that he might come with more gladness, if he understood his service for
the poor Brethren to be accepted, otherwise his coming would be with grief,
verse 32, 33.


Tim. Come to the matter, and touch the Doctrines, reasons, and uses, verse by
verse, as ye did before.


Silas. The first Doctrine out of the 30. verse is, that the stronger do need
the prayers of the weaker. The reason is, because there will be still somewhat
wanting to the best, and the force of prayers depends not upon the worthiness
of persons (for the Romans were less worthy then Paul) but on Christ's
merits, in whose name whosoever come to God, shall be heard for themselves and
other. For that God which commands us to pray for our selves, enioyneth us to
pray for others: especially, our teachers, as having more need unto, and more
right in our prayers, then other Christians have.

The Use is to warn the weaker to show their charity in praying for the
worthier, and the worthiest their humility in seeking the request of the
meanest. How much more ought the infirm to desire earnestly the help of the
zcalous prayers of the strong, when the strongest, such as Paul, does crave
the weaker sort to remember him. Secondly, Gods providence which is first and
sovereign cause, and men's prayers which are second causes, be not repugnant
but subordinate; the one destroies not the other, but they mutually require one
the other. Paul was sure to come to Rome by Gods power, yet he neglects not
the means, he prays, and entreats them to pray for him: see Acts 23, 32.
Math. 7, 7, 8. The reason is, because God has ordained prayer and other
means, with a commandment to use them: also he uses to serve his providence
by means, though he be free and untied to any means, yea, even when he
sets Instruments aworke, yet he does all, because he will: for he is a most
free agent.

This checkes such as foreslow prayer and other helps as need requires, and
as God offreth them; they are in his obedience and fear to be used, least he
be tempted. When a certain Pastor had said to a great Warrior, going to
battle, that he would pray for him; who replied that it should not need,
because if God meant him victory, it should come without his prayers; to whom
the Preacher replied, Then also cast away your weapons and Soldiers, for
without them (if he will) God can save. So he saw his error.

Likewise, a certain Physician having a Patient who was an Atheist, told him,
his Physic would not work without prayer to God, and so cured both his
atheisine and sickness at once. Thirdly, Christian prayer must be fervent,
cold suitors be ill speeders, James 5, 16. Of zealous prayers, Popery can give
no examples, because their prayers be uttered in a strange tongue: they labor
with their lips, not with their minds.

Fourthly, fervent prayer of the faithful, is as a strife or conflict, wherein
sundry join their forces against a common enemy. In worldly combats, as
soldiers mutually beseech the aid one of another, so the faithful by Paul's
example, are to incite one to join with another, and to conflict or fight
together by prayers: for this duty has many and great hindrances: as namely
Satan, because it does him much hurt, he suggesteth into the minds of men at
their prayers, thoughts of doubting, of wrath, reasonings, vain immaginations,
strange cogitations: so as it is a very difficult thing in time of invocation,
to have the whole heart fixed and stayed on God, and on the things which are
paid for. This thing nedeeth an holy strife and contention: Most men do not
account it thus: which causes feigned and fainting prayers to proceed from
many, such as vanish and fall to nothing ere they come a quarter of the way to
heaven, whither they cannot reach without a spiritual violence. Fifthly, no
better buckler in extremity then prayer, fervent and faithful. The Apostle
being in great danger of his countrymen the Jews, craves not the Romans to
bring forth their weapons (as swords and Spears, etc.) to encounter them and
rescue him, but to fight with God by hearty prayer for his safety, wherein
lies more security then in force of arms, by how much Gods power exceeds
all earthly might. Our degenerate and new Romans take a readier way and
shorter cut to quit them of their enemies (not by running so far as heaven,)
but by seditions, rebellions, murders, treasons, stabbing of Princes, blowing
up of English Parliament-houses, and such other monstrous unnatural courses,
whereof godly Paul never once dreamed, unless it were to denounce helltorment,
and heavens loss to them. Oh how unlike be the spirit of Paul and of the
Pope, who dares not trust God by prayer to fly to him only, but to impious,
diabolical, and hellish practices and policies, to effect his accursed will
against such as he accounts his foes, yet in truth Christ's friends? How far be
they from Antichrist, which delight so in the blood of Gods people, in
barbarous savage cruelty, such as amongst Scythians and Cannibals is not to be
heard of? Doeg is condemned for trusting in riches, Achas in his Physicians,
what shall be done to Papists which trust in murder and violence?


Tim. Touching the thing prayed for in verse 32. what reason had the Apostle to
desire this deliverance from the disobedient Jews, (unbelief is the greatest
disobedience, refusing to submit to the commandment which bids us believe in
Christ, and makes men disobedient to the word of precept, as well as of
promise) was he so timorous as he feared to be slain and killed of them? And
what need was there to pray for acceptance of his Alms (a matter so desired
and delightful to the poorer sort) and out of all this verse, what should we
learn for our edisication in godliness, as also out of the v. 33. what say ye
to these things?


Sil. Of the former petition, the cause was not immoderate fear of danger, or
a mind unprepared to suffer afflictions, see Acts. 21, 13. but partly, the
prophesies of the Spirit, revealing to him continual and great troubles to
happen to him at Jerusalem, Act. 20, 22. 23. and the extreme malice of the
Jews, hating Paul as a most resolute champion of the Messiah doctrine, and a
rigorous enemy or oppugner of the legal ceremonies and Mosaicall rites, (as
shadows which were to give way to the presence of the body, which is Christ,)
and finally, that he might not be wanting to his own preservation (the care
whereof nature and God have laid on every man, yea every creature. Hereby
teaching us first, that the Gofpell has no more fierce enemies then ignorant
zeal: witness the fury practiced by Jews and Papists a against the Gospel of
Christ, and the true professors thereof. 2. that sound and painful Preachers,
are exposed to perilous adversaries for the words sake. For such as hate the
Lord, hate his servants, as Christ told his Apostles: therefore Pastors have
need of much Christian courage, and of the prayers of the flock for their
desert. 3. Against such our own, and the Churches prayers, are to be opposed
as chiefest refuge; because of the promise which God made them, Mat. 18, 20.
Ps. 50 15. a guard of a thousand Soldiers, cannot make Gods children so safe
and sure, as one sighe or prayer of a contrite heart. For it is God only, that
makes men dwell in safety. All salvation belongs to God, and he hears their
prayers that fear him, and grants their desires. Here are reproved such as
neglect their Pastors safety, never commending it to God in their prays, much
more such as betray and be procurers of their peril and trouble, as Alexander
the Coppersmith, etc.

Touching his latter request, though alms be acceptable and welcome to the
needy (as bread and drink to the hungry or thirsty) yet even such Jews as
were become Christians, and had not whollye shaken off Moses Law, had and held
a great jealousy and sinister suspicion of Paul, see Acts 21, 21. which made
Paul fear the success of his service, how it would be taken, being brought by
one not very gracious to them, yet obliged unto this office by his own
promise, and the Churches impulsion, Gal. 2, 10. Learn, that Saints have
frailties, poor Saints have infirmities; for their Sanctification is not
absolute. Hence it is, that good offices cannot always be done to them, but
with some fear of unthankfulness and vntow ardnesse in accepting, and of il
construction of friendly endeauours: which as it did not dishearten Paul, so it
ought not us, who are to pray to have such weaknesses cured and amended in the
people, but not to be withheld by them from doing duty: but go on to fulfill
our vocation, as David did in the matter of Goliath, notwithstanding his
brethren did peruersely interpret his endeavor. So did Christ in preaching
and working Miracles, albeit the Jews sinisterly attributed all he did to
vainglory, and to the work of Beelzebub. In the other words following with Paul
in future events, let us learn quietly and contentedly to wait upon the will
of God, because it rules all, and turns all to the best, verse 32. by the will
of God; also to seek refreshing and joy in the society, conference,
consolation, and exhortations of the godly. For as many hot coals put
together, does make one another burn the more, and give the greater warmth, so
conferring and mutual communicating of gifts kindles zeal, increases
godliness, and confirms in the faith of Christ: therefore such are enemies
to themselves and others, which be enemies to godly conferences, and unto
brotherly fellowship.

Finally, it is a great mercy both to have God pacified to us; and one of us
at peace with another in the Lord. This is the only work of God, who is very
often therefore styled the God of peace, Romans 15, 5. Phil. 4, 9. Thus the God
of peace be with you all, Amen. This of having God with us (that is,) the
presence of his favor as well as of his essence and power, is a most blissful
thing, the cause of all peace, prosperity, and welfare to our souls and bodies,
now and for euet: as men be miserable without it, so most happy by it.
Therefore in Scripture very often prayed for. and much promised as the
foundation of al our good. See Exodus 4, 12. Josh. 1, 9. Judge. 6, 16. Genes. 39,
2. Acts 10, 38, etc.


CHAP. XVI.
DIAL. I.
Verse 1. unto verse 17. I commend unto you Phebe our Sister who is a servant
of the Church which is at Cenchrea. 2. That ye receive her in the Lord as it
becomes the Saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she has
need of you, for she has been a succourer of many, and of my self also. 3.
Greet or salute Priscilla and Aquila my fellow helpers in Christ Jesus. 4. Who
have for my life laid down their own necks, etc.


Timotheus. AFter our long sailing and travel in the deep and profound
Mysteries of Christian Religion and Faith, me thinks I ken the Land, and see
us to draw near the shore, and find our bark coming into the shallow
waters, as if we were at the haven and end of a troublesome voyage, full of
labor and weariness.


Silas. It is so: now at length, after six or seven years spent and past upon
the Ocean in the maine Seas, we are brought through by the good conduct of
that grand and most skillful Pilot Christ Jesus unto the arriving place. For
after some friendly and familiar salutations of certain special members of
the Church at Rome, whom Paul would honor with mentioning them, and giving
them their due praise to verse 18. then he shuts up the Epistle with a grave
admonition, to beware of Schismatic seducers, and with a devout exaltation
or celebration of Gods power, goodness, wisdom and glory; from v. 18. to the
end of the Chapter.

In the first verse, he commends a certain Woman, whom he describes by her
name [ Phebe,] Secondly, her profession, [ a Sister.] Thirdly, by her
condition or office [ a Servant, etc.] In the second verse, he expresses what
he would have them to do for her, 1. to receive her, 2. to use her as a Saint.
3. to assist her: and then he notes the reason wherefore, because of her
beneficence and liberality to others, not to a few, and even to Paul himself.
She is called a Sister, for the common faith and religion sake, and a servant
to the Church, either for that she was one of the widows, whose election and
duty is at large set forth, 1 Timothy 5. or for her charity toward the Church,
which sne entertained in her house, and succored with relief; and this is
most likely, 1. because of her long journey from Greece to Rome, which for an
old widdowe had bin too much: and 2. for her large bounty exercised toward Paul
and many more, which was impossible for a poor widow (such as Deaconesses
were, which in the Primitive Church attended sick persons. To commend her,
signifies to praise her, as one beloved of him for religion sake, and to put
her over to their trust and care, to be counseled and aided by them of Rome,
in things where of she might have need of them. Cenchrea was an haven near
Corinth. He would have her received, and lovingly entertained, [ In the Lord)
that is, either for the Lords sake, in his name, and for his love, or as the
Lord himself. As Christ says, Ye did it to me, when ye did it to one of
these: and as Paul writes that the Galathians received him as Christ Jesus,
who in his Ministers and members holds himself either honored or contemned.
Whosoever receives you, (...) me, etc. Thou persecutest me. Now we have not
himself in earth, he will be respected in these as his vicegerents and
deputies: (as becomes the Saints) that is, worthly as may beseem her, being one
of the Saints of them which were Saints by calling. See before, chapter 15. v. 26.


Tim. Now ye have opened the words, touch some instructions and so hasten
forwards.


Silas. In the example of this woman thus commended and described (as in a
Looking glass) we may behold these things for our edification. First, the
custom and duty of helping and pleasuring good Christians, with our
commending them to such as be good, is both good and ancient, warranted by the
practice of an holy Aposile. The reason hereof is, because it serves both for
the comme^deds sake, to exercise charity toward them, procuring them succor by
our creditc, and 2. for their sakes unto whom they be commended, that they may
have occasion to show their love, and may know toward whom to declare it
worthily. In our commendations, this caution is to be observed: that they whom
we praise, and either speak or write for, be good or praise worthy, and
known so to us, least we wrong them to whom we send Commendatory letters, by
leading them into an error, and our selves by bearing false witness against
the 9. commandment; for to commend the unworthy, is a deceit and a false
testimony. If men thought on this, they would not displease God to pleasure a
man.

Secondly, we learn that in receiving the godly, we must both consider their
dignity, that they are Saints and holy ones which will draw honor toward
them, and that in loving and helping them, we give proose of our reverence and
love to Christ their lord, which will make us cheerful in these duties, when
we believe that we do for the Lords sake, to be gratefully accepted, as it were
done to the Lord himself.

Thirdly, here is a comfort for gracious women, that they do belong to the
kingdom of heaven; for with God neither male nor female, all one in Christ:
holy Scripture has registered in perpetual record the faith and famous acts of
sundry of both sexes, to show himself free from acception of persons, and to
encourage the weaker sex to labor in godliness, seeing their love and
goodness is not forgotten, but had and kept in remembrance.

Fourthly, here is an example to such of both sorts as be noble and wealthy,
to be full of good works, as Dorcas, Acts 9, 36. as Susanna and Ioanna and
many others, Lu. 8, 2, 3. and as this Phoebe. The wives have not so much
liberty as widows, yet they may be bountiful and give much to good uses,
where husbands do make good allowance, inabling them wherewith to express
their charity, and when the case is such as was the case of Abigail, 1. Sam.
25, 18.

Lastly, here is a reproof unto rich men which suffer women to excel them in
bounty and piety. Many good women who have testified the sincerity of their
faith by their liberality, for maintenance of relgion, and learning, and
comfort of the poor, shall go to heaven to be in glory, when rich churlish
Nabals, and epicurish gluttons, as he in Luke 16. shall be adjudged to bear
shame in hell for evermore.


Tim. Tell us now what our Apostle had respect unto, in his salutations from
verse 3. unto verse 17? Interpret such phrases as need the light of exposition,
and observe some profitable instructions with best expedition ye can. For I
long to see us safe on shore.


Silas. To [salute] is with heartiest desire to pray for the welfare and
health of others: such a duty would not be done cursarily, perfunctorily.
Paul's heart and pen accorded in one, whose respect and purpose in these his
salutations is, to manifest more unto the brethren at Rome his entire good will
and sincere love toward them and their salvation. Secondly, to countenance
these persons here saluted, that by their authority and guists were most
enabled to stead and help the rest in their course of godhnesse. Thirdly, to
provoke others to emulation, and study of imitating these so commended. And
lastly, by these praises (as by a spur in their side) to excite these so
saluted, to proceed and profit more in all graces. We willingly embrace and
follow such good things, as others which be godly and wise (as Paul was) do
praise in us.

These persons saluted, were some men and some women, some Preachers, some
professors only, some Jews, some Gentiles; some only named, some both named
and noted with Epithites of praise. They be 28. in number, and besides single
persons, greeting is sent to some whole families. Lastly, salutations be sent
both singularly from a particular man as Paul, and generally from whole
Churches, verse 16. The first pair saluted, be Aquila and Priscilla, verse 3.
of whom read Acts 18, 2, 18. who are here commended four ways: First,
though they were no Ministers, yet were to Paul his fellow-helpers, not as
working with him in the same trade, Acts 18, 3. but in the Lord, that is, in
the Lords business, the spreading of the Gospel: for as they instructed
Apollos in the way of the Lord more perfectly, Acts 18, 16. so no doubt out of
then zeal and piety they labored to bring others to the faith of Jesus. Note
here Paul's modesty, admitting the help of his inferiors in his labor for the
Gospel: the head disdaineth not the feet; they were as feet in respect of
Paul, being a principal member of the Church, yet he despises them not, but
meekely receives their assistance.

Secondly, their charity in communicating their knowledge to the good of
others. As a Cloud the rain, and a Ewe her milk, so they powered out their
wisdom in scripture, for instruction of many: all our knowledge (like a
Candle) ought to shine unto others for their direction.

Thirdly, the Popes arogancie in disdaining such helpers he and his mitred
Bishops will have no such coadiutors: nay, they forbid Lay People so much as to
read Scriptures: they keep them in gross blindness, thicker then Egyptian
darkness, that they may not see their deceitful tricks, and horrible
abominations in their Doctrine and worship, in their teaching and living. I
read of some burned by Papists, for having a Testament about them.

The second praise is, that for Paul's sake, they put their lives in danger
(laying down their necks, signifying their readiness to dye for his love and
cause) which as it does serve for a pattern to Ministers both to set out the
condition of such as teach the Gospel to be as Lambs amongst Wolves; and the
constancy that ought to be in them, for preaching truth to put their lives in
ieopardy, as Paul did: so to all Christians for imitation of the zeal of
Priscilla and Aquila in behalf of Paul their teacher. It is to be noted both
with a check to such as either lead their instructors into dangers (as many
malicious hearers do) or do forsake them in their trobles, as they of whom the
Apostle complains, 2 Timothy 4, 16. and with a comfort to all such as in
perilous times and causes stick to their Pastors who have diligently fed
them; sithence Gods Spirit has registered this example to the immortal praise
of these two, who loved not their own lives, to deliver their instructor from
death. There is a maruailous strait conjunction between pastor and flock.

Thirdly, he says of himself, and all the Churches of the Gentiles, that
Aquila and Priscilla had made them their debtors: and this he says for good
reason, because their benefit was public, redounding unto the whole Church,
to preserve such a worthy servant of the church. Whereof this use is to be
made, that to do good to faithful pastors, by preserving their life and
liberty, is a special benefit; for the which, thanks are from all generally
due, which should hearten true hearers (as cause requires) not to spare purse,
pains, nay their own persons and lives, to succor such as are profitable to
many.

The last thing in their praise was, that they had a Church in their house;
either for that their family for their godly order observed in it, seemed to be
a Church, such religious exercises being there used privately (so far as
lawfully might be) as publicly in the assemblies were frequented: and thus it
should be in every household; or else for the faithful, (which being not many
at first) gathered together in their house, to celebrate their assemblies: for
they might not have in most places the free use of Christian religion, through
the malice of the Jews somewhere, and elsewhere of Gentiles: see Acts 13, and
14. Epenetus is entitled the first fruits of Achaia, both because he was in
order of time the first which professed Christ in that country, (as first
fruits came before the rest) and for that in degree of piety and virtue
excelled others, as first fruits are both reaped before, and be the chief and
choice of the crop. A worthy thing it is to give the onset, and begin to lead
others the way, which fear and worldliness makes men backward to do; yea
keeps numbers from following others that have broken the Ice, and made an
entrance into the zealous profession and practice of Christianity.

The other titles of beloved, approved, of laboring in the Lord, and being
in the Lord, (given to diverse here) do note how dear they were to Paul, for
their profession of faith, or fruits of their faith: and teach that others
ought to be so far forth beloved and esteemed of, as they pertain to Christ
our common Lord and show the same by their faithful endeavors to further the
Gospel. Also note v. 7. to be in Christ, signifies to be a christian or
faithful person: and to be [approued in Christ] is to be unblameable or
without reproof, nay well allowed offor his faithfulness and constancy in the
cause of Christ.

Whereas he salutes some of his kinsmen, learn, that to our kindred when they
be godly, we are tied by a double band, one of nature, the other of Religion:
and therefore such as forsake and forget their Christian religions kindred, do
give cause to fear, least neither piety nor humanity be had in regard by them.
Such as were in bonds with Paul for the Gospel sake, are therefore called his
fellow prisoners. They suffered bonds and imprisonment with him, and so showed
their hearty love both to Christ and to his Apostle Paul, whom they forsook
not, as diverse others did, 2. Timothy 4. All forsook me, but did cleave to
his doctrine by faith, and became his fellows in afflictions. Let Christians
learn thus to love the word, and the Ministers of it: such imprisonment is more
sweet then liberty.

Also, whereas some are commended for laboring in the Lord, and others for
laboring much in him (that is, in the divulging of his truth, and edifying his
Church, or doing other services of charity:) hereby we do learn, that there
is a difference among Laborers, some according to their means, opportunities,
gifts and great zeal, labor more and some less; but each are to have their
due praise, even he who laboreth little, as well as he who labors much: none
are to be defrauded.

Whereas v. 13. Rufus mother is called Paul's Mother, understand a Mother by
affection, not natural. Observe that Aristobulus and Narcissus are not
saluted, as being belike not yet converted: and Narcissus is thought to have
bin full of riches and naughtiness, overthrowing many a worthy man by
calumnies, yet both had Christians in their families. The kiss which Paul
mentions v, 16. shows the custom to be ancient; for the Saints at their
meeting, do declare mutual good will by a kiss, which was given sometime in
token of subjection, as Genesis 42. and Psalm. 2, 12. Sometimes a sign of Charity:
this was chiefly done before the receiving of the Eucharist, to testify peace
and brotherly amity. Whence arose the superstitious kissing the Paxe in popery,
which depraues and abuses al good things. By adding [holy,] he distinguishes
1. chaste kisses from wanton, and 2. adulatory, and 3. proditory, and 4.
dissimulatory kisses, such as Ioab Judas, and Ammon gave, which is no small
thing. For as giving the hand one to another at our meeting, after long
absence, signifies the delivery of our heart to him toward whom we use such
gesture, so kissing (of all other gestures) has I know not how, the most
evident and express representation of that which is within. For, whereas life
consists in respiration, and our breathing is by our mouth, kissing is a
sign that a man is ready to communicate, and as it were to infuse his own
proper soul to another. A custom not so ancient for use, 1 Pet. 5, 14. in
Eastern Churches especially, but now is as grossly abused in the Western, and
by such as afford this loue-token even to dogs.

Finally, whereas Paul familiarly names and saluteth many of his acquaintance
at Rome, and far more then other Churches being better known unto him, yet
not once mentions Peter, who should be the chief Pastor there, as Papists
say: The Apostle either did forget and neglect him (which is unlike,) or Peter
was unworthy (as an Apostata) of his salutation, which is untrue: or Peter was
not then at Rome, which is not improbable, yea, whether he were there at all or
no, is uncertain. For we do not find in all the history of the Acts, or other
parts of the new Testament, that ever Peter came at Rome, no not one syllable
to that purpose; therefore it can be no Article of faith, or thing necessary,
to be believed unto salvation: for all such things are either expressly written
or by necessary deduction to be collected out of Scriptures, which are (as
Origin says) the sole norme and rule of Faith. the immovable Canon of verity
(as (...),) the most exact gnomon, balance, and square of all truths, as
Chrysostom.

Again, what shall we say if the Scriptures do teach the quite contrary. For
Paul was converted a year or thereabouts, after the ascension of our Lord. The
third year after Paul's miraculous conversion in his way to Damascus, Peter
went to Jerusalem, where he continued with Paul the space of fifteen days,
Gal. 1, 18. all this while Peter was not at Rome. Eight years after Paul's
conversion, Peter was abiding at Jerusalem, being imprisoned was sought for to
be killed by Herod, about the 3. year of Claudius: as yet then he was not at
Rome, Acts 12, 2, 3, 4. etc. Six years after that, even full fourteen years
after that he first had met Paul at Jerusalem, (which was the 51. year from
Christ's birth) he was at Jerusalem, where he gave Paul and Barnabas the right
hand of fellowship, Gal. 2, 9. At which time a council was held at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. and then it was agreed upon by mutual consent, Galat. 2, 9. that Paul
should preach unto the Gentiles, and Peter to the Jews, who by an edict were
cast out, and banished from Rome; so as all this while he came not there. When
the Council was dissolved, whither did Peter go? to Rome (his Sea and seat as
the Papists feign) nay to Antioch, where he was to his face (a bold act to be
done, if Peter had been Pope) he was I say reproved of Paul for his
dissimulation, Galath. 2, 11. Moreover, when Paul was first led prisoner to
Rome, he found not Peter there, for then would not Luke having so good
occasion to mention him, Acts 28. have passed him over in silence: and Paul
having been a free prisoner for two years at Rome complained that all
forsook him: What Peter too? no verily; which argues all this space Peter not
to have been at Rome. Sure it is impossible he should sit Bishop there so
many years, full 25. till the last year of Nero, as popish Chronologers
reckon, and to suffer martyrdom there, and have his Sepulcher there. Or if all this were true, what is this to the Pope being no successor to Peter in
doctrine and piety, whatsoever he be for place and dignity? If he had
succession of his chair (a thing more then questionable,) yet he had none of
his faith. From which Rome now, how far it is gone from ancient Rome, has
been in sundry parts and passages of this Epistle observed: and in many other
more learned and unanswered nay unanswerable treatises has been of late
demonstrated, both at home and abroad, so as were not their foreheads of bras,
and their hearts of adamant, their consciences seared with an hot iron, they
would blush for shame, and repent with sorrow, that they had so long striuen
for Dagon, for an idolatrous religion, and for Babylon a Mother of
abominations and whoiedomes, Revel. 17. 5. Of whose cup of fornications as
they still delight to drink; so they certainly shall drink with her of the
cup of Gods vengeance, Revel. 18, 4, and 16, 19.

By the [Churches of Christ] he means particular assemblies, (members of the
universal Church) near to the places where Paul was now remaining,
professing the faith of Christ, and denominated by their places where they
were, as the Church of Corinth, Galatia, Antiochia, etc.


DIAL. II.
Verses 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Now I beseech you brethren mark them which
cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have learned,
and avoid them. 18. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus, but
their own belles, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of
the simple. 19. For your obedience is come abroad unto all men: I am glad
therefore on your behalf, but yet I would have you wise, to that which is
good, and simple concerning that which is on ll. 20. And the God of peace
shalltread Satan under your feet shortly: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
be with you all Amen. 21. Timotheus my work-fellow, etc.


Tim. HOw does the Apostle proceed, and what things be contained in these
verses?


Silas. When he had mentioned and saluted diverse godly persons amongst them,
whom he would have to set as examples to follow; now he admonishes them
whom they are to eschew, namely heretics and schismatics, which by opinions
rent themselves from the truth of doctrine, or in their wicked manners give
scandals. Touching these, he would have them marked and narrowly looked into,
because they are not easily found out, and through negligence of overseers,
they do creep into the flock. Secondly, he wishes to avoid them, both by
shunning privately their company for fear of taking infection from them, and
of hatdening them by our familiarity; and by shutting them (after once or twice
admonitions, Titus 3. 10.) out of public assemblies by excommunication, (which
is the sword of the Church, to strike and cut off rotten and pernicious
members.) Also by casting them into banishment, if they go on to pervert
others, which is the Magistrates care and part, verse 17. and in verse 18. To
the end the Christians at Rome might the better consider and decline such pests
and Serpents, which at Corinth and Galatia had bia, and were like enough to be
among the Romans: also to wind in themselves to disturb the peace, and
destroy truth and unity of the Church; (which Satan in his members most
studiously endeavors) therefore he gives certain notes whereby to know
these seducing and scandalous persons. The first is, they seek to turn men
from the true doctrine, (such as 'Paul in this Epistle, and other Apostles in
their Sermons and writings taught) broaching opinions either ex diametro
contrary, or at least besides, ( para signifies both, as Romans 1, 26.) that
doctrine which is apostolical. The purity of the wholesome words of Christ is
corrupted, when ought either other, or otherwise is brought in, either when
truth by humane inventions is adulteiated, or false doctrine apparently
crossing the Scriptures, is maintained, 1. Tim. 1. Gal. 1, 8, 9. This is then
one sign of a deceiuer, to lead awry from ancient doctrine, received from the
beginning by the ministry of Christ and his Apostles, John 2, 20.

Another sign in verse 18. is their hypocrisy: howsoever they indeed ought to
be, and in words do pretend to be servants of Christ, (having his name Jesus,
Lord, etc. and the profession of him much in their mouths, as if they were the
only persons that took pleasure and care to please serve, and honor him, to
defend his says and religion) yet they do nothing less, being enemies to his
doctrine, and true servants. Phil. 3, 18. and think they do a meritorious
act to destroy true Christians, Mat. 10, 17, 18. John 16, 2, 3. The third
sign is their end they aim at, which is to serve their belly; for filthy
lucre they teach things which they ought not, 1. Tim. 6, 5. Titus 1, 11, 12.
making their belly (not Jesus Christ) their God, Phil. 3. 18. And who would not
be ashamed to have them for teachers who have their belly for their God,
coining new and false opinions for temporal commodities sake?

The fourth mark is from their art and practice, which they use when they
will seduce; it is by fair and flattering speeches, whereby they steal away
men's hearts, pretending their good, when they mean it not, (as the Serpent
circumaented Eve,) promising much, and performing nothing, speaking pleasing
things (as if they would lay bolsters of down under their elbowes, Ezokiel 13,
18.) and with sweet sugared words praising both the persons and doings of such
as they would ensnare: like Physicians who minister delectable things, so these
sooth and smooth over men's faults, commending where they should condemae: and
this is signified (as Origin thinks) by sheep clothing, Mat. 7, 15. As
greediness for their bellies declares them to be ravenous wolves, and as the
Crododile by show of pity and humanity does beguile such as come near him; so
do these corrupters seek nothing but to deceive by their flatterings, like
Judas or Ioab, speaking sweet words that without suspicion they might put out
the sting of erroneous doctrine; and this their cunning makes it so hard to
discover them, and so much the more needful to mark and observe them.

The last thing whereby they are here noted, is the object whereupon these
impostours do work, and it is unwary and heedlesse people which neither
mistrust nor mark their malice. Widows whose houses they devour under
pretense of prayers and blessings, such as Paul speaks of, silly women laden
with sin, 2. Tim. 3, 6. As Satan set on Eve first, so his servants attempt
women which are less cautelous, yet vehement being once won, and powerful
perswaders of their husbands, to whom they are near and dear.

Howsoever this description did agree with such as did Iudaize, yoaking Moses
and the law, with Christ and grace in the cause of salvation, and does also
well fit other deceivers and heretics, yet never did coat so fit a man's
back, as these marks, do agree with popish Friars, Monks, Priests, and
lesuites especially, as it is notoriously known to the whole world, how they
boast of Jesus (of whom they have their name Jesuits) but be nothing less
then good Christians, attending lucre, decciuing simple folks. Also consider
here that these marks of discerning, be so many reasons to persuade
declining from seducers: for who ought not abhor and avoid such as do
pervert the pure doctrine of Christ, and persuade us to sorsake the fountain
of life, to go to Cesternes which hold no water? such as also be hipocrites
professing the service of Christ, and yet addicted wholly to voluptuousness and
gain, such as with goodly and glorious words do bring asleep vnheedfull
persons, to the end they may more securely make a prey of their goods and
souls. Upon which considerations, all Christians stand bound to observe and
avoid them.


Tim. But are there no other reasons in our Text to persuade care and diligence
in avoiding such?


Silas. Yes, these three, one from the effects, they do deceive, verse 18.
well may they promise life and salvation, but death and damnation will prove the
crop which will be reaped of such imposters: as the Serpent beguiled our first
parents with hope, and great promises, so do these.

The second reason is from the facility of the Romans, verse 19. whose ready
listening and obeying true teachers being far and wide deuulged and known to
their praise, might happily imbolden false teachers to attempt the perverting of
them with expectation of like success, for over much easiness in yielding,
might give false Pro phets hope to deceive: thus Origin, and Peter Martyr
afterward, and Piscator after him do collect the reason. Others think by
praising their obedience he encourages to constancy, to continue steadfast in
the good way, and to take heed of receiving contrary doctrine. To which
purpose he exhorts them to join prudence and simplicity, to be so simple as
not to know how to invent corrupt doctrine, yet so wise and skillful as to be
able to discern a strangers voice from Christ's voice, like good sheep, John
10, 4, 5. and true Prophets from liars; which discretion Paul prayed for to the
Philippians, Chapter 1, verse 9, 10. and exhorts the Thessalonians unto it, Chap.
5. verse 21. why it is needful, see 1. John 4, 1, 2. Revel. 22. Ephe. 4, 14.
Which admonishes al with knowledge to join judgment, and reprooueth such as
be wise to the world, but lack the wisdom of the word.

The third reason is from assurance of victory, so they watch and observe these
evil workmen, which scatter grains of errors in the Lords field, and strive
against their errors, they shall surely overcome by the might and grace of God,
verse 20. The God of peace will bruise Satan under your feet, etc.

There is in this promise, an allusion to the promise in Paradise, made to our
first parents, of the woman's Seed to bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3. which
implies such a conquest and overthrow of Satan, as he should never recover
himself. As Joshua set his feet on the necks of the five Kings, and
destroyed them. This has bin already in the head Christ perfectly fulfilled,
and shall be in his members, who must encounter awhile with Satan and his
instruments: but so they behave themselves valiantly, and place all their
affiance in God, it shall quickelie come to pass, that Satan (howsoever he
may seem to prevail) yet even when one would think he should ouerrun all,
then shall he take the foil. For God who is with his Church, is stronger then
the enemies which do fight against it: and the peace of his Church is so dear
unto him, as none that make division, shall be able to stand before him. All
which, has matter of exhortation to quicken us, unto all vigilance in prayer,
and good endeauours to withstand the assaults of the devil, taking great heed
of security, ease, and spiritual sloathfulnesse, least we be surprised on a
sudden.

And heete is also a matter of consolation, that we faint not whatsoever
combats and encounters with heretics, Scismatickes, or otherwise happen, yet
still to hold up our head, and take heart to us, under the aid and help of
God and his grace, seeing the victory will be ours. If we hold out but a little
while, we shall vanquish, and that very shortly even in this life, whereof we
have sundry examples; and not only at the day of judgment when our victory
will be consummate. A maruailous comfort that Gods Ministers and children
strive against errors, sins, and schisms, with certain hope of having the
upper hand. Which as it must beat down despair, and drive away fearful
sluggishnesse, so it keeps from presumption, to consider that not by our own
strength, not by our own arm, or bow, or shield, but it is the strength of
God that gives us the victory, And therefore not to us Lord, not to us, but to
thy name be rendered the glory.

Upon these reasons, we in England, and other reformed Churches in Europe, may
iustisie our separation from the Papists, whom we have left and are divided
from: but first because they left the Apostle doctrins, and divided them selves
from the faith and religion of Christ, to embrace novel errors, and
diabolical superstitions, contrary to the received doctrine from the
beginning; by whose hypocrisy and flatery, if we have not suffered our selves
to be deceived to the perdition of our souls, but continue still to fight
against the, under the assistance of the strong God, with undoubted trust of an
happy issue (so we mark and avoid them) therein we have done but duty,
obeying the commandment of the great God, who bids us to come out of Babylon,
and decline such as would with their subtle speeches and inventions beguile us
(and wriggle as a Snake whose head is off) with hope to reign in these
Churches, as sometimes they did. Well they may surprise with their craftines,
some heedlesignorant persons, and unstable, but in vain they look to
subiugate the wise and discreet Christians, under whose feet God shall rather
tread them, and Satan that great Dragon their Captain, under whose banner
they fight. For that kingdom must be destroyed, which does make war against
the kingdom of Christ, who is that stone cut out of the Mountain without
hands, which shall break in pieces all other regiments which rise up against
it, Da. 2.


Tim. What does the Apostle perform from the verse 20. until verse 24?


Silas. As before he reckons up such as at Rome he would have saluted: so
now he sends Salutations to the Romans from other which were with Paul, as
from Timothy, of whom read Phil 2, 19, 20, 21, 22. and Act. 16 1, 2. Also
Lucius, of whom read Acts 13, 1. and Jason, of whose courage and prudent
zeal, read Acts 17, 5. and Zopater of Berea, Paul's companion by sea, with
Timotheus and Gayus of Derbe into Syria: read Acts 20, 4. and Tertius Paul's
Secretary, and Gayus his host baptized by him, 1 Cor. 1. 14 and Erastus
Treasurer or conferrer unto the City of Corinth, a rich City and Quartus a
word not of number or order, but the name of a man. By the consent of these, he
would confirm the authority of his Epistle, and get the more credit; not for
that it was in it self weak, but the better to warrant it to others.


DIAL. III.
Verse 24, 25, 26, 27. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all,
Amen. 25. Now to him that is of power to establish you according to my Gospel,
and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the Mystery,
which was kept secret since the world began. 26. But now is opened and
published amongst all Nations, by the Scriptures of the Prophets, at the
commandment of the everlasting God for the obedience of Faith. 27. To God I
say only wise be praise, through Jesus Christ for ever.


Timotheus. Having found you willing ever sithence we began to confer for our
instruction about this Epistle, which as it is a key (as it were) to open the
understanding of other Scriptures, so your answers and satisfactions of my
Questions and Doubts, has well unlocked and unfolded the hidden treasure
thereof; I presume to put you to it once more, to tell me Paul's mind, or
rather Gods mind, contained in this Text unto the end of this Epistle.


Silas. Having walked along with you, through a long, rough, and cragged way,
now we are come unto the vpshot and resting place, it being also plain ground,
I may not give you over. In this last text (which some join unto the end of
the 14. chapter, touching which, see M. Beza there) we have a brief pithy
prayer unto God, v. 24. and a large and most precious Doxologie or praise of
God, 1. for his power, 2. Goodness, 3. Wisdom, in the rest of the verses.
For the prayer, I would have these things observed in it. First, that under
[Grace,] are comprehended whatsoever (from beginning, middle, and end) belongs
unto man's good now, or glory hereafter. Secondly, whereas Paul did both begin
and end his Epistle with it, Chap. 1, 7. and now ends, repeating it twice,
ver. 20. and 24. it not only teaches what Ministers ought to do by Paul's
example, both to edify by teaching, and earnestly to beg Gods favor, and all
the effects of it for the flock, but also the flock are admonished, that
grace is a thing most necessary. Not fire and water so needful for the body,
as grace for the soul: and therefore often, again and again to be asked, and
who soever know either the worth of grace, or the want, will much call for it.
And who so do not so, either they value not grace, or feel no need of it,
which is a woeful dullness. Thirdly, here is a proof against the Arrians,
Seruetus, and others, that Christ is equal to the Father, because Christ is
made the giver and dispenser of Grace, which is proper to the true God.

Lastly, this prayer in the end of every Epistle Paul wrote with his own hand,
as a sign whereby to discern the Epistle not to be counterfeit but his own, 2 Thessalonians. 4, 17. howsoever he used the help of a Scribe to pen the rest, yet this
clause he used with his own pen to write it. A good caution and prevention of
adulterated and false writings, that they be not cogged and crowded in under
the names of some worthy personages, to get them credit; an injury which has
been done to sundry learned and godly men.

Concerning the zealous praise and thanksgiving, wherewith Paul celebrateth
God in the end of this renowned Epistle, there is nothing or little in it, which
has not bin already handled in other Dialogues. Howbeit, to give some touch
and taste of matters will not be amiss. Note generally, that there is an
hyperbaton, the sense being suspended from verse 25. til 27. and thus it must
be put together. Glory be to him (that is to say) to the only wise God, who is
able to establish you, etc. and thus the construction is current, and no
imperfection in Paul's speech. Observe yet further, as Paul in the entrance gave
thanks to God for the Romans, chapter 1. ver. 8. and rendereth praise for
himself, after his description of his spiritual combat, chapter 7. v. 25. and
upon the discourse of the great secret of predestination finished, chapter 11. ver.
36, he bursts out into this exclamation and doxologie, O depth, etc. To him be
glory for ever: and now closes the whole Epistle with the like hearty sounding
forth of Gods praise, it may serve to admonish us of this duty of praising God
for our selves and others, for his mercies and benefits, for his doctrine and
works; how pleasant (as a sacrifice or an odor) it is to God, how the Saints
are delighted with it, having thanksgiuings often in their hearts and mouths to
witness their own joy in God, and to provoke others to magnify him. As the
Nightingale because the day is not sufficient to sound forth her songs,
spends the night in singing, so ought we even in the night season to sound
forth the praises of god: for this is one of his chief services, and in his
Children it is exceeding comely to rejoice and praise his mercies. How did
David's pen ouerflow with the praises of his God, how does he urge all men to
laud and celebrate his name? It is a fearful sign of a dead heart to be a
niggard, or sparing, careless, or cold this way.

Learn further, that whereas praises be offered to God by Jesus Christ, verse
27. it is because through him both al good guists are conuaied to us (as water
through a Conduit, from the fountain) and all praises are by him to be
referred to God, that they may be gracious, 1. Peter 2, 5. And therefore
Turks, Jews, Pagans, which have no true knowledge of Christ, they cannot
worship the true God, nor give him any praise which he shall accept of: for he
that has not the Son, has not the Father, and who so comes to the Father
not by the Son, shall neuerbee received. Oh, how much are Christians beholden
to God for the knowledge of his Son? Thus far of the duty of praising God,
and the manner how.

The arguments of his praise be these three, 1. from his power, 2. from his
goodness, 3. his wisdom: First, he commends his power, verse 25.
whereunto he ascribes their strengthening, wherein as he insinuates their
weakness, what need they had of confirmation in respect of Satan's force, and
their own feebleness: so he expressly teaches that it is God alone who can
make them able to stand and persevere in his grace to the end, as he said in
Chap. 14. verse 4. For it is Gods might alone which excels the power of
sin, the devil, and the world, which be stronger then the strongest in earth.

Howbeit from his naked power disioyned from his will, there is no comfort: but
the Romans were assured of Gods love, by their calling and justifying, etc.
Therefore here is matter of comfort, that notwithstanding all the fiery darts
of Satan to which they were exposed continually, and all the fury of all the
tyrants in the world which persecute the poor flock set amidst Wolves; yet
they shall be vpheld, because God which loves them, has might enough to up
hold them. Also what Paul prays for, that they were certainly to hope for,
being Gods Children, and the thing asked, necessary to their salvation. If any
then be weak, run to God, hide you under his powerful protection; if any
find strength to continue, attribute the whole glory to God, who says to the
weak, be strong, and comfort the feeble minded, showing his power in
greatest weakness, 2. Cor. 12, 9.

The next part of his praise is his goodness, manifested in the Gospel,
(which is the preaching of Jesus Christ) the greatest outward mercy of God, as
the instrument to work grace within: wherein we be warned that our
strengthening and corroboration of our hearts must be drawn neither from humane
reason, philosophy, traditions and inventions of men, no not from the law of
God, which discouers sin, and directs to duty, but comforts not against
terrors within and without; but from the Gospel preached, which is the power of
God, to the establishing of the heart in faith. Therefore it should continually
with great reverence be read, heard, studied, and meditated, as Gods arm to
confirm us to the end. We are further to note here in few words the dignity
of the Gospel, (so he calls his own Epistle, as Chap. 2. verse 16.) It is a
doctrine of most singular worthiness and value. It is extolled and set forth
here by four reasons, first by the object (Christ Jesus) in whom are shut up
all treasures of wisdom. It is termed the preaching of Jesus Christ, not so
much actiuely which he preached, as passiuely being preached concerning him, as
the matter and subject of it, (for the Gospel is a good word or message of
Christ) and not only the efficient cause and reuealer of it. Paul (less may
other Ministers) taught neither himself nor from himself, but Christ by a
revelation from Christ, Gal. 1, 16.

Secondly, by the form (a mystery revealed now by the Scriptures of the
Prophets) being before in the other ages precedent even from the worlds
beginning kept secret: of the acceptions of the word mystery, look Dialogue on
Romans 11. verse 25. Here it would be expounded of the vocation of the Gentiles,
(rather then of the whole doctrine of Christ) according to Ephe. 3, 4. which
heretofore was taught in some sort to the Jews only, and but to some of
them, and obscurely in dark sentences and prophesies that all nations should
be restored by Christ: yet in comparison of that clear and bright knowledge
which since Christ, has shined from the beams of the word, it may be said to
be kept secret, and to have been hidden. Let men therefore so much the more
provoke themselves even to real and great thankfulness, by how much more
grace is vouchsafed us above that which the fathers of the old Testament
enjoyed, or else to look for the greater condemnation. Many kings and Prophets
have desired to see these days, etc. Woe be to thee Corazin, if the great
works etc.

Learn yet moreover both the antiquity of the Gospel (to quit us from
novelties) and the harmony between it and the Prophets, in that by the
Scriptures of the Prophets it is said now to be made manifest to us, who
ought therefore to study the Prophets with a purpose to learn Christ in them:
flying popery as the new way, and holding us to the doctrine of faith as the
old and good way.

Thirdly, it is praised by the author (at the commandment of the everlasting
God) that is, according to the eternal counsel and disposition of God, who by
his most high liberty and wisdom might show this secret when and to whom, and
how far he himself would. The whole dispensation of the Gospel depends
altogether upon the good pleasure of God, who as he sheddeth his rain upon one
City and not upon another, and in what measure, and with what fruit he
thinks good: so the doctrine of salvation is absolutely ordered by the
appointment and commandment of God: man's wisdom and will here has no
stroke.

Fourthly, by the final cause or end of the Gospel, which is, to call not a
few but many, even Jews and Gentiles at one time or other, such as were given
to Christ among them, unto the obedience of faith, (that is) that they might
believe the promises of grace resting in the^ by faith, which is the most
excellent obedience, and cause of all practicke obedience. See Dialogue on
Chap. 1, v, 5. and Chap. 10, verse 16. And thus far of the description of the
Gospel by the causes ofit.

The third and last praise of God is, for his wisdom, ( To God only wise,
verse 27.) as he is entitled, 1. Tim. 1, 17. because wisdom is essential
to God, and he is infinitely wise, knowing himself and all other things most
exactly and with all perfection: also in wonderful wisdom both making and
moderating the world, being the very fountain of all understanding and
prudence which shines in any creature, Angels, or men: hence he is glorified
by the title [onely wise God,] but especially for that admirable wisdom
revealed in the Gospel from himself in maruailous and most divine discretion.
For the better explication of this title, that sentence cited by Paraus and
Peter Martyr out of Origin, deserves often to be read and thought on: Do not
(says he) so understand God to be wise, as if wisdom had made him wise, as
it happens amongst men (for men are wise accidentally by a separable quality,
and by participation of wisdom:) God is not so, but as author and wellspring
of all wisdom. For God is not wise by communication of another wisdom, but
of himself he is so, and of him the only wise God, all others derive their
wisdom: worthily therefore it is written, to the only wise God, for he alone
so ingendreth wisdom, as he is not by wisdom made wise.

This clause (for ever) in verse 17. notes eternity to the end of the world,
and everlastingly without ceasing of the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven,
bliss and honor, and glory, will be (...) to him that sits upon the
throne, and to the Lamb. To whom as for all other mercies (which are
inumerable) for the accomplishment of this our conference to the illustration
and clearing of this dark Epistle in some measure for the instructiof the
Church, be all praise and glory. Amen.


FINIS.
AN INDEX OR TABLE of the chief words and matters opened and treated of in
this Epistle.
ABba. Chap. 8. Dial. 14. Abraham, a pattern of all justified persons, Chapter 4.
verse 1: and v. 22, 27.

Abraham, how the father of the faithful, and heir of the world, Chap. 4. v.
13. and 17.

Abraham's faith commended, chapter 4. v: 17, 18, 19.

Abraham when justified, and why circumcised, chap: 4. Dial. 1, 2, 5, 6. 7.

Abraham's true Children and counterfeit, chapter 9. Di. 2.

Abraham how the root of the Jews, ch, 10. di. 13, and 15

Abrogation of Moses Law how far, and wherein not, chapter 6. di. 8. and ch, 7.
dial. 2, 4.

No Abolition of the creatures at the last day, but an alteration only, chap.
8. Dial. 19, 20, 21.

Abstinence from certain meats at certain times, no matter of Religion or
salvation: against Jewish and popish abstinence, Chap. 14. ver: 17.

Absolution from sin, first part of Justification, Chap. 5 verse 1.

Actions, their end and event, Ch: 14. v: 6.

Adams fall, Chap. 5. verse 12, 6.

Adam propagated sin and death into his posterity, ch: 5. v. 12, 13, 14, etc.

Adam compared with Christ, to whom he is like and unlike in sundry respects.
How, and wherein the second Adam excels the first, ch: 5. v. 15, 16, 17, 18.

Adiaphora, that there be such, and how to discern them, and deal in them,
chapter 14, throughout.

Adoption what it signifies, also how manisold, and what it is. chapter 8. v. 15,
23.

Adoption to be certainly known, and how, chapter 8. v. 16.

Adoration by Latria and doulia, a vain distinction, Ch: 1. v. 9.

Adulti have faith by hearing, chapter 10. v. 14.

Advocate or intercessour, how Christ is so, and how the Spirit: and what
things required to Christ's aduocateship, and what comfort in it, Mary no
advocate, Chapter 8. v. 26. and 34.

Adultery, Chap. 1. v. 29.

Affictions, their causes, kinds, ends, uses, and remedies, how they work
patience, chapter 5. v. 3. 4. Ch 12. v. 12

AEdification what, Chapter 14. v. 19. 20. ch: 15, v. 2.

All not ever put universally, but indefinitely, and for to take away
distinction of nations, ch: 10. v: 11. c: 11, 32.

Alms or benificence unto the poor, how woor thie a duty, and what
prouocations to it, and hindrances, ch, 12, 13. chapter 15, 25, 26.

Allegation of Scriptures, how used by the apostles, ch 1. 17. and 4. v: 3. chapter
11. v: 13, 14

Altars Priests, and Sacrifices under the Gospel, and how. ch: 12. v: 1. chapter
15. v 16.

Ambition what, chapter 12. v: 16.

Analogy of faith, what, Chapter 12. v. 11, 12.

Anathema, what, and whither Paul prayed to be made so, Chapter 9. v. 3.

Angels good, and bad, what their power is, chapter 8, v. 38.

Anguish what, chapter 8. v. 35.

Antiquity of the Gospel, and of the Doctrine of free justification by Fairh,
Chapter 1. v. 2. and 17.

Antiquity of Fathers and doctors of the church, what we are to yield unto it,
Chapter 9. and 10. in (...) dial.

Antichrist, Cha 3. v. 5. cha: 12. v: 10.

Apostle, what it means, how many: of their calling, authority, dignity,
diligence and efficacy of the Ministry, and extent of their commission, and
other marks whereby to know one, chapter 1, v. 1. Ch: 15. v. 14, 15.

Jesuits no Apostles: Harmony between Apostles and Prophets, Chapter 15. v: 20,
21.

Application of Doctrine: how it is a part of faith, chapter 1

Appear all must before Christ, when and how, Chapter 14. v. 12.

Arrogancy and pride how differ, Chapter 12. v. 16.

Astrology coniecturall or Astronomicall science, why and wherein to be
blamed, Chapter 9. v: 9, 10.

Assurance, a necessary effect of faith, Chapter 4. v. 21.

Augustine no English Apostle, or converted unto the faith, Chapter 10, v: 18.

Authority, the kinds and degrees of it, causes and use of it. How to be
submitted to, and why, chapter 13. v: 1, 2, 3, 4

Awakening, corporal, spiritual, why needful, ch: 13. v. 11, 12.

B.
Backbowed, what it means. chapter 11. v. 10.

Backbiting what, chapter 1, 30. Baptism is not regeneration, but a seal of it,
whence it has his force: it is not absolutely necessary to (...) not ex opere
operato, chapter 4. v: 11, and Chap. 6, verse 3.

Benefits of the Covenant, Chapter (...). v: 29.

Blaspheming what, Chapter 1. v 24. Ch: 14. v. 16.

Bless, what it importes, chapter 12. v. 14.

Blessedness what it is, wherein it consists, the causes and effects of it,
chapter 4, v: 6, 7, 8.

Blood of Christ, comprehends his whole sufferinges and obedience, why joined
with faith, Chapter 3. v: 25.

Blindness of the Jews, chapter 11. v: 10.

Boasters who, chapter 1. v: 30.

Body, why sin so called, chapter 6: v, 6: c 7. v: 24.

Body, how the Church so likened ch: 12. v. 3, 4.

Body, the resurrection of it chapter 8, 11. and 14. v. 9. c. 8. v. 34,

Boldness in a Minister, a good thing, the reasons of it chapter 15, v: 15. ch, 9.
v. 27.

Bondage of the wise to the husband, in what things, and how long, and what
freeth her, chapter 7, v. 1, 2, 3.

Bondage to sin and the law, wherein it is, and how freed from it, ch 7. v. 4,
5, 6.

Bound to sin, how the ingodly and godly differ in this, ch 7. v. 6.

Bow the knee to Christ, what it notes. Ch 14. v: 11.

Branches seeming and true Ch: 11. v: 17, 19.

Brethren, why Christians so called, whether Papists be our brethren or not,
cha. 12. v. 1. and v. 10.

C.
Calling to a function Ecclesiastical, by whom, what works of it, how
needful, Chapter 1. v: 1.

Calling of English Preachers, justified to be of God ch, 10. v. 15.

Calling unto Christianity general or special.

Calling often joined with election, and why, Ch: 8. ve. 28, (...). Chapter 9, v.
21. Chap. 9, verse 11. ch: v: 9. 24.

Canon of faith and manners, is the written word of God, Chapter 14, v. 23. and
often elsewhere.

Cauillers at good doctrine how to be handled, chapter 3, 8.

Chambering what it is. chapter 13, v. 13.

Charity or love how a debt, how differs from others debts, chapter 13, verse 8.
How it does not justify us, and yet it is the fulfilling of the Law, Chap:
13. verse 8, 9, 10.

Charity chiese of Moral virtues, it judges coniecturally, Chap, 12, verse 9.
ch 8, v. 38.

Chastity lost by drunkenness and gluttony, c. 13. v: 13

Certainty of salvation by Faith and by hope, infallibly by both, and why,
chap. 8. ver. 1, 24.

Certainty of Gods providence stands well with means, ca: 15. v. 30.

Ceremonies Legal determined in Christ his death, chapter 14. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Christ true God, also man and why, chapter 1. v: 3, 4.

Christ his person, his offices, his benefits, chapter 1. ver. 3, 4.

Christ delivered to death by Judas, and by his Father, ch: 4. ver: 25.

Christ why both dead and raised, also why ascended, ch: 8, 34. and 14, 9. etc
4, 25

Christ judge of all, chapter 14. v: 11, 12.

Christ only meritorious cause of our salvation, ch: 3. verse 24.

Christ only High priest and interc effot alone, ch: 8, verse 34.

Christ author of all good things with his Father, ch: 1, ver. 7.

Christ, of him the Spirit proceeds, ch: 8, 9.

Christ the substance and scope of Scriptures, chapter 1, v: 2, 3.

Christ the object of faith.

Christ justifies sinners, both by his active and passive obedience, chapter 5, v.
18, 19.

Christ Lord of quick and dead, chapter 14. v 9.

Christ the husband of believers, ch: 7. v: 4.

Christ the only head of the church his body, chap: 12. verse 3.

Christ the only Priest of the New Testament, ch: 15, 16. and 12, 1.

In Christ the integrity of his humane nature, the perfect obedience of his
life, the passion of his death, im puted to sinners to iustifye, ch: 8, v. 22.

In Christ the substance and efficacy of Baptism to be found, ch: 6. v. 4.

Christ dead, buried, and raised, sanctifies the elect sinners, chapter (...), v:
3, 4.

Christ setleth believers in a better condition then that which they lost in
Adam, ch 5. v. 15, 16: 17.

Christ how as many saved by him, as lost by Adam, chapter 5. v: 15, 16.

Christ a Savior of the faithful of all nations, and of them only, ch: 10,
12.

Christ a sanctifier, as well as a iustifier, chapter 6. v. 1, 4.

Christ how the end of the Law for righteousness, chapter 10, v: 4.

Christ, how the first born, ch: 8. v. 29.

Christ his (...) over his brethren, wherein it stands, ch: 8. v. 29.

Christ how subordinate to election, as ground of it, ch: 9, verse 11.

Christ how given of his father, ch: 8, verse 32.

Christ a redeemer of the faithful both under and after the Law, both Jews
and Gentiles which do believe, chapter 3. ver: 30.

Christ his conception and incarnation without sin, and why, To. 1. v, 4.

Christ, wherein elect sin ners have conformity with him, chapter 8, ver. 29.

Christ died, rose again, etc. all for the elect, chapter 8. v. 33.

Christ true God, yet a per son distinct from the father, chapter 1. v. 4. and 8.
verse 9.

Christ his love to his eni. mies, ch: 5. v. 8.

Christ God for ever, chap. 9. verse 5.

Christ given to be a Sanipler and pattern of duty, as well as a Savior, chapter
15. v. 3, 7.

In Christ what it is to be, and how it is known, cha: 8. verse 1.

Christ's Mediatorship depends on Gods eternal leave and election, chapter 3. ver. 25.

Christ what he suffered, his whole life and passion, how humble, chapter 15. v.
3, 8.

Christ how he now lives to God, chapter 6. v: 10.

Christ pleased not himself what it is, ch: 15: v. 2.

Christ how the Son of God chapter 1. ver: 4.

Christ why our propitiator. ch: 3. v. 25.

Christ proved to be God by his resurrection, and how else, chapter 1. v. 4.

Christ how he sulfilleth (...) Law, and how he makes us fulfill it, chap.
10, 4.

Christ treads down Satan in himself, and in his members. chapter 16. verse 20.

Christ author of the Ministry: Apostles but his instruments, ch 15. v. 17, 18.

Christian Religion ancient, and the only true Religion.

Christianity a comfortable profession, ch 8. v. 1.

To be a Christian and the child of God, what a dignity it is, and in what
respects ch: 8. v. 17.

Children of God under the cross, and why. What comforts they have in this
estate, chapter. 8. verse 17, 18.

Children of God sanctified and freed from sin imperfectly, and have therefore
a continual combat with the flesh, chapter 7. v. 15, 16, etc.

Child of flesh and of promile, chapter 9. v. 8.

Church militant, not always visible and glorious, Chapter 11. v. 4.

Church universal of Christ never fails, particular Churches may fail, C. 9,
5.

Church universal, has dry particular Churches, ch: 6, 16.

Church of Christ, the Jews shall be called to it, when and why, chap 11. v, 23,
24, 25, etc.

Church in ones house what it is, chapter 16. v. 5.

Church English, a true Church of Christ.

Church English, has justly made secession from Synagogue of Rome, chapter 16 v.
17, 18, etc.

Circumcision justifies not: which true, which not. Why ordained. chapter 2. v.
29. chapter 4, 11

Commandment, how holy, good, just, and yet works sin and death, and how this
may be, chapter 7. v. 12. 13.

Combat between flesh and the spirit described in Paul's person, the assaults
and the (...), chapter 7. 10, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

Combat bitter and grievous, a mark of regeneration, chapter 7. v. 24, 25.

Communion with Christ, in his death and resurrection: how necessary, how set
forth in Scripture, ch, 6. v. 5. and 8. v: 9.

Comfort none out of Christ, to true believers ex ceeding great, chapter 8. v: 1.

Condemnation, none unto the believer, chapter 8, 1.

Concord wherein and why, chap: 12. v. 16, 18.

Conscience what: the office and force of conscience Chap 2. v. 15.

Conscience, peace thereof, how procured, and how preserved, whether and how it
may be lost, Ch: 5, v. 1.

Conscience has no Lawgiuer and Lord but Christ; no (...) and stay but his
word, Romans 13, v. 5.

Conseience binds us to obedience toward powers, To. 13, 5.

Conscience not so proper ly bound by humane Laws as by divine, Chap: 8. ver.
5.

Conscience, seek to rectify it, must not be wounded and offended, Chapter 14. v:
13. 15.

With Conscience doubtful do nothing: Romans 14, v: 23.

Conscience and faith not all one. chapter 14, v: 23.

Conscience good and evil, what makes it good, Chap: 14, verse 23.

Contention how lawful.

Contention to be avoided and why, ch: 1. ver. 29. chapter 12 16. and 14, 4.

Confession of Christ what it is, a fruit of faith, a way to salvation, has
great pro mises, many graces needful to it: who are unfit to make it, when to
be made, and to whom. ch: 10, v. 9, 10.

Confession of sins how to be made, it is a token and effect of repentance,
ch: 7. v. 14:

Constancy required in Christians, and why, chapter 13, v. 11.

Consusion follows not Faith and hope, but unbelief, chapter 5. v. 5. and 9, 1,
33.

Contention about doctrine must be bitter and why, Chapter 12, 25.

Creature what it means.

Creature, how subject to vanity and corruption, chapter 8 v. 20, 21.

Creature, how it waits and groaneth, and why, chapter 8. v: 22.

Curse others we may not, Chapter 12, 14, Chap. 11. verse 9, 10.

Curses and execrations, when they be lawful, chap: 11. v: 9, 10.

Customs what, why due to powers, Chapter 13. v: 6, 7.

D.
Damnation or condemnation, what it signifies, removed by Christ, Chap. 8. ve:
1.

Darkness spiritual, all under it by nature, Romans 13 verse 12.

Day of Judgment, when and why uncertain, ever to be remembered: how terrible
and how comfortable, Chap. 2. v. 6, 16, ch: 14. v. 10.

Death entered by sin, chapter 5. v. 12.

Death how manifold, Chapter 6, v. 23. Chapter 1, v. 32.

Death eternal, wherein it consists, chapter 6. v. 23.

Death how wages of sin, chapter 6. v. 23.

Death reigns as a King how long, and over whom, chapter 5, v. 14.

Death, dissoluer of Nature and marriage, chapter 7. ver: 1, 2.

Death the meditation of it, profitable to keep from sin, ch: 5. v. 12, etc.

Dead to sin and in sin, what it means, chapter 6. v. 2.

Dead to the Law, what. Chap. 7 v. 4.

I Died when the commandment came, what it means, chapter 7. v: 9.

Debts to be paid, and why, Ch: 13. v. 8.

Debate and Deceit, why to be avoided, chapter 1 v: 29.

Deceitfulness of sin, Ch: 7. v: 11.

Deceive us, how many ways sin does, ch: 7. v. 11.

Decree of God, c: 5. v: 11.

Desire, a prayer, ch: 8, v. 26 Ch: 12. v: 12.

Doing all things commanded, in a (...) Legal and Evangelical, ch: 10. v. 5.

Doctrine, the root of exhortation, and Mother of Faith, Chapter 12. v: 1. Chap:
15, v. 4.

Doctrine, the rule and judge of it is Scripture, Chapter 9. ver. 15, 17.

Dwelling of sin what it is, how cumbersom, Ch: 7. ver. 17.

Dwelling of the spirit what it means, and how need full, chapter 8. v. 9.

E.
Elias how deceived tho a Prophet, ch: 11. v, 2, 3.

Ecclesiastical power, subject to (...) power what to think of their
exemptions Chapter 13, v. 1, 2, 3.

Election distinguished, described by causes, properties, fruits, marks, Ch:
9, verse 11.

Election makes promiscof grace effectual, chap: 9, 10, 11.

Election, fountain of all good gifts, Chap: 11, 5. and 15.

Election dependes upon nothing which is in the elected, ch: 9, 11, 12.

Election manifested in a special calling, chap: 9. ver. 24.

Election made in massa (...) rupta, chapter 9, v. 11. where look for the whole
doctrine of election.

Emulation how it is good and commendable, chap. 11. v. 11.

Enemies many and mighty, Chap. 8, 8.

Enemies all by nature, chapter 5. v: 10.

Enemies to be beloved and blessed, Chap. 12. v. 14. how profitable.

Envy what, and why to be shunned, ch: 1, v. 29.

Epistle what it signifies chapter (...) v. 1.

Epistle to the Romans, excellent for author, matter and method, why set before
the rest, chapter 1. v. 1.

Eternal life what it is, and wherein it consists, Chapter 6. v. 23.

Eternal life, how it follows holiness, of favor, not by merit, Chap: 6.
verse 16, 23.

Evil not to be done, that good may come of it, Chap. 3. v. 8.

Evil how to he over com with goodness, Ch: 12. verlast.

Evil of crime, of affliction.

Evils inumerable and most grievous ones, follow Gods children, chap. 8. v. 35.

F.
Faith, the notation of the word.

Faith distinguished diversely

Faith, the parts and degrees of it.

From faith to faith, what. Chapter 1. v. 17.

Faith the only instrument within man, of Justification and Christ his blood
without man, chapter 3. v. 25.

Faith justifies not effectually, or materially: but relatiuely and
instrumentallie, Chapter 3, 1, 5.

Faith properly taken, is not our justification, Ch: 9, v. 33.

Faiths object adaquatum is the whole world, inadequatum the word of
Evangelical promise, chapter 10, v. 8.

Faith little, great, the tokens of both, chapter 1, 17.

Faith which works by charity, does justify, chap: 9. ver: 33.

Faith alone in the act of justifying, but not alone in the heart and life of
a justified person, chap. 9 v. 33.

Faith a fruit of election, and proper to elect ones, chapter 8. v. 30.

Faith b-eedeth assurance, doubting comes not of the nature, but of the
infirmity of Faith, chap. 4. v. 21.

Faith, rests on Christ dead and risen for salvation chapter 4. v. 25. chapter 10. v.
9.

Faith makes the general promises special, and Sacraments to be effectual,
chapter 9. v. 7, 8.

Faith known to him that has it, chapter 3, v. 1.

Faith once had never lost chapter 5, ver. 2, chap. 11. v. 20.

Faith without it, it is sin whatsoever is done, cha 14. verse (...).

Faith special and general chapter 14, 23.

Faith knits to Christ, and ground of all comfort and well doing, ch: 8. v. 1.

Faith is the being of a Christian chapter 11 v. 20.

Faith has righteousness and life annexed to it, Romans 1, ver. 17.

Faith makes persons and actions pleasing to God, chapter 14. ver. 23.

Faith certainly persuades all, but fullye the strong Christian only, chapter 4. v
21.

Fall away from saving grace Saints cannot, chap. 5 ver: 2.

Fasting in Lent not so an cient as Apostles times, and no Apostolical
Tradition, chapter 14. v. 5.

Fear of God two sold, service filial

Fear childlike may stand with faith.

Fear of God as a Father how due, necessary, and beneficial.

Fear an enemy to security.

Fear where it is not, there all wickedness wilbee. All this touching fear in
chap. 11. ver 20.

Fear how it belongs to powers from all sorts, chap. 13. v. 3, 4.

Fear of pain a companion of evil doing, chap 13 verse 4.

Fear how an effect of the Law, chapter 8. v. 15.

Feastiuall days of the Jews tolerated after Christ his death, til the light
of the Gospel mightd sperse these clouds and shadows of the Law. chapter 14, verse
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

Few be the true Israelites but precious like seed, cha. 9. v. 27, 29.

First fruits of the Spirit, what, chapter 8, v. 23. why graces so called.

Free will to evil naturally, but none to good, until grace set the will
free, chap. 9. v. 16.

Fruits, why goodworks so called, chapter 15, v. 28.

Fruit in holiness, cha. (...), v. 22.

Fruit none by sin, but shame and death, chapter 6. ver. 21, 22.

Fullness of the Gentiles and of the Jews, what it means, chapter 11. v 12. and
25.

Fullness of the blessing of the Gospel what, chapter 15. v. 29.

G.
Garment, how Christ is likened to one, ch: 13 v. 14.

Glasses sour to look our selves in ch: 7. verse 9, 10.

God his properties of bounty, kindness, patience, what they be, and whither
they should lead, chapter 2. ver: 4, 5.

God his wisdom vnserch able, uncontrollable, cha. 11. v: 33, 34.

God his truth infallible, prop of faith and hope, chapter 3. verse 4, 7.

God his power varesistable.

God his power, his Childrens buckler and safety, prop of faith, chap. 4. ver.
21 chap. 11. 23.

God his power, how an argument follows from it, ch: 11. v: 23.

God not author of sin, as a sin, but as a recompense, chapter 11. v: 9.

God hardens as a judge, chapter 11. v: 7, 8.

God in delivering or giving up by how many actions, and how just in them all,
chapter 1 v: 26, 28.

Gods providence orders all things, even the least and worst, chap. 1. v: 13.
chap; 15 and 22, 24.

Gods mercy fountain of election, and of all Consequents thereof, ch: 9. v.
15, and 18.

Gods mercy arbitrary and free, ch: 9, ver. 15.

Gods mercy differs from his Justice, ch: 9. v. 15.

Gods mercies many and manifold, ch: 12. and v. 1.

Gods mercies a strong motive to obedience, chap: 12. v. 1.

God ordainer of powers, and is obeyed or resisted in them, and how many ways,
ch: 13. v. 2, 3.

God of peace, of patience, and consolation, why so called, ch: 15. v. 5.

God sent his Son out of love to mankind, and why, ch: 8. v: 32.

God the only auenger, and why, chapter 12. v: 19.

God, with him no unrighteousness or cruelty, either in execution of decrees,
or in the decrees themselves, Ch: 9. v: 14, 19, 20. chap: 11, v: 35, 36.

God no respecter of persons, ch: 2. v: 11. How persons may be respected.

Gods will supreme cause of all his counsel and works. ch: 9. v: 11, 15.

Gods will not to be registered, how it is to be understood, ch: 2. v: 19.

Gods glory in manifestation of his mercy and justice, the utmost (...) of all
his counsels, ch: 9. v: 22, 23.

Gods wrath and Justice, how fearful a thing, ch: 3, 5. and ch: 5. v: 6. and 8.

Gospel of God, why so called ch: 1. v: 2. and 15. verse 16.

Gospel what it signifyes, preached by the Prophets, the authority,
excellency, antiquity, and efficacy of it, ch: 1. v. 2.

Gospel wherein it differs from the Law, ch: 1. verse 17.

Gospel not to be ashamed of, chapter 1. v: 16.

Gospel how the power of God, ch: 1. v: 16.

Gospel how called a form or mould, ch: 5, v: 17.

Gospel what a blessing to enjoy it, ch: 3. v: 2.

Gospel good, holy, just, ch: 7. v: 12.

Gospel to be delighted in, ch: 7. v: 22.

Gospel how to be esteemed and received, Chap: 1. v: 2, 3.

Gospel preached, both is object and instrument of Faith.

Gospel how the Jews enemies to it, Ch: 11. v; 28.

Gospel why at first confirmed with miracles, Chap: 15, v. 19.

Gospel a sacrificing sword ch: 15. v: 16.

Gospel bow cause of death being a word of life.

Gospel word of faith, and why, Ch: 10, v. 8.

Gospel brings Spirit of Adoption, Ch: 8. v: 14.

Good, why the Law so entitled, Ch: 7, v. 12.

Good earnestly to be sollowed, Ch: 12. v. 9.

Good purposed, when it cannot be effected. Ch: 15, verse 22.

Good which we would, we cannot always do, Chap: 7. verse 15, 16.

Good is wrought out of al things toward the elect, ch: 8, v: 28.

Good doers may look for praise, and need fear no punishment, Chap: 13.
verse 3, 4.

Good by the wise GOD drawn out of evil, Ch: 8, v. 28. Ch: 11, v: 11.

Good by sin converted to evil, Ch: 11. v: 9. 7.

Grace what it signifies, and how manifold, the spring of all good gifts,
Chap: 1, ver. 7.

Grace how holiness so called, Chap: 6. v: 23.

Grace how Apostleship so termed, Ch: 1, verse 5. Ch: 15, 15.

Grace extolled by Faith, suppressed by the Law, Ch: 4, 16.

Grace in cause of Justification contrary to works, Ch: 11, verse 6.

Grace more abounds where sin abounds, how to be understood, ch: 5. v, 20.

What it is to be under Grace, ch: 6. v. 15.

Grace of Christ how preuailes above Adams sin, ch: 5. v: 16, 17, etc.

That Grace may abound we may not sin, Ch: 6. v. 1.

Grace of God, how necessary for all believers, Cha: 16, v. 20, and 24.

Grief what it is, cha: 10, verse 2.

We must grieve and mourn with such as mourn, how, Chapter 12. v. 15.

Grief in Paul great for the abiection of the Jews, Chap: 9. verse 23. and
Chapter 10, 1, 2.

H.
Heart what it signifies, ch 10, v. 9, 10.

From the heart what it is, chapter 6, 17.

From the heart prayers must come if they be accepted, chapter 10, 15.

Heart-hardnesse what it is, how manifo'd, how procured, how to be cured: how
dangerous and fearful when it is whollye, and for ever. Marks to know it by
the causes of it, chapter 2. v. 5. Chap, 11 v. 7.

Have an effect of unbelief, and cause of shame, chapter 9. v, last.

Head of the Church, not Peter or Pope, but Christ. Chapter 12. v. 4.

Hearing, how Faith by it, Chapter 10, 14.

Heavens how under vanity, how to be glorified. New heavens what. Chapter 8. v
21, 22.

Heathen, their calling to Christ prophefied of, chapter 15. v. 9, 10. 11.

Heathens how a wild Olive, chapter 11. v. 17. Of their grafting in, and how
partakers of the fatness of the Olive.

Heathens, how beholden to Gods bountifulnes, chap. 11, v. 18, 19, 20, 21.

Holy how Scriptures be so, and why the law is so entitled, chapter 1. v: 1, 2.

Christians sacrifice, how holy, chapter 12. v. 1.

Holiness way to heaven, chapter 6, v. 23.

Holy how, the branches so, because root is so. chapter 11, 16.

How our children beso, ib.

Hope what it is, how manifold, how Christian hope differs from (...): see chapter
5. v. 5, 6. and c. 8. v. 24, 25.

Hope, how it makes not ashamed.

Hope how saved by it.

Hope the office of it.

Hope how the fruit of experience, and joined ever with patience, chapter 8. v. 24.

Hope is of good things to come only, and of eternal glo ry chiefly. See chapter 8,
24.

Hope a temedy of afflictions, chapter 12, v 12.

I.
Jesus, what it means. chapter 1 1. 3.

Ignorance of God, how great a sin, why to be avoided, chapter 2. v. 12.

Ignorance how it excuses

Ignorance polluteth zeal.

Ignorance joined with pride and rebellion against God chapter 10, v. 2. 3.

Ignorance how dangerous in a guide and teacher. Chapter 2 v. 19, 20.

Image of God. unlawful, how Image and Idol all one chapter 1. v. 23. 25.

Justice imputed, inherent.

Justification, how differs from sanctification. Causes and effects of it. Chapter
(...). v. 14.

Justified how we are by Christ's resurrection, chapter 4. verse last.

Justification the parts of it, how it is the ground of peace, chapter 5. v. 1.

K.
King, how Christ is so, chapter 1. v. 3.

Kingdom of Christ spiritual.

Kingdom of God, what be the conditions and parts of it, chapter 14. v. 17.

Kissing the Book in an Oath, chapter 9. v. 1.

Kisses how used in the primitive Church, chapter 16, v. 16.

Knowledge of the word, how excellent and necessary, ch 13. v. 12.

Knowledge part of faith, chapter 14. v. 14.

Knowledge of sin speculatiue and experimental, both by the Law, chapter 7. v. 7.

Knowledge of the Law, what it works, chapter 3. v. 20. and 4. v. 15.

L.
Law how many significations, chapter 3. 19.

Law how manifold, of nature, of Moses: Ceremonial, judicial, moral: how
abrogate, Chap. 2. v. 14. and Ch, 10, 4.

Law how spiritual, and what to be learned by it, chapter 7, v. 14.

Law, how called just, ch: 7 v 12.

Law impossible to be kept and why, chapter 8. v. 3.

Law how ordained to life and occasion of sin and death, Chap. 7. verse 10,
11.

Law of members and of mind what they be, chapter 7. v. 23.

Law how to be delighted in, and why. chapter 7. v. 22.

Law cannot justify us, and why, chapter 8. v. 3.

Law, the righteousness of it, neither easy, possible, cer taine, or
comfortable, chap. 10. v. 4, 5, etc.

Law how the inheritance is not by it, chapter 4. v. 14.

Law, how contrary to pro mise.

Law of faith, what. Ch, 3. v. 27.

Labor, a Christian life full of it, and why, chapter 13. v. 13.

Love, see Charity.

Lust how many kinds: good and evil, of sundry forts, chapter 7. v. 7, 26.

Lust before consent, is sin in the regenerate, Chapter 6. v. 12. and Chapter 7. v. 7.

Lust what a pestilent thing, chapter 7. v. 8, 9.

Lust inumerable, all rebels against the spirit, chapter 6. v. 12. chapter 7, v. 23.

Lusts, great pains taken to subdue them, Chapt. 6, 12.

M.
Magistrates, their original, kinds, degrees, office, end for which
appointed, see authority.

Maliciousness, chap. 1. v. 29.

Man old and new: Why sin called man. Chap: 6. verse 6.

Man his fourefold estate, 1. by Creation, 2. by Corruption. 3. by
regeneration. 4. by glorification, ch: 5. v. 10.

Many what it signifies, chapter 5. v. 19.

Marriage is of God indissoluble till death, chapter 7. verse 1, 2.

Marriage what it is, what contrary to it, how to be undertaken.

Marriage second lawful.

Marriage spiritual, how excellent, chapter 7, 1, 2.

Mass Popish, absurd, abominable, ch, 6, v. 9, 10.

Merit overthrows grace. chapter 11, 6.

Merit none by works and why, chapter 2. v. 6. Chap. 8. ver. 18.

Meats defile when eaten with opinion of cleannes, or with offense to other:
or when the eating of them is against charity, and hinders edification, chapter
14. verse 14, 15, etc.

Meats forbidden by the Law, became pure unto the faithful, chapter 14. v. 20.

Meats taken in excess or defect, do pollute the conscience, chapter 14. v. 17.

Miracles, their names, kinds, author: instrument, uses, no sure note unto the
truth or Church. Chap: 15. v: 19.

Ministry how excellent a function and necessary, chapter 15. ve. 16.

Mystery, unto how many things applied in Scripture, Chap: 11. verse 25.
chap: 16 verse 25.

Mystery the vocation of the Gentiles. Also the reuocation of the Jews, and
why, chapter 11. v. 25.

Mortal our body why, chapter 6. v. 12.

Murder, kinds, occasions, the greeuousnesse of it, chapter 1. v. 29.

N.
Nature, by it we be sinners, and under wrath, chapter 5. v. 8.

Nature, Law thereof, what and how by it Gentiles do the things of the Law. Chapter
2. v. 14.

Neighbor who, and how to be loved, chap. 13. ver: 9.

Night, what and how it is past, chap. 13. v. 12.

O.
Oath what, the sorme of it, the kinds, the end of controversies, the abuses
of an oath, chapter 9. v. 1.

Offense what the kinds, why none to be given, Chapter 14, v. 13.

Opportunity of doing duties, not to be let slip, chap. 13. v. 11.

Ordinances of God to be submitted unto. See authority.

Original sin, what, why so called: to be repented of, chapter 5. v. 12. Chapter 7.
v, 7.

Original sin, no moving cause of reprobation. chap. 9, 11.

Once Christ died, why that sufficient, Ch: 6, verse 10.

P.
Papists by doctrine of merit overthrow grace, Chap. 11. v: 6.

Papists enemies to Christ to their own justification and salvation, Chap. 10,
ve. 4.

Petcr whither at Rome, chapter 16, verse 15, 16.

Pope will not (...) subject to higher powers, Cha: 13, verse 1.

Pope claims both swords Chapter 13. ve. (...).

Pope his intolerable pride, no head of the Church, Chapter 12. V: 4. Against God
in the doctrine of merits, and against man, in King-killing Doctrine, chap. 11.

Patience, grounds of it, Chap. 12.

Persuasion of Faith, 2. of Charity, the one infallible, the other
coniecturall, Chapter 8, v. 38.

Passion, why sin so called Chapter 7, ver. 5, 6.

Perfection none in this life but imaginary.

Perfect, how the will of God is, Ch: 12, v. 2.

Pleasing God, Chap. 12, v. 1.

Poor who, why to be relieved, Chapter 15. v: 6.

Powers to be distinguished from the persons, and abuses, and manner of
acquisition, Chapter 12. v. 1, 2, 3.

Prayer to whom, why to God alone: mental, voeall; a fruit of faith, and
note of (...), Chapter 10, v. 1, 13.

Prayer must have feruency and affiance, Chap. 8, V. 14, 15.

Prayer how a note of Adoption, ibid.

Prayer how continual, chapter 12. v. 12.

Prayer, the hindrances of it, how to overcome them, Chap. 1 v: 9.

Prayer an help under the cross, Ch: 12. v. 12.

Prayer comes of the holy Ghost, Ch: 8, v. 26.

Prayer of great force and use, Chap. 15. ver. 30, 31.

Prayer for Saints living, not for the dead.

Prayer a strong weapon, chapter 15. v. 30, 31.

Preaching what it is, how necessary to beget faith, chapter 10, v. 14, 15.

Preaching the chief work of a Minister, Chapter 10. verse 14.

Promises how sure the kinds of them, Chapter 4

Prophets foretold of Christ and taught the Doctrine of grace, though not so
clearly as the Apostles, Chap. 1. v. 1. Chapter 15. v. 26.

R.
(...) with God, Chap. 5. v: 1. Chapter 5, v. 10.

Recompense, so sin is called, Chapter 1. v. 27.

Religion, Christian reasonable service, Chapter 12. V. 1.

Remedies three against affliction, Chap. 12. verse 12.

Reprobation that it is, why it is, the marks and fruits of it, Chapter 9. ver.
11, 12. Chap. 11, v. 7.

Revenge forbidden us, and why, Chapter 12. v. 19.

Reward how belonges to works, Chapter 2. v: 6.

Riches of bounty, etc. Chapter 2. verse 4.

Rich mercy, Ch: 9. v. 24.

Rome new, how it differs from old, thoroughout this Epistle to be seen.

Rome threatened to be cut off for high-mindednesse, and so fulfilled, Chapter 11.
v. 21

S.
Sacrament what, how many, what is (...) mon unto them all: the uses and
benefits which com by them, chapter 2. v. 25. chapter 4. v. 11.

(...), two ways men do err about them, Chapter 6. v. (...).

Sacrifice taken properly and improperly, Chap. 12, verse 1.

Sacrifice properly taken Legal and (...), chapter 12. v. 1.

Sacrifice legal, the kinds and ends of it: it determined in Christ the proper
Sacrifice of the Gospel, chapter 12. v. 1.

Sacrifice, proper or Christian, how many, and the conditions of it, chapter 12.
v. 1.

Scripture what it signifies. chapter 1. v. 2.

Scriptures how to know them to be Gods word, ibid.

Scripture a perfect Judge of (...) and Cano^ of says and manners, chapter 12
verse 2.

Scriptures contain the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God, chap: 12.
verse 2.

Scriptures best and surest interpreters of themselves, Chapter 11, v. 8.

Scriptures how to be read and heard, chapter 1. v. 2. Chapter 9. v. 12.

Saints who, how by calling. What this word may put us in mind of, Chapter 1. v.
7. Ch: 15. v. 25, 26.

Saints in truth, and by profession only, ibid.

Sanctified nature of Christ heals our corrupt nature, chapter 8. v 2, 3, 4.

Sanctification the parts of it, how represented and ratified in baptism, Chapter
6. v. 3, 4.

Severity of God against sin how great, chapter 11. v: 22.

Serve sin what it is, and how known, chapter 6. (...). 6. 20.

Service of sin how vile, ibid.

Servant of sin what, ib.

Seeking God aright or amiss. chapter 3, v. 11. chapter 10, v. 20.

Secret, see mystery. Shame double, 1 of face, 2. of conscience, Chapter 6, 21.

Shame, what it is to the godly and ungodly, and what it works in both, ibid.

Shame, why mentioned rather then any other fruit of sin, ibid.

Sin, the nature, kinds, filthiness, and danger of it, chapter 6. v. 23.

Sin, to live in it, what. Ch 6. v. 1.

Sin to abound what, chapter 5, v. 20.

Sin, how first husband, chapter 7, v. 4.

Sin how mortified and dead, not in a moment, cha. 7. v. 4, 5, 6.

Sins, our cause of Christ's death, and what it should admonish us of, chapter 4.
v. last, chapter 5, 8.

Sins none venial in their own nature, chapter 6. v: 23.

Sins how venial, ib.

Supper of the Lord, how to prepare to it. ch: 2. v. 25.

T.
Tribulatiou, see affliction.

Trust in God, see faith:

Truth of God, is for our comfort and imitation, Chapter 3, v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Truth of God not impeached by men's unbelief. Ib.

Truth of God, how renow ned by our lives. ibid.

V. W.
Vanity, how creatures subject to it, and why, Chap: 8, verse 20:

Unbelief, a Mother and maine sin, reasons against it, and why we ought to
believe God, Ch: 11, v. 20.

Will of God, ch: 12, v. 2.

Word of God, see Scripture.

Works good which be, and why to be done. What required to a good work, ch:
2, v. 6 ch: 14. v: 5 6.

Works neither (...) nor merit, and why, see Law.

Works to what ends they are to be done, seeing they justify not, ch: 2, v: 6.

Z.
Zeal what, erroneus and wise, ch: 10, v: 2.

Zeal without knowledge, ibid.

Zeal joined with knowledge, and of what things, ibid.

Zeal of the Jews faulty sundry ways, Ibid.

Zeal of Papists blind and furious, Ibid.

Zeal rare in Protestants, Ibid.

Zealous why we ought to be, and why we should take heed of blind zeal,
Ibid. Also Ch: 12, v: 11.

Errata.
Muse not courteous Reader, that thou do meet with these faults, for there
would have been far more, if the great diligence of the Printer had not
prevented it, the blind Copy and wine own ouer-sight were so bad. Correct
therefore with thy pen these here noted, ere thou begin to read, and bear
with the rest.

PAge 3. l. 25. read Reuocation, p. 4. l. 12. r. it. p. 8. l. 11: r. exordium.
p. 9: l. 34 r. his before free, and for after grace, and in the mar. r. the
Gospel after of. p. 21. l. 3. strike out (which of it self) and place it
before could in l. 32. P. 22. l: 16. r. gift. p. 23. l. 19. r. few. l. 22. r.
mean ones. p. 25. str, the 9. and 10. lines wholly. p: 27. l: 35. r. whom. p:
32. l. 28. r: be. p: 43. l. 17. r. too high. p: 54. l. 6. r. 1 John. p: 57. l:
19. r: with. P: 61, l: 14. r: by for on, in p. 63. the lines 12, 13, 14, 15.
16. must be joined to l. 6. p. 72 str. out whole lines, 7, 8, 9, 10 p. 73. r.
all matters after attribute. P. 84 l. 18. r. these four. p. 89. l. 13. r.
Antimisthia. p: (...). l. 1. r. as in killing Abcl. p. 107. l, 4. r. does not.
p ibid. l 16. r. judgment for Law, l. 32. r. coactiue. p: 112. l. 19. r. of
the 1: chap. p. 133. from the two last lines unto the 14. l of p. 135. all
belongs unto the 6. Dial. p. 186. l. 31. r. righteous. p. 189. l. 3. r. To. 12,
2. p. 272. str. lines 26, 27. p. 277. l: 26. r: hencc. p: 284. l: 8. (...):
hence. p. 362. mar. r. imputetur. p. 366. l. 34. str. actions. p. 385. in mar.
r. habent. p. 390. l. 17. r. frced. p. 397. l. 1. str. ont having a little
paper left. p. 409. l. 29. r. sick. p. 428. l. 18. r. now. p. 442. l. 7. r. and
works, it is a good sign. p. (...). l. 1. r. word. and 446. morg. r.
deplorat. 451. l. 14. r. good. p. 488. l. last. r. truth. p. 489. str. 5 last
lines. p. 502. l. 15. r. after unable, by his-own unthriftiness. p. 527. l.
15, (...). r. follows and his merits. p. 563. l. 19, 20. r. to our spirit
and with our spirit. p. 596. l. 6. r. explication. p. 606. l. 25. r. our error.
p. 6 (...) 1. l. 34. r. (...). p. p. 614. in (...). p. 628. l. 14. r. or some
thing which has Analogic and proportion with faith. p. 650. for thirdly, r.
secondly. l. 35. angels for devils. p. 652. l. 31. read probable only, p. 673.
l. 1. r. Silas. p. 679. mar. r. vniuersum genus. p. 693. l. 19. r. be just. p.
719. l. 30. r. having. p. (...). l. 3. r. (...). p. 759. l. 11. r. ver. 3, 4.
of this chap. p. 802. r. christ for faith. p. 833. r. preaching. p. (...). l.
21. r. has not done. p. 848. r. are things. pa. 860. l. 32: r. it is not true.
p. 862. l. 23. r. sub testo. p. 865. r: an agreement. p. 882. l. 18. read
Antopistos p. 867. mar. r. prophetarum. p. 897. l. 13. r. anomia. p. 976. r.
one believer. page 979 l. 11. so the promise. p. 991. l. 28. r. or for of. p.
997. l. 31. for gods judgment; (...). these are things. p. 902. l. 1. r. as
christ. p. 925. l. 6. r: toward the end. p. 1016. l. 32. r. allow them. p.
1023. l. 15. r. three. p. 1041. l. 10. for but r. nor. l. 12. r. canon. p.
1042. mar. str. Orineus p. 1048. in mar. r. one for even, and write after doc.
Fulke. p. 1069. l. 5. r. correction. page 1085. l. 27. r. unprofitable. 1090.
l. 10. (...). good laws, 1101. l. 13. r. acknowledge. p. 1106. (...). 4. r.
retchles. p. 1113. l. 21. r. for (...) l hy. p. 1121. l. 1. r. also defended
Peter's abiuring, after marriage. p. 1126. l. 31. r. vices for duties.


