SOME HELPS TO FAITH. Showing the Necessity, grounds, kinds, degrees, signs
of it. Clearing diverse doubts, answering objections, made by the Soul in
temptation.

By JOHN WILSON, Preacher of Gods word in Gilford.

PHILIP. 1.25.26. For your furtherance, and joy of faith that you may more
abundantly rejoice in Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the great South door of Paul's. 1625.

TO THE TRVELY NOBLE LADY, THE LADY LETTICE, Countess of Leicester: Mercy and
Grace in this life, Salvation with eternal glory in the World to come.
Good Madam,
Unthankfulness is a great defiler of conscience, both as it is a great sin
against justice; and as it prouokes wrath, whereby such persons are delivered
up to vile affections. And though thankfulness cannot stay in the instrument,
but goes by it to the author, yet it is due to such, by whose hands God
conueyes his benefits. It has pleased that blessed God* to stir up your
Ladyship for my good: first, in calling me to be a Minister to your Honorable
family, how weak soever; yet not without some fruit by his blessing, whose
power is seen in weakness; where, how I was cared for, my conscience does
witness: secondly, in your opportunity (preferring public good, so were your
words) giving me a free, and comfortable entrance into this charge, wherein I
now labor, according to my measure. And from that time, I have been followed
with kindness from that house; but that specially refreshes me to remember,
that for the work of my Ministry, your Honor willed me to count you as my
mother. I am bold thus in particular, to propound you for Gods Honor, as an
example, especially to Patrons.

And finding my self so much bound, I have long thought how besides my
prayers, I might by some paper testimony, show my self thankful to your
Ladyship; and resolved at last to write these notes fair, and send them for
the help of your faith and comfort, in witness of the continuing, of my true
care for your souls good. Hereunto I was the rather inclined, for that I
understood, some to have found help (through the mercy of God) to the
quieting of their conscience by the reading of them, when they were in shorter
notes of a Sermon: In the mean time, diverse friends called upon me, for
some thing to the Press, from which the knowledge of mine own wants has
hitherto kept me, yet debating it thus; If the matter be profitable: first, it
is not likely to be hurt that way, but more useful then by writing: secondly,
more fit to some for reading; and to convey books to friends, more commodious
then Copies in writing. Here I stuck at this, that good books for this help
be not scant; but then I thought again, that acquaintance being a help to
make them known, all come not to one hand: thi^dly, my desire to leave
testimony of my faith, on whom I hold: and how, fourthly, that God has glory
of diversity of gifts, which manifest the spirit, given to profit withal:
fifthly, that my self owe to them that have so adventured themselves. It
yielded, not without fear, I confess, yet commending it to God for his
blessing, and to the love of my dear friends to further it, it is now out of
my hands.

Good Madam, use it among other helps: I once left a little thing with you, to
help you in examination of your title to Heaven, this may a little further
that as being (I think) fuller, to that purpose. Calling made sure is a great
comfort, and advantage for a Christian, many give testimony to you: you have
given good example in your constant respect of Gods ordinances, glorify God
more with the fruits of your faith and love; call for the inspirations of the
spirit, to be carried earnestly after him, he purchased a people, to be
jealous of good works: look into the felicity of Gods chosen daily, be
still making it sure in your own conscience; the end of this life puts Gods
people in possession of endless life. The highest in the earth, have but term
of life in their present things, how great so ever; and dying out of Christ,
are without end miserable. Blessed are they that so trust in Christ, as to have
the Lord for their God: that is to be known in experience by the spirit of
Christ, destroying the dominion of sin, and lading us, so as that in the
course of our life, we are with God, though foiled for our humbling in many
temptations. The God of life, preserve your life of his good pleasure, for the
good of many, that praising God for you, may by their prayers further your
grace here with the exercise of it: the Lord be with you, your Honorable
sister with hers, all that belong to you, and guide your hearts into the love
of God, and to look for his Son, the blessed hope from heaven.

Your Honors in all duty, and humble observance. John Wilson.

SOME HELPS TO FAITH.
Showing the necessity, grounds, kinds, degrees, signs of it; clearing
diverse doubts, answering objections, made by the soul in temptation.
Luke 1.20. Because, thou beleeuest not my words, etc.


THE holy Evangelist, set to deliver the story of Christ from his beginning
(concerning his humanity) puts first a narration of his forerunner, how he did
rise (as he that would speak of the day light begins at the day star)
wherein he mentions the promise of his miraculous conception, and the joy of
his father and other friends: 2. the doubting of the promise by Zachary, with
the reason of it, age making it impossible by course of nature. Which is
aggrauated by the minister, Gabriel, and by the matter promised, glad tidings:
2. threatened with punishment of dumbness as a penal sign set out by the
time, till the fulfilling of the promise; and the cause, not believing the
words of such a messenger as he knew was sent of God. For Zacharies doubt
appears not to be about the quality of the Angel, whether he were true or
false. If he had only doubted whence the revelation came, it would not have
been so blamed, for Gideon did so, and desired a sign whereby he might know
it was an Angel of God that speak to him Judge. 6.17.21. But looking to the
order of nature, so as he considered not the power of God, as Abraham did in a
like case, he gave not such glory to God a to rest on his word and power.

Observation. I.
From his punishment for this cause that he believed not the word of God, sent
by his messenger, we may gather, how provoking a sin it is not to believe God
promising. His fault was but in one part of Gods word, admiting some doubt
about thee fulfilling of the promise: 1. It was a particular act of unbelief,
no habit: 2. not full, but of infirmity among many faithful services, yet
because he staggered at the promise, knowing that God had spoken, he shall
speak no words of his own, till God have fulfilled his. Sara overcame her
doubt, Heb, 11.11. by faith she received power to conceive seed, and was
delivered of a child when she was past age; because she judged him, faithful
who had promised, yet laughed at the message of the Angel and is reproved for
it, Genesis 18.12. Our Savior does reproach the two Disciples, honestly
testifiing of him, for folly and slownesse of heart to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken, Luke 24.25. he vpbraides the eleven with their unbelief,
because they believed not them which had seen him after his resurrection, Mar.
16.14. Moses and Aarons (faithful servants of God) were judged to death
temporal, Numb. 20.21.24.
for not sanctifying the Lord by believing his promise of bringing water out of
the rock, and to lose the honor of bringing Gods people into the Land of
promise. When a doubt creeps into a man's mind, whether that which God has
spoken shall come so to pass, it is injurious, and greiuous to him; much more
when with full unbelief his promise is rejected. Psalm. 106.24.25.26, 2. King.
7.2.

Reasons.
SIns are more greiuous as they have God for their object more immediately,
hating of God, despair, unbelief, the mother sin, it dishonours God above
many sins of morality: 1. In questioning his truth: 2. In limiting his power:
3. In disgracing his promise, and messengers: Esa. 7.13. Is it a small thing
for you to grieve men, that you will grieve my God, also.

Secondly, it is of prauity of nature, man's faithless disposition, whereunto
being indulgent, he bears with himself in it too much, where God offers to
fence him not only with promise, but sometimes with sign. God says of his
sons and daughters, that they are children in whom is no faith, Deuteronomy. 32.20.
Christ to his fearful Disciples, how is it that ye have no faith, Mar. 4.40.

Use: 1. We ought therefore to fear with hatred all unbelief, all kinds and
degrees of it, and to sway our hearts against their natural disposition: we
ought to believe God speaking to us, whatsoever, how often soever, in what
manner soever he do speak to us; and be violent against the hindering
disposition, so breaking into heaven. The devil flies not from us by dallying,
but by resisting him, Iam. 4.7. Faith makes supernatural things possible,
Math. 17.20. It obtaines wonderful things Heb. 11.11.33.34. It sanctifies God
in a man's heart, Esa. 8.13. and gives him glory before men, Romans 4.20.
Out-looking improbabilities, impossibilities in nature, resting on his truth
and power.

When God has spoken; let us rejoice in his word, saying, I have the word of
God, Psalm. 56 10.
whereof I glory; the word of God, I say, whereof I will glory. David assures
himself, to the ouercomming of sorrows and quickening him with spiritual
joy, that it shall be as God has said, Psalm. 60.6. God has spoken in his
holiness, I will rejoice, I shall divide Shechem, and measure the valley of
Succhoth. Gilead is mine, etc. when the Lord has said, I will not leave thee
nor forsake thee, we may boldly say the Lord is my helper, I will not fear,
Heb. 13.5.6. God will do that which he has spoken to me of, Genes. 28.15.
Thus Paul did give hope to them in the Ship with him in great extremity, Be of
good courage, for I believe God, Act. 27.25.36.
that it shall be even so as he has spoken to me: and they were all of good
cheer. At length we shall say (to Gods praise) As we have heard, so have we
seen in the City of our God, Psalm 48.8. Let us lay up the promises in our
hearts, set them still before us, digest them in a holy hope, and feed our
selves with them, be they general or particular, to this or that state and
condition, absolute or with exception of the cross; we shall believing,
perceive in sensible effect that God has not said in vain, Seek ye me.
Esa. 45.19.
None shall be ashamed that wait for him: Esa. 49.23.
either we shall have the very thing which we do desire, or the good of the
want of it.

Use. 2. Seeing one act of distrust in a particular promise is so offensive to
God, how grievous is it to forsake the general promise of mercy in Christ
Jesus, made to every one that believes on him? Heb. 4.1. Let us fear, it is
full of sin and danger.

First, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
It is a manifest disobedience, Romans 10.16, 21. against the first and great
commandment of the Law: which though it do not directly command faith in
Christ, nor reveal the righteousness whereby we are saved, Romans 3.21. yet
binds us to hearken to God, in all that he commands us; to whomsoever Christ
is preached, the commandment to believe in him is given, Mar. 1.15. Ioh. 6.29.
Ioh. 3.23.
They that revolt after profession of faith, are said to turn away from the
holy commandment given to them. 2. Pet. 2.21.

1. Ioh. 5.10.
Secondly, Unbelief is a kind of blasphemy; it makes God a liar, which agrees
not with his nature, it is impossible to him. Heb. 6.18. Tit. 1.2. His witness
is greater then the witness of man. He that honors a man with cap and knee,
yet counts him a vain lying fellow, does more dishonor him thereby, then with
all the outward signs he honors him: so he that believes not God testifying
of his Son, that whosoever receives him has life, what respect soever he
give him in other things, dishonours more then he honors him, making the
credit of his testimonies suspected; as he that believes has sealed that
God is true. Ioh. 3.33.


Thirdly, Unbelief has in it an odious unthankfulness in refusing Christ with
his grace so freely offered to every creature, Mark. 16.15. Christ lovingly
calls every one that is athirst to come to him, with gracious promise that they
shall not come in vain, 2. Cor. 5.20. 2. Cor. 6.1.
Ioh. 7.37, 38. beseeching men by his servants in his stead, to be reconciled
to God, and not to receive the grace of God in vain. He waits that he may
have place in men's hearts, promising sweet and refreshing familiarity to any
that hears his voice and opens unto him, Revel. 3.20. He puts none away that
come to him, John 6.37. God expostulates with men, why they will die, seeing
life is so freely offered them, Eze. 18.31. lamenting their folly and loss in
refusing him. Therefore whether it be of sottish negligence, or of obstinate
rebellion, it is inexcusable unthankfulness to reject him.

Fourthly, Unbelief holds a man in the power of sin, in an universal
pollution of nature: the seat of it is an evil heart, Heb. 3.12. a heart full
of evil affections; so it robbes God of that inward worship, which faith
purifying the heart sets up and maintains, it is joined with love, a pure
heart and a good conscience, 1. Tim. 1.5.

No true inward worship can be performed without faith, as may appear by
considering all the parts of it.

I. Confidence in God (whereby we roll our selves upon him for all needful
good, and to be helped and defended against all hurtful evil, Psalm. 112.7.
so as not to be afraid at any evil tidings, to laugh at destruction when it
comes, Job. 5.22.
to challenge the adversaries of our happiness with a holy insultation, either
as it were at the bar, for accusation or condemnation; or in the field, for
force to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.33, 34, 35.)
cannot be without faith in Christ. We have by him entrance unto God, with
boldness and confidence through faith in his name, Ephesians. 3.12. Him God raised
from the dead, and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God, 1.
Pet. 1.21.

That a man may stay upon God, he must know that he is his God, committing
the care of his safety, and the charge of his happiness to belong to him, being
both able and willing to help him; which necessarily requires faith in Christ,
that he may have right to that covenant, I will be thy God. So knowing whom
he has believed, he with quietness and confidence commits himself to him,
as Paul, 2. Tim. 1.12.

Diffidence, and thereby fear are found in godly men, and that in good causes
by defect of faith: much more in them that have no faith, whose hearts by the
sound of fear are moved as the trees of the forest by the wind, Esaias 7.2.
or are hardened against threatenings, by flattery, trust in lying words, making
falsehood their refuge.

Secondly, Love of God (whereby we are moved toward him, and cleave to him,
as soueraignely good in himself; 2. the author and maintainer of all our good
had or hoped for; 3. and for him do love such persons and things as he has
commended to our love; 4. give our selves to him to be at his will, seeking
his glory, and hating our selves, as we are against him; 5. cannot be
satisfied, but in fruition of him, and therein rest with delightful
contentment;) cannot be in an unbeliever. Ioh. 5 42*
1. In such the love of God is not. 2. Gods love preuents us, and mooues ours.
1. John 4.19. 3. He circumciseth our hearts to love him, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
his spirit is called the spirit of love, because it works it in us, 2 Thessalonians.
3.5.
and guides our hearts into it. 2. Tim. 1.7. 4. It is one special note by
which the heirs of the grace of life are described, 1. Cor. 2.9. and 8.3. Ephesians.
6.24. Romans 8.28. Iam. 1.12. The unbeliever is an enemy to God. Coloss. 1.21.

Thirdly, Fear of God (whereby we sanctify him in our hearts; stand in awe of
him and his word; hate to sin against him, even where no eye but his can take
notice of us; give our selves to good duties with strife to do them, 2. Chr.
19.9
so as pleases him; aspire to full sanctification, 2. Cor. 7.1.) cannot be in
an vnbelieuer. For it is wrought in regeneration, by virtue of Gods Covenant
with such as have their sins forgiven, Ier. 32.40. by the spirit of God that
rests upon Christ for his members, Esa. 11.2. is provoked by Gods mercy, Psalm.
130. verse. 4. and holds a man with a perpetual will to God.

The unbeliever either contemnes God, and declares it by lewdness in his
ways, Prou. 14.2. Or if he fear, it is either penal Esa. 33.14. like the
devils trembling; or mere servile, to be a bridle, to work some ciuility, the
chief object of it is evil of punishment. The fear of the belieuer, is
ingenuous, voluntary, with confidence, and joy, the chief object of it is
evil of sin, not his own distress but Gods offense.

Fourthly, Obedience (a voluntary subjection of mind and heart to God, to
hearken to, and to do his will, after that manner, and to that end which he
appoints) is not in an unbeliever; whose wisdom is enmity against God, Romans
8.7. He is a servant of sin, addicted to the wills of the flesh and mind, to
fulfill them, not subject to God nor can be.

Faith is the Mother of obedience, by it we receive the spirit, renewing our
nature unto delightsome agreement with Gods Law, Ioh. 5.3.4. moving us by Gods
mercies, impelling us by the love of Christ, to die to our selves to live to
him.

Fifthly, Patience (whereby under evils, we adide in Gods ways; possess our
souls, wait for God, and give him glory, acknowledging his hand, authority
over us and ours, his wisdom, righteousness and goodness) is not in an
unbeliever, for it is the daughter of faith and hope, 1. These. 1.3. a fruit of
the spirit, Gal. 5.22. and is wrought in meditation and application of Gods
promises, of the gift of his son the pledge of all promises, Romans 8.31.32.
and his presence with us in trouble, Psalm. 91.15. moderating the temptation to
the strength he gives, that we may be able to bear it, working our present
good and promoting our future glory, 2 Cor. 4. Unbelief has either,
senseless stupiditie, Ier. 5.3. or hardening and making the courage stout to
endure the uttermost, or a counterfeit humiliation, whereby men flatter God to
get out of his hands, which if it succeed not, their pride opens their mouth
against God unto stout words, and their heart frets against the Lord. Esa.
58.3. Mal. 3.13.14.

Sixthly, Prayer (an action of the heart wherein, acknowledging the author of
all goodness, we enforce the powers of our souls to do an immediate service
to him, to bring forward his decrees into execution) no unbeliever can rightly
perform: for it requires faith not only of Gods essence and power, but of his
love and good will to us, accepting our person, and receiving our prayer. Mar.
11.24. Romans 10.14. Heb. 11.6. Iam. 1.6. and it must be by the holy Ghost. Iud.
2.20. It requires an upright person. Prou. 15.8. the oder of Christ's sacrifice.
Reave. 8.4. And so is a note of saluatition. Joel. 2.38. Which is far from an
unbeliever.

Seventhly, thanksgiving or sacrificing praise to God, cannot be rightly
performed without faith, for it requires a heart affected with this above all
benefits, that the Lord is our God, Psalm. 144.15.
which was declared by giving thanks before the Ark, the testimony of Gods
presence with his people; it goes thus, thou art my God and I will thank
thee. Psalm. 118.28. With taste of his love in the benefits, as pledges of more
to come, as the valley of Achor for a door of hope with pleasure in the
commandment, Hos. 2.15.
consecration of our selves and that we have to God, offered in the mediation
of Christ for acception. 1. Pet. 2.5.


Unbelievers, though formally they may give thanks, convinced that all good is
from God, carried by pride in preferment of their gifts before other men, as
the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. yet they be more in prayers then in praises. Luke
17.16, 17.
As they cannot give thanks for spiritual benefits which are given only in
Christ, to such as believe on him: so neither for temporal freely, feelingly,
with love of the duty, with taste of Gods love and delight in him. As a judge
that feasts a malefactor by the way, who fears his hanging at a place
appointed, gets but heartlesse thanks of him: so God for his bounty to an
unbeliever, who still fears that he will destroy him after he has done him
good.

Unbelief disables a man to every good work, the branch brings not forth but
in the vine without Christ, or not being in him we can do nothing, Ioh.
15.4.5. The work cannot be better then the nature whence it proceeds, an evil
tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Math. 7.18.
The work may be materially good, but evil by abuse: productions of the flesh
by some perverse affection, unto ends not right in the sight of God, they be
dead works, not only as they proceed from a person spiritually dead, a
stranger from the life of God, but as they tend to the condemnation of the
worker, though far more tolerable then those sins that are such for their
matter and kind.

Sixthly, Unbelief holds a man under great misery.

First, Under the rigor of the law, without mercy to the pardon of the least
omission or defect.

Secondly, Under irritation of the law, the more it reueales sin, the more
corrupt nature lusts and strives to do it. Romans 7.5.8.

Thirdly, under the coaction of the law: he is in bondage unto fear of the
threatenings of it, and withheld from the evil which he loves, as a dog tied
up from biting or a fox chained up from prey, yet retain their disposition.

Fourthly, Under the malediction of the law, there is no curse but he may
fear it in his blessings, in his crosses, he has evil of good, and evil of
evil, all turns to his hurt. It shutts out thee good of most excellent
means, Heb. 4.2. makes Christ with all his virtue unprofitable to him, who by
his absolute power, can do whatsoever he will, yet concerning his ordinate
power is made impotent (in a sort) to great works by the unbelief of men. Mar.
6.5.

Seventhly, Unbelief increases a man's misery living under the Gospel, it
shall be required of him according to that which is committed to him; judgment
is to the Jew first, for abusing his preferment in the offer of salvation by
Christ. Romans 2.9.
This is condemnation that light is come into the world and men loved darkness
rather then light. Ioh. 3.19. Christ is to the ruin of many in Israel. Luke
2.34. They have a double damnation, one from the law wherein Christ found them,
another from the Gospel in which deliverance was offered, and they refused it,
Math. 21.44.
they that stumble at this stone, are broken, and they upon whom it falls are
all ground to powder. A malefactor dies justly by the law, but if he have
offer of the kings pardon and refuse it, he is twice guilty of his own death:
the judgment begins here in spiritual plagues, Romans 11.8.9. Ioh: 12.39. and
is fulfilled in hell, in a more greiuous damnation then that of Sodom and
Gomorrha. Math. 10.23.


Resolve therefore speedily to obey the Gospel, consent to God commanding you
to receive his son, promising mercy in him to every one that believes on him,
dispute not against his faithful and true sayings, listen not to the devil
and your carnal wisdom muttering and obiecting thus.

Objection. I.
Who am I? what is my worthiness that I should conceive of God that he so
respected me as to give his son, and with him so great happiness for me? I
dare not believe it.

Answer.
First, The opening of the sealed Book (the bare foreknowledge of things to
come) found no man living or dead worthy of it, Reu. 5.2, 3, 5.
but only Christ, whom then shall so great love find worthy of it in himself?
2. It commends the free grace of God, that he was so far from making the
respect of our worthiness, to turn his mind toward us, that when we were of
no strength, mere enemies, sinners and ungodly, Romans 5.6.
he provided the merit of his son for us: his love is set before the gift of
his son. Ioh. 3.16. To declare the freeness of the benefit, we bring
nothing, bring nothing but our needinesse: emptiness, nothingnesse are only
receivers of Christ with his blessing, and of faith also whereby to receive
him. It is of faith that it might be of grace. Romans 4.16. Herein has God
manifested, and made certain his love. 1 Ioh. 4.9.

That I may be settled in conscience that being in my self unworthy, I am
counted worthy, I must turn away mine eyes from my self, and behold Christ
Jesus alone, on whose worthiness the fulfilling of the promises depends, he
that imbraceth him and the promise of mercy in him, Reu. 3.4.
is said to be worthy, as he that reiects the offer of God so gracious is said
to be unworthy Math. 22.8.

First, The holy servants of God confessing their own unworthiness, have yet
believed, and humbly claimed Gods promise, with this reason: thou have told
this goodness to thy servant, thou art God and thy words be true, Genesis 32.9,
10, 11.2 Sam. 7.18.28. praying him to perform it for his own sake; Dan. 9.19.
who for his own sake puts away our iniquities, Esa. 43.25.

Objection. II.
The presumption of a bidden guest, sitting down at the wedding feast without
a wedding garment, was found and fearfully punished. Considering my
nothingnesse, and withal my great sinfulness, I fear to meddle, humility
seems to withold me.

Answer.
It is not presumption but humility to yield to Gods will, and a meet thing to
accept the gracious offer of his son unto life, approve and yield to what God
pronounces to please him, give your self liberty to judge in his work what
is meet, consider the correction of Peter refusing in modesty his Lords offer
to wash his feet. Ioh. 13.6.8.9. There is a carnal humility that may spoil a
man of his soul. Col. 2.13.23. We be fittest for Gods mercy, Ezech. 36.31.
when lothing our selves in our fowlenesse we aspire unto his grace, which he
gives to the humble. 1. Pet. 5.5.6.

Secondly, Great things beseem a great God, we are to consider not what we are
in our selves meet to receive, but what is meet for him to give, whose counsel
determines to this and that man, as his pleasure is, who works herein for the
praise of his glorious grace, that makes all for himself, Lord of all, free to
place his grace where he will, none gives him first. Romans 11.35.

Thirdly, He suffers his elect, to fall into great sins, which he orders to his
and their glory: 1. In giving them notice of them, with feeling, whether
strange terror and consternation accompany it, or they pass in the birth more
easly, yet they go before many civil men into the kingdom of heaven. Math.
21.31. disposing them thereby unto his calling unto fellowship with Christ: 2.
and makes them called, to do more with impulsion of love for much forgiven,
Luke 7.47. 3. To stand as patterns of Gods abounding grace, to prevent their
diffidence, who desire Gods mercy and grace, 1. Tim. 1.16.
yet distrust by the number and greatness of their sins.

Forthly, Number or greatness of sins, are not bars in all to shut out
Gods mercies in Christ, either for forgiveness, or healing of nature: they may
be resembled by the Sea, in which Gods great works are seen, which slowes to
the covering not only of sands, but rocks; because God has given his son,
to take with the nature of the elect, their death. Heb. 2.9.14. and thereunto
their sins. He made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.21. God laid upon him
all the sins of the Elect, figured in the goat that escaped, by lot Leuit.
16.21.22. Over which Aaron confessed all the iniquities of the children of
Israel, and all their trespasses in all their sins, putting them upon the
head of the goat, sending him by appointment, into a land not inhabited, that
the sins and curse might not reside among Gods people, prophesied in Esa.
53.6. Not only the punishment of our sins, but our sins were made to meet
upon him, whether past, present, or to come: and the equal value to all the
wrath that they did deserve, he endured. 1. Tim. 2.6. He his own self bare
our sins in his body to, or on the tree: 1. Pet. 2.24. By his stripes or
wailes we are healed, Romans 3.22, 23. and 10, 12.
all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God, he that is Lord over all
is rich unto all that call upon him. Be it ten thousand talents, five hundred
or fifty pence, he for Christ that has (as the surety) made satisfaction to
the full, for the whole debt, counts it as if he had no wrong by us, but that
we are just, clear, not guilty, puts away his anger, loves us freely: Hos.
14.15.
we need not for fear, (believing in Christ) pain and torment our souls in
respect of punishment to come, for any sin or blasphemy committed. Mark. 3.28.
Verily I say unto you all sins shall be forgiven unto the children of men,
and blasphemies, wherewith they blaspheme. Christ appointed forgiveness of
sins to be preached in his name without distinction of many or few, small or
great. Thus Gods people are encouraged to follow the Lord, and to set upon
reformation of sinners because there is hope in Israel for this. 1. Sam. 12.20.
Esra. 10.2.


3. God inuites to his feast, sinners, of vilest sort, Math. 22.9, 10. Luke
14.23.
such as are as miserable in soul, as they be in body; that by high ways and
hedges, Church porches or any meetings to make their advantage, show and offer
to pity, faces gnawen, eyes, noses, and members eaten with rottenness.

Whosoever accepts truly his inuitation, comes and eats of his provision, is
allowed, cleansed from all his sin, clothed with righteousness as a robe,
and adorned with graces as with Jewels, Esaias 61.10. Luke 15.21. Revel. 19.7.
Come receive Christ, he shall cloth you and deck you unto admiration. Who is
she, Cant. 6.9. that comes out of the wilderness to join her self to her
well-beloved? Cant. 8.5.

Objection III.
Redemption is not universal, in Gods purpose mercy is limited, Romans 9.11.14.
according to his will is all the difference between them that are saved and
them that perish, Math. 11. 25.26. Christ came to do the will of his father,
in giving eternal life to them that were given him. John 6.37. He gave his
life for his sheep, John 10.15. dyed for the children of God scattered in all
the world. John 11.52. But he did not pray nor speak a good word for the
world to his father, Ioh. 17.9.
his sacrifice was the foundation of his intercession: they must needs
therefore be of one extent. How shall I know that Jesus Christ by the will of
God gave himself for me, that I may stay upon him?

Answer.
First, He prayed for all, and therefore dyed for all that believe in him.
Ioh. 17.20. None come to him but whom his father draws, he draws none but
whom he had before given to him. John 7.37. Faith is peculiar to the elect.
John 10.26. Acts 13.48. Titus 1.1. The election obtaines it. Romans 11.7.
Believe, and you have a clear resolution, whereby you may say, he loved me and
gave himself for me. Gal. 2.20.


Secondly, Suspicion arising of a certain prejudice without ground, inclining
a man to the worst part, if it be but toward a man, is sin: for charity
thinks not evil, believes all things. 1. Cor. 13. To have God in suspicion,
when he calls me to receive his grace in Christ Jesus, is much more sinful,
both for injury to God, and hurt to my self. God has provided against such
putting of stumbling blocks to a man's self. Esa. 56.3.5.7. Whosoever loves the
name of God and to be his servant is assured of acceptance, and joyful
experience thereof for person and service.

The spirit of God makes no persuasion to a man of his reprobation, as he does
of his Election. Neither can it be gathered from sin of nature, or Action
internal, or external. Where Christ is esteemed truly, the spirit of grace
not dispited, if an Angel should pronounce your damnation, you should suspect
him for a lying spirit. Or if you knew an Angel from heaven to say so much,
that you shall be damned, you are to believe him no further then under this
condition, if you believe not in Christ Jesus and repent toward God; the
written word, in the true sense known, is to be rested in above the testimony
of an Angel from heaven. Galath. 1.6.

Thirdly, You have inducements to believe, that thou ought not to neglect. You
are borne holy; 1. Cor. 1.14. brought forth to God by the Church, Gods wife.
Ezech. 16.20.21. You are a child of the kingdom, Math. 8.12. yours is the
adoption, Romans 9.4. at least externally, as belonging to you. The covenant is
propounded. Sacraments ministered, not only as notes of profession but as
testimonies of Gods good will in Christ. Men having written their covenants,
set their seals to them and delivered them, they that deal with them use to
rest as secured, conceiving they deal with wise, honest and able men. God has
written his covenant, set his seal to it, and by a minister authorized by him
set you, as it were, in possession. If you reject it not, not only spiritual
things, but the application of them is represented in the Sacraments: you are
sprinkled with Sacramental water, you have given to you and receive
Sacramental bread and wine, which by Gods appointment have Sacramental union
with, and relation unto the spiritual thing represented. It is such an
obligation to faith, and consecration of a man's self to God, that if a man
excite not his faith and yield himself, he shall account to God above others
that never had these testimonies. Ezech. 20.37. I will cause you to pass under
the rod, and bring you into the bond of the covenant.

Objection. IIII.
God will not clear the guilty nor acquit the wicked: he ioynes perishing
unto impenitency: how shall I believe his promise of mercy to my pardon, that
cannot clear my conversion to my conscience. None can enter into the kingdom
of heaven but borne of the spirit; Ioh. 3.5.
Romans 8.13.
living after the flesh I shall die. I am commanded to let no man deceive me
with vain words to secure me from such danger. Ephesians. 5.5, 6.


Answer.
These two questions are distinct and must not be confounded, what manner of
persons they be that God admitts into heaven? And what manner of person may
receive Christ, unto justification of life?

The answer to the first is, that God receives none into heaven but such as
he has made meet thereunto by justification and sanctification in Christ
Jesus. Col. 1.12. 2 These. 1.11. The Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, that
God would make them meet for, or worthy of his calling of the high things in
heaven unto which he called them by the Gospel, not that there is inherent
dignity in any man, but by imputation of the worthiness of Christ, which is
ever accompanied with sanctification, or Godly nature. The inheritance is
undefiled. 1. Pet. 1.4. no unrighteous person, nothing that is unclean shall
enter into it. Reu. 21. 27. Whosoever remains in the full power of sin,
working iniquity, though he bless himself in his heart, transform God in
his thoughts, deceive himself in his imagination: he shall find that God will
not be merciful to him. Deuteronomy. 29.19. but set his sins in order before him,
Psalm. 50.21. His religion is in vain, Iam. 1.26. Without holiness no man shall
see God. Heb. 12.14.

The answer to the latter question is, whosoever finds his own guiltiness
and death, every burdened sinner hearing Christ propounded and the covenant of
grace in him, may come receive him with the promise of mercy, though when he
hears the Gospel preached he be in a clean contrary way to righteousness,
Romans 4.5. He that works not, but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith shall be counted for righteousness. Faith possesses the
sinner of Christ and his righteousness, which God of his grace imputes to him:
which is then as truly his own, as if he had wrought it himself, and so is
not putatiuely just as some blaspheming say, but truly and perfectly just, and
in that justice worthy of heaven. Christ's passions are his actions, Christ's
works his merits by the union which by faith he has with Christ. God cleares
not the guilty against order of justice, his sin is translated from him to
Christ, in whom God finds him; and Christ's righteousness to him: and receiving
in Christ full satisfaction he holds him no longer guilty, but is just in the
forgiveness of sins, and the sentence of righteousness pronounced upon him,
he receives right unto life.

Christ and the covenant in him is offered to unregenerate men, who enabled by
Gods spirit to perform the condition of the covenant, which is to believe in
Christ, the promises contained in the covenant are surely his, as a true heir
of them. Galath. 3.29. If ye be Christ's, then Abraham's seed, and heirs by
promise. Regeneration is not the condition of the covenant but a promise
contained in it, which is received by faith in Christ in whom the believer is a
new creature, the workmanshippe of God, created unto good works. A man must
not stay to believe till he find regeneration and repentance toward God, the
work of it: but first believe that he may receive in Christ the promise of the
spirit unto his new creation, or conversion to God, which declares it self in
outward works. Christ is sent to bless men in turning them from their
iniquities. Act. 3.26. Him God has lifted up with his right hand to be a
prince and Savior to give repentance to Israel. Act. 5.31. We are not to look
first to find repentance in our selves, and then come to Christ to obtain
forgiveness, but seek both in him. As the woman believed first that she
should be healed touching the hemme of Christ's garment, and upon the touch felt
in her self that she was healed; Math. 9.21, 22.
so we feeling our loathsome disease of sin, are to believe that we shall in
Christ be healed coming to him, who healed all manner of diseases in them that
sought to him, and after to seek experience of his virtue in our souls.
Children of the promise are such as are borne by faith of the promise, as Isaac
was, when Sara was unlikely to bear children as if she had been dead. Heb.
11.11.12. Gal. 4.28. Offer violence to your unbelieving nature, resolve, and
bind your soul by vow, promise to God as David does to keep his
commandments: Psalm. 119.106.
whereof this is not the least to believe in the name of his Son, and hold to
your promise, Ioh. 5.40.
think of the rebuke, you will not come to me that you might have life; Ioh.
4.48.
unless you see signs and wonders you will not believe; how it is that you
have no faith. Mark. 4.40.
Think of the praise of faith in such as without any experience upon the
hearing of the Gospel, when before they were great sinners, Ioh. 20.29.
staying merely upon the word of promise, whith by faith was near unto them,
even in their heart and mouth. Thus much of the second use.

3 Use. Seeing there is such danger in not believing, when God promises, it
requires our examination whether since we heard the Gospel preached to us,
we have truly believed. James and John disprooue some in their profession of
faith by the want of virtue with it, to testify of it. When men do believe in
Christ indeed, he makes them free, Ioh. 8.31.66.
and God that knows their hearts, gives testimony in fact of his accepting
for just by their faith, in giving them the Holy Ghost. Act. 15.8.1.
The Apostle Paul calls to examination of faith by experience of Christ in us.
2. Cor. 13.5.

Objection. I.
This seems not to be by ordinary way attained, infallible knowledge that I
do sincerely believe in Christ, seeing there is a kind of faith which alters
men so as they escape the filthiness of the world, yet it saues them not. How
may I know the right kind.

Answer.
First, The exhortation had been vain, if they which believe could come to no
certainety of faith in themselves, 2. Their profession ouer-bold that from
sense professed that they did believe, and their comfort to be suspected that
rejoiced that they did believe.

Secondly, It is true, there be diverse kinds of faith, historical, which
has some degrees; (temporary faith may be counted a higher degree of the
historical) and justifying faith: they differ in subjects, efficacy, and
parts of nature.

The historical and temporary faith, may be in reprobates, as it was in
Judas, and Alexander the coppersmith, and such as having been illuminated and
tasted the word of God, fall totally and for ever away. Justifying, or faith
properly so called, is only in the elect: the seat of that is only the mind
that assents to the truth and goodness of the word. This is in the heart,
receiving Christ with his blessing, staying upon him with affiance of heart for
our whole felicity.

The temporary faith receives neither what should be received, nor as it
should, nor is effectual in giving out, as the saving does, by divine virtue.
Faith which is only historical, receives not Christ unto union and
communion: what it receives is never with an honest heart, it purifieth not
the affections.

Faith properly so called, receives Christ unto union with the believer. John
6.56. 2. Cor. 13.5. Ephesians. 5.30. it receives in Christ the gift of
righteousness unto justification of life, Romans 5.1.17. reconciliation and
safety from wrath for ever, Romans 5.9. adoption, to be children of God, Ioh.
1.12.
and coheires with Christ, Romans 8. 16, 17. the holy Ghost, unto a new creation,
2. Cor. 5.17.
unto leading by counsel, motion, strength, warning, encouragement;
suppressing, crucifying, causing to dye the corrupt nature, lessening the force
and fruits of it, Romans 6.3, 6. Ephesians. 1.13. Gal. 5.24. and unto entrance to God
in prayer: the Spirit makes request for the Saints according to the will of
God, Romans 8.27.

Secondly, It works toward God, according to the strength and measure of it,
Romans 5.1.
a quiet state of conscience, Romans 7.25.
agreement of the new nature with Gods law unto delight in it, consecration of
our selves to God with love to be his servants, confession of truth to his
glory, and commending of our souls into his hands, 2 Timothy 1.12. 2. Cor. 4.13.


Thirdly, To the believer, according to the degree of it, it works quiet
dependence on God for provision and protection, content and comfort in God in
any condition, patience under Gods hand with delight in him. Psalm. 73.25, 26.

Fourthly, Toward faithful brethren, conjunction of souls and communion of
gifts spiritual and temporal, Act. 4.32.
with a brotherly kindness and love edifying the body; Ephesians. 4.16.
toward all men, love, humanity, justice, equity, mercy and goodness even to
enemies.

Fifthly, against the devil, resistance, standing, victory, by the power of the
Lords might. Ephesians. 6.16.

Thirdly, For parts of nature, temporary faith has but two which the spirit
works; knowledge, and appobation unto some joy in the word received: faith
properly so called has both them and an other as an essential degree above the
other; which distinguishes it from the other in kind, as sense distinguishes
the life of beasts from that of plants, that have vegetative life but not
sensitive; and reason the life of men from that of beasts, which have sense
common with man but not reason. And this part of faith which so formally and
essentially differenceth it is application, or appropriation of Christ and the
promise of mercy in him, which is called receiving of Christ, and drinking his
flesh and blood, putting him on: by this Christ dwells, and lives in the
believer, joining him so to the Lord that he is one spirit with him. For want
of this, the temporizer is an unbeliever, in respect of true faith, a hidden
infidel, such as Christ would not commit himself unto. Ioh. 6.64.
Ioh. 2.24.

Yet they are said to believe by reason of some materials of faith: 2. for
similitude in a cheerful profession of that Gospel: 3. In regard of some
subjection to the word which open infidels cast away, yet differs from faith
properly so called, as hypocritical from sincere, dead from lively, general
from special, ineffectuall from effectual, and transitory from abiding.

Objection. II.
The things revealed are sweet to them, they taste the word to be good, receive
it with joy; that seems to implie application.

Answer.
By the light of God in their mind they see the kingdom of Christ to be
glorious, heavenly and above this world; which many thought but earthly: they
see their state for whom it is prepared to be full of happiness, Gods love
and good will therein of great admiration: they perceive a possibility of
obtaining this happiness, which knowledge for the time delights them.

Secondly, They perceive sin to be full of miserable vexation, know and fear
a painful sting in death, and hearing of a free and full deliverance from
these evils by Christ, they in some sort for a time submit themselves to the
Gospel, forsake them which are wrapped in error, cease concerning act many
gross sins, and do many things commanded, and so are received in the charity
of the Church as members: by which vanishing taste temporary and partial
reformation, with some common graces with the estimation of the Godly, they
conceive a rolling opinion that they shall be saved, which for a while
pleases them; but is only as the commotion of affections in a dream.

Thirdly, The spirit of God makes no preswasion of Gods love to them, nor ever
gives life to the seed which in sowing fell in such ground. It is said to
spring up as corn in stony ground or sown among thorns that choke it, but
it never is brought forward to that which God works in them whom he calls of
his purpose. They are said only to seem to have. Hence it is that they do
not so much (setledly) as purpose, desire, and endeavor to get that faith which
is proper to the elect: 2. or strive (of conscience of the commandments)
against doubts and fears to give glory to God by believing: 3. they are not
jealous of the deceiuablenesse of their heart, they try not their state, with
love to be true, and to know they are of the truth.

It is with them as with a man admitted into a rome, where a table is furnished
with delicates (for some chosen guests) to see and taste of them, who is able to
discern the goodness of the things set forth, the goodwill of the houshoulder
to them that are bidden for whom they are provided; yet receives them not so as
they for whom they were intended.

The true belieuer tastes the love of God to him as a chosen guest in the
delicats provided for him, and by that taste is carried in desire to grow up
more in the grace that rejoices him, praises Christ for that rest and
sweetness he finds in in him, Cant. 2.2.
and comes with endeavor more and more to him, 1. Pet. 2.2.
giving himself to him as truly happy, in him his faith conquers, when the
temporizers is overcome, and he goes back after Satan.

Objection. III
True faith gives a knowledge of Gods love to him to whom it is given to
believe. 1 Ioh. 4.16. we have known and believed the love of God toward us.
I find not that knowledge of Gods special love to me: can I have faith and
see none?

Answer.
There may be faith in the soul that takes not notice of it; God hides
himself from them to whom he is a Savior. Christ told Thomas with the rest of
the Disciples that they knew whether he went, and the way to come to him in
their death: yet he said we know not whether thou go, Ioh. 14.5.
and how should we know the way? Christ's words were true, they knew not their
own knowledge. So he promises when he gives his spirit more plentifully,
they shall know (by the effectual working of it in them) that he is in them
and they in him. John 14.20. Implying that yet they knew not that, as they
should know it by experiment of faith. Faith may be implicit in respect of
clear knowledge of Gods favor, even after many years soberly spent in Gods
service.

Secondly, Faith is for a time but in seed, not able to quiet the heart in
knowledge of Gods love, yet the reign of unbelief is destroyed: he that was
careless of, or auerse from faith, now wills, loves, desires, labors to
believe: the grace given has disposed him to follow after it according to the
commandment, Follow after faith. 1. Tim. 6.11. The will is Gods work. Phil.
2.13. Virtues in will and act are the same in kind, differing only in degree,
as in vice, lusting after a woman in heart unlawfully is adultery in him that
lusts, though it come not into act: coveting an other man's goods inordinately
is theft, though he be hindered from taking them.

Thirdly, Lusting contrary to the flesh argues the presence and working of
Gods spirit; Gal. 5.17. in that the will of the flesh is not fulfilled but
hindered. Desire of holy graces is an act of spiritual life, Neh. 1.11.
act argues faculty, and faculty being.

Fourthly, Christ graciously receives, and tenderly cherishes the little ones,
Zach. 13.7. giving charge against contempt, and thereby offense of them, Math.
18.5.10. encouraging men to receive them as counting that in so doing he is
received, when it is done in his name: he calls on men to bear with the weak,
to comfort the feeble minded, 1. These. 5.14. he promises to bind up the
broken and to strengthen the weak, Ezech. 34.16. to gather the lambs with his
arm, and to carry them in his bosom, Esa. 40.11.
with tender regard of their weakness; he gives unto him that faints, and
unto him that has no strength he increases power; Esa. 40.29. he quenches
not the smoking flax, the bruised reed shall he not break, but of weak and
small beginnings shall he bring forward his kingdom victoriously. Math. 12.20.
How did he respect the shaken Disciples, the two going Emmaus? to whom he
joined himself, not without reproof of their slownesse of heart to believe:
yet to confirm their faith by opening the Scriptures unto them, Luke 24.32.
and the eleven together, reproching them for their unbelief, yet showing his
hands and his side, to the gladness of their hearts. Mar. 16.14. Ioh. 20.20.
He crowns a gracious will where power want. Prou. 10.24. Esa. 1.19. 2 Cor.
8.12.

Fifthly, Though it be given to some to know Gods love to them with such sweet
contentment as passes pleasures of nature: Psalm. 4.7. and 63.5. Cant. 1.3.

Yet it is not so with them at all times. Some that have gloried in good,
walking in the light of his countenance, made their songs of him, after have
oppressed with sorrow, their souls sore troubled, fainting within them, Ion.
2.7. their heart failing them at the thought of the multitude of their sins,
Psalm. 40.12. troubled in thought of God refusing comfort, Psalm. ^7.9, 10.
in great temptation to despair, uttering words sauouring of it, as if they
forgot their separation from them that perish: Esa. 6.5.7. Psalm. 31.22. Lam.
3.18. yet get victory at length.

Objection. IIII.
Believers purged by the blood of Christ, are without conscience of sins,
Heb. 10.2. know they are not guilty and are at rest in soul: I am sensible of
guiltiness with painful fear; how dwells then the faith in God in me?

Answer.
First, Faith is but in journey yet, and has different degrees; we read or
hear of weak and strong, little and great, as it increases it gives us to
know that we have no guilty conscience.

Secondly, God does not ease the believers of al their pain and fear at once,
David heard Nathan pronounce his absolution from his sin in the name of God:
2. Sam. 12.13. yet had not present freedom from conscience of sin, as
appears, Psalm. 51.7. Mary's love testified her faith and forgiveness of sins:
yet was she afflicted in conscience, as appears by her tears; Christ's
absolution spoken to her face, thy sins be forgiven thee, bidding her go in
peace. Luke 7.48.50.

God accepts voluntary contrition for sin, as it is offensive to him; it is
founded in love which argues faith begun. Psalm. 34.18. Psalm. 51.17. Esa. 57.15.
They must wait for the Lord that hides his face, and look for him. Esa. 8.17.


Thirdly it pleases God to quiet men's hearts by evidence of sanctification, 1.
Ioh. 1.7.
sometimes, when they want sense of faith and justification by it. 1. Ioh. 3.19.
As the natural spirit comes not to any member but in connection to the head,
so the spirit of sanctification is given to none but in their union to Christ.
By that spirit we know he is in us, and we in him: 1 Ioh. 3.24. it is Gods
seal and earnest, to assure his promise, something above a pledge in common
use: because the pledge is restored when the promise is fullfilled: an earnest
is not restored but is made full according to the promise.

Objection. V.
There is a righteousness not allowed in heaven which had love from Christ,
Mark. 10.21. and something called sanctification which is no sign of true
faith, because men fall away from it to greater sinfulness, then ever they had
before, and their latter end is worse then their beginning: how may I then know
that sanctification that infallibly testifies of true faith?

Ans. 1. True holiness is an effect of union with Christ, Heb. 2.11. the
virtue of his death and resurrection: Romans 6.4. Phil. 3.10. Col. 2.11.12.
proceeds from election: Ephesians. 1.4. and is an evidence to assure it unto us: 1
Pet. 1.2.
2. These. 2.13.2. Pet. 1.10. a beginning of glorification, which is brought
forward unto perfection of glory. Romans 8.30. 2. Cor. 3.18. Therefore that from
which men fall, and that morality which Christ's example teaches us to love, as
a work of Gods good providence to the preservation of society, cannot be true
sanctification, though sometime in a large sense so called for some materials;
or because they seemed so to themselves deceived in their imagination. Prou.
30.12. Gal. 6.3. They have some kind of dispositions toward grace, but it is
not brought forward to sanctification: they only seem to have. The world
cannot receive the spirit. Ioh. 14.17. An honest heart whereby fruit is brought
forth with patience is the note of a true believer, resembled by the ground.

Secondly, True righteousness in life, is such proof of a man borne of God,
and indeed righteous, as we are to rest in. 1 Ioh. 2.29. and 3.7. It differs
from civil righteousness and seeming sanctification diversely though they have
much of the matter in them: 1. in cause, extent, and end. 1. The next and
immediate cause of a good work is inherent righteousness infused from Christ,
of whose fullness we all receive grace for grace: it is not only done in grace
but by grace. Romans 7.6.
1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am that I am, and his grace which is in
me was not in vain, but I labored, etc. not I but the grace of God which is
with me, called living and walking in the spirit. They be actions of a
supernatural life begun, which we have in Christ by faith. Gal. 2.20.

That righteousness which is not allowed in heaven, is produced by the flesh, of
fleshly wisdom, which the Apostle opposes to the grace of God in guidance of
conversation: 2. Cor. 1.12. it is by the providence of God, preserving natural
light and conscience in some above others, and giving to some light by his word
and spirit, whereby corruption is held under for a time, that the heart cannot
show the naughtiness that is in it, and they receive some common graces which
God governes to the producing of some good works for matter: but he never
renewing the fountains of actio^, the mind will, and affections, the work
proves in Gods sight corrupt by the disposition of the instrument, and no
mixture of true goodness in the production, as there is none in in the
instrument. They are as clouds without water, like comely members of a body
that want a head to give them life. God leads the believers by his spirit into
good works, by governing the gracious habites infused, the godly nature into
holy acts, hindered and corrupted indeed by the flesh concurring with the
operations of grace in the same work, that the best work needs the sacrifice
of Christ to make it accepted, the corrupt mixture pardoned. Yet their is some
true goodness in it, and it is properly a good work, by the production of the
spirit exercising faith, hope, love, zeal, fear of God, humility, and other
graces.

Secondly, True righteousness is a begun obedience to all the Law of God, by
the seed of God abiding in the believer whereby he sins not, as the
unbeliever, nor can sin. 1. Ioh. 3.9. As disobedience was punished with loss
of original righteousness, and universal corruption of nature that man had
all sin in seed: so by faith in Christ discharged of guilt thereof God gives
again original justice and all virtues in seed that are common to Christians.
A little child shall lead him. Esaias. 11.6. because of his new creation and
disposition to keep Gods law which God has put in his heart.

False righteousness never delivers up a man to a full rule, and conscience of
severity of right living; it gives not strife thereunto, it is with
percialitie, reservation either for persons, Math. 5.44. times, Psalm. 78.34.36.
or things, Mark. 6.26. True righteousness has something singular, false
righteousness is ever with reigning sin: of which after.

Thirdly, True righteousness is done to God in honor and obedience, to please
and glorify him, to adorn his doctrine, to justify profession, to prepare
unbelievers, to confirm and provoke believers by good example: in conscience
of which the soul rests, when carnal men traduce the believer and impute his
work sometime to madness, when it transcends their capacity, sometimes to
some perverse affection, or bad counsels of heart. 2. Tim. 3.10. Thou have
fully known my manner of living, purpose etc. 1. Cor. 4.5. 2. Cor. 5.13.14.

False righteousness, as its not wrought in God, so it is not done to him, but
bends back upon a man's self, Zach. 7.5.6. either to avoid punishment, and get
reward, it is servile, and mercenarie, or to get praise, to be counted an
honest man, fit to live in a society. To do all in the name of Christ, Col.
3.17. that God in all things may be glorified, 1. Cor. 10.31. in ministering as
of the ability that God ministereth, 1. Pet. 4.11.
is of grace. It is the true love of God that carries the heart in intention
to God. To a good work is required power, love, and a sound mind which
Christians receive in measure. Love is counted the fulfilling of the law, Romans
13.8.
it produces and directs the works of the believer to God in Christ, to whom
he lives as the Lord of his life and death, Romans 14.8. Men unconverted are
turned so away from God, Phil. 1.21.
that they cannot spiritually love him. It may be as the God of nature, and
author of benefits, which they seek to have and receive, they love him for
their advantage: but not as he is in himself soueraignely good, nor as they
believe his love to them in Christ. They may do something not only for
temporal blessings, as Saul and Iehu, but with relation to eternal life as
the young ruler that was so rich, Math. 19.16. but live not to magnify Christ
in their bodies which is peculiar to grace, Phi. 1.20.

Objection. VI.
Some that fall away seem to be changed by the Gospel not only outwardly but
inwardly: how can I be then infallible certain of the truth of my
righteousness?

Answer.
There change is the gift of some common graces, which Christ, as Lord,
bestows upon them, but he never gives life to them as members of his body
whereof he is head. They are made partakers of the holy Ghost, in some inferior
working, but are not made new creatures, nor receive grace accompanying
salvation, as appears by the opposition of these two, Their works proceed not
from one and the same principle internal: Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 9.
the true believers proceed from the new creature, faith working by love, from
the life of the spirit, which the other have not. Consider a little the
difference of the work of God in the fountains of action.

First, the mind of a temporizer is not holy, though it be enlightened to know
and acknowledge the truth. It is peculiar to believers to be renewed in mind
after the image of God: Col. 3.12. They that believe not, have minds and
consciences still defiled and not healed with the unction from him that is holy.

Which may appear: 1. in that his knowledge of truth is not rooted in him, in
time of temptation he goes away, and his light vanishes; so as that a
greater darkness comes upon him. If the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness? Math. 6.23.
They go back after Satan the prince of darkness. For degree the devil was
said to be cast out, but repossesseth them again; so it is worse with them
then before.

Secondly, There mind not being sanctified, Col. 2.20.
they soon are puffed up in their mind unto vain reasoning, which beget a
false opinion: which having striuen for, they hardly forsake. They sometime
fancy a lie which seems wisdom to them to follow, though they send to
inquire of God, as seeming to offer their minds to his direction to know what
is best to do. Ier. 42.3.5.20. Surely ye dissembled, you were fully minded to
go into Egypt whatsoever the Lord should say. They have an inclination to
unrighteousness, and meeting with deceivers, are easily carried away, and that
by the just judgment of God, whose the deceiuer and deceived be, Job. 12.16.
and makes the punishment of the master as the punishment of the Scholar. Mal.
2.12.

Thirdly, In that their knowledge is ineffectuall, they know not as they ought
to know. 1. Cor. 8.2. Not for their own use, which yet is required, Job. 5.27.
Not what first and principally, what more earnestly to follow. It leaves them
ignorant of themselves, so as they think themselves to be some thing, when they
are nothing, are puffed up, Masterly, censorious not only toward frail man,
but sometimes toward God himself, as, Mal. 3. verse 14. Their light shines
not effectually into their conscience, and so as to guide them, it is denied
therefore the account of knowledge for the liuelesnesse of it. 2. Pet. 1.9. 1.
Ioh. 2.4.9.

Fourthly, their thoughts and devises declare the fleshlinesse of their minds,
that which rises naturally as the fruit of their mind is as an ill favor
out of a sink, they mind things of the flesh, and when they take counsel and
deliberate, it has the same savor with the root, when they roll some good
thing in their heads, they corrupt and defile it, the devil also whose power
is yet in their mind, puts ill thoughts into them, as his first borne, and his
breath to blow up the fire of fleshly lusts, unto which they so attend, as they
forget God, his properties, works and ways, and walk in the sparks of their
fire that they have kindled, Isa. 50.11.

But the true believer is not so.

First his knowledge is an abiding light, shining constantly till he come to
life, called for that the light of life, John 8.12. He is taught of God, so as
he declines not from his statutes. Psalm. 119, 102. Because he taught him, he
cannot believe otherwise then he has received, though false teachers confirm
their doctrine with signs and wonders. Matthew 24.24. They will not hear a
stranger, specially in fundamental doctrine, they know not his voice, John
10.8. 1 Ioh. 4.4. They know by an holy anointing abiding in them the truth,
and that no lie is of the truth, 1 Ioh. 2.27. and discern the particular lie,
using such means and helps as God affords them. They be tempted and troubled
with the temptation, but are always with God, and overcome the temptation, and
return to their mind with confirmation, knowing whom they have believed,
Psalm. 73.2, 23. Gal. 5.10.

Secondly, Though they may err in many things because sight is not perfected
at once, it is with some darkness as it were in the dawning between light
and darkness, yet not in full darkness true light has shined to them, and
they see though with many fancies, as he who at the first touch of his eyes
saw men walk, Mark. 8.24,
but as trees, not in their perfect lineaments till Christ set to the cure
again, then he saw clearly; hence comes such diversity of judgments among
learned and good men: yet truth being propounded to them and defended by
others, they have a gracious aptness to yield to it when they see it. Esaias
11.6. A little child shall lead them. James 3.17. The wisdom from above is
tractable; they offer sincerely their emptied minds unto Christ that he may
fill them with a frame of truth: so renouncing the wisdom of the flesh, they
allow their wits no liberty but in God* The ear tastes words as the palate
does meat, Job 12.11. 1 Cor. 14.37, 38. Heresies in the Church manifest the
approved. 1 Cor. 11.19. As Aegles to the carcass, by proper sagacity, so are
they gathered to the truth concerning Christ, Luke 17.37.

Thirdly, their knowledge is effectual, life eternal is begun, continued, and
consummate in it, John 17.8.12. For Gods teaching is such as the effect
follows. John 6.45. Every man that has heard, and has learned of the Father,
comes to me. These are together, 1. knowledge of him, 2. being in him, 3.
love of him, 4. and keeping his word, 1 John 2.3, 5. They by this light see
God, specially as he is revealed in Christ, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. They see
themselves in the very secret chambers of their hearts for defects,
contrariety to Gods law inwardly; whence hindering of good and furthering of
evil comes, admire the rich and abounding love and grace of God in Christ, 1 Timothy 1.14. confessing their own unworthiness, Job 9.3.20.
have mean thoughts of themselves, compared to God, compared to Saints: and
show by good conversation their works in meekness of wisdom. Iam. 3.13.
They be called the meek of the earth, Zeph. 2.3.
that do Gods judgments.

Fourthly, The thoughts of the just are right, Prou. 12.5. their renewed mind
gives disposition thereunto, and they are as fruits brought forth to God by
the virtue of Christ; specially as the spirit breaths obedience, and gouernes
them to devise good things Isaiah 32.8. They not only have a good treasure in
their hearts, whence good thoughts are brought forth, but they form their
thoughts unto good minding, with study and careful thought how to do
acceptably, pray for pleasing meditations, and labor to keep their thoughts
in an order, to serve God with their thought.

Secondly, The conscience of a temporizer, whether you consider quiet, or
troubled, differs much from the believers, in the execution of the function;
because the believer has some holiness restored to his conscience, which none
can have but in Christ, who have learned him, and have been taught as the
truth is in Christ Jesus, to put off the old man, and to put on the new,
Ephesians. 4.22.

1. The cause of quietness. 2. the effects. 3. the continuance, difference it.

First, The quietness of an unbeliever, or that believes not, (so as it may
properly be called faith) is upon mistaken grounds, as that his faith gives
him right in the Covenant which God has made to all that truly receive
Christ, whose merit is the foundation of the covenant, it is infalliblie true
in the proposition, whosoever has his Son has life, Ioh. 1.12.
to as many as received him he gave this dignity, to be the children of God,
but it is false in the assumption, I believe in Christ and receive him. So in
the point of sanctification, deceived with show, when he has not the truth, he
rests upon the promise made to the sanctified, but falsely assumed to him: as
before.

Secondly, Or it is by a wilful presumption of finding God peaceable toward
him, Deuteronomy. 29.19* Ier. 7.8,
against the express words of the curse, trusting in a lying word, wherein
sometimes they are strengthened by false teachers, that give life to them that
should not live.

Thirdly, Or by not stirring of corruptions, slumbering in error without sense.
By ignorance of the law I was a live without the law, but when the commandment
came sin revived, and I died. Romans 7.9.11.


Fourthly, By earthing themselves, as it were in a cave of forgetfulness of
God, and their own estate; diuerting their thoughts to other things, not
considering that he remembers all their sins and that they shall come to
judgment.

Fifthly, Oppressing their conscience with false reasonings they take evil for
good, good for evil, and lie under the woe denounced against it without fear.

Secondly it gives no true comfort in God as reconciled, no delight in him Job.
27.10. it is not renewed unto that righteousness which was lost, holds not to
universal obedience, but suffers to live in some sin known consciencelesly,
it witness not, nor holds a man unto, right manner and end of actions with due
circumstances, but only excuses the work done, as Iehu did when he said to
Iehonadab the Son of Rachab come with me and see the zeal that I have for
the Lord. 2. King. 10.16.
He was carried with a great will to the fact, but not with pure intention, but
to make himself sure of the kingdom: as the young man's conscience witnessed,
Luke 18.21.
all these have I kept; when for right manner and end he had kept none of them.

Thirdly, The peace it has continues not. When God enterrupteth his
presumption, opening his conscience to notice his working of iniquity, in the
midst of laughter the heart is sorrowful and like Balteshar at the fight of a
hand writing upon the wall he is filled with terror, Dan. 5.6.
and his false confidence destroyed, there shall be only fear to make them
understand the hearing. Esa. 28.19.

First, The quietness of a true believers conscience is caused by resting on
Christ, to the sprinkling of it with his blood, as the blood of atonement for
all his sins; Romans 5.9, 10.
so particularly for those that do specially lie upon the conscience, both for
present peace with God, and safety from wrath for ever hereafter, through
Christ's aduocation and intercession, appearing in heaven for him. Romans 8.33,
34, 35.
It is also strengthed by experience of Gods good will, Romans 5.4. Psalm. 41.11,
12. and by evidence of sanctification, in the dying of the root of all sins
by degrees, lessening the force and fruits of sin, in the life of the spirit
governing the soul by exercise of holy graces planted in it, to bring glory to
the name of God by good works and labors of love, Heb. 13.18. 1 Ioh. 3.19.
with faith of Christian liberty, and particularly of freedom from the rigor of
the law, that God accepts in Christ a begun obedience though it be imperfect.

Secondly, For effects, it works comfort in God, rejoicing in him because of
the atonement, Romans 5.11. free entrance into his presence with our lawful
suits, Heb. 10.22. with a holy shame for sins though forgiven, Ezech. 16.63.
witnessing the love of Christ to us, it holds to his word, to live no more to
our selves but to him; Act. 24.16.
it has the authority of God in such respect that it cannot in any known law
cast it out with despising the commandment, Psalm. 18.22.
given to us though in lesser matters: 1. Ioh. 3.9.
and therefore makes us strive against sin and maintain a close fight with
it, and not only holds us to travail of soul for inward mortification, but
to hold on in good duties when we suffer evil for the Lords sake. It
encourages in well-doing not only for matter, but for intention, against
imputations of hypocrisy and vanity. Job. 27.4.5.6. 2 Cor. 1.12. The peace it
gives keeps the mind and heart in Christ Jesus. Phil. 4.7.

Thirdly, For continuance, it is a never failing feast; it may be interrupted,
by desertion, temptation, falls, but it remains in cause, and returns at
length. 2 Samuel 23.9. The troubled conscience of the unbeliever, or vain
believer, and the troubled conscience of a true, though not perfect believer
are differenced in cause, measure and effects.

First, The vain believers trouble is of the spirit of bondage causing fear
and disquietnesse. Romans 8.15. He is amazed at his own brutishness rebuked for
sin, whereof the conscience is witness, by apprehension only of misery
following it. Prou. 5.12.13.14.

Secondly, For measure, the conscience of an unbeliever accuses too sorely,
hiding away the Gospel; and so without hope, grief wholly possesses the
heart, without strife against it, as sinful; urges not to faith and repentance
truly: he affects deliverance and sometimes complains of God for the
greatness of his punishment, as they do in hell, with indignation gnashing
their teeth, despairing utterly as Judas. For the spirit having opened their
conscience to see their sins and Gods wrath, with sense of guiltienesse, leaves
them in terrors, and mooues them not to go to Christ. So through their own
corruption they bring forth desperate sorrow, a fearful effect of their
desperate sinning, who answer such as exhort them to repentance, There is no
hope, I have loved strangers and them will I follow; Ier. 2.25. to whom God may
justly say this shall ye have at my hands, ye shall lie down in sorrow. Esa.
50.11.

Thirdly, it makes a man shun God, as Adam upon his fall, as the devils did
Christ as their tormentor, it makes a man flee the stroke of the word in a
sincere ministry, it hates the light Ioh. 3.20. as Ahab said of Michaiah,
whom he confessed a prophet of the Lord, I hate him, as Herod did John.

First, The troubled conscience of the true believer is from the Spirit of
grace sanctifying the conscience unto some rightnesse, in performing this
function, in accusing and disquieting to his good, though not without some
mixture of the flesh, it troubles for sin, as of enmity against God,
offensive to him, and causing wrath, whereby the sinner is detestable to
himself, doing things so unworthy. He cannot live under Gods displeasure.

Secondly, for measure, this unquietness is not full, because he is not
without some measure of faith in Christ, to the purging of his conscience from
guiltiness and filthiness of sin; though, it may be, he sees no faith in his
own heart. His conscience tells him he ought to believe because of Gods
commandment, he valueth faith highly, and seeks it of God constantly, with
mourning for his unbelief; he calls upon his heart to trust in God, as not
without hope, though languishing, not without love whereby he cleaues to God,
seeking his favor and the light of his countenance, specially, be he in
prosperity or adversity.

Thirdly for effects, it makes the believer to bear punishment upon him,
whether from God, Lament. 3.28, 29. putting his mouth in the dust, he opens
not his mouth against God, Ezech. 16.63. It makes him to fear sin to come,
and suffers him not to continue in known sins, it works him to readiness
to forgive men, because he needs pardon and seeks it. He welcomes the
ministry, wounding and healing, and strives to remember God in his ways,
promising with purpose of heart to sing joyfully of Gods righteousness, when
he opens his mouth. Or from men: of which after; whether from law and justice,
or from wrong dealing.

Thirdly, the will of an unbeliever (of which a work is specially good or bad,
and so accounted of God) is not made free from spiritual bondage: a man is
counted good or evil of his will. It is the comfort of a strong christian,
that he finds the work of God in his will for delight to do that which God
requires, with present and working will, not altogether ineffectuall.

The new heart is peculiar to them whom God has received in Christ. Ezech.
36.26. To have the stony heart taken away and to receive a heart of flesh.
Godly desires are peculiar to godly men who are carried by Gods Spirit, which
they allege to him as his own work, who gives to will, Nehemiah 1.11. Esaias
20.8. graciously hearing and fulfilling them. Psalm. 10.17. Prou. 10.24. It
qualifieth a work unto acceptance and reward, that it was not only done, but
willed, 1 Cor. 9.17. 2 Cor. 8.10.

Men not in Christ by a true faith, are said to be dead in sin and their
works dead, their Will is not free then to any spiritual work, death depriues
not only of action but faculty.

They are said to serve sin, if their will be in a full bondage they are not
free, all that are not freed by Christ remain in spiritual bondage to sin,
they must be in him whom he freeth, and that is by a true faith; they are
governed by the providence to some works that are good for their matter, but
in them they are intrinsecally guilty, they have no will to obey and honor the
Lord, therein they proceed not from an inward frame of goodness, and
conformity of heart to Gods law, their will is worse then their deed, they
receive the Gospel, but not with an honest heart, purely for it self, but
with corrupt respect.

They forbear some sins but not for love of God, and that they have chosen
Gods law, whereof sin is a violation, their will is not turned against it out
of any inherent holiness contrary to it, but as contemned by light of the mind
as reproachful for one that professes true religion, or some way dangerous,
as appears by their partiality in the law. Iam. 2.4.

The true believer is by the spirit of Ghrist in part, truly and for ever
freed in his will from the spiritual bondage and servitude of corruption, and
his liberty is brought forward by degrees. The change is by a supernatural
work, as if a stone which a hundred times forced upward falls down again
should have a new inclination put into it, the change were above nature. But
now the inclination is natural, so in this work of God in taking away the
stony heart and giving the will a new inclination, the divine power having
made this alteration by infusion of grace and holiness into it; the action of
it, in willing to believe to be justified, to be healed in nature of the
sinfulness perceived, to be quickened unto good works, to do them more
spiritually, is natural and free, by reason of the godly nature.

Search your self according to this difference in mind conscience and will,
and be a true witness of the work of God in you.

Objection. VII.
I find such corruption in my mind, conscience, and Will especially, that I
fear I am under the dominion of sin, not only having damnable matter in me,
(from which Gods children be not free) but damning, for sin reigns unto
death.

Answer.
First, If you desire healing of your nature, groan in desire to grace,
perceive your fowlenesse unto a lothing of your self, fear not, sin has
not dominion over you.

True grace and sense of sin may be together in a true believer, who by new
light perceives what is sin, by renewed self-love more impartially judge
themselves and their doings, by spiritual life feel that which they that are
blind and dead, in whom self love is fully corrupted, neither see nor feel.
Prou. 30.2.3. Romans 7.24.

That we see, abhor, confess, lament as our exceeding misery, sin
dwelling and working in us, hindering the good we would, corrupting our best
works, carrying us to hated evil. That we earnestly desire deliverance from
this bondage. That we may do Gods will in earth as it is done in heaven. No
measure that is joined with imperfection satisfies us: but we contend further,
that we endeavor our selves to get more grace and the exercise of it, apply our
hearts to fulfill Gods statutes, bid battle to all vices, purge our selves,
embrace crosses as means of mortification and profit in holiness, love a wise
reprouer, bear malicious reproves, and that we rest not in aliuelesse
conformity in the external action to Gods law, it is of the grace of God given
us in Christ Jesus, Romans 7.14.15.24. Phil. 3.13.14. 1 Chro. 28.7.9. Hos. 6.3.
Psalm. 119.101. 1 Ioh. 3.3. Heb 12.7.10.11. Prou. 25.12. 2 Samuel 26.10.12. Psalm.
119.93.

For sins past, 1. That we voluntarily remember them to afflict our selves,
taking grief and shame for offending of God. 2. That we willingly bear the
punishment of them, loathing our selves for our deeds that were not good, hold
our selves wholly damnable, open not our mouth in defense or extenuation, but
confess our selves vile to Gods glory, with indignation, at our folly and
brutishness: 3. that by rememberance of our service of such hateful and now
hated sins, we keep our selves from our iniquity and provoke our selves to
the study of innocence, that we are carried to labor in Gods work with
greater impulsion of love, considering Christ's love dying for us, Gods love
giving him for us, and forgiving so great debt: 4. that we are humble, modest
in opinion and speech of our selves, whatsoever graces we have received, that
considering our change by the grace of God, we be humane, compassionate toward
sinners, loving to make them just, waiting for their repentance, devouring
indignities from them in hope and desire, that they which are such as we were,
may be such as we are, by the grace of God, lovingly and gladly receiving them
repenting, is of grace, Esaias 54.6.7. Ezech. 16.63. Leu. 26.42. 2 Samuel 15.26.
Mich. 7.9. Job. 42.6. Psalm. 73.22. Psalm. 18.23. 1. Pet. 4.2.3. 1 Cor. 15.9.10.
2. Cor. 5.14. Ephesians. 3.8. 2 Timothy 2.24.25. Tit. 3.3. It is a token that is
pacified, is moved in his bowels toward us as his dear children; Ier. 31.20.
will meet us with tokens of peace and love, Luke 15.20.23. and defend us as
now delivered from our sins not being that we were, being that we were not:
Luke 7.44. and justify the joy of good men in our returning from death to
life. Luke 15.31.

Secondly, Where sin reigns, the man is but flesh, merely carnal, Genesis 6.3.
Ioh. 3.6. distitute of the spirit, Iud. v. 19. in the full power of sin. Romans
7.5. wholly replenished with it, Act. 8.23.
and as it were buried in it.

If the Spirit of Christ be in you, it freeth you from the law and force of
sin, and the hurt of death. You are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit; for
the Spirit of Christ dwells in you, Romans 8.2, 9. Though you have and show
forth much more corruption in affection and manners then many other christians
do, yet the new man lives in you as a babe. 1 Cor. 3.1. infirm and feeble to
keep the old man under, and to bring forth the actions of a christian. And
because of the seed of God in you (though in comparison of stronger christians
you may be counted carnal) yet compared with mere carnal men, you are
spiritual, you are not wholly carried by the desires of the flesh as they, but
contrary lusts strive in you to destroy one another, Galath. 5. verse. 5.17.
The perfectest Christian in this life compared with the spiritualnesse of Gods
Law, may well* pronounce himself carnal. Neither nature nor action is fully
conformable to it, Romans 7.14.
but though there be much in him contrary to the Law, yet the root of the
matter is in him. Job 19.28. You should say why do we persecute him, seeing
the root of the matter is in him.

Where sin reigns, temptations fill the heart, Acts 5.3. Satan possesses
the sinner in peace, Luke 11.21. who pampers his lust, and makes the motion of
it his full contentment: he will do the desires of the devil, who leads him
with an inward efficacy, without any true resistance of his: he lives and
walks in sin, 1 Ioh. 5, 19
Coloss. 3.7. lies in wickedness, he leads his life according to corrupt
nature, though he have materials of righteousness, and be held back by Gods
providence from some gross act of sin, as Genes. 20.6. I kept thee also that
thou should not sin against me: therefore I suffered thee not to touch
her. Yet neither is their heart sound in Gods statutes, nor indeed desires to
be: they have no study of piety reigning in them. When God regenerates a man,
he makes him willing to be regenerate, which is in time together with
regeneration; in order of nature the soul is healed before the desire, but the
desire is first known to us: we see the effects which lead us to the causes,
as the morning light before the morning Sun, yet we know the light is from
the Sun drawing near to be revealed. Even wants of righteousness note sin
to reign, where a man fears not, repents not sin in general, with desire
of an universal cleanness from sin, secret or known to him, when sin
generally in nature, action, manner of producing actions with grief to defile
Gods work, is not in some measure labored against of conscience toward God,
and pardon sought in Christ unto rest in that blood of atonement, it is an
uncomfortable state. Purging a man's self, is a note of a vessel of honor, 2.
Tim. 7.2.
opposed to the committing, so to the reign of sin. Reign of it, is
expressed by obeying it in the lusts of it; His servants ye are to whom ye
obey. Romans 6.16, 17. Obedience subjects a man voluntarily; ye have obeyed from
the heart, you were the servants of sin.

The true believer, detests so the Devils motions, upon the sudden iniection
sometimes, that he is without taint of sin by them: yet it is an affliction,
with victory, as it was with our Savior tempted by the Devil, Math. 4.11.
to whom God sent Angels for his comfort; yet our corruption considered, it is
a rare thing.

Sometimes he is drawn aside, and enticed unto consent, with a contrary will,
sometimes deliberate, sometimes sudden: but he cannot be brought under the
reign of sin, yet unto acts of sin. For Christ keeps his possession, the
seed of God abides in them, the Law is in their heart, they serve it with their
mind, though sin with their flesh. Romans 7.25. The spirit is willing, the
flesh makes weak; they have only good of their desires. Prou. 11.23. God
pardons, what they allow not themselves in, but hate, yet do it: he rewards
the good, as the fruit of his own Spirit, brought forth to him in Christ.
Their will is better then their deed, they please God, though not themselves,
desiring more grace to serve him acceptablie.

Do you not by a will freed, solicit the understanding to discern, and with
judgment truly determining, to command right things? Seek you not for more
light of mind, and holiness of judgment, for the guiding of your way? Do
you not desire rightnesse to your conscience, soundness of heart in Gods
Statutes? Could you not cast away righteous men, but in that name receive them,
were it not for love of righteousness? Do you seek to further Gods work, by
Ministers of righteousness, because they work the work of the Lord, and
turn the disobedient to the wisdom of just men? Leave you not the reigns
corruption, but are held with a bridle of righteousness to serve it? Does the
fear of God, though sometimes driven from its station, yet dwell as
controuller in your soul, recover the station, repress the refractarie
thoughts and affections, sway your heart against the natural motion, that you
may keep Gods Word, make you cease from your own works, with desire that God
may work his in you, that the leading of you (though you be interlaced with
the flesh) you give to the holy Ghost, loving that he may have the
principality in you, praying for the holy Ghost principally? (of which after
in the examination of prayer.) Ponder you with care and delight to find
willingly, and setledly to follow things of the spirit? Attend you your self,
concerning spiritual being? Greiue you inwardly, for that which the flesh does
outwardly or within: not loosing, but using love to God, in resisting sinful
motions? it is not your working, but suffering of sin. Charity may be in
some sins astonished, but not abolished; as a soldier, with a great blow on
his head, may lie as liuelesse, yet his will to fight against the enemy
remains; he recouereth and seeks for his shield, and returns to fight with
increased resolution. The exercise of grace in thoughts, deuisings, purposes,
desires, endeavors, which proceed from the spiritual part, have promise of
life and peace. Romans 8.6. They be of regeneration, which is glorification
begun; in which men proceed by the Spirit of the Lord, from glory to glory.

Objection. VIII.
Some wicked men are at some strife with themselves before they sin, as
Herod, and confess their folly and guiltiness after sin done, sometimes
with tears, as Saul: how shall I know, I have true freedom from the reign of
sin; they do the sin which they stick at, and return to the sin which
they confess, and weep at the notice of; I doing so in some particulars, what
difference between me, and a fool returning to his folly?

Answer.
First, in the strife before sin, the difference is in the extent of matter:
Secondly, in the motions, or principle whereout it proceeds: Thirdly, in the
issue.

For matter, the unbelievers strife is commonly but in some more gross evil,
that makes one infamous amongst men: as Herod's strife, about breaking his oath
to the loss of his credit, with them that sat at table with him; or to do a
work condemned by the light of his mind, in putting to death an innocent man,
whose justice triumphed in his conscience. He lived in other sins (as may
appear) without strife. The true believer, as he has received commandment
not to sin, he strives to obey it, and so lives in a contention against
himself, in mind, will, affections, about the body of righteousness
delivered in the law; laboring to dead the very root of all sin, that his
corrupt nature may be more barren, and less rebellion in him against God,
where man can take no motive of it. This is implied in that prayer, Psalm.
119.29. etc.
Take from me the way of lying, and grant me graciously thy law, let no
iniquity have dominion over me, let my heart be sound in thy statutes; in
that promise, I will run the way of thy commandments, Verse. 32.
when thou shall enlarge my heart: when it shall be larger to receive grace,
and more free and willing to obey; thus are they said to seek Gods precepts,
because they have given themselves to God, and their members instruments of
righteousness, they apply themselves to fulfill Gods Statutes; and it is
their comfort, that their conscience bears them witness of this care and
strife, for the universal righteousness of the law, as it concerns them. I
will walk at liberty (casting out tormenting fears, enjoying a quiet rest
and comfort in conscience) for I seek thy precepts. Verse 45. I with my mind
serve the Law of God. Romans 7.25. The wicked are said to forsake the law, to
depart from Gods Statutes, and therefore salvation to be far from them
because they seek them not, and to be taken away as dross. Psalm
119.155.119.

For motives. As the strife is between a fleshly mind, and sensuality, that
informing the conscience, that the thing to be done is pernicious, and against
civil behavior, this wilfully egging him on to satisfy unregenerate humor:
So the arguments to hold back the will from consenting to the act, are taken
from fear, either of danger in the world or damnation in hell, or shame, and
reproach, or some fleshly respect, which sometimes though they hinder the act
yet not the desire, that in love to sin, they devise vain reasons and
pretexts, and draw iniquity with cords of vanity, inducing themselves to false
conceits: which concluding that they fancy, are to them strong to draw on
sin as cartropes to draw weights. They do not abhor evil. Psalm. 36.4. And
though a man have a right judgment for matter of good and evil, and his
choice be according to his judgment, his practice according to his choice; if
he hate not the evil which he forbeares, or love not the good which he does,
he is guilty within, how soever his outside be. Thus Christian rigteousnesse
is noted, Heb. 1.8.9. The sceper of thy kingdom is a scepter of
righteousness, thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity.

That which moves strife against sin in the believer is the will of the spirit
against the will of the flesh, with love to God, to Christ, to Gods law, by the
inherent holiness agreeing with Gods Law, so the commandment is not greiuous,
but obedience to it is cheerful and delightsome, thereby it setts it self
against the corruption of it self: Psalm. 119.161.
thus David, I have refrained my feet from every evil way that I may keep thy
word, the strife was from the love of the word of God, and so from the love of
God to obey and please him.

Thirdly, The unbeliever though he escape for some time the filthiness of the
world, he is entangled again and overcome, and come under a stronger bondage
then before, obstinated in evil. 2. Pet. 2.20.

The true believer strives in the strength of God, faith possessing him of Gods
power, pointing him to Christ's suffering in the flesh, arms him, 1. Pet. 1.5.
and 4.1, that though in some particular he receive the foil, yet his will is
not won from righteousness, he fights again for his own freedom, and is
invincible, Job 17.9.
thanking the Lord for his help, he holds on his way, and grows stronger and
stronger, as did the kingdom of David against the house of Saul, which became
weaker and weaker.

They by the allurement of temptations may sin sometime against their light
and conscience, as David by violence of lust, captiued of the flesh as gotten
into the power of it in that particular, the conscience brought a-sleep, the
soul doting for a time upon the devise of the flesh, and a while lies in a
kind of liking of the sinful motion concerning the carnal part in the soul:
now grace is driven as it were from her station, and lies in weak and
disseuered desires, yet without purpose to continue in and heap up sin. But
God will send new succor from heaven to join to that weak grace remaining:
then conscience awakes, the will is excited, down goes the power of the
flesh, the heart is affectioned to Christ. This may appear in the temptation
of the Church, as she confesses all the matter, Cant. 5.2. I sleep but my
heart waketh, etc.

Yea it may fall out, that after victories, they may in some particular be
brought back to repented sins, which increases the fault, in that being
healed they sin again, it endangers to greater pain for their cure.

Thirdly, It weakens grace that it gives not that help as before to the means
used, as it is with nature made weaker by relapses into bodily disease. As
frequent acts of virtue strengthen the habit: so by more acts contrary to it,
it is weakened. Yet thus may it fall out in this strife of flesh and spirit:
the devil though resisted flees from us, yet will return again with new
assaults, and not always tempt to other sins but many times to the self same
that we have repented, if God see it good to leave us and not confirm our
wills in the strife. A good man may be brought under again in the same sin as
Jonas that after his repentance of flying away from his work at Niniue stands
to justify it, and defiled his prayer with it. Ion. 4.2. He prayed unto the
Lord and said I pray the O Lord was not this may saying when I was yet in my
country and therefore I prevented it to flee to Tarshish?

As in anger grace gives an inclination against the inordination of it, yet
upon occasions it will prevail, it was mortified without question in David, as
other sins in root; yet find how Nabals churlishness stirred it to resolve
upon reueng unto blood, so may it be in some other sin with which a man is
specially left to wrestle. 1. Sam. 25.34.


Yet where resolution is to keep the law of God, continued strife to perform
the resolution, hope of sufficient grace to abide with him, not to be brought
any more under dominion of sin, mourning with many a low sigh for such a
sinful disposition, seeking newness of heart, walking constantly with God in
other duties, hatred, after falls renewed, yea increased, argues clearly that
grace is present, sin reigns not, the will is on Gods side truly, though
weakly.

Fourthly, God will not be less merciful then he commanded us to be, he
requires us to forgive men that repent seven times in a day, seventy times
seven times* Math. 18.22.

The after grief of hypocrites is not for Gods offense but for their own
distress, either feared in the threatening as Achabs, or felt as in Esau
weeping for the lost blessing, or ^t the best in the triumph of virtue over
vice in their conscience, as David's innocence compared by Saul with his wrongs
to him did draw tears from him, convinced in his heart that God was with
David: but without turning to God, it works not repentance unto salvation. The
true belieuer sorroweth of love to God whom it greiues him to have offended,
his tears are dropped down to God. Job. 16.20. the sorrowful water that he
draws he powers it forth before the Lord, 1. Sam. 7.6. he repents toward God
and weeping inquires the way to Sion with his face thitherward, renewing his
covenant, Ier. 50.4.5.

You finding then you have a constant will to be healed in nature, to believe
repent, and do spiritual works in such a manner as God may be pleased, that
in doing good things you are carried with inward inclination as agreeable to
your nature, the new creature delighting in it, purely for the holiness and
goodness of the law so commanding, that you ly not drowned in natural
sinfulness as one lies drowned in the water, but have sin in you, out of the
full power whereof you are gotten, as one gotten out of the water has yet
water in him, and labor to draine out your corruption through the holiness in
your will set against it, desiring to follow that will which resists the will
of the flesh. That your will is better then your deed, fear not: you are so
led by the spirit, as that you give not your self as a servant to sin to
obey and fulfill it in the lusts of it. As many as are led by the spirit of God
they are the children of God. Romans 8.14.
His leading frees not here from all sin, but enlightening the mind and
applying to consider things to be done or to be avoided, and by working upon
habits of grace infused, it excites the renewed will and confirms it, and as
he sees God either preserues it from, or gives strength in temptation, though
not always to every duty, nor to avoid every sin, yet to hold a course in
goodness to the end, and to preserve from dominion of sin, that in general you
make no declinatio^ from God though in many things you sin. Psalm. 40.12.
He that said his sins were more then the hairs of his head, Psalm. 119.157.
said also I have not decline^d from thy statutes.

Objection. IX.
True grace will grow and he brought forward: I find it not so in me, and
therefore fear I have none

Answer.
Grace is small in the beginning and is scarce perceived but by will and desire
to have it, and that some goodness God takes notice of. Grace in the
beginnings of it is resembled to the light before we see the Sun, that light
we know is from the Sun: to corn in the seed which first dies, then is
quickened, and after appears in a blade, the husbandman knows not how. Mar.
4.27. Growth is, where it is, not sensible till after sometime.

You must consider growth diversely. 1. In parts of sanctification, which though
all be infused in seed, yet they are brought to appear by diligence. 2 Pet.
1.5. Add to your faith virtue, etc. some virtues are hardlier produced then
other, yet by exercise become easy, we are commanded to learn to do well.
Esa. 1.17.

Secondly, In degrees of the same parts. 1 These. 4.10. so we are required to
cloth our selves, adorn and arm as with putting on virtues more and more.
Romans 13.12. Coloss. 3.12. 1 Pet. 3.4. and. 5.5.

Thirdly, In more acts of the same virtue, Reu. 2.19. or of the same renewed
faculty, the mind more fruitful in good thoughts, the will in good elections.

Fourthly, In spirituallnesse of the same acts and faculties which have less
mixture of sin in them.

Examine whether as a plant of the Lord you are not more fastened in your root,
spread in your branches, filling the^ more with fruits, and they growing in
bigness or ripenes to better relish. Cant. 4 13, 14, 16. Hosh. 14.6, 7.


Or consider in particular your love which faith works by; it grows in
intension, becoming more fervent and flames now that was before but a sparkle:
2 These. 1.3.

Secondly, In extension when it is not partial, but takes in more persons,
even bad men to make the^ good enemies to reconcile them, procuring their good,
weak brethren to support them, bearing with them, pleasing in that which is
good to edification, giving them time and help to profit, poor neighbors,
to fulfill the royal Law.

Thirdly, In rooted firmness, not changed with changes in the persons loved
abiding in adversity, in falls, covering trespasses, ouerco^ming offenses,
passing by them, devouring indignities.

Fourthly, In guiding the acts of love with more judgment. Phil. 1.6. We are
to love with our heart and with our mind: thus the Apostles loved a while
though entirely yet not wisely, Ioh. 14.28,
Math. 16.22.25.

Fifthly, In naturalnesse and pureness, carrying to the good of the loved more,
with less self-loue and respect of our own good, more benevolence, less
concupiscence in it.

Sixthly, In labors and works of love unto store of good fruits, old and new
Cant. 7.13. 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 Timothy 6.18.

2. The growth of grace has stoppes: 1. In Gods desertion. 2. By inordinate
affection unto, Cant. 5.2.
and contentment in lawful things; Eccl. 2.2. 3. By suffering some foul lust
too far, as Samson lost his strength, as David found all out of frame. 4. By
our own dulnes and slownes of heart, Heb. 5.11.12. Luke 24.25. We are called
upon to be diligent in following after faith, hope, love, 1. Tim. 6.11.
and other graces, and not to be slothful. Heb. 6.12.

Fifthly, by wilful want of meet helps, forsaking holy assemblies and
ordinances, Heb. 10.25.
by prejudice and conceit. Disaffecting powerful means for external
flourish, so the Corinthians were hindered, till rebuked they were sensible of
their evil, and became fervently minded.

Sixthly, unlawful fellowship with evil persons. Pro. 13.20. David the nearer
he comes to God, with resolution to keep his Law, the further he remooues
from the wicked, who were no helps, but hindrances to his performing of his
purpose, Psalm. 119. 115. dangerous for cooling zeal, snaring with temptations,
and learning their way. Not that all fellowship with such persons is unlawful
to all godly men, the Apostle allows a christian (table) fellowship with a
professed Infidel, and open Idolater, in the case of advantage of Religion: if
he be bidden, advise about the conuenience of his going, for probable good,
either in winning, or making less auerse, to hear the truth more equally
with less prejudice. Or it may be to further a man's own peace or confirm
it. Genesis 26.29, 30. Or when a godly man is joined in office with them, not
communicating in their sins, showing them good example, knowing how to
answer every man.

Thirdly, sense of want of grace, complaint and mourning from that sense,
desire settled and earnest with such mourning, to have the want supplied, use of
Gods means, with attending upon him therein for this supply, is surely of
grace. For promises are made to the poor in spirit, that mourn, that thirst,
that desire the holy Ghost. Mat. 5.3, 4. Revel. 21.6. Luke 11.13. Such come
from a spiritual sight, discerning the worth of grace, 1. Pet. 2.3.
a spiritual taste, that the Lord is gracious, holiness of will inclining a
man to holy things. Exercise your knowledge, faith, hope, love, spirit already
received, to your Lords advantage, and you shall have more. Mar. 4.24.

Pray, and consider in Paul's prayers for the Churches, how far your desire
may extend, to be filled with all the fullness of God, as you are capable, till
there be no want of that in you, which should be full in you, till he has
fulfilled in you, all the good pleasure of his goodness. He is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. Ephesians. 3.19.20. The
desires of the righteous shall be granted. Pro. 10.24.


Objection. X.
I have prayed as I am able, and sought the Lord in his ordinances, I find not
Gods answer to my comfort, which makes me call my right in God, into question,
and fear my case.

Answer.
First, God is known by hearing prayers. Psalm. 65.12. Thus Manasseh knew him.
2 Chronicles. 33.13. Israel halting between two opinions, was confirmed by the
answer of Elias prayer, that the Lord, he is God. 1 Kings 18.37, 38. David
gathers Gods approbation of him, and his love to him by receiving, and
answering his prayer, Psalm. 66.17, 18, 19. Psalm. 116.1.2. and so calls his
soul to rest. verse 7.

Some upon their having answer, that their prayer was heard, and the effect
should follow, have worshipped in thankfulness, before they saw it come so to
pass, as was promised. 2 Chro. 20.18, 19.

The example of one heard in his prayer, adds to the hope of godly men, that
they shall not seek him in vain. Psalm 32.6.34.5, 6. He has not commanded
us in vain to seek him. Esaias 45.19.

Secondly, as the spirit makes requests which we cannot express, but God
knows the meaning thereof. Romans 18.26. So may it give answer, whereto,
through anguish of spirit we little attend: as Exodus 6.9.

Thirdly, though God answer the prayers of his servants, when it is only in
their purpose, before they pray, perceiving that they will ask. Psalm. 32.5.
Esaias 65.24. Sometimes while they are speaking. Dan. 9.21. Or upon the ending of
their prayer. Act. 4.11. He holds some longer, sometimes many years in
suspense, yet answers, when his glory shines most in the grant. Luke 1.13. He
will take notice of men praying. Ananias must to Paul, and give him comfort,
for behold he prays. Act. 9.11.

First, Numb. 12.13, 14.
he deferres us sometime for our humbling, we are not low enough yet, for his
exalting of us. 2. Chron. 33.12.13. He prayed, humbled himself greatly, and
prayed, and God was entreated.

Secondly, or to prove us. Deuteronomy. 8.2. Wicked men will not attend long, but
quarrel with God for not answering; and leave off praying. Mala. 3.14. Esaias
58.3. Godly men feel strife of flesh. Lam. 3.8.24. Yet the spirit that
wrought, does maintain the desire, and vpholdes the soul in the strife, and
thus makes the victory of faith recompense the deferring of our desire, as in
the woman of Syrophoenissa, who striving with three great lets: Silence, which
the flesh might interpret a negative answer; Particularitie, I am not sent but
to, etc. thirdly, Unworthiness, called a dog, unmeet for the childrens
bread: held her faith, unto her great praise, obtained her desire, to her great
comfort. Matthew. 15.28.

Jacob was deferred, yet would not cease wrestling, till he had the blessing,
there God spoke with us, He obtained; so shall we, using like faith and
constancy in our striving with God in prayer. Hos. 12.4. God that requires
vnweariednesse, and will hear his crying day and night, Luke 18.1, 7. does in
stead of present answer, glorify himself by his supporting grace. 2. Cor.
12.8.9.

Thirdly, he sits us unto due estimation of his gift, and care to hold that
fast, which we came so hardly by.

Fourthly, he has put to every work a convenient time, which we are no fit
judges of. John 2.4. Mine hour is not yet come. Different measures of grace,
are given at diverse times. John 13.36. Now thou can not, thou shall
hereafter follow me.

Fifthly, sometimes it may be, it is because we ask amiss either in our end.
James 4.3. Or that we are amiss, in not joining endeavors: we are to pray in
the spirit, but with all to build up our selves. Iud. 20. We must pray in
temptation, but we arm our selves also, Ephesians. 6.11.

Fourthly, it may comfort us, that we have the grace of prayer, though our
desired answer appear not, it is a sign of a gracious estate. Zach. 12.10.
The spirit of prayer, is the spirit of adoption, and makes requests for the
Saints. Romans 8.15.27. Such prayer as a good work, furthers our account in the
day of Christ* Math. 6.6. If we know he hears us, we know we have the
petitions, that we ask of him. 1. John 5.15. God will accept of no other
language in prayer, Gal. 6.18. 2 Timothy 4.22.
but that which the spirit ioyns with making our voice to be heard above, in
prayer: that is always needful; the Lord be with thy spirit. In all worship
of God, private or public, God seeks such as worship him in spirit and
truth; John 4.23. in their spirit sanctified and governed by his.

Objection. XI.
My prayers in respect of distractions, and inability to vary matter, are such
as I fear my prayer is not, as Job says of his, pure. Job 16.17.


Answer.
First the holy spirit assists no man in this life in any good work so as to
free it wholly from mixture of sin, when we would do good evil is present
with us. In prayer, Romans 7.^1.
seeing our lusts are but in part mortified they draw our thoughts to attend
upon them, and distract our attention and affection from the things we pray
for, that our hearts are not held in meet elevation to God, and the devil
taking advantage of our carnalitie will hinder us what he can in a work so
much against his kingdom, we are apt to be tied to things by our senses, from
which divine things being so far removed, we cannot without much watching
and travail of soul stay our spirits upon them long.

Secondly, A godly man having much of the flesh in him is sometimes only
sensible of the operations of it when yet the spiritual part is willing to do
the work according to God, Ioh. 3.8.
Gods breathing in us is at his liberty, and no more to be let then the wind,
sometime we feel motion but we know not whence it comes, because we suspect
the flesh. There be helps to know when it is of God.

First, When with uprightness we propound to our selves the service of God in
prayer, and with strife of heart labor to worship him with our faith, trust,
hope, reverence, humility of heart, bewailing our want herein.

Secondly, when at other times we are conscionable of our doing Gods will, as
we are in prayer desirous that he should do ours. Psalm. 66.18.19. Ioh. 9.31.
1. Ioh. 3.12. That prayer which is out of a good conscience with strife to go
forward in duty, though far of it, is of Gods spirit who makes requests for
them whom he has sanctified. Romans 8.27.

Thirdly, When we are brought into Gods presence with love and desire, our
prayer not merely forced by necessity, but an effect of our filial affection
to God, who inspires in the weakest motion of faith, teaches to go, and holds
by the arms such as submit to the commandment, with some pleasure in it.

Fourthly, When we can deny our own wills, careful to understand Gods,
content in our heart that it be done whatsoever be to us denied of that we
desire, desiring that the creature may be for the creator, that his name may
be glorified in all that we are taught to pray for, things, or persons,
though we be not profited thereby, acknowledging the authority, the power, and
the glory to be his.

Fifthly, When we seek spiritual things specially, Romans 8.5. they that mind
the things of the spirit are after the spirit. It is of spiritual life that
we seek and affect not things on earth but things in heaven Col. 3.1.2.

Sixthly, When not for our selves and ours only, but for all that we are to
pray for, friends and enemies in a due order, specially for Saints, and persons
chief in place and power for Gods glory.

Seventhly, When such desires are settled, so as we neither forsake them nor
change them for others, knowing that they be after the will of God. Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, that I may behold the beauty of
the Lord. Natural motion is not so: it is not hard to make the opposition,
between it and spiritual motion, by that which has been said of the signs
of it.

For varying: 1. Our Savior gives example, when the matter is one, to make no
scruple of varying words. God delights not in variety of words, that which he
looks to, is specially, the desires and groans of heart, whether we can
express them or no, being after his will: as in singing, the melody that
pleases the Lord is that in the heart. Col. 3.16.


Form of wholesome words is profitable, gathered according to inspired word,
in the holy Scriptures, wherein matter of our requests is contained either
expressed or by just collection, invention, memory, affection, may be helped so.

If forms were unlawful ny way as limiting the spirit, then the prescribed
forms, by God appointed to be used, and chosen, yea commanded sometimes, in
the words to be done in extraordinary occasion of praise, as: 2. Cor. 20.6.

As he that prays by another man's mouth prays well, though he be kept
therein to the form devised according to the will of God for matter to be
asked: so may the form written, inform him for matter sometimes more then his
own heart, and work instantly with the apprehension, true feeling of it, and
desire, by the spirit, whose work is specially inward.

Occasions being diverse, God revealing other matter, will surely enable you to
make known your requests, at least to look to him, as a sick child to his
father, whose desires it may be the father knows not, nor can satisfy. Our
heavenly Father is full in both, this ability may be in a man, like the money
he has about him, which he knows not of, till necessity makes him search, and
is glad to find.

It is good to meditate of matter needful before we pray, and to lift our
heart to God, to teach us to ask what we ought, who know not of our selves:
and to give what he knows we ought to have asked.

Objection. XII.
I find my self so affected to the World, in care for present things:
secondly, in contentment, in having them: thirdly, in fear of man: fourthly,
in want of desire to be with Christ, that I fear, that I have no spiritual
life.

Answer.
First, calling is indeed a selection of men from the World, unto Christ and
his Kingdom. John 15.19. The note is not to be of the World, though in it,
dead to it, living by another spirit, then the spirit of the the World. Both
openning the mind to see better hope of calling, and guiding the freed will,
to choose and tend to it. Hebr. 6.11. with bent course following things above,
this World left in preparation of heart at least.

Secondly, yet being in this World care is required, even where it may cause
some distraction, from more full attendance on the things of God. As in a
Christian husband and wife, with intentiuenesse of mind, to approve their
faithfulness in the covenant mutual between them. 1. Cor. 7.33.35.

They are to provide for their own. 1. Tim. 5.8.2. Cor. 12.14. with forecast.
2 Cor. 12.14.
Prou. 21.5. Hiding things under their hand. Psalm. 112.5. Pro. 13.23.
Prou. 27.23. Discretion in ordering affairs, giving necessaries, places,
before delights and ornaments. Prou. 24.27. To the good before God, he gives
wisdom, understanding, and joy. Eccles 2.26.

Cautions. First, the heart must be watched over, that it be not weighed down
with the cares of the World, not the Word be choked. Math. 13.22. Luke 21.34.
Heb. 12.1.

Secondly, earthly imploiment must be seasonable, not shutting out spiritual
opportunity. Luke 14.18, 21.

Thirdly, it must not be service of worldly lust, but of God requiring in our
place and personal calling, diligence: 2 Thessalonians. 3.8. Ephesians. 4.28.
1. To eat our own bread: 2. To have to minister to them that want: Prou.
3.9. Eccles. 17.13.
3. To honor God with that we have, to make our grace shine forth in good
works, Prou. 12.24. Eccl. 7.13.

Secondly, It is not unlawful to take contentment in good things given of God
to us and our family: we may taste him sweet in his blessings and rejoice,
Deuteronomy. 26.11. He gives abundantly all things, not to lay up, but to enjoy: 1 Timothy 6.17. he gives food unto gladness Act. 14.17. we may lawfully both see
and be affected with pleasure of the proper goodness of his creature.

First, Cautions. So we see God in his blessings and creatures and be led to
him, moved by his goodness to serve him cheerfully and with a joyful heart.
Deuteronomy. 28.47. Psalm. 26.3.


Secondly, That we dwell not in delight of the creature, our heart not resting
in it, 1 Cor. 7.30
Job. 31.25. buying as not possessing, rejoicing as not rejoicing, making the
Lord our portion, Psalm. 119 57. resolved to keep his law, exalted or abased,
full or hungry, Phil. 4.12.

Thirdly, That sensible of the reeling of earthly heights, uncertainty of
these changable conditions, we have our mind composed through habitual
resolution, to depend on God to equabilitie of affection in all conditions,
content with Christ our true, certain, and great gain, counting all, loss,
dung, separate from him. Phil. 3.8.

Fourthly, That we be of like affection with others, rejoicing with them that
rejoice, and remembering Joseph's affliction, Romans 12.15.
to the moderating of our pleasures, and to the exercise of love and mercy.
Amos 6.6.


First, Nature fears things hurtful to it, seeks the perseruation of it
self, it is a part of true wisdom to foresee evils and to provide against
them: beware of men, Math. 10.16.17.

Secondly, There is a fear due from inferiors, in subjection to superiors.
Romans 13.7. with sense of Gods image in their superiority, and conscience of
their own infirmity, to season obedience, which requires fear, and to
preserve them from indecent behavior.

Thirdly, There is a corrupt and inordinate fear, whereby we sin in not
sanctifying the Lord in our hearts by depending upon him, and making him our
dread and fear, Esa. 8.13.
for no fear of any creature to sin against him: which is either full and
occupies the heart wholly: which kind of fearful ones have a fearful
place appointed, if they do not repent, Reu. 21.8.

Or it is of infirmity, with love to God and his commandment, strife against
it to glorify God in resting on him, which in the weakness of faith may
prevail, yet not reign. Thus many godly men have been guilty and out of this
passion done reproachful things.

Confirm your heart against this fear, 1. by Gods commandment, in nothing
fear your adversaries. Phil. 1.28. and call upon the fearful to be strong
Esaias. 35.4.

Secondly, By promises considered and applied by faith in Christ, Esa.
51.12.13. Heb. 13.7, Esa. 43.2, 3.
Ioh. 10.28. of Gods presence, Psalm. 91.15. of his protection against hurt, or
deliverance, or strength to bear the temptation: 1. Cor. 10.13. of certain
profit by affliction, Heb. 12.20.
excellency of glory following sufferings for God, for Christ, both for matter
and intention. And with the promises consider them that by faith and patience
now inherit them, 2. Cor. 4.18 Heb. 6.12.
and specially look upon Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith; Heb. 12.2.
consider him in his sufferings being such a person not only innocent, but the
Son of God, and the glory that he lives in, and will bring them into that are
faithful in him.

Thirdly, By weighing the providence of God, in three degrees: 1. In
unreasonable creatures, sparrowes of mean price, but have the course of their
life defined by it, Mat. 10.29.
swine were not free to the devils will but by divine permission. Mark. 5.12.
2. In reasonable men unbelieving, have him their Savior, 1 Timothy 4.10
he is the Savior of all men. 3. His providence special toward believers,
having their haiers in number, and custody. Mat. 10.30 those three in the ho^^
fiery furnace had not a hair of their head burnt. A Christian above other men
neither lives nor dies at adventure, but to a Lord, that will own him in life
and death. If he give quietness who can make trouble, Romans 14.8. 1 Thessalonians* 5.10.
whether upon nations or a man only? Job. 34.29.

Fourthly, Thinking on the spirit you have received, not of the world, not of
fear, but of power and a sound mind: 2. Tim. 1.7.

Fifthly, Of the good that comes by such sufferings to others, many glorify God
in seeing such grace shine forth in such as the spirit of glory rests upon.

Elect not called are prepared to conversion, they that are called are
confirmed becoming more hold in Gods cause, Phil. 1.13.14. and for reprobates
a testimony is left on Gods side against them whose judges the believers shall
be with Christ at the day of judgment.

You have not yet resisted unto blood in striving against sin, you must
resolve and prepare for it, whether God will call you to it, or not: it is a
fellowship with Christ, greatly argues faithfulness, Act. 15.26. Lesser
sufferings are the marks that are upon Christ's faithful servants; a great
work of our love to God and our brethren, Gal. 6.17.
Ioh. 14.31. Ioh. 15.13. a glorious victory over the world, flesh and devil,
Reu. 12.11. leaving glory on the names of such, and making their example
perswasiue. Ephesians. 3.1.

Fourthly, To be with Christ whether by death, or by change is best of all; we
desire by chang if that might be, not to put off the substance of our bodies
but the qualities: 2. Cor. 5.4. but that not granted to us, but to such as
shall be alive and remain at Christ's coming: 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.
1. These. 4.15.17. It is a holy choice, with suctiection to God, to desire
rather to be out of the body with Christ, then in the body absent from him. 2.
Cor. 5.8.

Secondly, Yet for the use of a good man's life to others, it may make a stop in
this choice, Esa 38.18, 19.
Phil. 1.23.24.

Thirdly, Good men are not always in such case as to dare to die, their soul
is troubled, Psalm. 6.3. 2. They would do God more service, Psalm. 119.17. they
desire to mourn more for their sins, which heaven admits not, there is no
sorrow.

Fourthly, The godly have their graces mixed with their contraries, in remiss
degrees the love of Christ and the love of being in this world may be
together, no man here follows the guidance of the spirit without sensible
hinderance of the flesh: the comfort is that we give not the reigns to the
flesh, you do not make present things your treasure, desiring to live in the
body only to enjoy them, as if you thought your felicity ended with your life.
Does it not afflict you that your love to Christ's presence is no more full and
flaming? fear not. What gather you of Lots lingering in Sodom till (God being
merciful to him) the Angel led him out by the hand? that he had no spiritual
life? or that some earthly thoughts and affections, striving against his grace
held him? Kindle your love to Christ, Genesis 19.16.
and cool it to the world, compare them and the gain by them together. Cant.
8.7. Phil. 3.8. and come up more out of this wilderness to cleave to your
well-beloved, who makes his to be the glory above all societies in the world, to
their admiration that swim in earthly pleasures; pray to see the felicity of
the chosen, Cant. 6.8, 9.
the worth of your hope in immediate communion with Christ, that he may be all
in all to you, you may keep you chaste in love to him from adultery with this
world, and greatly desire the sweetness of his familiarity.

Consider what account he makes of the love of his set upon him, Cant. 4.10.
and be provoked to get more of it into your heart that is so precious with him.

Go forth in contemplation of his incomparable excellency, glory and honor
wherewith he is crowned. Cant. 3.11. you shall find him wholly desirable,
Cant. 5.10.16.

Labor to know his love that passes knowledge and be drawn to it as
soldiers to their banners, all the world cannot give an example of such love,
Romans 5.8.

He is tied in his desire to the presence of his Church, his love in pleasures,
Cant. 7.5.6. his prayer to his father a little before his death was, that they
which believed in him might be where he is, Ioh. 17.2^.
he gave his promise for their comfort that he would come again, and take
them to (...) be where he is. Ioh. 14.3.
Let this further your desire to be with him.

In the mean time continue in his love in keeping his commandments Ioh.
15.10. stand on his side against Antichrist in his battles with him, Reu.
17.14. He judges and fights righteously, and the victory is certain on his
side, Reu. 19.11.16.20. Be diligent in making him known, in opening his
excellencies, Cant. 1*2.
that his name being as an ointment powered out, others may love and seek him,
speak forth his praise, declare his will, confess him before the world. It is
not without fruit Cant. 8.13. The companions harken to thy voice.

Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, and the Lord
guide our hearts into the love of God and patient waiting for of his Son.
Romans 15.13.
2 Thessalonians. 3.5.
Unto God the Father, Son and holy Ghost be honor, Thanksgiving, obedience
and subjection: Whose is the kingdom, power, and glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

