A Christian Dictionarie, Opening the signification of the chief words
dispersed generally through Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
tending to increase Christian knowledge.

Whereunto is annexed: A particular Dictionary

For the Revelation of S. John. For the Canticles, or Song of Solomon. For the
Epistle to the Hebrews.
By Tho: Wilson Minister of the Word, at Saint Georges in Canterbury.

Every word of God is pure. Prou. 30, 5. Ye err, because ye know not the
Scripture. Mat. 22, 19. Words, are notes and marks of things. Aristotle.
Galen lib. 1. de Method. cap. 5. Whosoever is ignorant of words, shall never
judge well of things. I Ubi plura, aut diuersa eiusdem vocis significata
afferuntur, prima sunt propria and genuina, caetera metaphorica. Mercerus in
Pagn. Dictinctio vocis ambiguoe, primum sit in omni rerum consideratione.
Keckerman System. Log. LONDON, Printed by W. Iaggard. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lord WOTTON, Baron of Marleigh, one of his
Majesty's Privy Counsel, Comptroller of his house, and Lieutenant of Kent, his
very good Lord: T. W. wishes all happiness in Christ, now, and hereafter for
ever.
AMong all Sacred and Divine Books, which teach that great Mystery of
godliness (Right Honorable) there are none more Mystical, then the Canticles
of Salamon: The Epistle to the Hebrews: and the Apocalipse or Revelation of S.
John. In the first of these three, we are by a continual Allegory of Marriage,
instructed in the most sweet and straight conjunction between Christ and his
Church. In the second, under comparison, with Tipes and Figures of the Law, we
do learn the perfection of Christ's Priesthood and Sacrifice, for full
reconciliation of all elect sinners with God. In the third (which has as many
Mysteries, as words) by dark Prophetical Phrases, we have fully deciphered
the condition of the Christian Church, till the return of Christ her Husband;
together, with the certain ruin, both of Turkish and Popish Regiments, as
most infest enemies to the spouse and truth of God. The explication of these
portions of Sacred writ, by an easy and familiar way of a Dictionary, I have
thought it my duty (humbly craving your Lordship so to interpret it) to
dedicate unto you (my Right Hon: good Lord, to who^ for many respects,
especially for your gracious favor to my mean self, and your great affection
to the Divine truth, I hold my self much indebted) as I have put forth a
general Register of Sacred words, with their significations, scattered
throughout the whole Bible, under the Names of three Right Reverend persons,
mine especial Benefactours. If by my Divine Candle, there shall arise any
light, for the better understanding of heavenly and Holie-Scriptures; let all
glory be given to him, who is the Father of Lights, from whose Light, we all
receive Light; and unto whose blessed guiding and protection, I commit your
Honor, with your right Honorable and virtuous Lady, and hopeful Children. From
mine house in Cant. December. 1611.

Your Honors bounden Servant, and dutiful Chaplen, Tho: Wilson.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Fathers in Christ, my Lord Bishop of Carlisle, and of
Worcester. Also, to the Right Worshipful, Mr. Doctor NEVILE, Deane of
CHRIST-CHVRCH, in Canterbury; THOMAS WILSON, wishes all health and Happiness,
from Christ our Lord.
RIght Reverend, that which King Asuerus said of Mordechaie, when he found by
reading in the Chronicles the great pleasure he had done him, by discovery of a
dangerous treason against him, What Honor and dignity (says he) has bin done
to him for this? The like (though not the same) may I say, concerning your
Lordships and Worship, upon recording with my self, the many and great favors
which you have done me from my youth, to this day: what duty and service (for I
may not say, what Dignity and Honor) has bin returned to you for all this? My
Conscience does answer me with some check, as his Servants answered their
King: There has been nothing done. If upon this answer, that Heathen man
entered into some deliberation with himself, how to recompense Mordoche, my
check would prove a sting in the end, if I should always suffer my self to
forget your very great and most constant Good Will and benificence. For one of
you; to wit, my Lord of Carlisle, was under God, the foundation of all the
learning and preferment which I enjoy, having cherrished me in his College
(whereof he was a most worthy Prouest and Governor, neglecting himself and
his, for the good of his house;) and afterward, sending me to the place where
yet I abide, by Gods goodness; and there have been, and still am much
comforted through the great love and care of that Reverend and most courteous
Deane of that Church, whereof I am a Member. The third, vouchsafing me his
loving respect, both long before and since he was advanced to his first Sea.
Entering into some deliberation, what I might do, not for dignifying you
(albeit that were my part to do, were it in my power) but for delivering my
self from suspicion and imputation of an ungrateful mind, I resolved to
presume upon your great and well approved benignity and patience to dedicate to
you, and under your three names (being for your place and painfulnesse, chief
setters forth, and teachers of Christianity) to publish a great part of this
my Christian Dictionarie, which with much and long labor, and not without some
fruit (I hope) to the Godly Professors (for whose sake and good, cheefely, I
meant it) I am sure, with much gain of knowledge, and increase of judgment
to my self, I have at length (as I could) finished it. Unto which, if your
Honorable Lordships will afford Patronage, Countenance, and gracious Aspect,
I shall in such wise, acquit some part of bounden duty toward you, as yet I
will acknowledge my debt increased* by the addition of dignity unto me* so to
grace this poor but painful Work* as it may have shelter under your wings,
against the carping Tongues of the envious, who neither will put forth their
strength to do good, nor yet will bear with others, which desire to employ
their Talents. Thus craving pardon of my boldness, and submitting my self and
endeavors to your favorable acceptance, I commend you all three, to him who is
one in Essence, and three in persons; the Blessed Trinity, in vndeuideable
Unity. Whose wisdom and power, ever guide and defend you in earth* till his
infinite goodness and mercy, have glorified you in heaven.

From my house in Canterbury. An. Dom. 1611.
The General Preface, To the Christian Reader.
THe end of Teaching, is to cause others to learn; and to learn, is to know
things to be, what they are. Now of things to be known, words are notes or
marks, leading the mind to the comprehension of the things. It cannot be
then, but a great hinderance to the understanding of things; when words, which
betoken and signify things, are not understood; and a great furtheraunce,
when they be understood. Wherefore, as it is necessary in Grammar Schools,
that Children which learn French, Latin, or Greek, have their Dictionaries
and Lexicons allowed them, to enterpret such hard and strange words, by
knowledge whereof, things to be learned, become more easy; and their labors,
which have composed such Books, are much to be commended. So I have wondered,
that of so many, worthy, learned, and Godly Divines, which are as willing for
their love to the good of the Church, as able for their sufficiency of gifts;
not one, no not one (that I know) have ever attempted to provide our Christian
Scholar such a Christian Dictionary of words, as contain the secrets of our
Heavenly profession and Art. Many have framed and set forth Primers, and A. B.
Cs. for beginners; I mean Catechismes, to enter them into the knowledge of
God: but not any (as yet) have set too their hands, to enterpret in our Mother
tongue (in Alphabet order) the chief words of our Science, which being very
hard and darkesome, sound in the ears of our weak Scholars, as Latin or
Greek words, as indeed, many of them are derived from these Languages; and
this I have esteemed, as no small let to hinder the profiting in knowledge of
holy Scriptures amongst the vulgar; because, when in their reading or hearing
Scriptures, they meet with such principal words, as carry with them the
Marrowe and pith of our holy Religion; they stick at them, as at an unknown
language. Mathias Flaccius Illyricus (whom I did not look upon, nor upon
Enchiridion Marlorati, until I had well nie done this work) has worthily
performed this in Latin, by whose help, it is easy for a Divine to do some
such work in English: I, the vnmeetest and vnwoorthiest of all my Brethren,
not one of a thousand, but the meanest of ten thousand; have attempted this
enterprise, and performed a poor something, sufficient only, to give the
more learned an occasion to do some more exact thing in this kind. Therefore,
for their better encouragement thus to do, (besides the breach of the Ice unto
them) I have breefely set down before them, the great and manifold profits
that would arise out of such a work, being substantially done. First of all,
thy self, being a Minister of the word, it will bring thee this fruit, that
thou shall teach with more facility, having ready and at hand, the true and
right definition of things. Secondly, the distinguishing of words of diverse
acceptions, lying always by thee, will ease thee of some labor in searching,
when thou art enforced by occasion of the Text, to enterpret such words.
Thirdly, the people committed to thy charge, being by means of such a Book,
well acquainted with the chief Words, which contain any Doctrine, thou shall
not need in the course of thy teaching, to be always troubled with the
opening of such words; but presuming upon their knowledge, may the more
insist and dwell in the pressing and urging the Doctrine and practice of the
things so well understood before. Now, as touching the hearers, their growth
and proceeding in Christianity, will be greater and more speedy, by the help
of such a Dictionary; which having given light unto them, to know the
principal words of their Art, the matter of Doctrine contained in these
words, and raised out of them, will be sooner perceived, and take better
impression. Again, the right distinguishing of things, the one from the
other, when the Nature and due bounds of every word is declared, would prove
some preservative against errors and Heresy, which commonly arise upon the
ignorance of things, while they are shuffled confusedly together, one thing
being taken for another; or some thing being taken to be that, it is not. I
could show this in sundry particulers, one instead of all: Justification; this
word, not rightly understood, what errors has it bred? whilst some take it, to
be the making of our selves just, infusion of grace in the hearts of the
elect. Others, to be nothing else, but a making of our actions to become just
and holy; whereas, it is an absolution of a Sinner from his guiltiness, and
pronouncing him righteous by God, when he believes in his son Christ Jesus.
Lastly, it will provoke Christians more willingly to read Scriptures, when
they have at hand a Dictionary, to declare and expound such words as they
understand not. For, as men adventure to crack that Nut, whose Kernel by
cracking is to be obtained; so the Christian is much moved to read, when he
has, as it were, a cracker to get him the Kernel; that is, a Dictionarie to
give him the sense of the words, which he reads. To conclude, it may prevent
scruples, which may arise in some Conscience, through ignorance of words, and
their true and fit meanings.

Now, a few Aduertisements will be requisite to be added about this my simple
endeavor. First, my care was to put in no words, but such as were material, and
of some moment and use. Secondly, if either I have left out some material
words, or not given all the significations of those whereof I have made
choice, or given more then they have, or not set down the significations for
order, so precisely as would be; let these faults (if any such be) be pardoned
by thee, till they be supplied by some more sufficient: for whom (as I have
said) I do herein but break the Ice. Yet hereof, I would have them take
knowledge, that such significations as I give, I find them in the word: but if
any word have other, or more, it is more then I find. Thirdly, I would have
none to think, that my meaning were to give an exact definition of every thing
(let him be thought very wise and happy, that can do this) but some true and
familiar explication or description of words, to make things that be obscure to
become somewhat plainer to the ignorant. Fourthly, these explications which I do
give, may differ in terms from such explications, as ye shall find in other
men's Writings of the same words. But I verily trust, that you shall find for
the most part, an agreement in substance of truth. Moreover, in citing
Scriptures, I have sometime noted such places, wherein the words which I do
interpret, is only named; Sometime, the place where the Interpretation is
found, with the word; and some places which only have the Interpretation, and
not the word. I cite few places, because the light given to a word in one
place, will clear other places where that word is used in that same sense,
which the advised Reader shall discern by the circumstance of the place.
Besides, I have put some Ecclesiastical words, which be not found in
Scripture, in so many Sillables, yet are there for the matter, as Trinity and
Sacrament, etc. Again, sometime ye shall find the word, and sometime the
thing, and sometime both opened. Finally, my request is, that no Minister do by
this Book hinder his own searching, it being intended to be a mean rather to
when his diligence to search more narrowly: nor any hearer use it to
contention, but to edification; not for matter of idle dispute, but for
needful direction. And if I be longer in the explanation of some words, then
the Nature of a Dictionary will bear, or do open some words, which (to some)
may seem needless; impute it either unto the waightinesse of the things,
which being dark and important, need opening; or unto the dullness of common
Capacities, which see little in divine matters; or if ye will, to want of
dexterity in my self, who have been but of late acquainted with this Trade.
Thus entreating thee (courteous Reader) to have consideration of my weakness,
and of the newness and strangeness of the work, favorably to pardon wants
(which in such a forest of words and things, cannot but be many) I commend
thee unto the merciful goodness and protection of the Almighty.

Thine to do thee good, Tho: Wilson.

A short Advertisement, touching the commodities of this Book, and the things
performed in it.
CVrteous Reader, albeit in my general Preface and particular Rules, I have
somewhat discovered both my purpose, and the profit of this new unwonted
work; yet for thy better encouragement to bestow the cost in buying, and
pains in Reading, I have here distinctly and severally gathered the maine and
manifold uses, whereunto this Book may serve, if it be rightly used and not
abused, as every Book (even the best) may be, and are.

1 The most words of Holy Scripture, both maine and mean, both proper and
borrowed; are here plainly, and with few words expounded and opened, to help
the Minister to interpret, and the hearers to understand the Scriptures.

2 The sundry and diverse acceptions and scattered senses of one and the same
word, are noted and gathered under one view, with fit places of Scripture,
agreeing to the diversities of the sense.

3 Where any word is by the Holy Ghost drawn from his proper sense, to an
improper and figurative signification, there ye have the name of that Trope or
Figure, set down under that Word, whether it be Metaphor or Metonimie, Irony,
Sinecdoche, or some other; by which means, the reason of pulling many words
from the Primitive signification, to a secondary, may appear.

4 Besides single words, this Book interprets very many double words,
compounded of a Nowne and an Adjective, or Epithet. Also sundry
Scripture-Phrases be expounded.

5 In setting down the meaning of the words, this Dictionary does very often
point at some wholesome Doctrine, and sometime expresses it.

6 All the words of foundation (as I verily trust) which contain the sure
grounds of our Faith and Religion, are here comprehended.

7 Here be given the definitions of the Capital and chief matters, with due
proofs of Scripture, to confirm every part of the definition, the better to
express the nature of things.

8 You shall find not a few Theological distinctions and divisions, the better
to distinguish one thing from another.

9 Not only words, which bear difference between Protestants and Papists,
are written down and cleared in this Book, but also there is a taste given,
of the odds and difference it self, in most points of Controversy, between
us and them, for the information of such as have less profited, in discerning
the differences.

10 There be two thousand Texts of Scripture (at the least) declared and made
plain, to the understanding of the simplest.

11 Unto such words as be hard or weighty, I have sometimes added, for fuller
edifycation, short and easy observations, under this word [ Note] being set in
the Margent.

12 Lastly, this is not the least fruit that may come of this Dictionary, to
the studious and well minded Christian, that it may cause him more narrowly to
search and examine what signifycation every word of Scripture may bear: for
out of mine own experience, I may truly speak it, that since I took this
Book in hand, it has caused me a great deal more thoroughly to mark the
Scriptures, the sweet proportion and large compass whereof, I know much
better then ever I did.

Differences between this Book, and M. WILLIAM KNIGHTS.
1 HIs Book is a Concordance, mine is a Dictionary.

2 His is Axiamaticall, of simple propositions; mine is partly Verbaticall and
Rematicall, as I may so speak, of Words with their signifycations: partly,
Pragmaticall of things, with their Defynitions, Divisions, and Observations
Theological.

3 His serves for Doctrines, Reasons, and Uses; mine serves most for
interpretations.

4 His helps Ministers to direct them to teach well; mine may help all, but
cheefely hearers, to direct them to learn well. To be short, they do agree in
nothing but the General truth, and in following the order of the Alphabet.

The Judgment which a Godly Reverend man (a Doctor of Divinity) gave of this
Book, in a Letter of his to the Author, after he had seen some part of it.
MY leisure would not suffer me to read so much of your Dictionary, as I wish I
had: but that I have perused, gives me that good liking of it, that I assure
you, I do take it to be a very profitable work, both in regard of the easy
Method and order of finding out such matters as are therein contained; as also,
for the sound exposition of such Words and phrases as you set down: besides,
the manifold variety of things, which a man shall see in a Synopsis laid
before his eyes. Of all which, the faithful Reader (especially the Preacher of
the word) shall make singular use. I must therefore give my best approbation to
this work of yours, as to other your godly labors in this kind: and when it
shall be finished, I shall be glad to use the benefit of it, and will advise
such as I am acquainted with, to do the like. Fare ye well.

Your Friend R. C.

Whosoever does but cast his eye over any part of this Work, must confess it
to be both painful and ingenious: And (which adds much to the commendation
of it) this adds not to any that went before. It is far more easy to add,
then to invent: and for ought that I know, the Author does not build upon any
other Man's foundation in this kind. But that which Crowns this, and all such
Christian endeavors, is, the subject whereabout it does converse. For though it
be a Dictionary interpreting Words and Phrases; yet is it a Divine Dictionary,
teaching the Language of the Holy Ghost in our own Native tongue, which if a
man could once attain to speak Naturally and kindly, he would be more
powerfully eloquent, then if he spoke with the tongues of men and Angels.

Roger; Fenton.

To the Christian Reader, studious of the Scriptures.
IT is the Custom of worldly men, so sure to lay up their earthly Treasure, as
there is no coming to it without a Key, because it is kept under lock, or
locks rather. Thus it fares with the Heavenly neuer-withering Treasure, which
being (as it were) locked up from all men (as they be the Sons of Adam) cannot
be enjoyed of them, without the help of a double Key. One, is merely
Spiritual and Principally held and kept in his hand, which has the Keys of
the house of David, to open the wits and understanding of such as be blind by
Nature. Luke 24, 45. and still more and more to illuminate such as be already
taught of God. Psalm. 119, 18. The other, is so Spiritual, as it is also
Ministerial; to wit, the Interpretation of Scriptures, either by vocal
preaching, or by sound Writing of such Scribes as be skillful to open the
word of the kingdom. The former Key, thy humble faithful Prayers must
provide, beseeching God thy Father most instantly, in the name of his son, to
open thine eyes to make thee able to see the wonders of his Law. The latter (as
from many other Divine Lock-smiths) so from this Author is ministered to thee
in this present Book; full of labor, and very lightsome. What remains, but
that as a natural man would be glad of a Key, to open the Lock where much Gold
and Silver is stored up: so thou should joyfully embrace this work, which
leads thee to a Treasure more to be desired then Gold; yea, then much fine
Gold. Farewell.

Charles Euars.

A Friendly Counsel to the Christian Reader, touching the use and benefit of
this Book.
Would thou, as all Gods children would, conceive and understand
What thou do read in holy writ, as God does thee command? Ioh 5. 39. Mat
22, 29. ^. Cor 4. 7. Ephesians 3* 8

Would thou attain true sense of words, and matter in them hid,
What meaning each word does contain, from error to be rid?
Do thou delight to have in-sight into the Sacred Treasure
Of Christ's riches, and with thy ^ill therein to take thy pleasure?
Then read this work, which painful hand has wrought to ease thy pain,
That in reading Gods holy word, thou may reap greater gain.
Our English tongue, from many tongues, a snatch and smacke has taken:
As Englishmen, from foreign men, their Coats and Suits have shapen.
Some words from French, and some from Greeks, mo from the Latins flow.
Some new, some old; some dark, some plain, some hard and strange to know.
Some, to some place do give great light; some darken much ^o^e Text;
Some general in the first place, some special in the next.
Some properly sound in this clause, improperly in that:
What some words sound thou know right well; some sound thou know not what
So, oft-times thou leau'st off to read and search the holy Scriptures,
Because thou vnderstand'st not words, which hide their heavenly Treasures.
But lay this Book on thy left hand, and Bible on thy right;
When doubt arises from a word, on Book straight cast thy sight.
It will soon help to clear thy doubts, and make plain Text to thee* Col.
1, 10. Ioh 13. 17* and 17. 3. ^a. 1, 22.

That thou shall know what God does mean, and well his counsel see.
So shall thou read, and in reading, increase thy knowledge da^l^,
And knowledge of our God and Christ, with practice, makes men happy.
By R. Raven.
To the Friendly Reader.
IT is a special duty of a good Teacher, to know and deliver the sound and fit
sense of the places and Texts of Scriptures; and of every good hearer to look
after the same, how to understand rightly what he hears and reads. In this
behalf, how much the Church of God is beholding to that learned judicious
Writer, M. Calvin, all that are learned, do well know, and willingly confess:
For when he meets with a place, wherein he sees men have made scruple, he
does in the end (after some sifting of the matter) strike the Nail full on the
head, with his resolute Census est, This is the sense or meaning of the place.
And surely, we ought thankfully to receive what here this Author (though in
many other respects, and in this also, far inferior to Calvin, out of whom
he will acknowledge to have sucked his best knowledge) painfully and freely
offers unto us, who herein imitateth M: Calvin; For, as the one beats out
the meaning of a sentence, so this present Writer, labors to press and draw
out the Kernel, which lies hid and wrapped in some obscure and doubtful words.
Finally, in humbleness of heart, apply thy self to profit by this and other
such profitable Books, as are framed to the edification of the godly
Christians, in their most holy faith. Farewell.

Thine in Christ. I. S:

To the Christian Reader
ALthough words be the significations of things, yet as Aug. de doct. Christ.
lib. 4. and cap. 11. says very well: It is a note of the best and wisest men,
In verbis, verum amare, non verba, quid enim prodest clauis aurea si aperire
quod volumus non potest? Aut quid obestlignea, si hoc potest, etc. In words, to
love the truth more then the words; For what anayleth a Key of Gold, if it
cannot open the Treasure that we would feign enjoy? Or what hinders a Key of
Wood, if it can open it, etc. Jews Viues has fitly observed out of Augustine
de ciu: dei lib. 13. cap. 24. Quanti sit momenti ad omnes arts disciplinasque
intelligendas vera and Germana vocabularum cognitio. The true and proper
signification and knowledge of words, is a matter of great moment and
consequence to the understanding of all Arts. It is very fit therefore (good
Reader) thou should imitate the wise Traveler, he will be careful to
attain to as much skill as may be in the Languages of all those parts and
Countries through which he is to pass, that he may with the fewer
inconveniences, be interrupted in the way, and with greater expedition may
run his intended race and journey: So thou, in thine intended journey to
Canaan, if thou be ignorant of the Language, Customs, Words, Phrases,
Meanings, and Orders of the place and Country, wilt meet with a World of
inconveniences, to interrupt thine intention, and discourage thee in thy
course, so as thou will either leave off, or very faintly and uncomfortably go
forward. For as the same Augustine says again very truly, Nam aut ignotum
verbu^, facit haerere lectore^, antignota locutio; Either an unknown word
causes the Reader to stick, or an unknown Phrase and manner of speaking. Use
therefore this Book, which God has affoorded for thy good, and for thy guide,
read it diligently, and be much conversant therein, it will be a faithful
guide and Interpreter unto thee; It will bring thee acquainted with the
Language, Phrase, and Customs of Canaan; It will open unto thee the hidden
Treasures of heavenly Wisdom, and it will tell thee in plain English and
easy terms, the mind and meaning of thy good God toward thee. Entertain
it kindly, and take it up unto thee, as that Noble Eunuch did his guide
Phillip. Acts 8, 31, 39. and it will make thee (as he did) go thy journey with
joy and cheerfulness. As the Seamen and Mariners in their Uoyages, be
careful to bring (...) so be thou in thine, as careful to bring (...), an
upright and sincere mind; and I doubt not, but thou shall find it (...), even
according to thy hearts desire, and answereable to thine expectation. Farewell.

B. S.

CVrteous Reader, thou art much bound to bless God, for the great plenty and
abundance of excellent Books, which by the hands of his painful and godly
Servants he has afforded thee, as helps and furtherances to bring thee to the
sound knowledge, and right understanding of his sacred word: But among them
all, in my judgment, there is no one in our Native tongue, that does more
oblige thee to true thankfulness, then the Book thou now beholdest, in regard
of the great necessity and manifold use of the same; as also the exceeding
rich profit and benefit, which (by Gods blessing, if thou make the right use
of it) thou may reap thereby. For beside the multiplicity and great variety
of wholesome matter, which thou shall find scattered through the whole work,
here thou have most of the dark words and phrases contained in the Scripture,
in Alphabeticall order; plainly, breefely, (yet fully) and soundly unfolded;
and in most places, the corrupt glosses of the Papists upon them, compendiously
discovered and confuted. Here thou may at one view, see the diverse
acceptations and significations of words, with the figures and Tropes denoted,
in which the Scripture uses them. By this Book, thou shall be made able to
distinguish of words, which in Scripture are ambiguous, to explain words and
phrases obscure, and easily to understand such as be hard and unknown. By
this Book, if thou be a Minister, thou shall become Bonus Textuarius (for what
is that but to be able to give the true meaning and gemine sense of the
Scripture?) and bonus Textuarius est bonus Theologus. This Book will make thee
a more profitable teacher; for qui been distinguit, been decet. By this Book
(whosoever thou be) thou shall be fortified to shield thy self (and happily
others too) from error, as also to see when others do err, and to draw them
out of error; for error springes from ignorance; that is, from
misunderstanding the Scripture. Math. 22, 29. By this thou shall be made
skillful, to discern the voice of thy Shepherd Christ Jesus, from the voice
of a stranger. John 10, 3, 5. In a word, by this book in short space, and with
no great labor, thou may plentifully abound in all heavenly wisdom and
knowledge. So that, as one says of Cicero; Sciat se multum profecisse, cui
Cicero vnice placet; In like manner, it may more truly be affirmed of this
Book; whosoever he be that delights much in it, shall thereby gain
infinite benefit. The Author has been pleased to entitle this Book A
Christian Dictionary, and so it is; for it interprets words. But it may also
be worthily called; The Key of the Treasures hid in holy Scripture; the enemy
of Ignorance; The high and ready path to Knowledge; The Discloser of Gods holy
secrets; A light for Ministers, whereat they may borrow light; A Lantern for
the people, to direct them in the Light: And to be short, the way to make all
the Lords people to prophecy, as Moses wished. Then Gentle Reader, be not
without it, let it be continnally by thee, yet buy it not for Nouelty, because
it is the first of this kind that ever saw the light; but for the invaluable
worth of it. Sit tibi charus, non quia rarus, sed amatus quod amabilis; 1.
amari dignus. Seneca says; Noua, quamuis non magna, miramur. That we make much
of new things, though they be not great. Lo, in this Book, they both meet
together, here is newness, and here is goodness. This work is new, and it
is precious, how then, should it not much Inamour thee?

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci. I. B.

The Epitome and Anatomy of this Book, abridged and vnbowelled.
AS Stars from Heaven much light afford,
So do the words we find in Word.
But Stars shine not till they appear,
Nor Words do teach, till sense we hear.
Then read this Book, that thou may spy
Gods mind; thy mind to rectify.
The signs of things it makes bare, 1. Significations. 2. Definitions. 3.
Distinctions.

The things themselves it does declare;
Yea thing from thing it seuereth plain,
That better knowledge thou may gain.
What odds twixt truth and error is, 4. Controuersall words. 5. Fundamental.

It shows eke, attend to this:
The words which Fundamental be,
Are all in Table placst for thee.
Eke words, whose matter Scriptures clear, 6. Ecclesiastical.

Yet Words themselves do not appear.
Praise God, apply thy mind to know Required unto right use of all* 1.
Thankfulness. 2. Humility. 3. Prayer.


All Words of his, both hie and low:
With humble heart this Book admit,
And pray for grace to thrive by it.
The Dictionary to the Readers.
Unkind, vnkist, (says Proverb old)
Love springs from knowledge, thus we hold:
To Christian world unknown am I;
Once known* you will not pass me by:
Though Book of words my Title be,
Yet naught but matter found in me.
The Authors Reply.
Fear not; who loves the word of Grace,
Thee lovingly he will embrace.
Ad Beneuolum, pium, and literatum Lectorem.
SAcra cupis (Dilecte Deo) mysteria Christi
citius and melius nosere? sum Librum,
Hunc tibi sum librum, Coeli namque abdita pandit,
and res, and voces ordine quasque locat.
Hic facite inuenias multo sieve, multa, labor,
quaete, quaeque pios posse leuare scio.
Sed cave, non segnem reddat, reddat magepromptum
ad disquirendum quae liber iste tacet.
Sis si forte gregis ductor, been consule, nostris
vtere, si nescis tu meliora, pr^cor
Sui meliora feras, nostris atque addere caeptis
si inuat; and multis, and mihi grataferes.
T. W.

Distichon.
SIbona, quae noua, dulciaquae succincta futura:
hic nouitas, bonitas, est simul hic breuitas.
Aliud.
ANte simplicitas moueat, vel lu^idus or do?
aut charus liber hic, vel tibi nullus erit.
W. M.

A Preface before the Table.
GEntle Reader, in this vast Ocean, and large Forest of words contained in
this Dictionary, I do find that there be three sorts most material; where of
I desire that thou sholdst take more especial notice and knowledge, as being
of more worth and weight. The first I call an Ecclesiastical word, which being
translated from common use of speech, is by the Church appropriated, to
signify holy and divine things. A word of this kind, though it be not in the
Scripture for Letter and Sillables: yet is to be found there for matter and
substance; as Trinity, etc. Sacrament, Indifferent, Satisfaction, Merit, etc.

A word of the second rank, I do term Polemicall; because it pertaines to
Controversy, and has in it a ground of difference between the true
Christian, which thinks, speaks, and writes Orthodoxally, and soundly; and
others, which love and embrace errors, in favor where of they wrest, and
pervert the pure words of Scripture: as Justification, Assurance, of Faith,
Hope of Glory, Concupiscence, Antichrist, etc.

A word of the third sort, is called Fundamental, of which kind, I do take
such words to be, as do contain in them things, which being denied,
Religion it self is overthrown; even as an house is ouer-turned, by taking
away the foundation or groundwork whereupon it stands; as Grace, Faith, God,
Christ, etc. for the descerning of these words from other, I judge this to be a
necessary rule.

A word, containing in it anything, which being denied, A Rule whereby to judge
a fundamental word.
either God himself, any person of the Godhead, the decrees of God, his
properties, his works of Creation and providence, his word of Law and Gospel:
or Christ Jesus the Mediator, his Person, Natures, Offices, benefits, Church,
and people be denied; either directly, or by necessary and immediate
consequence. Any such word is Fundamental, for that must needs be the
foundation of an House, which being removed, the house cannot but fall. Of
this Nature be the words, upon denial whereof, follows the ruin of the
whole Fabric of Religion.

Of these three kinds of words, I have here drawn a Table after the order of
the Alphabet, setting a Star * before an Ecclesiastical word, to know it by.
I have prefixed this syllable [ Con] above a Polemical word, and have placed an
[ F] over the head of a fundamental word: where it happens, that any one
word is both an Ecclesiastical, and a word of Controversy, I have written
upon the top of it, both a Star, and this syllable [ Con.] Also, you shall find
this syllable [ Con] and an [ F] over every word, which is both Polemicall, and
a word of Foundation.

Moreover, whereas I have with the explication of words, sometimes joined the
definition of the thing expressed by such a word, ye shall find this syllable
[ Def.] put under the foot of such a word. And those words in this Table that
do admit distinctions, they are noted out by this syllable [ Did.] directly
put under the word.

Finally, if in the draught, either of this Table, or of this whole Dictionary,
I have failed in any thing (as no doubt but I have, being but a man; and
therefore subject to error, from which no Book is privileged, saving the book
of Books,) I do earnestly entreat thee to cover my slips by love, either
amending them, or admonishing me of them: doing unto me, as in the like case
thy self would be done unto: ever remembering, that it is much easier to
dislike, then to do the like. The former, will cost thee nothing; but the
latter (trust me) will cost thee pains, unto sweat and weariness, if thou will but endeavor to do what I have done before thee.

Farewell.
A Table of the most material words in this Dictionary.
con Abraham's bosom. Page. 36 con Abrogation of the Law. 287 def con
Acceptions of persons. page 3 F Adoption. 5 did con F Advocate. 6 con Agony of
Christ. 7 F Almighty. 8 con All. 7 con Altar. 9 con Angel. 11 con Antichrist.
13 con Anointing. 348 F Assention of Christ. 17 con F Assurance of Faith. 18

B.
con Babylon. 21 con Baptism. 22 def con F To believe in God. 26 con Binding
and loosing sins. 27 con Blasphemy against the holy Ghost. 29 def F
Blessedness. 31 did con Blessing. 30 con F Blood of Christ. 33 con F Body of
Christ. 34 Book. 34 did con Breaking of Bread. 39 Brotherly fellowship. 41
def

C.
F Calling. page 45 did con Catholic. 48 Chaste. 50 did con Chair of Moses.
49 Children of God. 51 did con F Christ. 53 Christian 53 def con F Church. 54
did Circumcision. 55 def Coming of God. 57 ^^st con F Communion of Saints. 59
Compassion. 60 did con Concupisence. 61 did con Confession. 62 con
Confirmation. 63 def Conscience. 64 def Continency. 66 def Contract, or
betrothing. 20 def con Contrition. 66 did con Conversion. 67 did F Covenant
of grace. 96. did. def con F Counsel of God. 72 def Counsel of Man. 72 did
F Creation. 74 Craft. 74 did con F Cross of Christ. 75 did con Crown of
righteousness. 176

D.
Darkness. 81 did F Damnation. 81 con The Lords Day. 85 con Daily Bread. 86 F
Death. 89 did con F Decree of God. 91 Denial. 337 did con F Descension into
Hell. 96 def F Devil. 99 Discretion. 101 def Disobediance to God. 102 def con
Divorce. 104

E.
Eating. 120 did con Eating of Christ. 120 Elder. 121 did con F Election. 122
def Enemy. 123 did con Excommunication. 131 def Error. 127 did

F.
Faith. 137 did con F Faith justifying. 141 def Fall of Man 141 def con To
fall from grace. 141 did con Fasting. 143 did Father. 144 did F Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 145 con Fear. 14^ did con Feed. 151 did First. 157
did con First Faith. 158 con Flesh. 161. and 163 con For. 170 Forsake. 173
did con F Foreknowledge. 170 con Foundation. 176 did con * Free Will. 532
con Full of Grace. 181 con Fortune. 175 Freedom. 179 did

G.
Glory. 191 def F Glory of God. 193 F Glorification. 195 def F God. 196. did.
def F Godliness. 197 did F Goodness of God. 199 con Good works. 202 F
Gospel. 202 con F Grace. 206. def. did Guile. 208 did

H.
To harden the heart. 219 did con To hate being referred to God. Page 216 did
Hatred referred to Man. Page. 215 did con F Head of the Church. 217 Head. 216
did F Heaven. 221 did F Hell. 224 con Heresy. 225 F Holiness of God. 230
con F Hope of glory. 223 Humility. 239 did House of God. 236 did To humble.
238 did

I.
con Idols. 243 F Jehovah. 245 con Ignorance. 246 did con Images 247 did
Image of God. 249 did F Immortality of the Soul. 249 con Imposition of
hands. 250 con F Imputation of righteousness. Page. 250 def * Indifferent.
253 con Infant. 254 * Infinite. 254 Innocence. 255 did con F Intercession of
Christ. 256 con Is. 259 Justice. 265 did F Justice of God. 265 con F
Justification. 267. def. did F Judgment. 262 F Judgment of quick and dead.
Page. 260

K.
con Keys of the Kingdom. 270 did con Key of Knowledge. 270 King. 271 did
con F Kingdom of Christ. 273 did F Kingdom of God. 272 did Knowledge of
God. 277 did F Knowledge, as it is in God. Page. 278 Keeping the Law. 269 did

L.
F Law of God. 284 did con Liberty Christian. 292. def. did F Life
everlasting. 294 F Life of God. 294 Life godly what. 293 def F Lord, being
referred to christ. Page 299 did con Lords Supper. 300 F Love referred to God.
302 con Love referred to men. 301 did Lie. 304 did

M.
con * Mass. 312 def con Magistrate. 307 did con Marriage. 311 did F
Mediator. 314. did def Meditation. 314 did Meditation of Gods word. Ib. def
Meditation of Gods works. Ib. def F Mercy of God. 316 did con * Merit. 317 def
con Ministry. 317 def con Mystery. 320 Mortification. 323 def con Multitude.
326

N.
Nakedness. 329 did con New heavens, and new earth. Page. 335

O.
Offense. 341 did con One, once. 342 Ordinance. 345 did con F Original
sin. 346 def con Oath. 346 def con Oil. 347 did

P.
Passover. 350. Def. did con F Passion of Christ. 351 Patience. 353 def con
Perfection. 356 did con Permission. 358 con Perseverance in grace. 358 ^ A
Person in the Godhead. Page. 358 Persuasion. 358 did con F Good pleasure of
God. 364 con Pilgrimage. 360 con Pope. 364 Planting. 361 did con Prayer. 369
did Preaching. 370 def con F Predestination. 370 def Presumption. 372 def con
F Price of Redemption. 372 con F Priest. 374 did High Priest. 374 Promises.
376 did Providence. 380 def Prophecy. 378 did con Purgatory. 382 con F
Purpose of God. 382

Q.
con Quenching the Spirit. 385 did

R.
F Reconciliation with God. 392 Rest. 403 did con F Redeem. 393 con F
Redemption. 393 con F Regeneration, or incorporation into Christ. 395 def con F
Remission of sins. 398 did Renewing. 499 did con Repentance. 401 def. did
con F Reprobation. 402 def F Resurrection from the dead. Page 404 con F
Righteousness of Christ. 410 F Righteousness of God. 409 con Rock. 412 Rod.
413 did con Reward. 407 did con Rule. 415

S.
con Sabbath. 417 con * Sacrament. 418 con F Sacrifice of Christ's death. Page
419 did con Saint. 419 con F Sanctification. 422 did con F * Satisfaction by
Christ. 424 con F Savior. 424 Salvation. 424 Service. 440 did Schism. 426
def con F Scripture. 428 Shame. 442 did con F Sin. 447 did Sign. 445 did
con Single life. 446 F Sitting at the right hand of God. 450 con Sitting at the
right and left hand of Christ. 411 con F Son of God. 455 did F Spirit of
God. 460 con Seal of the Spirit. 116 Sister. 450 did con Supererogation. 471
con Supremacy. 472 def Sleep. 451 did Sheep. 443 did Shield. 443 did

T.
Testament. 483 did con Tradition. 492 did con Transubstantiation. 493 *
Trinity. 495 con Two Witnesses. 501 Temptation. 482. 481 did Temple. 480 did
Tabernacle. 475 did

V.
* Veil. did con F Union of two natures in christ. Page 511 con Vow. 513.
def. did con Usury. 515. def. did Voice. 514 did Unbelief. 508 did

W.
Ways. 527 did * Watchfulness. 524 def con Wedding Garment. 539 F Will of
God. 533 did F Wisdom of God. 538 War. 521 did con Worthy. 551 did con F
Worship of God. 551 did F Wrath of God. 552 Word. 544 did World. 548 did

Z.
Zeal. 556 def Yoke. 554 did

A. B.
Abba. Sig
FAther; Thus Christ expounds it, Mark. 14, 36. and Paul, Romans 8, 15. to cry
Abba Father: the doubling of the word, joining to the Syriacke [ Abba] the
Greek word (...), serves to teach, that God, is not God of the Jews only,
but of the Gentiles also, and will be called upon in all Languages, requiring
of his people a strong confidence in his fatherly goodness through Christ.

To abhor sig:
To have a thing in utter detestation and loathing, Esaias. 1, 13. I abhor your
Sabbothes and new Moons. Job. 42, 6. I abhor my self. Sometimes abhorring,
signifies loathing in show and profession only, and not in truth: as Romans 2,
22. Thou abhorrest Idols: that is; seem to detest them.

Abomination. sig:
Some accursed spiritual filthiness which deserves to be fled from and
abhorred of all men, as ominous, fearful, and unhappy. Deuteronomy. 22, 5. The man
that wears Woman's apparel, and the Woman that puts on man's raiment, both are
abomination unto the Lord. Prou. 12, 22. The lying lips are abomination unto
the Lord. Matthew. 24, 15. And often in Moses and the Prophets. See Deuteronomy. 25, 26.

2 Something, which for the uncleanness sake might not be eaten, or touched.
Levit. 11. 10, 11.

Abomination of Desolation. sig:
That, which all good men detest and hold accursed, by reason of the shameful
and foul filthiness of it, deserving and bringing desolation. And this is
meant (as some think) of the Idolles which the Romans not long after Christ
his Ascension, set up in the Temple at Jerusalem, whereupon followed
desolation, that is; the laying wast and downfall of the Temple, City, and
Nation of the Jews: this is the abomination of desolation fore-spoken of by
Daniell 9, 27. and after spoken of by Mat. 24, 15. But Master Iunius (not
without great appearance of reason) interprets [ Abhomination] of the Army of
the Romans, which consisted of abominable men, to wit, Infidels, who brought
desolation upon Temple, City, and people.

Absence, referred to God. sig:
His withholding some sign of his favor, or the sending some Judgment. For
as touching his essence and power, he is never absent from his Creatures, Psalm.
77, 7. Will the Lord absent himself for ever? Hence come those phrases in the
Psalms and elsewhere, of hiding his face, turning his back, departing,
returning, and such like.

To Abstain from. sig:
To separate, or estrange, and turn our mind from a thing, with an hatred of
it. 1. Pet. 2, 11. Abstain from fleshly lusts, that is, crucify the wicked
desires of corrupt Nature.

From Above, or above. sig:
That which is from heaven. Acts* ^, 19. Esa. 6, 11.

2 That which is excellent, and of great account, also heavenly and spiritual.
Galat. 4, 26. Jerusalem which is from above.

3 Things which belong to the heavenly life. Col. 3, 1. Seek things which be
above.

Above all. sig:
One, who has the chief authority and rule over the Church. Ephesians. 4, 6. Which
is above all. John 3, 31.

Abundance of the heart. sig:
An heart abounding and stored with things good or evil. Mat. 12, 24. Of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.

To abound sig:
To know and feel the force of a thing abundantly and plentifully, Romans 5,
20. Where sin abounds.

To Accept us. sig:
To receive unto favor, and to be well pleased with our persons, being
through sin estranged from God. Ephe. 1* 6. He has accepted us freely in his
beloved. This is the acceptance of our persons.

2 To approve graciously our imperfect and spotted works, by the free
forgiveness through Christ of those wants and faults which stick unto them.
1. Pet. 2, 5. Psalm. 51, 19. Then thou shall accept our Sacrifice, etc. This is
the acceptance of our works.

Acception of person. Sig
Respect or favor, given to one before another for some outward quality, as
of Nation, Riches, Kindred, Honor, friend-ship, and such like, Acts 10, 34. God
is no accepter of persons, for in every Nation, he that fears God is
accepted. Romans 2, 11. There is then no cause why any should deny the eternal
election of God, depending upon his own good pleasure alone, as the moving
cause, least he be counted an accepter of persons.

Access. sig:
A drawing toward or coming nearer, Romans 5, 2. We have access unto this
grace, etc. that is, we may approach into his gracious presence being now
reconciled to God, having our sins forgiven unto us through Christ,
apprehended and laid hold on even by faith.

To Acknowledge. sig:
To take knowledge of Gods word, to rule our selves by it, also of his
providence. What it is that he does to us either in anger or in mercy. Pro. 3,
6. In all thy ways acknowledge God.

2 To join and add knowledge unto knowledge, or to increase our knowledge,
when we know a truth more certainly, and clearly then we were wont to do.
Luke 1, 4. That thou may Acknowledge, etc. Tit, 1, 1.

3 Openly and frankely to utter and show forth our known sins, or Gods own
perfections, 1. John 1, 6. If we acknowledge our sins. Psalm. 32, 5.

4.
Then I acknowledged my sins unto the, etc. 4. To take others for such as they
are, loving them, and having them in due account. These. 5, 12. Acknowledge them
that admonish you, and have them in singular love for their Work. Note this
generally, that Note.
words of knowledge do many times comprehend affections in them.

According to God. sig:
With God, or having God going before us, John 3, 21. That they are wrought
according to God; according to his will in his word, which must go before us
in doing duties, as a guide or a Lantherne.

One accord sig:
Agreement or consent of hearts, Phil. 2, 2. Of one accord. Acts 4, 32. that
is, of one judgment and will.

To Accuse. sig:
To lay an evil or fault to ones charge; This is done, either truly, or
falsely; secretly, or openly. Ioh. 8, 10. Woman where are thine Accusers? Acts
24, 13, 19. Men accuse God, one man accuses another, and Satan accuses the
Brethren, also our own thoughts do accuse us. Revel. 12, Romans 2, 15.

Accursed. sig:
Separate from all human use, and appointed to temporal destruction. Ios. 6,
20, 21, Keep ye from the accursed thing.

2 Separate from Christ, and appointed to eternal destruction. Gal. 1, 9. Let
him be accursed. Romans 9, 3. I would be accursed or (separate from Christ) for
my Kinsmen. In these words, holy Paul makes no such prayer or wish, that he
might perish (for this had been unlawful and vain too, both against the
constant purpose of God, and his own assurance testified, Romans 8, 38, 39.
Neither was Paul bound to love the Jews salvation more then christ and his
grace) but by this manner of speech, being conditional, he bewrayes his
deep affection for the Jews his kinsmen, in that (if it could have bin) he
was ready to have redeemed their eternal destruction with his own.

A. D.
Add. sig:
To put unto, Revel: 22, 18. If any man shall add to these things in this
Book, etc. Prou. 30, 6. Put nothing his word. Deuteronomy. 12, 32. Men add to the
word of God, when they put something to the service of God, which he has not
commanded for his Service: or do make that to be Scripture, which is not
Scripture, putting to it somewhat which is false, or taking from it somewhat
which is true. Thus do the Romanists, as a man half blind, may see.

2 To cast in something as a surplusage and overplus, Mat. 6, 33. All other
things shall be added (or ministered) unto you.

3 To inflict some heavy Judgment, or to plague one with increase of wrath.
Revel. 22, 10. I will add unto him all the plagues, etc.

To Adjure. Sig
To command a thing by interposing the authority and name of God or Christ,
Acts 19, 13. We adjure you by Jesus.

2 To demand an oath of one for more safety, and certainty, Mark 5, 7. Where
the same word is in the Greek, as in former place of the Acts.

Administration. sig:
A public function, or charge, 1. Cor. 12, 5. There are diversities of
administrations.

Admonition. sig:
A warning by word or speech, when we are wisely, earnestly, and lovingly,
put in mind of some duty to be done, or some sin to be left undone. 1. These.
5, 14. Admonish one another: This is private admonition. Verse 12. speaks of
public admonition. Also Titus 3, 10.

2 A warning by example. 1 Cor. 10, 11. These things came for ensample, and
were written to admonish us.

Adoption. sig:
The purpose of God eternally decreeing to make some his children, Gal. 4, 5.
This is adoption of Gods purpose.

2 A taking, or admitting one actually to be a son by favor, who is none by
nature; and to adopt, is actually to take him for a son, who was the child of
wrath by nature. Romans 8, 15. Ye have received the spirit of adoption. Actual
adoption. 3 The dignity of being Gods people. Romans 9, 4. To who^ pertains the
adoption. This is external adoption.

Spirit of Adoption. sig:
A special gift of the spirit, certifying us of our adoption. Romans 8, 16. We
have received the spirit of adoption, to cry Abba Father.

To wait for y^ Adoption. sig:
Earnestly to look for the fruition and enjoying of our adoption, in a full
restoring at the last day. Rom: 8, 23. We wait for our adoption. This is
adoption complete and perfected; to wit, glorification in heaven.

Advantage sig:
Gain, benefit, or profit, either spiritual or earthly, Phil. 1, 12. Christ is
to me advantage. Mat. 16, 26. What will it advantage (or profit) a man to
win the world and to loose himself.

Adultery. sig: pro
Uncleanness about the act of generation between two persons, whereof the one at
least is married, Heb: 13, 4. Adulterers God will Judge. John 8, 3. A Woman
taken in adultery.

2 All manner of uncleanness, about desire of sex, together with the occasions,
causes, and means thereof, as in the 7. Commandment. Exodus: 20, 14. Thoushalt
not commit adultery. A Sinechdoche.

Advocate. sig: pro
One, that pleads for another at any bar of Justice. This is the proper
signification.

2 One, that pleads the cause of believing sinners Note.
at the bar of Gods Justice. Christ alone performs this office, by the
eucrlasting merit of his death. 1. John 2* 2. We have an All Words, which
concern Christ his mediation, are to be understood exclusiuely, shutting out
all creatures.
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Here falls down the
multitude of Advocates set up in the Romish Synagogue, to Christ his great
dishonor, who only is our Advocate, because he alone is our Propitiator, or
Reconciler.

A. F.
Affections. sig:
Passions which affect the mind with some grief or pain, especially when they
are strong and vehement. Romans 7, 5. The affections of sin wrought in us. In the
original Text it is read, The Passions of sin.

2 More entire feeling and hearty love, 2. Cor. 7, 15. His inward affection is
more abundant toward you.

Affliction. sig:
Any trouble, grief or evil whatsoever, that happens either to soul or
body, name, goods, or estate, for correction of sin, or for trial, as it does
to the godly; or for punishment and vengeance, as to the wicked, Romans 2, 8.
Anguish, affliction. Also 5* 3.

A. G.
Against Christ. Sig
Haters of Christ, and open Blasphemers, Math. 12, 30. He that is not with me,
is against me. They were not against Christ, which did think reuerendly of
him, though they did not follow him, and make open profession of him; but such,
as reproched him, his Doctrine, and works, are here said to be against him. As
appears by comparing together the 30, 31, and 32* verses of the 12. Chapter
of Saint Matthew.

Agony. sig: pro
Any fight, conflict, wrestling, or strife.

2 The deep soul-sorrow and extreme anguish of Christ, wrestling, and
striving, not only with the terror of death, but with the infinite Justice and
wrath of God, highly displeased with our sins, Luke 22, 44. And he was in an
agony, etc. If any think, this Agony did arise merely from a fear of
Natural death in Christ, they think too unworthily of Christ his excellent
fortitude, of his Fathers infinite Justice, of man's most horrible and execrable
sins.

A. L.
All. sig:
Every one, and then it is put universally, Romans 5, 12. Death went over all. 2.
Cor: 5, 10. We must all appear, that is, all and every one.

2 Some of al: and then it is put indefinitly. 1, Tim. 2, 2. God will have all
to be saved: Mat. 3, 5, and 4, 24. And he healed all diseases: that is, some of
all sorts and kinds. John 6, 45. These and such like places therefore, are
euilly cited in favor of vniuersallelection to prove that all and every one
were chosen, and that the cause of their damnation which do perish, is because
they refused offered grace.

3 Plentiful and perfect, Romans 15, 13. All Joy. 1, Cor. 13, 2. All knowledge.

A. L.
Allegory. sig:
A sentence consisting of sundry strange and borrowed speeches, which sound one
thing, and covertly shows forth another. Gal. 4, 24. Mat. 7, 6. and Mat. 3,
10, 11. afford us examples hereof. Allegories be either continued Metaphors,
whereof many examples are in Scriptures besides those here named: or a drawing
of some words plainly uttered at first, from their natural and proper meaning,
to a strange sense, for better instruction of our minds, in some points of
faith or manners, as that in Gala. 4, 24. Touching the latter kind of
Allegories, it is a safe thing to tread in the steps of the holy ghost, not
making Allegorical senses, where the Spirit has made none.

Alms. sig:
A relief given to the poor out of a pitiful heart, Mat. 6, 1. When thou
give thy Alms, etc. It has affection of mercy, and effect of succor; the
heart touched with pittifulnesse, and an hand reached out to give if we have
wherewith. See 2. Cor. 8.

Almighty. sig:
One of infinite power, able to do whatsoever he will, and to hinder whatsoever
he will not have done by his respective power, and by his absolute power able
to do more then he will; such a one is God only, 2. Cor. 6, 18. Says the
Lord God Almighty. Romans 9, 19. Who has resisted his will? The Papists reason
foolishly from Gods Almightinesse, to prove the real presence of Christ's body
in the supper: whereas they should rather prove it is his revealed will to
have it so, which they can never do. We may assure our selves that God is able
to do, and does whatsoever he is willing to do, but not on the contrary, that
he will do whatsoever he can do. Note further, that if God could do things
against his Nature, or things contradictory, or against his word, it would
bewray impotencie, and weakness, not Omnipotency and Almightinesse.

Alpha. sig:
That which is first amongst the Greek Letters, as Omega is that Letter which
is last: whereby is meant, that Christ is both beginning and ending, Re. 1, 11.
I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last.

All-sufficient. sig:
One God, most able to perform all promised good things, and to keep away al
threatened evils, Genesis 17, 1. I am God All-sufficient.

Altar. sig:
The Doctrine of free salvation by Christ crucified: or the sacrifice of
Christ's death, Heb. 13, 10. We have an Altar, etc. The meaning of this place
is, that such as remain (after due instructions) in the observations of
Legall-Sacrifices, shall not partake in the Sacrifice of Christ's death, once
offered on the cross. What is this to Popish Altars, whereon to Sacrifice
Christ again in an unbloody manner for sins of the quick in earth, and of
the dead in Purgatory?

2 The Sacrifices and Oblations, slain and offered at the Altar, 1 Cor. 9, 13.
They which serve at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar.

To offer, or bring our gift to the Altar. sig:
To do and perform the duty of godliness, which are unto God as an Oblation or
Sacrifice, Mat. 5, 23, 24. The efore if thou shall bring thy gift to the
Altar, etc. It is a speech borrowed from those times, when the Temple, and
Altars, and Sacrifices were in use. Therefore the Papists deal absurdly, which
upon these words, would build their Altars for Masses, and their Purgatory:
woeful Interpreters of Scriptures.

A. M.
Am. sig:
Existence or selfe-being, Exodus 3, 14. I am that I am; that is, I have my
being from my self, and from no other, and am the cause of being to all
things that be.

2 Representating, or resembling, John 15, 1. I am that Vine: that is, I
represent, and am like unto a vine.

Amen. sig:
In the end of Prayer, a wishing that it may be so, as we ask, and a
trusting that it shall be so: Gal. 1, 5. To whom be glory for ever and ever:
Amen.

2 Vehement asseueration, when a thing is earnestly and strongly affirmed. Mat.
18, 3. Amen I say unto you.

3 Certain, constant, or most firm, 2. Cor: 1, 20. Yea and Amen.

4 Truth it self, Revel: 3, 14. These things says Amen.

To Amend. sig:
To redress and reform faults. It is put for repentance, Math. 3, 8. Acts
26, 20. Bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance (or amendment.) Repentance
is as the root, amendment as the fruit. First, there must be a change of
the heart from evil to good, by the gift of repentance put into it of God, and
then will follow, an amendment and redress of our ways and manners.

A. N.
Anathema. sig:
One, which is accursed, or an execration, separate, and removed from the
fellow-shippe of the faithful. Sometime also from the grace of Christ, and
hope of salvation. Anathema Maranatha is one accursed for ever and a day, or
eternal execration, 1. Cor. 16, 21. If any love not the Lord Jesus, let him be
Anathema Maranatha. Anathema belongs to all obstinate, scandalous offenders.
Anathema Maranatha belongs only to Blasphemers of the Holy Ghost. Gala. 1, 9.
Let him be Anathema, accursed. Romans 9, 2. I could wish to be Anathema for my
Kinsmen, etc.

2 A thing separate from common use, and given unto GOD to serve for holy
uses, as being It may seem strange that one word should be put not only in a
diverse, but quite contrary signification. Some think it is because the verb
whence it comes, has diverse acceptions. Others think the word which sig:
things consecrate, in Lu. 21. to be writ with (H) and the other word with (e)
But I think they both are thus called of separating or departing either to
destruction, as the former, or to honorable use, a; the latter.
consecrate thereunto. Lu. 21, 5. and with consecrate things, the word is
Anathemata in the original, and significs Donaria or gifts hanged upon the
pillars of the temple for ornament of the place, and to the honor of God.

And. sig:
Because. 1. Cor. 8, 4. Col. 1, 24. Here it is a particle causall, as Mark 9,
49. And every Sacrifice, etc. 2. It is a note similitude.

3 Therefore* Mark 10, 26. And they were much more astonished. Here it is an
Illatiue particle.

4 That is to say, or even, Ephesians. 1, 3. Blessed be God, and the Father, etc.
Call. 1, 3. Revel. 21, 22. as it is in 2. Cor. 1, 3. Here it is a particle
exegeticall. 5. For the most part, it is a copulative particle, to couple words
and sentences together.

Angel. sig:
A Messenger or one sent of God. In this general sense Christ is called the
Angel of the Covenant. Mal. 3, 1. The Angel of the covenant whom ye desire.

2 A Minister of the Gospel, authorized and sent by Christ to publish the
message of reconciliation between God and man. Revel. 2, 1. The Angel of the
Church of Ephesus. 2. Cor. 8, 20.

3 A created good spirit, sent forth of God to minister for the good of the
elect, and for the punishment of the wicked, Heb. 1, 7. Of the Angels, he
says, he makes the spirits his messengers. Also v. 14. 2. k. 19, 35

4 A created wicked spirit, for such also God sends as messengers to do his
will, for probation of the godly, and for plaguing of the ungodly, so often as he
pleases. Mat. 25, 41. Prepared for the devil and his angels. Job. 1, 8, 9.
The Sadduces denied the being of Angels, saying, There were none. Others held,
they were but motions. Angels bread, Tungs of angels. See Manna and Tongue.

Angel of the Covenant. sig:
One sent with authority, to preach reconciliation with God, and to merit it.
Mal: 3, 1. 2. Cor. 5, 19.

Angel of Light. sig:
A good and holy Angel: or one, which does counterfaite himself to be so,
and is not. 2. Cor. 11, 14. For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel
of Light.

Anger. sig:
A desire of being revenged upon the person of our neighbor, either by our
words, or deeds. Mat. 5, 22. He that is angry with his Brother. etc. Here it
is taken in ill part.

2 A displeasure, not against the person, but against the sin of our neighbor,
or against our own sins. This kind of anger if it be moderate, and joined
with compassion, it is an holy affection, 2. Cor: 7, 11. In that ye were godly
sorry, what anger has it wrought? Ephe. 4, 21. Be angry and sin not. Here
it is taken in good part.

3 In God, it is his just displeasure against sin and sinners: or the
punishment which proceeds from him displeased. Psalm. 2, 12. Least he be angry.
Psalm. 90, 7, 8. God is angry, when he does such works as angry men do: who
punish and take away signs of favor from such as they be angry withal.

4 The decree and threatening of God to punish men. Psalm: 2, 16. Least he be
angry.

Anointed. sig:
A narrow strait or perplexity, when one knows not what counsel to take, or
which way to turn him, Rom, 8, 35. Shall anguish? etc.

2 Not only extreme pains which accompany sinners in this life, but eternal
torments in hell, Romans 2, 9. Tribulation and anguish upon the soul of every
one who does evil.

Anguish. sig:
Anointing. See in Oil.

Answers. sig:
A reply to some question propounded. Luke 2, 3. Jesus answered them.

2 To witness a thing. Ge. 30, 33. my righteousness shall answer for me.

3 The hearing and granting our Prayers. Esaias 58, 9. Thou shall call, and the
Lord shall answer.

4 The beginning of any speech, when no This is an Hebraisme: the reason
whereof is, because such as begin to speak, do either answer the necessity of
the matter, or the desire of the hearers.
Question or speech went before, Mat. 11, 25. At that time Jesus answered and
said.

5 The obedience yielded to Gods commandment, when that is done indeed which
was given in charge, Esaias 55, 12. I spoke, ye would not answer: [that is] Ye
would not obey.

Antichrist. sig:
Every one, who is an adversary to Christ, fighting against his doctrine by
mouth, pen, or sword. 1. Ioh. 2, 18. Ye have heard that Antichrist shall come:
Even now are there many Antichrists.

That Antichrist. sig:
One singular and special enemy of Christ, who pretending himself to be
Christ's Vicegerent, does in a notable, strange and disguised manner, impugn
and strive against his Gospel and Glory. This is now revealed more fully then
ever, to be the Papacy (that is) the head and body of that (commonly, but
falsely so called) Romish Catholic Church. 2. These. 2, 8, 9. 1. John 2, 22.
The same is that Antichrist. All the marks of Antichrist, as they are set
down, 2. These. 2. and in the Revelation, do not agree unto any other, save to
the Bishop of Rome and his Clergy, who are the Ringleaders of that general
Apostasy and defection from the faith which should reign, and now long has
reigned in the kingdom of Antichrist. How therefore be Papists deceived, which
will have Antichrist to be one man; a Jew, of the Tribe of Dan and that he
shall come but three year and an half before the end of the world, and shall
kill Henok and Elias, who should return again to live here in the world, with
innumerable other fabulous and false things, wherewith their eyes being
blinded, they cannot perceive themselves to be Antichrist, though they do all
the parts, and offices of Antichrist.

A. P.
Apostle. sig:
One that is sent as a messenger about any affairs. In this largest sense,
Epaphroditus is called the Apostle of the Phillippians, being sent by them unto
Paul to carry their benevolence. Phil. 2, 28. Even your Apostle.

2 A Minister, immediately sent from Christ to preach the Gospel in the whole
world. Here of there were at first twelve, Mat. 10, 1. and 28, 19. Gala. 1,
1. This is the strictest sense.

3 Any Messenger or Interpretor of Gods will to his Church. In this large sense,
Christ is called an Apostle, Heb. 3, 1. Consider the Apostle Christ Jesus.

Apostleship. sig:
Not only the function of an Apostle, but the ability from God worthily to
execute it to the edification of the church. Romans 1, 5. By whom we have
received grace and Apostleship.

To appear sig: pro
To come before one, to be present, to answer unto matters objected. Thus men
appear before men.

2 Not only to be present, but to be inquired into, and laid open, and made
manifest to our selves and others, what we have been, and what we have done.
2. Cor. 5, 10. We must all appear. Thus we shall appear before God.

3 To present ones self as an Advocate or spokesman, by his intercession to
appease God for us, so often as we do any sin of weakness, Heb. 9, 24. He is
entered into the heavens, to appear in the sight of God for us. Thus Christ
daily appears* before his Father for the elect believers.

4 To show a thing that it may be seen, Acts 2, 3. There appeared unto them
cloven tongues. Thus things visible and sensible appear to our eyes and senses.

5 To come unto Gods presence in his Temple to worship him. Exodus 23, 15, 16.
None shall appear before me empty. Also chap. 34, 23.

To appoint sig:
To decree, will, or purpose a thing certainly from everlasting. 1. These. 5,
9. We are appointed not to wrath, but to obtain salvation.

2 To set apart to some Office, as Deacons. Acts 6, 3. Which we may appoint,
etc.

To approve sig:
To declare and show himself indeed to be such an one as he is taken for and
should be, 2. Cor. 6, 4. In all things we approve our selves as the Ministers
of Christ.

A. R.
Are. sig:
Representing, or betokening, or being like, Genesis 41, 26, 27. The seven good
Kine, are seven years of plenty, etc. the like phrase in Revel. 17, 10. and
Revel. 1, 20.

Archangell. sig:
Prince of Angels (as Archipoimen the Prince of Pastors) Jude 9. Yet Michaell
that Archangel. This is Christ Jesus, who is strong as God: as also, the
doubling of the Greek Article does declare.

Arc. sig: pro
A Chest or Coffer, wherein to keep things sure or secret.

2 The great vessel or ship wherein Noah and his family lived safe, during the
flood, Heb. 11, 7.

Arc of the covenant or Testimony sig:
A Chest, wherein were put the two Tables of the Law, containing the Articles
of the covenant between God and his people, Exodus 26, 33. also Exodus 5, 21.
This Arc with the Mercy seat upon it, did represent Christ, being made man:
both because the God-heade was after a sort enclosed in him (as in an Arc) and
at the beholding of him God is become propitious to us: and lastly, by him, the
Covenant with all the Articles thereof are established.

Arm. sig: pro
That part and member of the body, which is strongest and readiest to do things
with all.

Arm of the Lord. sig:
The mighty power of God specially woorking in the Gospel, for the conversion
of the elect, Esaias 53, 1. To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

2 The great power of God generally uttered, either for saving the good, or
destroying the wicked, Psalm. Mighty is thine arm, and strong is thy right
hand, 1. Kings 8, 42.

Arm of Flesh. sig:
Most feeble and weak help, such is all help from man without God: Ier. 17,
5. Cursed be he that makes flesh his arm.

Armor. sig: pro
Weapons or warlike furniture for our own defense, and offense of our enemies:
1. Sam, 18, 18. David put on Saules Armor.

2 Those strong and powerful lusts of sin, whereby Satan conquereth natural
men, and holds them fast under his Banner and Dominion, Luke 11, 21. When a
strong man armed keeps his Palace, etc.

Armor of God. sig:
Spiritual furniture or weapons, given us of God alone for our defense, against
our spiritual Enemies, Ephesians. 6, 11. Put on the Armor of God.

Armor Complete. sig:
All manner or kinds of spiritual weapons, serving to fence the Christian
soldier on all sides, and to all purposes, Ephesians. 6, 11, 12, etc.

Armor of Light. sig:
The graces of the New man, such as accompany the effectual preaching of the
Gospel (which is like unto light) and these graces are called [ Armour]
because they are our defense against the assaults of sin, and Satan, Romans
13, 12. Put on the Armor of Light. What these graces be, and what defense
they afford us in our spiritual battle, See Ephesians. 6, Verses, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17.

Armor of Righteousness. sig:
Vprightnes or integrity of conscience, which is like armor or weapons,
wherewith the godly Apostle Paul and other his Companions in labor, did
defend themselves and their functions against satan's malice, 2. Cor. 6, 7.
Armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left.

Arrows. sig: pro
An instrument of war, which shot out of a bow, wound and pierce deep into
the body.

2 Deep and most grievous calamities, which like sharp Arrows, pierce even
the godly to the quick, for the probation and trial of their faith and
patience. Also for chasticement, Job. 6, 4. Thy Arrows are in me. Expounded,
verse 2. Psalm. 38, 2. Thine Arrows light upon me.

3 The effectual working of the Gospel, piercing men's consciences, either to
their killing or quickening spiritually, Psalm. 45, 5. Thine Arrows are sharp
to pierce the heart, etc. Revel. 6, 2.

4 Malicious slanderous tongues, which wounds and pierces like Arrows.
Psalm. 120, 3, 4. and 64, 3. And shot for their Arrows bitter words.

5 The heavy judgments of God upon the wicked for their destruction. Psalm. 64,
7. But God shall shoot an Arrow at them, etc.

A. S.
As. sig:
Likeness in quality, and not in quantity. Mat. 5, 48. Be perfect as your
Father is perfect.

2 Equality. John 5, 21. All should honor the son, as they honor the Father.

Ascension. sig:
Christ's going up into Heaven in his manhood: or an action of Christ, as he is
God. Removing his manhood up into the third Heavens, there to reign in most
excellent glory and power, for the good of his Church. Ephe. 4, 9, 10, 11.
Being ascended that he, etc.

To Ascend into heaven* sig:
To go up into heaven, bodily and visibly, Acts, 1, 9, 10. Ephe. 4, 9, 10.
When he ascended.

2 To be endued with light of spiritual understanding. John 3, 13. No man
ascends up, etc.

To Ask. sig:
To put a Question, Luke 20, 8. I alse ask you, etc.

2 To move a petition, or to desire something in Prayer, Math. 7, 7.

Assembly. sig:
A place for solemn meetings, either Civil, or Ecclesiastical. Mat. 23, 6. The
chief seat in assemblies.

To Assist. sig:
To minister aid or help; as it were, to stand to one in his danger. 2. Tim.
4, 16, 17. No man assisted, yet the Lord assisted me.

Assurance. sig:
That infallible certainty which an elect soul has by Faith of her own
salvation, and of the promise of grace, that it is true, and belongs to her
self. Heb. 10, 22. Draw near in assurance of Faith. Romans 4, 21, Being
assured, etc. The Papists are enemies to this assurance: they grant a probable
and coniecturall, but deny infallible assurance; because man's will (say they)
is mutable, whereas our assurance depends upon the unchangeable will of God.

2 Charitable persuasions of other men's salvation. 2. Tim. 1, 5. I am assured
it is in thee.

Full Assurance. sig:
A certain and strong persuasion of our own salvation by Christ. Romans 4, 21.
Being fully assured. Col. 2, 1. A speech borrowed from ships which be carried
with full sails.

A. T.
To Attend. sig:
Earnestly to bend the mind unto a thing, taking great care of it, and heed
unto it. Acts 20, 28. Attend therefore to all the Flock, whereof the holy
Ghost, etc.

To make Atonement sig:
To declare one to be purged from his sins, and reconciled to God, Leu. 5, 10.
The Priest shall make an atonement for him.

A. U.
Author. sig:
The beginner, or first Inuenter and maker of a thing, Heb. 12, 3. Jesus the
Author of our faith.

Authority. sig:
Good estimation and opinion, gotten by wisdom and well-doing.

2 Lawful power enabling to do some public works, Luke 20, 2. Tell us by what
Authority thou do these things. Mat. 20, 25.

3 Majesty, power, and efficacy, Mark, 1, 22. He taught them as one that had
authority.

A. W.
To Awake sig: pro
To come, or get out of a sleep, Mat. 8, 25.

2 To come out of the sleep of sin by repentance, as he that comes out of
bodily sleep by awaking, Ephesians: 5, 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from
the dead.

3 To be prompt and ready with a godly watchful mind to perform good duties,
Psalm. 108, 2. I my self will awake right early.

4 To Minister and give present succor after it has been long kept from us,
as though God had been asleep and forgotten us. Psalm. 7, 6. Awake for me O
Lord.

A. X.
Are. sig: pro
An Instrument to hew or cut down Trees withal.

2 The word of God, which (as a spiritual Axe) cutteth down spiritually wicked
men and Hypocrites, like rotten and barren Trees. This is it which is
elsewhere meant by plucking up, destroying, hardening, binding, retaining
sins, making the ears heavy, and the heart fat, etc. Mat. 3, 10. Now is the
Axe laid to the root of the Trees, etc. Some expound this, not of spiritual
judgments threatened in his word against unrepentant sinners; but of the power
of the Romans, which were the instruments of God, to destroy utterly the
unfaithful and wicked generation of the Jews, with a worldly destruction. The
former is the better exposition, because of that which follows, of casting
into the fire.

B. A.
Babes. sig:
INfants, whilst they be young and tender, vnweaned from the breast. Mat. 2, 20.

2 Such as be weak in faith and knowledge, whether they be newly regenerated,
or long since. 1. Cor. 3, 1. Even as unto Babes in Christ. Heb. 5, 13. Every
one that uses Milk is a Babe; that is, one who is not ripe in knowledge.

Babylon. Sig pro
A famous City in Assyria, whence Peter wrote his first Epistle. 1. Pet. 5, 5,
13.

2 Rome, even the Ecclesiastical Rome, where the Pope sits as head. Revel. 18,
2. It is fallen, Babylon that great City. In Rome are found the vices which
were in Babylon: Therefore by resemblance bears the name of Babylon. Metaphor.
See fallen. Note.


The Papists in their Testament printed at Rheimes, (to prove Peter to be at
Rome) do take Babylon in 1. Pet. 5, 13. to be Rome (mystically) for
resemblance to Babylon in Idolatry and cruelty; yea, and confess also, that
Rome is meant by Babylon, in the 16. and 17. of Revel. Therefore must needs be
the Sea of Antichrist.

Back parts sig:
So much of Gods glory, as in this life we are able to see. Exodus 33, 23. Thou
shall see my backe-parts, but my face thou shall not see; that is (says
Luther:) Here we behold God in his words, and in his creatures, and in the face
of Christ lesus our Mediator: But when this body is dissolved by death, then
we shall see him face to face, and know him as we are known. 1. Cor. 13, 9.
10, 12.

Backbiters sig:
Them which by false, or true reports, hurt the credit of their Neighbor in
his absence, and behind his back, Romans 1, 30. Back-biters, etc.

To be baptized with y^ Holy Ghost sig:
To receive the gifts of the holy Ghost, which sometime were in a visible
manner bestowed in the primitive church, before or after Baptism, Act. 1, 5.
Acts 10, 44. and 19, 5.

To Baptize. sig: pro
To dippe into Water, or to plunge one into the water.

2 To plunge into afflictions or dangers (as it were into deep waters.) Math.
20, 22. Can ye be baptized with the Baptism wherewith I am baptized? that is,
can ye suffer afflictions?

3 To sprinckle or wash ones body Sacramentally. Thus the Minister baptizeth.
Math. 3, 11. I baptize you with water, that is, outward Sacramental washing.

4 To wash the Conscience spiritually, purging it from the guilt and corruption
of sin, by Justification and Sanctification. Thus Christ baptizeth. Math. 3,
11. Christ shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. This is inward
spiritual washing.

The Minister baptiseth, by sprinkling with water, Note.
God baptiseth, by bestowing the gifts of his spirit. The baptism of John and
Christ were all one for Ceremony, Action, and Substance, difference was in the
persons; Christ being man and God.

To be Baptized for dead. sig:
Not for the dead, or over the graves of the dead, but as dead, even to destroy
and mortify sin, which is the true end of baptism, and necessarily proves
the hope of the resurrection. 1. Cor. 15, 29. Which are baptized for dead.

To be Baptized into the death of Christ. sig:
To receive Baptism, as a Testimony of mortification, and as an Instrument of
the Holy Ghost, for the extinguishing, and the killing of sin by the death of
Christ. Romans 6, 3. Have been baptized into his death.

Baptism, what it is?
The Sacrament of our Invitation or first entrance into the Covenant of grace:
not that then we first begin to be of the Covenant, but our being in it, is
thereby sealed and assured. Romans 4, 11. Circumcision as a seal of the
righteousness of faith. It is an error in Popery, to hold, that in Baptism,
natural concupiscence is taken away, not only touching guilt, but touching
corruption too, to be no sin.

More fully thus:
It is the solemn dipping into, or washing in water at the commandment of
Christ, in the name of the blessed Trinity; by this outward sign of washing
with water, to assure us of our entrance into fellowship with Christ, for our
Justification and Sanctification by his death and spirit unto eternal
salvation in heaven. Romans 6, 23. 1. Cor. 12, 13.

Baptism. Sig
Dipping into Water, or washing with water. 1. Pet. 3. 21. Whereof Baptism,
etc.

2 Pouring out, or shedding abroad the gifts of the spirit. Acts 11, 16. Ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost.

3 Ministry and Doctrine of John. Acts 10, 3. Unto John's baptism.

Barbarian. sig:
One rude and unlearned. Romans 1, 14. To the Grecians and Barbarians.

2 One, which so speaks, as he is not understood. 1. Cor. 14, 11. Shall be a
barbarian to me.

B. E.
To Be. sig:
To be made. Mat. 19, 5. Shall be one flesh. Iet. 32, They shall be my people.

2 To be known and apparently seen. 1. Cor. 15, 28. That God may be all in
all. Lu. 6, 35. Ye shall be the children of the most high, that is; made known
to be so.

3 To be esteemed and accounted some thing; as not to be, signifies to be vile,
and to be had in no account. 1. Cor. 1, 28. And things which be not, to bring
to naught things that are, or be.

To be with one. sig:
To be present, not only general, but with special presence of favor, for
assisting and prospering one in the work of his calling. Josh. 1, 9. For I the
Lord will be with thee whether soever thou go. Genesis 39, 2. The Lord was with
Joseph, and he prospered.

Beam. sig:
Either some erime, and great sin; or some lesser sins, neglected, often
gone over, and long dwelt in. Mat. 7, 4. And have a Beam in thine own eye,
first cast out the beam, etc.

To Bear. sig:
To take away sins, by suffering the punishment of them. 2. Pet. 3, 24. He
did bear our sins in his body upon the Tree. Esaias 53, 4. He did bear our
infirmities. Mat. 8, 17.

2 To stay and keep a Sinner from falling, lovingly supporting his weakness
by Prayers, Counsels, and Exhortations. Gal. 6, 2. Bear ye one another
burden.

Beast, or Beasts. sig:
All wild creatures which are upon the land. Psalm. 8, 7. And the beasts of the
field.

2 Some one ravenous or cruel beast. Genesis 37, 33. Some evil beast has
devoured him.

3 One of brutish understanding, having no more reason then a Beast. Psalm. 73,
21. I was a beast before thee, etc.

4 Men of brutish and beastly qualities, like unto beasts for fierceness,
uncleanness, and obstinacy. 1. Cor. 15, 22. I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus. See Acts 19, 9. Titus 1, 12.

5 Fierce, savage, and vnpure Heathens and Nations. Psalm. 80, 13. The wild
beast of the field has eaten it up.

6 Civil Rome, cruelly persecuting the Saints: also Ecclesiastical Rome,
treading in the steps of that barbarous cruelty. Revel. 17, 78. The beast
which thou have seen, was, and is not. Revel. 13, 1, 4. 17. in which place, it
signifies Rome as it is restored by the Pope, unto the Idolatry and Tyranie of
the superstitious persecuting Emperors, and made the seat of Antichrist.

7 Empires and Kingdoms, raised up and maintained after a beastly manner, with
oppression, cruelty, war and bloodshed. Dan. 7, 3, 17. And four great
Beasts came The four Monarchs signified by the four beasts in Daniell, are
by the learned held to be: first, the Assyrians or Babylonians. 2. The Medes or
Persians. 3. The Grecians. 4. The Romans.
Note.
up, etc.

Before God, or in his sight. sig:
In his presence, 2. Cor. 5, 10. We must al appear before Christ. Revel. 20,
12. I saw the dead stand before God.

2 Sincerity, so as God does allow of us in mercy. Luke 1, 6. They were both
just before God: that is, upright, though not persit. Ge: 7, 1. Noah an upright
man

3 Perfectly, so as God may allow of us in his strict Justice. Psalm. 143, 2.
None living shall be Justified before thee, or in thy sight. Romans 3, 20.

4 As God can witness. Here it is the form of an oath. Gal. 1, 20. Before
God, I lie not; that is, I call God to witness that this is truth. See God.

Before one. sig:
Without him. John 10, 8. All that come before me are Thieves; that is to say,
without me, or not by me, who am the only door.

2 First, in order of time. John 8, 58. Before Abraham was, I am. Romans 16, 7.
And were in Christ before me.

Beginning sig: pro
The time whence any thing has his first being. Genesis 1, 1. In the beginning
God created the Heavens and the Earth.

2 That which is chief or most excellent, as Pro. 1, 7. The fear of God is
the beginning of Wisdom. Prou. 4, 7. Wisdom is the beginning, that is; the
chief thing. Psalm. 105, 35. Even the beginning of al their strength, that is;
their chief strength.

3 A principle of Religion, or Catechizing Doctrine. Heb. 6, 1. Leaving the
beginning of the Doctrine of Christ, that is, the plain familiar manner of
teaching Christ.

4 An entrance into a thing. Gal, 3, 3. Are ye so foolish that after you have
begun in the spirit, etc.

To Behold sig:
To look upon a thing with our fleshly or bodily eye, this is the proper
signification.

2 To think upon a thing, with consideration and due regard. Romans 11, 22.
Behold therefore, the bountifulness and severity of God. Look ( See.)

Behold. sig:
A wonder worthy the beholding (as some think) or (as others think) a thing
commonly known, well may be, or should be known, Psalm: 51, 5. Behold, I was
borne, etc.

To believe sig:
To know the Scriptures to be true. James 2, 19. The Devils believe and
tremble. Exodus 4, 31. Thus Devils believe.

2 To assent willingly, and with some kind of Joy to the truth of the
Scripture, when we read or hear it, because it comes from God, and bringes
glad tidings. Acts 8, 13. He believed and did cleave unto Phillip. Acts 28, 27.
Mat. 13, 20. They received the word with Joy. Thus Hypocrites believe.

3 To put confidence in the Doctrine which we know and assent unto, making
application of it unto our selves. Mark 16, 16. He that believes shall be
saved. John 3, 18. He that believes in the son, shall never be condemned.
Thus the regenerare believe. Gal. 2, 20. Christ loved me, and gave himself for
me. Papists deny application of the Doctrine, to be any part of belief in God.

Belial. sig:
Wicked. Deuteronomy. 13, 13. Iud. 19, 22. Men of Beliall, or wicked men.

2 The Devil, that wicked one. 2. Cor. 6, 15. Christ with Beliall. With Satan,
says the Syriack.

Belly. sig:
Carnal pleasures, and all lawful honest pleasures of life, being
inordinately loved* Phil. 3, 19. Whose belly is their God. So are all
pleasures, when men too much love them, and with immoderate affections follow
after them, as if all their felicity were placed in enjoying of them.

Benevolence. sig:
Good will, or readiness of will, to help such as we may help. 2. Cor. 9, 5.
And come as of benevolence, not of niggardnesse.

2 The gift or Alms which comes of benevolence, and is freely bestowed. 2.
cor: 9, 5. To finish your benevolence appointed before.

3 All Co^ugall or Marriage duties, but especially bed-company between man and
wife for just ends, in chaste and sober manner. 1. Cor. 7, 3. Let the husband
give unto the wife due benevolence, etc.

Better. sig:
Less inconvenient. 1. Cor. 7, 28. Better to marry, then to burn.

2 More convenient 1. Cor: 7, 38. He that gives not his Uirgin in marriage,
does better.

3 More good and profitable. Phil: 1, 23. Having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is much better.

B. I.
Binding on earth. sig:
A solemn denounciation of Judgment by the Minister, against impenitent
sinners, according to the word of God; which is as a binding him in the fetters
of his sins. Mat: 16, 19. Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven. And Mat: 18, 18. Papists by binding, understand not only censures
of the Church, but corporal pains and corrections, the inflicting whereof,
belongs not to Ministers, but to Magistrates. Rom: 13, 3.

Binding the broken. sig:
The whole cure or healing of sorrowful sinners, both by forgiunesse of the
guiltiness, and mortifying their corruption. Esaias 61, 1. He has sent me to
bind up the brokenhearted, in Lu. 4, 18. it is called, The healing of the
broken hearted.

Bishop, or Bishops. sig: pro
Any that has the charge to ouer-see and provide things necessary. A Surueiour.

2 A spiritual ouer-seer, or one that has charge and ouer-sight of souls, by
the word to instruct and rule them. 1. Tim: 3, 1. If any man desire the office
of a Bishop, he desires a worthy work: See Acts, 20, 28. the inspection into,
and charge over the flock for Doctrine and manners, does (by Gods
commandment) belong to a Bishop, whereof the Greek name [ Episcopos] does
admonish us.

3 Pastors, Teachers, Elders, even whosoever had in the primitive Church any
Ecclesiastical power, either for Doctrine, or regiment of the Church. Phil: 1,
1. To the Bishops and Deacons of Phillippi.

4 Christ Jesus, who because he has chief care, charge, and ouer-sight of the
Church, for feeding and ruling it, and he only has upon him the charge of
saving souls by his Mediation, is therefore (by an excellency) called the
Bishop of our Souls. 1. Pet: 2. verse: last. Ye are returned to the Bishop of
your souls.

B. L.
Blackness. sig:
Afflictions, or Persecutions, which diminish the outward beauty and glory of
the Church. Cant: 1, 4. I am black o Daughters of Jerusalem. S^e Blackness in
Canticles.

Blasphemy sig: pro
An hurtful word, or any evil speech.

2 Every reproachful word, tending to the hurt and disgrace of any other man's
name and credit. Titus 3, 2. Speak evil of no man. In the Original, it is [
Blaspheme no man.] Likewise, in 1. Pet: 4, 4. Therefore speak they evil of
you. This is blaspheming of men. Mark: 3, 2. And blasphemies wherewith they
blaspheme.

3 A word uttered unto the reproach of God, of his Religion, of his Word,
Ordinances, Creatures, or Works. Rom: 2, 24. For the name of God is blasphemed
amongst the Gentiles through you. Tim: 6, 1. Examples of this kind of
blasphemy, we have in Acts 14, 11: and 25, 19. where Festus called Gods
Religion, Superstition. 2. Kings 18, 35. This is the blaspheming of God.

4 A malicious reproachful word, uttered against the known truth of the
Gospel: This knowledge of the Gospel, because it is had by the effectual
enlightening of the spirit; therefore, the sin of one who maliciously
reproacheth this truth once known, is named blasphemy against the Spirit, that
is, not against the person, but against the work of the spirit in man,
illuminating his soul to see the truth of Salvation. This is Blaspheming
against the Spirit.

A more ample description of the sin against the Holy Ghost, for help of
weak tempted Christians.
Blasphemy against the spirit, it is a Sin not in deeds and actions, but in a
reproachful word ( Mark 3, 30) uttered not out of fear, nor other infirmity,
as Peter did, and sick and frantic persons may do; but out of a malicious
hateful heart. 1. Cor: 16, 22. and Heb: 10, 26. Not by one that is ignorant of
Christ, as Paul was being a blind Pharisie; but by one enlightened through the
Holy Ghost with the knowledge of the Gospel ( Heb: 6. 4.) Not of rashness, but
of set purpose, to despite Christ his known Doctrine and works ( Heb: 10, 29)*
Being accompanied with an universal defection, or falling away from the whole
truth of God ( Heb: 6, 6) Also with a general pollution and filthiness of
life ( Mat: 12, 45. 2. Pet: 2, 20) Finally, being vnremissible, because such as
commit this sin, cannot repent ( Mat: 12, 32. Heb: 6, 6.) How are the Papists
out of the way touching this point, in that they will have this Blasphemy to
have six parts or signs; whereof the chief is final impenitency, which do
accompany every sin in the wicked. See their note on Math. 12, 45.

To Bless. sig:
To give thanks, or to praise God in a solemn manner, Mat: 26, 26. And when
he had blessed that is, when he had given thanks, as it is in Luke 22, 19. 1.
Cor: 11, 24. And in all places where the Saints are said We bless God wl eo we
praise him. God blesses us, either when be sends good things unto us, or
remooueth evil things from us, or turns all to our good: we bless one an
other by our mutual prayers.
to bless God, there it is meant, of their Thanksgiving, and of speaking well
of God. The Papists, by blessing, understand not a solemn blessing, by giving
thanks to GOD, to the consecrating or preparing the Creatures to an holy
action; but an operative blessing of the bread, making it to be the body of
Christ substantially and corporally: See the Annot. on Math. 26, 26.

2 To wish and pray for good things to others. Gen: 48, 20. Jacob blessed the
sons of Joseph. Such was the Priests blessing the people in the Law, and
parents blessing their children, even their good Prayers to God for their
welfare.

3 To increase that which is little, and to make it much, as when God is said
to have blessed the Widow of Sarepta her Oil and Meal in her Cruse. 2. Kings
17, 16. And when Christ blessed the five Loaves and two Fishes in the Gospel.
This blessing was operative indeed, and wrought a sencible multiplication of
the Loaves, and Fishes; so was there not a sencible mutation of the Bread and
Wine into the body and blood of Christ by that blessing. Mat: 26.

4 To give good things unto us, and to do us good in prospering our affairs
and labors. Psalm 67, 1. God be merciful unto us, and bless us: and verse 6.
Prou: 10, 22. The blessing of the Lord makes rich. Thus the word Bless is
taken in good part.

5 To flatter and please ones self, and to boast of his doings to others.
Psalm: 10, 2. The covetous blesses himself. Here it is taken in evil part.

6 The contrary, namely, This is usual in other tungs: as in Greek, E^^^ym^,
and E^m^mined, good Names, for worse things, as Furies, etc. Old Latins for
Nothing would say Well: Italians call loathsome diseases, Gods disease.
cursing, an Euphismos, when unseemly things are spoken in seemly words. Job:
1, 5* Least my sons have blessed God. (so it is in the Original) that is;
Blasphemed. 1. Kings 20, 10. He has blessed God and the King (so it is in the
Original) for he has Blasphemed. Here also it is taken in ill part.

To Bless abundantly sig:
To heap benefits plentifully upon one. Heb: 6, 14. Surely I will abundantly
bless thee.

Blessed. sig:
All them which be in the estate of an happy life, which consists in Gods love
and favor. Some be such by nature, as Adam in Paradise had natural
happiness: Some are blessed by grace, as all the godly, even here in this
life. Mat: 5, 2, 3, 4. Some are blessed by glory, as the glorified Saints in
Heaven. Revel: 14, 13.

Blessedness sig:
The happy condition of such as are in the favor of God, having their sins
forgiven them by says in Christ. Rom: 4, 6. Blessed is the man whose sins be
forgiven.

Blessing. sig:
Gods prospering of us, and of our affairs and labors, when all have good
success, and turn to our good Psalm: 3, 8. His blessing is upon his people.

2 All good things, be they spiritual or bodily, earthly or heavenly. They
are in Scripture phrase called Gods blessings, even every good gift from God
to men. Ephesians: 1, 4. Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings. Deuteronomy: 28, 2. All these blessings shall come upon thee; blessed shall
thou be in thy Cattle, etc.

3 A gift from man to man. Gen: 33, 11. I praythee take my blessing.

Cup of Blessing. sig:
Cup of Thanksgiving, which we take with giving of thanks to God for the
gift of his son. 1. Cor: 10, 16.

Blind. sig: pro
Such as by birth or casualty lack their natural sight.

2 Such as be ignorant and lack knowledge, which is the eye of the mind. Rom:
2, 20. A guide to the blind. Math. 15, 14. The blind lead the blind.

To make Blind. sig:
To keep men from seeing the truth, when the light of it is set before them.
Psalm: 69, 23. Let their eyes be blinded.

2 To increase Ignorance, for the abuse of former knowledge, as happened to
them spoken of. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 11. and Esaias 6, 10.

Blindness. sig:
Want of knowledge; or ignorance in matters of Salvation, either in whole, as
in all natural men. Ephesians: 4, 18. Through the ignorance that is in them: or in
part, as in men regenerate, who do see and know but in part. 1. Cor: 13, 12.
We know in part we see, as in a glass.

Blood. sig:
Death or slaughter, Psalm: 51, 14. Deliver me from blood. Math: 27, 24. I am
innocent of the blood of this man. Genesis 4, 10. Will I require his blood.

2 Revenge or punishment due for the shedding of blood. Math: 27, 25. His blood
be upon us and our children.

3 Cruelty. Habak. 2, 12. Woe unto him that builds a City with blood. Esaias
1, 5. Your hands are full of blood.

4 The slain man. Josh. 20, 5. If the auenger of blood pursue after him.

5 The price of blood. Acts 1, 13. The field of blood, that is purchased with
the price of blood.

6 Cause of their own destruction, Acts 18, 6. Your blood be upon your own
head.

7 The vnpure beginnings of our birth and conception. John 1. 13. Not of blood.
Ezekiel. 16, 6.

8 The first man, of whom all men came as of the first stock. Acts 17, 26. God
has made of one blood all mankind.

9 The juice of the Grape. Gen: 49, 11. And his Cloak in the blood of Grapes.

To betray innocent Blood. sig:
To deliver by Treason, an innocent person unto death. Mat. 27, 4. Betraying
the Innocent blood.

Blood of* Christ. sig:
The death and whole sufferinges of Christ. One part of his sufferings being
put for all. Ephesians: 1, 7. By whom we have redemption through his blood. And often
in the Romans, and Hebrews, and throughout Paul's Epistles, is the blood of
Christ (one part of his sufferinges) put Sinecdochically for the whole
sufferings, visible and invisible. Therefore it is absurd to stick to the
Letter, concluding from thence, that Christ's outward visible suffering were
sufficient. For from the Letter of Scripture, it will follow, that if this
bloodshedding was enough, therefore his flesh might be spared, and all the
pains felt therein; also his soul, with the heaviness and sorrow thereof,
whereof there was as great need as of the rest. For Christ suffered nothing in
vain, and our soul having sinned, yea, and that principally, it was therefore
to be redeemed no less then our bodies.

Blood of the Covenant. sig:
The blood of Beasts sacrificed under the Law, as sign and pledge of the old
Covenant, which was administered in figures, prefiguring or being type of the
blood of Christ, wherewith the New Covenant is ratified. Exodus: 24, 8. Then
Moses said, Behold the blood of the Covenant.

B. O.
Body. sig:
That part of man which is made of flesh and bones. 1. Cor: 15, 43. The Body is
sown in weakness.

2 The whole man. Rom: 6, 12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that
is, in your selves which be mortal. A Sinecdoche.

3 Pith and substance. Col: 2, 17. But the body is in Christ.

4 The unregenerate part of man. 1. Cor: 9, 28. I beat down my body, that is,
the Old Man.

Body of Christ. sig:
The one part of Christ's manhood, distinct from his soul. Heb: 10, 5. A body,
etc.

2 Whole Christ with all his good things. Mat. 26, 26. 1. Cor. 10, 8. This is
my body; that is, a Sacramental sign of me, and of all that is mine. Christ's
body is not made of bread.

3 His Church, which is his mystical body, consisting of the faithful only.
Ephesians: 1, 22. Head to the Church, which is his body. Col. 1, 18. He is the head
of the body of the Church. The wicked are not of this body.

4 The man-hoode of Christ only. 1. Pet. 2, 24. Who bare our sins in his
body.

Body of death, and body of sin. sig:
Sin, being (as it were) a body having many lusts as members annexed to it,
and a deadly thing, deserving and leading to death such as serve it. Romans 6,
24. Who shall deliver me from the body of this death. Romans 6,6.
Romans 6, 23. The wages of sin is death.

Body of flesh. sig:
The humane Nature of Christ. Col. 1, 22. That body of his flesh.

2 The Old Man, and mass of corruption. Col. 2, 11. Putting off that sinful
body of the flesh.

Book. sig:
The whole Scripture, or some part of it, written together in one Volume.
Revel. 22, 18. The Book of this prophecy. Luke 4, 17. He took the Book. The
Book of Scriptures.

2 The rehearsal of ones Petigree, or offspring. Mat. 1, 1. The Book of the
generation, etc.

3 Every man's conscience or knowledge that he has of his own doings, good or
evil. Revel. 20, 12. Then the Books shall be opened. Book of Conscience.

4 Gods providence, or his fore-appointment of all things. Psalm. 139, 6. For in
thy Bookwere all things written. Book of providence.

Book of life. sig:
The decree of Gods election, choosing some men freely to life eternal in
Christ. This is called a Book, because the elect are as certainly known to
God, as if he had their names written in a Book. Revel. 21, 27. In the Lambs
Book of life. Phil. 4, 3. Book of predestination.

Book of Rememberance. sig:
A Chronicle or book of story, wherein the names and acts of men are
remembered. Ester. 6, 1. The King commanded to bring the book of Remembrance,
and the Chronicle.

2 The special love and care of God, minding such as fear him in such sort, as
if he had their names before him in a Book. Mal. 3, 16. A Book of Remembrance
was written before him.

Boldness. sig:
Courage, or liberty of speech* Acts 4, 13. When they saw the boldness of
Peter. Acts 28, 31. With all boldness.

Bonds. sig:
The crafty devices and mischievous plots of wicked men, wherewith (as with
bonds) they hold the righteous. Psalm. 116, 16. Thou have broken my bonds
assunder. Here it is taken in ill part.

2 Sin, which is a spiritual bond to tie men to Satan. Acts 8, 23. Thou art
in the bonds of Iniquity, that is, held fast of Iniquity, which is like a
bond. Here it is used in evil part also.

3 Gods Ordinances and Laws, which are (as bonds) to tie us to our duties,
and to fasten us to God. Psalm: 2, 3. Let us break their bands. It is the
speech of Gods enemies, scoffingly speaking of Gods Statutes.

4 Gods benefits (which are also as bonds and Cords of love) to link us to
himself. Hosee. 11, 4. Even with bonds of Love. Here it is put in good part.

5 Imprisonment, or other afflictions, suffered for the Name of Christ. Acts
26, 29. Except these bonds. Heb. 13, 3. Remember them that are in Bonds.

Bones. sig:
A man's chief bodily strength, or, that wherein his chief outward strength
lies.

2 His inward spiritual courage and comfort of mind. Psalm. 51, 10. That the
Bones which thou have broken may rejoice: that is to say, that so much comfort
may be restored to me, as I have lost by my fall. Lamen: 3, 4. Prou. 14, 13.

Bone of bones. sig:
The nearest conjunction that may be, as of Kinsfolks. 2. Sam. 5, 1: Also of
the husband and the wife. Gen: 2, 23. of Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5. 30. The
two former be natural conjunctions; the third, is mystical.

Bosom. sig:
Lawful company with a woman. Gen: 16, 5. 2. Sam: 12, 8.

In the Bosom of the Father. sig:
That Christ is privy to all Gods secrets (not as a piece cut off from the
substance of the Father) but as one that is in the inward part of his Father,
or, as one in him. Ioh. 1, 18. Which is in the bosom of his father, etc. John
17, 21. As thou (o Father) art in me, and I in thee. A threefold most near
conjunction of the Father and the Son, is signified by this being in his
bosom; first, of persons in one Nature; secondly, the infinite love of the
Father toward Christ his son; thirdly, the communication of his Secrets to
him.

Abraham's Bosom. sig:
The most blessed comfortable life, which they (that dye in that faith that
Abraham did) shall enjoy after this life in heaven. Luke 20, verse 25. And was
carried by the Angel into Abraham's bosom; or it is the society and communion
which the faithful (who believe as Abraham did) shall have in the kingdom of
heaven. A Metaphor or speech, borrowed of the Eastern people, which at their
repast leaned each on another breast, or bosom. John 13, 23.

2 Abraham's Bosom, is interpreted by Papists in Rheimes Testament, to be a
part of hell, called Limbus Patrum, wherein such as dyed before Christ his
time, did rest, feeling no pain, nor yet any joy and pleasure, (contrary to
the 25. verse of the sixteenth Chapter of Lukes Gospel, Now Lazarus is
comforted) from whence Christ delivered them after his death, when he went
down into Hell to harrowe it, and to pull souls out of it into Heaven, which
(they faign) to be shut against men, during the time of the Old Testament,
contrary unto that Scripture: Eccle. 12, 9. The Spirit returns to God who gave
it; and to plain reason; for such as were believers in Christ to come, they
had salvation of their souls as the end of their faith.

To Bow. Sig
To bend the body in token of reverence. Gen: 23, 12. Then Abraham bowed
himself before the people of the land. Genesis 18, 1, 19. that is, He bowed
himself to the ground.

2 To give ear unto our Prayers by granting what we ask. Psalm: 16, 2.

3 To show submission and Religious reverence, in the offering up of our
Prayers. Ephesians: 3, 14. I bow my knees, etc.

4 To testify by this gesture, our inward piety and worshipping of God. Exodus:
4, 31.

Bowels. sig:
The most secret thoughts and cogitations of the mind. Prou: 20, 27. The
light of the Lord searches all the bowels of the belly. A Metaphor, or speech
borrowed from the body to the mind.

2 The most feeling compassions of the ha^t. Col: 3, 12. Bowels of mercy, that
is, most tender mercies. Luke 1, 78.

3 Inward deep grief and heaviness. Lam: 1, 20. My bowels are turned within
me.

A Bow. sig: pro
An Instrument of War; and sometime is used to signifye the whole furniture
and force of war. Psalm: 44, 6. I do not trust in my Bow. Gen: 48.

2 The strength of the wicked, which they use to the hurting of the godly.
Psalm: 7, 12. He has bent his Bow, and made his Arrows ready. Psalm. 11, 2.

3 The tongues of the Ministers, whence proceed words (like Arrows) to strike
the very hearts of men, either for their conversion if they be [ Elect] or
hardening if they be [ Reprobate.] Revel: 6, 2. He that sat on him, had a Bow.

To break the Bow. sig:
To destroy and bring to nothing the greatest strength and the power of the
enemies of the Church. Psalm: 76, 2. There he brake the Bow, the sword, etc.

Bow of steel or brass. sig:
Singular and very great strength. Psalm: 18, 34. A Bow of brass is broken
with my Arms.

Deceitful Bow. sig:
False help, which fails in time of need; or unfaithful men, in whom there
is no trust. Hos. 7, 16. They are as a deceitful Bow.

B. R.
Bread. sig: pro
Food made of Corn, as of Wheat or any other Corn to nourish this Natural
life. This is material Bread. In this sense Manna is called bread. Exodus 16, 4.

2 All things necessary for this life (by a Sinechdoche) as in the Lords
Prayer, and elsewhere very often in Scripture, as Exodus: 23, 25. I will bless
thy Bread: which comes hence, because (of al necessaries for life) bread is
most common and most needful. Math: 4, 4. Math: 6, 11. Give us this day our
daily bread. Prou. 20, 13. Genes. 3, 19.

3 Christ himself, who to them that eat him by faith, he is to their souls,
the same that bread is to their bodies; bread being no more needful to our
bodies, then Christ is to our souls for spiritual strength, comfort, and
refreshing. John 6, 50. I am that bread that came down from heaven. This may
be called caelestiall and spiritual bread. A Metaphor.

Bread broken. sig:
Our Communion or fellowship which we have with Christ crucified, and with all
his merits. 1. Cor. 10, 16. The Bread which we break, is it not the communion
of his body? That is, Does it not signify and seal this unto us?

One Bread sig:
The Union and society of the faithful, which partake in one bread. 1. Cor.
10, 17. We that are many, are one Bread.

Staff, or Stay of Bread. sig:
The strength which the Bread has to feed us, by the blessing of God. Esaias 3,
2. Stay or staff of bread and of water, etc.

Unleauened bread. sig:
Bread which is without mixture of Leaven, or sweet bread. Exodus 23, 15.

2 Sincerity and truth, without mixture of Iniquity and Hypocrisy. 1. Cor. 5,
8. Let us keep the Feast with unleavened Bread of sincerity, etc.

To eat bread. Sig
To celebrate or keep a Feast, as was wont to be at offering of Gratulatorie
Sacrifices. Exodus 18, 12. Came to eat bread with Moses Father in Law.

2 To take or eat ordinarily. Acts 2, 46.

Common Bread. sig:
Bread appointed to use of common life, and not to holy use. 1. Sam. 21, 5.

Shewbread. sig:
Sacred and Holy bread, set forth and showed upon the Table before the Lord. 1.
Sam. 21, 7. Mark 2, 26. How he eat the Shewbread.

Bread of Deceit. sig:
Substance or goods gathered by Craft or wile. Prou: 20, 17. The Bread of
deceit is sweet to a man.

Bread of Tears. sig:
Tears were instead of bread, to feed on. Psalm: 80, 6. Thou have fed us with
the Bread of tears. Psalm. 42, 3. Tears have bin our bread to eat.

To Break in pieces. sig:
Utterly to destroy one without hope of recovery (as a vessel of earth, or
glass) which being once broken cannot be made whole. Psalm. 2, 9. Thou shall
break them in pieces like a Potters vessel.

Breaking bread. sig:
Participation and fellowship in the Lords Supper. Acts 2, 42. And breaking of
bread. The Jews made their bread thin, and therefore they did but break it.

2 Participation and fellowship, in common repast, and eating their meat at
home. Acts 2, 4* And breaking bread at home, they did eat their meat
together, etc.

Broad way sig:
The way of sin, or a sinful course of life, such as most men walk in. Mat.
7, 13. Broad is the way that leads to destruction.

Brother. sig: pro
One, who is borne of the same parents, as James the Brother of John. Mat. 10,
2. This is a natural Brother.

One, which marries our Sister, or our Wives sister. Thus was Isaac Labans
brother. Genesis 24, 29. This is a legal brother.

3 A near Kinsman. Genesis 13, 8. Let us not strive for we are Brethren. Romans 9,
3. For my Brethren that are my Kinsmen according to the flesh. Thus Nephews
and Cozen-Germaines are called brethren. Thus Christ's Kinsmen, are called his
Brethren.

4 Every one that knows and professes together with us the same Christian
Religion, holding the same God for their Father, and the same church for their
Mother. Romans 12, 1. I beseech you Brethren. And in most places where Christians
are called brethren. This is a Christian Brother.

Brethren. sig: pro
Sons of the same Father or Mother, as Ruben and Judah; Isaac and Ismael;
Jacob and Esau.

2 True believers, they that be such indeed, and before God, not in name and
profession only, even Christ's whole spiritual Kindred, which are knit to him
by the bond of Faith, and amongst themselves with unfeigned love. Heb. 2, 11.
Therefore he is not ashamed to call them Brethren. Col: 4, 9. Math. 12, 50.
Romans 8, 29. This is an Inward spiritual Brotherhood.

3 Ministers of the word, who for their common function and work sake, are
called brethren. 2. Cor. 8, 23. and elsewhere often.

4 Such as with one mind agree together in any act, good or evil. Genesis 49, 5.
Simon and Leuy Brethren. They were so called here, not for their common parents
sake, but for that they did consent in an evil act, the killing and spoiling of
the Sichemites. They were companions in a wicked work.

5 Such as partake with us in common Nature, being men as we are. Genesis 29, 4.
My brethren, whence be ye?

Brotherly kindness. sig:
That inward affection of love, whereby we embrace the Christian Brethren, more
nearly then we do all others. 2. Pet. 1, 7. And unto love join Brotherly
kindness. Love reaches to all men to whom it may do good, but brotherly
kindness only to Note.
Christian Brethren. Love, is as the Hall whereinto all comers are received;
but brotherly kindness is as the Parlour, whereinto more near friends and
special acquaintance are received and admitted.

Brotherly fellowship. sig:
The society which the Brethren have amongst themselves, communicating their
gifts for mutual strength and comfort. 1. Pet. 2, 17. Love Brotherly
fellowship.

Brotherly fellowship, is the Communion of brethren, Brotherly fellow-ship what
it is?
when all Gods blessings, both Inward and Outward, as occasion and need
requires, are communicated by Charity, to the mutual help one of another. It
consists not only in rejoicing and being merry together (though in a Religious
manner) much less in such worldly mirth as they delight in, which are commonly
called good-fellowes: but in the right use of all good gifts, being applied to
the good of the Brethren absent from us, as well as present with us, according
to our opportunities and means.

Brute. sig:
Rumor, same, or report of a matter. Mat. 9, 26. This brute, etc. verse 31.

Bride. sig:
The Church or company of true believers, spiritually joined in marriage with
Christ, as a Bridegroom and Husband. Revel. 21, 9. I will show the Bride the
Lambs wife. Revel. 22, 27. John 3, 29. He that has, the Bride, is the
Bridegroom.

Bridegroom sig:
Christ, betroathed spiritually, and joined to the Church, as to his Bride or
spouse. Mat. 25, 5. Mark 2, 20. While the Bridegroom is with them.

Bridegroomes Friend. sig: pro
One, who is joined with the Bridegroom, to see that all be well done at the
keeping of the wedding. Judge. 14, 11. Such were Sampsons Companions.

2 John Baptist, who by his Ministry and life did greatly further the
spiritual wedding or conjunction between Christ and his Church. John 3, 29.
The friend of the Bridegroom rejoices greatly, etc. See Luke 1, 16, 17. Every
faithful Minister which helps forward this mystical marriage, is the
Bridegroomes friend.

B. U.
Buckler. sig: pro
A weapon for defense, in time of fight.

2 The mighty defense of GOD, which is as a Buckler to them that trust in him.
Psalm. 18, 1. Thou art my Buckler ( or shield.)

Bud. sig:
Christ, in respect of his mean estate amongst men. Esaias 11, 1. A graft or a
Bud shall grow out of his root.

2 The Church of Christ, springing up out of the remnant of Israel, as a bud
out of the earth. Esaias 4, 2. In that day the bud of the Lord shall be
beautiful and glorious.

Buffeting. sig:
Some shameful temptation inward or outward, as a buffetting to abase us. 2.
Cor. 12, 7. The Messenger of Satan to buffet me.

Buggery. sig:
Uncleanness against nature about generation. 1. Cor. 6, 10. Leuit. 18, 23.

Building. sig:
Making, ^raming. Gen: 2, 23. He built woman of a Rib. 2. Cor: 5, 1.

2 Teaching and instructing hence, Ministers, called builders. 1. Cor. 3, 10.
How he builds.

Burden. sig: pro
Some heavy thing, which does load or grieve us with the weight of it. Ier: 17,
27.

2 The Doctrine or commandments of Christ. Mat: 11, 30. My burden is light.
So it is to the regenerate, to whom the commandments of Christ are not
grievous, because they are led by the spirit, and have their sins forgiven
them; but to the unregenerate they are as a grievous burden.

3 Prophesies, and foretelling of grievous calamities (as it were) heavy
burdens to come upon a people for sin. Esaias 13, 1. The burden of Babell. The
burden of Egypt.

4 All heavy and hard things. Psalm. 55, 24. Cast thy burden upon the Lord. Esaias
9, 4. Mat. 23, 4. Acts 15, 28.

5 Imperfections and wants which appear in our duties. Gal. 6, 2. Bear ye one
another burden; that is, seeing ye are all subject to Infirmities, support and
uphold one another through love. All sins are burdens. Psalm. 38, 4. For with
their weight they press us down. Heb. 12, 1.

6 Every trouble or grief, even to the least. Eccles. 12, 5. Grasshoppers shall
be a burden.

Bulls of Basan. sig:
Strong, powerful, and cruel enemies. Psalm: 22, 12. Many young Bulls have
compassed me.

Burial. sig:
The putting of a Corpse into the grave, to be covered with earth, which is
the proceeding of natural death. Acts 8, 2. 1. Cor: 15, 2, 3. Dead, buried.

2 The wasting of sin by mortification, as a dead corpse wastes in the
grave. Romans 6, 3. We are buried with him. This is the proceeding of the death
of sin, which is one part of our sanctification, and is effected by the Virtue
of Christ buried.

To be buried with Christ. sig:
To be partaker of Christ his death and burial, for a further mortification of
sin. Col. 2, 12. In that ye are buried with him.

Burning. sig:
Earnest desire and lust after Sex, which is, when one has an unconquerable
Army of unruly and unchaste desires and thoughts in him, dishonoring him and
his body, 1. Cor: 7, 9. It were better marry then burn. Romans 1, 27.

To build. sig: pro
To set up or make an house where none was before. Mat. 7, 26.

2 To increase, or to enlarge a family and stock, by multitude of children.
Ruth. 4, 11. Rahell and Leah did build the house of Israel.

3 To strengthen and increase others in the knowledge and faith of Christ. 1.
Cor. 3, 10. I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon. Jude 20.

4 To prosper and bless the Governor and government of a family. Psalm. 127,
1. Unless the Lord build, the house, etc.

Building. sig: pro
A material house set up with hands.

2 The Church and people of God here on earth. 1. Cor. 3, 9. Ye are Gods
building.

3 A place of eternal bliss and glory. 2. Cor. 5, 1. We have a building given
of God.

Builder. sig: pro
One, which of nothing makes something to be. Heb. 11, 10. Whose builder is
God.

2 A faithful Minister of the Gospel, who does lay the elect upon Christ (as
builders do lay one stone upon another) 1. Cor. 3, 10. As a skilful master
Builder.

3 Any Governor of City or family. Psalm. 127, 1. The builder builds in
vain.

Wise builder. sig:
One who lays a sure foundation; that is, one who believing the promises
concerning Christ, endeavors to do his commandment. Mat. 7, 24.

Foolish (Builder) sig:
One, who neglects a good foundation, having the knowledge and profession of
Christ, without faith and repentance. Mat. 7, 26.

To Buy. sig:
To get some commodity, by giving the due price of it. Genesis 49, 30. Ruth 4, 5.

2 To obtain or get a thing by our endeavor, Prayer, or other good means.
Prou: 23, 23. By the truth. Esaias. 55, 1. Come and buy without Money.

C. A.
To Call. sig:
TO Inuit Sinners unto Repentance, by the Outward preaching of the word, or
otherwise by afflictions and benefits. Mat. 2, 16. Many called, few chosen.
Prou. 1, 24. I have called, but you have refused. A common and outward calling.

2 To draw effectually the elect unto Christ, by the Inward work of the spirit,
through the word. Romans 8, 28. To them which are called of his purpose. An
inward and special calling.

3 To appoint and choose unto some work, and to give fitness thereunto. Exodus:
31, 2.

A special and free work of Gods spirit, singling Inward Calling what it is?
and drawing the elect from amongst the Reprobate, making them to become that
which before they were not, even true believers, members of Christ, Saints,
Sons, and heirs of God. Romans 8, 30. Whom he predestined, them he called.
1. Cor: 1, 2. Saints by calling. Romans 4, 17. God calls those things which be
not, as though they were.

Calling. sig:
A lawful and warrantable estate of life. 1. Cor. 7, 10. Let every man abide
in his calling.

2 The estate and condition of Christianity. Ephesians. 4, 1. Walk worthy of your
calling.

3 The action of God translating men into this estate. 2. Pet. 1, 10. Make your
calling sure.

Calling upon y^ name of Jesus. sig:
Either the whole worship of God by a Sinecdoche, of the part, for the whole;
or else it signifies Prayer unto Christ, for necessary graces. Acts 9, 14. To
bind all that call on thy name. Acts 7, 50. Stephen called on, and said; Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit.

Called. sig:
As much as named, or one known by such a Name, as Christ called Peter,
Cephas: and Luke 1, 60. He shall be called John.

2 One partaker of an effectual vocation, when the mighty God (as it were) by
the speaking of a word, does make one to be that, which he is named and called
(to wit) a Saint, and holy, as God the caller is holy. Romans 1, 7. Called to be
Saints.

Candle. sig: pro
A material light, shining in the darkness of the night. Luke 15, 8.

2 The light of knowledge, or the word of God rightly known, serving as a
Candle to show us our duties, and our sins, and to direct both our selves and
others. Math: 5, 15. No man lights a Candle to put it under a Bushel, but on
a Candlestick.

3 Gladness and Joy, by benefits or deliverances out of trouble. Psalm: 18, 28.
God will light my Candle. Prou, 13, 9.

The word and Scripture of God is the only and all sufficient Candle and
Candlelight of the church. Note.
2. Tim: 3, 16, 17. It teaches all truth of salvation, it conuictes all
error, it instructs in all righteous works, it reprooues all sins. The
Church and Doctors are but the Candlestick, nor that neither, except they
bear out this light.

Candlestick sig:
A frame of Wood, Iron, or Brass, or other metal, wherein to stick a Candle
being lighted, to give light to them who are in the house.

2 Some particular Churches or company of men, professing Christ, and bearing
out the truth of the Gospel in their Doctrine and lives, as the Candle is set
forth and showed by the candlestick. Revel. 1, 20. The seven Candlestickes
which thou saw are the seven Churches.

Captive. sig: pro
One taken prisoner and held in ^^^ds* Captivity is the estate of such persons.
1. Kings 8, 26, 47, 48. In the Land of their enemies, which led them away
captive.

2 One, who is bondor become prisoner to Satan and sin. So are the regenerate
in part, and the unregenerate wholly. Romans 7, 23. 2. Tim. 2, 26. In which they
are held captives at his pleasure.

Captivity led captive. sig:
David, making his enemies Tributary to him. Ps. 68. 18. But especially Christ,
his ouercomming sin, death, satan, hell, which held the elect prisoners.
Ephesians. 4, 8.

Care. sig:
A taking thought to please God in our own persons, by doing his will. 2. Cor.
7, 11. Yea, what care?

2 A thought-taking, and study for the welfare of others. 2. Cor: 8, 6. The
same care for you. Phil. 2, 20. Who will care for your matters.

3 A taking thought for the things of this life. Which when it is moderate
without distrust of God, it is good and commendable: If it be otherwise, it is
evil, and forbid. Mat. 6, 34. Care not for tomorrow.

Carnal. sig:
A frail and transitory thing, which vanished at the coming of Christ. Heb.
7, 16. After the Law of the carnal commandment. Thus he calls the
Leuiticall Law.

2 One wholly infected with sin. John 3, 6. That which is borne of the flesh,
is flesh, or carnal; that is, fleshly, and sinful.

3 One, who has more sin then grace; more flesh then spirit. 1. Cor. 3, 1. But
as unto carnal, even as unto Babes, etc.

4 One, who is in part corrupted by sin, yet having more grace then sin.
Romans 7, 14. The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal.

Cart-rope.
See Cords.

Catholic. sig:
Universal or general, that which concerns not one person, or place, or
people, but reaches unto all people, of al places, times, ages, sex,
conditions. Thus the church of Christ in our Creed, is entitled [ Catholic.]
And the Epistles of James, Peter, and John be so called, [ The Epistle
Catholic of James, etc.] Because they were sent not to one church, as that to
Corinth, to Phillippi, etc. or to one person, as to Philemon, to Titus, etc:
but to all Jews believers, every where dispersed, or to al (believing) both
Jews and Gentiles, in the world. How this Title can agree unto the Romain
church, being but a particular Church (if she were as sound, as she is rotten)
let reasonable men judge. To say, the Romish Catholic church, is, as much as
to say, the whole English-Brittish-Nation.

Cauillation forged. sig:
False and unjust accusation, a malicious invention to trouble a man. Luke 19,
8. If I have taken from any man by forged Cauillation. Zacheus being a
Publican, or collector of Tribute, and having wronged many, under pretense and
color of the Weal-publicke, did therefore charge all such for enemies unto the
commonwealth, whosoever found fault with his robberies and harms. This was
his forged cauillation. A speech, borrowed from such, as told out who
transported Figs* from Athens (contrary to a Law made in that behalf) to
scrape some money from such (as being accused by them) were found guilty.

Cause. sig:
Suite, action, controversy. Esaias 1, 23. The widows cause comes not before
them.

2 The matter or crime wherewith one is charged. Acts 25, 27. And not to show
the causes which are laid against him.

C. E.
Centurion. sig:
A Captain, set over an hundred soldiers. Acts 10, 1. Mat. 8, 5.

C. H.
Chafe. sig:
A Reprobate, like unto Chafe for his vileness, inconstancy, and barrenness.
Mat. 3, 12.

2 False Prophets, with their false Doctrine. Ier. 23, 28. What is the Chafe,
etc?

Chain. sig:
A Collar of Silver or Iron, to wear about ones neck, either for Ornament, or
punishment.

2 The grace of Heavenly wisdom, which is as a Chain, to deck and adorn one
withal. Prou. 1, 9.

3 The cross, or afflictions for the Gospel. 2. Tim. 1, 16. He was not ashamed
of my Chain.

Chamber 3. sig: pro
Some secret place in an house. Mat. 6, 6. Enter into thy Chamber.

2 The protection of God. Esaias 26, 20. Enter into thy Chamber.

Chambering. sig:
Unclean and wanton behavior. Romans 13, 13. Not in chambering and wantonness.

Chair of Moses. sig:
The Doctrine which God delivered to Moses, and was taught by them that
succeeded him in the Office of teaching, Mat. 23, 1. The Scribes and Pharisees
sit in Moses Chair, hear them; that is to say, so long as they teach Moses
Doctrine, obey them. Papists are herein deceived, interpreting this, of place
and succession of persons, and not of truth of Doctrine.

Charge. sig:
Commandment. Mat. 9, 30. Jesus gave them charge. 2. Tim. 4, 1. Genesis 26, 11.

2 Cost. 2. These. 3, 8. Because we would not be chargeable to others.

3 Government, or function. 1. Kings 2, 3. And take heed to the charge of the
Lord thy God.

Charity. sig:
That affection of love, which moves us to hold our Neighbors dear, and to
desire and seek their good in every thing which is dear unto them, and that
for Christ sake, according to the will of God. 1. Cor. 13, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. where
you have the properties of Charity, at large described.

Charret. sig:
A carriage, wherein were fighting men of war* Iud. 1, 19. Because they had
Charrets of Iron.

2 Captains, and strength. 2. Kings. 2, 12. Charets of Israel.

3 Angels. 2. Kings 6, 17. Mountain was full of charrets.

Chaste. Sig
One borne with some natural impediment. This is natural chastity. Mat. 19,
12 See Geld.

One gelded, or made chaste by the Art of man. This is Artificial chastity.
Mat. 19, 12 See Geld.

One fitted by God, for the gift of continency. This is Christian chastity.
Mat. 19, 12 See Geld.

to Chasten. sig:
To correct in love for our profit, as a Father does his child. Heb. 12, 6.
Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth.

Chastity. sig:
An abstinence and forbearing, not from marriage, but from all strange and
rouing lusts, about the desire of Sex. Titus 2, 5. To be wise, chaste. etc.

Cheerfulness. sig:
A readiness, and willingness of mind, in the doing of any good thing. Romans
12, 8. He that shows mercy with cheerfulness. 2. Cor. 9, 7. God loves a
cheerful giver.

Children. sig: pro
Young ones, as Infants or others which be of t^ years. Mark 10, 13. Forbid
not children to come unto me.

2 All Inferiors, which love and obey their Superiors, as Fathers. Prou. 4, 1.
My children hearken. Thus in Haebrew, their servants were called children. Genesis
18, 7. And often elsewhere.

3 All truly humbled Christians. Math. 18. 3, 4. And become children.

4 Such as take themselves to be very weak and unable to do great things. Ier.
1, 6.

Children of God. sig:
The elect before their new birth, because God has purposed to make them his
children, which by Nature are not so, they are therefore called his children,
as if they were already; as in John 10, 16. they are called Sheep, who God
before appointed to call to the fold. John 11, 52. To gather together into one
fold the children of God. Children by grace of election.

2 Such Elect, as being begotten anew by the Immortal seed of the word, do
bear Gods image in holiness, endeavoring in all things to do their Fathers
will. Luke 6, 35. And you shall be the children of the most highest. Ephesians. 4 24.
1. Pet. 1, 14, 15. Children by grace of regeneration.

3 The Holy and Elect Angels, which are the children of God by creation. Job.
1, 6. The children of God came and stood before the Lord.

generation of Gods Children. sig:
The succession and race of the godly, continuing successively from age to age,
by the merciful providence of God preserving them. Psalm. 73, 15.

Children of wisdom. sig:
Wise children; that is, all the godly which are taught, having wisdom from
above, and are studious of that true wisdom revealed in the word, loving and
practicing it. Luke. 7, 35. Wisdom is Justified of her children.

Children of the day, and of the light. sig:
All such as are enlightened by the spirit, to the sound and distinct knowledge
of God in Christ, through the Gospel. 1. These. 5, 5. Ye are the children of
the light, and of the day; that is, such as know God soundly.

Children of Abraham. sig:
Them that came of Abraham's loins, though they do not believe. John 8, 37.
Mat. 3, 9. To raise up children to Abraham.

2 Them that believe and live as Abraham did, treading in the steps of his
faith and love; such be the children of Abraham, though they be no Jews, but
Gentiles. Gal. 3, 7. They which are of faith, the same are the children of
Abraham. John 8, 37. If you were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of
Abraham. Romans 4, 11, 12.

Children in maliciousness. sig:
Such as be like little children, void of malice, and vnharmefull. 1. Cor. 14,
20. But as concerning maliciousness be ye children.

Little children. sig:
Lowly persons, which be little in their own eyes, like unto children. Math.
18, 4. Whosoever shall receive one such little child.

Children of Israel. Sig
The Israelites, which sprung and came out of Jacob, who was called Israel.
Exodus 14, 1. Speak to the children of Israel.

Child of Promise. sig:
One that is borne by virtue of Gods promise, and not by ordinary course of
generation, as Isaac was. Romans 9, 8. The children of the promise are counted
for the seed. [ Note] that all elect which be born anew by faith, in the
promise of grace, they are the children of the promise.

Children of the flesh. sig:
Such as are borne by natural generation, as Ismael was of Abraham. Romans 9, 8.
Which are the children of the flesh.

Children of the Devil. sig:
Such as bear the Image of the Devil, and resembles him in malice and
subtilty, as children do their Father, in all things doing his will. Ioh. 8,
44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and his will ye will do. Acts 13, 10. O
thou child of the devil, full of all subtilty.

Children of Disobedience. sig:
Disobedient children, which are given to disobedience. Ephesians. 5, 6. The wrath of
God comes upon the children of disobedience.

Children of the night, and of darkness. sig:
Such as remain in ignorance and sin. 1. These. 5, 5. Ye are not children of
the night, neither of darkness.

Children of fornication. sig:
Either Bastards, to wit; children begotten in fornication; Or Idolaters, which
imitate others in false worship. Hose. 2, 4. They are the children of
fornication.

Child of Perdition. sig:
A lost person, appointed to destruction, and running headlong thereunto. So
is Judas called, in John 17, 12. None of them is lost, but the child of
perdition.

Child of wrath, of death, of hell. sig:
One guilty of, and through desert of sin subject to wrath, death, and hell.
Ephesians. 2, 3. 2. Sam. 2, 5. Mat. 23, 15.

Christ. sig:
One anointed with material Oil, by the commandment of God: as the
Highpriests, Prophets, and some Kings were under the Law. 1. Sam. 16, 13.

2 One anointed of God with the Holy Ghost, and power; that is, with special
gifts above measure, and authority, to execute for us men the Office of a
perfect Mediator with God; that is, of a Priest, Prophet, and King. Acts 10,
38. Him has God anointed with the Holyghost, and with power. And v. 36.
Papists rob him of all his Offices, especially of his Priesthood, by the
abominable order of Sacrificing Priests, and Priest-hoode, as of his kingly
office, by giving Laws which should bind the Conscience, and of his
Prophet-ship, by unwritten Traditions.

3 The whole mystical body of the Church, comprehending both head and members.
1. Cor. 12, 12. As all the body is one and has many members, even so is Christ.
Here (Christ) by a Sinechdoche of the chief part for the whole, is put to
signify the holy Catholic Church, that mystical body, consisting of Head
and members.

Christians. sig:
Persons spiritually anointed to be members and worshippers of Christ. Acts
11, 26. The Disciples of Antioch, were first called christians. 1. John. 2, 20.
Ye have an ointment.

A Christian is one, who being sometime both What a christian is.
most base and profane, a vassal to Satan, and Servant to sin, through
Adams sin, and his own; is anointed now, and endowed through Grace, with
faith and the Holy Ghost that he may become a Priest, and a King unto God, to
serve him in righteousness and true holiness all his days, as a person
dedicate to Christ. Romans 5, 6, 7, 8. 1. Pet. 2, 9. Ye are a Royal Priesthood.
Ephesians. 2, 3. Children of wrath. Or thus: A Christian is one whom Christ has
loved, and washed in his blood, making him a King and Priest unto God. Revel.
1, 5.

Chronicles. sig:
A brief note of things done, with the time expressed. 2. Kings 24, 5. Are
they not written in the Book of Chronicles?

Church. sig:
A company of men, selected, gathered, and called out of the world, by the
Doctrine of the Gospel, to know and worship the true God in Christ, according
to his word. 1. Cor. 1, 2. To the Church of God at Corinth. Revel. 2. 3. Hear
what the spirit says to the Churches. This is the visible Church, which is not
always eminent and glorious to the eye of flesh, as our Papists do avouch
too confidently.

2 The whole company of the elect, which in all ages and places, have or do,
or shall believe in Christ, through the calling of God the father, by the
operation of the holy spirit. This is the invisible catholic Church. Col. 1,
18. He is the head of the body of the church: which comprehends the faithful
of all times, countries, conditions, years, and sex. How then can the Romish
church, which began but since Christ's time, be the Catholic?

3 The faithful of some one family. Phile, 2. And to the church that is in
thinehouse.

4 The lawful governors of the Church, to whom the censures of the Church do
of right belong. Mat. 18, 17. If he will not hear them tell it to the Church.
This is the Church representative.

5 A material Temple. 1. Cor. 14, 34. Let women keep silence in the Churches.
1. Cor. 11, 18.

C. I.
To Circumcise. sig: pro
To cut off, or to pa^e away the foreskin of the flesh, to witness thereby an
entrance into the covenant of mercy with God* for forgiveness of sin, and
newnes of life. Genesis 17, 10* 11. This is to circumcise Sacramentally.

2 To mortify and subdue the flesh, with the lusts thereof. Ier. 4, 4. Be
circumcised to the Lord, and take away the foreskin of your hearts. This is to
circumcise spiritually; and thus much is meant in all places where circumcision
of the heart is called for: even a correcting of sinful nature, and the corrupt
desires thereof.

Men of circumcised ears, lips, and hearts. sig:
Such as have the inward spiritual effect and grace of circumcision, together
with the sign: as on the other side, uncircumcised lips, ears, and heart,
be affirmed of such as have the outward sign only, without the signified
grace. Acts 7, 51.

Circumcision. sig:
A person circumcised, or a Jew: as uncircumcision signifies a person
uncircumcised, a Gentile. Romans 2, 28. and Acts. 15, 2. Where Christ is called
the Minister of circumcision, that is, of a people circumcised, to wit, of the
Jews. Gal. 2, 7, 9.

2 The whole legal ceremonious worship of God, by a Sinechdoche of the part for
the whole. Acts 15, 1. Except ye be circumcised, ye cannot be saved. Gal. 5, 2.

3 Those which be truly godly persons, spiritually circumcised in their heart,
forsaking their own corrupt reason and will. Phil. 3, 3. We are the
circumcision, which worship God in the spirit. This is Circumcision made
without hands, of the heart, and in the Spirit, not in the L^^ter. Romans 2* 29.

It is a Sacrament of the Old Testament, signifying Circumcision what it is*
and sealing up to the people of the Jews their entrance into Covenant with
God, for the remission of their sins, and mortification of their lusts by
faith in Christ to come. Romans 4, 11. They received the sign of circumcision.
Genesis 17, 10, 11, 12.

City. sig: pro
A place compassed with walls for people to dwell in. Math. 9, 35. And Jesus
went to all Cities and Towns. Genesis 19, 25. And ouerthrewe those Cities and
inhabitants.

2 The people which dwell in such a place. Acts 19, 29. And the whole City
was full of confusion. A Metonimie.

3 The Church of God upon earth. Cant. 3. 2, 3. The Watchmen which went about
the city.

4 Heaven. Heb. 11, 16. He has prepared for them a city. Ephe. 2, 19. A
Metaphor.

C. L.
To clappe hands. sig:
To rejoice and be glad, whereof clapping of hands is a sign. Psalm. 98, 8.
Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills rejoice. Prosopopo^^.

To cleanse. sig:
To pronounce one clean, from legal pollution. Leuit. 13, 7. And cleanse him.
Thus Priests cleansed.

2 To take away guilt and corruption of sin. 1. John 1, 7. Thus Christ
cleanses.

Cleansing. Sig
Outward ceremonious washing of things or persons, as a Type of the Inward.
Mark 1, 40, 41. Be thou clean.

2 Spiritual and inward holiness, when the heart is kept clean from the spot
of sin. Mat. 22, 26. James 4, 8. Of this cleansing the spirit is Author, the
Word is the Instrument. John 15, 3. Ye are clean, through the word.

3 Forgiveness of sins, by the imputation of Christ's blood to the believer.
Psalm. 51, 2. And cleanse me from my sin.

Clean. sig:
One, who is holy and pure, free from the power of sin, by the grace of
sanctification. John 13, 10. Ye are clean.

2 One free from the guilt and curse of sin, by the grace of justification.
Psa. 51, 7. Purge me with Iso^, and I shall be clean.

to Cleave. sig:
To stick fast, and be nearly and straightly knit unto God by the affections
of the heart.

2 To be joined together most straightly, as man and wife. Mat. 19, 5. And
cleave to his wife.

3 To continue with one. Acts. 11, 23. Acts. 8, 13. And did cleave to Phillip.

Clouds of witnesses. sig:
An heap or great number of witnesses, or Holy examples Heb. 12, 1.

Clouds without water. sig:
Hypocrites, which make a fair show, and yet are empty and barren of all
goodness. Jude 12.

C. O.
Cold. Sig
Such as be scarce indifferent, but mere careless in matters of God, and of
their own salvation. Revel. 3, 15. I would ye were either hot or cold.

Coming of Christ to us. Sig
The presence of his spirit to convert us, that our hearts may be made his
dwelling place. Revel. 3, 20. I will come in to him. Ephesians. 3, 17.

2 Giving new tokens of his spiritual presence, by comforting and
strengthening us, and increasing his graces in us. John 14, 18. I will not leave
you Fatherless, but will come unto you. Also verses, 23, 28. This is a coming
in mercy and favor.

3 Executing his Judgments against Sin and Sinners. Revel. 2, 16. Repent or I
will come unto thee, and fight against them. This is a coming in wrath.

Coming of Christ from the Father. sig:
Christ his being borne man, that he might live here, and do the work of a
Mediator, by his obeying the Law, and suffering the death of the cross. John
15, 27, 28. I am come out of the father. 1. Tim. 1, 15. This is a coming in
infirmity and weakness.

Coming of Christ to the Father. sig:
His leaving the world, and going up to his father. John 17, 13. And now Father
I come to thee. This is a coming in glory; as also, his coming at the last
day will be glorious.

Our Coming to Christ. sig:
Our believing in him. John 6, 3^. He that comes to me, shall never hunger,
etc. Faith, as it is the mouth, hand, and eye; so it is also the foot of the
soul, whereby we come unto Christ.

Coming of Satan. sig:
His setting upon Christ with great power and subtilty. John 14, 30. The
Prince of this world comes and has naught in me.

Coming of Antichrist. Sig
His effectual and mighty presence and working, for some great hurt unto
others. 1. John. 2, 18. Ye have heard that Antichrist shall come.

Coming up to heaven. sig:
The following of Sins one after another, and arising one of another in such
sort, that they at length grow to such a heap, that they came up even to
Heaven. Revel. 18, 5. Her sins are come up to Heaven.

To Come out. sig:
To forsake all fellowship with the ungodly, in there wicked manners, but
especially with Idolaters, and Idolatry. 2. Cor. 6, 17. Come out from amongst
them, and separate your selves. Revel. 18, 4. Come out of her my people. This
is a spiritual separation only, when the bodily and local separation cannot
be had.

Comelines* sig:
That which has in it gravity and modesty, and stirs up to godliness. 1.
Cor. 14, 40. Let all things be done in comeliness.

Common. sig:
That which is common for the use of it, land not in possession. Acts 4, 34.
They had all things common, and gave to every man as he had need.

2 Unclean, polluted, unholy, and profane. Math. 15, 11. Acts 10, 14. The
word in the Original Text, is (...), and (...); Common, or to make common.

Common hands. sig:
Unwashed hands. Mark 7, 2.

Common Salvation. sig:
That safety and freedom from sin, and eternal death, purchased by Christ;
which is called, [ Common Salvation,] because all the faithful have equal
interest in it. Jude. 2. To write unto you of the common Salvation, that is
(says the Bible note) of the things which belong to the salvation of us all.

To Commune. sig:
To talk together of some matter. Genesis 34, 6. To commune with him.

Communion. sig: pro
A fellowship or agreement, when diverse join and partake together in one
thing. 2. Cor. 6, 14, 16. What Communion? What Fellow-ship? What Agreement?

Communion with Christ. sig:
Our fellowship and partaking spiritually, and in deed, with Christ himself,
and all his merrites by faith unto salvation. 1. Cor. 10, 16. The Bread which
we break, is it not the communion of his body? No wicked have Communion with
Christ (whatsoever our Papists affirm) otherwise then Sacramentally, by
profession, or in the opinion of the Church.

Communion with God. Sig
Our being one with him, or being united to him, as a child to the father. 1.
John 1, 3. If ye walk in the light, ye have communion with God.

Communion of the Spirit. Sig
The fellowshippe which the faithful have in the same graces and works of the
Spirit. Phil. 2, 1. If any fellowship of the spirit. 2. Cor. 13, 13. The
communion of the Holyghost be with you all.

Communion of saints sig:
The fellowship which the Saints have with Christ and all his benefits by
faith, and among themselves by love, which makes all their gifts touching the
use, common to every one. 1. John 1, 4. That ye may all have communion with
us, and that also our communion may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. The Papists do untruly restrain this communion to society with their
Church, which is no true Church.

Communication. sig:
Speech, or talk, whereby we make our private thoughts common to others. Ephesians.
4, 29.

Comparison. Sig
The putting or setting together in one sentence, two equal or like things;
by the one, to manifest and make plain the other. Mark. 4, 30. With what
comparison, etc.

2 Applying the words to the matter, that things taught, and the kind of
teaching may be like. 1. Cor. 2, 13. Comparing spiritual things, etc.

Compassion. sig:
Suffering together, when two or three feel the same grief: and properly, it
is that motherly compassion, pittifulnesse, feeling, and greeuing for the
misery of her child. Esaias 49, 15. This is natural compassion.

2 The merciful Nature of God, infinitely inclined Being referred to God. sig:
to pity and succor the miseries of his creature, namely of his elect. Psalm.
103, 13. The Lord has compassion on them that fear him. 2. Cor. 1, 4. God of
all compassions. This is divine compassion.

3 That mutual pity, or fellow-feeling which Being referred to Men. Sig
Christians have of each others misery, as if they suffered together. Luke 10,
33. When he saw him, he had compassion on him. Hebr. 13, 2. Remember them that
are in bonds, as if your selves were in bonds. This is christian compassion.

Complete. sig:
Full, whole, or perfect. Ephesians. 6, 11. Put on the complete or whole Armor,
etc.

To comprehend. sig:
To reach unto a thing, to lay hold on it, to perceive or acknowledge. John. 1,
5. They comprehended it not. Phil. 3, 12. That I may comprehend that, etc.

To be comprehended of Christ. sig:
To be laid hold on by Christ, showing us the way to heaven, and giving
strength to walk in it. Phil. 3, 12. I am comprehended of Christ.

Concord. sig:
Agreement of heart and affections, when being many, we have one heart, and the
same love. 2. Cor. 6, 17. What concord, etc. 1. Cor. 1, 10.

Concubine. sig:
Women, which were as it were half Wives, as the Hebrew word signifies. 1.
Kings 11, 3. and 300. Concubines.

Concupiscence. sig:
The prauity or naughtiness of our nature lusting after things forbidden of
God. James 1, 14. But every man is tempted when he it drawn away by his own
concupiscence. This is our Original concupiscence, 1. Original
which is the fountain and root of all wicked lusts and desires, and of all
Sins whatsoever, being itself also a sin properly, even after Baptism in
the regenerate; contrary to the Papists, who deny this. See Romans 7, 7. Also
Romans 7, 14, 15, 16, 17, etc.

2 Evil desires and motions, springing from the root of this Natural
concupiscence, whether they be consented to, or not. Romans 7, 8. Wrought in me
all manner of concupiscence. This is Actual Concupiscence, 2. Actual. 1.
Unuoluntary. 2. Uoluntarie.
which is either Vnvoluntary, as the first motions before consent of will; or
Voluntary, when consent of will comes to the motion. Both the one and the
other, be properly sin, because they be the transgression of the Law,
hindering that perfect love of God and of our Neighbor, commanded in the Law,
and drawing us to things contrary to the Law. Romans 7, 15, 16, 17. 22, 23. etc.

Condemnation, or condemning. sig: pro
The pronouncing of the sentence of punishment upon any malefactor by some
Judge. John. 8, 10. Has no man condemned thee? This may be done, either
justly or unjustly. Prou. 17, 15.

2 A pronouncing of Sinners guilty, and adiudging them to punishment upon the
conviction of a fault. Romans 8, 34. God Justifies, who shall condemn^? Romans 8,
1. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ, that is; they are
freed from the damnatory sentence of the Law, pronouncing a curse to every
sin.

3 The punishment itself, whereunto one is adjudged and condemned. 1. Cor. 11,
32. Because we should not be condemned with the world.

4 The abolishing a thing, and utterly taking it away, as if it were not. Romans
8, 3. Condemned Sin in the flesh. 1. Pet. 4, 6.

5 Pronouncing of a sentence or censure, uncharitably, or rashly of other men's
persons, and doings. Luke 6, 37. Condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned.
Romans 14, 4.

6 The convicting or reproof of ones wickedness and fault, by the good example
of another. Thus the Ninevites shall condemn the obstinate Jews. Math. 2, 41,
42. Romans 1, 27. Shall condemn the, etc.

to Confess. sig:
To acknowledge us as his own; Thus Christ will confess the faithful at the
day of judgment. Luke 12, 8. Him shall the son of man confess before the
Angels.

2 To testify, or bear witness of one, plainly and sincerely. John 1, 10.
John confesses and denied not, saying, I am not that Christ. Luke 12, 8. He
that confesses me before men. Thus we confess Christ.

3 To utter and speak forth ones praise, or to give thanks. Heb. 13, 15.
Offer to God the Calves of your lips, confessing his name; that is, acknowledge
his benefits, and give him thanks for them. And in the Psalms very often, to
confess God, is put, for to praise God.

4 Frankely and boldly to tell forth what we hold and believe in matter of
Religion. Romans 10, 10. With the mouth man confesses to Salvation.

5 To lay open our sins and offenses, either unto God in private or public
confessions, or to our Neighbor whom we have wronged, or to some godly
persons, at whose hands we look to receive comfort, being cast down by some
grievous sin; or finally, to the whole Congregation, when our fault is
public, 1. John 1, 9. We confess our sins. Psalm. 32, 5. I said I will
confess my sins. Mat. 3, 6. James 5, 16.

6 To acknowledge a crime before a Judge. Josh. 7, 19. Confess what thou have
done.

Touching Popish confessing of our particular Note.
finnes, distinctly, for number and circumstances every year, in the ears of a
Massing-Priest upon necessity of Salvation, there is no one word in all the
Book of God. For it is a mere devise, invented for advancement of the
Apostaticall See of Rome.

Confession. sig:
Profession, or declaration either of the truth of Doctrine, or of the
Innocence of his person. 1. Tim. 6, 13. Who before Pontius Pylat witnessed a
good confession.

2 Invocation or Prayer unto God, by Christ, and all other works of Religion.
Romans 10, 10. With the mouth man confesses to Salvation. This is expounded, of
Prayer, verse 13.

to Confirm. sig:
To strengthen, or make strong. 1. Pet. 5, 10. Confirm and strengthen you.

2 To perfect or finish a thing. Psalm. 68, 28. Confirm (o God) the thing that
thou have wrought in us.

3 To perform some word or promise. 1. Cor. 1, 6. The Testimony of Jesus has
been confirmed in you; that is, truly performed unto you, by bestowing the
guiftes of the Holy Ghost which were promised before.

A work of the Spirit, strengthening faint and Confirmation, or Corroboration
what it is.
weak minds in faith and obedience unto the end. 1. Pet. 5, 10. The God of all
grace confirm and strengthen ye. God confirms, as author or efficient cause
of strength; the Word, Sacraments, and Ministers, confirm as Instruments and
helps. Luke. 22, 32. Being converted, confirm thy Brethren. A man confirms
himself, when he takes heart to him in a good cause, upon hope of Gods help.
1. Cor. 16, 13. Example in David. 1. Sam. 17, 34, 45. No ground in Scripture
for the Popish Sacrament of Confirmation, which is a devise of their own
brain.

to Confound. sig:
To put one unto shame by foam public punishment, and sometimes quite and
utterly to destroy and root one out. Psalm. 31, 1. I have put my trust in thee,
let me not be confounded. Psalm. ^2, 5. They trusted in thee, and were not
confounded; that is, they were not forsaken and put to utter rebuke and shame
before men.

Confusion. sig: pro
Affection of shame, which appears in the countenance, by blushing or
changing of the color. Dan. 1, 7. Unto us, confusion of face, or open shame,
etc.

2 The casting down of the conscience before God and man for some sin. Psalm.
119, 6. Then shall no confusion come to me.

3 Perverting of order and peace: or disorder. 1. Cor. 14, 33. God is not the
Author of confusion.

What Conscience is.
It is a faculty of man's soul, taking knowledge, and bearing witness of a
man's thoughts, words and works, excusing them when they be good, and accusing
them when they be evil. Romans 2, 15. Their Conscience bearing them witness,
and their thoughts accusing or excusing. If the Conscience be not deceived,
but bear a true witness, then it is no erroneous Conscience, yet may be an
evil Conscience if it be not Sanctified, as well as enlightened.

Pure Conscience. sig:
A Conscience not trobled and polluted with notorious and gross crimes. 2.
Tim. 1, 3.

2 A Conscience purged and made free from guilt and horror of death by faith in
the blood of Christ. Heb: 9, 14. Purge your Conscience from dead works. Acts
15, 9. Your hearts purified by faith.

Seared, or burned Conscience. sig:
A Conscience quite extinct and cut off, or utterly hardened. 1. Tim: 4, 2. And
have their Conscience burned with an hot Iron.

Clear Conscience. sig:
A Conscience kept without offense and spot. Acts 24, 6. To have a clear
conscience.

good Conscience. sig:
A Conscience, which obeys such light and direction, as it does think and
take to be true and sound light and direction. Acts 23, 1. In all good
Conscience.

Consolation or Comfort sig:
That Inward spiritual refreshing and strengthening of the heart, by the
consideration and feeling of Gods merciful promises in Christ. Psalm. 119, 50.
Thy promises have comforted me in my trobles. 2. Cor. 1, 4 God comfort us in
all our trobles. and v. 5. Our consolation abounds through Christ. Romans 1,
11, 12. Where Consolation and Strengthening, are put the one for the other. The
Holy Ghost being the worker of comfort, is therefore called the Comforter by
an excellency. The promises of the word, are the grounds of Comfort, our
believing hearts are the seats of comfort. Godly Ministers and the faithful,
are the helpers of our comforts. John 16, 7. I will send the Comforter. 1.
These. 4, 18. Comfort your selves one another with these words. 2. Cor. 7, 7.

to Consecrate. sig:
To sanctify, to dedicate unto God, or to separate and set one apart to
execute some holy Function, of ( Priest, Leuite, Nazarite,) Exo. 29, 1. When
thou consecratest them to be my Priests, thus thou shall do. Numb. 6, 18.
and 8, 13. The Consecration is, by doing some Ceremonies, appointed of God for
such a purpose.

Constancy. sig:
Continuance in a good thing to the end. Psalm. 8, 5. Ephesians. 6, 18. With all
Constancy or Perseuera^ce.

to be Content. sig:
To be well pleased and apaide, with the condition of life and portion of goods
which we have. Hebru. 13, 5. Be content with those things ye have. 1. Tim. 6,
6, 8. When the mind is pleased with such things as God has thought fit and
meet for us: This is Contentment; so as withal, we be ready to undergo a
meaner and hard estate, if God will, ever judging our present condition best
for us.

Continency, what it is.
It is a special gift of God, whereby one is enabled to keep himself Chaste,
without the help of marriage. 1. Cor. 7, 5. Incontinency is the contrary.

Contract or Betroathing, what it is.
A free promise and mutual agreement of lawful marriage, by consent of
Parents, before meet witnesses, between one man, and one woman, in words of
the present time. Mat. 1, 18. Mary was betrothed to Joseph. This is no
Ceremonial, but a Morrall duty: for the very Despondi, hic nuptijs dictus est
dies. Terenc.
Heathens, by light of Nature knew and practiced it; whereof came the
difference amongst them, between Sponsalia and Nuptiae, that is; Espousals, and
Marriages. Such also is the proceeding between Christ and his Church; first
they are espoused in earth, then married in heaven. See Canticles.

Contrition. sig:
The brusing of a sinners heart (as it were) to dust and powder, through
unfeigned and deep grief, conceived of Gods displeasure for sin. Ps. 51,
17. A broken and Contrite heart thou will not despise. This is Evangelical
Contrition, and is a work of grace, the beginning of renewed Repentance, as 2.
Cor. 7, 10. Godly sorrow causes Repentance unto Salvation. Papists err, in
teaching Legal Contrition or sorrow, stirred up by the threatenings of the Law,
to be a work of grace and part of Repentance: whereas rather, it is a part of
the Torment of hell, yet accidentally turns to the good of the Elect, by
making them more fit to receive grace, being humbled by the Law.

Conversation. sig:
Not one work, or two, or a few Actions, but the whole course of our life,
with every degree and step of it, from the time of our effectual calling, and
so forwards unto the end of our race. This course is termed an honest
Conversation. 1. Pet. 2, 12. Have your Conversation honest. But our course from
the time of our birth, until the time of such calling it is termed a vain
conversation. 1. Pet. 1, 18. Redeemed from your vain Conversation.

Conversion sig:
The turning, or total change of an elect Sinner from sin to God: and in
this signification is comprehended, both faith and Repentance, even the whole
work of grace. Psalm. 51, 14. And sinners shall be Converted to thee. This is
Passive Conversion, wherein we suffer God to work upon us, but our selves by
our Natural power, work nothing, unless it be to hinder the work of Grace,
what we may.

2 A turning from some particular sin or sins, whereby we have offended God
or man. Luke 22, 32. When thou art converted. Ier. 31, 18. Convert thou me, and
I shall be Converted. This is an Active Conversion, performed by men already
regenerate, who being already renewed by grace, do work together with his
Grace; Converting grace being accompanied with assisting and supporting grace.

God conuerteth a Sinner by putting grace of repentance Note.
into his soul. A Sinner conuerteth himself, when he endeavors his own
conversion, diligently and constantly using al good means, public and private.

Corban. sig:
A gift, or an Offering. Mark 7, 11. If a man say to his Parents Corban, that
is; By the gift which is offered by me, etc.

Cords. sig:
Government, good Laws, and Commandments. Psalm. 2, 3. And cast their Cords
from us; that is, the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ, whereby he ties us to
him.

2 Strength, might, and policy, whereby the wicked tie the godly, as Oxen are
tied with Cords and bands. Psalm. 129. The Lord has cut the Cords of the
wicked.

Cords of vanity. sig:
Allurements, Prouocations, and occasions of sinning. Esaias 5. 18. Woe unto them
that draw Iniquity with Cords of vanity. The same is also meant by Cart-ropes.

Cords of man, and Bands of Love. Sig
Most singular and sweet clemency and kindness of God, to pull us forcibly
to our duty. Hosea 11, 4. I led them with Cords of a man, etc.

Corruption sig: pro
Rottenness, such as the body feels in the grave. Psalm. 16, 10. Thou will not
suffer thy holy one to see Corruption. 1. Cor. 15, 42. It is sown in
Corruption.

2 That vicious and naughty quality of sin, spiritually wasting the Soul,
being contrary unto that Integrity and soundness in which we were created.
Ephesians. 4, 22. Cast off the Old Man, which is corrupt through lust.

Corrupt. sig:
Foolish, unwise. Psalm. 14, 3. They are all Corrupt; that is, they have not
understanding, to perceive the things which God offers, and does to them.

2 Rotten and unsavory. Ephesians. 4, 29. No Corrupt communication; that is, Filthy.

to Corrupt. sig:
To live otherwise then we should, by doing any manner of Sin, or leaving
undone good duties. Deuteronomy. 4, 16. That ye Corrupt not your selves. Psalm 14, 1.

2 To defile, or destroy. 1. Cor. 15, 33. Evil words Corrupt good manners.

Covenant. sig: pro
A. League or Agreement between two or more parties, being at variance. Genesis
21, 32. Thus made they a Covenant at Bersheba. This is a Civil Covenant.

2 The sign and pledge of Gods Covenant. Genesis 17, 4.

3 Our promise made unto God, for yielding obedience to his will, Nehe. 9, 38.
We make a sure Covenant. Or for performing duties to men. 1. Sam. 18, 3.

4 A league or agreement which GOD has made with man for Salvation. Ier. 32,
40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them. This is a Religious Covenant.

5 The word of God, which contains the Articles of our Covenant and agreement
between God and man. Psalm. 25, 10 14. To such as keep his Covenants, and his
Testimonies. Exodus 19, 5. And keep my Covenant.

6 The promise whereby married persons bind themselves each unto others, for
the pure use of wedloc^e. Mal. 2, 14. This is called the Covenant of God. Prou.
2, 17. Because God is the Author of it, it is also made in his presence, and by
Invocation of his name, to perform duties commanded by him. This is marriage
Covenant. A mixed Covenant; partly Civil, and partly Religious.

7 Circumcision, which is the sign of the covenant. Genesis 17, 13. My Covenant
shall be in your flesh; that is, the sign of the covenant. Verse 10.

8 The Tables of the covenant. Romans 9, 4. And the Covenants; that is, the
Tables wherein the Articles of the covenant were contained.

Covenant of works:
Is a league touching the saving of some one condition of their perfect
obedience. This was made with Angels and Adam before their fall: and since that
time, it is propounded in the Scriptures to convince us of sin, and to
prepare us to Christ. Romans 3, 20. Galat. 3, 24. The Law is our Schoolemaister
to Christ. Leuit. 18. 5. The Man that does these things, shall live.

Covenant of Grace:
Is an agreement concerning men, to be freely saved through Faith in Christ.
Gal. 3, 11. The just shall live by faith. John 3, 16. God so loved the world.
Ier. 31, 33, 34. This Covenant, is either Old or New, in diverse respects and
circumstances, being one for substance.

Old Covenant.
This was given or published by Moses, and made with the Jews only, till
Christ's Resurrection, being placed in Ceremonies, which in time for Oldnesse
vanishes away. Hence it is called [ Old.] Heb. 9, 13.

New Covenant.
Is made with Christian people, published by Christ most clearly, wherein more
persons are renewed, and more Graces bestowed, being always to endure one and
the same. Hence it is called [ New.] Heb. 9, 13. Ier. 31, 31. I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel.

Covenant of Salt. See Salt.

Covenant breakers. sig:
Such as be unmindful of promises and bargains. Romans 1, 30. Covenant breakers.

Covenant with death and hell. sig:
Agreement with them. So do wicked men imagine. Esaias. 28, 15.

Covenant of Leui. sig:
The agreement which God has made with the Levites, to bless them with peace
and life, if their duties be performed in their place. Mal. 2, 8. Ye have
broken the Covenant of Leui. Verse 5.

Book of the Covenant. sig:
The Writing which did contain the Articles and conditions both on Gods part,
what he promised to do to the people, and on the peoples part, what duties
they were to perform to God, according to the tenor of the Covenant. Exodus 24,
7. After, he took the Book of the Covenant and read it.

Covering. sig:
The Roof of an house, a Veil, or ought else, which serves for defense, or
keeping close.

2 The Husband, who is called the Covering of his Wife, in respect of his duty
toward her, by protecting her, and of his Authority over her, in governing
her, for the veil and covering which women did wear, was a sign of their
subjection. 1. Cor. 11, 6, 7. Genesis 20, 16.

3 Stopping, or making dumb and silent. Prou. 10, 6. Iniquity shall cover the
mouth of the wicked.

Covering of sins. sig:
The forgiveness of sins, for the death of Christ, which is as a Mantle to
cover them from the eyes of Gods Justice. Psalm 32, 1. Blessed is the man whose
sins are covered.

2 Concealing, keeping close, or secret, when we do not tell a thing abroad.
Prou. 10, 12. Love covers a multitude of sins, which by a charitable
private reproof are hid and covered from the punishment of God, and shame of
men.

to Cover the feet. sig:
To do ones easement, or to go to Stool. Judges 3, 24. Surely he has covered
his feet. 1. Sam. 24. 4. An dishonest thing, uttered in honest words.

to Covet. sig: pro
To love or desire money or earthly goods (for themselves) either our own or
others. Ioshu. 7, 21. 1. Tim. 6, 9, 10. The desire of Money is the root of all
evil.

2 To desire spiritual blessings, or heavenly glory. 1. Cor. 12, 31. Covet
after the best things. Phil. 1, 23. I covet to be loosed, and to be with
Christ. This is a good Covetousness, when spiritual blessings or celestial
blessedness, is ever greedily and eagerly desired. Other things we may desire,
no further or otherwise then as helps to these.

Covetousness. sig:
Desire of having more, or the inordinate love of money. Heb. 13, 5. Let your
conversation be without Covetousness. This is called Idolatry. Colos. 3, 5.
Ephesians. 5, 5. Because the Covetous man not only prefers his treasure before
God, but does place his life in his substance. Luke 12, 15, 16, 17, etc.

Counsel. sig:
The wisdom and direction of Gods Spirit and word, governing our course of
life. Psalm. 73, 24. Thou will guide me by thy Counsel. Psalm. 16, 7.

2 An action of the whole and holy Trinity, deliberating and determining before
the world, of all things which should be, or not be; especially of the
salvation of Angels and men. Ephe. 1, 11. He works all things after the
Counsel of his will. This counsel depends upon Gods will, as the supreme and
only moving cause, and not upon foreseen faith or works. Romans 9, 11, 18.

3 Advise taken about things to be done. Prou: 20, 18. Establish thy thoughts
by Counsel. And by Counsel make War. Exodus 18, 19. This kind of counsel
is either good or evil; subtle or carnal.

4 The beginning and first degree of sin; to wit, evil lusts and desires.
Psalm. 1, 1. Blessed is the man, that has not walked in the Counsel of the
ungodly.

5 A company of men assembled into a certain place, to consult or take advise
of public matters. Acts 22, 30. And all the Counsel to come together. Acts
23, 1.

6 The place where men are met together for common consultation. Acts 24, 20.
Whiles I stood in the Counsel.

7 The Judgment which stood and consisted of twenty three Judges, who had the
hearing and deciding of the waightiest matters of life and death. Math. 5, 22.
Shall be worthy to be punnished by the Counsel.

Counselor. sig:
One, who gives all sound advise, as Christ does by the Doctrine of
Scriptures; which therefore be called our counselors, or men of our counsel.
Psalm. 119, 14. Esaias 6, 6. Counselor.

Count. sig:
See Imputation.

Countenance. sig:
Love, liking, favor, or dis-fauour, witnessed by the countenance. Genesis 31, 5.
I see your Fathers Countenance is not toward me, as was wont.

2 Gods favor witnessed and showed forth in his graces and benefits. Psalm. 4,
6. Lift up the light of thy Countenance.

3 Gods displeasure, witnessed by withdrawing the signs of his favor, or by
sending some judgments. Ps. 13, 1. How long will thou hide thy Countenance
from me; because me^ by their countenance bewray their anger or love. Hence it
is, that being attributed to god, it signifies his displesure, or his gracious
favor.

4 The face, or look of a man. Psalm. 104. Oil to make the Countenance
cheerful.

Light of Gods Countenance. See Light.

Country. sig: pro
A Region or Land where people dwell. Heb. 11, 9. As in a strange Country,
verse 15.

2 A certain compass of ground without a City. Mark 16, 12. As they walked
into the Country.

3 Heaven, where the Saints shall dwell for ever. Heb. 11, 16. They desire an
Heavenly Country.

Courage. Sig
Valor and strength of mind, a good heart, being wisely bold and confident in
a good cause. Josh. 1, 7, 9. Be of good courage.

Court. Sig pro
The first entrance into an house, a yard, or coming in. 1. Kings 7. 12.

2 The rooms and places of the Temple, into which Gods people might assemble
for public worship, and hearing the Law. Psalm. 84, 2. My soul faints for
the Courts of the Lord. Psalm. 116. 19.

3 All those several spaces and distances of ground, which were in the Temple
before ye came to the Holy of Holiest, or to the most holy-place: of these
spaces or Courts there were six in number; every Court was twelve steps one
above another, and of every one there was a several use. 2. Chron. 4, 9. And
he made the Court of the Priests. 1. Kings 6, 36.

4 That space of ground which was within the utmost Rayles, being called the
first or the utter Court. Revel. 11, 2. But the Court which is without the
Temple, meet it not. Into this Court, because the Heathen and profane people
might come to see and hear, therefore it signifies in the former Scripture (
Revel. 11, 2.) All Infidels and strangers from Christ.

C. R.
Craft. Sig
Trade, or occupation. Acts 18, 3. For that was their Craft. Here it is taken
in good part.

2 Deceit, guile, and fraud. Ephesians. 4, 14. By the deceit of men, and with
Craftiness. Here it is taken in ill part.

Create. sig:
To make something of nothing. Genesis 1, 1. God created heaven and earth. Hebr.
11, 2. The things we see, were made of things which did not appear.

2 To give and work Grace where it is not. Ephesians. 1, 16. Created to good works.

3 To restore Grace, as touching the feeling and fruit of it. Psalm: 51, 10.
Create in me a clean heart.

4 To be the Author and worker of a thing. Esaias 45, 7. I make peace, and create
evil, I the Lord do all these things.

faithful Creator. sig:
God, who safely and faithfully keeps them whom he has once made and taken
charge of. 1. Pet. 4, 19. As to a faithful Creator.

Creature. sig:
The whole frame of Heaven and earth, and sometimes some particular work of
God. Romans 8, 20. Because the Creature is subject to vanity. Also verse 21, 22,
23. It is put for one particular work or thing created. Romans 8, 39.

2 All men, whether Jews or Gentiles. Mark. 16, 15. Preach the Gospel to
every Creature.

new Creature. sig:
That quality of holiness, created in the hearts of the Elect at their first
conversion to God. 2. Cor. 5, 17. He that is in Christ, let him be a new
Creature. This is called the New man, and Spirit, and Law of the mind.

Crooked. sig: pro
That which is contrary to straight, or to right. Eccles. 7, 15.

2 All swaruing from the straight and right line of Gods word. Psalm. 119, 3.
Surely they work no Iniquity; or [ Crooked thing,] for so it is in the
Original. Gnaula.


Crum. sig:
The least and lowest degree, or measure of Gods grace. Math. 15, 17. The
whelps eat the Crumbs, etc.

Cross. Sig
That Tree or Wood whereon Christ dyed, being made in form of a Cross. Math.
27, 32. They made Simon of Cyrene to bear his Cross. Come down from the
Cross. The Papists without all reason adore the Relics of it, and attribute
Virtue to it, being but a Creature, if it were extant.

2 The whole passion of Christ, from his Cradle to his death, but especially
his sufferings upon the Tree. Heb. 12, 3. Who for the Joy was set before him,
endured the Cross. Metonimie.

3 The Doctrine of the Gospel, that is, of free Salvation by Christ crucified.
1. Cor. 1, 18. The preaching of the Cross to us that be saved, is the power of
God. Also Verse 17. Gal. 5, 11.

4 The preaching of Christ crucified. Gal. 6, 11. They would not suffer
persecution for the Cross of Christ.

5 Every grievous or painful thing sent of God, either to our minds or bodies.
Math. 10, 38. Take up thy Cross and follow me. Metaphor. This is the general
Cross common to all men, as they be men.

6 Such afflictions as the faithful suffer for Christ, and for Righteousness.
Gal. 6, 14. God forbid, that I should rejoice, but in the Cross of Christ.
This is a special Cross peculiar to Christians.

Crown. Sig pro
A round Garland, set upon the head, in Token of victory: or that which
Princes wear upon their head at their Coronation. 2. Tim. 2, 5. He is not
crowned, except he strive lawfully.

2 Kingly or Royal dignity and power. Ps. 132, 18. But on him his Crown shall
flourish. Metonimie.

3 Whatsoever excellency or glory we have in us, or without us. Revel. 4, 10.
They cast their Crowns before his Throne. Lam. 5, 16. The crown of our head
is fallen.

4 That which either brings or increases our Renown, Comfort, and Glory
before men. 1. These. 2, 19, 20. Ye are our Crown of rejoicing. Ye are our
Glory and Joy. Prou. 12, 4.

Crown of Righteousness. Crown of life. Sig
Eternal life, which is given as a free reward to such as lead a righteous
life, which the God who is most righteous, has promised, and will also
perform. 2. Tim. 4, 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness. Romans 6, 16, 23. This is also called the Crown of life. James.
1, 12. Reu. 2, 10. Because in the life eternal, there shall be honor and
glory unspeakable; whereunto Good-works are the way, but are not the cause.
Hence the Papists do corruptly gather the merit of works. See their Annotat.
on 2. Tim. 4, 8.

Crown of Glory. sig:
That most excellent glory which the Saints have in Heaven, shaddowed unto us
by a kingly Crown, which of all earthly things is most glorious. 1. Pet. 5, 4.
Ye shall receive an incorruptible Crown of glory.

2 A glorious and honorable thing. Prou. 16, 31. Age is a Crown of Glory.

Crown of Gold. sig:
A most ample and glorious Kingdom, such as David had over Gods people. Psalm.
21, 4. Thou have set a Crown of Gold upon his head.

Crown of Thorns. sig:
A Crown made of Thorns, set upon Christ's head in derision, and to increase
his pain. Math. 27, 29. They put a crown of Thorns on his head.

to Crown us with Compassion. sig:
To make us famous and glorious, by merciful deliverances, as if he should set
a Crown upon our head. Psalm 103, 4. He crowns us with compassion.

to Crucify. sig: pro
To fasten one to the Cross, there to languish till death. Math. 27, 35.
Crucified him.

2 To mortify or kill sinful lusts by little and little. Gal. 5, 24. Have
Crucified the flesh.

3 To lay open Christ unto the scorn and mock of the world. Heb. 6, 6.
Crucify Christ.

4 To despise the world, and to be despised and set at naught by the world.
Gal. 6, 14.

Cry. sig:
Most earnest desires in Prayer, arising from the feeling, or fear of some
misery. Psalm. 40, 1. He heard my Cry. Exodus 14, 15. Wherefore did thou Cry
unto me.

2 Loud and boystrous speech, or roaring. Ephe. 4, 31. Put away crying from you.

3 Weeping, and vehement sorrow or mourning. Revel. 21, 4. There shall be no
more crying.

4 Grievous and bitter Complaints, such as the poor make in their great
distresses. James 5, 4. The cries of them are entered into the ears of the Lord.

Crier. sig:
A public Minister, appointed and sent to proclaim (as a Crier) the coming
of the Messiah to work our Redemption. Such an one was John Baptist. Math. 3,
3. The voice of a Crier. John 1, 23.

to Cry. sig:
To sigh in Prayer, or with great earnestness to desire good things. Psalm. 22,
2. O my God, I cry by day. Romans 8, 15. This is our crying to God.

2 To reprove sin earnestly, and to call sinners to repentance with great
vehemence of voice. Esaias 58. Cry aloud and spare not.

3 To crave or demand vengeance from Divine Justice. Genesis 18, 20. The cry of
Sodom is great. Deuteronomy. 24, 15. James 5, 4. Genesis 4, 10.

C. U.
Cup. sig: pro
A kind of Pot, Maser, or Goblet, whereby of old time they did measure a
portion of drink to each person in the family. Luke 22, 17. And he took the
Cup.

2 The Wine contained in the Cup; also the blood, whereof the Wine was a
pledge. Math. 26, 27, 28. He took the Cup, and said; This is my blood.

3 The Cross, or a portion of affliction, measured and distributed to every
one of the faithful. Mat. 20, 23. Ye shall indeed drink of my cup. v. 22.

4 Death, joined with the wrath and curse of God. Math. 26, 39. Father let
this cup pass from me. John 18, 11.

5 Punishment or pain, inflicted upon Sinners in great measure and fearful
manner. Psalm. 11, 5. This is the portion of their cup. Psalm. 75, 8. Ier. 25,
17. Often in the Prophets and Psalms, it is used for Gods wrath and fury
against the wicked.

6 A great portion of Joy given to the faithful. Psalm. 23, 5. And my cup
runs over.

7 A lot, a condition, or happy estate. Psalm. 16, 5. The Lord is the portion of
my cup.

golden Cup sig:
The Titles of the Catholic church, of Peter's Chair, and Christ's Vicar, out
of which (as it were) out of a Cup of Gold, Popish Prelates have offered unto
Kings and Nations their abominable errors and Idolatries. Revel. 17, 4. She
had a cup of Gold in her hand.

Curse. sig:
Every punnishment of sin happening in this life: also death in the end of
this life, but especially destruction both of body and soul after this life.
Deuteronomy. 28, 2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 6, 23. The wages of sin is death. Mat. 25, 41. Go
ye cursed.

2 A thing accursed, being separate from Christ, and from erernall Salvation,
to be for ever destroyed. Gal. 2, 9. Let him be a curse. Romans 9, 3. 1. Cor:
16, 22.

to Curse. sig:
To wish and pray for evil things and execrable, to befall others, or our
selves. Math: 5, 44. Bless them that curse you. Rom: 3, 14. Whose mouth is
full of curssing.

2 To utter and pronounce cursses against others. Number. 22, 6, 12.

Custom. sig:
The Law, and that that ought to be done in reason and right.

2 Use, or that which is wont to be done, being sometimes contrary to Law and
reason. 1. Sa. 2, 13. The Priests Custom toward the people was this. And 8,
9. John 18, 39. We have a custom. Genesis 31, 35.

3 The place or Table where the custom was received. Mat. 9, 9. He saw a man
sitting at the Custom.

Cutting a pieces. sig: pro
A severe punishment used amongst the Romans for some heinous and gross
crimes.

2 That most fearful punnishment which shall be given to Hypocrites after
this life. Mat. 24, 51. And he will cut them in pieces.

Cutting off
3 Temporal outward destruction and calamity sent from God in this life. 1.
Sam. 2, 31, 33. I will cut off thy Arm; or from Magistrates Gods Lieutenants.
Psalm. 101, 8. I will cut off the workers of Iniquity.

4 Separation from the fellowship of the Saints, or a shutting out from the
people of God both now, and for ever. Gen: 17, 14. Even that person shall be
cut off from my people. Mat. 3, 10. John 15, 2.

5 To mortify and subdue some wicked lust and affection. Math: 5, 30. If thy
right hand offend thee, cut it off.

6 Suddenly in a moment to be given and sent unto men, when they thought of no
such matter. Dan. 2, 45. The stone was cut off the Mountain.

D. A.
Damnation. sig:
THe Sentence of Damnation given forth against one. Revel. 17, 1. I will show
thee the Damnation of the great Whore, that is; her Damnatory Sentence.

2 Temporal chastisement. 1. Cor. 11, 25. They eat their own Damnation, that
is; by their vnreuerent eating, they procure unto themselves Temporal
corrections, such as are named Verse 30. Weakness, Sickness, etc. Luke 23, 40.

3 Eternal and extreme pains of the Reprobate in hell. Math. 23, 14. And
they shall have the greater Damnation. 2. Pet. 2, 4.

Dancing. sig:
A comely motion of the body, stirred up by the Inward and spiritual Joy of
the heart, to testify thankfulness for some great benefit or deliverance from
God. 2. Sam. 6, 16. David danced before the Arc. 1. Sam. 18, 6. Exodus 15, 20.
Judge. 11, 34. and 21, 21. Luke 15, 25. This kind of Dancing is lawful and
holy.

2 A motion of the body, seemly or unseemly, stirred up by natural or carnal
Joy, to please and satisfy our selves or others; Mark 6, 22. And the Daughter
of Herodias danced, and pleased Herod, etc. This kind of dancing is unlawful
and wanton, unless it be privately, by the one sex alone, for moderate
recreation.

Darkness. sig: pro
The absence, privation, or want of natural light. Genesis 1, 4. God separated
light from Darkness. Mat. 27, 4^. This is natural darkness.

2 Ignorance and unbelief, which is the absence and want of spiritual light.
1. These. 5, 4. Ye are not in darkness. Ephesians. 5, 11. John 3, 19. 1. John 2, 11,
This is spiritual darkness, containing the fearful estate of unbelievers in
this world.

3 The woeful and uncomfortable estate of the damned in hell, which is the
absence and want of Heavenly light. Mat. 22, 13. Cast him into utter
darkness. Mat. 8, 12. This is eternal darkness: the second death.

4 Calamity and sorrow, as light does sometime signify deliverance and Joy.
Psalm. 18, 28. Thou (o God) wilt lighten my darkness, that is; thou will turn
my calamity and sorrow into prosperity and Joy. Joel 2, 2. A day of
Darkness, that is; of affliction and sorrow: and very often in the Prophets
and Psalms.

5 The mind of all men, such as it is since their fall, full of blindness and
sin. John 1, 5. That light shined in the Darkness, etc. Ephe. 5, 8.

6 Sin, and wretchedness the wages of Sin. 1. John 1, 5. And in God there
is no Darkness.

7 A private and secret place, where some few persons only be present. Mat.
10, 27. What I tell you in Darkness, that is; at home in private, as
appears, by comparing verse 27. the first part of it with the latter.

utter Darkness sig:
Such darkness and misery as is without the kingdom of Heaven, for in the
kingdom there is light and happiness. Math. 22, 13. Cast him into utter
darkness.

Prince of Darkness sig:
Satan, the Captain and Ringleader of al wicked men, even of the whole
hellish Rowt. Ephesians. 6, 12. The Princes of the darkness of this world.

works of Darkness sig:
All evil and sinful works, which come from darkness of Ignorance, and
lead to darkness of misery. Ephesians. 5, 11. 1. These. 5, 8. Romans 13, 12. Cast away
the works of Darkness, that is; such works as blind Gentiles live in, and
commit.

to walk in Darkness. sig:
To lead such a kind of life, as they do, which shun and fly the light of
the word: a sinful life. 1. John 1, 6. He that walks in Darkness, etc.

to love Darkness sig:
To take full pleasure and delight in unbelief and Sin. John 3, 19. Men
loved Darkness, rather then light.

to sit in Darkness sig:
To remain and abide secure in the estate of sin and wretchedness. Luke 1,
79. To give light to them that sit in Darkness.

power of Darkness sig:
The Dominion, rule, and sway, which Satan and Sin do bear over all
unregenerate persons. Col. 1, 13. Who has delivered us from the power of
Darkness.

fiery Darts sig:
The most fierce and dangerous temptations which Satan casts at us (as fiery
Darts) to destroy our faith. Ephe. 6, 16. That ye may quench all the fiery
Darts of the Devil.

Daughter. sig: pro
A Woman-Childe, or a Female, as Thamar the Daughter of David.

2 The holy Catholic Church, even the company or body of all true believers,
called a Daughter in respect of God her Father, who has spiritually begotten
her, and loved her as his Daughter. Psalm 45, 9, 10, 13. The Kings Daughter
is all Glorious within.

3 Particular Churches or Congregations, professing the faith of Christ, and
begotten of that immortal seed of the word, which first came out of
Jerusalem. Cant. ^, ^* I am Black, o ye Daughters of Jerusalem. Those
Churches are called Daughters of Sion, and of Jerusalem. Esaias 62, 11. Because
they were begotten by the Doctrine that came out from thence. Esaias. 2, 3. And
the Law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

4 False Churches, which make a great show of piety, and yet are but the
assemblies of Idolaters and Heretics. Cant. 2, 2. So is my Love amongst the
Daughters. Also in Cant. 6, 8. it signifies strange people and Nations.

5 A Niece, or a Sons Daughter. Exodus 2, 21. Who gave to Moses Zepporah his
Daughter.

6 Posterity, or offspring. Luke. 1, 5. Which was of the Daughters of Aaron.

7 A City. Math. 21, 5. Tell ye the Daughter of Sion, that is; the City of
Sion.

Daughters of singing. sig:
The ears which take delight in Music. Eccles. 12, 4. And all the Daughters
of singing shall be abased.

Daughters of Jerusalem. sig:
Women, which dwelt at Jerusalem. Luke 23, 28. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me. And often in the Book of Lamentation, it is so taken.

2 Churches begotten by the word, which came forth from Jerusalem: as before.
Cant. 1, 2. O ye Daughters of Jerusalem.

Day. sig: pro
The space of 24. hours, and this is the Natural day: or of twelve hours,
which is the Artificial Day. Luke There be twelve hours in the Day.

2 Time generally. Math. 3, 1. In those Days. Luke 1, 5.

3 The time of Grace, under the light of the gospel. Romans 13, 12. The Day is
come. Also verse 13. Heb. 4, 7. Acts. 3, 24. All the Prophets spoke of those
Days.

4 The light of Truth, or the lightsome Doctrine of Heavenly Truth. Job. 9, 4.
While it is Day. 1. Cor. 3, 13. For the Day shall declare it. 1. These. 5, 8.

5 That space that a man lives in, or does any notable act, or suffers any
great thing. John. 8, 56. Abraham rejoiced to see my Day.

6. Year. Numb. 14, 34. Ezekiel. 4, 6. One Day shall be for a year, etc. Genesis
27, 46.

7 Judgment. 1. Cor. 4, 3. Or of man's Day. So it is in the Original, for
Judgment.

Days. sig:
The short time of man's life, who is a creature (as it were) of a days
continuance. Psalm. 90, 9. Our Days, as spent in thine anger. Genesis 47, 9.

2 The time and space wherein any thing continues. Psalm. 90, 16* Comfort us
according to the Days wherein thou have afflicted us.

Day of the Lord, or of Christ. sig:
The time of his coming in the flesh to live amongst us. Luke 17, 22. Ye
shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man. This time of Christ's
life is called the day of his flesh. Heb. 5, 7. In the Days of his flesh. Mal.
4, 1.

2 The time of his second coming to Judgment in Glory and Majesty. Luke 17,
24. So shall the Son of man be in his Day. 2. Pet. 3, 10. The Day of the Lord
shall come. This is called the [ Day of Day of wrath and destruction. Romans 2,
5. 2. Pet. 3, 7: Day of Redemption. Luke 21, 28. Day of revelation* To. 2, 5
Day of Judgment. 2. Pet. 2, 9. That Day. 2. Pet. 3, 12 Last Day. Great Day.
John 6, 39.
Wrath, Condemnation, and Destruction] in respect of the Wicked. [ A Day of
Redemption and Deliuering] in respect of the Godly, who are then to be set free
from all kind of Evils. [ A Day of Reuelation] in respect of all men and
Angels, who shall be then revealed and manifested what they be, and what
they have done. [ A Day of Iudgement] because therein all persons are to be
tried and adjudged unto that condition and state unto which they must stick
for ever. Finally, [ That Day] by an excellency, being the [ Last Day] and [
Great Day] full of Glory to Christ, of Joy to the Good, of Sorrow to the
Wicked; after which there shall be no succession of Days and Nights, but one
perpetual Day for the Righteous, and one perpetual Night for the Sinners and
Ungodly.

the Lords Day. sig:
The first Day of the Week, being the first Day of the Creation, called
commonly [ Sonday] Revel. 1, 10. I was ravished in the Spirit on the Lords Day:
so called, for that our Lord rising from death on that Day, brought forth the
light of a new and aeternall world, it is also kept for Remembrance of the
Mystery of our Lords Resurrection, on which day, for that end, solemn
Assemblies were kept by the faithful. 1. Cor. 16, 2. Acts 20, 7. By our Lords
appointment. Acts 1, 3. Papists err, in making the Constitution of this Day,
to be a mere Tradition of the Church, without any authority of Scripture.

Day of salvation. sig:
Time of the Gospel, wherein the glad tydinges of Salvation are published and
offered. 2. Cor. 6, 2. This is the Day of Salvation.

Day of Uisitation. sig:
The time wherein God of his great Mercy shall convert a Sinner. 1. Pet. 2, 12.
May glorify God in the Day of visitation.

good Days sig:
A blessed and happy life, wherein many good things befall us. 1. Pet. 3, 10.
If any man love to see good Days. Psalm. 34. 12.

Daily bread. sig:
That which is sufficient and necessary for our nature, or Bread sufficient for
every day. Mat. 6, 11. The Siriach reads it [Bread of our necessity] that is;
meet and necessary food. The Papists do err, when they expound thus of the
Sacrament of the Altar.

holy Day. sig:
A day set apart to holy use. Esaias 58, 13. From doing thinewill on mine
Holy Day. Such are to consecrate unto the honor of God alone.

this Day. sig:
Every Day, or the Day present which now is. Math. 6, 11. Give us this Day.
Teaching us, from Day to Day, to depend upon God for things of this life.

2 Shortly, ere it be long. Josh. 23, 14. This Day I enter the way of all the
earth.

to Day and to morrow. sig:
Time that now is, and the time to come, even the whole time of his office.
Luke. 13, 32. I will heal still to Day, and to morrow.

to Day. sig:
The whole season of our calling to God, even all the time of this life,
wherein God offers us grace, and calls us to him. Psalm. 95, 7. To day if
ye will hear his voice.

at one Day sig:
Very shortly, and at one instant. Re. 18, 8. The Plague shall come at one Day,
that is; suddenly, and in a moment.

Day and night. sig:
Perpetually, for ever, and without any end. Revel. 14, 11. They shall have no
rest, Day or night.

2 Continually without ceasing, so long as this world lasts. Revel. 12, 10.
Which accuses them before our God, Day and night.

ten Days. sig:
A small and short space of time (as it were for ten days long.) Revel. 2, 10.
Ye shall have tribulation ten Days, that is; a few days. A definit and
certain number, put for an Indefinite and uncertain.

Day of temptation sig:
All the time wherein God tried his people. Psalm. 95, 8. In the Day of
temptation in the wilderness.

Day of darkness. sig:
Times of affliction and trouble, or sharp and hard times. Ioell. 2, 2. A Day
of darkness, and of blackness.

evil Days sig:
Times full of sins and troubles, or troublesome and sinful times. Ephesians. 5,
16. For the Days are evil. Genesis 47, 6. 2. Tim. 4, 2.

D. E.
Deacon. sig:
A Steward of the Church Treasury, being appointed to look unto the poor,
and to Minister unto every one of them as he had need. 1. Tim. 3, 8. Phil. 1,
1. To the Bishops and to the Deacons. Of their Office and election, read Asts
6, 1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Of their several kinds, See Romans 12, 8.

Dead. sig:
One, whose soul is separated from his body either by natural or violent
death. 1. Pet. 4, 6. The Gospel was preached to the Dead, that is; such as
were naturally Dead, when this was Written of Peter, but were alive when the
Gospel was preached to them.

2 One, whose soul and body is separated from Gods grace and Spirit. Luke 9,
60. Let the Dead bury their Dead. Revel. 3, 2. 1. Tim. 5, 6.

3 One very near to death. Genesis 20, 3. Thou art but Dead. Job. 27, 15. His
remnant shall be buried in Death; that is, before they be wholly dead, while
life is in them, they shall be buried.

Dead Works. sig:
All manner of sins, Original, Actual, in thought, word, and deed. Heb. 9, 14.
Purge your Conscience from Dead works. Heb. 6, 2. Sins are thus called;
First, because they come from persons spiritually Dead. Secondly, they deserve
eternal Death, and lead thereunto without forgiveness. What becomes of
venial Sins, if all be deadly? If every sin, even the least, is a work of
Death, and in strict Justice be worthy of Destruction eternal, then no sin
is so light and venial as can be done away without the merit of Christ's
death, only by an aspersion of Holy Water, or kissing the Pax, etc.

Dead in trespasses and sins. sig:
All unregenerate, natural, and unmortified men: even all the elect, as they be
and stick in the corruption of their Nature. These are Dead in sin; first,
because through guilt of sin they are void of true life, and worthy of
Death. Secondly, because they are under the power of their sinful lusts, (as
one that is drowned in the Water) having no more power to do any duty of a
godly life, then a Dead man has to do the duties of natural life. Ephesians. 2, 2.
Being Dead in trespasses and sins, you were quickened. Ephesians. 4, 1^. Ye were
strangers of a godly life.

Dead to sin. sig:
A mortified person, one, in whom the Death of Christ has broken the force of
sin, that it cannot reign. Romans 6, 2. How can they which be Dead to sin,
etc. Where the vigor and force of Sin, (which is the life of sin) is crushed
and extinct, there sin cannot bring forth such bitter fruits, as it was wont
before Sanctification to do; therefore, even as men which have so lost their
bodily strength, as it cannot be recovered, are said to be dead while they
live, so though sin still live in the Godliest, yet they are dead to sin,
because the power and old strength of sin is sore abated, and lessened daily.

Death. sig:
A separation of soul from body. Heb. 9, 27. After Death comes Judgment.
This Death is either natural, or violent, and it is called a bodily and
worldly Death.

2 A separation of soul and body from Gods favor in this world. Luke 1, 79.
And sit in the shadow of Death. This is spiritual Death.

3 A separation of the whole man from Gods heavenly presence and glory, for
ever. Romans 6, 23. The wages of sin is Death. Revel. 20, 6. They shall never
see the second Death. This is aeternall death. To. 8, 6.

4 A deadly thing. 2. Kings 4, 40. Death is in the Pot, that is; a deadly thing
is there. Romans 7, 23. Sin is there called the Body of Death, because it is a
deadly thing.

5 All Calamities and miseries, not only of the world to come, but of this
life, which be as the Harbengers and Forerunners of death. Genesis 2, 17. Thou
shall die the Death, that is; thou shall become subject to death, and to all
evils that brings us to death. 2. Cor. 1, 10. Great death, put, for Great
dangers.

6 Destruction and overthrow. Hosea. 13, 14. O Death, I will be thy Death,
that is; thy destroyer and abolisher; thy overthrow.

7 Pestilence, or plague, which is a deadly sickness, bringing Death. Revel.
6, 8. His name that sat thereon, was Death.

8 The peril or hazard of present Death. 2. Cor. 11, 23. In Death often, etc.
1. Cor. 15, 31.

9 Things which being once created and living, are now perished and Dead. Job.
28, 22. Destruction and Death say, etc.

second Death. sig:
Eternal Death and damnation of soul and body in Hell, as the first Death is
the dissolution of the soul and body. Revel. 2, 11. He that overcomes shall
not be hurt of the second Death.

to see, or to taste Death. Sig
To die, or depart this world. Luke 2, 26. I should not see Death.

heavy to Death, and sorrows of Death. sig:
His most mortal and deadly heaviness and sorrows, or a Death full of bodily
greefes and souls torments. Acts 2, 24. He loosed the sorrows of death. Math.
26, 38. My soul is heavy to Death. Out of these sorrows and death, springes
all true life and Joy.

no bands until their Death. sig:
The constant prosperity of the wicked, living in a continual tenor of welfare
till they dye, even like a web of Cloth, made of even and strong Thread,
without knots or s^urles. Psalm. 73, 4. There are no bands in their Death.

shadow of Death. sig:
Death, shaddowish and darkesome, full of discomfort and heaviness. Job. 24,
7. But the morning is even to them as the shadow of Death. Luke. 1, 79. Psalm.
23, 4. Luke 1, 79. Esaias 9, 2, 3.

Debate. sig:
Strife, or variance, when men of contrary desires and opinions, differ and
fall out amongst themselves. Romans 1, 29. Debate, etc.

Debt. sig: pro
A sum of money which we owe to another, or that which is any way due to another.

2 Sin, which is called a Debt, because for sin we do owe unto the Justice
of God eternal Death, and unto our Neighbor, whom we wrong by our Sin, we
do owe the recompense of the wrong done to him. Math. 6, 12. Forgive us our
Debts.

Debtor. sig:
One which owes duty to another, by Virtue of some calling. Thus Ministers and
Princes are Debtors. Romans 1, 14. I am Debtor both to the Wise and unwise.

2 Such one as by Law of Charity owes relief to others. Thus the rich are
Debtors to the poor. Romans 15, 27. And their Debtors are they.

3 One who is beholden to another for some benefit received. Romans 8, 12. We
are Debtors to the spirit, because the spirit does regenerate us, and dwell in
us, and witnesses our adoption to us, comforting us: for these benefits we are
Debtors to the Spirit, being bound to be led and ruled by the good motions
thereof.

4 One who is a Trespasser and offender of us, either in word or deed. Math.
6, 12. As we forgive our Debtors.

Deceit. sig:
Subtilty, craft, or cunning, when men hide their evil meanings by some
coulorable words or deeds, that they may more easily hurt and entrap others.
Romans 1, 29. Murder, debate, deceit. Prou. 25, 24. He that hates, will
counterfeit with his lips, but his heart lays up deceit.

Deceitfulness of sin. sig:
The guilefull craftiness of sin, entrapping us by fair flattering shows,
and sundry wily sleightes. Romans 7, 11. Heb. 1, 13. Least any of you be hardened
by the Deceitfulness of sin.

Deceitful tongue. sig:
A tongue which utters false and guilefull words, to deceive others. Prou.
21, 6.

Decent. sig:
That which of it own Nature brings some dignity and comeliness to Divine
actions, as a Table and a Table-cloath at the Communion, a Pulpit and a
Pulpit-cloath to a Sermon. See Comeliness. 1. Cor. 14, 40.

Decree. sig:
Gods purpose and determination concerning all persons and things. This is his
general Decree. See Counsel.

2 His particular purpose of sending some special blessing or punishment.
Zepho. 2, 2. Before the Decree come forth. This is a special divine Decree.

3 Determination of the Church, touching things to be done, or not to be done.
Acts 16, 4. And they delivered them the Decrees to keep. These be
Ecclesiastical Decrees.

4 Purposes and thoughts of Princes, published to their people, touching
matters of war and peace. Esaias 8, 10. Pronounce a decree. These be Civil
Decrees.

5 Statutes and Ordinances for the administering of Justice between man and
man. Pro. 31, 5. Least he drink and forget the Decree.

Deliverance from Blood. Sig
Freedom from the fault and punishment of the Sin of murder. Psalm. 51, 14.
Deliver me from blood.

from evil.
2 Freedom from the Tyranny and power of sin and Satan. Math. 6, 13. Deliver
us from evil.

from wrath
3 Freedom from eternal vengeance. 1. These. 1, 10. Which delivers up from
the wrath to come.

from troubles.
4 Freedom and safety from outward dangers and enemies. Psalm. 25, 22. Deliver
Israel (o God) from all his troubles. 2. Tim. 4, 17.

to Deliver from an evil work. sig:
To preserve and free one from committing any thing unworthy his calling. 2.
Tim. 4, 18. The Lord will deliver me from every evil work.

to Deliver one up to a reprobate mind. sig:
Three things; first, a withdrawing of his grace, that it should not stay nor
uphold them; secondly, a willing permission or suffering them to fall, and
ministering occasion; thirdly, a giving them up to be ruled by his lusts, and by
the devil, as a Judge gives up a Malefactor unto the hands of the
executioner. Thus was Judas delivered up to Satan. Romans 1, 18. God delivered
them up to a Reprobate mind. And Verse 24.

to Deliver up to Satan. sig:
To shut out justly (according to the word) offensive livers, by the sentence
of excommunication. 1. Cor. 5, 5. That ye deliver him to Satan. 1. Tim. 1, 20.
Whom I delivered up to Satan. Such as be worthily thrust out from the private
fellowship of the Saints, and the public participation in holy things, are
thereby declared to be under the power of Satan, and to appertain no more unto
the kingdom of Christ, till they repent. See Math. 18, 17.

to Deliver ones soul. sig:
To acquit and discharge ones self from partaking in the guilt and dangers of
other men's sins. Ezekiel. 3, 21. If thou admonish the wicked, thou shall deliver
thine own soul. 1. Tim. 4, 6.

to Deliver unto the Judge. sig:
To overcome and cast his Adversary, and by the sentence of the Judge to commit
him to prison. Math. 5, 25.

to be Delivered into the form of Doctrine. sig:
To have the impression or print of saving knowledge made in our hearts, by the
Doctrine of grace (which is like a form or molde) transforming and altering
the elect into the likeness of Christ. Romans 6, 17.

to Deny ourselves. sig:
To forsake the motion of our own corrupt reason and will. Luke 9. 23. If any
man will come after me, let him deny himself. And Luke 14, 26. When that which
is pleasing to our corrupt nature, and hinders us in the course of Godliness
is loathed and eschewed. This is the denial of ourselves, which is the very
same, with mortifying of the Old man, and crucifying the flesh. Here of a
notable example. Heb. 11, 24, 25.

to Deny Christ. sig:
To renounce him and his Gospel, either in our profession or lives, either for
a time, and of infirmity, as Peter; or for ever, and of maliciousness, as
Julian the Apostata did. Math. 10, 33. Whosoever shall deny me before men. 1.
Peter. 2, 1. Even Denying the Lord. Titus 1, 16.

to Deny us sig:
Not to acknowledge us as his own, but to cast us out as Reprobates. 2. Tim.
2, 12. If we deny him, he will deny us.

to Deny himself. sig:
To be unconstant and mutable in keeping of his word and promise. 2. Tim. 2,
13. God cannot deny himself, that is; his truth.

Depart* being referred to God. sig:
His leaving or going from us by the presence of his favor, when he withdrawes
his benefits or protections, spiritually or bodily; for as touching his
essence and power, he never departs from his creatures. Psalm. 71, 12, 18.
Depart not, or go not f^r from us O Lord. Gods departing, is either in part,
or wholly; either for a certain time, or for ever.

to Depart, being referred to men. sig: pro
To leave one, by going out of his sight. Genesis 31, 49. When we shall be
departed one from another.

2 To leave off, or go from the service and practice of sin. 1. Tim. 1, 19.
Let every one depart from Iniquity.

3 To forsake and go from the fellowship of the wicked, sometimes touching
their persons, when God commands, or our vocation will suffer, as well as from
their sins. Numb. 16, 27. Depart from the Tents of these wicked men. Psalm. 6,
8.

4 To fall from the true Doctrine of God, or from the Christian faith. 2. These.
2, 3. Except there come a departing first. 1. Tim. 4, 1. In the latter times
some shall depart from the faith.

to be Deprived. sig:
To be excluded or shut out. Heb. 4, 1. Least ye be Deprived. The word
properly signifies to wax faint in running of a race, and to give over ere we
come to the Goal: in which sense, al men through sin are deprived of Gods
eternal glory, that is; they can never attain that Goal of Heavenly bliss,
without Christ and his righteousness, imputed to faith. Romans 3, 23. All have
sinned, and are Deprived of the glory of God.

Depth, or Deep. sig:
Some extreme misery, and grievous danger. Psalm. 131, 1. Out of the Deep have
I called unto thee o God.

2 Destruction or torment, aeternally suffered in the Deep pit of hell. Romans
10, 6. Who shall go into the Deep.

3 The lowest and nethermost parts of the world. Esaias 7, 11. Ask it either in
the Depth beneath, etc.

4 The most hidden thoughts of God or men. Prou. 12, 4. Romans 11, 33. O the
Depth of the Wisdom of God, etc.

5 The first matter of things; the formlesse mass of earth and water confused
at the first. Genesis 1, 2, Darkness was upon the Deep.

Deepenesse of riches. sig:
Riches unsearchable, and most profound. Romans 11, 33. O the Depth of his Riches.

Deep things of God. sig:
Things se^ret, hid, and kept close (as it were) in the breast of God, till
they be revealed to us by the spirit and word of God. 1. Cor. 2, 10. The
spirit searches the Deep things of God.

Deep waters. sig:
Great dangers which threaten death, like deep Waters which ouer-whelme a man.
Psalm 69, 2. I am come into the Deep Waters; that is; deadly dangers.

2 The most secret, and most inward thoughts and counselles of a man's heart.
Prou. 20, 5. Counsel in the heart of a Man is like Deep Waters.

Desert. sig:
A Wilderness, or a forsaken place, barren and void of Inhabitants. Exodus 19,
2. They came into the Desert of Sinai, and Camped in the Wilderness. See
Wilderness.

Descending sig: pro
Coming down from above, or from some high place to a lower.

2 Some visible sign of Gods presence, and especially the assuming of our
Nature in the person of his Son, that he might dwell visibly amongst us.
John 3, 13. No man has ascended up into heaven, but he that descended from
Heaven. John 1, 14. Ephesians. 4, 9, 10.

3 To examine a cause, or to enter into judgment with good advise and
consideration. Genesis 18, 21. I will descend (or go downo) now, and see, etc.

4 Sending down from heaven. Psalm. 7, 16. His cruelty shall descend or fall
upon, etc.

5 Coming without respect of place, high or low. John 4, 47. He besought to
descend, or go down, etc.

to Descend into hell. sig:
To go down into the grave, and there to be shut up under the power of
death. Genesis 37, 35. Surely I will descend (or go down) into hell, or grave.
Psalm. 16, 7.

2 To be oppressed with sorrow extreme and deadly, of mind or body. Genesis 42,
38.

Descention into hell, what it is.
The extreme humiliation and abasement of Note.
Christ in his manhood, under the power of death and the grave, being kept
there as a prisoner in bands until the third day. Acts 10, 40. 1. Cor. 15, 4.
He was buried, and rose the third day. Christ, his local going into hell, to
draw out thence the souls of Patriarchs, etc. is a mere popish dream.

Desire. sig:
Lawful appetite, after a lawful thing. Genesis 3, 16. Thy Desire shall be to
thy Husband.

2 Unlawful lusting after things lawful, or after things forbidden. 1. Tim.
6, 10. The desire of money is the root of all evil.

3 The longing of a faithful soul, either for some bodily or spiritual good
thing, whereof it feels a want. Psalm. 145, 19. He will fulfill the desires of
them that fear him.

4 Vehement and continual looking for a thing (as it were with thrusting forth
the head) to see if we can spy it come. Romans 8, 19. The fervent desire of the
Creature.

Desolate. sig:
Left alone, heavy and comfortless. Psalm. 25, 16. For I am desolate and poor.
Math. 23, 38.

Desolation sig:
The laying of a thing wast, being brought to utter ruin, whereof follows
discomfort and heaviness. Esaias 6, 12. And there be a Desolation in the midst
of the Land.

2 Eternal ruin, when impenitent sinners at the end of their days are turned
into that deep and uncomfortable pit of hell. Psalm. 73, 18. And casts them
down into desolation.

sudden Desolation. sig:
Unlooked for, and most dreadful Judgment, hurling down, and laying wast all
things, like a mighty fierce storm of Hail, or sudden rising of Waters,
bearing down all before it. Prou. 1, 27. When your fear comes like sudden
Desolation. Job. 30, 14.

abomination of Desolation. sig:
An abominable Desolation. Dan. 9, 27. See Abomination.

Despair. sig:
Want of hope; it is either in opinion, as when godly men think themselves to
be without hope in a pang of temptation, as David did: or in truth, as in
wicked men, who always want hope, and sometimes profess the want of it, as
Caine. 2. Cor. 4, 8. We Despair not. Acts 27, 20. We Despaired, or All hope
was taken away. Despair is contrary to hope, as unbelief and diffidence is
unto faith.

to Despise, when it is spoken of men. sig:
To set at naught, and lightly to account of any thing.

2 To neglect the use of a thing. In this sense the wicked are said to despise
the bounty and patience of God. Also the word of God. Romans 2, 4. Despisest thou
the bounty of God? Acts 13, 41. Behold ye Despisers. Prou. 1, 30. When men make
no use or profit of Gods Word, Chasticements, or Benefits, thereby they declare
how they despise them, holding them as vain things. Thus Children are said to
despise the Counsel of their Parents, when they do not follow it.

to Despise, referred to God sig:
His accounting us vile in his own sight, or making us vile in the eyes of
men. 1. Sam. 2, 30. I will honor him that honors me, and him that despises
me, will I despise.

not to Despise. sig:
To esteem highly of a thing, and to value it at a great rate. Psalm. 51, 17. A
Contrite heart (o Lord) thou will not Despise. Hebr. 12, 5. In these places,
less is spoken, then is meant.

to Destroy. sig:
To pull down and make wast a building or house, making it eeuen with the
ground, not leaving a stone upon a stone, as it is written. Luke 21, 6. A stone
shall not be left upon a stone, that shall not be thrown down.

2 To take away a thing quite, so as it be no more. In this sense, Christ is
said to destroy sin. Romans 6, 6. That the Body of sin might be Destroyed. For
at length (to wit) at our death, sin shall be quite taken out of our Nature.
2. Tim. 2, 10, 18.

3 To bring men unto a remediless downfall and misery, both in body and
soul. In this sense, God destroys the wicked. Ps. 38, 38. The transgressors
shall be Destroyed.

4 To take punnishment upon the wicked, by death, as Magistrates do. Psa. 101,
8. Betimes will I Destroy the wicked of the Land, and cut off the workers of
Iniquity.

5 To hazard the Salvation of our Brother, by giving offense, or by laying a
stumbling block before him. Romans 14, 15. Destroy not him with thy meat, for
whom Christ dyed.

6 To execute the final Judgment upon evil Spirits. Mark 1, 24. Art thou
come to Destroy us?

Destruction. sig:
Temporal Death. Psalm. 90, 3. Thou turnest man to Destruction.

2 The casting down of a person, or place, or people, in such sort as they be
never able to rise again, like to an old ruinous house, which being fallen
down, cannot be built again. Ose. 13, 9. O Israel, Destruction is of thy
self. 2. Pet. 3, 7. Ps. 37, 12. There they are fallen that work iniquity, and
shall not be able to rise.

3 A Snare, or Trap, such as Fowlers and Hunters spread. Exodus 22, 33. It shall
be thy Destruction.

Destruction of y^ flesh sig:
The taming or mortifying our corrupt Nature: Thus Beza takes it. The
leanness and wasting of the body, thorough great heaviness and affliction of
mind for sin: Thus Piscator expounds it. 1. Cor. 5, 5. Unto the
Destruction of the flesh.

Devil. sig:
A Calumniator, or Accuser, which accuses us before God day and night, Revel.
12, 9, 10.

2 One who is like the Devil, of a Deuillish quality. John 6, 70. Have I not
chosen twelve, and one of you is a Devil, that is; the Child of the Devil,
as like him, as a Child is like the Father.

3 A wicked Spirit, the Prince and Captain of the rest. Math. 25, 41. Prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.

to cast* out Devils. sig:
To drive or thrust out of men's bodies and minds by his Divine power, the
Devils, which personally dwelt there (as in their house or hold.) Mat. 8, 31.
and Chap. 9, 33, 34.

seven Devils. sig:
Many Devils, a number certain, put for an uncertain. Luke 8, 2. Out of whom
went seven Devils.

to command Devils. sig:
By his voice effectually to bid them depart from any whom they possessed and
vexed. Luke 8, 29.

Devise. sig:
A thought, counsel, or purpose of doing some thing. Psalm. 33, 10. Thou
bring to naught the Devises of the people.

2 The event that does follow upon a man's Devises. Prou. 1, 31. They shall be
filled with their own Devises, that is; with the fruit of their Devises, or
with that which comes of their own purposes and plots.

Devout. sig:
One truly Religious, who has vowed and bound himself to the true worship of
the true God, abhorring Idolatry. Acts 10, 2. Cornelius a Devout man.

2 A superstitious person, which seems Religious, and is not, but is given to
Will Worship. Acts 13, 50. The Jews stirred up Devout Women against Paul.

to Devour. sig: pro
To eat without chawing, and to swallow down whole. Genesis 41, 24, 21.

2 With cruel fierceness to tear and spoil spiritually men's souls and
bodies, as a Lion deuoures the silly Lamb. 1. Pet. 5, 8. Seeks whom he may
Devour. A Metaphor.

3 To spoil and undo one in his outward estate, without pity. Thus mighty men
oppress and devour the poor, as great Fish and Beasts devour and eat up
the small. Ier. 15, 3.

4 To wast and spend ryotously. Luke. 15, 30. He has Devoured thy goods with
Harlots.

5 To apply and take to our own use that which was given and appointed once to
Gods service, or to keep back in our hands, that which was due to him. Prou.
20, 25. It is Destruction to a man to Devour that which is Sanctified.

6 To deceive and defraud other of that which is theirs by cunning pretenses
and shifts. Math. 23, 14. Ye Devour widows houses, under color of long
Prayers.

Deutronomy. sig:
A second Law; because the Law which GOD gave in Mount Sinai, is rehearsed (as
if it were a new Law) in this Book of Deutronomy, which is a Commentary or
exposition of the Morrall Law, or ten Commandments.

Dew. sig:
A Water, or small Rain, which softly dropping and falling upon the ground
every morning, does keep it moist, and make it fruitful. 1. Kings 17, 11.
and by resemblance or likeness, it does signify and set forth the things
following.

2 The fruitfulness of good Doctrine, and of the word of God. Deuteronomy. 32, 2. My
speech shall Still as the Dew. A Metaphor.

3 The profit and commodity which comes of Brotherly love, or of the Communion
of Saints. Psalm. 133, 3. As the Dew of Hermon, etc.

4 Innumerable multitudes of the elect, plentifully gathered into the Church of
Christ, as the Dew that drops from Heaven. Psalm. 110, 3.

5 The short continuance, or sudden vanishing of the goodness which is in
Hypocrites. Hosea. 6, 4. Your Goodness goes away as the Morning Dew.

D. I.
to Dig a pit sig:
To cast about, to devise and plot the hurt of others. Psalm. 7, 15. He has
made a pit, and Dug it, and himself is fallen into it. Thus men Dig.

2 To prepare and send destruction upon sinners. Psa. 94, 13. Till the pit be
Dug up for the Wicked. Thus God Digges.

Diligence. sig:
The earnest bending of the mind to do a thing well, and frequenting
oftentimes so to do. 2. Pet. 1, 5. Give all Diligence to join, etc. Eccles.
9, 10.

Diligent hand. sig:
A man which loves labor, and gets his living in the sweat of his face. Prou.
10, 4. The Diligent hand shall have plenty; or makes rich.

to Direct. sig:
To govern, rule, and order a thing unto happy success, when the grace of God
in the heart assisteth us to do well, and his providence blessing us, causes
our work to fall out well to us. Ps. 90, 18. Direct the work of our hand upon
us.

Discern. sig:
To put a difference between things and persons, which be like one another,
being able distinctly to know one from the other; and touching things and
persons which do differ and be unlike, to perceive which are most excellent,
and to allow them. 1. Cor. 12, 10. Discerning of spirits. Revel. 2, 18. And
triest the things which differ. Phil. 1, 10.

Discretion referred to men. sig:
That gift of God (called Judgment.) Phil. 1, 9. Psalm. 112, 5. Whereby sundry
Christians are enabled to try and judge of things and persons to be such as
they are. By this gift, Peter discovered Simon Magus. Acts 8. and Paul
bewrayed Elimas the Sorcerer. Acts 13, 10. and John Mark. Acts 15, 38. It is a
worthy gift proper to godly Wise men. Prou. 20, 5. Psalm. 112, 5. Most
needful it is for a Minister of the word to have a good measure of this
gift.

Referred to God.
2 The wisdom which God declared in making and disposing the world, and the
several parts thereof to his glory, and man's good. Ier. 51, 15. He stretched
out the Heavens by his Discretion.

Disciple. sig:
A Learner, or Scholar, who submits himself to another, to be taught any
Learning. Acts 20, 30. To draw Disciples after them. Mat. 11, 2. John sent two
of his Disciples.

2 One, who learneth the Doctrine of Christ, that he may believe, and practice
it. Luke 11, 26. The Disciples were first called Christians in Antioch. Luke
14, 26.

3 The Apostles, who in a peculiar manner are often called the Disciples of
Christ. Math. 8, 1. and 10, 1.

4 Hypocrites, which heard and professed his Doctrine without love to it, or
faith in it. John 6, 66. Many of his Disciples went from him, and walked no
more with him.

Disobedience to men sig:
An unwillingness to do what is commanded, and a readiness to do the
contrary. 2. Tim. 3, 2. Disobedient to parents.

Disobedience to God sig:
A vice which causes men to do what God forbids, and to leave undone what
he commands, either because his precepts be troublesome to our sloathfull
nature, or above our corrupt reason. Romans 5, 19. By the Disobedience of one
man. Ephesians. 5, 6. Children of Disobedience. Esaias 1, 19.

to Disobey. sig:
To refuse, to harken, and do, according as God commands and forbids in
his word. Deuteronomy. 28, 15. If thou Disobey the word of the Lord thy God. Esaias 1,
20* But if ye refuse, etc.

Dispose. sig:
To put a thing in order, or every thing in his own place. 1. Cor. 11. 32. I
will dispose (or set things in order) when I come.

2 To direct and turn a thing to this or that end. Genesis 50, 20.

3 To give out and distribute (as a Steward) the Treasures of God. 1. Cor. 4,
1, 2. It is required of Disposers, etc.

Disposition sig:
An effect of Gods most wise providence mightily ordering and fitting all
counselles and actions, both his own and others, to their due and proper ends.
Genesis 50, 20. But God disposed it to good. Pro. 16, 9.

Distress. sig:
Any great trouble, danger, or grievous affliction, whereby men are so
straightned, as they know not at al what they may do. Ps. 107, 6. He delivered
them out of their Distress. 2. Cor. 1, 8.

Distrust. sig:
Want of trust, when men do not rely and rest upon God for temporal
provision and protection, or for eternal salvation. Psalm. 78, 22. They
believed not in God, but distrusted his help.

Divine. sig:
One, that excels in the knowledge and teaching of Divine and heavenly
Mysteries. Revel. 1. John the Divine.

Divine sentence. sig:
A sentence most provident and prudent, full of foresight and prevention. Prou.
16, 10. A Divine sentence shall be in the lips of the King.

Divine nature. sig:
The godly nature; that is, those godly qualities of righteousness and true
holiness, wherein the regenerate resemble God. 2. Pet. 2, 5. Partakers of the
Divine Nature.

Diuiner, or Soothsayer sig:
One, which by a devilish spirit that is in him, does prophecy and tell
before, what things shall come after. Deuteronomy. 18, 10. Let none be found among
you that is a Diuiner. Esaias. 8, 19. Genesis 41, 8. Ezekiel. 21, 21. Consulting by
Divination.

spirit of Divination. sig:
One, that by a devilish Spirit studieth to withdraw others from the worship
of God, and true holiness of life. Leuit. 20, 6, 27. If a man or woman have a
spirit of Divination.

to Divine. sig:
To tell things to come, as a Soothsayer by the help of an evil spirit.

2 To devise and find out ways and means how to know that which is hard to
be known. Genesis 44, 15. Know ye not that such a man as I can Divine.

Division. sig:
Disagreement in Doctrine or affections. Romans 16, 17. Mark them which cause
Division.

to Divorce sig:
To refuse ones wife, or to put her away from being his wife. To make a
separation and departing. Math. 19, 3, 7. 1. Cor. 7, 14, 15.

bill of Divorce. sig:
A writing, or Letter, which the Husband gave vnro the wife to witness that
he had refused her, and willingly put away, or turned her off from being any
more his wife. Deuteronomy. 24, 1. Let him write her a Bill of Divorce, and put it
into her hand. The Jews did not this by precept from God, but by permission
from Moses, who allowed such a Letter of divorce for the safety of such Wives
as had cruel and hard-hearted husbands, as it is written. Math. 19, 8. Moses
suffered you for the hardness of your hearts, to put away your Wives, but from
the beginning it was not so. Therefore such Jewish Divorce was evil morrally,
but not ciuilly. Divorce for adultery allowed by Christ. Math. 5, 33. Also 19,
5. The Papists hold, that the bond of marriage (being an holy Sacrament, as
they say) cannot upon any cause be broken, but is vnviolable till death: and
therefore, if Adultery be committed by either party, they allow a Divorce ( A
thoro) from bed only, and do not give leave to the innocent party to marry
again. See their Annotation in Rhem. Testament, on Verse 18. of the 16.
Chapter of Luke.

D. O.
Doctor. sig:
One, who teaches others, and causes them to learn any knowledge. This is
the general signification.

2 One, who soundly teaches the Doctrine of Christ, skilfully confuting
errors, which be contrary to it. Ephe. 4, 11. Pastors, and Doctors [or
Teachers.]

3 One, who teaches effectually and within, making us believe what we learn
and know of him. Math. 23, 6. For one is your Doctor, even Christ. Esaias 54, 13.
All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord. Ier, 31, 34.

4 One, that ambitiously affects the honor of a Teacher, and a guide. Math.
23, 10. Be not many Doctors. Romans 2, 19. Thou perswadest thy self that thou
art a guide of the blind, that is; one that can go before others, as a guide
or a teacher. This honor the Pharisees willingly took to themselves, being
unworthy of it. Math. 5, 14.

be not called Doctors sig:
That the ambitious seeking after Titles ought to be eschewed. Math. 23, 10, Be
not called Doctors.

Doctrine. sig:
That which is taught, or set others to learn. This is the general
signification.

2 The instruction of the Church in that truth, which is according to Godliness.
1. Tim 4, 13. Give attendance to Doctrine. Titus 1, 2. Here it is taken in
good part.

3 Any manner of instruction, how corrupt or evil soever it be. 2. Tim. 4, 2.
Doctrine of Devils. Here it is taken in ill part.

4 The act of Teaching, Mark 4, 2. And said to them in his Doctrine, that is;
whiles he was teaching them, or in the act of teaching he said.

form of Doctrine. sig:
The Doctrine of the Gospel, which is like a form, mold, or stamp, changing
the elect into the Image and likeness of it self, by imprinting in their
hearts (through the Holy Ghost) those very graces of faith, hope, love, and
obedience* which it teaches and requires. To. 6, 17. Ye have obeyed the form
of Doctrine, etc.

Doctrine of Christ. sig:
Such Doctrine as has Christ for the Author, matter, and scope or end. Heb.
6, 1. The beginnings of the Doctrine of Christ, that is; which comes from
Christ, teaches Christ, and leads unto Christ.

Doctrine of godliness. sig:
That Doctrine of grace which does teach us the way how to worship God
aright, and makes us his true worshippers, that is; godly persons. 1. Tim. 6,
3. The Doctrine which is according to Godliness.

Doctrines of men. sig:
Such opinions and Doctrines as have none other then men for the Authors of
them, without any ground out of the word. Col. 2, 22. After the Doctrines of
men. These are called precepts of men. Math. 15, 9. Strange Doctrines. Heb. 12,
9. And a wind of Doctrine. Ephesians. 4, 14. Being like Boats tossed up and down
with contrary winds.

Doctrine vncorrupt, wholesome, sound. sig:
Such Doctrine as is not mixed with Leaven of error, but is in it self pure,
and makes them which received it, to be sound in the faith, and of vncorrupt
and pure manner. Titus 1, 9. Also 2, 7, 8. With vncorrupt Doctrine.

Doctrine of Devils. sig:
Such erroneous opinions as come from the Devil as Author, and keeps them
which receive it fast in his snares. 1. Tim. 4, 1. They shall give heed to
Doctrines of devils.

to do the will of God sig:
To believe the promises of mercy (for this is the will of God. John 6, 40. And
to endeavor the keeping of his Commandments and Laws. Math. 7, 21. He that
does the will of my Father. This is Evangelical doing, according to which, all
the godly be doers of the will of God.

2 Perfectly to keep the morrall Law, or ten Commandments, without failing
in any point, either for matter, manner, and measure of doing, or end. Romans 2,
13. The doers of the Law shall be justified. This is Legal doing, which is to
be found only in the man Christ, and the holy Angels.

Doing. sig:
The execution and fulfilling Gods Decrees and Counsels. Psalm. 115, 3. Our God
is in heaven, he does whatsoever he will. Esaias 45, 7. I do all these things.

2 The performance of Gods precepts, either by endeavor, or in perfection.
Psalm. 15, 7. He that does these things, etc. Gal. 3, 2. He that does these
things shall live.

3 The working of some evil works. 3. Ioh. 11. He that does evil, etc.

to Do evil. sig:
To send some punishment, or evil of affliction. Amos. 3, 6. Is there any
evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Thus God does evil.

2 To offend God in some sinful deed, through weakness. 2. Sam. 12. 9.
Wherefore have thou done evil in his sight? Thus Godly men do evil.

3 To live wickedly, fulfilling the lusts of sin with pleasure and
greediness. 3. John 11. He that does evil has not seen God. Thus ungodly
men do evil.

to Do good sig:
To prosper and bless. Genesis 32, 9. I will do thee good.

2 To lead a Godly life. 3. John 11. He that does good is of God.

Dog. sig: pro sig:
A Creature vile and base, whose property is to snarle, bite, and btawle,
loving ease, and greedy after meat.

2 A despised and abject person, which is of vile account. 1. Sam. 17, 44. Am I
a Dog? 2. Kings 18, 13. Is thy servant a Dog? 2. Sam. 3, 8.

3 The Gentiles, which were strangers from Christ. Math. 15, 26. I may not take
the Childrens bread, and give it to Dogs.

4 False Prophets and Teachers, who (like Dogs) impudently bark against the
truth, and shamelesly rail against the true Teachers. Phil. 3, 2. Beware of
Dogs.

5 Contemners of the word, to wit; such filthy unclean livers, as desperately
hate and scorn all good admonition, and their admonishers. Math. 7, 6. Give
not holy things to Dogs. 2. Pet. 2, 22.

6 An Whore, which lets out her body for hire. Deuteronomy. 23, 18. Thou shall not
bring the price of a Dog into the house of God.

7 Negligent, covetous, and unfaithful Ministers which seek their own
things, and not the things of Christ. Esaias 56, 10, 11. These greedy Dogs can
never have enough, they look every one to their own way, etc. Dumb and
greedy Dogs be careless and covetous Shepherds, which mind not the safety of
the Flock, but the benefit of the Fleece.

Dominion. sig:
Rule, Lordship, and power, either moderate, of lawful Lords. Jude 25. To God
only be Dominion: Or immoderate and hurtful, of unlawful Lords or Tyrants.
Romans 6, 14. Sin shall not have Dominion over you.

Door. sig: pro
That, whereby an ordinary entrance into, and passage out of an house is made.

2 Christ, by whom an entrance is made into the Church of God, as by a door
one enters into an house. John 10, 1, 9. I am the Door, if any man enter,
etc.

3 Opportunity or occasion of doing much good. 1. Cor. 16, 9. A great Door and
effectual is opened unto me, that is; a very large occasion of profiting many.

4 Our hearts, which are as Doors, whereby entrance is given to Christ, to
come into us, and to dwell with us. Reu. 3, 20. I stand at the Door. Psa. 24,
7.

Door of faith. sig:
The Doctrine of the Gospel, by which (as by a door) we enter in to God, and
he enters into us. Acts 14, 27. God has opened the Door of faith unto the
Gentiles.

Door of utterance. sig:
An open and free mouth to preach the Gospel. Col. 4, 3.

Door of my lips. sig:
The lips, which are as a Door, by which our words pass out. This Door is
opened by two keys; one, of benefits; the other, of the spirit: The lock
which shuts it, is the fear of God. Psa. 141, 3. Keep the Door of my lips.
Psalm. 51, 15. Open thou my lips, O Lord, etc.

Double. sig:
Great measure. Revel. 18, 6. Give her Double according to her works.

Double portion. sig:
Two parts, or twice so much as double portion. Deuteronomy. 21, 17, 1. Two parts.

Double honor. sig:
Much and great Honor. 1. Tim. 5, 17. Let Elders which rule well, be had in
Double Honor, that is; in singular love and reputation. 1. These. 5, 13.

Double spirit. sig:
A great portion of the spirit, or of spiritual gifts. 2. Kings, 2, 9. Let thy
Spirit be Doubled upon me.

Double minded. sig:
A mind that goes two ways, a wavering unstable mind. James 4, 8. Purge your
hearts ye Double minded.

Doubting. sig:
The mistrust of heart, about the providence and promises of God, when the
soul does not rest quietly and surely in God, but sticks and staggers,
hanging, as it were, between two. Romans 4, 20. Abraham Doubted not through
unbelief. Math. 14, 31. Why Doubt ye, o ye of little faith. Doubting in wicked
men comes from want of faith, and mere infidelity: but in the godly, it comes
from weakness of faith.

2 Wavering, and uncertainty of mind. 1. Tim. 2, 8. Lift up pure hands without
Doubting. James 1, 6.

3 Peplexity and anxiety of mind, when one is so straightned, as he cannot see
which way to turn him, or what to do. 2. Cor. 1. 8. We altogether Doubted
even of life. 2. Cor. 4, 8. We are in Doubt.

Dove. sig: pro
A creature of a very meek and harmless Nature.

2 The Holy Ghost, which is like a Dove for meekness and innocence. Math. 3,
16.

3 Holy Church, or company of believers, which is chaste and sincere, full of
spiritual beauty, like a Dove, resting safe in Gods eternal love, as a Dove
in a rock. Cant. 2, 5. My Dove, etc. A Metaphor.

eyes of a Dove. sig:
Gracious, chaste, and most single, like to the eyes of a Dove. Cant. 1, 15.
Thine eyes are like the eyes of a Dove.

D. R.
Dragon. sig: pro
A fierce and cruel Beast, full of strength, and very terrible for his force
and power. Psalm. 148, 7. Ye Dragons and depths.

2 The Devil, who is called a great and red Dragon, in respect of his exceeding
strength and bloody cruelty against the Saints: which must serve, to make us
watchful and fervent in Prayer against his grievous assaults. To. 12, 3, 9. And
the great Dragon the old Serpent. Metaphor.

3 The greatest evils and enemies which may befall and beset us in this life.
Psalm. 91, 13. The young Lion and the Dragon thou shall tread under thy feet:
that is; thou shall overcome even thy strongest enemies. The King of Babell
for cruelty likened to a Dragon. Ier. 51, 34. Also Ezech. 29, 3. And
Antichrist. Revel. 13, 4.

poison of Dragons. sig:
The evil works of wicked men, which are like poison of Dragons, detestable
to God, and dangerous to men. Deuteronomy. 32, 33. Their Wine is the poison of
Dragons.

places of Dragons. sig:
The wast Wilderness. Psalm. 44, 19.

habitation of Dragons. sig:
Forsaken and desolate Cities. Ier. 51, 37. Babell shall be as an habitation or
dwelling place for Dragons; that is; without an Inhabitant.

to Draw. sig:
To make willing to believe in Christ, them, who by Nature are unwilling. Ioh.
6, 44. None can come to me, except the Father Draw him.

2 To make us more and more willing to follow Christ, by adding grace unto
grace; a second to the first; and to the second, a third. Cant. 1, 3. Draw me,
and we will run after thee.

3 An effect of the exceeding great power of Satan, prevailing even against the
great lights of the Church to put them out, and to pull them from their
standings. Reu. 12, 4. And his tail Drew the third part of the Stars out of
Heaven.

to Draw sin by cords. sig:
To heap up sin upon sin, violently, by all means. Esaias 5, 18. Woe to
them who Draw sin by Cart-ropes, etc.

to Draw waters. sig:
To shed abundance of tears for sins done against Gods Law, as if Buckets
of tears were drawn out of the Well of a sorrowful heart. 1. Sa. 7. 6. They
drew water, and powered out before the Lord, and fasted that day. An Hyperbole.

Dream. sig:
A nightlie vision, or a vision in the night. Mat. 1, 20. And an Angel
appeared to him in a Dream. Ioell. 2, 28. They shall Dream Dreams, that is;
they shall have plenty of Divine revelations.

2 False visions, and lying Prophesies. Ier. 23, 26, 27. The Prophet that has
a Dream, let him tell a Dream.

3 The uncertain and vanishing condition of worldly rich men. Psalm. 73, 10. As
a Dream when one awaketh, etc.

Dross. sig:
False Doctrine, and corrupt Religion. Esaias 1, 22. 25. Thy Silver is turned
into Dross.

2 Hippocrites, and wicked men. Psalm. 119. 119. Thou will Destroy all the
wicked like Dross.

Drunkenness. sig: pro
Excess in Drinking, when Wine or strong drink is taken in so abundantly, til
it inflame and set the lust on fire. Esaias 5, 11. Woe unto them that rise up
early to follow Drunkenness, and to them that continue till night, till the
Wine do inflame them. Prou. 23, 29. There is a notable description of the
sin of drunkenness, by the dangerous effects outward and inward, which it
brings forth in men's bodies and souls. Read the place and consider it.

2 Blindness and perturbation of a mind, not able to discern true things
from false. Esaias 28, 7. The Prophet and the people have erred by strong drink,
they stumble in Judgment. In this signification the Whore of Babell is said
to make drunk the kingdoms of the earth with the Golden Cup of her
fornications, that is; with her most false and pestilent errors offered out of
a Cup of Gold, to blind and besot them. Revel. 17, 2, 4. Ier. 23, 9.

3 Furious division, such as is amongst drunken men which do rashly smite one
another. Ier. 13, 14. I will fill them with Drunkenness, and will dash them
one against another. A Metanimie.

4 Feasting, and liberal fare, as Genesis 43, 34. And they drunk, and had of the
best drink. Hest. 3, 15. The King and Haman sat down to drink. Hest. 7, 1.
Sinechdoche.

5 Plentiful abundance of good things. Ps. 65, 9. Thou visits the earth, and
have made it Drunken, that is, thou have watered it abundantly, and made it
rich. And verse 10.

6 All kind of inordinate living. 1. These. 5, 7. They that are Drunk. A
Sinechdoche.

7 Wanton riotousnesse, and infamous lust. Habac. 2, 15. Metanimie.

D. U.
Dumb. sig: pro
One that cannot speak for lack of natural ability. Math. 9, 32. Mark 7, 32.

2 One, that cannot speak and teach others, for lack of grace and knowledge.
Esaias 56, 10. Their Watchmen are all Dumb, they have no knowledge.

3 One that will not speak though he can, being quiet and silent under Gods
hand. Psalm. 39, 9. I was Dumb and opened not my mouth.

Dumb spirit. sig:
A Spirit, which makes him dumb, whom he possesses. Mark 9, 17, 25.

Dung. sig:
Gods enemies, trod under foot as dung and mire. Psalm. 83, 11. They became
the Dung of the earth. Mal. 2, 3.

2 All things even the most precious and glorious, without Christ* Phil. 3, 8.
I judge them all Dung.

Dust. sig:
A weak and vile Creature. Genesis 18, 27. How shall I that am but Dust speak to
my Lord? Genesis 3, 18. Dust thou art.

2 A mean estate. Psalm. 113, 7. He lifts the needy out of the Dust.

3 Death, or the estate of the dead. Gen, 3, 7. To Dust thou shall return.

Dust put upon the head. sig:
Deep heaviness and sorrow, in respect either of some great sin, or of some
great judgment. Ios. 7, 5. And they put Dust upon their heads. Actos. 15, 31.

to shake off the Dust of the feet. sig:
To witness by this sign, how execrable and loathsome they are, which refuse
and contemn the Gospel, the very Dust is infected with their sin. Mat. 10,
14. Shake off the Dust of your feet.

D. W.
Dwelling. sig:
A true, mighty, and fixed presence, either for good or evil, according to the
nature of the thing that dwells. John 1, 14. The word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us. Thus the spirit and the word are said to dwell in us. 2. Cor.
5, 16. Col. 3, 16. Ephesians. 2. Christ Dwells in our hearts, that is; they be
conversant with us, and do keep mansion in our hearts, ruling and ouer-ruling
us, as a Master rules and guides his house. Also sin dwells in the
regenerate. Romans 7, 17. Not I, but sin that dwells in me, forcibly
hindering, and by his presence mightily crossing and striving against the good
motions of grace, in the heart of a sanctified person.

2* Constant trust in Gods providence and promises. Psalm. 91, 1. Who Dwells
in the secret of the Almighty.

3 To remain, abide, and continue. John 5, 56. He that eats my flesh
Dwells in me, and I in him.

4 To have place, or entertainment. Psalm. 5, 3. No evil shall dwell with thee.

5 Familiarity or Communion, both perfect and immediate, between God and the
elect. Revel. 21, 12. And he will dwell with them.

6 Solace, comfort and protection, by Gods comfortable presence. Revel. 7, 15.
He that sits on the Throne will Dwell with you.

to Dwell together. sig:
The society and conversation of man and wife, for the performance of marriage
duties. Mat. 1, 18. Before they came to Dwell together. 1. Pet. 3, 5.

Dwelling of the Spirit in us. sig:
Three things. First, that his presence is effectual and mighty, to possess
and govern the faithful, which are his Temples, having dominion over them,
inwardly enlightening to know, and powerfully guiding to do the known will of
God. Secondly; that his presence is continual, not as of a guest, who lodges
for a night in an Inn, and is gone next day; nor as a Soiourner that flitteth,
but as an owner and possessor to abide for ever, as in John 14. Thirdly, the
manner of his presence; not by infiniteness of power, as he is present to al
creatures to sustain them, but by his grace and healthful effects, uniting to
Christ, regenerating to be his lively members, witnessing our adoption, etc.

D. Y.
to Dye. sig:
To give up the Ghost. Genesis 5, 20. And he Dyed.

2 To be continually in the danger of death. 1. Cor. 15, 31. I Dye daily.

to Dye to sin. sig:
To break the force of sin, and every day to weaken it something. To. 6, 2.
How can they which are Dead to sin, live therein. Thus the godly Dye even
while they live.

to Dye in the Lord. sig:
To yield up our Spirits in the faith of Christ, under hope of Salvation by
him* with repentance for all our sins. Revel. 14, 13. Blessed are they which
Dye in the Lord. This is to fall asleep in Christ. 1. These. 4, 13,

to Dye for the Lord. sig:
To give our lives for the Testimony of Jesus, as Martyrs do. Acts 21, 13. I am
ready to Dye for the name of the Lord Jesus. Thus dyed James. Act. 12, 2. and
Antepas. Revel. 2, 13.

to Dye in sin. sig:
To perish by impenitency, or to go into everlasting death through continuance
in sin. John. 8, 24. Ye shall dye in your sins. Thus shall all they dye,
which believe not in the only begotten son of God.

to Dye the Death. sig:
Certainty of dying. Genesis 2, 17. Thou shall Dye the Death.

to Dye the death of the righteous. sig:
To have a Death like to the Death of the righteous; or to have an end like
unto his. Numb. 23, 10. That I might Dye the death of the righteous, and my end
be like his.

to Dye in Adam. sig:
To be subject to Death, by the guilt of Adams disobedience. 1. Cor. 15, 22.
In Adam all Dye.

Dying. sig:
The miserable estate and condition in which the faithful, but especially the
Ministers of the word be in this life. 2. Cor. 4, 10. We bear about in our
bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus.

E. A.
Eagle. sig: pro
A Bird, the King of Birds, whereof Pliny mentions diverse kinds, unto which
it is common, to be gathered together to a dead Carrion, thorough the smell or
scent of it; also to fly aloft, and to carry their young upon their wings in a
tender care of them, etc. Job. 39, 31, 32, 33, 34.

2 Believers, which upon the wings of a lively faith soar aloft, and mount
up to Christ Jesus, whose crucified flesh has a sweet savor, that
attracteth and draws them to him, as the savor of the dead carcass can
cause the Eagles to resort unto it. Luke 17, 37. Where the carcass is, there
will the Eagles resort.

These senses and collections be not contrary* but diverse: and may well stand
together.
Or thus: If there be such wit in Birds (as Eagles) that they will come so
far to one carcass, a great shame is it to believers, not to be gathered to
the Author of life, by whom they are truly fed unto an everlasting life.

Or thus: As Eagles assemble to the Carrion: so the believer shall be perfectly
joined to Christ, in despite of Satan, according to that. 1. These. 4, 17. And
so they shall be ever with the Lord* When the Son ne of m^n shall come to judge
the world, all the faithful shall be gathered to him. An Allegory.

Eagles wings. sig:
The merciful providence of God, saving and protecting his people from
dangers. Exodus 19, 4. I carried you upon Eagles wings. Eagles fly aloft, and
carry their young on their wings, to put them out of danger, which signifies
Gods loving providence, procuring the safety of the Church, and of every
member of it. A Metaphor.

2 Swiftness, speediness, and by sudden flight vanishing away. Pro. 23, 5.
Riches takes wings like an Eagle, and flies into Heaven.

great Eagle sig:
That most mighty and rich king of Babel; to wit, Nabuchadnezzar. Ezekiel. 17, 3.
So expounded in Verse 12. of this Chapter. A Metaphor.

Ear. sig: pro
The instrument of hearing.

2 The understanding which comes by hearing. Reu. 2, 11. He that has Ears to
hear, etc. Deuteronomy. 29, 4. A Metanimie.

3 Service, obedience, or perpetual subjection. Psalm. 40, 6. Mine Ears have
thou opened; that is, thou have framed me to thy perpetual service. Exo. 21, 6.

gods Ear. sig:
Either his infinite knowledge (as if he heard all things) or his readiness to
hear and grant our requests. Psalm. 94, 9. He that made the Ear, shall he not
hear? Psalm. 116, 2. He has inclined his Ear unto me. A Metaphor.

Earnest. sig: pro
Something given to bind a bargain; as a shilling, to bind the payment of an
hundred pound.

2 A pledge, or pawn. Genesis 38, 17, 18. What is the Earnest (or pledge) that I
shall give thee?

3 An hostage given in War. All these are (as an earnest) to confirm and
assure a thing. 2. Kin. 14, 14.

Earnest of the spirit. sig:
The Spirit, which is like an Earnest in a bargain, for the first fruits or the
saving gifts of the spirit, to wit; Faith, Hope, Love, and Repentance, do in
such sort assure the godly of having their full happiness in Heaven at last, as
he that has received an Earnest, is sure to have the full sum paid him, or
the full bargain aecomplished. Ephesians. 1, 14. Also 2. Cor. 1, 22. And has given
the Earnest of the spirit. In this sense, the Apostle in the fore-saide places,
uses the similitude of a Seal, which also serves to confirm a promise; and
therefore fit to signify, the assurance which the spirit of adoption does give
the faithful, of their inheritance in heaven.

Earth. sig: pro.
Dry Land. Genesis 1, 9. Psa. 24, 1. The Earth is the Lords. Also it signifies
that matter whereof all terrestrial and caelestiall bodies were made. Genesis 1,
2.

2 Land and Sea, and all that is in them. Genesis 2, 1. Thus God created Heaven
and Earth; etc. And wheresoever it is opposed unto heaven. Ps. 124, 8. Which
made Heaven and Earth. Also by a Sinechdoche, this figure Earth, is put for all
things created.

3 The Inhabitants or people which dwell in the earth. Psalm. 101, 1. Sing unto
the Lord all the Earth. Genesis 6, 11. Genesis 9, 13. By a Metanimie of the place;
containing, being put for the persons contained in it. As Josh. 23, 14.

4 Earthly minded persons. Psalm. 10, 18. That Earthly man (or man of the
earth) cause to fear no more.

5 That which is frail and weak. 2. Cor. 4, 7. We have this Treasure in
vessels of Earth, or Earthly. Signifying thereby, frail and weak men, to whom
the treasure of the Gospel was committed, to be by preaching seattered abroad.

6 The increase or fruit which comes out of the earth. Genesis 3, 17. In sorrow
thou shall eat of it, that is; (the Earth) all the days of thy life. Metanimie.

7 A Region, Land, or Country. Math. 9, 26. Mark 15, 33. Luke 4, 25. In all
which places, the word Englished [ Land] is [ Earth] in the Original, by a
Sinechdoche.

Ease. sig:
A stubborn resting and continuing in an evil and sinful course, with
pleasure and delight in it. Prou. 1, 32. The ease of the Fools slays them.

Easy. sig:
That which may well be born, or which we may use with none or little
encumberance and burden to us. Math. 11, 30. My yoke is easy, to wit; unto
the regenerate. See Yoke.

to Eat. sig: pro
To chew meat with the teeth, to make it fit to enter the stomach. This is
natural eating.

to Eat Christ. sig:
To receive him, by believing in him, as meat is received into the stomach by
eating, so Christ is received into the soul by believing. John. 6, 35. He that
believes in me shall never hunger more, and he that believes in me shall
never thirst. This is spiritual Eating. Thus is the flesh of Christ eaten,
when we do by faith believe, that it was given for us, and is the price of our
sins to God. The Capernaicall and Papisticall Eating of Christ, is both absurd
and abominable; for so Infidels and wicked men; yea, very Mice and Rats may
eat him, and have eternal life by him, if his very flesh were corporally
present in the place where the Sacrament is administered.

to Eat our own judgment. sig:
To procure Judgment to our selves by our eating unworthily the Lords Supper.
1. Cor. 11, 30. He that eats this Bread unworthily, eats his own
Judgment, that is; he is cause of punishment to himself, by eating unduly.

to Eat a Roll, or a Book. sig:
To receive, and (after a sort) to draw and take in both the argument or
matter, and also the gift of prophecy. Ezekiel. 3, 1. Son of man Eat this
Roll.

2 To study and learn the Scripture til one know the points of Doctrine, and
have the power thereof in the heart. Revel. 10, 9. Take the Book und eat it up.

to Eat Bread. sig:
To feed, or to eat meat. Mar. 3, 20. They could not so much as eat Bread;
that is, take their meat and repast.

to Eat and Drink. sig:
To live, and be safe. Exodus 24, 11. They saw God, and did Eat and Drink.

to Eat up gods people sig:
To exercise wrong and cruelty toward the godly. Psalm. 14, 4. They Eat up
my people like Bread, even as usually and willingly as they eat Bread, they do
oppress the Godly.

E. C.
Ecclesiastes sig:
A person united again to the Church, upon his repentance done and published
before the church. Eccles. 1, 1.

2 A Book or portion of Scripture, called Ecclesiastes, because it is a
witness of his [ Salomons] uniting to the Church after his grievous fall.

E. D.
Edify. sig: pro
To build, or to make an house.

2 To do all manner of duties, either to bring our Neighbor unto Christ, or if
he be won, that he may grow from faith to faith: for the faithful they are
Gods house and building, his temple and stones of the new Jerusalem; and the
furthering of these in Christianity, is edifying and building of them up. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 11. Edify one another. Romans 15, 2. Ephesians. 4, 12. A Metaphor.

Edification sig:
Either the action of one, who seeks by instruction to build up others in
godliness: or the event and fruit of such an action. Ephesians. 4, 12, 16. For the
edification of the body of Christ. 1. Tim. 1, 4.

E. L.
Eldership. sig:
The College or whole company of Elders, which labor in the word and the
regiment of the Church. 1. Tim. 4, 14. Given thee with the laying on of hands
of the Company of the Eldership.

Elder. sig:
An ancient, or one stricken in years, or of great age. 1. Tim. 6, 1. Rebuke
not an Elder. This is an Elder in respect of age.

2 A temporal Governor and Ruler among the Jews. Exodus 34. 1. Also Exodus 4,
29. The Elders of the Children of Israel. Exodus 17, 5. Take with thee the
Elders of Israel. Math. 21, 23. Acts 4, 5. These were Lay, or civil Elders.
Elders by office and dignity in the Commonwealth.

3 One that has authority over a flock, to rule or teach it. 1. Tim. 5, 17.
The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor. 1. Pet. 5, 1. The Elders
which are among you. This is an ecclesiastical Elder, to deal in the
Edification of the Church.

4 An Apostle. 1. Pet. 5, 1. I also that am an Elder. 2. John 1. The Elder to
the elect Lady.

5 Progenitors, or Forefathers, which lived in former ages. Mark 7, 3.
Holding the Tradition of the Elders.

6 Pastors, Deacons, and other Church Officers. Acts 14, 23. Synochdoche.

Election. sig: pro
A choosing of some out of many, as if out of a great heap of Flowers or
Herbs, Gold, or precious Stone, or other things, ye would gather the chief.
Now, where some are chosen, others are refused; and where some be refused, all
be not Note. They err, who hold election unto life to be common: or to depend
on foreseen faith or works, for it is most free.
chosen.

2 The choosing of some, to obtain salvation by Christ, according to the good
pleasure of GOD. Romans 9, 11. Election of grace.

3 The choosing or appointing some unto public functions, by voices, or by a
common consent. Acts 14, 23. When they had ordained Elders by election in every
Church. John 6, 70.

4 The elect themselves. Romans 11, 7. The Election has obtained it.

Elect angels. sig:
Certain Angels chosen from amongst the rest to eternal life. 1. Tim. 5, 21.
I charge thee before God and the Elect Angels.

gods Elect. sig:
Such men and women, as are freely chosen of God in Christ Jesus unto
everlasting salvation, without respect of faith or works, foreseen only,
because God would show them mercy. Titus 1, 2. According to the faith of Gods
Elect. Romans 9, 9, 10.

2 Christ, whom alone God Elected and chose to be the Messiah and Savior. Luke
23, 35.

Elect Lady sig:
Some excellent and honorable Dame. 2. Ioh. 1. To the Elect Lady. In this
sense Theophilus is called most Noble. Luke 1, 3. being a chief and principal
person.

Election what it is.
Gods eternal decree, freely choosing as some Angels, so also a certain
number out of lost mankind, to obtain salvation by faith in Jesus Christ, unto
the praise of his glorious grace. Romans 9, 11. Acts 13, 48. Ephesians. 1, 4, 5.

Election of grace. sig:
Free Election, o^ that Election which comes from the free mercy and favor of
God. To. 11, 5. According to the Election of grace. If Election be of grace,
then it is not of works; for then Grace were no Grace says the Apostle, and
that is no way free which is not free every way.

Elements, or rudime^ts of the world sig: pro
The Fire, Air, Water, Earth, called Elements, because they be the beginning
whereof other visible Creatures are compounded. 2. Pet. 3, 10, 12. Elements
melt with heat.

2 The Legal Ceremonies of the old Testament, which were Principles or Rules,
whereby God ruled and instructed his Church (as it were) under a
Schoole-maister in those days. But being now joined to the Gospel. or held
as necessary to salvation, they are to be taken heed of. Col. 2, 8. Beware
least ye be spoiled by Traditions of men, according to the Elements of the
world. Thus it must be read after the Original Text. Gal. 4, 9. See Rudiments.

Elyas. sig:
That particular Prophet and man of God, called [ Elias] the restorer of
Religion in his time. 1. Kin. 17, 16. According to the word of the Lord which
he spoke by the hand of Flyas.

2 John Baptist, which came in the spirit and power of Elyas, to restore
Religion in his time. Mat. 17, 11. Certainly Elyas must first come and restore
al things. verse 13, And his Disciples perceived that he spoke this of John
Baptist.

E. M.
Emanuell. sig:
God with us, or God in our Nature, God-Man. Math. 1, 23. And they shall call
his Name Emanuel: This is a name of Christ's person.

Emulation sig:
A strife, who should go before other in receiving favors and honors. Gal. 5,
20. Debate, Emulation. Here it is taken in ill part. There is an example of it
in Mark 9, 33.

2 A strife between two or more persons, who should go before and excel
other, in doing good. An example hereof, we have in Romans 11, 14.

to Embalm sig:
To season a dead body with Spices, to preserve it from savoring. Genesis 50, 1.

Empty. sig:
Void, or one which has nothing that good is. Luke 1, 53. The rich he will
send empty away.

E. N.
End. sig:
Term, conclusion, or last end of a thing: also scope or mark. Romans 6, 22.
And the End everlasting life. 1. Pet. 4, 7. End of all things is at hand.

2 Payment, or Reward. Romans 6, 21. The End of these things is death. Phil. 3,
19.

3 Perfection and Complement. 1. Timo. 1, 5. The End of the Commandments is
love. See Romans 13, 10.

4 Sum. Eccles. 12, 13. Let us hear the End of all.

5 Day of Judgment, when this world (as it is) shall End. Math. 24, 6: 3.

6 That, for whose cause a thing is appointed, or done. Romans 10, 4. Christ is
the End of the Law for Righteousness. The End or cause for which the Law was
given, is to justify. This it cannot do through our sin. Romans 8, 3. but
Christ by fulfilling the Law, is become righteousness to believers; and so is
the End of the Law.

Endeavor. sig:
A setting or bending of our mind earnestly to do some duty. Acts 24, 16. I
endeavor in all things to keep a clear Conscience. Phil. 3, 13. And Endeavor
my self to that which is before. This is al which the Gospel requires of the
believers to Endeavor (not absolutely to have) holiness of life.

Enemy. sig:
A person, who out of an hatred toward us, seeks to hurt us by word or deed,
either secretly or openly. This word is both applied to Satan and Exodus 23, 4,
5.
men. Luke 6, 35. Love your enemies, do well to them that hate you. Math. 13,
25, The Enemy came and sowed Tares. This is a true real Enemy.

2 A supposed Adversary, which in truth neither hates nor hurts us, but in
our opinion only. 1. Kings 21, 20. Have thon found me out, o my Enemy. Thus
godly Ministers and good men be Enemies to impenitent sinners, whom they
reprove. Gal. 4, 16. Am I become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth?
This is an immaginary Enemy.

Enemies. sig:
All men, as they are born into this world, corrupt and infected with sin,
which had made a separation between us and God; God for sin hating men, and
men through sin hating God. Romans 5, 8. If when we were Enemies we were
reconciled to God. This enimity was mutual; not our evil actions and qualities
only, but for and through them our persons were hated of God before our
Conversion. For reconciliation is of our persons, being alienated by sin, and
estranged from God. Esaias 59, 3. Ephesians. 2, 3.

Enimity. sig:
Bitter and unreconcilable hatred and division. Genesis 3, 15. I will put
Enimity. Romans 8, 7. The Wisdom of the flesh is Enimity with God.

to Enlarge sig:
To make wide that which is strait and narrow, to become more capeable and fit
to receive Gods gifts. Psalm. 119, 32. When thou shall Enlarge my heart.

Enlightening. sig:
The putting into us the light of knowledge, making such to see and know the
truth, who were ignorant before. Heb. 6, 4. They which were once Enlightened.
Luke 24, 45. Then he opened their understanding.

to Enlighten the eyes sig:
To make the light of Gods countenance to shine upon one in distress, showing
himself favorable again. Psalm. 13, 3. Enlighten mine eyes least I sleep in
death.

to Enter into joy. sig:
To be partakers of the goods and heavenly commodities of our Lord. Math. 25,
21. Enter thou into thy Masters joy.

not to Enter into judgment. sig:
Not to exact straight reckoning, requiring of me all that thou may. Psalm.
143, 2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant.

to Enter in at the strait gate. sig:
To deny our selves, and take up the Cross and follow Christ. This is to
enter in at the narrow door. Mat. 7, 13. To prepare our selves to a strict and
precise course.

to Enter into the kingdom of God sig:
To become a true member of the militant Church (which is the mystical body of
Christ) over which he reigns as head and King. John 3, 5. Except ye be borne
again of the spirit, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

2 To be reckoned worthy and meet to be Teachers in the Church militant. Math.
5, 20. Ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That the place should thus be
expounded, appears by the verses next going before.

to Enter the way of the world. sig:
To dye, according to the ordinary course of nature. Josh. 23, 14. And now I
enter the way of the whole world.

Envy. sig:
That affection which makes men grieve and fret at the good and prosperity of
others. Galat. 5, 21. Romans 13, 13.

Envious. sig:
Any person, who repineth and grutcheth at the welfare and happiness of
others. The word is applied in Scripture, either to Satan or men. Ps. 37, 1.
Fret not thy self, nor be envious. Math. 13, 28.

E. P.
Epistle. sig: pro
A Letter sent from one to another, about common affairs. 2. Sam. 11, 14.
David sent an Epistle to Ioab by Uriah.

2 Those holy writings of the Apostles, sent unto the Churches for their
instruction in godliness. Col. 4, 16. When this Epistle is read of you.

3 Any thing which does represent and tell forth the mind of another. Thus the
holy Scriptures may be called Gods Epistles.

4 That which gives a good witness and commendation (as an Epistle) 2. Cor.
3, 23. Ye are our Epistle, and the Epistle of Christ. The conversion of the
Idolatrous and wanton Corinthians unto the faith of Christ, did more witness
and commend the Divine power of Christ, and vocation of Paul, then any
commendatory Epistle could possibly do.

E. Q.
Equal with God. sig:
The self same God, of the same substance, power, and glory. Phil. 2, 6. He
thought it no robbery to be Equal with God.

Equality. sig:
A due proportion, while the abundance and superfluiry of the rich, is applied
to the relief of the poor. 2. Cor. 8, 18. That there may be Equality.

E. R.
Exror. sig: pro
A going from the right path, or straying out of the way.

2 Some opinion or action, swaruing from the rule of Gods word. Mat. 22, 29. Ye
err, not knowing the Scripture. Psalm, 95, 10 Psalm. 119, 21. There is an Error
in action, as well as in opinion; in deeds, as well as in Doctrine.

E. V.
Evangelist sig: pro
One, who brings or tells good news.

2 A Minister of the Gospel joined unto the Apostles (as assistant, not as
Equal in degree) in preaching glad tidinges of salvation, and establishing
Churches. Ephesians. 4, 11. Some to be Evangelists. 1. Tim. 1, 3. 2. Tim. 4, 5. Titus
1, 5.

3 One, who wrote the history of Christ's life and death. Thus there were only
four: as Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.

Even. sig:
That is; 2. Cor. 1, 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Everlasting. sig:
One, who is without beginning or end. 1. Tim. 1, 17. To the King Everlasting.
Psalm. 90, 2. Thou art GOD from Everlasting, to Everlasting. Revel. 1, 8.

2 That which shall never have end, though it had a beginning: as Everlasting
glory, fire, pain, life, judgment. Math. 25, 46. Heb. 6, 2.

Everlasting Gospel. sig:
The Doctrine of grace, which God himself delivered from the beginning to
continue to the end, without altering or perishing, whereas all other Doctrines
invented by men fall away. Revel. 14, 6.

from Everlasting to everlasting. sig:
God to be without beginning, and without end, in respect of his own aeternall
being; and in respect of his people, to be their God from Everlasting, by
predestination, and unto Everlasting by Glorification. Psalm. 90, 2. Even from
Everlasting to Everlasting, thou art our God.

for Ever. sig:
Without any end, eternally. Luke 1, 33. And shall reign for Ever, and of his
kingdom shall be no End. 1. These. 4, 17. We shall Ever be with the Lord.
Psalm. 45, 2.

2 For a long time. Psalm. 132, 12. Their Sons shall sit upon thy Throne for
Ever. And Verse 14, 1. Sam. 13, 13. Psalm. 110, 4. Genesis 13, 15. And in all those
places, where [ for Euer] is applied to the Ceremonial Law of Moses, which
vanished at Christ's coming: yet it is said to be ordained for ever, because
it was to endure a long season, some two thousand years, till the death of
Christ upon the Cross, Exodus 12, 14, 24. Colo. 2, 14, 17.

3 Till the year of Iubile, which might happen to be a great while, Exo. 21,
6. And shall serve him for Ever.

4 Till the end of a man's life, Exodus 19, 9. That they may believe thee for
Ever.

Evil. sig:
Afflictions and dangers, and whatsoever losses and harms sent from God, Amos
3, 6. There is no Evil in the City. Esaias 45, 7. This is an Evil of
punishment, or a paenall Evil.

2 Injuries and wrongs done to us from men, Pro. 17, 13. He that rewards Evil
for good, Prou. 20, 22.

3 Sin and Iniquity, Math. 6, 13. Deliver us from Evil. Romans 7, 15. The
Evil which I hate, that I do. Esaias 5, 20. This is Evil of fault, or ^time, or
a Moral Evil.

4 Satan, who by an excellency is called the Evil one, Luke 1, 14. This is
the Prince of Evil.

5 Sinful, Math. 7, 11. If you which are Evil.

6 A corrupt Conscience, or wicked Custom, Math. 5, 37. Comes of Evil.

Eunuch. sig: pro
A gelded man, whereof our Savior Christ makes three sorts, Math. 19, 12.
Esaias 56, 4.

2 A Noble or mighty man, of great authority with Princes. Such an one was
Potipher. Genesis 37, 36. Potipher an Eunuch of Pharaoh and his chief Steward.
Acts 8, 27.

F. X.
to Exalt one. sig:
To think ones self righteous, despising others, as the Pharisie. Luke 18,
14. He that exalts himself.

2 To lift up and prefer himself above his betters, as they that did strive
for the uppermost Seats, at Feasts. Luke 14, 11.

3 To honor or advance one unto renown and credit. Luke 14, 11.

Examination. sig:
A diligent and narrow search and trial of a man's self, whether he be in
Christ, and with what imperfections and wants he holds the graces of Christ.
2. Cor. 13, 6. Examme your selves, know ye not your own selves, etc. 1 Cor.
11, 28. This is our private Examination of our selves.

2 Diligent search and trial of others, whether they be such as they profess
and would seem to be. Revel. 2, 2. Thou have Examined them that say they are
Apostles, and are not. This is public Examination of others by lawful
Governors.

3 Taking knowledge of, and near looking into our hearts, our works, and
causes. Psalm. 26, 2. Examine my raines, and 139, 23. This is our Gods
Examination of us men.

Example. sig:
A tipe or sign for us to look upon for admonition, to be warned by it. 1
Corin. 10, 11. These things came unto them for Examples.

2 A pattern or sampler for us to look upon, for Imitation to be followed of
us. John 13, 5. For I have given you an Example. Phil. 3, 17. 1 Pet. 2, 21.

Excellency of dignity. sig:
One most Excellent, in dignity, and might, and pre-eminence, Genesis 49, 3. The
Excellency of Dignity.

Excess. sig:
That which is to much in any thing, when one goes beyond, or passes due
measure and bounds. Ephesians. 5, 18. In Wine is Excess. 1 Pet. 4, 3. Excess in
eating and drinking. ver. 4. Excess of riot.

to Excommunicate. sig:
To blot out ones name from among Gods people; or to cast one out from the
visible outward Communion of the Saints. John 9, 22. He should be Excommunicate
out of the Sinagogue, John 12, 42.

an Excommunicate thing. sig:
A thing separate from common use, to be applied unto holy v^es, upon pain of
a Curse unto him that should convert it to his own use. Joshua 7, 1. A
trespass in the Excommunicate thing.

Excommunication, what it is.
It is a solemn and fearful public censure of the Church, cutting off
lawfully, according to the word of God, and casting out of their public
society and private fellowship, such members as publicly offend in some
grievous crime, or be obstinate contemners of the lawful admonitions of the
Church for private faults, that by such shame they may be driven to repentance,
and others by their example kept from Infection of Sin. Matthew 18. 15. 1 Cor.
5, 5, 6* 7. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 14. which places plainly show, what Excommunication
is, who are to execute it, upon whom, for what matters, to what ends, and how
long. The abuse of Excommunication in Popery, is manifold and most gross,
especially herein; that being a spiritual censure, they apply it to the
deposition of Kings, and alienation of Subjects from their oath of allegiance,
and other temporal matters.

Execrable. sig:
Things or persons accursed, and appointed to be destroyed. Joshua 6, 18.
Beware of the Execrable thing, least you make your selves Execrable.

Exercise. sig: pro
Bodily recreation, or moving the parts of the body, for the preservation of
health.

2 Outward austerenesse of life, in watching fasting, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Bodily
Exercise profits not.

3 The practice of godliness, and studying the Scriptures. 1 Timothy 4, 7.
Exercise thy self to godliness. Psalm 1, 2.

to Exhort. sig:
To quicken and stir up faint and dull Christians unto the duties of
godliness, by reasons out of the word. Heb. 3, 13. Exhort one another while it
is called to day. This is one part of the public Ministry. 1 Cor. 14, 3. Tit.
2. verse last.

2 To perform the whole work of the Ministry, Asts 13, 15. If ye have any
word of Exhortation speak on: Sinechdoche. Exhortation, which is but one
action of the Ministry put for the whole duty of a Teacher.

Exodus. sig:
A departing out. Thus is the second Book of Moses termed, for the passage
of Israel out of Aegipt.

Exor^ist. sig:
One, who by a special gift of God, did call forth foul spirits out of the
bodies of those which were possessed with them. This gift was in the Primitive
Church, and lasted but for a time, for the practice of this gift. See Acts 16,
18.

2 Such as usurped and counterfeited this gift, but had it not, Acts 19, 13.
Certain Exorcists took upon them to name the Lord Jesus: Such be the Exorcists
of the Romish Church; mere Iugglers.

Extortioner sig:
One that wringeth and wresteth from others more then right, under color of
an Office, taking above his appointed Fee. 1 Cor. 6, 10. Extortioners shall not
inherit the kingdom of Heaven.

E. Y.
Eye. sig: pro
That member of the body, whose faculty it is to see lightsome things, and to
direct our way.

2 The knowledge which God has of al things, Prou. 15, 3. His Eye is in every
place to behold good and evil. Psalm. 11. 4. His eyes will consider, his
Eyelids will try the Children of men. Metaphor.

3 Gods merciful and watchful providence. Psalm 34, 15. His Eye is over the
righteous. Metaphor.

Eye. sig:
The understanding or the Judgment of the mind, which is as the Eye of the
Soul. Psalm 119, 18. Open mine Eyes: Act^s 26, 18. Numb. 24, 3. by a Metaphor.

2 An evil affection appearing and expressed by the Eye. Math. 5, 29. If thine
Eye offend thee, pluck it out. Job 31, 1.

3 A guide to direct. Job 29, 15. I was an Eye to the Blind; that is, a guide
to the Ignorant, to show them right and wrong.

4 The whole man, by Sinecdoche. Revel. 1, 7. Every Eye shall see him. That is;
all men.

To have God before our Eyes. sig:
To respect God, that we may fear him, and trust in him. Psalm.

pure Eyes. sig:
The infinite holiness and Justice of God, which cannot look upon any sin
without extreme hatred and loathing of it. Hab. 1, 13. Thou art of pure Eyes.

single Eye. sig:
A mind enlightened unto a lively Faith in Christ Jesus. Math. 6, 22. If thine
Eye be single, as the body is full of light; that is, when the heart is endewed
with a pure sincere Faith, it enlightens and directs the whole man in all
Christian ways

Eyes of a fool. sig:
Rash meddling and fond gazing of foolish men, after things unprofitable, and
unnecessary, letting go things more needful. Pro. 17, 24. The Eyes of a Fool
are in the corners of the world.

Eyes of the wise. sig:
The circumspection and prudence of wise men, espying and finding out all
things, both good and hurtful, that the one may be followed, and the other
eschewed. Eccles 2, 14. The Eyes of the wise is in his head. As Eyes set a loft
in the Head, are as Watchmen to look out for the weal of the whole body, so is
wisdom to the man that is wise: it looks out and tries al things, that he
may do the good, and refuse the contrary.

to open the Eyes. sig:
To restore the faculty of seeing, or to make them see which were blind. John
9, 10. Math. 20, 33. That our Eyes may be opened.

2 To give use of seeing to such as have the faculty. Genesis 21, 19. Then God
opened her Eyes that she saw the Well. Number. 22, 31.

3 To give experimental knowledge of a thing. Genesis 3, 7. And their Eyes
were opened, etc.

to wink with y^ Eye sig:
To refuse to see that truth, which (if men would) they cannot but see. Matthew
13, 15. They winked with their Eyes.

which Eye has not seen. sig:
That which does exceed all natural capacity of man, to wit; the Mystery of
the Gospel. Esaias 64, 4. 1 Cor. 2, 9.

F. A.
Fables. sig: pro
ATale, not true but likely, or a ^aigned devise. This is the proper
signification.

2 All vain, false, and curious Doctrines, Speculations, and Questions, which
have in them no profit to edification. 1. Tim. 1, 4. Give not heed to Fables.
Titus 1, 14. and 3, 9.

Face. sig: pro
That part of man's body, which (being on hie) is most apparent to be seen, and
does best bewray our favor or displeasure toward others. Lastly, by which
one man is known and discerned from another, as touching his person. Gal. 1,
21. I was unknown by face unto the Churches.

2 The appearance and outward show or countenance (as it were) of every thing.
Math. 16, 3. Ye can discern the Face of the sky.

3 The invisible nature of God, or the most perfect divine essence and majesty
discovered. Exodus 33, 23. My Face ye cannot see; that is, my Majesty and
Essence in the brightness and full glory^e cannot see, and abide it discovered.

4 The favor, countenance, and good will of God. Dan. 9, 17. Cause thy Face to
shine upon the Sanctuary. Also it comprehendes all benefits and deliverances,
whereby God does witness his favor to his people. Psalm. 80, 3. Cause thy Face
to shine, that we may be saved.

5 The place of Gods worship, whence his Face and favor is to be perceived in
the Doctrine of grace, soundly taught and applied. Genesis 4, 14. I shall be
banished from thy face. Hereof David complains 1. Sam. 26, 19. Jonas 1, 3.

6 Service before God, or in the presence of God. Mat. 18, 10. There Angels
always behold the Face of my father; that is, do service in his presence. Ps.
51, 11. Cast me not out from thy Face; that is, from doing service before thee
as a King, as thou did cast out Saul who was King before me, etc.

to show his Face. sig:
To reveal, lay open, or make known unto us, his most bright and glorious
Majesty: this he does to no man. Exodus 33, 20. and verse 18. Show me thy
Glory, and God answered; Thou can not see my Face.

2 To manifest his favor. Thus he does continually to his Saints. Psalm. 80,
19. Show us thy Face and we shall be whole. Psalm. 4, 6.

to hide his Face. sig:
Not to take knowledge of us, and of our sins, with dislike and meaning to
punish them. Psalm. 51, 10. Hide thy face from my sins; that is, look not
upon them to punish them.

2 To withdraw his countenance, and show forth his displeasure in some
judgment and affliction. Psalm. 27, 9. Hide not thy Face from me.

to seek Gods Face sig:
To ask counsel of God in things doubtful, and to pray unto God in cases
dangerous. Psalm. 27, 8. Seek ye my Face; thy Face Lord I will seek.

Face to face sig:
Familiarly, and plainly. Deuteronomy. 5, 4. The Lord talked with you Face to Face.
Exodus 31, 11.

2 Perfectly, and fully. 1. Cor. 13, 12. Then shall we see Face to Face.

to fall upon the Face. sig:
To adore and worship God groueling upon the ground. Josh. 7, 6. And fell to the
earth upon his Face. Mat. 17, 6.

Face of Jesus Christ. sig:
The knowledge which we have of God, by, and through our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is the lively express Image of his father. 2. Cor. 4, 6. In the Face of Jesus
Christ. Colos. 1, 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God.

Fair. How the Church is Fair. sig: pro
Beautiful, or one of good favor, goodly to see to* Ioh. 42, 15. Dan. 4, 4.

2 The Church, which is fair, beautiful and glorious within. Cant. 4, 1. Thou
art Fair my love; Fair she is, for she has the perfect holiness of Note.
Christ her husband imputed to her by faith, that she might be without spot or
wrinkle. Ephesians. 5, 27. Also she has the Spirit of sanctification, to begin
holiness in her self. 1. Pet. 1, 2. 2. Cor. 6, 11. So as she is Fair, both
Imputatiuely, and incoatiuely, and at length shall be Fair perfectly: and all
this spiritually. For outwardly she is black, afflicted, crossed, and
persecuted in the world. Cant. 1, 4.

Faith. sig: pro
Truth and constancy in words and promises, when that is performed in deed,
which in words was spoken and promised. Romans 3, 3. Shall our unbelief make
the faith of God of none effect? Psalm. 25, 10. Ps. 86, 15. And in all other
places where God is commended for Mercy and Truth. The word in the Original
signifies [Faith.] Gal. 5, 22. Math. 23, 23.

2 The Doctrine of Faith, or the Gospel which we do believe. Gal. 1, 22. He
now preaches the Faith which before he Destroyed. 1. Tim. 1, 19. and 3, 9.
Jude 5. 1. Tim. 4* 1. and 3, 9. A Metanimie of the Adiunct for the Subject.

3 Things promised, or the accomplishment of Gods promises made in the Old
Testament. Gal. 3, 23. We were shut up unto that Faith, which afterward should
be revealed.

4 A naked knowledge of God, joined with an outward profession of his religion
and Faith. Iam. 2, 17, 24. Faith, if it has no works is dead. This is
Historical or Dogmaticall Faith, as Divines call it.

5 A certain and sure persuasion of some wondrous and strange effects and
works to be done by the power of God. 1. Cor. 13, 2. If I had all faith. Math.
17, 20. This is an active myraculous faith, which lasted but a short space.

6 The knowledge and joyful assent of the mind yielded to Gods promises for a
time, till affliction come. Luke 8, 13. Which for a while believe, but in time
of temptation fall away. Acts 8, 13. This is Temporary Faith.

7 A firm and constant apprehension of Christ and al his merits, as they are
promised and offered in the word and Sacraments. To. 1, 17. The just shall live
by Faith. Gal. 3. 11, 14. And in all those places of scripture, where
Righteousness, Justification, life Eternal, and Salvation, are attributed to
it. This is Justifying or saving Faith, because it enables the elect soul, to
receive Christ's perfect Justice unto Salvation in heaven. This Faith once had,
is never utterly lost, as Papists fancy.

8 Fidelity, and faithfulness, in doing duties to others without fraud and
deceit. Titus 2, 10. That they may show all good faith; that is, Faithfulness.

9 Hope. 1. Pet. 1, 5. We are kept through Faith unto salvation. Yet this
properly belongs to hope, which is a certain expectation of salvation
promised. A Metanimie, of the Cause, for the Effect.

10 A confidence of obtaining some earthly and bodily good thing, after a
myraculous sort. Acts. 14, 9. When he saw that he had Faith to be healed.
This is a passive miraculous Faith.

11 A firm knowledge and assurance of that liberty which Christians have in
things indifferent. Romans 14, 1, 22, 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

12 Fervent study, desire, and zeal, to practice and maintain Christian
Religion and Doctrine. Romans 1, 8. Your Faith is published throughout all the
world.

13 Righteousness or Justice. Psalm. 119, 75. Thou have afflicted me in So it
is in the Original.
Faith, or in righteousness, and justly.

14 A Promise, or Vow. 1. Tim. 5, 12. They have forsaken their first Faith.
See the word [First.]

15 Constancy and faithfulness, in performing duty; or inconstancy and
unfaithfulness, indifferently. 1. Sam. 26, 23. The Lord will reward every man
according to his Righteousness and Faith, or faithfulness.

16 Christ, being apprehended by faith. Romans 9, 32. Also Romans 3, 28. A man is
justified by faith. So it is put and taken in the Treatise of Justification,
wheresoever Faith is written without express mention of Christ.

Faith of the Elect. sig:
That Faith which is proper to the elect. Titus 1, 1, 2. Acts 13, 44, 48. which
none can have but the elect and chosen children of God.

dead Faith sig:
A fruitless and vnworking Faith. James 2, 26. Faith without works is Dead;
like a Dead-man, a barren womb, a withered Tree.

effectual Faith. sig:
Such a knowledge of Christ as is not idle, but works by love. 1. These. 1, 3.
Remembering your effectual Faith. Gal. 5, 6.

Faith unfeigned. sig:
Sincere, without Hypocrisy and countersetting. 1. Tim. 1, 5. And of Faith
unfeigned.

precious Faith. sig:
An excellent faith, being a most worthy gift, whereby we attain very
worthy and precious things. 2. Pet. 1, 1. To you which have obtained like
precious Faith.

from Faith to Faith. sig:
From one degree of Faith to another, as from a little and weak Faith, to a
great and strong one. Romans 1, 17. Revealed from Faith to Faith. For true lively
Faith increases daily.

Faith great or little. sig:
The degrees of Faith, as men believe in Christ more or less, strongly Luke 7,
9. I have not found so great Faith. Math. 14, 31. O thou of little Faith. This
little Faith is adjoined with much doubting.

Faithful. sig:
One, who keeps his word and stands to his promise. 1. John 1, 9. God is
Faithful. 1. Cor. 1, 9.

2 One, who believes the promises of Christ. Ephe. 1, 1. To the Faithful in
Christ Jesus.

3 One, who faithfully and truly performs his office and charge that he is
put in trust with. 1. Tim. 3, 11. Faithful in all things. Col. 4, 9. 1. Pet.
5, 12. Siluanus a Faithful Brother to you.

Faithfulness. It is
See the Word [Faith.]

Lively Faith, what?
That gift of God, whereby an elect regenerate soul, receives Christ and all
his benefits to be her own. John 1, 12. Or thus more plainly. That gift,
whereby the believers are firmly persuaded, not only that the word of God and
all the promises are true, but do belong to themselves.

first Faith. sig:
The Vow of Baptism, or Faith of Christianity, which young widows (who were
lascivious wantons) did make void by marrying to ^nfidels; so, as they
renounced Christianity and followed Satan. Others do expound this first Faith,
of the promise and fidelity which young Widows gave to the Church, to do
service to the poor, which upon their marriage to another husband, they did
frustrate, P^pists do interpret (^^^st Faith) to be vow of chastity, without
any ground from the Text
1. Tim. 4, 12. Making void the first faith.

Fall. sig:
Every sin, especially when the will does consent unto it; for that is, as
if one should stumble and take a fall, Psalm. 37, 24. Though he fall he shall
not be cast off. James 4, 2. In many things we sin all. In the Original Greek
Text, it is thus: We stumble or fall. Also, the word Englished [ Offence] in
Romans 5. Verse 16, 17, 18. In the Original Text signifies Fall. Metaphor.

2 A particular departing or going from the Doctrine and profession of Christ,
unto some Heresy or Idolatry; after the example of Hymeneus, Phyletus,
Alexander, and other Apostataes. Reu. 9, 1. I saw a Star which was fallen
from* Heaven into Earth. 1 Corin. 10, 12. Let him that stands take heed
least he Fall. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4, 1.

3 Any adversity or danger. Pro. 24, 16. A just Man Falls seven times a day
and rises again; That is, Many are the dangers and troubles of the righteous,
but the Lord delivers them out of all.

4 Decay, or worldly ruin. Revel. 17, 2. Babylon is Fallen, it is Fallen; That
is, Rome is de^ayed in credit of her Doctrine and Religion, in authority,
riches, power, and Jurisdiction, and in all these she hasteneth to an utter and
final ruin and downfall. Also in all those places which speak of worldly
downefals. Psalm 20, 8. Lam. 1, 14. Reu. 17, 10 Pro. 16, 18.

5 Perishing for ever, or everlasting destruction. Luke 2, 34. He is appointed
for the Fall, and rising again of many in Israel.

Fall of man, what it is.
It is the defection of our first Parents in their voluntary disobedience to
Gods Commandment, whence followed upon themselves and all their posterity,
loss of Gods favor and Image, with corruption of nature, and de^ert of all
misery. R^^. 5, 12, 13, 14, 15. etc. compared with Genesis 3, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

Falling away. sig:
An universal forsaking or departing from the whole doctrine of Christ, after
it is once known by the enlightening of the Spirit, with a mali^io^s dispite
of it, because it is the truth of God. Hebr. 6, 6. If they fall away, and 3,
12* and 10, 29. This is the sin of total^ Apostasy: whereof read more, 2. Pet.
2, 20. 1 John 5, 16. See Blasphemy of the Spirit.

to Fall from grace. sig:
To leave and forsake that good way and course, which men had once taken for
the obtaining of Grace. Gal. 5, 4. Ye are Fallen from Grace. Such as have once
saving Grace and be justified thorough Faith, do now Fall utterly and wholly
from it: but sundry which had entered a good course to get this Grace, do
afterward leave it; and this is to Fall from Grace in that place of Paul to
Galathians, They err, which think saving grace may be wholly lost for a time,
or finally, and forever.

False. sig:
That which is void of truth, being unfound and counter^eit. As False Balance,
False weights, False heart, False doctrine, False ways. Psalm. 119. False
Witness. Math. 27, 59. They sought False Witness.

False christ. sig:
One that professes himself to be Christ, and is not. Math. 24, 24. There
shall arise False Christ's. This did one Dositheus, of whom Theophilact makes
mention; and one Theudas an Aegiptian, spoken of in the Acts 5, 36. and after
that, one Maues and David George, head of the Libertines, of whom Josephus
writes. And one Hacket an Englishman: all these named themselves Christ: so
did one John Moore at London, in the third year of Queen Elizabeth, and two
other at Oxford, in the sixth year of Henry the third, as Holinshed reports.

False Apostics. sig:
Such as say they are Apostles and are not, being Broachers of lies and errors
under the name of true Apostles of Christ. 1 Cor. 11, 13. Reuelation's 2, 2.

False Prophet. sig:
One that is a teacher of lies, wresting the Scriptures for his Belly and
filthy lucre, or for vain glory sake. Matthew 7, 15. Beware of False Prophets.
Romans 16, 18. Titus 1, 11. 1 Timothy 6, 3, 4, 5.

False matter sig:
A lying speech, or word of untruth, which may endanger another man's life.
Exodus 23, 7. Thou shall keep thyselfe far from a False matter.

False balance. sig:
Deceitful Weights, which beguile those that trust the truth of them. Prou.
11, 1. False Balance are an abomination unto the Lord.

False ways sig:
Whatsoever opinion or action swarueth from the word of God. Psalm. 119, 128. I
hate all False ways.

Famine. sig:
Scarsity of Bread, even unto hunger; or extreme want of victuals. Genesis 26,
1. There was a Famine in that Land.

2 Scarsity and want of heavenly Bread, which is the word of God. Amos 8, 11. I
will send a Famine of the hearing of the word.

Fan. sig:
Gods word preached, whereby (as by a Fan) the good are severed from the bad.
Matthew 3, 12 Whose Fan is in his hand. Metaphor.

Fasting. sig:
A total or whole abstinence from meats, drinks, and all other pleasures of
this life for a certain time, to witness our unfeigned humiliation for sin,
to tame the flesh, and to help our feruency in Prayer, either for preventing
some Judgment to come, or turning away some Judgment present. It is either
private or public. Ester 4, 16. Act 10, 30. Mar. 2, 19. Ion. 3, 4, 5. This is
bodily Fasting. which is no work commanded in the Law simply for it self,
much less a meritorious work; neither does Christian Fasting consist, in
forbidding of certain meats at certain times limited: that is rather a
civil Fast.

2 An abstinence or freeness from Vices, as covetousness, oppression,
cruelty, incontinency, lying, etc. Esaias 58, 6. Is not this the Fast that I have
chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burden? This
is spiritual Fasting.

3 Abstinence from all manner of meat or sustenance for many days together,
without being any whit hungry. Matthew 4, 2. He Fasted forty days and forty
nights*: thus Moses Fasted, and Elias. This is miraculous Fasting, which
served the more to commend the Doctrine of the Law and Gospel, to show it to
be no vulgar thing, but given of God. The apish Imitation of this Fast, by the
Papists is ridiculous and joined with gross superstition, in as much as they
forbear flesh in Lent, as a work of Religion and salvation, contrary to the
Scriptures; which teach, that meats defile not a Man.

4 Hunger. Math. 15, 32. I will not send them away Fasting; That is, Hungry. 2
Cor. 11, 27. This is a necessary and compelled Fast, which the Saints of God
do overcome by patience.

to sanctify a Fast. sig:
To call men unto public repentance. Ioell 2, 15. Sanctify a Fast. The power
to command: this is in the lawful Christian Magistrate (where such an one is)
upon the advice and good direction of Gods Ministers, who are to execute and
perform what has been religiously and advisedly by Superiors enjoined.

Father. sig: pro
One that begets Children. Gene. 22, 7. My Father. Exodus 20* 12. This is a
Father by Nature, as Abraham was to Isaac, and Isaac to Jacob.

2 A Grandfather, and generally any Ancestor or Progenitour. Exodus 2, 18. And
when they came to Revel their Father. Genesis 20, 12. She is the daughter of my
Father. (...) 20, 18. Walk not in the steps of your Fathers; That is, do
not as your forefathers did. Heb. 3, 9. This is a Father by precedence of
time. Thus Jacob called Abraham his Father. Gene. 31, 42. who is also called
the Father of Leui. Heb. 7. as Nahor is of Laban.

3 An aged man, or one full of years. 1 Timo. 5, 1. Rebuke not an Elder, but
exhort him as a Father. This is a Father by Age.

4 One who is instead of a Father, performing the love, care, and duty of a
Father; by instructing, ruling, protecting. Thus all Superiors are Fathers to
their Inferiors. 2 Kings 5, 13. Father, if the Prophet, etc. and in Esaias 49,
23. Kings and Magistrates are called ^^rcing Fathers. Also Ministers are called
Fathers. Prou. 4, 1. Hear o Children your Fathers instruction. This is spoken
in the person of a Minister, who is a Father to the people; the reason is
rendered. 1 Cor. 4, 15. Because they beget men by the Gospel. These be Fathers
by Office.

5 Author, or Inuentor of anything. Genesis 4, 20. Iaball was the Father of
them that dwell in Tents. John 8, 44. Father of lies. James 1, 17. Father of
lights. Gene. 36, 43. He was Father of the Edomites.

6 A benefactor and preserver. Gene. 45, 8. God has made me a Father to
Pharaoh, Job 29, 16. Psa. 68, 5.

7 One, that is the original or head and chief beginner of any Nation or
people. Gene. 22, 21. And Kemuell the Father of Aram. 1 Chronicles. 8, 6. These were
the chief Fathers of them that inhabited Geba. Genesis 36, 43. Esauwas Father of
the Edomites. That is, author and root of that people.

8 One, that is inward with us, or very nearly joined to us. Job. 17, 14. I
said to corruption, thou art my father.

9 All the persons of the Trinity, even the whole Godhead. Math. 6, 9. Our
Father which art in heaven. Here Father is put essentially.

10 The first person of the blessed Trinity, begetting the Son, and sending
forth the Holy Ghost. Math. 28, 19. And baptize them in the name of the Father.
Ephe. 1, 3. God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Here Father is put
personally.

Father of glory. sig:
Most glorious Father, or one full of glory. Ephe. 1, 17. The Father of Glory.

Father of mercies. sig:
One, who is himself most merciful, and the Author of mercies and compassion
in others. So is God alone. 2. Cor. 1, 3. Blessed be God the Father of
Mercies, and God of all Comfort.

everlasting Father. sig:
One, who is himself absolutely Eternal, and the Author and purchaser of
eternity to others, giving eternal good things to his people. Esaias 9, 6.
Everlasting Father. Thus is Christ Jesus a Father of Eternity.

the Father of spirits. sig:
The maker and giver of Souls. Heb. 12, 9. Be in subjection to the Father of
spirits.

your Father. sig:
God, who is a Father of the believing Apostles, and all other the faithful.
First, because they are begotten by the immortal seed of his word, and 2. are
the members of his son, 3. and are adopted by him, 4. bearing his Image, 5.
and are pertakers of his Fatherly love and benefits. John 20, 17. I ascend to
my Father, and to your Father.

without Father and Mother. sig:
One, whose Parents were not manifested and known. Hebr. 7, 3. Without Father,
without Mother. Such was Melchisedech, who so long out-liued those of his time,
as his Parents were worn out of knowledge, and be unmentioned in the holy
Story.

Father of many nations, and of the faithful. sig:
Abraham, who is thus called. First, because he was unto his posterity and
seed, a rare example of faith and justification, 2. a worthy restorer of
Religion, 3. the Father of the Messiah, 4. having the promises of eternal life
given him, both for himself and others, 5. into whose bosom believers of all
Nations shall be gathered. Romans 4, 16, 18. That he should be the Father of
many Nations.

to go or be gathered unto their Fathers. sig:
By dying, to be joined unto their Forefathers in the estate of the dead, both
in respect of their bodies being put in the Sepulchers of their Fathers, and of
their souls, being companions with them of the same eternal bliss. Genesis 15,
15. Thou shall be gathered to thy Fathers in peace. 2. Kings 22, ^2. I will
gather thee unto thy Fathers.

thy Father is an Ammorite. sig:
One, that is degenerate and grown out of kind, being of the child of
Abraham, become as bad as an Heathen. Ezekiel: 16, 3* 45.

Fat heart. sig:
Senseless, hard, vnyeelding heart, without feeling of Gods Mercies or
Judgments. Psalm: 119, 70. Their heart is as Fat as Brawne. Deuteronomy. 23, 15.
Metaphor.

Fat bread. sig:
Plenteousnesse of the earth, and abundance of al pleasant things belonging to
this life. Genesis 49, 20. Concerning Asher, his Bread shall be Fat.

Fat wheat sig:
The finest and best of the wheat. Psalm. 81, 16. He shall feed them with the
Fat of Wheat.

Fat of the land. sig:
The cheifest and choicest commodities and fruits. Genesis 45, 18. You shall eat
the Fat of the Land. A Metanimie.

marrow and Fatness. sig:
Tranquillity, and joy of mind. Psalm. 63, 5. My soul shall be satisfied with
Marrow and Fatness.

Fatness of the earth. sig:
Great abundance of Corn and Wine, which comes from the Fatness of the
earth. Genesis 27, 39. The Fatness of the earth shall be thy dwelling place.
Genesis 4. A Metanimie of the cause.

Fatness of gods house. sig:
The manifold and plentiful spiritual blessings of God. Psalm. 36, 8. They
shall be satisfied with the Fatness of thine house.

Fat men. sig:
Men full of wealth and might. Esaias 10, 6. The Lord of Hoasts shall send
leanness amongst his Fat men.

2 Full of spiritual vigor and liveliness. Psalm. 92, 10. They shall be Fat
and flourishing.

3 Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the Earth. Psalm. 22, 29. They that be
Fat in the Earth, shall worship.

Fatness. sig:
Swelling Pride. Psalm 73, 7. Their eyes stand out for Fatness; That is, so
puffed with pride, that they can neither see and know themselves, nor consider
others. Metaphor.

2 Delicates, or delightful things. Job* 36, 16. That which rests upon thy
Table have been full of Fatness.

Fault. sig:
The guilt of Adams disobedience imputed to us. Romans 5, 16. The Fault came by
one offense.

2 Some sin done in our own persons. Psalm 19, 12. Who knows his Faults?

Favor. sig: pro
A good and comely countenance. Prou. 31, 30. Favor is deceitful.

2 Credit and respect, gotten by well doing. Pro: 22, 1. Loving Favor is
better then Gold.

the Favor of God. sig:
His gracious accepting of us, and merciful readiness to do us good. Psalm.
51, 18. Be Favorable to Sion.

the Favor of men. sig:
Their good liking toward us, and readiness to do us good, and not hurt.
Gen: 33, 10. If I have found Favor or grace in thy sight. Acts 24, 27. And
Foelix willing to get Favor of the Jews, left Paul bound.

F. E.
Fear. sig:
A certain natural affection, whereby men are stricken, by reason of some
dangerous and hurtful evil; either true, or imagined. Genesis 32, 11. I Fear
him. Josh. 2, 9, 11. Mat. 14, 30. and 28, 4. This is natural Fear, in it
self neither good nor evil: It was in the man Christ. Heb. 5, 7. It becomes
evil through our distrust mixed with it.

2 The free voluntary reverence which inferiors show to their Superiors, for
the Lords sake, making them careful to obey, and loath to offend. Ephe: 5,
33. Ye Wives Fear your Husbands. Romans 13, 7. Fear, to whom Fear belongs.

3 The thing, or danger Feared. Prou. 1, 20. When their Fear comes; that
is, when that which they Fear comes. Psalm. They Fear where no Fear is;
that is, no cause of Fear, nothing to be feared. A Metanimie.

4 The person which is feared. In this sense God is called the Fear of Isaac.
Genesis 31, 42, 53. But Jacob swear by the Fear of his father Isaac; either
because God had stricken Isaac with a fear when he would have given away the
blessing to Esau; or because of the reverence and Fear which* Isaac yielded
unto God: or for both these causes, is God called the Fear of Isaac. A
Metanimie.

5 An holy affection of the heart, awing us, and making us loath to displease
God by sin, in respect of his great goodness and mercies, and for a love we
bear to righteousness. Psalm. 130, 4. There is mercy with thee, that thou
may be Feared. Exo. 24, 25. This is This child like Fear, may well stand with
certainty of salvation, so cannot servile and perplexed Fear.
filliall or child-like Fear. Gods children are commanded thus to Fear, and
are often commended for so fearing. Job 1, 1. Acts 10, 2. The fruit and force
of this Fear is, to restrain from vice, and constrain unto well doing for
desire to glorify God. See examples of Joseph. Gen: 39, and Nehemiah.

6 A terror in the heart of wicked men, dreading God as a Judge, being loath to
offend him by sin, in respect of his punnishments, and not from a hatred of
wickedness. Thus Foelix feared. Acts 24, 25. This is servile and slavish
Fear. Gods children are forbid this Fear. Exodus 20, 20. Moses said to the
people, Fear not. Yet thorough Gods merciful goodness it proves a
preparatiue unto faith. Acts 2, 37. Romans 8, 15.

7 The whole worship of God. Deuteronomy. 6, 13. Thou shall Fear the Lord. Acts 10,
35. In every nation he that Fears God. Psalm. 112, ^. and 128, 1. and
elsewhere often by a Sinechdoche of the part for the whole. For, where Gods
fear is truly planted, there will follow the whole worship of God.

8 Dreadful works of Gods Justice, which strike men with Fear. Psalm: 90, 12.
Who knows the power of thy wrath or anger, according to thy Fear. Thus
Tremelius reads it. It is a Metanimie, of the effect for the cause.

Fear not their Fear sig:
Fear not that whereof they are afraid; to wit, their Idols. Esaias 8, 12. Fear
not their Fear; or (as Tremelius translates it) Fear not with their Fear;
that is, with a distrustful Fear, which withdraws the heart from God and
his promises.

to meditate Fear. sig:
To think upon dangerous things, which breed Fear. Esaias 33, 18. Thine heart
shall Meditate Fear.

Fear of God was upon them. sig:
A great terror and fear, sent into their hearrs of God, to restrain and stay
them from doing any harm to Jacob. Gen: 35, 5. And the Fear of God was upon
the Cities that were round about them.

Feast. sig:
Solemn, and abundant fare, kept upon some especial occasion, to remember
some great mercy of God, and therewith to cheer the heart. Genesis 21, 8. Abraham
made a great Feast that same day that* Isaac was weaned. Nehe. 18, 12. Gen: 29,
22. And made a Feast.

2 The day or whole time wherein such solemn Feasts are kept. Acts 18, 21. I
must needs keep this Feast. John 7, 8. Leuit: 23, 4. The whole space of eight
days, wherein their Feasts lasted.

3 A good Conscience, which of Solomon is called a continual Feast, because of
the great and constant peace and joy which it breeds. Prou: 15, 15. A good
Conscience is a continual Feast. A Metaphor.

Feasts of love. sig:
Bankets kept in the public meetings of the Church, to testify and to
nourish brotherly love. Jude 12. These are as spots in your feasts of love.
These grew to such abuse, as the Apostle Paul abolished them. 1. Cor: 11.

to Feed. sig:
To nourish, by ministering meat to the body, common to men and beasts. This
is natural feeding.

2 To teach others by wholesome doctrine, and to rule them with godly
discipline. John 21, 16. Feed my Sheep. Math. 28, 18. Go teach all Nations.
This is Ecclesiastical Feeding, peculiar to Gods Church. It is far from the
Popes supremacy, which is a tyranising, not a teaching. A Metaphor.

3 To rule or govern politically. Psalm. 78, 71, 72 He brought David to Feed
his people, and so he Fed them. 2 Samuel 5, 2. Math. 2, 6. This is a political
Feeding.

4 To strengthen and comfort the Soul inwardly. Psalm 28, 9. Feed them also.
A spiritual Feeding.

Fellows. sig:
All true believing Christians, whom Christ has taken into fellowship of
himself and his merits. Psalm 45, 7. With Oil of gladness above his
Fellows.

Feet. sig: pro
That member which is lowest in the body, bearing it up, being the Instrument
of motion, and carrying the body from place to place. John 13, 5. He washed the
Apostles Feet.

2 Approaching and coming of such as preach reconcilement with God, or the
Preachers so approaching. Romans 10, 15. How beautiful are the Feet, etc.

3 The whole man, or the man himself. Romans 3, 15. Their Feet are swift to
shed blood; That is, they themselves are ready and forward to slaughter. Psalm
119, 101, 105. Thy word is a Lantern to my Feet; that is, to my self. Psalm
73, 2. There be innumerable examples of this signification in the Psalms, and
elsewhere in the Scripture. It is a Senecdoche of the part for the whole.
Psalm 122, 2.

4 The Apostles, and other sincere Preachers of the word. Romans 10, 15. How
beautiful are their Feet; That is, if the Feet which be the lowest and
basest part of Gods Messengers be beautiful, much more the Teachers themselves,
are acceptable and gracious to every contrite and broken heart. A Sinecdoche.

5 The will, and the affections, desires, care and endeavors, which are the
beginning of our actions, as the Feet are the Instrument of motion, and do
carry our mind hither and thither, as our body is carried by our Feet. Eccle.
4, 17. Look well unto thy Feet, when thou entrest into the house of God. Psalm.
17, 5. That my Feet do not slide. Psalm. 16, 12. Prou* 4, 27. Remove thy Foot
from evil. Metaphor.

6 The daily slips and sins that come of frailty. John 13, 10. He that is
washed, has no need save to wash his Feet; The meaning is, such as be once
washed from their sins, by Faith in the blood of Christ unto Justification,
and by his Spirit unto newness of life, or Sanctification; such have no need
but to wash their Feet; that is, their daily faults which they fall into of
weakness, which are to be washed, by lamenting that we have committed them, by
asking of God pardon for them, believing that we shall obtain it thorough
Christ, craving the government of the holy Spirit, to become more needful of
Sin for hereafter.

7 Christ's humanity or Manhood, the which is subject to his Godhead, as our
Feet is to our head; also to Christ, as he is Man, all things are put under,
as the Footstool to the Foot. Psalm 8, 6. Thou shall put all things under
his Feet.

Foot of pride. sig:
The cruelty and violence of proud men. Psalm 30, 11. Let not the Foot of
Pride come against me.

to sit at ones Feet. sig:
To be ones Scholar, or daily hearer. Acts 20, 3. At the Feet of Gamaliell,
and Deuteronomy. 33, 3. The reason hereof is, because hearers sat on forms at the
Feet of their Teachers, speaking to them out of a Chair or higher place.

to dip the Foot in oil. sig:
To have Oil in such abundance, as one may wash or dip his Foot in it. Deuteronomy.
33, 34.

washing one another Feet. sig:
All mutual duties and works of love. John 13, 14 Ye ought to wash one another
Feet; By this ( One) all helps and services toward our neighbor are meant.

Path of thy Feet. sig:
Every action of our life, either outward, or inward. Prou. 4, 26. Ponder the
path of thy Feet.

to fall at ones Feet. sig:
To become a suppliant unto any. 1 Samuel 25, 24. She fell at his feet.

to lick the dust of Feet sig:
Most submisse reverence, and extreme adoration. Esaias 49, 23. Psalm 99, 5.

Fervent. sig:
Earnest. James 5, 16. Prayer avails much if it be Fervent. Unto Fervent
Prayer there is required; on the one side, a distinct knowledge, joined with
good feeling of our sins and miseries; and on the other side, a certain
belief to speed, coupled with zeal of his glory, earnest desire of Gods
truth and mercy to be manifested, in granting of Prayers.

Few. sig:
A small number. Math. 15, 34. A Few Fishes. It is used here absolutely.

2 A very great number, yet but a Few in comparison of a far greater. Math.
20, 16. Many called, Few chosen. Math. 7, 14. Few there are that find it. It
is put here comparatively.

F. I.
Fidelity. sig:
Truth in performing of our just promises, and in standing to lawful bargains
and Couenantes. Matthew 23, 23. Mercy and Fidelity, or Faith.

Fig Tree with leaves sig:
Hipocrites, which have appearance of holiness without Fruits of a good life.
Math. 21, 19.

2 All unprofitable, and unfruitful hearers. Lu. 13, 7.

Filthy. sig:
One who weltereth (as it were a Swine in Mire) in the defilement of Sin,
taking his full pleasure in it. Revel. 22, 11. Let him that is Filthy be Filthy
still.

Filthy lucre sig:
Gain, gotten or kept by sin. Titus 1, 11. Teaching what they ought not for
Filthy Lucre. 1 Peter 5, 3.

Filthiness. sig:
The secret and uncomely parts of the body (as they are called of the
Apostles) being naked or bare. Exodus 20, verse last. That thy filthiness be
not discovered thereon.

2 Every sin which is called Filthiness, because it defiles man
spiritually, and ought to be loathed as a Filthy thing in Gods sight. 1 Pet.
2, 1. Lay away all Filthiness. 2 Corin. 7, 1. James 1, 12. 2 Pet. 2, 20. Mat.
15, 18. That which comes out of a man, defiles a man.

3 Shame and Ignominy, which follows sin and sinners. Ezechiell 16, 36. Thy
filthiness discovered.

Filled. sig:
Perfection, when there is no want. Luke 2, 40. He was Filled with wisdom.
This sense the word [ Filled] has, wheresoever it is spoken of Christ, or of
the Estate of the life to come.

2 A great and rich portion, or measure of any thing, though there be great
want. Luke 2, 35 He has Filled the hungry with good things. Luke 1, 10.

Find. sig:
The having that given us which we want and desire of God, Math. 7, 7. Seek
and ye shall Find. Thus do we Find God, and good things.

2 The bringing home of a sinner, by giving Faith and repentance. Romans 10, 20.
I am Found of them that seek me not. Thus God Finds us.

Finger of God. sig:
The holy Ghost (which is as the Finger and power) whereby all great works are
wrought. Luke 11, 20. If I cast out Devils by the Finger of GOD. Math. 12, 28.
Exodus 8, 19. A Metaphor.

to finish Sayings. sig:
To make an end of speaking. 26, 1. When Jesus had Finished those Sayings.

to finish their Testimony. sig:
To make an end of their message, continuing to bear witness of Christ
until they died. Revel. 11, 7. When they have Finished their Testimony.

it is finished sig:
Whatsoever was Prophefied or Figured under the Law, touching the sufferings of
Christ, is now ended. John 19, 30.

Fire. sig: pro
That Element, whose property is to burn, and and give light, which we
commonly call Fire; the use whereof, is not only for heat and light, but for
trying and purging Metals.

2 Christ, who in regard of his mighty operation in purging the elect, and
separating them from the dross of their corruption, is compared to Fire. Mala.
3, 2. He is like a purging Fire, and Fullers Soap.

3 The holy Ghost, which is of a fiery quality, enlightening and cleansing the
heart. Math. 3, 11. With the holy Ghost and with Fire; That is, which is like
unto Fire. Mark 9, 49.

4 The word of God trying and examining men's Doctrines. 1 Cor. 3, 13. Every
man's work shall be revealed by Fire; that is, as by the Fire it is known what
Gold is current, and what is counterfeit; so by the light of the word, it s^al
be manifested what doctrine is built upon the foundation, what not.

5 The word of God; to wit, the Gospel preached, which in another respect is
likened to Fire, because of the trouble it kindles, and raises among the
wicked which resist it (as if Fire were cast amongst them) Luke 12, 49. I am
come to set Fire on the Earth.

6 Afflictions great and dangerous, which serve to try and purge us, as gold is
tried in the Fire. Ps. 66, 12. We went through Fire and Water. 1 Pet. 4, 12
Think it not strange concerning the Fiery trial.

7 Extreme and most sharp pain, appointed for the wicked in Hell. Mark 9, 34.
Where the Fire never goes o^t; that is, most grievous pain which never shall
have an end.

8 Gods burning displ^asu^e and wrath, as the cause of all punnishment and
pain to the wicked. Heb. 12, verse last. Esaias 66. Psalm. 88. Psalm. 18, 8. A
consuming Fire went out of his mouth.

9 Lightning and Thunder. Psalm. 148, 8. Fire and Ha^le. Psalm. 105, 32.

strange fire sig:
Common fire, such as was not sent down from Heaven. Le^. 10, 1. And offered
strange fire before the Lord. Unto which, by allusion, strange worship, and
strange Doctrines are likened.

flames of Fire. sig:
The piercing knowledge of Christ, searching and piercing into all things,
even the most secret thoughts of the heart. Revel. 1, 14. His eyes were like a
Flame of fire.

consuming Fire. sig:
The infinite wrath of God, against faithless and unrepentant sinners. Heb.
12, 29. Our God is a consuming Fire. And often in the Prophets, the wicked are
likened to Stubble, and Gods wrath to Fire, which as easily and fiercely
destroys wicked men, as Fire does consume Stubble.

a Fiery law. sig:
That Fire, out of which God uttered all things which he would have done of us,
or not done, according to his Law. Deuteronomy. 33, 2. At his right hand did shine a
Fiery Law.

pillar of Fire. sig:
A Token of Gods visible presence, serving to guide the people of Israel in the
night season, thorough the wilderness. Exodus 13, 21. By night in a Pillar of
Fire.

the Holye-Ghost, and with Fire. sig:
The Holy Ghost, which is like Fire, of a fiery quality, enlightening and
purging our souls. Mat. 3, 11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and
Fire.

the bush burning with Fire, and not consuming. sig:
The estate of the militant Church here in earth, mightily preserved by Gods
defense, amidst many great dangers and afflictions. Exodus 3, 2. The bush burned
with Fire, yet not consumed.

to answer^ by Fire. sig:
To send down fire from heaven (as an answer) to the Prayers which were made
to God for it. 1. Kings 18, 21. And then the God that answers by Fire, let
him be God.

to pass or go through the Fire. sig:
To offer up, or to Sacrifice one as a (...) Off^ring. As Israel did their
children to the ^doll Moloch. 2. Kings 21, 6. And he caused his sons to pass
through the Fire. Leuit. 20, 2, 3.

2 To purge or purifye metal by Fire, that it may be meet for the Lord use.
N^m. 31, 23. All that will abide the Fire, ye shall make pass through the
Fire, and it shall be clean.

3 To endure affliction, or to abide the trial of the Cross. Psalm. 66, 1^*
We did pass through Fire and Water, and thou broughtest us to a wealthy place.

Firebrand. sig: pro
A piece of wood almost burnt, consuming it self, ready to be quite extinct
and put out.

2 The two Kings of Israel and Assyria, which threatened Judah, as if they would
destroy it themselves, being shortly (for all their bragges) to fall and
perish. Esaias 7, 4. Fear not these Firebrands.

First. sig:
That which is before other, in respect of time: and then it is a word of
order, and has reference to second, third, fourth, etc. Math. 10, 1, The
First* is Simon called Peter; that is, he was first called to be an Apostle.
1. Cor. 15, 47. The First man is of the earth, the second man, etc. 1. Cor. 12,
28.

2 That which is chief, or more excellent. Romans 3, 2. The word which is here
translated [ Chiefely] in the Original it signifies [ First.] And so it is
also Luke 19, 47. Acts 28, 2. where the [ First of the Jews, and of the
people,] is put for the [ Chief of the Jews, and of the people.] So Luke 15,
22. Here it is a word of Dignity and Honor.

3 The greatest; and then it is a word of power and Authority. Revel. 1, 5. The
First begotten of the dead, and that Prince of the Kings of the earth.

First love. sig:
Former affection of love, which being decayed, needed refreshing. Revel. 2, 4.

First loo^kes. sig:
Former actions, which they were wont to do, while they heartily loved the
Gospel. Revel. 2, 5.

First ^aith. sig:
Vow in Baptism, whereby we are bound to profess the Christian faith, or
that promise which younger Widows made to the Church to remain such, that
they might serve the poor. 1. Tim. 5, 11, 12.

First borne or first begotten. sig:
The First male-Childe that was borne to a man, though there were none other
borne after it. Gen: 49, 3. Reuben my First borne. Deuteronomy: 21, 17. 2. Chr: 21, 2,
3, 4. Math: 1, 25. Amongst the Jews, the ^o wit, if the Father were sick,
lunatic, or absent from home, then the eldest brother being of sufficient age,
did govern the rest in his Fathers stead. Thus Peter Martyr, on Romans ^.
First borne had a twofold prerogative above his Brethren; one, was a double
portion in his fathers substance; the other, was * pre-eminence and rule over
his brethren. The Apostle alluding to this custom of the Jews, called Christ
The First begotten of every creature. Col: 1, 15. And First begotten of the
dead. Verse 18. because he was begotten (as he was the son of God) before
things were created; and being the chief heir of the world, he had chief
rule amongst all his Brethren, which being once dead, shall after rise to
eternal life.

First fruits sig:
That small portion of fruits which was First gathered to offer unto God. Exodus
22, 29. and 34, 26. The First ripe fruits of thy land thou shall bring to the
Lord.

2 Christ raised from the dead, by his own resurrection, sanctifying all the
believers to a blessed resurrection, as the First fruits under the Law did
sanctify the whole mass and heap of other fruits. 1. Cor. 15, 20. The First
fruits of them that sleep.

3 An holy kind of offering, taken out of the residue of men (as First fruits
were taken out of the rest.) James 1, 18. As the First fruits of his Creatures.

4 A certain measure of the special and saving graces of the Spirit; as
Faith, Hope, Love, etc. which therefore are likened to the First fruits,
because the having of these graces, gives hope of inioying heavenly bliss and
joys in due time: even as the Israelites, by the Offering up of their First
fruits to God, were raised up to a good hope, to enjoy the whole crop in due
^eason. Romans 8, 23. We also which have received the First fruits of the
spirit, do wait for the redemption of our bodies.

5 The forefathers, or First fathers of the Jews, as Abraham, Isaac, Iac^^.
Romans 11, 16. If the First fruits be wholly, so is the whole lump.

the first of his strength sig:
The man-child, which is First begotten when his Parents were in their best
strength and vigor. Deuteronomy. 21, 17. For he is the first of his strength Gen: 49.
3. He is called the beginning of strength.

the First day of the Sabbath. sig:
The First day of the week, which in Scripture is called the Lords day, and
with us Sunday. Ioh. 20, 1. The First day of the Sabbath. So it is read in the
Original. 1. Cor: 16, ^.

First heavens, and first earth. sig:
Heavens and earth, considered in that corrupt estate wherein now they are,
through our sin, before that perfect restoring and change which shall be at
the great and last day. Revel: 21, 1. First heavens, and first earth,

First things. sig:
Sins, and their ^^^ectes of sorrow and misety. Revel. 21, 4. There shall be
no more crying, nor death, nor sorrow, nor pain, for the first things are past.

First Adam sig:
That man named Adam, first of that name, and First in respect of the second
Adam (having brought in sin and death) as the second Adam signifies Christ,
who destroyed these works of the first Adam. 1. Cor. 15, 45. The first man
Adam was made a living soul.

First resurrection. sig:
Sanctification, whereby the Elect arise from the death of sin* to walk in
newness of life. Revel: 20, 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part ^n the
first resurrection. Romans 6, 4. Christ has raised us from the dead, to walk in
a new life. Master Brightman expounds the First resurrection, of the calling
of the Jews again unto the faith; which is after a sort, a raising them from
the dead. This exposition, in substance is one with the former; because the
calling of the Jews, will be the quickening of them by Grace.

Fishers. sig: pro
Such as make benefit unto themselves by fishing. Esaias 19, 8. The fishers shall
mourn, that is; the Egyptians shall be sorry when that the River Nylus shall
be dried up, wherein they were wont to fish to their commodity.

2 The Armies of the Caldeans, pursuing the Jews to destruction, like as
fishers take fishes in their net. Ier. 16, 16. I will send out many fishers to
take them.

Fishers of men. sig:
Ministers of Christ, who by the word (as by a net or hook) do draw men (as
fishes) to Gods Church and kingdom. Mat. 4, 16. I will make you fishers of men.

F. L.
Flagons of wine. sig:
The most comfortable promises of Gods mercies for salvation, which are as
wholesome Wine abundantly drawn out of Christ's Seller, which is his word.
Cant. 2, 5. Stay me with Flagons; that is, the plentiful comforts of the
word, and the rich graces of the spirit, power into my heart for my
strengthening.

to Flatter. sig:
To speak pleasing or false words, with a mind only to please and beguile,
for our own profit. Prou. 28, 23. He that reproues, finds more favor at
last, then he that flattereth. Prou. 26, 22.

smoking Flar. sig:
Weak Christians (like to Flax) which has neither heat nor flame, and
yields forth but smoke only: even such be infirm and weak Christians, who
have no more but an unfeigned desire to believe and repent; as it were, a
spark ready to die. Mat. 12, 20. Smoking Flax shall he not quench. Esaias 42, 3.
Bruised reed, has the same signification.

Flea. sig: pro
A vile and base creature, so called.

2 A mean and contemptible person. 2. Sam. 24, 15. After whom do thou
pursue, after a dead Dog, or after a Flea? That is, an abject or base person.

Flesh. sig: pro
The body consisting of sundry members. Romans 2, 28. Which is outward in the
Flesh; that is, in the body. 1. Cor. 5, 5. 2. Cor. 7, 1. Gal. 2, 20. Psalm. 79,
2. The flesh of thy Saints, unto the Beasts of the earth.

2 A wife. Genesis 2, 23. This is Flesh of my flesh. Ephe 5, 31. Who ever hated
his own flesh? In Mat. 19, 5. [Flesh] is put for [Person.] Shall be one Flesh.
Ephe. 5, 31.

3 One of our kind, which is like unto our self, even every man and woman.
Prou. 11, 17. He that hates his own flesh is cruel. Esaias 58, 7. Turn not
thy face from thine own Flesh; that is, from him which has a common nature
with thee.

4 Consanguinity, or neerenesse of blood. Romans 9, 3. My Kinsmen according to
the flesh. Romans 11, 14. If I might provoke them of my flesh; that is, my
Kindred.

5 The whole man, consisting of body and soul. Genesis 6, 12, 13. All flesh has
corrupted his way upon earth. 1. Pet. 3, 18. Christ was put to death concerning
the flesh; that is, concerning his manhood, for his body was dead naturally,
and his soul felt the sorrows of death spiritually. Acts 2, 24. Luke 3, 6. 1.
Pet. 1, 24. Math. 24, 22. And elsewhere often, is [Flesh] put, to signify the
[whole human Nature.] Romans 1, 3. and 8, 5. as it is simply considered,
without sinful corruption.

6 Mankind, being weak and feeble, either to help himself or others. Ier.
17, 15. Cursed be he that makes flesh his arm; that is, which places his
strength and safety, in weak and vain man. Esaias 40, 6. Psalm. 78. 39. Ioell 2,
28. In these, and many other places [ Flesh] does signify our whole kind, as
it is wrapped in great imbecility and frailety.

7 The quality of corruption, which is not sinful, but the effect of sin,
accompanying our bodies in this life. 1 Cor. 15, 50. Flesh and Blood shall not
inherit eternal life, neither corruption inherit incorruption; that is to say,
our corruptible bodies cannot come to Heaven. That which shall inherit Heaven,
must be an incorrupt Flesh, a body without corruption.

8 What thing soever belonges to this present life. 1 Cor. 7, 18. Such shall
have trouble in the flesh. Thus Beza expounds it. Also it signifies the
estate of this present life. Phil. 1, 24. To abide in the flesh is more
needful for you.

9 Whatsoever is in man, reputed most excellent and glorious without the grace
of Christ; as Nobility, birth, wisdom, wit, understanding, reason. Math. 16,
17. Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto thee. John 1, 13, 14. Borne not
of Flesh and Blood. John 3. Phil. 3.

10 All that in Religion, which is outward and to be seen with the eye, as
Moral works or ceremonies. Romans 4, 1. What has Abraham gotten according to
the Flesh. This word [ Flesh] in the second verse, is expounded to be the
works of Abraham, which did not justify him before God. Thus Beza and
Piscator Interpret this place. See Gal. 6, 12. and 33. Where Flesh, signifies
the Ceremonies of Moses Law; and whatsoever it is which is without, is noted
by this word. Phil. 3, 3.

11 The whole Nature of Man, as it comes into the World, corrupt and vile,
infected by sin; or that part of Man which is unregenerate. John 3, 6. That
which is borne of the Flesh is Flesh. Romans 7, 5. When we were in the Flesh.
Romans 8, 8. They that are in the Flesh; That is, in the corruption Unbelief,
and all motions of the soul which be evil, all wicked desires, all out words
and works done without grace; how good, holy, or spiritual soever they seem
to be and show for; also our learning, doctrine, preaching, prayers, and what
else soever comes not of the spirit of Christ, is called Flesh in the phrase
of Scripture.
of sinful Nature; and in all other places where the word [ Flesh] is applied
to men unregenerate, it signifies the whole corruption and naughtiness of our
Nature, raging and reigning both in the reason and will: but in those places of
Scripture, where [ Flesh] is attributed to newborn persons, and is set
against the spirit, as in Gal. 5, 17, 19, 24 Romans 7, 18, 25. In all these (I
say) and such like Texts, the word [ Flesh] signifies the remainder of natural
corruption, even so much of that vicious quality of sin, as still sticks
behind in regenerate persons, and is unmortified. The reason and cause why
sin is noted out by the name of [ Flesh] it is, because through the Flesh (to
wit our Seed) or through carnal generation, sin is conveyed into the whole
man, Soul and Body: also, for that the Flesh or Body is the instrument to
execute the lusts of our natural concupisence. Romans 6, 13. Thus Piscator, and
Peter Martyr do judge. Illiricus adds another reason; to wit, because man, as
he is sinful, tendes wholly to carnal things. By this we see, how such are
deceived, who will have only the inferior part of the soul (as will and
affections) meant by Flesh.

12 Common or ordinary course of nature. Gal. 4, 29. He that was borne after
the Flesh.

13 The Inferior, or unreasonable part of the Soul, as it is corrupt by
sin; to wit, the sinful will and affections. Ephe. 2, 3. In fulfilling the
will of the flesh; that is, the desires of our corrupt will.

14 Every living Creature, reasonable and unreasonable. Psalm. 136, 25. Which
gives food to all flesh. Genesis 6. and 7. Leu. 17.

15 Authority, dignity, wealth, worship, corporal conversation. 2 Cor. 5, 16.
We know no man after the flesh.

16 Outward appearance. John 8. Ye judge according to the flesh.

17 A glorified person, whose body and Soul is perfitly blessed. Job 19, 26.
And shall see him in my flesh.

18 The secret parts of Man or Woman, Leuit. 15, 2. Whosoever has an Issue
from his flesh, etc.

heart of flesh. sig:
A tender and soft heart, yielding unto the word of God, easily receiving the
impression of Grace. Ezec. 11, 19. I will give you an heart of flesh, which is
set against a stony heart; that is, hard and hardened, not yielding to God.

the infirmity of the Flesh. sig:
The weakness of our understanding, being more carnal then spiritual, and
having in it more ignorance then knowledge. Romans 6, 9. I speak after the
manner of a man, because of the infirmity of your flesh.

2 The cross, or afflictions, which make one outwardly infirm and weak. Gal.
4, 13.

the Flesh of Christ. sig:
Whole Christ, both Godhead and Manhood in one person, with all his benefits.
John 6, 55. My Flesh is meat indeed; that is, my self being believed on. A
Sinechdoche.

2 The Manhood of Christ, as it is considered apart from his Godhead, or
Divine Nature. John 6, 63. The Flesh profits nothing; that is to say, the
human Nature of Christ, is not profitable to us of it self, but as the
Godhead dwells in it, giving life to it, and quickening us by it. Thus
Master Tindall, and the Bible-note expound this place. Augustine and
Chrisostom expound it of understanding the word Carnally, and not Spiritually.
The former is the better.

destruction of the Flesh sig:
The taming and making lean the body, the vital Juice or moisture being dried
up by heaviness of the heart for sin. 1 Cor. 5, 5. He be delivered unto
Satan for the destruction of the Flesh. Thus Pis. cator expounds this place.

Flesh of Flesh, or to be ones Flesh. sig:
Natural conjunction, such as is between Husband and Wife, or between
Kinsmen. 2 Samuel 6, 2 He is Flesh of our Flesh. Genesis 2, 13. This is Flesh of my
Flesh. Math. 19, 5. They twain shall be one flesh; that is, as one man most
nearly coupled, or one person, as before.

2 Spiritual union and conjunction, such as is between Christ and his
members. Ephe. 5, 3. We are members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his
Bones; that is, most straightly coupled to Christ by the spiritual band of our
Faith.

Flesh and Blood. sig:
The whole humain Nature, such as it is in it self, considered without the
Grace of regeneration. Matthew 16, 17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this;
that is, human Nature, as it is corrupt and sinful, has not taught it thee.

2 Mortal men, as they are weak and feeble. Ephesians. 6, 12. We wrestle not
against Flesh and blood. Gal. 1, 16. I communicated not with Flesh and blood;
That is, with any man in the world.

3 An humain living body, subject to rottenness. 1 Cor. 15, 50.

to walk after the flesh. sig:
To follow the motions of corrupt nature in the guiding of our life and
manners. Romans 8, 1. Which walk not after the Flesh. ver. 12.

to walk in the Flesh. sig:
To live in this frail body until we be taken up into Heaven. 2 Cor. 10, 3.
Though we walk in the Flesh. Also to live in the Flesh has the same
signification. Phil. 1, 22. Gal. 2, 20.

to sow unto the Flesh. sig:
To apply a man's care and labor to heap unto himself carnal and earthly
things, which belong to the cherishing of this Mortal Flesh or body. Gal. 6,
8. He that sowes to the Flesh, of the Flesh shall reap corruption.

to be in the Flesh. sig:
To be a mere natural man, unregenerate, drowned in the lusts of sin, and a
Servant of sin. Romans 7, 5. When we were in the Flesh. Romans 8.

to crucify the Flesh. sig:
To weaken the strength and power of natural corruption. The death of Christ
does this by merit, and the spirit does it by the efficacy of his grace, and
the Saints by godly endeavor stirring up that Grace. Gal. 5, 24. They that are
Christ's, have crucified the Flesh. Romans 8, 12, 13, 14.

to be condemned in the Flesh. sig:
To have the wicked naughtiness of our Nature mortified and subdued. 1 Pet. 4,
6. That they might be condemned according to men in the Flesh. 1 Cor. 5.

Flock. sig: pro
A great company of Sheep gathered together into one Pasture. Ier. 49, 29.

2 The whole Church of Christ upon Earth* Can. 1, 7. Get thee forth by the
steps of the Flock. Metaphor.

3 Some particular Church. Acts 20, 20. Take heed to the Flock.

4 An Host of men, or a rude and unskillful multitude. Iere. 49, 20. The least
of the Flock shall draw them out.

Flood. sig: pro
The ouerflowing of waters, as Noah's flood. Genesis 6 Psa. 93, 3, 4.

2 Extreme dangers and violent troubles, stirred up by wicked men against Gods
Children, or such great evils as be otherwise sent of God. Psalm. 42, 7. All thy
Floods and Waves are gone over me. Revel. 12, 15. The Serpent cast waters
(like a flood) out of his mouth. Psalm. 69. 15.

3 Mighty Kings and people, who for strength and power are like unto a Flood.
Esaias 59, 19. For the Enemy shall come like a flood. Metaphor.

4 Great store, rich plenty of good things bodily and spiritual. Esaias 41, 18.
I will open the Floudes of the tops of the hills. John* 7, 38. Out of his belly
shall flow Floods (or Rivers) of Waters of life. Metaphor.

Floor. sig:
The visible Church, as it contains good and bad (like Wheat and Chafe in a
Barne-floore.) Math. 3, 21. He has his Fan in his hand, and will purge his
Floor. Metaphor.

Flourishing. sig:
The outward frail estate and short prosperity of wicked men. Psalm. 37, 35. I
have seen the wicked strong and flourishing (or spreading) like a green Bay
Tree. Psalm 103. As a Flower of the field, so flourishes he.

2 The happy prosperity of the godly. Pro^er. 14, 11. The Tabernacle of the
just shall flourish.

3 Spiritual liveliness and vigor. Psalm. 92, 14. They shall be fat and
flourishing.

Flowing. sig:
Plentiful increase, either of earthly blessings, or of spiritual graces,
John 7, 38. Out of his belly shall flow the water of life. Psalm. 23, 4. My Cup
does Flow or run over.

Flower. sig:
Frail and vanishing men, which flourish for a while, and suddenly vanish like
a Flower, that withers in a day. Esaias 40, 8. The Grass withers, and the
Flower fades. Metaphor.

2 Riches, prosperity, and all good things of this life. James 1, 10. For as
the Flower of the grass, he shall vanish away. That is, his riches and plenty
of worldly good shall fade as a Flower sadeth.

F. O.
Fold. sig: pro
A Sheep-coate, or Sheepe-house, to keep them safe from the cruelty of Wolves,
or other wild Beasts.

2 The invisible Catholic Church of Christ, consisting of believing Jews and
Gentiles. John 10, 16. I have other Sheep which are not of this Fold. The
elect are gathered into the Church, as Sheep into a Fold by the Ministry of
the Pastors. A Metaphor.

seauen-fold. sig:
Manifold, or abundantly, also often times. Psalm. 79, 12. Andrender to our
Neighbors seauenfold.

hundred Fold. sig:
Plentifully, or very much. Mat. 19, 29. He shall receive an hundred Fold.

to Follow. sig: pro
To come after one which goes before. 1 Samuel 25, 27. Let it be given them
that Follow my Lord. Math. 4, 19. As Servants Follow and go after their
Masters.

2 To imitate, or to do as another gives us an example. Math. 10, 38. He that
takes up his Cross and Follows me. 1 Cor. 11, 1. Be ye Followers of me as I
am of Christ.

3 To believe and obey. John 10, 27. My Sheep hear my voice and Follow me. 1
King. 18, 11. 2 Pet. 1, 16. And in all places where men are said to Follow
strange Gods: it does signify to put trust in them, and rely upon them,
yielding them service.

4 To endeavor and strive toward the obtaining of some thing. Phil. 3, 12. I
Follow: and verse 14. I Follow hard; which is expounded in verse 13. I endeavor.

5 To dye with one. John 13, 36. Thou can not follow me now; that is, dye
with me.

Fool, or Foolish. sig: pro
An Idiot, or one destitute of wit, of little or no capacity and discretion.

2 A sinner and wicked man, who dispising the wisdom of the word, follows
his own lusts, and the sinful vain customs of this wicked world. In this
sense, the word is used throughout the Proverbs of Solomon: also Psalm. 14, 1.
The Fool has said in his heart: and often elsewhere, as Psalm 73, 3. I
fretted at the foolish, to see the prosperity of the wicked.

3 A covetous worldling. Luke 12, 20. O Fool this night shall thy Soul be
taken from thee. 1 Samuel 25, 25. It is put for an Idolatour. In Romans 1, 2. They
became Fools.

4 A man that is improvident, without foresight. Math. 7, 26. He that hears
these words and does them not, shall be like unto a Fool which built his
House, etc.

5 One (who though he be godly) yet has much ignorance and unbelief remaining
in him. Luke 24, 15. O ye Fools and flow of heart, to believe. It is also put
for all unbelievers, which wholly want faith. Mat. 25, 2. Fi^e were Fools.

6 One, possessed with natural ignorance from his birth. In which sense, all
men; yea, young infants, naturally be fools. Titus 3, 3. We were fools or
unwise.

7 A name, or word of reproach. Mat. 5, 22. Whosoever shall say Fool. A
Sinechdoche. Every word of disgrace, as Knave, Ass, etc. understood by this
one.

8 One, which does see and acknowledge his own spiritual foolishness. 1.
Cor. 3, 18. Let him be a Fool, that he may be wise.

9 One accounted a fool by the world. 1. Cor. 4, 10. We are fools for Christ.

Foolish words. sig:
Such words as be void of reason and godliness, having in them no edification.
Ephe. 5, 4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking.

Foolish things. sig:
Such things as the world esteems for foolish. 1. Cor. 1, 27. God has chosen
foolish things, to confound the wise.

Foolish Questions. sig:
Questions or doubts moved about things curious and unprofitable. 2. Tim. 2,
23. Put away foolish questions.

Foolishnes or folly. sig:
All naughtiness whatsoever generally. Pro. 22, 15. Foolishness is bound up
in the heart of a Child.

2 Some particular heinous sin, as Incest, Idolatry, and such like. 2. Sam, 13,
12. Commit not this folly. Josh. 7, 15.

3 That which men do account most absurd and foolish. 1. Cor. 1, 23. We preach
Christ crucified, unto the Grecians foolishness.

4 That which is indeed and truth most foolish and absurd. 1. Cor. 3, 19. The
wisdom of the world is Foolishness with God.

For. sig:
An efficient cause of a thing. Romans 8, 2. Romans 3, 23. And elsewhere very
often, this word [ For] is a Causall particle.

2 A sign, or a consequent of a thing. Luke 7, 47. Many sins are forgiven
her; For she loved much. Therefore the Papists do dote, when they do heerupon
gather, y^ love and good works be the meritorious cause of forgiveness of
sins: whereas the forgiving much debt, is laid down as the cause of much
love. verse 42, 43.
Here this particle [For] notes the consequent, and that which follows,
forgiveness of sin; to wit, the earnest love of Christ, and does not note
the cause why her sins were forgiven her, which was her faith in Christ.
Math. 25, 34, 35. Come ye blessed of my father, For when I was hungry. Here
likewise, the particle [For] notes not the cause, but the signs and tokens of
blessed persons, or the fruit by which they were discerned and known. Here
it is a particle redditiue, rendering the reason of the foregoing sentence.
Revel. 14, 13. Romans 4, 2, 3.

3 In behalf of another, or in ones stead, to ones benefit or good: as to
suffer for the Gospel, or for the name of Christ; to die For the brethren, and
to be separated from Christ For the brethren; and Christ dyed For us, and such
like. Whereof all do note the impulsive cause.

4 The final cause or end. As Romans 11, 36. All things For him; that is, his
own glory is the end to which all things, both made of him, and governed by
him, are referred and disposed. Prou. 16, 4. God made all things For himself*

Foreknowledge. sig: pro
A bare foresight of things to come, or to be done hereafter; which in God is
ever joined with his counsel, or determination. Acts 2, 23. Being delivered
by the determinate counsel and Foreknowledge of God.

2 Gods eternal love or good pleasure. To. 8, 29. Whom he knew before, etc.
Romans 11, 2. 1. Pet. 1, 2. Elect according to the Foreknowledge of God.

Such as sever Gods will from his foreknowledge, Note.
or do make his foreknowledge of things, the highest cause of their existence
(whereas God fore-knoweth what things shall be, because he has first decreed
they shall be) or which will have foreknowledge of faith and works, to be
causes of election; they are deceived.

to Forget. sig:
To let things slip out of mind. This is the general signification.

2 To let God, his word, and benefits, slip out of mind, whereof follows
disobedience, neglect of Gods worship, and wicked contempt of God, as a fruit
and consequent of such Forgetfulness. Judge. 3, 7. They did wickedly, and
forgot the Lord. Psalm 78, 42. Thus men Forget God; the wicked wholly, the
Godly in part.

3 To cast off one, to cease to love, care, and provide for him. Psalm. 77, 9.
Has God forgotten to be merciful? Esaias. 49, 15, 16. Thus God Forgets the
wicked; and the godly do sometime think that they are thus Forgotten, yet are
not so. Psalm. 107, 5. If I Forget thee ( o Jerusalem;) that is, if I cease to
love thee.

4 To defer or put off the punnishment of the wicked; and to remove
punishment from the godly. Psalm. 74, 23. Forget not the voice of the enemy.
Amos. 8, 7. I will not for ever Forget any of their works; that is, I will not
always defer to punnish them, though it may seem I have Forgotten. Jeremy 32.

god Forbid sig:
A form of denial, with a loathing of the thing objected. Romans 3, 31. Also 6,
2. This is usual with Paul, so often as he judges cauils unworthy of a
direct refutation.

to Forget his labor. sig:
Not to be moved nor trobled with remembrance of calamities past. Genesis 41, 51.
God has made me^ Forget all my labors.

to Forget that which is behind. sig:
Not to think upon, or mind that which one has done or suffered for Christ or
his Gospel, looking forward to things which are to be done here after. Phil.
3, 15. I Forget that which is behind.

land of Forgetfulness. sig:
The place and estate of the dead, who Forget the living, and the living them.
Psalm. 88, 12. And thy righteousness in the land of Forgetfulness; or Oblivion.

to Forget thy fathers house. sig:
To renounce and abandon all carnal and worldly affections, which spring from
inbred corruption, and whatsoever may hinder our faith and love to Christ.
Psalm. 45, 11. Forget thine own people, and thy fathers house.

Forgiveness See Remission. sig:
The pardoning of our sins done against God, as if one should cross a debt
book. Ps. 32, 1. Whose sins are Forgiven.

2 A Forbearing to revenge trespasses done against us, being ready to take unto
favor such as wrong us, upon their repentance. Mat. 18, 35. Except ye Forgive
from your hearts. Col. 3, 13.

Form. sig:
Favor, beauty, outward dignity, and glory. Esaias. 53, 1. He has no Form.

2 Substance, or essence. Heb. 1, 3. The engraued Form of his person.

Form of God. sig:
God himself, or one who is God, and that truly and in very deed, of the same
substance and glory that God is. Phil. 2, 6. Who being in the Form of God;
that is, Form, Nature, or Substance, be all one in this argument.

Form of a servant. sig:
A very man, one having the true nature of man, being like a man in all things
(sin excepted.) Phil. 2, 7. He took the Form of a Servant, and was made like
to a man; that is, he took the substance, nature, properties, affections, and
infirmities of a man, all except sin. Heb. 3, 17. and 4, 15.

Formed. sig:
Fashioned, framed. Christ is said to be formed in us, either when the lively
faith of Christ is at our new birth engendered in us, or is renewed after some
great fall. Gal. 4, 19. T^ll Christ be Formed in you.

Fornication. sig:
The uncleanness of unmarried persons, about generation. Gal. 5, 19. The
works of the Flesh are manifest: Adultery, Fornication, etc.

2 All uncleanness that way, by whom-soeuer, married or unmarried, or
howsoever. 1. Cor. 6, 9, 18. He that commits Fornication, sins against
his own body. This is bodily Fornication. Sinecdoche. See Math. 5, 32.
[Fornication] put for [Adultery.]

3 Idolatry, or strange worship, which is spiritual Fornication: wherein the
faith plight with God (as with an husband) to worship him only after his own
will, is violated and broken. Ezekiel. 16, 15. Thou have powered out thy
Fornications; and elsewhere very often, in this and other Prophets. As Ier. 3,
9. Judah has committed Fornication with stocks and stones.

to Forsake, referred to God. sig:
Not to withdraw his essence or power from his creature (for they be every
where present) but his grace and blessing, which is done diversely, in respect
of them whom he does forsake. 2. Chro. 15, 2. Ifye Forsake him, he will Forsake
you. This is the general signification.

2 Wholly and for ever, to take away from men all such graces as he had given
them, leaving them altogether to Satan, and their own lust. This is called a
giving up, or delivering up to vile affections. Romans 1, 24, Thus God forsakes
wicked men, and Hippocrites. Thus did he forsake Cain and Judas, and Saul. 1.
Sa. 16, 14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul. 2. Sam. 7, 15, And thus
will not God forsake his people. 1. Sam. 12, 22. The Lord will not Forsake his
people for his names sake.

3 To take away some particular grace, and that for a time only. Thus was
David forsaken, having lost (after his grievous sin) cleanness of heart,
peace and joy of conscience, freedom of Spirit, stablenesse of mind, etc.
Psalm. 51, 10, etc.

4 To take away the knowledge, feeling, fruit, and working of his Graces for a
season. Thus was Peter forsaken. Mat. 26. and against this forsaking, David
prays in Psalm. 119, 8. Forsake me not over long.

5 To withdraw for a time or for ever, his blessings and good success from our
labors, and his temporal protection from our persons, both our selves and
ours. Heb. 13, 5. I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Psalm 22, 1. Why
have thou forsaken me.

6 To withdraw and take away his word, his worship and ministry. Lam. 2, 7. The
Lord has forsaken his Altar; that is, he has caused his worship to cease, he
has taken away his Law, his Prophets, his Visions, his Sabbaothes, as verse 7,
9. This is Gods forsaking man.

to Forsake referred to men.
7 To withdraw our heart from God, when we cease to put our trust in his
promises and providence, and to obey his Commandments. Deuteronomy. 32, 15. Israel
forsook the strong GOD that made them. Psalm. 119, 53. I am affraide of the
wicked because they forsake thy Law. Hebr. 1^, 1^. Psalm 119, 118. Heb. 10, 39.

8 To depart from the service of the true God, to the service of strange Gods.
This is a branch and fruit of the former forsaking. Judges 2, 11, 12. They
served Balim, and forsook the Lord God of their Fathers. This is man's
forsaking of God.

9 To deny our help and aid to others in their necessities and dangers. 2 Timothy
4, 16. No Man assisted me, but all forsook me. Thus man forsakes man.

a forsaking al for christ. sig:
A settled and well grounded purpose and affection, to leave all outward good
things of this life, and life it self, for the love of Christ his Gospel;
and to leave them indeed actually, when occasion serves. Luke 14, 33. He that
forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my Disciple. Mark 10, 29. Thus the
Christian man forsakes all; first in affection and desire, then in effect and
deed, if need be, and occasion serve thereunto, as then it does, when we
cannot hold life and earthly things, without denying Christ and his word.

Fortitude. sig:
Courage, when adversities are borne, and duties done with a valiant and stout
mind. Esaias 11, 12. The Spirit of Fortitude shall rest upon him.

2 Divine might, upholding and strengthening us. Psalm 18, 1. The Lord is my
Fortitude or strength.

Fortress. sig:
A strong hold, or place of defense; such is Gods providence to them that
trust in him. Psalm 18, 2. The Lord is my Fortress. A Metaphor.

Fortune. sig:
Chance, when some things falls out beside our purpose, and whereof we can give
no reason. This is called Fortune or chance: but in respect of God, who knows
all things, and orders them most wisely to just and due ends, there is no
chance nor Fortune. Eccle. 9, 11. Time and Chance comes to them all. Luke 10,
31. And it Fortuned, or Chanced. Christians must beware how they do commonly
use this word [ Fortune and Chance] in their mouths, or attribute ought to it,
setting it up against Gods providence, which orders al things, both good and
evil, great and small. I give this signification of Fortune, only to show how
far it may be allowed; namely, so far, as that in such things (as in regard
of our foresight happen accidentally to us) we do yet acknowledge a divine
providence.

Footstool. sig:
Earth, which is subject to God, and put under his will and power, as a stool
under our Foot. Esaias 66, 1. Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my Footestoole.
Metaphor.

2 The Temple of God, or the Ark where God promises to hear his people. Ps.
99, 5. Fall down before his Footstool. Lamen. 2, 1. See Bible-note in Geneua
Translation.

foundation sig: pro
The Groundwork, which vpholds the whole building, as the foundation of an
house, of a Castle, of a Fort and Tower, etc.

Metaphors
2 Christ, who in respect of his person and office, is the only foundation and
rock of his Church, to support and bear it up against hell gates; he being
the firm foundation, or Cornerstone. 1. Cor. 3, 11. Other Foundation can none
lay, then Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 2, 4, 5, 6. Behold I put in Sion a chief
Cornerstone, and precious. Christ is the foundation of Foundations.

3 The Apostles and Prophets, who in respect of their Doctrine, are as
subordinate or second Foundations, laying the elect upon Christ, the only sure
Foundation. Ephesians. 2, 20. Built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles. These be such Foundations, as that themselves also be lively stones
built upon that Foundation Christ. All be equally Foundations, not Peter more
then the rest. A Metaphor.

4 The Doctrine of Christ, taught in an easy and short manner: or the sum of
Christian Doctrine. Heb. 6, 1. Not laying again the Foundation, etc.

5 The immovable strength and firmness of Gods elect, being grounded upon
his eternal love. 2. Tim. 2, 19. But the Foundation of God remains sure.

6 Princes and Rulers of the earth, upon whom the Commonwealth rests, as the
house doot^ upon the foundation. Psalm. 82, 5. All the Foundations of the earth
were moved. Or else expound it thus: All things from the highest to the lowest
are out of order.

7 The bottom of the waters, or bowels of the Earth* or lowest parts of the
World. Psalm. 18, 15. The Foundations of the world were discovered.

8 The great Mountains and highest hills, which seem to bear up the Heavens
upon their tops. Psalm. 18, 7. The Foundation of the Heavens moved and
shook. Thus it is read in Tremellius, according to the Original.

to Found. sig:
To build surely, to establish and confirm. Psalm. 24, 2. He has founded it
upon the Seas.

Fourth generation. sig:
The space of four hundred year, being ended and expired. Genesis 13, 16.

Fountain. sig: pro
A Spring, from whence Waters, Brooks, or Rivers do spring, or an head-water.
Gene. 7, 11. The Fountains were broken up.

2 The Original beginning, or first cause of every good thing which concerns
true life. Psalm 36, 9. With thee is the Well (or Fountain) of life. A
Metaphor.

3 The Word of God, or the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, whence (as
from a Fountain) does spring and flow forth Rivers of wholesome doctrines,
giving life to such as receive them. Iere. 2, 13. They have forsaken me the
Fountain of living Water, and dug pits which hold none. A Metaphor.

4 Christ Jesus, whose bloodshed is an ever running Fountain, to wash
believers from all uncleanness of sin. Zache. 13, 1. In that day, there
shall be a Fountain opened to the House of David for sin and uncleanness.

5 The spirit of God with his healthful and saving gifts, derived unto, and
flowing upon the Church, and every true member of it, to cheer it and refresh
it. I^ell 3, 18. A Fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord. Ezekiel.
47, 1. Reuela. 22* 1.

6 Our possessions and goods, whence our liueli-hood arises, as Water springes
out of a Fountain. Prouer. 5, 10. Let thy Fountains flow forth, etc.

7 Eyes, which (as a Spring or Fountain) sends forth tears (as a witness of
hearts grief.) Iere. 9, 1. Mine eyes a Fountain of Tears.

For. sig:
Every thing that hurts the Inheritance or vineyard of the Church, be it
false doctrine, or corrupt manners. Cant. 2, 15. Take away the Foxes.

2 False Prophets, which craftily undermine the safety and state of Religion,
and of the Church. Ezec. 13, 4. O Israel, thy Prophets are as Foxes in the
wast places.

3 All crafty and guilefull persons, which with their carft and cunning, seek
to deceive and hurt others. Luke 13, 32. Tell that Fox.

little Foxes sig:
All occasions and appearances of evils. Cant. 2, 15. These little Foxes.

to be a portion for Foxes. sig:
To be cast out upon the Mountains without burial, that Foxes and Beasts
may feed upon them. Psalm 63, 10. They shall be the portion for Foxes.

F. R.
Frame of the heart. sig:
The inward secret thoughts, inclinations, and purposes of the Soul; as it is
expounded by Moses himself. Genesis 6, 5. The whole Frame; that is, the thoughts
of man's heart are evil continually, according to the Translation of Tremellius
it should thus be read.

Free. sig: pro
Such as be Bondmen, but are exempt from the yoke of slavery. 1 Cor. 7, 22.

2 Believers, whom Christ has set free, and delivered from the Curse and rigor
of the Law, and not only from yoke of Legal* Ceremonies: also from the
^y^anny of sin, by his death and spirit, so as they are no more under the
bondage of sin (though sin be still in them) nor need fear the condemnation
due to it; also they serve God with a free ingenious spirit, as Children their
Father. Romans 5, 7. He that is dead is Free from Sin. Romans 7, 6. Free from
Sin; that is, from the Dominion of Sin, verse 14* Romans 8, 2. Free from
Sin and Death; that is, from the condemnation due to it, as verse 1. Psalm
51, 11. John 8, 38. This Freedom is wholly of Grace, not at all of Nature; See
Will.

Believers are Free, and not Free; therefore they Note this.
cry both, who shall Free me from Sin? Romans 7, 24. and also they tryumphantly
say; Christ has freede me from the Law of Sin. Romans 8, 2. They are freed wholly
from the guilt and punnishment of Sin, but from corruption of sin, they are
freed in part only, so far, as that it do not reign over them.

the Lords Free man. sig:
A true Christian, who though he be bond and Servant unto man, is yet set Free
by the Lord Jesus from the servitude of Satan and Sin. 1 Corin. 7, 22.

Free from all men. sig:
One that is not beholden unto other men to live at their cost. 1 Cor. 9, 19.
Though I be Free from all men.

Free among the dead. sig:
One separate from the living, left for dead. Psalm. 88, 5. Free among the dead,
like to the slain which lie in the Grave.

Friend. sig: pro
One, whom we do entirely love above others, and use more familiarly and
privately then we do others, as David did Jonathan. Pro. 18, 24. A friend is
nearer then a Brother.

2 One, to whom God imparteth his mind and secrets, so familiarly and fully,
as one Friend does to another. Genesis 18, 17. Shall I hide this thing from
Abraham. Hence it is, that James, 2, 29. calls Abraham the Friend of God:
also the Apostles are called Christ's Friends. John 15, 15. You I have called
Friends, because what I had of my Father I have made known to you.

Friendship of y^ world. sig:
The love and unmeasurable desire of carnal and worldly things. James 4, 4.
The friendship, or the Amity of the Wo^ld, is the enimity with God.

Frozen in their dregs. sig:
Stubborn Sinners, which obstinately stick in their sins, mocking both God
and Man. Zephe. 1, 12. I will visit them that be frozen in Dregs. Ier. 48, 11.

Fruit. sig: pro
The increase which comes of the Land; of Trees, of Cattle, and of other
Creatures. Deutro. 28, 4. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy Ground, and of thy
Cattle.

2 The couersion of men to God, by the ministry of his Servants. John 15, 16. I
have appointed that ye go and bring forth Fruit; and verse 2. 3. He that
abides in me brings forth Fruit. In this sense, the Gospel was fruitful in
all the World. Coloss. 1, 6. Conversion of Sinners to the Faith, is as
delightful to God, as sweet Fr^^^ is to men. A Metaphor.

3 All, and every one of Gods Graces and works in his Children, because they
come from his spirit, (as Fruit from a Tree) and do so please him, as good
Fruit is pleasing to us. Gal. 5, 22. The fruits of the Spirit, is love, peace,
joy, etc. Phil. 1, 11. Filled with the Fruits of righteousness. A Metaphor.

4 The due recompense and merit of our evil works. Micha. 7, 13. For the
Fruits of their inventions. Proverb. 31. They shall eat the Fruit of their
works.

5 False doctrine the proper Fruit of a Falfe Prophet. Math. 7, 16. By their
Fruits ye shall know them.

6 The profit and commodity that comes of well doing. Prouer. 31, 31. Give her
of the Fruit of her hands. Romans 6, 22. Ye have your Fruit in holiness.

7 Any godly deed tending to the spiritual profit of others. Phil. 4, 17. I
desire the Fruit, etc. either speech it self, or the reward which comes of
good or evil speech. Prouer. 12, 14. A man shall be filled with good things,
by the Fruit of his mouth.

Fruits of righteousness. sig:
All good works, done by justified and righteous persons. Phil. 1, 11.
Aboundiug with the Fruits of righteousness.

fruits worthy of repentance. sig:
A godly and just life, meet for such as have repentance. Mat. 3, 8. Bring
forth Fruits worthy of repentance.

Fruit of the womb. sig:
Children. Deuteronomy. 28, 4. Blessed shall be the Fruit of thy womb. Psalm. 127, 3.
and 132, 11. Genesis 30, 2. and in Deuteronomy. 28, 4. Children be called the Fruit of
the body, being derived from the body of their Parents, as Fruit springs from a
Tree: Also delightful unto them, as Fruit to our mouth.

Fruitful. sig:
Profitable, as unfruitful: signifies unprofitable. Titus 3, 14. Colo. 1, 6.
And is Fruitful.

2 Abundant. Col. 1, 10. Fruitful in good works.

F. U.
Full. sig:
The proud, and such as be swollen with high conceit of their own
sufficiency and worth, so as they feel no need of Christ. Luke. 6, 26. Woe
unto them that are Full. Revel. 3, 17. affords us an example hereof.

2 Much, or abundantly rich, and plentiful. Acts 6, 5. Stephen Full of the
Holy Ghost, and of faith; that is, endued with a great portion of faith. In
Luke 1, 28. it would not be read [Full of grace,] but [Freely beloved,] as the
Greek word signifies; and Chrisost: expounds it.

3 That which is perfect, or has no want. 2. John 8. That we may receive a
Full reward; that is, a perfect reward. John 15, 11.

4 Sincere and sound. Col. 4, 12. That ye may stand Full in all the will of
God.

Fullness. sig:
Such a measure of perfection, where nothing is lacking. John 1, 17. Of his
Fullness we all receive. Col. 1, 10. And sometimes, it signifies only a large
and plentiful portion of any thing, whereof the Scripture has inumerable
examples: as fullness of the earth, etc.

Fullness of God. sig:
Such a measure of perfection, as God has appointed to every one of the elect
through Christ. Ephe. 4, 13. and 3, 19. That ye may be filled with all the
fullness of God.

Fullness of Christ. sig:
The Church, which being Christ his body, he esteems himself an imperfect
head without it, though in himself he be filled with all good things. Ephe. 1,
23.

Fullness of the godhead sig:
The whole, and most perfect Godhead. Col. 2, 9. In whom dwells all the Fullness
of the Godhead bodily; that is, substantially.

Fullness of the blessing of the gospel sig:
A rich and plentiful blessing of knowledge and comfort, by the Doctrine of
the Gospel. Romans 15, 25. With Fullness (or abundance) of the blessing of the
Gospel of Christ.

Fullness of y^ Gentiles. sig:
The whole number of the elect Gentiles, called and brought home to Christ.
Romans 11, 25. Till the Fullness of the Gentiles be come in.

Fullness of time. sig:
That time Fully ended and come, which God in his Counsel had set. Galat. 44.
At the Fullness of time.

Fullness of bread. sig:
Excess in eating, or Gluttony. Ezekiel. 16, 49. Pride, Fullness of bread.

Full wickedness. sig:
Wickedness come and grown up to the greatest measure, being now ripe for
Vengeance. Genesis 15, 16. When the Wickedness of the Amorite was Full.

Fulfilling being referred to God. sig:
The performance of his threatenings, promises, or Prophesies. Math. 26, 54. How
then should the Scriptures be Fulfilled: and 37, 35. Also, in those places,
where God is said to Fulfill the desires of the righteous, by giving promised
blessings.

2. to Christ.
2 The perfect keeping of the word, as by Christ only. Mat. 3, 15. It
behooves us to Fulfill all righteousness.

3. to other men.
3 An earnest desire, with answereable endeavor to Fulfill the Law. Psalm. 119,
112. I have applied my heart to Fulfill thy Statutes.

4 Supplying something that is wanting; or increasing that which is little.
Phil. 2, 2. Fulfill my joy; that is, add something to my joy. John 17, 3. My
joy is fulfilled in them. Col. 1, 9.

5 Truly and indeed performing a thing. Gal. 6, 2. Fulfill ye the law of
Christ; that is, the law of love, which is fulfilled of such, as do indeed
love their Christian Brothers, even as Christ commanded, and for Conscience of
his Commandments.

to Fulfill y^ measure of our fathers. sig:
To go on, to do as our Fathers did before us, following their ways, till we
be as evil as they. Math. 23, 32. Fulfill the measure of your fathers.

Furnace. sig:
Most sharp afflictions, whereby Christians are proved and known to themselves
and others what they be, as Gold is tried in the Furnace. Deuteronomy. 4, 20. The
Lord has taken you, and brought you out of the Iron Furnace. 1. Pet. 1, 7.

G. A.
Gain. sig: pro
PRofit coming of a man's bodily labor.

2 Spiritual advantage or commodity. 1. Tim. 6, 6. Godliness is great Gain.

Gall. sig:
A thing so called, of a very bitter quality.

2 Any bitterness whatsoever. Psalm. 69, 22. They gave me Gall to eat. Lam. 3,
5, 15, 19.

3 The evil works of wicked men, whereby they grieve God and man. Deuteronomy. 32,
32. Their Grapes of Gall. And verse 33. Deuteronomy. 29, 18.

Garden. sig:
A place of pleasure for Herbs and Flowers, to delight our senses withal.
Math. 26. 36.

2 The Church, wherein the righteous which be the Lords plants do grow, having
excellent graces, and bringing forth excellent works (as spices and fruit) to
delight Christ withal, that he may love to walk and abide therein. Cant. 6,
10. I went down to the Garden of Nuts. Cantic. 4, 15, 16. and 5, 1.

the Garden of the Lord sig:
A most excellent delicate Garden. Genesis 13, 10. It was as the Garden of the
Lord. Such was the Garden of Eden, full of al pleasures and delights.

a Garden watered or vnwatered. sig:
An estate, either prosperous and flourishing through Gods blessing, or unhappy
and wosull thorough his curse. Esaias 58, 11. Thou shall be as a watered Garden.
Esaias 1, 30. As a Garden which has no water.

Garments. sig: pro
That wherewith one is clothed. Math. 27, 37. They divided his Garments. 1.
Tim. 6, 8.

2 Christ with his perfect righteousness imputed, which as a Garment or long
white Robe, does hide the spiritual nakedness, and decketh or adorns the
soul with spiritual beauty. This is that wedding Garment, spoken of Mat. 22,
11. And to this do these exhortations belong, where we are willed to put on
Christ.

3 The graces of Sanctification. Reu. 3, 4. Which have not defiled their
Garments. Hither do those exhortations appertain, which bid us put on the
man. Ephe. 4, 24. And to put on mercy, meekness, humbleness, etc. Col. 3, 9,
10, 11.

Garment spotted by the flesh. sig:
Obstinate sinners, their persons, sins, and societies. Jude 23. Hate the
Garments spotted by the flesh. It is a speech borrowed from the custom of the
Jews, which did shun and eschew such as were Legally unclean; yea, even their
Garments; to teach Christians how to abhor offensive wicked persons, and
their company.

Garner. sig:
A Storehouse, wherein to lay up Corn or other things. A Corne-house.

2 Heaven, whereinto the faithful are gathered in the end of the world, as
wheat after harvest is gathered into a Garner. Mat. 3, 12. And gather his
Wheat into his Garner. A Metaphor.

Gates. sig: pro
That which gives us entry or passage into an house or City. Judge. 16, 3. And
Sampson took the doors of the Gates of the City.

2 A place before the Gate, where Magistrates did publicly meet, for hearing
and determining causes. Genesis 34, 20. Hamor and Sechem his Son went unto the
Gate of the City. Genesis 23, 10. And very often elsewhere; as in the Prophets.

3 A City, by a Sinecdoche of the part for the whole. Genesis 24, 60. And thy
seed possess the Gate of his enemies. Psalm. 87, 2.

4 Jurisdiction o^ power* In the 5. Chap. verse 14 of Deuteronomy. Nor the strangers
within thy Gates. Because seats of Judgment were erected in the gates, for the
administering of Justice. Hence they signify jurisdiction and government. Amos
5, 12. They oppress the poor in the Gate; that is, in public judgment,
which was exercised in the Gate. Also strength and power is signified by gate,
because of old time, the chief fortification of the Cities, consisted in
their Gates, where their munitions and defenses were placed. Hence comes that
phrase (of the Gates of hell) being put for the whole power Gates of hell, what
they signify.
and policy of Satan, even whatsoever by counsel or force he is able to do.
Math. 16, 18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against them.

5 That godly conversation, whereby an entrance (as by a Gate) is ministered
into the Kingdom of heaven. Math. 7, 13. Narrow is that Gate that leads to
life. 2. Pet. 1, 11.

6 The Judges and Princes which sat in the Gate to exercise Judgment. Esaias 3,
26. Then shall her Gates mourn and lament; that is, the Governors and Rulers.
Ier. 14, 2.

Gate of heaven, or house of God. sig:
A place, worthy and fit to be consecrate and set apart for Prayer and the
service of God. Genesis 28, 17. It is the house of God, and the Gate of heaven.

Gates of Sion. sig:
The open assemblies of the Church, where the public ministry is exercised.
Psalm. 9, 14. Within the Gates of the Daughter of Sion.

Gates of righteousness. sig:
The Temple, which is called the Gate of righteousness; either, because only
just and righteous persons were to enter there to worship the righteous God; or
else, because by the Doctrine and Religion there taught, an entrance was made
to come unto God, and to attain true righteousness. Psalm. 118, 19, 20. Open
unto me the Gates of righteousness.

Gate of death. sig:
Death itself, or grievous dangers threatening Death. Psalm. 9, 13. Psalm. 107,
18.

broad Gate, narrow Gate. sig:
The entrance and passage to destruction to be very easy, but very hard to
life and glory. Math. 7, 13, 14. Broad is the Gate, and narrow is the way.

Gates of brass. sig:
The strongest helps and defenses. Psalm. 107, 16. He has broken the Gates of
Brass.

to raise one in the gates sig:
To commend one publicly in the open meetings, amongst the Elders. Pro. 31,
31. Her works praise her in the Gates.

to Gather. sig: pro
To bring or bind together things which are scattered. Leuit. 19, 9, 10. 2 Cor.
8, 15.

2 To collect for the poor, when the guiftes of many do meet together to help
one. 1 Cor. 16, 1, 2. Concerning the Gathering for the Saints.

3 To bring elect Sinners (like straggling sheep) into the Fold of the Church,
that they may at length meet altogether in Heaven. Ephe. 4, 12. For the
Gathering of the Saints: Also to call the reprobate by the outward ministry.
Mat. 23, 37. How often would I have Gathered thee and thou would not.

4 To destroy and overthrow. Psalm. 26, 9. Gather not my soul with the Sinners.

5 To search and examine our hearts, provoking our selves unto repentance.
Zeph. 2, 1. Gather your selves, etc.

to Gather with Christ sig:
To further and advance true Religion and Gods kingdom. Matthew 12, 30. He that
Gathers not with me, scatters.

Gazing-stocke. sig:
A public reproach. 1 Cor. 4, 9. We are made a Gazing-stocke to the world.
Nahum. 3, 5.

G. E.
Genealogy. sig:
A pedigree, lineage, stock, or race.

2 Vain and unprofitable questions and things. 1 Timothy 1, 4. Give no heed to
Genealogies.

Generations. sig:
A History or Narration of things which happen unto any persons. Genesis 6, 9, 25,
19.

2 The Original or first beginning of a thing. Genesis 2, 4. These are the
Generations, etc.

3 Ancestors and Forefathers. Math. 1, 1. The Book of the Generation of Christ.

4 Persons or people which live in some one age. Heb. 3, 10. I was grieved with
that Generation. Mat. 11, 16. Eccle. 1, 4. Math. 23, 36. also 24, 34. For an
age, or men of that age.

5 A kind of men* Luke 16, 8. Wiser in their Generation.

from Generation to generation. sig:
In all times, both past and to come; for ever, and without end. Psalm. 90, 1.
Thou hact been our refuge from Generation to Generation.

2 For a long time. Exodus 1^, 16, The Lord swear I will have war with the
Amalekites from Generation to Generation.

Genesis. sig:
Birth, Original, or first beginning of any thing. Hence the first Book of
Moses is called Genesis, because it describes both the beginning of the World,
and the Church of God.

Gentile or Greek. sig:
Every one who is not a Jew. Romans 2, 28. Romans 9, 30.

2 One, who being a Jew by Nation, was a Gentile in behavior, being full of
impiety and unrighteousness. Psalm. 59, 5. O Lord awake to visit all the
Gentiles, or Heathen.

3 The Jews which were scattered amongst the Greeks. John 12, 20. There were
certain Greeks amongst them which came for to worship.

Gentleness. sig:
That gift which makes us courteous and tractable, ready to give mild words,
and with reason to yield others; easy to be spoken to, and to be entreated;
apt to please, loath to displease with reason. Gal. 5, 22. The fruits of the
Spirit, is Gentleness, long suffering, Faith, etc.

G. H.
holy Ghost. sig:
The third person in Trinity, proceeding from the Father and the Son, being
himself most holy, and the worker of holiness in all Angels and good Men.
Math. 28, 18. Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. John. 15, 20, Romans 8, 9.

G. I.
Gift. sig:
Every good thing which is given us of GOD. James 1, 17. Every good Gift is
from above.

2 Christ, who by an excellency, is called that gift worth all other Gifts,
being the head and cause of them all. John 4, 10. If thou know the Gift of
God. 2 Cor. 9, 15.

3 Patient suffering for Christ. Phil. 1, 19. It is given you to suffer with
Christ. Where suffering for Christ, is called a Gift.

4 Gods eternal election, and such spiritual good things as flow from
thence; to wit, Remission of sins, Faith, Sanctification, perseverance in
grace, and eternal life. Romans 11, 29. The Gifts of God are without Repentance.

5 An alms or relief bestowed upon the Saints. 2 Cor. 8, 7. That ye may
abound also in this Gift.

6 Justification, or imputed righteousness. Romans 5, 16, 17. The Gift of that
righteousness.

7 The Holy Ghost and his miraculous Gifts. Acts 8, 20. That the Gift of God
may be obtained by many.

8 A thing, given from man to man, either to testify good will and loyal
affections; then it is taken in good part, as 1 Samuel 19, 27. or to gain good
will from some Ruler to help our suit; then it is taken in ill part. Exodus 23,
8. Thou shall take no Gift.

to neglect a Gift. sig:
To suffer it to l^ idle and vprofitable (as a sword that rusteth in a sheath.)
Timo. 4, 14. Neglect or despise not the Gift in thee.

the gift of ones hand. sig:
That which is in ones power to give, or the giving after ones ability. Deuteronomy.
16, 17. Every Man shall give according to the Gift of his hand.

to give. sig:
To elect, or in his decree of election to give. John 6, 37, 37. All that the
Father gives me, etc.

2 Actually to bestow, and franckly. Psalm 2, 8. John 3, 16. That he gave his
Son.

3 To consecrate and offer up. 2 Cor. 8, 5. These gave themselves to the Lord.
Exodus 22.

Girdle. sig: pro
That which keeps a Soldiers Armor fast to his body.

Girdle of truth. sig:
Integrity, or soundness of a good Conscience. Ephe. 6, 14. Your loins girded
about with truth.

your loins girt. sig:
The tucking up, or keeping short our wicked lusts, by Mortification: or an
utter abstaining from all things which hinder the Christian traveler in his
journey toward Jerusalem, which is above* 1 Pet. 1, 13. Luke 12, 35. Let your
loins be Girt about. It is a speech borrowed from the common usage of the East
Countries, where men did wear long Garments, and could not travail unless
their Clothes were girt and tuckt up: So it signifies the exercise and
practice of Mortification and repentance.

G. L.
Glory is a singular and high opinion, which one Glory, what it is.
conceiueth of the excellency and worthiness of another.

Glory. sig:
Praise, increased and abundantly published. Lu. 2, 14. Glory be to Godon
high. Math. 6, 1^. Romans 11, 36. To him be Glory for ever; And elsewhere often.

2 Exceeding shining brightness. 2 Cor. 3. 7. For the Glory of his countenance.

3 Earthly pomp and Majesty, serving to make Kings Glorious and renowned
before men. Math. 6, 29. Solomon in all his Glory was not like one of these.

4 The mercy of God. Ephe. 3, 16. That he may grant you according to the
riches of his Glory; that is, according to his rich mercy.

5 The Arc of the Covenant, which was a witness of the Glorious presence of
GOD, who did there hear the prayers of his people, and give forth his
Oracles; whence the Temple was called, the house or habitation of Glory. Psa.
26, 8. Romans 9, 4. The Adoption and the Glory. 1. Samuel 4, 22.

6 Riches, authority, sumptuous buildings and garments, etc. which because they
are glorified and praised of men, and make their possessours glorious before
men, are therefore called [ Glory] in the phrase of Scripture. Psalm 49, 16.
When the Glory of his House is increased. Ester 1, 4. To show his Glory.

7 The Soul of man, and his tongue, which are his most glorious parts. Genesis
49, 6. My Glory be not thou joined with their assembly. Psalm. 108, 1. And so
is my Glory also; that is, my tongue.

8 An ornament, that which adorneth and honors one. 1 Cor. 11, 7. The man is
the glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the Man.

9 An honest name or good report. Psalm. 7, 5. And lay my Glory (or Honor) in
the dust.

10 Goodness, or the work of Gods mercy, in defending and blessing his
people, which turns to his Glory. Psa. 90, 17. Thy glory upon their Children.

11 Dignity, excellency. 1 Cor. 15. There is one glory of the Sun, another of
the Moon.

12 Worship and renown. Psalm 3, 3. Thou art my Buckler and my glory. Luke 2,
32. The glory of his people.

13 Grace of regeneration, or the renewing of Gods glorious Image. 2. Cor. 3,
18. From Glory to glory; that is, from one measure of grace to another. This
is Sanctification. As [ Grace] is sometime put for [ Glorie] so on the
other-side [ Glory] does signify [ Grace] as the way to glory, and wherein
God is glorified by his free giving, and continuing it.

15 A glorious victory, by ouer-comming ones self. Psalm. 73, 24. And afterward
receive me into Glory.

Glory of God. sig:
The Godhead, or divine essence. Exodus 33, 18. Show me thy Glory.

2 The Doctrine and miracles of Christ, which were signs and tokens of his
Divine power. John 1, 14. We saw his Glory. John 2, 11.

3 The manifestation of Gods omnipotency and goodness. John 11, 40. If thou
did believe, thou shall see the Glory of God; that is, Gods might and mercy
manifested.

4 The glorious and most admirable presence of God, witnessed by some visible
token. 2. Kin. 8, 11. The Glory of the Lord, filled the house of the Lord.
This Glory was a visible cloud, full of light and brightness, as a token of
Gods wonderful presence. 1. Sam. 4, 22. Luke 2, 9. And in this sense it is
written, that Christ shall come unto Judgment with Glory.

5 Religion or worship of God. Romans 1, 23. They turned the Glory of the
incorruptible God, into the similitude of corruptible man.

6 The celebrating or setting forth of his praise. John 11, 4. This sickness
is not to death, but for the Glory of God. Romans 3, 7.

7 The perfect righteousness of the man Christ, the free imputing whereof unto
believers, turns greatly to Gods Glory. Esaias 40, 5. The Glory of the Lord
shall be revealed. In this sense are expounded those words of the Apostle. Romans
3, 23. All have sinned, and are deprived of the Glory of God.

8 Felicity in heaven, or life eternal, which consistes in the participation
of Gods glory. Luke 24, 26. Romans 5, 2. And rejoice under the hope of the glory
of God.

father of Glory, and God of glory. sig:
The true God, who alone is truly Glorious, and the Author of all glory to his
creatures. Ephe. 1, 17 That father of Glory. Acts 7, 2. The God of Glory
appeared to our Fathers; that is, God full of Glory and Majesty.

to Glory in God. sig:
To attribute all good things unto God, with praise and Thanksgiving. 1. Cor.
1, 31. He that glories let him Glory in the Lord. Ier. 9, 33. This place
shows, what it is to Glory in the Lord: to confess and praise his
mercifulness, righteousness, and judgment.

to Glory concerning God. sig:
To rejoice and triumph inwardly in our hearts, because we have the great God
to be our Father through Christ. Romans 5, 11. We Glory concerning God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus it is to be read after the Original.

to give glory to God. sig:
To acknowledge God the searcher of all hearts, and just auenger of all
wickedness; by confessing plainly what thou have done. Joshua 7, 19. My son
give Glory to the Lord of Israel.

2 To believe and praise the truth of God, that he is such an one as he keeps
promise, and is able to perform that which he has promised. Romans 4, 20. And
gave Glory to God.

3 To confess God, the Author of every good work. John 9, 24. Give Glory to
God, this man is a sinner.

Glory of his grace. sig:
Glorious or renowned grace. Ephe. 1, 5. To the praise of the Glory of his
grace.

Glory and joy. sig:
Matter or cause of glorying or rejoicing. 1. These. 2, 20. Ye are our Glory
and joy.

spirit of Glory. sig:
That Glory or renown, whereby the spirit does beautify constant Christians,
which suffer reproach for Christ. 1. Pet. 4, 14, For the spirit of Glory, and
of God rests upon you.

Glorify. sig:
To make glorious. Romans 8, 30. Whom he justified, them also he glorified. Thus
God glorifies the elect, by adorning them with gifts of grace in this world,
and celestial Glory in the world to come.

2 To make known ones fame and Glory. Mat. 5, 16. That they may see your works
and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Thus the elect Glorify God, when
they greatly praise and thank him, confess and honor him, both in words and
deeds.

3 To manifest, and make known the Glory of another. John 17, 5. Glorify thou
me Father, etc.

Glorious. sig: It is
Full of brightness and Majesty. 2. Cor. 3, 9. If the ministration was
Glorious.

Glorification, what?
An action of God, freely, without our desert, yet for the merit of Christ,
making glorious, or endowing with glory all the elect, both men and women here
in this life; by sanctification begun, and in the next world by sanctification
perfect: first, in their soul at death, afterward in the whole man, at the
resurrection, to the praise of his own grace, and their eternal comfort. Romans
8. And who he justifies, them he glorifieth. Luke 16, 22. 1. Cor. 15, 42, 43,
44.

G. O.
Goat. sig:
A Creature so called, being naturally very noisome unto Sheep.

2 All unbelievers and wicked persons, which are like to Goats, because they
are not only out of the fold of the holy Catholic Church, but are hurtful
and troublesome to the flock of Christ. Ezech. 34, 18. Mat. 25, 32, 33. And
the Goats on his left.

God. sig:
A most powerful spiritual substance, the mighty maker and Governor of the
world. Genesis 1, 1, 3. Then God said. Ioh. 4, 24. God is a spirit. And
wheresoever God is absolutely used.

2* Kings, Princes, and all lawful Magistrates, because they represent the
person of God, bearing the Image of his power, and executing his Judgments*
Ps. 82, 1, 6. I have said ye are Gods. 2. Chr. 19, 6* Here it is used in the
plural number.

3 One, which interprets and declares the mind of God to another. Thus is
Moses called Aarons God, and Pharaohs God. Exodus 4, 16. And thou shall be to
him as God: and 7, 1. I have made thee Pharaohs God. Here it is used with an
addition; as Pharaohs God: Aarons God.

4 God is put essentially for all the three persons, even for the whole Deity.
John 4, 24. or personally for some one person of the Trinity. Ephesians. 1, 3.
Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To. 9, 5. Christ is God,
blessed for ever.

to believe God and Moses. sig:
To give credit unto that, which God or Moses from God speaks. Exodus 14, 31.
The people believed the Lord, and his servant Moses. Believe Moses; not in
Moses.

to be for the people to Godward. sig:
To be as Judge, to hear and determine such hard causes as could not
otherwise be ended, but by asking Counsel of God. Exodus 18, 19. Be thou for
the people to Godward.

Gods. sig:
The three persons of the Trinity, in Unity of essence. Genesis 1, 1. Gods made
the world. So the Haebrew Text reads it, in the plural number.

one God. sig:
Such a God, as in essence is one, and in his will two, being always constant
and like himself. Romans 3, 24.

many gods sig:
Many Idols, which were reputed Gods. 1. Cor. 8, 5. There be many Gods, and
many Lords. Thus Paul speaks, according to the opinion of the Heathens, who
fancy unto themselves a multitude of Gods; whereas in truth, there is but one
God, and one Lord.

before God. sig:
The place where Sacrifices were offered to God before the building of the
Tabernacle, Exodus 18, 12. Eat bread before God.

2 A place in the Tabernacle, near unto the Ark where God appeared. Deuteronomy. 12,
17. and 27, 7.

Godhead. sig:
The essence and nature of God. Col. 2, 9. In Christ dwells the fullness of
the Godhead bodily; that is, the true Nature of God is in him truly, and for
ever.

Godly Nature. See Divine Nature.

Godliness. sig:
The service and worship of the true God, both inward and outward, as it is
commanded in the word. Acts 3, 12. As if by our Godliness we had done this.
2. Tim. 3, 5.

2 The inward spiritual worship of God, when he alone is trusted, and feared,
and loved, above al. 2. Pet. 3, 11. What manner of persons ought we to be for
Godliness. 1. Tim. 4, 8. Godliness is profitable to all things. Tit. 2, 12.

3 The whole duty of man, both toward God and his neighbor. 1. Tim. 6, 6.
Godliness is great gain. Titus 1, 2.

4 Christian faith, or religion of Christ. 1. Tim. 3, 16. Great is the mystery
of Godliness.

5 Godly deeds. 1. Tim. 2, 2. In all Godliness and honesty; that is, honest
and godly works.

6 Duties to parents and Kindred. 1. Tim. 5, 4. Let them learn to show
Godliness to their own House.

Godliness, what it is.
Godliness, is an earnest love of God, out of a pure heart, a good Conscience,
and faith unfeigned, stirring us up to glorify God, and to do good to his
people. Thus Master Deering defines it.

Godly sorrow. sig:
A grief for sin, because it is sin, and contrary to Gods will and glory.
This is called godly, because it comes from God, is agreeable to his will,
and profits us unto ^epentance toward God. 2. Cor. 7, 10. Godly sorrow
causes Repentance.

to Go in and out. sig:
To administer, execute, and perform public duties, in the time both of
war and peace, with great trust and diligence. Numb. 27, 17. Who may Go in
and out before them. Deuteronomy. 31, 2. 2. Chro. 1, 10.

2 To do private duties well and faithfully. Deuteronomy. 28, 6. Psalm. 121. The Lord
shall preserve thy Going out, and thy coming in.

3 To live safely. John 10, 9. He shall be saved, and shall Go in and out.

to Go into one. sig:
To have to do with one about generation. Genesis 29* 21. Amos 2, 7. A man will Go
into a maid. An unseemly action, expressed by a seemly term.

Gold. sig: pro
A kind of metal, pure and precious, highly esteemed for the great worth and
use of it. Haggai. 2, 9. Silver is mine, and Gold is mine. Genesis 2, 11.

2 The precious gifts and merits of Christ; to wit, his wisdom, Riches,
Sanctification and Redemption. Revel. 3, 18* Come buy of me Gold.

3 The most pure graces of the spirit; to wit, faith, hope, and love. Psalm. 45,
10. Her clothing is of broidred Gold. Metaphor.

4 Pure and sound Doctrine, agreeable to the word. 1. Cor. 3, 12. But if any
man build on this Foundation, Gold, Silver, etc. Metaphor.

5 Most costly gifts and presents of al kinds and sorts. Psalm. 72, 15. To him
shall they give of the Gold of Sheba. Esaias 60, 17. For Brass will I bring
Gold. Sinechdoche.

6 The most excellent glory of the heavenly life. Revel. 21, 21. The street of
the City is pure Gold.

Goodness, when it is referred to God. sig:
That property in God, whereby he is in himself most good, and communicates
his good things to others. Ps. 34, 8. Taste and see how good the Lord is.

2 It is his gracious kindness, whereby he is beneficial to his creatures.
This is uncreated goodness.

3 The benefits which come from Gods goodness. Exodus 18, 9. He rejoiced at
all the Goodness. This is created Goodness.

4 His most infinite holiness and justice. Luke. 18, 19. None Good, save God
only.

being referred to men.
That quality, whereby men become beneficial and helpful to others, after Gods
example. Gal. 5, 22. The Fruits of the spirit is Goodness. This is created
Goodness.

2 That imperfect agreement of all our faculties and powers with Gods will.
Acts 11, 24. A Good man.

Good, being referred unto things. sig:
That which all men desire, as being pleasurable unto them. Psalm. 4, 7. Who
will show us any Good? Here it signifies the chief Good felicity, which all
men seem to desire.

2 Prosperity, and every thing that is prosperous. Lam. 3, 38. Evil and Good
proceeds from God. Esaias 45, 7. I create Good and evil.

3 That which is expedient, behoouefull, or convenient. 1. Cor. 7, 1. It is not
Good for man to touch a woman. Genesis 2, 18. It is not Good for man to be alone.
And elsewhere very often, Good, is put for commodious and profitable.

4 That which is virtuous and Morrally Honest, Righteous, and Just. Psalm. 37,
27. Flee from evil, and do Good. Psalm. 14, 1. There is none that does Good.

5 That which is commendable or praiseworthy. Math. 26, 10. She has done a
good work upon me. 2. Tim. 4, 7. A good fight. 1. Tim. 6, 13. A good
confession,

6 That which lackes nothing to the perfection of being. Genesis 1, 31. And lo,
all was very good.

7 That which is healthful, wholesome, and available to our salvation. Romans 8,
28. All things work together for good, to them that love God. Ephe. 4, 29. But
that which is good, to edifying. 1. Tim. 4, 6.

8 That which is sufficient. 2. Chro. 30, 22. He spoke to the Levites, that had
good knowledge.

9 Cheerful, solemn, and joyful. 1. Sam. 25, 8. We come in a Good season.

10 That which is lawful. 1. Tim. 4, 4. Every creature of God is good.

11 That which is sweet and grateful. Genesis 3, 6. When she saw that the fruit
was good. 2. Chro. 18, 7. He does not prophecy good unto me.

12 The benefits of God, both for this life and the life to come. Psalm. 103, 5.
Which fills thy mouth with good things.

Good, when it is referred unto persons. sig:
One, who is holy of himself, and most holy or perfectly holy, being Author
of all holiness in others. Mark 10, 18. There is none good, but one which is
God.

2 A godly man, who is imperfectly good, doing good to many. Acts 11, 24.
Barnabas was a good man. Thus all regenerate persons be good.

God is said to be with good men; either inwardly Note.
by his grace, directing and assisting in doing all duties, strengthening and
comforting in fears, and doubtful cases, and dangers: or outwardly, by his
merciful providence, protecting their persons, and prospering their
enterprises and works.

Good age. sig:
A life full of years, accompanied with health of body and spiritual
prosperity, unto the end of our days. Genesis 25, 8. Abraham dyed in a good age.
Genesis 15, 15.

Good Conscience. sig:
A power in man's soul, giving testimony of men's actions and estate before God,
according to the light of knowledge which it has. Such a good Conscience may
be in a man unregenerate. Acts 23, 1. I have in all good Conscience served God
until this day. This Paul speaks of himself, being a Pharisie. 1. Tim. 1,
19. Having faith and a good Conscience, when one follows the light of
knowledge that shines in his Conscience, and does accordingly unto it: such an
one is said in Scripture phrase, to have a [Good Conscience] and to serve God
in a good conscience, though he be but a natural man, and lack saving
knowledge. This Conscience is good Morrally.

2 A power of the soul, enlightened with saving knowledge of Gods truth, and
sanctified by the Spirit, to give Testimony truly both of our Good estate
before God for eternal life, and of all our doings in this life; excusing and
comforting us when we have done well, checking and accusing us, when we have
done evil. Heb. 13, 18. Pray for us, for we are assured we have a good
conscience. And Acts. 24, 16. It is called, [ A clear and unspotted
Conscience.] 2. Tim. 1, 3. It is called [ A pure Conscience.] This good
Conscience, only regenerate men have, and it is Supernaturally good; or good
Spiritually.

Good eye. sig:
A merciful and liberal eye. Prou. 22, 9. He that has a good eye.

a Good name. sig:
A favorable report given us of Good men, in respect of our well-doing. Prou.
22, 1^. A good name is better then riches.

Good word of God. sig:
The will of God revealed in Scriptures, which teaches a good life, and
promises good things, and makes us Good, being Good in it self: and
therefore, it is called [The Good Word of God.] Hebr. 6, 4. And have tasted of
the good Word of God.

a Good heart sig:
A Soul framed by God unto goodness, being made able to love this Good word
of God, and to desire and endeavor to obey it. Luke 8, 15. An honest and good
Heart.

Good hope. sig:
A sure expectation of Good things in Heaven. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 16. And good hope
through grace.

Good things. sig:
Remission of sins, atonement with God, eternal life. Romans 10, 15. Which
brings glad tidings of Good things.

Good works sig:
Such things as God has commanded to be done, even all Good thoughts,
counsels, desires, words, and deeds which come from a regenerate man, and are
according to the will of God revealed in his Law. Ephe. 2, 10. Created to good
works. Unto a Good work, it is required, that the ground or beginning of it
be Good; to wit, a pure heart, Faith unfeigned, and a Good Conscience. Secondly,
that the thing done, be Good, being commanded of God in his Law. Thirdly, the
end Good, being referred to Gods Glory. Works of Popery devised by men, are
no Good works. Math. 15.

Gospel. sig:
The History and Narration of the things which Christ spoke and did; as the
Gospel according to Mark, Matthew, etc. Mark 1, 1. The beginning of the
Gospel of Christ.

2 The glad and joyful tidings of Remission of sins, and eternal salvation
by Faith in Christ. Mark 1, 15. Believe the Gospel. Luke 2, 10. I bring you
tidings of great joy, etc. Gala. 3, 8. And elsewhere often it signifies; that
doctrine which teaches the true way how to attain perfect righteousness and
eternal life; namely, by believing in the Son of God. Hence called Gospel,
as one would say, a Good-spell, or Gods-spell.

3 The whole doctrine of the word, both of Law and Grace. Mark 1, 14. Teaching
the Gospel of the Kingdom of God.

4 The preaching or publishing the doctrine and promise of Grace. Romans 1, 9. I
serve God in the Gospel of his Son. That is, in declaring and preaching the
Gospel of his Son.

Gospel of Jesus christ sig:
The doctrine of salvation by Christ, not as it is Books; but as preached,
believed, and practiced. Romans 1, 16. Not ashamed of the Gospel.

Gospel of peace. sig:
The message or doctrine of peace and Reconciliation with God by Christ, which
alone (being believed) is able to pacify the conscience. Ephe. 6, 15. Your
Feet-shod with the Gospel of peace. 2 Cor. 5, 19.

Gospel of God. sig:
The doctrine or promise, whereof God is Author and giver. Romans 1, 1. To
preach the Gospel of God.

Gospel of salvation. sig:
A doctrine which brings us to be partakers truly of that salvation which
God has promised, Christ purchased, the word offers. Ephe. 1, 13. Even the
Gospel of your salvation.

Gospel of ye Kingdom. sig:
A doctrine which brings us to Christ, that he may reign as King in us. Mat.
4, 23. Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom.

the Gospel of the grace of God. sig:
That doctrine which certifieth us of Gods favor and love, restored in Christ,
for the free pardon of all our sins, and full reconciliation with God. Acts
20, 24. To testify the gospel of the Grace of God.

the Gospel of the glory of God. sig:
A glorious doctrine, entreating of the most excellent glory of God, and at
last translating the believers of it into eternal glory. 1 Timothy 1, 11.
According to the glorious gospel of the blessed God.

Paul's Gospel. sig:
That doctrine of life, whereof Paul was Minister, to spread and publish it to
mankind. Romans 2, 16. According to my gospel.

Truth of the Gospel. sig:
That most pure and sound Doctrine of Christ. Gal. 2, 5. That the truth of the
gospel might continue with you.

Gospel of the son of God. sig:
An heavenly doctrine which has the Son of God for Author, matter, and scope
of it. Romans 1, 9. In the gospel of his Son.

faith of the Gospel. sig:
That Faith, which is yielded to the doctrine taught in the Gospel, resting
thereon, and looking only thereunto. Phil. 1, 27. Through the Faith of the
Gospel.

Governor. sig:
One set over others to rule them (as a civil Magistrate) in the things of
this life. Matthew 27, 11. Jesus stood before the Governor. 1 Pet. 2, 14.

2 One placed over others, to rule them in the things of God. 1. Corin. 12,
28. Helpers, Governors.

G. R.
Grace. sig:
The free and eternal favor and good will of God, which is the Wellspring of
all the benefits that we have. 2. Tim. 1, 9. But according to his own purpose
and grace. Roman. 11, 6. If of grace, not of works, etc. This is Grace of
election, which makes us gracious and acceptable unto God. And by this Grace,
we are so often in Scriptures said to be justified and saved. Romans 3, 4, and 5.
Acts 13, 43.

2 Faith, withal the healthful and saving effects and fruits thereof: which
are called Grace, because they are freely given us. Hebr. 12, 15. No man fall
away from the Grace of God. 1 Pet. 5, 12. This is Grace freely given, which
Popish Sophisters do wickedly confound with that Grace, whereby we are freely
beloved.

3 Free imputation of Christ's righteousness. Romans 5, 15. The grace of God has
abounded unto many. Also verses 17, 20, 21. In all which, by Grace, is meant
the righteousness of Christ, freely imputed to believers. This is the Grace of
Justification, which Papists confound, with Grace of Sanctification.

4 The work of the spirit renewing our Souls to the Image of God, and
continually guiding and strengthening them to the obedience of his will. Romans 6,
14. Ye are under grace. Also verse 23. 2 Cor. 12, 9. My grace is sufficient for
thee. This is the Grace of Sanctification, which is freely given, as a witness
of Gods favor in electing and iustifiing us.

5 That happy and blessed condition into which we are admitted, and wherein we
are kept by the good will and free favor of God. Romans 5, 2. We had this
access into this grace where in we stand.

6 The Gifts of the holy Spirit freely bestowed upon us* 2 Pet. 3, 18. But grow
in grace. 1 Pet. 5, 10. and elsewhere often, as John 1, 16. This also is Grace
freely given, but does not make us grateful to God.

7 The spiritual, or evangelical worship of God. Hebr. 13, 9. It is good the
Heart be established with grace.

8 Some godly comfort and instruction. Ephe. 4, 29. That it may minister Grace
to the Hearers.

9 Alms, or works of mercy to the poor. 2 Cor. 8, 4. That we would receive
the Grace.

10 The bountiful liberality of God, enabling us to give to the poor. 2 Cor.
9, 8. God is able to make all Grace abound toward you.

11 Favor or liking with men. Genesis 19, 19. Thy Servant has found grace in thy
sight. And elsewhere often, as Genesis 6, 8. and 33, 10.

12 The effectual presence of the Holy Ghost. Acts 14, 26. From whence they
had been commended to the Grace of God. 1 Cor. 15, 10. The Grace of God in me.

13 Afflictions and bands, suffered for Christ. Phil. 1, 7. You are all
partakers of my Grace.

14 The benefit and gift of heavenly wisdom. 2 Cor. 1, 12. Not by fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, etc.

15 Generally, any benefit bestowed upon us. 2 Cor. 8, 1. Of the Grace of God
bestowed upon the Churches.

16 Elegance of speech, which made Christ gracious and amiable to all. Psalm.
45, 3. Full of grace are thy lips. Luke 4, 22. Words full of Grace.

17 The persuasion, Fruits, and feeling of Gods good will increased in us. Romans
1. 7. Grace and peace from God the Father. Thus is the word [ Grace] to be
taken in all the salutations of Paul to the Churches. Also. Gal. 6, 18. Ephe.
6, 24.

18 Eternal glory in Heaven. 1 Pet. 1, 7. As they which are Heirs of the
Grace of life. 1. Peter 1, 13.

19 Acceptance with God and Men. Luke 2, 22. Jesus increased in Grace or favor
with God and men. James 4, 6. God gives grace to the humble: that is, makes
them accepted and favored.

What Grace is.
Grace, is the free good will of God, whereby he counts us dear in Christ
Jesus, forgiueth us our Sins, and gives us the holy Ghost, and upright life,
and eternal felicity. Thus Peter Martyr defines it.

Grace for Grace. sig:
A lively Faith, as one Grace; afterward, eternal life, as another Grace. John
1, 16. And Grace for Grace.

or thus.
Grace upon Grace; that is, one Grace of the spirit after another; the spirit
of Christ daily pouring new Graces upon us. This is the best exposition.

or thus.
Grace and favor, showed to us for the love and favor which God bears his
Son.

or thus.
Grace, conveyed into us, from the fullness of Grace in Christ.

Grace and truth. sig:
The free forgiveness of sins in Christ, unto a full reconciliation with
God, and the fulfilling of all the shadows of the Law. John 1, 17. But grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ.

to find Grace. sig:
To have proof of Gods mercy and free favor, in preserving and blessing us.
Genesis 6, 8. And Noah found Grace in the eyes of the Lord.

2 To have men gracious and favorable unto us, to do us good, or to forbear
to do us evil. Genesis 33, 10. If I have found now grace in thy sight.

Grafting. sig: pro
A joining of a science or graft so nearly and firmly into a stock, as that
it become one with it.

2 The uniting or joining the elect unto Christ, most nearly, by the spirit
and Faith. Romans 6, 5. And the word is said to be grafted into them. James 1,
21. Receive with meekness the word grafted into you.

Grain. sig:
A small measure or portion of any Gift. Math. 13, 31. If ye have Faith like
the grain of Mustardseede; that is, the least degree of a lively Faith, if it
be but a true desire to believe, in a truly touched and humbled heart.

Grapes. sig:
The fruits and works of men's lives, which if they be good, they are likned
to sweet and good Grapes: if they be wicked works, then they are compared to
wild and sour Grapes: if notoriously wicked, then they are called Grapes of
Sodom, Grapes of gall, and poisoned Grapes. Esaias 5, 2. It brought forth wild
Grapes. And verse 4. Deuteronomy. 32, 32. Their Uine exceeds the Uine of Sodom,
their Grapes are Grapes of gall.

Grass. sig:
That which is frail and of short continuance* fading like the Grass. Psalm.
90, 5. In the morning he flourishes like the Grass. Psalm. 103, 15.

Gravity. sig:
A seemly moderation of gesture, words, countenance, and actions, according to
the dignity of a man's person, age, sex, calling. Titus 2, 2, 7. With gravity
and integrity.

to Grieve the spirit of God. sig:
To vex, displease, and make sad. Ephe. 4, 30. Grieve not that holy spirit of
God; that is to say, do nothing against that light set up in your conscience
by the word and spirit, for this will grieve the Spirit, and make him un willing
to abide in you: as a Guest has no pleasure there to remain, where he is
despised and grieved. Esaias 7, 13, and 63, 10. Psalm. 78, 40.

Great. sig:
One that is in authority and power above others. Mat. 20, 19. Will be Great
among you.

2 One who is author of much people. Gene. 48, 19. He also shall be Great.

Green. sig:
Flourishing and prosperous. Psalm. 37, 35. Like the green Bay Tree.

Green tree. sig:
An innocent and unguilty person. Luke 23, 31. If this be done to the green
Tree, what will be done to the dry; that is, if God give the Jews leave thus
to crucify me, who have no fault to deserve this punnishment: what grievous
judgments will fall upon impenitent Sinners, who are like dry sticks, apt and
meet to burn in the Fire of Gods wrath.

G. U.
Guile. sig: pro
One that shows another his way.

2 Teachers, who are called Guids, because they go before the Flock as
Guides, to show them the way to salvation. Romans 2, 19. And perswadest thy self
that thou art a Guide to the Blind.

to Guide. sig:
Effectually to move and stir the heart toward God. 2 These. 2, 5. The Lord
Guide your hearts to his love.

Guile. sig:
A subtle invention or devise to deceive another by, when as one thing is
done, and another thing pretended. 1 Pet. 2, 1. Lay aside all Guile. This is
Guile in practice and action.

2 Deceitful speech, tending to deceive, when one thing is said, and another
thing is meant. 1 Pet. 2, 22. In whose mouth there was no guile. This is guile
in words and promises.

3 Inward Hypocrisy, and unsoundness of heart. Psalm 32, 2. In whose Spirit
there is no Guile. This is Guile in thoughts and purposes.

Guiltiness sig:
Worthiness or deserving of punishment, which necessarily does follow every
sin. Math. 5, 22. Which shall be Guilty of Judgment; that is, shall be
worthy. Romans 3, 19.

G. Y.
Giants. sig:
Apostatae^s, or such as revolt go back, and fall away from God and
godliness. Gene. 6, 4. There was Giants in the Earth in those days. The
words lay down the fruit of corrupt marriages, mentioned verse 1. to be not
ouergrowing in stature, but in impiety and sin.

H. A.
Habitation sig:
A Place of Defense, or refuge, as an house is to the dweller in it. Psalm 90,
1. Lord thou have been our Habitation. Thus is God an Habitation to his Saints.

2 A Temple to dwell in, to possess and rule in it. Ephe. 2, 22. To be the
Habitation of God by the Spirit. Thus the Saints are the Habitation of God.

to Halt. sig:
To counterfeit, or to play the Hypocrite. 1. Kin. 18, 21. Why Halt ye between
two. Hebr. 12, 13. Least that which is Halting be turned away. When the heart
goes two ways, this is halting.

Hammer. sig:
The word of the Law and Gospel, which is as a Hammer, to break the stony
hardness of our hearts, and to bruise them to powder, as it were, that they
may become soft, humble, and contrite.

Hands, referred to God. sig: pro
A member of the body, which is the instrument of many and manifold actions.

2 Gods eternal and effectual purpose, concerning all things to be done. Acts
4, 28. To do whatsoever thine Hand and thy Counsel determined to be done.

3 Gods actual power, working all things which be done according to his
purpose. Acts. 4, 30. So that thou stretch forth thine Hand. Psa. 118, 16.
Mark 6, 2.

4 Gods blessings, protection, and deliverances, which be special works of
his power. Psalm. 104, 28. Thou fillest with thine Hand every living thing.
Exodus 14, 31. God ha h protecting and blessing hands. 2. correcting hands. 3.
revenging hands. To fall into these, it is fearful.


5 The vengeance and severity of God, in plaguing the wicked, and scourging his
children, which also be particular works of his power. Judge. 2, 15. The Hand of
the Lord was sore against him. Psalm. 32, 2. Thy Hand was heavy upon me.
Psalm 38, 2.

6 The special favor of God accompanied with a singular kind of Virtue. Luke
1, 66. And the Hand of the Lord was with him.

7 The spirit and gift of Prophecy. Ezekiel. 1, 3. The Hand of the Lord was upon
him. and 37, 1.

8 The spirit of strength and fortitude. 1. Kings. 1, 46. The Hand of the Lord
was on Eliah.

9 An Instrument or ministry by which God does any thing, as by the hand of
Esaias, of Jeremy, etc. Exodus 4, 13. Send by the Hand of him. Hag. 1, 1. Mal. 1,
1.

Referred to men.
10 A man himself, by a Sinecdoche. Genesis 43, 9. Of mine Hand shall thou
require him.

11 A man's power. Eccles. 9, 10. Whatsoever is in thy Hands to do. Prou. 3, 27.
It signifies Kingly and royal power. Ps. 89, 29. I will set his Hand in the
Sea, etc.

12 Aid or help. 2. Kin. 15, 19. That his Hand might be with him.

13 Possession. 1. Kin. 15, 19. And establish the kingdom in his Hand.

14 Counsel and endeavor. 2. Sam. 14, 19. Is not the Hand of Job in all this?

15 Tyranny and servitude. Exodus 18, 9. He had delivered them out of the Hand
of the Aegiptians.

16 Disposing or ordering. Ge. 39, 3. The Lord made all that he did to prosper
in his Hand.

17 The work and labor which is done by the Hand. Acts 20, 24. My Hands have
ministered to my necessity. 2. These. 3, 8.

The arm, finger, and right hand of God, have Note.
the same signification with [ Hand.]

to give the Hand. sig:
To have common society or fellow-ship in any business. Gal. 2, 9. They gave
us the right Hand of fellowship.

to bear up in the hand. sig:
To take special care of one, to support and comfort him. Psalm. 91, 12. They
shall bear thee in their Hands.

sloathfull Hand. sig:
A man given to sloth and Idleness. Prou. 10, 4. A slothful Hand makes poor.

Hand writing. sig:
The Morrall Law of God, which because it is not fulfilled of us, accuses us,
and shows us to be guilty, as if our own hand writing were brought against
us. Col. 2, 14. He has taken away the Handwriting. Others think, that by
Handwriting, is meant the Ceremonial Law, consisting in Rites, Ceremonies,
Sacrifices, and Oblations; the innocent Beasts which were slain in Sacrifices,
and all other Oblations for sin, witnessing (as a Handwriting) how guilty and
worthy we were to dye through desert of sin. This is the better exposition;
because it is termed the Handwriting of Rites or Ordinances. In Col. 2, 14.
and Ephe. 2, 17. it is called the Law of the Commandments, which stands in
Rites and Ceremonies. A Metaphor.

to stretch out ye Hand sig:
To call upon God in Prayer. Esaias 1, 16. When ye shall stretch forth your
Hands, I will not hear you. A Metanimie of the sign.

2 To comfort. Ier. 16, 7. They shall not stretch forth the Hand for them, to
comfort them.

3 To mourn and lament. Lament. 1, 17. Syon stretches out her Hands, and
there was none to comfort her.

4 To be crucified. Ioh. 21, 18. Thou shall stretch forth thine Hand.

5 To give Alms to the poor. Prou. 31, 21. She stretches out her hands to
the poor.

6 To smite and afflict one. Esaias 5, 25. He has stretched out his Hands upon
them. Exodus 3, 20. Therefore will I stretch out my hand and smite.

7 To invite and call unto repentance. Esaias. 65, 1. I have stretched forth my
Hand to a rebellious people. Prou. 1, 24.

to bear his soul in his hand. sig:
To live in a continual fear and danger of death. Psalm. 119, 109.

to lift up the Hands. sig:
To strike or punnish. Also to pray; also to deliver; also to swear or take an
Oath; also to offer violence. Ps. 10, 12. Lift up thy Hand; that is, deliver.
Psalm. 63, 4. I will lift up my Hands in thy name; that is, pray unto thee.
Psalm. 106, 26. Therefore he lift up his hand; that is, he swear. Job. 21, 21.
If I have lift up my Hand against the poor; that is, used force or violence.

to strike Hands. sig:
To promise. Pro. 6, 1. If thou have stricken Hands with the stranger.

his hand shall be against others. sig:
That he; to wit, ( Ismaell) in his posterity, should make war with many
people. Genesis 16, 12.

Harvest. sig: pro
The time of the year, wherein Corn and other fruits are reaped.

2 A great number of people, prepared and very ready to hear the word of God.
Mat. 9, 37. The Harvest is great, the Laborers are few. Example here of in
the Samaritans. John 35, 36.

3 The end of the world. Mat. 13, 39. The Harvest Note. God ^a^dens as a Judge,
giving up: Satan, by inspiring men by resisting, as authors.
is the end of the world.

4 Fit and meet occasions for following our businesses and affairs. Prou. 6,
8. She gathers her food in Harvest. Prou. 10, 5. He that sleeps in Harvest.

Hardening. sig:
The whole execution of Gods eternal purpose, for the just destruction of the
Reprobate. To. 9, 19. Whom he will he Hardneth.

to Hate, r^ferd to God sig: Referred to men.
Not to love some in his eternal Counsel, but to pass by them, and not to
choose them. Romans 9, 13. Esau have I Hated; that is, I have decreed, not to
love him. This Hating has not foreseen sin, but Gods will, for the proper
cause of it; yet God decrees none to destruction, but for sin.

2 To abhor actually, and to revenge sins already committed. Esaias 1, 13. I
Hate your solemn feasts. Psalm. 45, 7. Thou art a God which Hate wickedness.
God does not actually hate his creature, but in regard of sin inherent, or
acted and already done.

3 To desire revenge, or to wish evil, out of a rooted and settled malice. Thus
Kain hated Abell. John 3, 13. And Ahab Hated the Lords Prophet Micha. 1. Kings
22, 8. and wicked men do thus Hate the righteous. Psalm. 34, 21. They that Hate
the righteous shall perish. This is a hatred of persons, not of sins in them;
a malicious hatred, of which, in 1. John. 3, 15. He that Hates his Brother,
is a Manslayer.

4 To detest sin, because it is the breach of Gods Law. Romans 7, 15. What I
Hate, that do I. Jude 23. Thus the righteous Hate even the Garment spotted with
sin and corruption. They hate sin in themselves, and others; pitying the
persons of others. This is a hatred of sin, and not of their persons which do
sin. This is a Charitable Hatred.

5 To love less one then another. Luke 14, 26. And Hate not Father and Mother,
Wife and Children: Yea, and his own life, ye cannot be my Disciples.

6 To do the actions or works of persons which do hate others. Leuit. 19, 17.
Pro. 13, 24. He that soareth correction, Hates his child; that is, he does as
hateful persons would do, who keep back from others, that which should do them
good.

7 To neglect one. Luke 16, 31. He will Hate the one, and love the other.

8 To eschew and fly from. John 3, 20. He that does evil, Hates the light.

to Hate with a perfect Hatred sig:
Neither to love the vices for the persons sake, nor to hate the persons for
the vices sake. Psalm. 149 22. I Hate them with a perfect Hatred, as if they
were mine enemies. Or it may signify, to hate unfeignedly, and from the heart.

Haters of God. sig:
All wicked disobedient sinners, which by their breaking willingly the
commandments of God, show they Hate God. Some see this in themselves, such as
do commit that unpardonable sin. Others do not so much as suspect it: These are
secret Haters of God; the others be open and known (at least to themselves)
Haters. Romans 1, 30. Haters of God.

Hatred. sig:
Rooted or grounded malice, when the heart is possessed with desire of revenge,
upon true or supposed wrongs done to us. Pro. 26, 26. Hatred may be covered
with deceit.

2 Sins, the cause of Hatred. Ephe. 2, 16. And slew Hatred thereby.

3 Strife and dissension which follows Hatred. Prou. 15, 17. Then a fat Ox
with Hatred.

Has. sig:
The good using those graces which we have. Mat. 3, 12. Who soever Has, etc.

2 A seeming to have. Luke. 8, 18. From him shall be taken that which he
seems that he has. Mat. 13, 12. From him shall be taken even that he Has.

H. E.
Head. sig: pro
That member of the body which is placed hiest, and is the seat of reason,
memory, immagination, and senses.

2 One, that has rule and pre-eminence over others. Thus God is the Head of
Christ, and Christ the only Head of his Church; and the husband the head of
his wife. Ephesians. 5, 23. 1. Cor. 11, 3. The Prince is the head of his people.
Ex. 6, 14. Exo. 18, 25. Heads over the people. Because of the Sovereignty and
power over them. The first is a spiritual; the second, is an oeconomicall; the
third, a political Head or Governor: the Pope, is so far from being Head of
the Church, as he is no sound member of the holy Catholic, or of the whole
Church, being the head of that Apostasy and falling from the Faith. 2. These. 2:
3, 4, 5.

3 A chief or principal member in any society. Thus is a Pastor a Head, in
respect of his flock. 1. Cor. 12, 21. The Head cannot say unto the foot. Esaias
9, 15. The honorable man is the Head.

4 The chief vigor and force. Genesis 3, 15. He shall break thine Head. That
wherein thy chief strength and power consists.

5 The whole man, or the man himself. Prou. 10, 6. Blessings are upon the Head
of the righteous. In this sense, it is threatened to the wicked, that their
sin shall be upon their head; that is, upon themselves.

to Heap. sig:
To store up, or lay up together, as men which will gather treasure into one
place. Romans 2, 5. Heapest up wrath against the day of wrath.

to Hear. sig:
To grant and fulfill our desires. John 9, 31. God Hears not sinners, but if
any man be a worshipper of God, him hears he. And often in the Psalms and
elsewhere. Thus God Hears our Prayers: and his not granting, is his not
hearing.

2 To listen unto the words of God only with the outward sense of the ear.
Mat. 13, 19. They Hear the word, and understand it not. Thus all Wicked men
which be within the Church Hear the word.

3 To yield willing assent in our minds to the word of God, with a firm
purpose to obey. John. 8, 47. He that is of God, Hears Gods word. 1. John 4,
6. John 10, 27. My Sheep Hear my voice, and follow me. Thus good children
hear Gods word.

4 To submit ones self to Christ, as to an heavenly and perfect Schoolmaister.
Mat. 17, 5. Hear him; that is, be content to be his Disciples.

5 To believe and give credit to that we hear. John 9, 27. I have told you,
and you Have not heard it. 1. Tim. 4. ver. last. Thou shall save them that
hear thee.

6 Barely to understand and know. Iere. 5, 21. They have ears and Hear not.

Heart. sig: pro
The fleshly part of man's body, which is the seat of affections.

2 The whole man, by a Sinerdoche of the part. Psalm. 45, 1. My Heart will utter
forth a good matter, I will entreat, etc.

3 Soul, with the faculties of understanding; Reason, Judgment, Will, etc.
because the Soul keeps resident in the Heart, and there shows it self most
present (as it were) in her chair of State. Hence it is, that Heart is put for
the Soul with her faculties. Pro. 23, 26. My Son, give me thy Heart. Math.
15, 19. Out of the Heart proceeds evil thoughts. Psalm. ^5^* 10. Create in me
a clean heart. Verse 17. 1. Pet. 3, 14. Psalm. 26, 6. and 73, 13.

4 Will and affections only, which are seated in the heart. Thus it
signifies, when Heart and soul be named together. Math. 22, 37. With all thy
Heart, with all thy Soul.

5 The affection and meaning. Exodus 23, 9. Ye know the heart of a stranger.

6 Understanding. Romans 2, 15. Which show the effect of the Law written in their
hearts.

7 The middle part of any thing. Exodus 15, 8. In the heart of the Sea. Ezekiel.
27, 4.

with all thy Heart. sig:
Perfection. Mat. 22, 37. Love the Lord thy God withal thy heart. This is a
Legal sentence, requiring perfection of love, which is found in Christ only,
and in the Saints which be in Heaven.

2 Sincerity. Ezechiah and David served GOD withal their Heart, and Psalm.
119, 2. This is an Evangelical sentence, requiring but uprightness of love,
which is found in all the Saints here on Earth.

with the whole heart. sig:
Without Hypocrisy and faining: even sincerity. Ier. 3, 10. Judah has not
returned to me with her whole Heart; but fainedly.

from the Heart. sig:
Willingness, without compulsion. Secondly, singleness, without Hypocrisy.
Thirdly, cheerfulness and alacrity, without sad pensiveness. Romans 6, 17. Ye
have obeyed from the Heart.

honest heart. sig:
Such a Heart, which studieth inwardly to be indeed that which outwardly it
seems to others; or a firm resolution of the Soul, to do and practice the
good things which the word teaches. Luke 8, 15. They which hear the word
with an honest Heart.

Hearts desire. sig:
Unfeigned and earnest desire. Romans 10, 1. My Hearts desire is, that Israel
might be saved.

One Heart and one way. sig:
Agreement and consent; both in Religion, and in affection. Ezeck. 32, 39.

a Man after Gods Heart. sig:
Such a man, as is liked and loved of God for his uprightness of life. 1 Samuel
13, 14.

to harden the Heart. sig:
To leave one in his natural hardness, not softning his Heart, but as a just
Judge, delivering him to Satan to be more hardened. Thus God hardened Paraohs
Heart. Exodus 9, 12.

2 To inspire blind thoughts, and to make hard. Thus Satan.

3 To follow his own lusts stubbornely. Thus Pharaoh hardened himself.

stony heart. sig:
Extreme hardness of Man's wit and Heart, with stubbornness resisting Gods
will. Ezec. 11, 19. I will take the stony Heart out of their bodies.

Disobedient and vnyeelding Heart. Heb. 3, 13. Least your heart be made hard
through deceitfulness of sin. This is the Brazen forehead, the Iron sinnew,
the stony heart, the heart of Adamant, which nothing can bow, nor break; neither
promises, nor threatenings; blessings, nor afflictions. It is called Romans 2, 5.
An Heart that cannot repent. Unto which Estate men come by long custom of
sin. This hard Heart, comes by the judgment of God: Secondly, by the malice
of Satan: thirdly, by the perverse will of man.

fleshly heart. sig:
An Heart made soft and tractable by the Spirit of God. Ezekiel. 36, 26. I will
give you an Heart of Flesh. See Flesh.

strength of my Heart. sig:
God, who makes very strong the fainting hearts of his Children. Psalm. 73, 26.

double heart, or mind. sig:
An hypocritical dissembling Heart which goes two ways, speaking one thing,
and meaning another. Psalm. 12, 2. They speak with a double Heart.

2 A wavering, doubtful, and unresolved Heart. James 1, 8. A double minded Man
is unstable in all his ways.

to write the law in the Heart. sig:
To engraue and print naturally the difference of good and evil in man's
understanding. Romans 2, 15. Which show the effect of the Law written in their
Hearts.

2 To renew supernaturally the Soul unto the Image of God, to resemble him in
righteousness and true holiness. Ier. 31, 33. I will write my Law in their
Hearts.

to knit the Heart to God. sig:
To cause one to love God with a sincere and constant motion of Soul. Psalm.
86, 11. Knit my Heart to thee, that I may fear thy name.

a large heart sig:
A very wise and prudent Heart, able to comprehend many and great things. 1
Kings 4. 29. GOD gave Solomon a large Heart, etc.

a pricked Heart. sig:
A Heart deeply wounded with bitter sorrow and grief for sins done against
God. Act. 2, 37. They were pricked in Heart.

a pure and clean heart. sig:
A Soul purged from the guilt and punishment of sin, by Justification; and
from the power of sin by Sanctification. Math. 5, 8. Blessed are the pure in
Heart, for they shall see God. Psalm. 51, 10. Create in me a clean Heart. Psalm.
73, 1.

to speak to ones Heart. sig:
To give kind and comfortable words, which may cheer the mind that is sad
and heavy. Gene. 34, 3. He spoke to the Heart of the Maid. So it is translated
by Tremellius. Also Gene. 50, 21. Esaias 40, 1.

the Heart of the Earth. sig:
The Grave. Mat. 12, 40. The Son of man shall be three days in the Heart of the
Earth.

singleness of Heart. sig:
Godly simplicity and uprightness of mind, when in doing duties, even to men,
yet Gods will and glory is cheefely looked unto and respected. Ephe. 6, 5. In
singleness of Heart, not with eye-seruice, etc.

to steal away the Heart. sig:
To go away privily by stealth (as it were) without the knowledge of Laban.
Genesis 31, 20. Jacob stole away the Heart of Laban.

2 To entise and allure the love and good will of others unto us. 2. Sam. 15,
6. He stole the Hearts of the people.

to say in the Heart. sig:
To have doubtful and perplexed thoughts about salvation. Romans 10, 6. Say not
in your Heart.

Heaven. sig:
God, who dwells in Heaven. Luke 15, 21. Father I have sinned against Heaven,
and against thee. Luke 20, 4. Was it from Heaven, or of Men. This is, uncreated
Heaven.

2 The Seat and mansion of blessed Angels and godly men. Math. 5, 19. Great is
your glory in Heaven. Acts 3, 21. This is the Heaven of the blessed, called the
third Heaven.

3 The visible Church on Earth. Reuelat. 12, 7. There was a great battle in
Heaven. And very often it is thus taken in the Revelation, as the attentive
Reader may well perceive. This is Heaven on Earth. See Dictionary upon the
Revelation, in the word [ Heaven.]

4 The Spheres or Orbs, and the elementary Region. Psalm. 19, 1. The Heavens
declare the glory of God.

5 The Air next unto us. Mat. 6, 26. The Birds of Heaven labor not. And 13,
42. The Birds of Heaven build their Nest in the Branches, etc. This is the
ayerie Heaven, called the Sky.

6 Heavenly creatures, or the Angels which always abide in Heaven. Job 15, 15.
The Heavens are not clear in his sight. Math. 6, 10. As it is in Heaven. These
be the Inhabitants of Heaven.

7 Some exceeding great height. Deutro. 1, 28. The Cities are walled up to
Heaven. That is, had very high walls.

8 Perfect salvation and blessedness in Heaven. Revel. 10, 6. Who shall ascend
to Heaven? That is, who shall tell us by what way to come to salvation, and
whether we shall be saved there or no.

in Heaven. sig:
That glorious divine Majesty, manifested fully in Heaven, and from thence,
expressed mightily in his manifold works upon Earth. Math. 6, 9. Our Father
which art in Heaven. Matthew 5, 48. As your Father which is in Heaven. Esaias 66,
1. Romans 1, 18. Psalm. 50, 6.

Heaven of Heavens. sig:
The Firmament, which does comprehend in it all the Inferior Heavens. 1 Kings
8, 27. The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him.

to ride upon the Heavens. sig:
To make known, and show forth his divine majesty and omnipotency. Psalm. 68, 4.

Heaven and Earth. sig:
The whole Fabric or frame of the world. Acts 4, 24. Thou art the God which
have made the heavens and the Earth.

2 The matter where of heavenly and earthly Creatures were framed. Genesis 1, 1.
In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth.

from one end of Heaven to the other. sig:
The whole compass of the World; even to the utmost and furthermost, or most
remote parts of the World. Psalm. 19, 6. His going out is from the end of
Heaven, etc.

Heaven of Brass. sig:
An Heaven which powers not down the rain to make the Earth fruitful. Deuteronomy.
28, 23. The Heaven above it shall be Brass. 1 Kings 8, 35. There shall be
unfruitfulness and great barrenness.

the host of Heaven. sig:
All Celestial Creatures, Angels, and Stars. Gene. 2, 1. He made Heaven and
the Host thereof.

2 The Stars only. Iere. 33, 22. As the host of Heaven cannot be numbered.

the days of Heaven. sig:
The perpetuity and continual durance of Heaven, even as long as heaven
endures. Psalm. 89, 29. And his Throne as the days of Heaven.

to be lifted above the heavens. sig:
To be most highly praised and glorified, for the works of his great power and
Majesty. Psalm. 108. Exalt thy self (o God) above the Heavens.

Heaven. sig:
The uppermost Region of the Air, where the Meteors be. Gene. 19, 23. Rained
Fire and Brimstone from Heaven.

Hedge. sig: pro
A closure or fence, set up for safeguard of Vineyards, Corne-fieldes, Orchards,
etc.

2 Gods protection, and whatsoever he gives us belonging unto our defense; as
good Magistrates, good Laws, godly Ministers, true discipline, valiant and
skillful Warriors, etc. Job 1, 10. Thou have made an hedge about him, and
about his House. Esaias 5, 2. And he hedged it. A Metaphor.

3 A stop and hindrance to ones purposes and endeavors. Hos. 2, 6. I will stop
thy ways with Thorns, and make an hedge.

Heir. sig: pro
One that succeeds into the Inheritance and possessions of another after his
death. Gala. 4, 1. So was Isaac Heir to Abraham, and Solomon to David.

2 To be partaker of the goods of our heavenly Father, freely, because we are
adopted Children. Romans 8, 17. If we be Children, we are also heirs. Gal. 4, 7.

Hell. sig: pro
The place appointed for the torment of the Reprobate after this life. Luke 16,
23. And being in Hell in torments.

2 Most deep and deadly sorrows, like to the sorrows of Hell. Psalm. 18, 5.
The sorrows of Hell compassed me, and gat hold upon me.

3 Satan, the Prince of Hell, with the whole Army of wicked Spirits. Mat. 16,
18. The Gates of hell shall not prevail; that is, the strongest assaults of
Satan. A Metanimie.

4 The Grave, and the Estate of the dead therein. Psalm. 16, 10. Thou shall not
leave my Soul in hell. Acts 2, 31. And in innumerable places of the Old
Testament, the word [ Hell] is used in this signification. As Gene. 42, 38. Job
14, 13. and 17, 13. Haba. 2, 5. Revel. 20, 13, 14. Revel. 6, 8.

5 The belly of the Whale, wherein Jonas was shut up (as in a Grave) and felt
sorrows, like the sorrows of Death. Jonas 2, 2. Out of the Belly of hell
cried I.

Hellfire. sig:
The whole extreme pain of the damned in Hell. Mat. 5, 22. Called Damnation of
hell. Math. 23, 33. How should ye escape damnation of hell? Fire being a most
terrible Element, is fittest to express the dreadful state of such as be in
Hell.

Helper. sig:
The Minister of the word, who is a Helper of the Faith and Joy of Gods
people. 2 Cor. 1, 14. Helpers of your Joy. Acts 8, 27. Helped them much that
believed.

2 Deacons, which were helpful to the poor of the Primitive Church, by the
just and wise distribution of the Church-Treasure. 1 Cor. 12, 18. Helpers,
Governors.

3 A Wife, who is called an Helper* because of her ayding and furthering her
Husband, by counsel and pains. Genesis 2, 18. I will make him an help.

4 God, the Sovereign Helper of his people, and Author of all Help from
others. Psalm. 12 1. O Lord help, for there is not a righteous Man left. Psalm.
63, 7. Because thou have been my helper.

Heresy. sig:
Any manner of Sect, or way of worshipping God. Acts 24, 14. That way that you
call heresy. Thus Christian Religion is called Heresy by profane men. Acts
5, 17, and 15, 5.

2 Some opinion in matter of Faith, repugnant and contrary to the word of God;
being of some chosen out to themselves, and wilfully maintained. Gala. 5, 20.
The works of the Flesh be heresy. 1 Cor. 11, 19. There must be heresies.
Papists err, which account such opinions for heresies, as are not condemned,
but rather taught in the word, which is the only rule of saving truth.

Heretic. sig:
A person, wilfully* and stiffly maintaining false opinions against the
Scriptures, after due admonition. Titus* 3* 10. A man that is an heretic,
after one or two admonitions avoid.

There be three things required to an Heretic. Note this.
First, that it be an error about some Article of Christian Faith. Secondly,
that it be contrary to the evidence and clear truth of holy Scripture,
soundly and generally held by the holy Catholic Church of God in Earth.
Thirdly, that it be stoutly and obstinately maintained, after conviction, and
lawful admonition.

Heritage, or Inheritance. sig: pro
A certain portion of Lands or possessions, descending from Father to Child,
after the death of the Father. Luke 12, 13.

2 God himself, whose favor and communion* is the Heritage and portion of the
Saints. Psa. 16, 5. The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance.

Metaphors
Also verse 6. Psalm 119, 57. Because the Levites under the Law were
maintained by the oblations offered unto God. Hence it is, that God is called
their Inheritance. Deuteronomy. 18, 20. I will be your inheritance and your part.
Deuteronomy. 10, 9.

3 The people of Israel, whom God loved and respected (as a man does his
Heritage which he has purchased) Deu. 4, 20. The Lord has brought you out of
Aegipt, to be an Inheritance to himself. Deuteronomy. 22, 8, 9.

4 The Church consisting of Jews and Gentiles. Psalm. 2, 8. The Heathen for
thine Inheritance.

5 The statutes and word of God, which godly persons do account and reckon of,
as their heritage and portion. Psa. 119, 111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as
my heritage for ever.

6 The Kingdom of Heaven, called an Inheritance, because it is freely given
unto believers, as unto Sons and Heirs by grace of adoption. Psalm. 16, 6. I
have a goodly heritage. Mat. 25, 34. Take the Inheritance prepared.

7 Children. Psalm. 127, 3. Children are the Inheritance of the Lord.

Heir of the World. sig:
Christ, who had all the people of the World for his Children. Heb. 1, 2. Whom
he has made heir of all things.

2 Abraham, to whom God gave the Land of Canaan to be his Inheritance, as a
pledge and tipe of heavenly glory; yea, and all the faithful to be his
Children. Romans 4, 13, 17.

H. I.
to Hide. sig: pro
To conceal and keep any thing from fight and knowledge of others, that it may
be secret and safe.

2 To keep our sins in silence, either not at all confessed, or not
confessed unfeignedly. Prouer. 28, 13. He that hides his sins shall not
prosper. Job* 3, 33. Psalm. 32, 3, 4. Thus men hide their sins.

3 To cover sin by free forgiveness. Psa. 51, 9. Psalm. 32, 1. Hide thy face
from my sins. Thus God hides sins.

4 To protect and keep safe. Psalm. 27, 5. In time of my troubles he has hid
me. Thus God hides us, as an Hen her young under her Feathers*

5 To put ones self under the promises and protection of God, by a true Faith,
repenting him of his sins. Proverb. 27, 12. A wise man sees the plague
coming and hides himself. Prouer. 22, 3. Thus the godly hide themselves
under the Wings of Gods providence.

Hidden man. sig:
The inward man, or new man, so much in a man as is regenerate by grace. Which
is called hidden, for that the World knows not the Children of God. Also,
because the Children of GOD are Christians in secret, in the Heart. 1 Pet. 3,
4. Let the hidden Man of the heart. Romans 7, 21. Romans 2, 29.

Hidden tresure. sig:
The Gospel or doctrine of Grace, which is hid from the understanding of
natural men. Mat. 13, 44. The Kingdom of God is as a Treasure hid in the
field.

Hidden Manna. See Manna.

High Priest. See Priest.

Hill, or holy Hill. sig:
The Invisible, Catholic, and Celestial Church, whereof part is in Heaven
triumphant; and part is on Earth Militant. Psalm. 15, 1. Who shall dwell in thy
holy hill. Psalm 20, 7. The Mountain or hill of his holiness.

Himne. sig:
A song made in the praise of God. Coloss. 3, 16. Psalms, Himnes.

Hindrance. sig:
Loss or damage. Psalm. 15, 5. Though it be to his hindrance.

Hipocrit^. sig: pro
One who assumeth or takes upon him the person of another, as Players upon a
Stage use to do. Where a Beggar bears the person of a King.

2* He that makes semblance and show, to be that he is not, indeed and in
truth; outwardly appearing righteous, and being inwardly full of Iniquity; like
Graves or painted Tombs. Math. 23, 27. Woe to you Hipocrites. Mat. 6, 2. and
7, 5.

Hypocrisy. sig:
The cloaking of Infidelity and sin, with appearance and show of faith and
repentance. Mat. 23, 28. But within ye are full of hypocrisy. 2 Timothy 4, 5.
Having a show of godliness, denying the power of it.

2 False doctrine, which is called Hypocrisy, because it has the show and
resemblance of truth. Luke 12, 1. Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which
is hypocrisy.

Hisop. sig: pro
An Herb, whose natural property is to open and cleanse the body. Exodus 12,
22.

2 The blood of Christ, cleansing from all sin, such as by Faith lay hold on
it. Psalm. 51, 7. Purge me with Isop and I shall be clean. 1 John 1, 7. The
blood of Christ purges us from all our sin. A Metaphor.

H. O.
to hold one by y^ right hand. sig:
To support and stay one which is weak and sliding, that he fall not away, and
to raise up being fallen. Psa. 73, 23. Thou hold by my right Hand.

to hold up the Hand. sig:
To do the part and office of a Standard or Ensign bearer; as Moses did when
he held up his rod or staff with his hand. Ex. 17, 11. And when Moses held up
his hand, Israel prevailed. This is not well understood of Prayer, which neither
Moses could continue in an whole day, neither needed he two to hold up his
hands for this purpose.

Holy. sig:
That which is severed from earth and earthlinesse.

2 That which is pure, clean, and unpolluted, separate from sin and
corruption. Such are the godly here imperfectly, and such they shall be in
heaven most perfectly. 1. Pet. 1, 16. Be ye Holy, Ephe. 1, 4. That we should
be Holy without blame.

3 One, who is infinite pure and righteous, so is God only. Leuit. 11, 44. For
I am Holy. And 19, 2.

4 One, who is consecrated or set apart of God, to be the Messiah and Mediator
for mankind, having for that purpose all the bounty of his Father powered on
him. Psalm. 16, 10. Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Luke
4, 34, I know who thou art, even the Holy one of God. Such an one is Christ
only, who being both properly God, and (as man) conceived of the Holy Ghost
without sin, ordained to be the Sacrifice for sin, and to sanctify and
make al his people holy. In these respects, he is often and woorthily in
Scripture called that Holy one. Acts. 3, 14. Ye denied that Holy one. 1. John
2, 20. Also he is termed the Holy of Holiest, or most Holy. Dan. 9, 24. And to
anoint the most holy.

5 One, who is not only most Holy in himself, but does immediately by his
virtue and working, renew and make Holy others, continually stirring them up
unto Holy duties. Thus is the spirit, the third person in the Trinity, called
Holy. Mat. 28, 19. And the Holy Ghost. Ephe. 4, 30. Grieve not the holy spirit
of God. 1. Pet. 1, 2. Unto Sanctification of the Spirit.

6 The whole Church of Christ, his mystical body, even all his chosen and
peculiar people; who because they have in the midst of them God his word and
Sacraments to sanctify them, and Christ his holiness imputed to them, and the
Spirit of Christ within them to purify them, and do endeavor to lead a holy
life: In these regards, it is called the Holy Church, and Holy people. 1. Cor.
1, 2. Unto the Church of God Sanctified by Christ's Saints by calling. Deuteronomy. 14,
24. Thou art an holy people to the Lord.

7 Things, and persons, which are set apart by Gods ordinance, to Holy uses and
Offices. Thus Jerusalem, and the Temple, and the Priests, and the Altar, and
the Sacrifices, and the Shewbread, and the Fire, and Incense, Vessels,
Garments, Tithes, and whatsoever was dedicated as Sacred unto God, was called
Holy. 1. Sam. 24, 4. Haggai. 1, 12. Leuit. 21, 6, 12. Math. 24, 15. Set in the
Holy place.

to be Holy. sig:
To keep himself, from eating or touching ought which is Ceremonially
unclean. Leuit. 11, 44.

Holiness. sig:
That divine uncreated essence, which being it self most Holy and undefiled,
loves every thing which is so, and hates the contrary. Psalm. 89, 35. I have
sworn once by mine holiness; that is, by my self, who am most Holy.

2 That created quality of pureness wherein the Saints resemble God, being
pure, severed in part from mixture of sin, as God is Holy and pure. Heb. 12,
14. Without holiness no man can see God.

3 All duties, which do immediately concern God and his worship. Ephe. 4, 24.
In holiness and righteousness of truth. Romans 6, 22. Luke 6, 22. Luke 1, 75.
And in all other places where Holiness and Righteousness are put together.

4 Purity or cleannes of body, about the act of generation. 1 Thessalonians. 44.
Possess your vessels in holiness

5 Sincerely, Holily, with a purpose to do as one speaks. Psalm. 108, 7. God
has spoken in his Holiness.

habitation of his Holiness. sig:
The Land of Canaan, which the most Holy God promised to his Holy people, by
whose residence, but chiefly by the special presence of God there, it was
sanctified. Exodus 15, 1^. Thou will bring them into the habitation of holiness.

Holy of holies, or holiest of all. sig:
Some thing, person, or place, which was more Holy then others. Hebr. 9, 13.
Which is called the holiest of all. It was that place in the Sanctuary,
whether the High Priest entered once a year, as a Figure and Type of heaven.

Holy place. sig:
The Land or Country of Judea, called the Holy Land, and an Holy Nation, in
comparison of other Nations and Lands; as Jerusalem is called the Holy City,
being more holy then the Country of Palestine; and the Sanctuary is called
Holy, because it was more holy then the City, etc. Mat. 24, 15. When ye shall
see the abomination of Desolation; (that is, the Army of the Romans) set in
the Holy place.

Honesty. sig:
All kind of duties, which men are mutually to practice one toward another,
without doing any uncomely, filthy, or wicked thing. 1. Tim. 2, ^. In all
godliness and Honesty.

2 Careful covering, or comely Garments. 1. Cor. 12, 23. Put we more honesty on.

Honor. sig:
All that respect which we owe to our Governors of all sorts, which more
particularly does consist in reverence, love, obedience, and thankfulness, as
in the fifth Commandment. 1. Pet. 2, 17. Honor the King. Exodus 20, 12. Honor
thy Father and Mother.

2 Reverence to Magistrates. Romans 13. 7. Honor to whom Honor, etc.

3 Obedience to parents. Ephe. 6, 1, 2.

4 Honest care and regard of others which are our Inferiors. 1. Pet. 3, 6*
Give Honor to your wives. This is done by bearing with their weakness, and
providing things meet for them, according to our degree and estate.

5 Help and aid, which (by way of thankfulness) we do perform to our
Parents or others. Mat. 15, 6. Though he Honor not Father and Mother. 1. Tim.
5, 3, 17.

6 Estimation. 1. Cor. 12, 26. If one member be had in Honor. It also
signifies, Riches and wealth, which beget estimation and Honor, by a Metanimie.
Genesis 31, 1. All this Honor.

7 Comeliness, beauty, and dignity. 1. Cor. 12, 24. And has given more
Honor to that part that lacked. A more comely and seemly covering.

8 Inward reverence, and all outward private duties of kindness and love. To.
12, 10. In giving Honor, go one before another. Acts 28, 10. 1. Pet. 2, 17.
Honor all men.

9 An earnest care to preserve from sinful uncleanness, as Fornication,
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Riot, and such like. 1 Thessalonians. 4, 4. How to keep his
vessel in honor.

10 Some public function or calling, either in Church or Commonwealth, given
to such men, as for their virtue deserve to be honored and preferred. Heb. 4,
5. No man takes this Honor unto himself, but he that is called. Thus we may
well understand that place of 2. Pet. 1, 17. For he received of God the Father
Honor; that is, an honorable function, with ample and honorable gifts, to be
the reconciler of mankind. John 8, 54.

11 Plentiful praises which we yield to God, when we confess and acknowledge
his divine virtues and properties, and that of him comes al good things, and
that he alone is to be called upon and worshipped. Revel. 4, 13. Praise and
honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the Throne. And in the
Psalms very often: as also elsewhere in Scripture.

12 The glorious and blessed estate of the Saints in heaven, or that exceeding
great praise which they shall there have with God. Romans 2, 10. Unto every one
that does good, shall be Glory and honor.

to Honor God. sig:
Truly from the heart, to worship, fear, and love him, and above all things to
trust in him, and obey him. Sa. 2, 30. I will honor him, which honoreth me.

to Honor with ye lips. sig:
Outwardly with the mouth and gesture, without true Faith and love to worship
God. Mat. 15, 8. Ye Honor me with the lips.

to Honor Christ. sig:
To believe in him, and confess him to be the Messiah. John 5, 23. All men
should honor the Son, as they honor the Father.

to honor us sig:
To power his benefits upon us, and to bless us with favor before God and
men. 1. Sam. 2, 20. I will Honor him.

to Honor man before God. sig:
To bear with the wickedness of men, to the reproach and dishonor of God. 1.
Sam. 2, 29. And honor thy children above me.

to Honor the Father. sig:
By words and works to praise and magnify God his Father. Thus Christ honored
his Father by Doctrine, Miracle, Praises, Prayer, and Godly life. John 8, 49.
But I Honor my Father. How God honors the Son, see before.

to Honor another man sig:
To countenance one by presence, and keeping company. 1. Sam. 15, 30.

to Crown Christ with Honor. sig:
To advance Christ to the Office of King and Priest, fulfilling him with most
excellent gifts, raising him from the dead, making all things subject to him,
having lifted him up to sit at his right hand in the highest heavens. Heb. 2,
7. Thou crownest him with glory and Honor.

Hope. sig:
An assured expectation of all promised good things of this life; especially of
heavenly Glory. 1. Cor. 15, 19. If in this life only we have Hope in Christ,
etc. Romans 5, 2. We rejoice under the Hope of the Glory of God. Christians build
their Hope upon the mercies of God in Christ; Papists, upon Gods grace and
their own merits.

2 The thing which is Hoped for. Col. 1, 4, 5. Titus 2, 13. Looking for the
blessed Hope. Romans 8, 24. Hope that is seen, is no hope. And in all places,
where it is written, The Hope of the wicked shall perish. Metanimie.

3 Faith. 1. Pet. 5, 15. To them which ask a reason of the Hope which is in
you.

4 Whole Religion. Ephe. 1, 18. That ye may know what is the Hope of your
vocation. Psalm. 39, 8.

5 Christ Jesus the Messiah, who is called the Hope of Israel, in respect of
the Fathers, which looked for his promised coming. Acts. 26, 6. and 28, 20.
For the hope of Isreal's sake, I am bound with this Chain.

6 God himself. Psa. 142, 5. Thou art my Hope and my portion; that is, my God
in whom I hope.

7 Some mighty King or people. Esaias. 20, 5. They shall be ashamed of Aethyopia
their Hope (or their expectation.)

in Hope above Hope. sig:
In hope of God, and above the Hope of man. In desperate things Gods children
Hope well. Romans 4, 18. Which Abraham above Hope, believed under Hope. Above the
Hope of man, and under the hope of God; who can raise the dead, and call
things which are not as if they were.

lively Hope sig:
Either the good things hoped for, which are dureable and everliving, or that
immovable and certain expectation of Gods promises. 1. Pet. 1, 3 Which has
beget us to a lively Hope.

the God of Hope. sig:
That God which works Hope by his Spirit, and nourishes Hope by his
promises, and does fulfill it by offering and giving the good things
promised. Romans 15, 13. Now the God of Hope fill you with all joy.

to be saved by Hope. sig:
Certainly to look for salvation promised, as if we now enjoyed it, and by Hope
to possess it, To. 8, 24. We are saved by Hope.

Hope, what it is.
Hope (to wit, Christians) is a certain and undoubted expectation or looking
for of al promised good things which be to come, but namely of heavenly
blessedness, being freely given us of God, and grounded upon his infinite
mercies, and Christ's merits alone.

Horn. sig: pro
That part of a Foure-footed-beast, which is his chief strength and beauty.

2 Power, might, and strength. 2 Samuel 22, 3. God is the Horn of my Salvation.
Hitherto belongs the Horn of the righteous. Psalm. 112. The Horn of the
wicked. Psalm. 75, 4, 5. The Horn of David. Psalm. 132, 17. The Horn of
Salvation, the Horn of his people. Psalm. 149. A Metaphor.

3 Worship and renown. Job 16, 15. I have abased my Horn unto the Dust.

4 Kingdoms, People, and Provinces, with their Rulers and Kings, which (like
Beasts with Horns) fight one against another, and every one against Gods
people. Dan. 7, 7. For it had ten horns. Zache. 1, 18, 19, 21. Revel. 17, 12.
And the ten Horns, are ten Kings.

5 The omnipotency or almightinesse of God expressed in his works. Habak. 3,
4. He had horns coming out of his hands.

6 A Trumpet. Exodus 19, 13. When the Horn blows long. Verse 16.

to lift up, or exalt the Horn. sig:
To boast, or be proud of ones Riches or power. Psalm. 75, 5. Lift not up your
horn on high.

2 To increase the power and dignity of his people. Psalm. 75. 10. Psalm. 148,
14. 1 Samuel 2, 1.

to break the Horns. sig:
To spoil one of his power, might, and dignity. Psalm. 75, 10. All the horns
of the wicked will I break. Lamen. 2, 3. He has cut off all the horns of
Israel. That is, taken from them their strength and glory.

Host of God. sig:
A company of holy Angels, attending and waiting upon God, as an Army of
Soldiers upon their General. Genesis 32, 2. This is the Host of God.

2 All Creatures, in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible, which fulfill
the will of God readily, and mightily, as a strong Army. Genesis 2, 1. And all the
Host of them.

House. sig: pro
A place to dwell in. This is an earthly habitation.

2 The Grave, which is the common House and receptable of all human bodies.
Psalm. 49, 14. Job 30, 23. The House appointed for all the living.

3 The people or persons dwelling in the house. Heb. 11, 7. He prepared the
Arc to the saving of his House; that is, his Household. Mat. 10, 12. When ye
enter into an House, salute the same. Acts 10, 1. Cornelius and all his House:
elsewhere often. A Metanimie of the place, containing, for the persons,
contained.

4 Kindred, Stock, or Lineage. Luke 1, 27. Of the House of David. Luke 16, 27.
Send him to my Fathers House.

5 Family and posterity. 2 Samuel 7, 18. What is mine House. Exodus 1, 21. He
made them Houses; that is, he did increase and prosper the Families and
Posterities. Genesis 39, 4. He made him ruler over his House, and over all he had.

6 Substance, goods, and worldly riches, laid up in Houses, to be safe kept
there. Mat. 23, 14. They devour Widows Houses. Genesis 39, 5, 6. God blessed the
house of the Aegiptian; That is, all his substance which he had.

House of God. sig:
Heaven, where Saints, and blessed Spirits shall dwell with God for ever. John
14, 2. In my Fathers House there be many Mansions. 2 Cor. 5, 1. This is a
Celestial House.

2 Every particular assembly, called the Church Militant, where God dwells, and
unto whom he gives Laws, as an Householder to his House. 1 Timothy 3, ^5. That
thou may know how to behave thy self in the House of God. This is a
spiritual House.

3 The universal Church, or whole company of the faithful, spread over the
Earth. Hebr. 3, 2, 5. Moses was faithful in all the House of God. Also Verse
six, Christ is as the Son over his own house*

4 Every faithful and godly person, in whom Christ dwells by Faith. 1 Pet. 4,
17. Judgment must begin at the House of God. Hebr. 3, 6. Whose House we are.

5 The true Religion of God* taught and professed within the Church of God.
Psalm. 69, 9. The zeal of thine House has even eaten me.

6 The Temple in Jerusalem. Luke 19, 46. My House shall be called the House of
Prayer.

the house of Jacob, or of Israel. sig:
The people of Israel, or the Nation of the Israelites. Ex. 19, 3. Also the
whole Church of Christ, even all Gods people both Jews and Gentiles. Psalm.
115, 12. He will bless the House of Israel. Luke 1, 27. He shall rule over
the House of Jacob for ever.

House of bondage. sig:
Aegipt, where the people of Israel were in great slavery. Deuteronomy. 5, 6. From
the House of bondage.

fathers house sig:
The custody, care and government of Fathers. Numb. 30, 4. Being in her Fathers
House.

House of Prayer. sig:
The place appointed to assemble in, for the public worship of God. Whereof,
because Prayer is a chief part, therefore the place of Divine worship, is
called the House of Prayer, as the people assembled in that place, are called
the house of God. Math. 21, 13. My House shall be called the House of Prayer.
The Papists, idly and foolishly wrest these words, to prove, that Temples
are thereby made for Sacrifice; Others, as foolishly abuse it, to shut out
preaching. The best way is, not to sever what God has joined.

House of David. sig:
The Visible Church.

House built vppen a Rock. sig:
Every believing Christian, who relies by Faith upon the Rock Christ, and
declares the truth of his Faith by his ready obedience to the word. Mat. 7, 24.
I will liken him to awise man, who has built his House upon a Rock.

House built upon the Sand. sig:
Every unbelieving and disobedient person, who relieth upon men, and not upon
Christ, and serves his lusts, and not God. Math. 7, 25. Which has built his
House upon the Sand.

to make Houses. sig:
To build a House where none was.

2 To establish, increase, and prosper ones Family and posterity. Exodus 1, 21.
He made them Houses.

House of God. sig:
The Sinagogues, where the Jews assembled to worship God, but especially the
Temple. Eccle. 4. Verse last. When thou enterest into the House of God.

H. U.
Humble. sig:
One lowly minded, esteeming others better then himself, ascribing all unto
God, being little in his own account, even as a weaned Child. Mat. 18, 4.
Whosoever shall humble themselves as this little Child. Psalm. 131, 1, 2.

Christ humbled himself. sig:
His Incarnation, in that he would be man, and a Servant, subject to death,
even the death of the Cross, he being equal to God. Phil. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8. He
humbled himself.

Gods humbling or abasing himself. sig:
His gracious loving care, which he vouchsafes to have of us most vile worms,
and most grievous Sinners, himself being so glorious and holy. Psalm. 113, 6.
Who abaseth himself to behold things in Heaven and Earth.

to humble. sig:
To put reproach upon us, and cast us down from our dignity. Luke 14, 11. He
that exalts himself shall be humbled. Thus God humbles in wrath. Heroa and
Nebuchadnezzer, thus humbled.

2 To take down our courage, and height of our pride, and to make us humble and
meek, that we may have confidence, not in our selves, but in God. Thus God
humbled Paul and Manasses in mercy. And thus the godly by their endeavor
humble themselves, 2 Chronicles. 12, 7. They have humbled themselves. Micha. 6, 8.

3 To submit and yield unto our Superiors. Gene. 16, 9. Humble thy self under
her hand.

4 To defloure or defile one by force. Deutro. 22, 24. Because he has humbled
his Neighbors wife.

Humility. sig:
Lowliness, and modesty of mind. Pro. 22, 4. The reward of humility, etc.

2 A low, poor, and mean estate. Luke 1, 48. He has looked upon the humility
and poor estate of his Servant. There is humility of heart, and of condition.

Hunger. sig: pro
Earnest desire of food upon some want being felt. Math. 4, 1, 2. He was
afterward an hungry.

2 Vehement desire after Christ his righteousness, forgiveness of sins, and
grace of his Spirit, out of a want and extreme need which we feel of them.
Math. 5, 6. Blessed are they that hunger after righteousness. Luke ^, 53. Thou
fillest the hungry with good things.

3 Any kind of danger. Psal^ 33, 19. To preserve them against hunger, or in
Famine.

to hunger no more. sig:
To be satisfied, and fully contented. John 6, 35. He that comes to me, shall
hunger no more; That is, in me, and in me alone, he shall find that which
shall give him full contentment, and satisfaction to his Soul.

Hunter. sig: pro
One which follows wild Beasts, to catch them, and take their lives from
them, by Snares, Dogs, or otherwise. Such an one was Esau.

2 A great Spoyler or Robber, which by might oppresses others. Such an one was
Nimrod. Genesis 10, 8, 9. Nimrod, a mighty Hunter before God.

3 The Caldeans and Babilonians, which GOD would send in fury, to vex and hurt
rebellious Enemies. Iere. 16, 16. I will send out many Hunters.

snare of the Hunter. sig:
Any great danger whatsoever. Psalm 91, 3. He will deliver thee from the Snare
of the Hunter.

to Hunt after ones Soul. sig:
To lay in wait to destroy one, by taking away his life. 1. Sam. 24, 12. Thou
Hunts after my Soul to take it.

2 To put men's Souls in danger and peril of perishing everlastingly, either
by keeping away good doctrine, or teaching false. Ezekiel. 13, 18. Will ye Hunt
the Souls of my people, that ye may preserve your own Souls alive? Thus
Tremellius reads it.

Human Creatures. sig:
All civil Magistrates; who therefore be styled Human Creatures; because,
howsoever they be appointed of God, yet their kinds, number, and order, are
not so of God laid out, but that Man may make more, or fewer; of greater
authority or less, as occasions of places, times, and disposition of the
people require. 1 Pet. 2, 13. Submit your self to every Human Creature. So
it is read in the Original, word for word; and not ordinance of man, as our
Translations render it.

I. D.
Idle. sig:
HIm that may work, and will not, but cease to labor through love of ease.
Exodus 5, 17. Ye are too Idle. 2 One that is unoccupied, because he lackes
work. Math. 20, 3, 6. Why stand ye here all day Idle; Because no man has
hired us. The former are Idle voluntarily, but these latter necessarily.

Idol. sig:
Any Image, or visible representation of false or true God, though it be not
worshipped, nor made with any intention of worship. 1. John 5, 21. Keep your
selves from Idols. 2. Cor. 6, 16. What agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols. Deuteronomy. 4, 15. Exodus 32, 4. does manifest the truth of this. For, the
Image which the Jews made of the true God, is condemned of God himself. Exodus
32, 8. And they that made it were punished as Idolaters. 1. Cor. 10, 7. Neither
be ye Idolaters, as were some of them, with whom God was not pleased. 1. Cor.
10, 5. Finally, in the forenamed place of Deuteronomy. 4, 15. the only making of an
Image of God, is precisely forbidden; and learned See Doctor Fulke in his
defense of our translations against Greg. Martine. ch: 3.
Divines both affirm and prove, that both Scriptures and Fathers, have in
differently used the word Idol and Image, for one and the selfsame thing.
Witness that one place of Tertullian (amongst many) upon those words of 1.
Ioh. 5, 21. John (says he) does not write thus [ Keep your selves from
Idolatry] that is, from the service of them: but [ From Idols;] that is, from
the very Image of them. It is therefore a dotage in Popery, to distinguish
between Idol and Image; and to make the picture of a false God only, to be
an Idol.

Idol is nothing. sig:
The false and feigned Gods of the Heathen. 1. Cor. 8, 4. An Idol is
nothing. Genesis 31, 19, 30.

2 An Idol to be as an empty and vain Dream; not in respect of the matter
whereof it is made, for that is something: but in respect of the form which
does counterfaite and falsify true things, making them seem to be what they
are not. Also, in respect of the vain mind of the Idolater, who wickedly
imagines some Divinity to be in the Idol, whereas there is but one true God in
the world. Therefore worthily is an Idol said to be nothing, being a false
and lying sign, a very fixion, being nothing for signification, though
something for substance; a piece of wood or stone, etc. 1. Cor. 8, 4.

Idolatry. sig:
The worship or adoration of an Image, or of God, before, and by an Image. 1.
Cor. 10, 7. Neither be Idolaters as they were. Deuteronomy. 5, 9. Thou shall never bow
to them, nor serve them.

2 The making of any Image or likeness of God, or of any creature, in heaven
or earth, for a Religious end. Deuteronomy. 5, 8. Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image or likeness, etc. Gal. 5, 20. Idolatry, Witchcraft. 1. Cor. 6, 9.

3 All All worship of false Gods, and false worship of the true God, is
Idolatry.
humain inventions thrust into divine service. Deuteronomy. 12, 32. Whatsoever I
command you, that do, put nothing thereto.

4 Setting the heart inordinately upon any creature; by fearing, loving,
trusting in it, more then in God, and above him. Thus is Covetousness called
Idolatry. Col. 3, 5. And wantons make their Belly their God. Phil. 3, 19.

I. E.
Jealousy. sig:
Grief, for suspicion of dishonesty in married yoake-fellowes, Husbands or
Wives. Number. 5, 14. If he be moved with Jealousy, and be Jealous of his Wife.

2 An earnest love of others, in respect of their welfare and good, joined with
great grief for their hurt. 2. Cor. 11, 2. With a godly Jealousy.

3 Hot displeasure, and indignation of GOD. Psalm. 79, 5. Shall thy Jealousy
burn like fire?

Jealous. sig:
One, grieved with suspicion of dishonesty in the married yoak-fellow, with
desire of revenge. Thus are men Jealous, and thus also is God said to be
Jealous, when the marriage between him and his Church, is violated and broken.
Deuteronomy. 5, 9. For I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God; that is, so grieved with
Idolatry, as I study to revenge it.

2 One, which seems to be much grieved for others, but it is out of a love
to himself, for his own commodity sake. Gal. 4, 17. They are Jealous over
you amiss. This he writes of the false Apostles, who for their own gain and
credit did love the Galathians. Here Jealous is taken in evil part.

3 One which loves others truly, not for lucre and glory to himself, but
for the benefit of the persons loved. 2. Cor. 11, 2. I am Jealous over you.
Thus Paul and all Godly Ministers are Jealous over the Flock. Here Jealous
is taken in good part.

Jehouah. sig:
An eternal selfe-being, one that has his essence of himself, from
everlasting; and is the cause of existance or being to all things and
creatures, which are of him, by him, and for him. Exodus 6, 3. But by my name
Jehovah was I not known to them. Acts 17, 28. Romans 11. verse last.

Jesting. sig:
Pleasant and witty words, being offensive, and hindering edification. Ephe. 5,
4. Jesting.

Jesus. sig:
A Savior, one that saves his people from their sins. Math. 1, 21. He shall
be called Jesus. It is a name of his benefits; to wit, salvation had by Christ.

Jew outward. sig:
He that is a Jew by Nation, Name, and profession only. Romans 22, 8. A Jew
which is one outward.

Jew inward. sig:
One, who is a Jew in truth, though he be not so by name or Nation. Romans 2, 29.
He is a Jew which is one within; that is to say, one who professes himself to
be one of Gods people, and is so in deed, and before God, in spirit and in
heart.

Jerusalem. sig:
Either the City; as Psalm. 125, 2. and 122, 2, 3. or the Inhabitants. Math. 3,
5. Or all the faithful people of God through the World, Jews and Gentiles.
Joel. 2, 32.

I. G.
Ignorance. sig:
Want of the true knowledge of God, and of heavenly things. Ephe. 4, 18.
Thorough the Ignorance that is in them. This ignorance, is either simple, when
means of knowledge be wanting: or wilful and affected, when one may know and
will not. Ignorance being in it self a sin against the first Commandment,
cannot excuse sin that it should be no fault at all.

2 Unbelief, which follows Ignorance as a Companion or fruit. 1. Pet. 1, 14.
Fashion not your selves to the former lusts of your Ignorance; that is, of your
blind unbelief, A Metanimie of the cause.

3 Error, through want of judgment, and right deserving of things. Leuit. 3,
2. If any man shall sin through Ignorance, A Metanimie of the cause.

4 Any sin whatsoever, which comes from such ignorance and error, according
to the use of the Hebrew tongue, which under Ignorance, means every sin,
even that which is witting and willing. Hebr. 9, 7. And for the Ignorances of
the people. A Sinechdoche of the part for the whole.

Ignorance may excuse a sin that it be not so Note.
great a fault, but it cannot so excuse, as it shall be no fault at all. Excusat
a tanto, non a tot^.

lusts of Ignorance. sig:
Blind motions and evil desires of unbelieving persons, who lack the true
knowledge of Christ. 1. Peter. 1, 14. Fashion not your selves to the former
lusts of your Ignorance.

Ignorance. sig:
One which sins unwittingly. 1. Tim. 1, 13. For I did it Ignorantly.

2 One which does a voluntary sin, knowing it to be so. Heb. 5, 2. To have
compassion of the Ignorant. See Bible-note.

3 One that cares not for other men's affairs and matters. Esaias 63, 16. Though
Abraham be Ignorant of us. Men are careless of that where of they be ignorant.

4 One, that wants the knowledge of the true God, and his worship. Acts 17,
23. Whom ye then Ignorantly worship.

not to regard the time of Ignorance. sig:
To permit and pass over, for causes known to himself, the Ignorance of many
thousand years. Acts 17, 30. And the time of this Ignorance God regarded not.

I. M.
Image. sig:
Any shape or portraiture, drawn by Art, to represent something by it for
civil use, as Caesar's Image was made, to represent Caesar. Math. 22, 20. Whose
Image or superscription is this? This is an artificial Image made for civil
respects; as to distinguish Coins, or beautify Houses, and it is lawful.

2 Some shape or picture, made to the likeness of God, or of some creature for
Divine worships sake. Exodus 20. 4. Thou shall make thee no graven Image. Deuteronomy.
4, 15. Image of the true God unlawful, as well as the Image of a false God.
This is a Diabolical Image, being made for Religion sake, and is unlawful.
Where such Images be, there is no Religion (says a Father.) The Scripture
says, that God spoke with a voice, but showed no Image to his people of
himself. Deuteronomy. 4.

3 All men's devises, commanded as Gods service. Exodus 20, 4. This is also
superstition.

4 Our likeness and resemblance of God, in righteousness and true holiness.
After this Image Adam was created. Genesis 1, 26. Let us make man after our Image*
and unto this are all the elect restored again by Christ. Ephe. 4, 24. This is
a spiritual or Celestial Image.

5 Our likeness and resemblance with God, in respect of rule and authority. 1.
Cor. 11, 7. The man is the Image and glory of God. Hitherto of accidentary
Images.

6 A real, essential, true, and lively expressing of the very substance of
another. In this signification, is Christ said to be the Image of God his
Father. Col. 1, 15. Heb. 1, 3. Also, the Law is said, not to be the very Image
of the things. Hebr. 10. 1. And it is written of us, that as we have bornethe
Image of the earthly, so we shall bear the Image of the heavenly man. 1. Cor.
15, 49. And the Revelation of S. John, speaks of the Image of the beast which
all men shall adore. Revel. 14, 9. In all which places, is meant the very things
and substances themselves, or the solid and true existence of the things. These
be essential Images, which have the substance of the things whereof they be
called Images.

7 Any manner or resemblance whatsoever, lawful or unlawful; lively or
painted; true or immaginary. Genesis 5, 3. He begat a Child in his own likeness,
after his Image. Psalm. 73, 20. Thou shall make their Image despised. Where the
word [ Image] signifies, an immaginary vanishing shadow, to set forth the
lightness and inconstancy of all earthly things, which seem and make show to
be the true goods and felicity it self, yet are nothing but a shadow or
vain likeness thereof: therefore, by the Apostle, are called; a shape,
fashion, or figure. 1. Cor. 7, 31. Romans 12, 2.

Image of God. sig:
Christ, in whom God is to be seen and beheld, as touching his substance and
glorious properties; as a man is to be known by his Image or picture. 2. Cor.
4, 4. Which is the Image of God. This is a consubstantiall Image, respecting
essence and substance.

2 Dominion and perfect holiness. Genesis 1, 27. In the Image of God created he
him. This Image is accidental, respecting qualities.

3 Authority and power, which by Gods ordinance the man has over his wife. 1.
Cor. 11, 7. He is the Image of God.

Immortal sig: pro
That which is not capeable of death, or subject to dye.

2 An euer-during Nature, which is so of it self, without possibility of
perishing or dying. 1. Tim. 1, 17. To God Immortal, only wise. Thus is God
only Immortal.

3 That, which being once dead, shall rise again never to die more, as men's
bodies. 1. Cor. 15, 53. Mortality must put on Immortality.

4 That which shall never have end, though it have a beginning; as Angels, and
men's souls; of which, though it be not in express words said in Scripture,
that they be Immortal, yet inumerable places, by good consequence, prove them
to be so, as 1. Cor. 15, 19. 2. Cor. 5, 1. Luke 16, 22, 23, 24, etc.

Imortality sig:
Such an estate and condition, wherein death has no place, nor power. 1. Cor.
15, 5, 34. When mortal has put on Immortality, then death shall be swallowed
up into victory.

Importunity. sig:
Continuance or constancy in Prayer, when we pray and faint not. Luke 11, 8.
Yet doubtless, because of his Importunity, he will give him what he needs.
Example of this Importunity is in Luke 18, 2, 3, 4. etc. The poor widow.

Imposition of hands, or laying on of hands. sig:
Putting on of hands, which is an ancient Ceremony used of the Jews in two
cases; one, in consecrating public Sacrifices, as also Priests and Levites,
to declare such to be offered to God. Leuit. 4, 4. And secondly, in solemn
benedictions and Prayers. Genesis 48, 14, 17, 20. Jacob put his hands upon
Manasses and Ephraim, and prayed for them. It was continued under the Gospel,
by Christ and his Apostles in time of Prayer, and bestowing spiritual graces.
Also in time of admitting Church Officers; Ministers, and Deacons. Mat. 19, 15.
Christ put his hands on little children and prayed. Acts 6, 6. The Apostles
prayed, and laid their hands on the Deacons. Acts 8, 17, 18. Then they laid
their hands on them and they received the Holy Ghost; and by a Metanimie of the
sign, it does signify the whole Ministry of the Church, and the order of
Church-Gouernment. Heb. 6, 2. The Doctrine of Baptism, and Imposition of
hands. Touching the Papists Imposition of hands, in the Sacrament of Order (as
they call it) there is no ground for it in the whole Scripture.

Imputation. sig: pro
Accounting, reckoning, and allowing some things to another of favor; as
Merchants, who do not put the debt in their reckoning, which they will forgive.

2 An action of God, freely accounting the righteousness of Christ to be his
righteousness, who believes in Christ. Romans 4, 3, 4. And it was Imputed (or
counted) to him for righteousness. In this fourth Chapter to the Romans, this
word [ Imputed] (derided by Popish Heretics) is seven times repeated in the
Doctrine of Justification, and is joined unto faith; without which, there is no
Imputation of Christ's Justice to us. Romans 4, 23, 24. Our sins and punishment
were Imputed to Christ (who Note.
bare our sins in his body, and was made sin for us. 1 Pet. 2. verse last.)
And his righteousness with the merit thereof (even eternal bliss) is imputed
and accounted to al believers; whence arises Justification of a Sinner before
God. 2. Cor. 5. verse last. He that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him: Not our righteousness, but the
righteousness of God; not in us, but in him (says an ancient father.) The
Papists, scoffing at this most necessary and divine action, of Imputing
righteousness to faith, apprehending Christ, calling it in their Notes printed
at Rhemes, a new-no-Iustice, an untrue Imputation, an immaginary thing, a
putatiue righteousness, a fantastical apprehension. In these and such like
taunts, they utter so many blasphemies against Heaven, and all to maintain and
establish their own righteousness of works.

I. N.
In. sig:
By, or through. 1. Cor. 14 2. Speak in the spirit; that is, by the
Inspiration of the spirit. 1. Cor. 15, 22. In Christ all shall be made alive;
that is, by Christ. 2. Cor. 3, 16.

2 Against. Genesis 4, 23. I have slain a man in my wound; that is, against my
self, and to my own hurt.

3 To, 1. These. 4, 7. God has called you In holiness; that is, unto
holiness. Ephe. 2, 10. Created of God In good works; that is, unto Good
works. James 5, 3. and very often elsewhere.

4 Out of. Exodus 31, 4. To work In Gold, in Silver, and in Brass.

5 Of, or concerning. Romans 5, 12. We rejoice In the Lord; that is, concerning
the Lord.

6 With, or together with. Math. 16, 27. The Son of man shall come In the glory
of his father; that that is, together with his own, and his Fathers glory.

7 As Math. 10, 41. He that shall receive a Prophet In the name of a Prophet;
that is, as a Prophet, because he is so.

8 From. Colo. 3, 16. Sing in your hearts; that is, from your hearts, or
heartily.

9 Before. John 1, 1. In the beginning was the word; that is, before the
beginning.

10 For. 1 Cor. 1, 4. I thank God for the Grace given you In Christ; that is,
for and by Christ.

11 Upon. John 14, 1. Ye believe (...) God* ^eue also In me; that is, upon me.

In Spirit and truth. sig:
Spiritually and truly, by the vn^ motion of a sanctified Heart. John 4, (...)
him In Spirit, and In Truth.

Churches In Christ. sig:
Christian Churches. Gal. 1, 21. 1 T^ so Brethren In Christ, Saints In
Christ, and in Christ before me; that is, a Christian before me*

Babes In Christ. sig:
Such as be Babes or Infants, in respect of groa^ in Christianity. 1 Cor. 3, 1.

In the spirit. sig:
Spiritual, regenerate by the Spirit unto a new life. Romans 8, 9. Ye are In
the Spirit.

In Christ. sig:
As touching Christ, and Christianity. Gala. 6, 15. For In Christ Jesus,
neither circumcision avails any thing. 1 Cor. 4, 15. I have begotten ye In
Christ.

2 In the preaching and publishing the doctrine of Christ. Romans 16, 9. Salute
Urbanus, our fellow Helper In Christ; that is, In the matters of Christ.

3 A member of Christ, one linked unto, and grafted in Christ by Faith. Romans 8,
1. To them which are In Christ.

In sins and trespesses. sig:
One covered and ouer-whelmed In Sin, as one that is drowned In the Water.
Ephe. 2, 1. Dead In trespasses and sins.

Incomprehensible. sig:
One greater then Heaven and Earth, whom the World cannot contain, nor men's
wit conceive him as he is. Psalm. 145, 3.

Incon^^nency. sig:
An unableness to keep himself chaste in single ^^^e, or In the estate of
Marriage. 1 Cor. 7, 4. Least ^than tempt you to Incontinency.

Incoruption. sig:
The quality of bodies after the Resurrection, being no ^ore subject to
rottenness and corruption. 1 ^ 35. Till corruption put on Incorruption (...)

^oundnesse and Integrity of a regenerate Soul. ^ Pet. 3* 4. Which consisted
In the Incorruption of a meek Spirit.

Incorruptible crown. sig:
Immortal and never perishing Glory. 1. Peter ^4.

* Indifferent. sig:
Some thing, which is neither commanded of God, nor forbid, but of a middle
Nature; being In it self neither good nor evil, and may be changed according
to circumstances of time, and persons, and places: as to eat this or that
meat; to (...) this or that apparel; to have religious meetings, at such a
time, in such a place, and diverse other things as belong to the outward
administration of the Word and Sacraments. Wherein yet, nothing must be
appointed to be done, contrary to order, comeliness, or edification. See Romans
14. 1 Cor. 14. throughout. Where though this Word [ Indifferent] (...) not
^ound at all, yet the matter it self signified by (...) the rules to direct
us, about things that be Indifferent, are there to be found.

Learned Divines affirm (as Illiricus and others) Note this.
that things Indifferent, that be of a middle Nature, cease to be such, when
any of these conditions following are annexed unto them. 1. Compulsion. 2.
Opinion of worship, necessity, or merit. 3. Scandal and offense. 4. Entrance,
and occasion of abuse, or Idolatry. 5. Any hindrance to truth or edification,
or obscuring and darkning of Religion and piety by them, though they should
contain no other evil In them.

A conformity and through agreement, amongst Note also
all Christian Churches, in outward Rites and Ceremonies, is neither necessary,
nor possible, because of the great differences of places, people, and times.

Infant. sig: pro
A Child which cannot speak, being young and yet in the swathing clouts; Such
an one, if he die at this age, either before or after Baptism (so there be no
contempt of the Sacrament) he is saved by the Covenant of Grace, made to
Parents and their Children. Genesis 17, 7.

Infidelity. sig:
A privation or utter absence of Faith. A total distrust in Gods promise. See
Unbelief. 2. Cor. 4, 4.

Infidel. sig:
One that is no Christian, but a Heathen. 1 Timothy 5, 8. He is worse then an
Infidel. See Vnbelieuer.

* Infinite. sig:
That which is absolutely unbounded and unlimited, having no measure at all,
either for time or greatness. So is God only. See Incomprehensible.

Infirmity or weakness. sig: pro Metanimies.
Outward bodily feebleness. 1 Timothy 5, 23. Use a little Wine for thine often
Infirmities. Thus is sickness called, because it makes Infirm and feeble.
Metanimie.

2 Some spiritual weakness of the godly, in their knowledge and Faith. Romans
6, 19. Because of the Infirmity of the flesh. Romans 14, 1. Math. 26, 41. Thus is
sin called, because it makes the Soul weak to do good, and withstand
evil. Metanimie.

3 A privation and want of all strength, as touching godliness. Romans 5, 8.
When we were Infirm, (or of no strength) Christ dyed for us; that is, that
natural imbecility, which we all bring with us into the World, which Paul calls
ungodliness. Romans 5, 6.

4 Afflictions, reproaches, persecutions. 2. Cor. 12, 10. Therefore I take
pleasure In Infirmities. Also, it signifies inward tentatious, fears,
distrusts, etc. 2 Cor. 12. Which show how weak we are and Infirm.

5 A vile, contemptible, and abject estate. Gal. 4, 13. Through Infirmity of
the Flesh I preached the Gospel unto you. 1 Cor. 12, 22.

6 Unableness to free from sin and death. Heb. 7, 18. Because of the
weakness thereof.

Iniquity. sig:
That which is written or crooked, swaruing from the straight line of Gods word:
it is put, either largely for any sin; and thus, even our Birth-sin is
iniquity. Psalm. 51, 5. I was borne In Iniquity: Or more strictly, it is put for
some heinous and gross offense. Psalm. 119, 3. They work no Iniquity. Psalm.
90, 8. Thou have set our Iniquities. Exo. 20, 5. Visiting the Iniquities of the
Fathers.

2 Workers of Iniquity, or wicked men. Job 5, 16. Iniquity shall stop her mouth.

3 The punishment due to Iniquity. Leuit. 5, 1. He shall bear his Iniquity;
And very often elsewhere.

worker of Iniquity. sig:
One which walks after the lusts of corrupt Nature, wholly following them as
guides in all and every action of life. Math. 7, 23.

* Innocence. sig:
A mere voydnesse of fault, and freedom from all Sin. In this estate Adam was
created. This is perfect Innocence by Creation.

2 A certain measure of this estate in all regenerate persons, who endeavor to
serve God In Innocence of life, having also Christ's Innoceny imputed to them.
Psalm. 26, 6, 11. I will wash my hands In Innocence. This is Innocence of a
person restored.

3 Uprightness, in some special or particular cause. Psalm. 7, 8. According to
the Innocence that is in me; that is, Innocence of cause, when one is clear
and free of some fault, whereof he is accused.

Innocent. sig: pro
One which does none hurt nor harm unto others. Math. 10, 16. Be Innocent as
Doves.

2 One, that is free from some one particular fault or crime; or one that is
guiltles in this or that thing. Genesis 24, 8. If the Woman will not follow thee,
thou shall be Innocent or discharged of thine Oath. Ion. 1, 14. Lay not upon us
Innocent blood. Exodus 23, 7. Genesis 10, 5.

3 A just and righteous person, which lives uprightly. Job 4, 7. Who ever
perished being Innocent.

4 One that is free from punishment, or one unpunished. Pro. Though the wicked
join hand In hand, yet they shall not be Innocent. 1 Kings 2, 9. But thou
shall not count him Innocent; that is, thou shall not free him from punishment.
Also Exodus 34, 7. Not making the wicked Innocent.

Intercession, or request. sig:
The request which the death of Christ makes for believers after they have
sinned, that their sins may be pardoned for his merit: or, it is the merit of
Christ's death, coming between our sins and Gods Justice, to appease it, as an
Advocate that pleads for his Client. 1. John 2, 2, 3. Romans 8, 34. And makes
request for us. Heb. 9, 24. He appears in Heaven for us. Christ is our
Intercessour four ways. First, by appearing for us in the fight of God. Heb.
9, 24. Secondly, by the force of his Sacrifice once offered, to make full
satisfaction to Gods Justice. Hebr. 10, 12, 14. Thirdly, by his constant will,
that for the merit of that Sacrifice, God would be pacified toward the elect.
Heb. 10, 10. Lastly, by the assent and agreement of the Father, resting in this
will of his Son for us. John 11, 42. Mat. 17, 6. Popish intercession To
affirm Mary our lords mother and the Saints, to be Mediators of Intercession
with God, argues gross ignorance, and is blasphemous.
of the Virgin Mary and other Saints, does dishonor Christ the only
Intercessour.

2 The request which we make one for another, in the name of our Intercessour
Christ, either for good things to be given, or evil things to be removed from
us. 1 Timothy 2, 2, 3. Prayers, Intercession, and giving of thanks, etc. These be
charitable mutual Prayers of the godly, while they live together.

Interpretation. sig:
A translating or turning out of one tongue into another. 1 Cor. 14, 13, 26. If
any speak with strange tongues, let him pray that he may interpret.

2 An opening or declaring dark Scriptures or prophecy. 2 Pet. 1, 20. No
Prophecy is of private Interpretation. Scriptures must be interpreted by
Scriptures.

3 Expounding Visions or Dreams. Genesis 40, 8. Are not Interpretations of God?

4 A speaking and teaching some thing evidently and plainly. Job 33, 23. If
there be an Interpreter with him.

Interest. sig:
Increase or gain, taken for the lending of Money upon fore-agreement and
compact. Pro. 28, 8. He which increased his Riches by Usury and Interest, etc.
Here the word [ Interest] is taken in ill part. For the word in a good sense,
signifies; that benefit which a merciful and free lender takes for his own
Indemnity, to repair such loss, whereof the borrower, by his default, was an
effectual cause, by the keeping of Money borrowed in his hand, longer then he
ought, to the certain damage of the lender.

I. O.
Joy. sig: pro
A sweet motion of the Soul, in regard of some present, or hoped for good.
This good, if it be worldly, then is the Joy but natural and worldly: if it be
heavenly, good, or tending and leading thereto; then is the Joy spiritual and
heavenly. Psalm. 51, 13. Restore to me the Joy of my Salvation. Romans 5, 3. We
rejoice in tribulation. John 15, 11. That your Joy may be full.

2 The matter or cause of Joy. 1 Thessalonians. 2, 20. Ye are our Crown and Joy. Job
3, 22. Psalm. 48, 2.

3 The most comfortable and full happiness of Heaven. Math. 25, 21, 23. Enter
into thy Masters Joy. See Enter.

4 A godly boasting and glorying. 1 Cor. 9, 15. Least any man should make my
Joy, or rejoicing vain.

5 Those good things, either earthly or spiritual, for the which we use to
rejoice. John 16, 22. And your Joy none shall take from you. 1 Cor. 7, 30. Romans
15, 13. The God of hope fill you withal Joy; that is, with every good gift
whereof ye may rejoice, plentifully and abundantly. James 1, 2. And elsewhere
often. Metanimie of the cause.

6 That cheerfulness and alacrity which we show forth toward our neighbor.
Gal. 5, 22. The fruit of the Spirit is Joy, peace, etc.

7 Joyful speech, or Songs of thanksgiving and praise. Psalm. 126, 2. And
our tongue with Joy. Metanimie of the cause for the effect. For praise comes
of Joy, as Joy comes of good things.

8 The having or possessing of any good thing from whence Joy springs. John
3, 29. This my Joy is fulfilled. John 15, 11. And that my Joy might remain in
you.

Joy in the holy Ghost. sig:
A gladsome, sweet, and comfortable motion of the heart, stirred up by the
Spirit of Adoption, upon the feeling of Gods love in Christ to eternal life;
and upon the tokens of that love, both in earthly and spiritual blessings.
Romans 14, 17. The Kingdom of God, is righteousness, peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost. This is called Christ's Joy. John 15, 11. And glorious Joy. 1 Pet. 1, 8.
Because it is part of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Joy of the Lord. sig:
Divine Joy, which comes from the Lord, and is placed in him. Nehemi. The Joy
of the Lord shall make ye strong.

Joy of God sig:
Comfort of mind, arising from Gods goodness, manifested in some outward or
inward deliverance. Psalm. 51, 12. Restore to me the Joy of thy salvation; that
is, thy deliverances were wont to make me glad, let it be so again with me.

to hear of Joy and gladness. sig:
To be made joyful and glad, by hearing and believing the glad tidings of
forgiveness of sins: For Joy comes from faith, and faith by hearing. Psalm.
51, 8. Make me to hear of Joy and gladness.

to Joy in tribulations. sig:
To have occasion and matter of true comfort and cheerfulness of our heart from
afflictions, because they are pledges of Gods love, and trials of Faith and
patience. Romans 5, 3. We Joy in tribulations.

Joy in the Lord. sig:
That true inward comfort which faithful hearts feel, because the Lord is
their merciful Father in Christ Jesus. Phil. 4, 4. Joy in the Lord. Romans 5, 11.

I. S.
Is. sig:
Betokens, signifies, seals. Mat. 13, 38. The field, Is the world. Math.
26, 27. This Is my body. And elsewhere often. Gal. 4, 24.

2 Leads, or brings unto. Romans 7, 7. Is the Law sin? That is, does it bring
unto, or lead to sin? Romans 6, 23. The gift of God is eternal life; that is,
holiness (which is Gods free gift) leads unto aeternall life, as a way
leads to a City. Romans 8, 6. Wisdom of the spirit, Is life and peace.

3 Bring forth, causes, meriteth, or deserves. Romans 8, 6. The Wisdom of the
Flesh Is death; that is, not only leads unto, but deserves death aeternall.

Israel. sig:
A Prince of the strong God, or one that has obtained principal power from
the mighty God. Genesis 32, 28. Thy name shall be called Jacob no more, but
Israel; because thou have power with God.

2 The Patriarch Jacob, who was called Israel, because he had strength to
wrestle with God, and to overcome; as in the former place appears. Romans 9, 6.
All that are of Israel; that is, of Jacob.

3 The people of Israel, which were the posterity of Jacob, of whom consists
the visible church till the coming of Christ. Exodus 19, 3. Tell the children
of Israel. Psalm. 76, 11. And very often in the Old Testament.

4 The whole Invisible Catholic Church, consisting of believing Jews and
Gentiles. Psalm. 124, 1. Now may Israel say. Psalm. 125, 5. But peace shall be
upon Israel. Gal. 6, 16. And upon the Israel of God; that is, upon the whole
elect people of God.

5 Every elect faithful person. To. 9, 6. All they are not Israel.

Israelite. sig:
A Jew, which descended of Jacob, according to the flesh. Romans 9, 4. Which are
the Israelites.

2 A Godly Christian (though a Gentile) which from his heart worshippeth the
God of Israel. Ioh. 1, 47. Behold in deed an Israelite, in whom there is no
guile. Romans 2, 29. Psalm. 73, 1. Yet God is good to Israel, even to such as are
of a pure heart.

I. U.
a Judge. sig:
A chief Governor, or Sovereign Ruler, who has all the world in his
disposition, and under his power. So is God alone. Genesis 28, 25. Should not the
Judge of the world do justly?

2 A Deputy-Gouernor, as it were, Gods Lieutenant, in the government of the
whole world. So is Christ, as Mediator, and he alone. 2. Tim. 4, 1. I charge
thee before Christ, the Judge of quick and dead. John 5, 22.

3 A Governor, that has general rule by Gods appointment, over some one
people or Nation, to preserve and govern it. Judge. 3, 26. God raised them up
Judges.

4 A person appointed over criminal causes, and civil controversies, to end
and determine them by his sentence. 2. Chr. 19, 5. He set Judges in the land.
Deuteronomy. 16, 18. Judges shall thou make thee in* all thy Cities. Luke 12, 14.

to Judge, referred to God. sig: Referred to men.
To rule and govern. Psalm. 67, 4. God shall Judge the earth with
righteousness. Psalm. 9, 4, 8. Heb. 10, 30. The Lord shall Judge his people.

2 To correct, chastise, or to punnish, which is one act of divine government.
Psalm. 51, 4. That thou may be pure when thou Iudgest. Hebr. 13, 4. Adulterers
God will Judge.

3 To pronounce a righteous and true sentence upon all things, and persons,
which is also another act of Government. Romans 2, 16. At that day when God shall
Judge the world.

4 To give defense and preservation against malicious unjust oppressors. Psalm,
7, 8. Judge me according to my righteousness. See verse 10. which seems thus
to expound the word. Psalm. 43, 1. Judge me (o Lord) and deliver me. This is
also one part of government.

5 To enquire into, try, and discern things and persons. Psalm. 7, 11. compared
with verse 9. Psalm. 11, 4, 5. The Lords Throne is in heaven, his eyes will
consider and try, etc.

6 To rule and govern any people. Judge. 4, 4. Debora Judged Israel.

7 Truly to understand and discern all things as they be. 2. Cor. 2, 15. The
spirituallman Judges all things. 1. Cor. 14, 29. Let two or three speak, and
let the other Judge; that is, discern what is spoken.

8 To utter an upright and impartial sentence of other men, and their doings.
John 7, 24. Judge a righteous Judgment, and not according to appearance.

9 Rashly and curiously, without any cause or calling to carpe at, and censure
other men and their actions. Math. 7, 1. Judge not, and ye shall not be
Judged. Romans 14, 13. Let no man Judge his Brother; that is, rashly determine of
him, and of his final estate; for that belongs to God only.

10 To approve and allow the last sentence of the great Judgment. 1. Cor. 6,
2. The Saints shall Judge the world and the Angels.

11 To hear, try, and determine civil causes, between a man and his
Neighbor. 1. Cor. 6, 2. Are ye unworthy to Judge the least matters? Exo. 18,
13. Moses sat to Judge the people.

12 To condemn, or to pronounce a Judicial sentence, true or false. 1. Kings
4, 28. Psalm. 82, 1.

13 To accuse, and by a good example to testify against others. Math. 12, 41,
42. The men of Niniuie shall rise in Judgment against this wicked Generation.
Romans 2, 27.

14 To declare by deeds, and pronounce sentence against ones self. Acts. 13,
46. You Judge your selves unworthy of life.

to be Judged. sig:
To be punnished. Math. 7, 1. Ye shall not be Judged.

2 To be rashly censured, or lightly esteemed, as one of less worth then
others. 1. Cor. 4, 3. I pass little to be Judged of you.

3 To be called to an account, and sifted. Romans 4, 4. When thou art Judged.

4 To be tried, and have his cause known, either to be acquitted, or
condemned. Acts 25, 10. Where I ought to be Judged. 1. Cor. 6, 1.

Judgment sig:
Government of the world. John 5, 22. He has committed all Judgment unto the
son. Psalm. 9, 7. He has set his Throne for Judgment.

2 Chasticement. 1. Cor. 11, 29. Eats his own Judgment. 1. Pet. 4, 17.
Judgment begins at Gods house.

4 The merciful moderation or measure which God keeps in chastising his
children. Ier. 10, 24. Correct me, but with Judgment.

4 Solemn divine action of the last day. Eccl. 12, 14. God will bring every
work to Judgment. This Judgment has in it three things; first, an inquiry
unto all things and persons. Secondly, a laying them open. Thirdly,
pronouncing an upright sentence. 2. Pet. 2, 9. Math. 25, 31, 32, 33, etc.

5 The just Statutes and Commandments of God. Psalm. 119, 7, 20. When I shall
learn the Judgments of the righteousness. Psalm. 19, 9.

6 The spirit of Justice and Wl^edome, enabling to know and discern right and
wrong, good and evil. Pfal. 72, 1. Give thy Judgments to the King.

7 Wrath, vengeance, and punishment, executed upon the wicked. Math. 5, 22.
Shall be culpable of Judgment. And very often elsewhere. Psa. 33, 5.

8 The punishment inflicted upon Christ for our sins. Acts 8, 33. Ia his
Humility his Indgement has been exalted.

9 That great power and authority which God gave to Christ the Mediator, to
determine and do that which is righteous and just. John 9, 39. I am come unto
Judgment in this world. John 16, 11.

10 A settled state, when Religion was committed to the Gentiles, superstition
being cast out. Math. 12, 18. He shall show Judgment to the Gentiles.

11 Equity, or righteous dealing. Luke 11, 42. And pass over Judgment. Genesis
18, 19. Esaias 1, 17. Seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed.

12 Amendment, or reformation of the world. John 12, 31. Now is the Judgment
of this world.

13 The way and course which God holds in governing all things. Romans 11, 33.
How unsearchable are his Judgments.

14 Sentence. 2. Pet. 2, 11. Give not railing Judgment.

15 Sentence of damnation and absolution. Jude 15. To give Judgment against
all men.

16 Courts, and places of Judgment. 1. Cor. 6, 4 If ye have Judgment, etc.

17 A power and faculty to discern things which differ. Phil. 1, 9. And in all
Judgment.

18 A right sentence given of men, and of their actions, in Courts of
Judgment, publicly or privately. 2. Chron. 19, 6. Psalm. 82, 2. Give just
Judgment.

19 Instruments of Gods vengeance. Ezekiel. 14, 21. When I send my four
Judgments, etc.

20 Famous examples of Gods vengeance. Psalm. 48, 11. They shall be glad because
of thy Judgments.

Just. sig:
One, who is Righteous, by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. Romans 1,
17. The Just shall live by faith.

2 One, who deals Justly in his particular vocation, as a Magistrate, etc.
Luke. 23, 50. A good man, and a Just.

3 One, who endeavors to live uprightly in his general calling, as a
Christian walking in the righteous Statutes of God. Luke 1, 6. They were both
Just before God. Job. 1* 1.

4 One, who in his life and death aunsweres the perfect Justice of the Law of
God. 1. Pet. 3, 18. He died: the Just; for the Unjust.

5 One, that is exceeding faithful, keeping his word of promise. 1 John 1, 9.
He is faithful and Just to forgive us our sins.

6 One, who is essentially Just, and infinitely the cause of Justice in all his
creatures. Exodus 9, 37. The Lord is Just or righteous.

7 One, which thinks himself righteous, and is not. Lu. 18. 9. Certain
trusted that they were Just.

Justice, referred to God. sig: To men.
That divine property, whereby God being most Just in himself, rendereth right
to every creature, infinitely rewarding and loving the good, extremely hating
and punishing the wicked. Genesis 18, 25. Shall not the Judge of all the world do
just or right?

2 Gods merciful benefits and protections. Esa. 59, 9. Neither does Justice
come near to us.

3 Fidelity, or truth, in keeping his promise made to us, touching Redemption
by Christ. Romans 3, 26. That he might be Just.

4 That political virtue peculiar to Magistrates, which disposes them to do
right to every man, rendering praise to whom praise; and vengeance to whom
vengeance belongs. Job. 29, 14. I put on Justice. Romans 13, 2, 3. 1. Pet. 2,
15, 16. This is distributive Justice.

4 That morrall virtue, which moves men to give to others their due, and to
deal rightly in matter of bargains and contracts. Genesis 18, 19. He will teach
his servants to do Justice. This is commentatiue Justice.

5 That grace infused into al Gods children, confirming them in part unto the
will of God, both in their nature and actions. Ephesians. 4, 24. Created in Justice
(or righteousness.) See Righteousness.

Justify. sig: pro
To absolve and acquit one, that is accused from the crime wherewith he is
charged, and to pronounce him innocent. Pro. 17, 15. He that condemns the
righteous, and Justifies the wicked.

2 To absolve and acquit a sinner, which believes, from the guilt and
punishment of all his sins, and to pronounce him righteous before the tribunal
seat of God, through the Imputation of Christ's righteousness to his faith. In
this sense, we are said to be Justified by faith, and not by works. Romans 3,
28. Therefore we conclude, a man is Justified by faith, without works of the
Law. And often elsewhere, both in that Epistle and others, [ Iustifying] is
put for our [ Absoluing] from sin, and being pronounced Just before God his
Judgment seat. See Acts 13, 39. Esaias 53, 12.

3 To declare and manifest him to be Just, which is so already. James 2, 21.
Was not Abraham our Father Justified by works? 1. Tim. 3, 16.

4 To commend and acknowledge, a thing, or person, to be just and good. Luke 7,
35. Wisdom is Justified of her children. And 10, 39. He willing to Justify
himself.

5 To ouer-match, ouer-com, and exceed others in evil, so as others may seem
to be Just, in comparison of them. Ezekiel. 16, 51. Thou have exceeded them in
thine abominations, and have Justified them in all thy abominations. Ier. 3,
6.

6 To be more just, or less unjust. Ier. 3, 11. Israel has Justified her
self more then Judah.

7 To exempt one, and to make him utterly and wholly free from any thing. Romans
6, 7. He that is dead, is justified from sin; that is, freed from sin: as
some Translations have it.

8 To endeavor to make himself more just, or to profit and persevere in
righteousness. Reu. 22, 11. He that is Just, let him be still justified. Thus it
is read in the Original Greek Text.

In all the Old Testament, it cannot be found, Note.
that the word which signifies [ Iustifying] is ever Against the Papists.
used in the Original Haebrew tongue, otherwise then for [ Absoluing] a person
accused. Neither in the New Testament (when our [ Iustification] before God is
spoken of) has it any other meaning; and never found (in this Argument) to
signify; of evil and unjust, to make one just and good.

Justification. sig:
Forgiveness of sins, by the sufferings of Christ, and imputation of Justice,
by his obedience, to the believer. Romans 5, 16. The gift is of many offenses
unto Justification. verse 18. The benefit abounded toward all men, to the
Justification of life. Here Justification is strictly used.

2 Whatsoever we have from Christ, either by Imputation of faith, or by
sanctification of the spirit, effectually renewing us. Tit. 3, 7. That we being
Justified by his grace. In this signification, we find the word [ Iustifying]
used. Romans 8, 30. Whom he called, them he Justified. Here Justification is
used largely, for Sanctification also.

What Justification is.
Justification, is an action of God, freely, of his own mercy and favor,
absoluing a believing sinner, from the whole curse due to his sins, and
accounting him perfectly Just in his sight, unto eternal life in heaven,
through the perfect obedience and sufferings of Christ Imputed to his faith,
unto the euer-lasting praise and glory of Gods Justice, mercy, and truth.

The efficient cause of Justification, is, the grace of Note.
God; The material, is Christ our Redeemer; The formal, is Imputation; The
helping Isntrumental cause, is, Faith within, and the Gospel without; The
final cause, is, Gods glory; The utmost, and our salvation, the nearest end
thereof.

Justification before God, is not known in all Note.
Scripture, to be used, for the infusion of the habit of Justice into the
soul of the elect, at their first conversion. This is Popish and rotten
Divinity.

K. E.
Keep. sig:
TO hold fast and make sure. 2. Tim. 1, 14. Keep that which was committed to
thee.

2 To reserve and hold fast in ones memory what is taught us. Luke 2, 51. Mary
Kept these sayings in her heart. Psalm. 119, 4. Thou have commanded to Keep
thy precepts diligently.

3 To preferue, protect, and defend against enemies, and evils, spiritual and
bodily. Psalm. 121, 4. He that Keeps Israel. John. 17, 11. Keep them in thy
Name. 1 Pet. 1, 5.

to Keep the word. sig:
To believe the promises of Grace, and to endeavor to do the words of
commandment. Luke 7, 27. Blessed are they that hear the word of God and
Keep it. Revel. 2, 26. He that Keeps my word to the end. Evangelical
Keeping.

to Keep the Law. sig:
To desire and take care, how to perform and do according to our power,
things commanded. 1 John 2, 3. If we Keep his Commandment. Psalm 119, 4,
5, 8. These be Evangelical sentences, and speak of Evangelical Keeping.

2 To perform fully and perfectly all the things required in the Law. Math.
19, 17. He that will enter into life, let him Keep the Commandments. This
is impossible to be done through our weakness. Romans 8, 3. Christ only since
man's fall, has done this. Legal Keeping.

to Keep the Faith. sig:
To hold fast without loosing, both the gift and doctrine of Faith. 2 Timothy 4,
7. I have Kept the Faith.

Key. sig: pro
An Instrument, made to open or shut the lock of a door, or of a Gate. Judge.
3, 25. They took the Key and opened them.

2 Great authority and power, to command in the things that belong to this
life. Esaias 22, 22. I will lay upon the shoulders of Eliakim, the Keys A
speech borrowed. For Keys were a sign of government.
of the House of David. Here by was shaddowed and represented, the exceeding
great authority and power which Christ exercises in his Church, by
commanding, forbidding, punishing, hardening, calling, etc. See Revel. 3, 7.
Which has the Keys of David.

Key of knowledge. sig:
The gift and ability to Interpret Scriptures, whereby an entrance is made to
the knowledge thereof, as by a Key an entrance is made into an House. The sense
of Scriptures, is as it were locked up, til it be opened by wise and sound
Interpretation, which is the Key of Knowledge, Luke 11, 52. Ye have taken away
the Key of knowledge. The Key (says Chrisost.) is the opening of Scripture,
whereby the Gate of truth is opened. Key is the exposition of the law (says
Turtullian.) Opening the Scripture, is the Key (says Hierom.)

Keys of the kingdom. sig:
The ministry of the Gospel, even the whole power thereof, which was equally
committed to Peter and the rest of the Apostles; and after them, to the
Ministers of the Church, to whom it belonges, by the commission of Christ, to
open and shut, to bind and loose, to retain and remit sins; also to teach, to
reprove, to exhort. Matthew 16, 19. To thee I give the Keys of the Kingdom.
ver. 19. and Chapter 18, 18. Tell it unto the Church. Revel. 1, 16. The Gospel
is the power of God to Salvation. Suppose the Popes were Peter's successors,
yet these Keys were unjustly tied to their girdles, which do not teach
knowledge.
Keys of the Kingdom are twofold. 1. Key of knowledge. 2. Key of power and
government. Papists, falsely imagine these Keys to be tied only to Peter's
Girdle.

Keys of the bottomless pit. sig:
Power and government over the deepest darkness of Hell. Revel. 9, 1. And to
him was given the Key of the bottomless pit. See Dictionary on Revelation.

K. I.
Kindness. sig:
Readiness and facility in doing good; it is that virtue, whereby a good man
becomes beneficial and profitable every way to such, to whom he can be
helpful. 2 Cor. 6, 6. By Kindness, etc.

2 The benignity of God, readily doing good to his Creatures. Romans 2, 4. The
riches of his Kindness.

King. sig: pro
Any Ruler or Governor of others. Genesis 36, 31. These are the Kings that
reigned in Edom. Judge. 17, 6 In those days there was no Kings in Israel;
that is, no ordinary Magistrate. They had no Ruler at all.

2 A person, that has chief rule and power under God in his Kingdom over his
peoples lives and goods, to govern them according to good and wholesome Laws,
and the reasonable customs of that Country where he reigns. Prou. 8, 15. By
me Kings reign. 1 Kings 4, 1. King Solomon was King over all Israel. This is
a Political K. and is set up, either by lawful election, succession, or
Conquest.

3 The Soueraigne-Emperour, and Ruler over the whole World. Psalm. 24, 10. Who
is the King of Glory? This is a Celestial and Universal King over the World.
And thus God the Father, Son, and Spirit be King. 1 Timothy 1, 17. Now to the
King everlasting.

4 A person, that has spiritual rule (even over the Conscience) to appoint
Laws to his Church, to save and destroy, to command and forbid, upon pain of
eternal death; finally, to protect against all Enemies, and to bless with
good things of all sorts. Psalm. 2, 6. I have set my King upon Sion. Psalm. 110,
1, 2. Psalm. 45, 1, 5, 6. This is a spiritual King over the Church. And such an
one is Christ the Mediator; and he alone in a peculiar sort, who is called the
King of peace and righteousness, a King of Kings, the King of Israel, and
King of Glory. The Lord of the Kings of the Earth: the head of his Church,
which is his body, having all things subject to him. Ephe. 2.

5 A believing person, even every true Christian which has power from the
Spirit of Christ, (as a King) to subdue and to keep under the rebellious
motions and lusts of his corrupt reason and will, and is by Faith partaker of
Christ's royal dignity and glory, being with him Heir annexed of an heavenly
Kingdom. Reu. 1, 6. And has made us Kings and Priests unto God. 1 Pet. 2, 9.
Ye are a Kingly Priesthood. Thus are all the faithful Kings.

Kingdom of God. sig:
His powerful government, generally over the whole World and every particular
in it, even to the Sparrowes of the House top, and hairs of our head, which he
preserves and disposes of, according to his own will. Psalm. 145, 13. Thy
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom. Math. 10, 30. This is his Kingdom of
power; whereunto men, devils, and all Creatures are subject.

2 His special gracious government and rule over the elect, whose hearts he
enlighteneth and guides by his Spirit, effectually moving them to believe his
promises, and do his will. Math. 6, 33. Seek the Kingdom of God. John 3, 3.
Except ye be borne again, ye cannot see the Kingdom of God. Romans 14, 17. The
Kingdom of God, is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Luke
17, 21. The Kingdom of God is in you. This is the Kingdom of Grace.

3 His glorious and blessed estate, wherein he reigns, with Million of
Saints for ever and ever, full of heavenly Majesty and felicity. 1 Cor. 6, 9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. This is
the Kingdom of glory.

Kingdom of Christ. sig:
His regiment and rule, which he (as Mediator) has and exercises over the
Church, inwardly by his Spirit, and outwardly by his word; to the gathering of
the elect unto himself, and to the destruction of the wicked. John 18, 36. My
kingdom is not of this World. Luke 1, 33. Of his Kingdom there is no end. This
Kingdom of Christ our Mediator, is spiritual, and eternal; therefore, both
Jews, Papists, and al other, who dream or deal, as if Christ his kingdom
were worldly in outward power and pomp, are exceedingly deceived.

Kingdom of Heaven. sig:
The Visible Church here in Earth, as it consists both of good and bad
Christians. Which is therefore called the Kingdom of Heaven, because the way to
the blessed Kingdom is taught therein, and Christ (that heavenly King) rules
over it, and we must be first members thereof, before we can be members of
that which is in Heaven. Mat. 13, 47. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Net
cast into the Sea. Math. 5, 19, 20. Is the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; that
is, in the Church of Christ on Earth.

2 The doctrine of the word, and the Preachers thereof, because by them we are
called to the kingdom of Heaven. Math. 13, 24, 25. The Kingdom of Heaven is
like unto a man that went to sow his seed. And verse 45. The Kingdom of Heaven
is like unto a Marchant-man.

3 The time of Grace under the Messiah, exhibited and sent unto the World, to
Preach and work the Redemption of mankind in his own person. Matthew 3, 3.
The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

4 The estate of Grace, wherein the elect have their sins forgiven them,
being justified by faith in Christ, and are led by the spirit of Christ to live
purely. Mat. 13, 31. The Kingdom of heaven is like a grain of Mustard-seede.
The Kingdom of heaven (says one) is nothing but a newness of life, by the
which, God does restore us to the hope of an everlasting blessedness.

5 The blessed life and everlasting felicity, which the Saints shall enter into
after this Mortal life is ended. Mat. 5, 10. For theirs is the Kingdom of
heaven. 1 Pet. 1, 5, 6.

Kingdom, power, and glory. sig:
The eternal royal decree of God, touching the government of all things in
the world: his power is, that might-Diuine, whereby he does execute and
administer his royal decrees. Glory is, that exceeding great praise which
redoundeth unto him, by such administration. Mat. 6, 13. Thine is the Kingdom,
and the power, and the glory.

a kingdom of Priests. sig:
The society of all the faithful, which believe in Christ, of whose royal and
priestly dignity they are made partakers through Grace. As 1 Pet. 2, 9. Revel.
1, 6. Exodus 19, 6. Ye shall be a Kingdom of Priests.

Kissing. sig:
Temporal homage and subjection to some superior, whereof Kissing was a sign
in the East parts of the World. 1. Sam. 10, 1. And Samuel Kissed him. Genesis 40,
41. Metanimie of the sign for the thing. Kiss of subjection.

2 Spiritual submission of the Conscience, such as the faithful yield unto
Christ their Lord and King, believing in him, and fearing him. Psalm. 2, 12.
Kiss the Son least he be angry. And such also, as wicked Idolatours perform
to their Idols, by adoring them, and trusting in them. Hos, 13, 2. Let them
Kiss the Calves.

to Kiss. sig:
To embrace one with most near and affectionate love, as Christ does his
Church, and the Church Christ. Cant. 1, 2. Let him Kiss me with the Kisses of
his mouth; and as the Woman (in Luke 7.) did Kiss Christ, her beloved and
blessed Savior, in token of feruen love toward him.

2 To declare submission to a superior, whereof (in the East-Country) Kissing
was a token. Psalm. 2, 12. Prou. 24, 26. Genesis 41, 40.

a holy Kiss sig:
A pure and chaste Kiss, as a sign and token of Christian and brotherly love.
1 Cor. 16, 20. Salute ye one another with an Holy Kiss. A Kiss of dilection.

K. N.
Knees bowed to Christ sig:
All Creatures, visible, and invisible, yielding submission to Christ,
voluntary, or vnvoluntary. Phil. 2, 10. That at the Name of Jesus should every
Knee bow. Romans 14* 11. Devils and wicked Men, are subject to Christ
necessarily, the elect Angels and good men, willingly. Metaphor.

to bow the knees to God sig:
To pray unto him with reverence, and submission of mind and body. Ephe. 3,
14. I bow my Knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Metanimie of the
sign.

Weak Knees. sig:
A man of a weak and feeble body. Psalm. 109, 24. My Knees are weak.

2 A man dejected in courage, and faint hearted. Heb. 12, 12. Wherefore
strengthen your weak Knees. Job 4, 4. Thou have with thy words comforted
weak Knees.

to strengthen weak knees. sig:
To confirm a feeble mind by counsel, instruction, and comfortable words.
Esaias 35, 3. Strengthen the feeble Knees.

to bring forth upon ones Knees. sig:
To cherish in our bosom, and entreat kindly the Child of another, as if it
were our own. Genesis 30, 3. That may bring forth, or bear upon her Knees.

Knocking. sig: pro
Making a noise with our Finger, or otherwise, against a door being shut, that
may be opened unto us. Acts 12, 16. Peter continued Knocking.

2 A faithful, earnest, and constant prayer, for all necessary things. Math.
7, 7. To him that Knocks, it shall be opened. James 5, 16. This is our
Knocking at the gates of Heaven.

3 Gods calling and inuiting of us, by his word and Spirit calling to our
consciences to be let in and entertained, that he may dwell with us for ever.
Reu. 3, 20. I stand at the door and Knock. This is Gods Knocking at the Gates
of our Hearts.

to Know. sig: pro
To take notice or knowledge of any thing. Romans 1, 21. Though they knew God.

2 To enquire and search into a thing that we may perceive it. Neh. 6, 12.
Then I knew, that (behold) the Lord had not sent him. In this sense it is often
written of GOD, that he came down to Know, and to see.

3 To love, allow, and be well pleased with: As Psalm. 1, 6. The Lord Knows the
way of the righteous. Romans 11, 2. God has not cast away his people whom he
Knew before. 2 Timothy 2, 19. Revel. 2, 24. As not to Know, signifies to be
displeased with, to refuse, and punnish. Matthew 7, 23. I Know ye not. Mat. 25,
12.

4 To cherish and take care of others, to protect and do them good. John 10,
27. I Know them.

5 To Know or feel a thing by experience. Eccle. 8, 5. He that Keeps the
Commandments shall Know no evil thing. 1 Cor. 4, 19. 2 Cor. 2, 9. Genesis 22,
12.

6 To possess or have any thing in our power, or to enjoy it as our own.
Psalm. 50, 11. I Know all the Fowls on the Mountains, and the wild Beasts in
the fields are mine. Amos 3, 2. You only have I Known of all other Families;
that is, chosen and taken you as my own possession.

7 To Know the honest and lawful use of the Marriage bed. Genesis 4, 1. After
that Adam Knew Eve his Wife. Luke 1, 34. Seeing I Know not a man.

8 To consider. Psalm. 90, 11: Who Knows the power of thy wrath? Luke 19, 12.

to Know God, or Christ. sig:
Barely and nakedly to understand, that there is a God and a Christ, and that
Jesus is he. Luke 12, 47. He that Knows his Masters will and does it not.
Mark 1, 24. I Know thee what thou art, even that holy one of God. 1 John 2, 4.
Romans 1, 21. Thus wicked men and Devils Know God.

2 Truly and effectually, to believe this God to be our God and Father, and
this Jesus to be our Savior; whence arises hope, love, obedience toward
him and his word. John 17, 3. This is life eternal, to Know thee to be the
only very God. 1 John 2, 3. Hereby we are sure we Know him if we Keep his
Commandments. Jeremy 31, 34. And often elsewhere, it does signify to Know
with Motions, affections, endeavors, and actions, which follow Knowledge, are
signified and contained in words of Knowledge.
confidence and trust. Thus godly men do Know God with this special Knowledge
of Faith, which is a part of the covenant of Grace, even the condition on our
behalf.

3 To understand the will of God extraordinarily, by visions and dreams. 1 Samuel 3, 7. This did Samuel before he Knew the Lord.

4 Perfectly and fully, to see God unto eternal happiness. 1. Cor. 13, 12.
Then shall I Know, even as I am Known.

to Know Man. sig:
To pierce into his Heart, even into his very thoughts and purposes. John 2,
24. Because he Knew them all. Verse 25. For he Knew what was in Man.

2 To put confidence in man. 2 Cor. 5, 16. Henceforth we Know no man after the
Flesh; that is, I do not admire them or their friendship, riches, etc. So as
to rely upon them.

3 To live in Marriage, and to take the use of it. Luke 1, 34. Seeing I Know
not a Man. See Know.

4 To commit that sin that is against Nature. Genesis 19, 5. That we may Know
them.

5 To Know one with approbation. Matthew 26, 75. I Know not the Man; That is, I
do not approve him as the Messiah, nor follow him as his Disciple.

to Know Sin. sig:
To Know what is sin, and to have an experiment all feeling of the force and
danger of it. Romans 3, 20. By the Law comes the Knowledge of sin. Romans 7, 7.
I Knew not sin but by the Law.

2 To consider it, and with godly sorrow to acknowledge it. Psalm. 51, 3. For I
Know mine Iniquity.

3 To be privy to a man's own sins, what, and how many, and how great they
be. Psalm 19, 12. Who can Know or understand his faults?

4 To be guilty of sin, by committing or doing of it, in thought, word, or
deed. 2 Cor. 5, 21. Which Knew no Sin; that is, never did any sinful thing,
but is clean void of all sin, as well in Nature as Action.

5 To take notice of our Sins, to punish them. Reu. 3, 15. I Know thy works,
that thou art neither hot nor cold.

to be known of God. sig:
To be loved and approved of God. 1 Cor. 8, 3. If any man love God, the same is
Known of him.

2 To be taught a more perfect Knowledge of God. Gal. 4, 9. Ye rather are Known
of God; that is, as Augustine expounds it; ye are known of God, because God
has made you to Know him better then ye did.

3 To be perfectly united and joined unto God, in full fruition of him and his
Felicity. 1. Cor. 13, 12. Even as I am Known.

knowledge. sig:
That infinite Divine Essence, seeing, beholding, and understanding himself,
and all other things most perfectly. 1 Samuel 2, 3. For the Lord is a God of
Knowledge.

2 The clear and distinct understanding of heavenly truth, revealed in the
word, when we are enlightened by the Spirit, to perceive the Scriptures, both
for the meaning of the words, and matters to be Known. Prou. 15, 14. The heart
of him that has understanding, seeks Knowledge. Prouer. 3, 10. 2 Peter 1, 7.
Join with your Virtue, Knowledge.

3 That special light of Faith, which is a Knowledge with application, when
the elect Soul is enabled to see the doctrine of Christ, and to receive it.
Esaias 53, 11. My righteous Servant, by his Knowledge shall justify many. This
is particular Knowledge; whereby we believe that doctrine which we Know to
belong unto us.

4 An Idle, naked, and bare understanding of Divine truth, severed from Faith
to God, and love of our Neighbor. 1 Corin. 8, 1. Knowledge puffs up.

5 Prudence, wisdom. Pro. 1, 2. To understand the words of Knowledge.

6 Use, experience. 2 Cor. 8, 7. Ye abound in faith, in word, and Knowledge.

7 The gift of teaching, set up of God, for the gathering and confirming of
his Church, through the word preached. 1 Cor. 13, 8. Knowledge shall cease;
That is, the Ministry of the word, whereof comes Knowledge.

8 The skill how to do things well and rightly. 2 Corin. 6, 6. By Knowledge.
Knowledge of truth, Knowledge of Christ, Knowledge of Salvation, Knowledge of
God: signifies the sound understanding of that truth concerning God and Christ,
which brings salvation with it.

that Knowledge. sig:
A light in some particular truth, which is revealed to one, and not to
another. 1 Cor. 8, 7. Every man has not that Knowledge.

rich in knowledge. sig:
One, endewed with great plenty and store of Knowledge. 1 Cor. 1, 5. Ye are
made so rich in knowledge.

to spread Knowledge. sig:
To give instruction to others, helping them to Know what they did not Know.

to lay up Knowledge. sig:
To have it laid up, that it may be drawn out in time of need. Prou. 1^, 14.
A wise man lays up Knowledge.

to preserve Knowledge sig:
To Keep, maintain, and increase understanding, of heavenly doctrine, for the
instruction of others. Mal. 2, 7. The Priests lips preserve Knowledge.

to Know ye words and ways of God. sig:
Diversely; either to understand them only, or to believe them, to regard and
approve them, to obey and practice them; according to the circumstances of the
place. Psalm. 95, 10. Psalm. 147, 20. Math. 13, 23.

L. A.
to Labor. sig:
Pains, even unto weariness. 1. Tim. 5, 18. The Labourer is worthy of his
wages. Verse 17. They that Labor in the word.

2 All evils both of sin and misery. Revel. 14, 13. They rest from their
Labors; that is, from pain, care, sorrow, crying, tears, sin, death, and
whatsoever is evil. In Ps. 90, 10. it sig: painful grief and sorrow.

3 The diligence, care, and endeavor, to do the works of our calling, well and
constantly. Prou.

In all Labor there is abundance. Prou. 10, 16. The Labor of the righteous
tends to life.

4 The fruit and increase which comes of Labor. Exodus 23, 16. When thou have
gathered in thy Labors.

Laden. sig:
One groaning and mourning under the weight and burden of sins, being seen
and felt; with great desire of forgiveness by Christ, to the ease of his
grieved soul. Mat. 11, 28. All that are Laden.

2 One, pressed down with a great weight of Iniquity, being full of grievous
sins, without feeling them. Esaias, 1, 4. A people Laden with Iniquity.

Ladder of Jacob. sig:
The journey of Jacob, wherein God would be present with him, in favor, by
his Angels, to lead him forth well and happily, also to bring him back again.
Genesis 28, 12. Their stood a Ladder. See verse 15, and 20.

2 Christ Jesus, and his Mediation. John 1, 51. Angels ascending, etc.

Lake. sig:
Some great standing water, or deep poole, or hollow pit.

2 Hell, the place appointed for tormenting the Reprobate. Revel. 20, 14. Were
cast into the Lake of fire.

3 Great calamities, and deadly dangers. Psalm. 30, 3. Into the Lake, or pit.
Verse 9. Elsewhere often.

Lamb. sig:
A young Sheep, meek and tractable, apt for Sacrifice under the Law, and
always for meat.

2 A true Christian, endowed with the spirit of Grace and meekness. Esaias 11,
6. And the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb. John. 21, 15. Feed my Lambs.

3 Antichrist, counterfetting and making show of meekness and love to the
Saints of God. Revel. 13, 11. Which had two horns like a Lamb.

4 Christ. Revel. 21, 23. And the Lamb is the light of it.

that Lamb of God. sig:
Christ, who is likened to a Lamb, for his perfect Innocence and meekness:
and because, by the Sacrifice of himself, he alone took away the sin of the
elect, making a full satisfaction for them to Gods Justice; therefore he is
called by an excellency, that Lamb of God; as being the truth and substance of
all outward oblations. John 1, 29. Behold that Lamb of God, which takes away
the sins of the world.

Lamp. sig:
A Torch, to give light in the night season.

2 A true and lively faith, working by love. Mat. 25, 4. The wise took Oil in
their vessels with their Lamps. In the night and darkness of this world, our
light whereby we see our way, it is our faith in the word of God.

3 A dead faith, or naked knowledge of God, void of love and good works.
Math. 25, 3. The foolish Virgins took their Lamps, but took no Oil with
them.

Land. sig:
The whole Continent of the earth, as it is distinguished from Sea. Math. 23,
15. Ye compass Sea and Land.

2 One particular Region or Country. Mat. 9, 26. The brute went through all
that Land; as the Land of Judah, of Moab, of Egypt, of Philistims, etc.

3 The people and Inhabitants of any Land or Country. Esaias 37, 18. The Kings
of Assyria have destroyed all Lands. Genesis 41. 57. The Famine was sore in all
Lands.

Land of the living. sig:
The earth, or the world, which is the place of this life. Psalm. 116, In the
Land of the living.

Language of Canaan. sig:
The Haebrew tongue, wherein God was served by his people, while they dwelt in
Canaan.

2 Fellowship with Gods people in Doctrine and worship. Esaias 19, 18. Five
Cities shall speak the Language of Canaan.

pure Language. sig:
Sound and true Doctrine. Zeph. 3, 9. Then will I turn to the people a pure
Language.

Last. sig:
The Gentiles, which being last, yet become first. Mat. 19, 30. The last shall
be first. The Jews who were first, being rejected for their unbelief, became
last: and the Gentiles believing in Christ by the calling of God, were accepted
before the disobedient Jews; and so became first, though they were last.

Last days, or last times sig:
The times since the revelation of Christ, by the preaching of himself and of
his Apostles. 2. Pet. 3, 3. In the last days shall come Mockers. Jude 18. 1.
Tim. 4, 1. These days since Christ are called last, because all was
consummated and ended, which was before prophesied touching man's Redemption,
and there remains nothing else but the coming of the great Judge, to finish
this pilgrimage and warfare of the Church.

Last day. sig:
The day of Judgment, after which, there shall be no more day nor time. John 6,
39. And should raise it up again at the last day.

to Laugh. sig:
To smile, out of doubting. Thus Sarah laughed. Genesis 18, 12. Then Sarah Laughed.

2 To smile, in Token of joy, out of a true belief. Thus Abraham Laughed. Genesis
17, 17. Abraham Laughed.

Laughing or derision. sig:
The contempt of God, toward wicked men and all their attempts against him, and
how much it is from God, to think of releeuing them in their extreamities.
Psalm. 2, 3. The Lord shall have them in derision; or, Laugh them to scorn.

to Laugh at ones destruction. sig:
To conceive extreme fury against any person, or people, even to the rooting of
them out. Pro. 1, 26. I will Laugh when their destruction comes. When God is
said to Laugh at the wicked, it is to show these four things. First, how
little he regards the^. Secondly, how far he is from helping them. Thirdly, how
easy it is for him to destroy them. Lastly, that he is exceeding hotly
displeased with them.

Law. sig:
That, which has the force of governing and moderating our actions. This is
the general property of a Law. Hence come these phrases. The Law of the mind;
the Law of the members; the Law of sin; the Law of God; the Law of the Spirit.
Romans 7, 23, 25. This is the large signification of Law.

2 The Decalogue, or ten Commandments. Romans 7, 7. Except the Law had said,
Thou shall not lust. Also Verse 14, 22. And Romans 8, 22. and 3, 20. This is
called the Morrall Law, because it teaches duties, both to God and our
Neighbor.

3 The whole Doctrine of the word, comprehending the promises of free
salvation by Christ. Psalm. 19, 7. The Law of God is perfect, converting the
soul. James 1, 25.

4 Books of Moses, Psalms, and Prophets; even the Scripture of the
Old Testament, which contain the Doctrine of the Law, and the promises of the
Messiah. Rom, 3, 19. Whatsoever the Law says. Law, sometime signifies the
whole Old Testament. John 10. 34. and 15, 25. Sometime but the five Books of
Moses. Gal. 3, 21.

5 The condition of keeping or fulfilling the Law exactly, in every point: or
the works of the Law, being perfectly observed. Romans 3, 21. The righteousness
of God, is manifest without the Law. And 4, 13, 14. Gal. 3, 10, 11, 12.

6 Natural instinct and light of reason, commanding honest things, and
forbidding the contrary; or the Law of Nature written in a man's heart. Romans 2,
14. They are a Law to themselves.

7 Legal Ceremonies. 1. Cor. 9, 20. To them which were under the Law.

8 The second Table of the Law, and the precepts thereof. Rom 13, 8. He that
loves another, fulfilleth the Law. Gal. 5, 14.

9 Institution, or ordinance of Aaron. Heb. 7, 12 The Law also is changed.

Law of Faith. sig:
The Doctrine which teaches righteousness by faith in Christ. Romans 3, 27. Our
rejoicing is excluded by the Law of faith; that is, by the Doctrine which
offers and promises salvation; on this condition: if we believe.

Law of liberty. sig:
The word and Doctrine of God, freely reproouing sin in all estates, without
difference or respect of persons: and therefore, it is called the Law of
liberty. As also, because it belongs chiefly and properly to such, as are freed
and set at liberty from sin by the grace of Christ. James 1, 25. Who so
looks into the perfect Law of liberty. Esaias 58, 1.

Law of works. sig:
The Doctrine which teaches to get righteousness and salvation, by working
according to the Law. Romans 3, 27. Not by the Law of works.

Law of righteousness. sig:
The righteousness which is commanded in the Law. Romans 9, 31. But Israel
which followed the Law of Righteousness: or the Doctrine, which promises
righteousness and life, to him, who perfectly keeps the Law.

Law of Christ. sig:
The precepts of Charity. Gal. 6, 2. Fulfill the Law of Christ. This is called
in John, a new law. John. 13, 34, 35.

Law of commandments. sig:
The precepts touching Ceremonial rites. Ephe. 2, 15. The Law of
Commandments, which stands in ordinances.

Law spiritual. sig:
A Doctrine, requiring obedience from the thoughts and the most inward desires
of the soul, and not in outward works only. Romans 7, 7. The Law is spiritual.

Law of the spirit. sig:
The holy spirit of Sanctification, which is like unto a Law, commanding with
Authority, and with power enforcing to do good things, and to avoid evil. Romans
8, 2. The Law of the spirit of life.

Law of the mind. sig:
A mind renewed by the spirit, which rules and commands good things, and
forbids evil (as a Law,) it is the same with the former. Romans 7, 23.

Law of sin. sig:
Sin, or natural corruption which (like a Law) commands evil actions,
enforcing us unto them, and forbidding us good things, drawing us from them.
Romans 8, 1. Has freed me from the Law of sin.

Law of the members. sig:
Sin, ruling (like a Law) in our members; that is, in our faculties of body
and soul, as far as they are unregenerate. It is the same with the Law of
Sin. Romans 7, 23. I see a Law in my members.

Law of death. sig:
Sin, by his Imperial Tyrannical lusts, deserving and leading unto death
and destruction. Romans 8, 2. Has freed me from the Law of death.

through the Law. I am dead to y^ law sig:
Through the Law of grace, granted by Christ, I am free from the bondage and
curse of the Law given by Moses. Gal. 2, 19.

Or thus. The Law of Commandments, by terrifying my Conscience, brought me to
Christ, who caused me to dye to the Law indeed, by making me righteous
thorough faith in him, that I might not fear the curse of the Law; and by
sanctifying me, that I might not obey the lusts which are against the Law.

how Christ is the end of the Law. sig:
By fulfilling the Law for us, he is in such wise made our righteousness (so
we believe) as if our selves had perfectly observed the Law. Romans 10, 4. Christ
is the end of the Law, for righteousness, to every believer.

to abrogate the Law. sig:
To repeal and disanull it, to make it void, and of none effect. Ephe, 2, 15.
In abrogating the Law of Commandments. Heb. 8, 13.

Abrogation of Moses Law.

1 The Ceremonial Law, is wholly Ephesians. 2, 15, 16 Heb* 7, 8 9, 10 Chapters
thoroughout.
abrogate Note this.
and done away, as touching the use and practice: but is perpetual, as
touching the substance and truth, which is Christ.

2 The Judicial Law, is also abrogate, saving so far, as it is grounded upon
the Law of Nature, and agrees with the Morrall Law; and as Christian
Magistrates shall Judge it, fitting for the estate and welfare of their people,
being a Law of most excellent equity.

3 The Morrall Law, is abrogated in respect of believers, only as touching the
Rom, 4, 5. Chapters. Romans 6, 14.
curse, and the rigorous exaction, requiring perfect obedience upon pain of
aeternall death; also Rom* 7, 4, 5, 6
as it is the vigor and strength of sin: but is not abrogate as touching the
Rom: 7, 14, 15, 16, 17, etc. Rom 3, 20 and 7, 7.
Doctrine, Government, and Obedience of it; for it still serves to show sin,
and reprove sinners; to teach all duties to God and men, to humble and fear
us, by denunciation of Psa. 119, v* 105*
wrath and judgments, to direct (as a rule) our whole life and actions; but
not to justify us before God, which the Law cannot do thorough our sinful
corruption, whereby we are made unable to keep it perfitly; therefore (through
our fault) it cannot confer and bestow perfect righteousness upon us. Romans 8,
3. The Papists then do err much, in teaching, to seek our righteousness
before God, from the works of the Law, either in whole, or in part.

L. E.
Leaf. sig: pro
A certain green blade shot forth of a Tree, to show that it lives, and is
not dead and withered.

2 The life of Grace which the godly live here; and the (not fading of this
Leaf) does signify constant perserance in this Grace. Psalm. 1, 3. Whose Leaf
shall not fade.

3 The life of Glory, which from Christ is communicated to the elect being in
Heaven, for their eternal happiness. Revel. 22, 2. And the Leaves of the
Trees served to heal the Nations therewith.

4 Knowledge and profession of Christ, without the fruit of obedience. Mat. 2,
19. He found Leaves, but no Fruit.

shaking of a Leaf. sig:
Any small or little fear; or the appearance and show of a danger. Leuit. 26,
36. The sound of a Leaf shaken, shall chase them.

League. sig:
A solemn conuention or agreement by mutual promises, either between man and
man touching the affairs of this life, or else between God and Man, touching
that life which is eternal. See Covenant and Testament: Leagues and Covenants
were wont of old, to be ratified with blood, and solemnized with Banquets and
Feasts. See Gene. 21, 27. Also Exodus 24, 8. Heb. 9, 20.

Leanness. sig:
Famine or scarsity of Earthly blessings, which cause leanness and wasting of
the body. Esaias 17, 4. The Fatness of his Flesh shall be made lean.

2 Death, which does accompany and follow such scarsity and leanness. Psa.
106, 15. And leanness entered into their Souls.

to Lean upon. sig:
To rest or rely upon the help of others which trust in them. Esaias 36, 6.
Whereupon, if any Man Lean, it will go into his hand.

Leaping. sig:
Rejoicing, either for health of body restored to the Lame, or Grace restored
to Sinners. Esaias 35* 6. Then shall the Lame Man Leap, as an Heart.

Learning. sig:
The doctrine of Christ. Ephe. 4, 20. But ye have not so Learned Christ.

2 False doctrine, such as the false Prophetess Iesabell taught; to wit, that
men might eat of things sacrificed to Idols, and commit fornication without
Sin. Revel, 2, 24. As many as have not this Learning.

3 The instruction and reformation of our minds in godliness. Romans 15, 4. They
are written for our Learning.

4 Human knowledge, or skill in the liberal Arts and Sciences. John 7, 15.
Seeing he never Learned. Acts 7, 22. Acts 4, 13.

Least. sig:
None at all, of no reckoning or place. Math. 5, 19. He shall be called the
Least in the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, he shall have no place in the Church
of God.

2 Of small reckoning and regard with others. Luke 22, 26. Let the greatest
amongst you, be as the Least.

Leaven. sig: pro
That which secretly and speedily sowereth the whole Lump of Dow, altering the
Nature of it. Math. 13, 33.

2 The Kingdom or Church of Christ here on Earth, secretly waxing and
increasing by degrees, both in number of persons, and in graces of the Spirit,
as Leaven being but little, yet spreads it self through the whole Lump.
Math. 13, 33. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto Leaven, which a Woman took,
etc.

3 The doctrine of the Gospel taught in the Church, which alters the Nature
of a man, turning his heart first, and afterward his members, that he may
lead a new life; even as a Leaven alters the Nature of the Dow, and makes it
through sower, being sweet before. Mat. 13, 33.

4 The corrupt doctrine of Heretics, corrupting the sweetness of heavenly
doctrine, by their false Glosses; which is also noted by the Name of
Hypocrisy, because corrupt doctrine is deceitful, false, and ungodly, making
all the Lovers of it Hipocrites. Math. 16, 6. Luke 12, 1. Beware of the Leaven
of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.

5 Corrupt and vicious Livers, which with their company (like Leaven) infect
others. Corin. 5, 6. Know ye not, that a little Leaven Leaueneth the whole
Lump. 1 Cor. 15, 33.

old Leaven. sig:
Maliciousness and wickedness, even the whole naughtiness of our sinful
Nature, with the bitter Fruits of it. 1 Cor. 5, 7. Purge out the old Leaven.

to be led by the Spirit. sig:
To be mightily and forcibly, yet willingly, removed and carried by divine
power from place to place. Math. 4, 1. Being compared with Luke. 4, 1, 14.
Jesus was led aside of the Spirit. And Mark 1, 12. The Spirit is to drive him
out.

2 To be governed by the good motions of the Spirit of God. Romans 8, 10. They
that are Christ's are led by the Spirit of Christ; that is, be obedient to the
government of the Spirit.

to be Led into temptation. sig:
Not only to be forsaken in the temptation, but to be given wholly over to the
tempters will, and held prisoner at his pleasure. This is never done but to
the wicked; yet it is often deserved by the godly, who praying against it, do
escape it. Mat. 6, 13. Lead us not into Temptation; that is, let us not fall
into the Tempters hand to be as his slaves.

Left Hand. sig:
The fearful estate of the ungodly, adjudged to torments; as the right hand
signifies the happy estate of the godly, appointed to life. Matthew 25, 30, 31.

left handed sig: pro
One that performs bodily actions, as readily and strongly with the left
hand, as others do with the right hand. Judges 3, 15. E^ud, a Man left handed.

Letter. sig:
Outward profession of God, and whatsoever is in Religion, besides the Spirit
and Grace of Christ. Romans 2, 29. Not in the Letter.

2 The whole doctrine of the Law, severed from the quickening Spirit of Christ,
to make it effectual. Romans 7, 6. And not in oldnesse of the Letter.

Leuy. sig:
The whole race or number of the Levites. Mal. 2, 4. My Covenant which I made
with Leuy.

Leuite. sig:
A Minister of the Old Testament, whose office it was, to instruct the people
and to wait upon the Altar. Numb. 3, 45. Take the Leuits, etc. Deutro. 33, 10.
They shall teach Israel thy Law, and shall put Incense before thy face, etc.

2 Every true faithful Christian (which is a spiritual Leuite) to worship God
in Spirit and truth. Esaias 66, 21. I will take of them for Priests and Leuits,
says the Lord.

L. I.
Liberty. sig: pro
Freedom from any servitude or bondage.

2 Freedom from the bondage of Sin and Satan, and from the servitude of Moses
Law. Gala. 6, 1. Stand fast in the Liberty wherein Christ has set you free. 1
Pet. 29, 16. Gal. 5, 13. This is Christian Liberty begun and imperfect; being
bought for us by the price of Christ's blood, and revealed unto us by the
Gospel.

3 A full and perfect deliverance, from the very corruption of Sin, and of
the Grave too, and from all misery whatsoever. Ephe. 1, 14. Which is the
Redemption of that Liberty purchased unto the praise of his Glory. This is the
accomplishment of the former Liberty. It is called [ Glorious Liberty.] Romans
8, 21. Because the Saints being once freed from all miseries, shall be
glorified in Heaven.

4 That condition of Gods Children, from whom the veil of the heart is taken
away, and that yoke of darkness (which by the sin of one man being put upon
us) was made more heavy by another yoke of Moses Law, increasing and
strengthening natural blindness in us before conversion. 2 Cor. 3, 17. Where
the spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty. 1 Pet. 2, 16.

5 A freedom or power, which is given unto the Christian about things
indifferent, to use them, or not to use them, keeping our selves within bounds
of Charity and Edification. Romans 14, 19. Here of the Apostle entreats. Romans
14. throughout. Also 1 Cor. 6, and 8. and 1 Cor. 10.

Christian Liberty, what it is?

Christian liberty, is a spiritual benefit purchased by the death of Christ,
to the setting free of the faithful which believe in Christ, not only from
the 1 Cor. 7, 23.
precepts and traditions of men, as binding the conscience, and 1 Cor 9. 19.
Gal 5, 1. Rom 8, 1.
from the yoke of the whole Ceremonial Law of Moses; but also from Romans 7,
4, 5. Also Romans 5, 15. 16, 17, 18
the curse and rigorous exaction of the Moral Law, even from the whole wrath
of God, due to our Sins, by the Justification of Faith; and finally, Rom 6, 13,
14, 15.
from the dominion and reign of sin, by the Sanctification of the Spirit:
That ye may Luke 1, 74.
serve and obey the will of God without all terror and slavish fear, in all
quiet tranquillity of mind, and cheerfulness of Conscience, under sure hope
of eternal glory. Therefore they are much deceived, whosoever think Christian
Liberty to consist in freedom of the doctrine and obedience of the Moral Law,
or from the yoke of any lawful authority, civil, or ecclesiastical, that
men may live licentiously as themselves list, using their liberty as a cloak
of wickedness.

a people set at Liberty. sig:
Such a people, as through grace are made partakers of Christian Liberty. 1
Pet. 2, 9. An holy Nation, a people set at Liberty.

Life. sig:
A power, to move and do actions tending to selfe-preseruation. Acts 20, 24.
My Life is not dear unto me. John 1, 3, 15. This is Life of Nature.

2 The free motion of the mind and will of Man, toward God, to do the
works pleasing to him. Romans 8, 2, 6. The wisdom of the Spirit, is life. This
is the Life of Grace, which when it is perfect in Heaven, it becomes the Life
of Glory: and of Spiritual Life, is then made Eternal.

3 A man's Life. Math. 10, 39. He that loses his Life, shall find it.

4. The valiant enduring of dangers for Christ and his word. Cor. 2, 4, 10.
That the Life of Jesus might be made manifest in our bodies.

5 Blood, which quickneth the Flesh. Genesis 9, 4. The Flesh with the Life, ye
shall not eat, etc.

the Life of God. sig:
That Life, whereby God lives in his Saints, or a godly Life. Ephe. 2, 12.
Strangers from the Life of God. This is also called the Life of the Spirit, and
the Life of Christ.

what a godly Life is.
A godly Life, is that power which God by the Spirit of his Son, puts into
the hearts of the elect, at their regeneration, enabling them to move
themselves toward God (who before were dead in sins) that they might begin
to think, speak, and do in some measure, the things pleasing unto God. This
Life being once begun, it is still preserved and continued (without returning
to death of sin) unto the next World; and therefore is called Life eternal.
Romans 6, 7, 8, 9, 23. The gift of God is eternal Life.

New-Life. sig:
An unblameable and pure Life, framed (not after the lust of the Olde-man) but
after the will of God in his Word. Romans 6, 4. Walk in newness of Life.

Life everlasting. sig:
Heavenly happiness and glory. This is likened to Life, because of all earthly
things, Life is most precious; and this Life is everlasting, because it
endures for ever. Romans 6, 23. Eternal Life is the gift of God.

2. Christ himself. 1 John 5, 20. This same is that Life eternal.

Life, as it is affirmed of God. sig:
That most single and perfect Diuine-being, who of himself understands,
loves, and wills things infinitely; applying himself to these actions of
his own free accord, and is the cause and Fountain of all Life, being a
motion, both bodily and spiritual in all his Creatures which live and move,
and have being. Hence he is called that Life, and Life eternal, and the living
God, who lives for ever. 1 John 1, 2. That Life was made manifest. John 1, 4.
and 5.

to be alive to God. sig:
To be quickened, and moved of the holy Spirit, to do what pleases God. Romans
6, 11. But ye are alive to God.

to live to God sig:
To consecrate and order our whole Life after the will of God, and unto his
glory. Romans 14, 8.

to live with Christ. sig:
To have communion and fellowship with the Grace of Christ for newness of
Life, or with his glory for eternal Felicity. Romans 6, 8. We shall Live with
him. 2 Timothy 2, 11. If we dye with him, we shall live with him.

to be made alive in Christ. sig:
To have our dead bodies quickened, by that Divine power of Christ, whereby his
members shall be raised at the last day. 1 Corin. 15, 22. Even so in Christ
shall all be made alive.

to see Life. sig:
To enjoy and possess it: as not to see, does signify not to enjoy. John 3,
36. He that obeys not the son, shall not see life.

bread of life sig:
Vital, and lively bread, living and giving life to others, and so is Christ
only. John 6, 35. I am that bread of life.

book of Life sig:
The decree of eternal election. Revel. 10, 14. See Book.

living stones. sig:
True Christians, which live by faith in the son of God. 1. Pet. 2, 5. Ye
also as Lively stones.

2 Christ himself, the Author of true and spiritual life. 1. Pet. 2, 4. To
whom coming, as to a Living stone.

to Live after the flesh. sig:
To live after the evil desires of our corrupt Nature. Romans 8, 13. If ye Live
in the Flesh, ye shall dye.

Light of the living. sig:
This common Light wherein we live, while we are in this world. Psalm. 56, 13.
That I may walk before God, in the Light of the living.

to Live. sig:
To move, and do the actions of life by a selfemoouing power, ingendered of
God.

2 To be in health, to live, and to like well. John 4, 5. Go thy way, thy
son lives.

3 To preserve one alive, against the danger of death. Genesis 17, 18. O that
Israel might live in thy sight. Genesis 42, 2. That we may live, and not die.

4 To recover life and strength after some disease.

5 To live well and happily, or to flourish, and prosper. 1. Sam. 10, 24. Let
the King live. Psalm 38, 19. Mine enemies live, and are mighty.

to Live by that which comes out of Gods mouth. sig:
To live or maintain this bodily life, by Gods decree, appointment, and
blessing (being depended on) and not only by natural means, and secondary
causes. Mat. 4, 4. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

to Live to ones self. sig:
In the Government of life, to follow his own will alone, and not the will of
God for the rule of it; forgetting Gods glory. Also, without thinking of this,
that he must render account of his life unto God, unto whose power alone, all
men are subject. Romans 14, 7. None of us lives to himself.

as the Lord lives, and as thy soul Lives. sig:
That thing, which is affirmed and spoken to be so true, as that the Lord
lives, or as that person lives, which is the speaker of it. Ruth. 3, 13. I
will do the duty of a Kinsman, as the Lord lives. 1. Sam. 1, 26.

Light. sig:
That creature of light, shining throughout, over the whole earth. Genesis 1, 3.
God said, let there be light.

2 Sun, Moon, and Stars, which be (as it were) the vessels of this light.
Genesis 1, 16. Therefore he made two great lights.

3 God, who is like light, both for the brightness of his majesty and his most
pure and single Nature, being of infinite knowledge and holiness, without any
darkness of ignorance or sin. 1. Ioh. 1, 4, 5. God is Light. Ioh. 1, 5. That
Light shines in darkness. And elsewhere [ Light] does signify, God the Creator
of Light.

4 The word of God well understood, which serves as a light to show us the way
we are to walk to heaven. Psalm. 119, 108. Thy word is a Lantern to my feet,
and a Light to my paths. John. 3, 20, 21.

5 Christ himself, who is full of Light, and enlightneth every man that
comes into the world with reason and natural understanding; and all elect
men, with true faith, and holiness. John 1, 8. He was that true Light, that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world. Ioh. 9, 5. I am the Light
of the world. John 1, 8.

6 The wise and faithful Ministers of the Gospel, who in respect of their
sound Doctrine and good life, are likened to light. Math. 5, 16. Ye are the
Light of the world.

7 The Doctrine of the Gospel. Acts. 26, 23. And should show light unto this
people, and to the Gentiles. Some understand this of aeternall life.

8 All believing Christians, which are themselves enlightened unto the saving
knowledge of God, giving Light to others by their godly conversation. Ephe. 5,
8. Ye are Light in the Lord.

9 Some knowledge of God and of his Glory. Cor. 2, 4, 6. To give the Light of
the knowledge of the glory of God.

10 Holiness of life. Mat. 5, 16. Let your Light so shine before men.

11 Joy, Gladness, and Comfort, which comes by Gods merciful benefits and
deliverances; as Darkness, signifies, Sorrow and Misery. Ester 8, 16. And to
the Jews, came Light, and Joy, Gladness, and Honor.

12 That force of reason and understanding, which is kindled in our minds, to
acknowledge him the author of so great a benefit. John 1, 4. And that life was
the Light of men.

13 That glorious and blessed life in Heaven, which is endless. Col. 1, 12.
The inheritance of the Saints in Light.

14 One, that delivers out of adversities. Psalm. 27, 1. The Lord is my Light.

Works of Light. See Armor of Light.

Light of Gods countenance. sig:
Gods favor, declared by his blessings and graces; as men's favor is declared,
by their countenance. Psalm. 4, 7. Let the Light of thy countenance shine upon
us.

2 The knowledge or presence of God. Psalm. 90, 8. Thou set our sins in
the Light of thy countenance.

to walk in the light. sig:
To follow Gods word, as our guide, in our travel to eternal blessedness. 1.
John. 1, 7. But if we walk in the Light.

See Lips.

Little flock sig:
The people of GOD, small in number and in worldly reputation. Luke 12, 32.
Fear not Little Flock.

Little sister sig:
The Church of the Gentiles. Cant. 8, 8. We have a Little Sister.

Little ones. sig:
Such as be of poor and mean estate in the world. Math. 18, 6. Whosoever shall
offend one of these Little ones.

Little faith. sig:
A small portion and degree of Faith, much troubled with ignorance and
doubtings. Math. 8, 26. Why do ye donbt, o ye of Little faith?

Little strength. sig:
A small measure of spiritual grace, whereby the heart is but meanly
strengthened to Godward. Revel. 3, 8. Thou have a Little strength.

Little Fores. sig:
All occasions, and appearances of evil. Cant. 2, 15.

L. O.
Locusts. sig: pro
A certain vile Creature so called. There were diverse kinds of them; some
hurtful and venomous; others, commodious for meat. Mat. 3, 4. His meat was
Locusts.

2 Deceivers, or authors of false Doctrines, generally: and more specially; the
Popish Clergy, with their swarms of Monks, Friars, Priests, and Jesuits.
Reu. 9, 3. There came Locusts out of the smoke.

to Loose. sig:
To pronounce forgiveness of sins, to truly humbled and repentant sinners.
Math. 18, 18. Whatsoever you shall loose on earth, etc.

2 To give the fruit of forgiveness of sins in heavenly blessedness. Math.
18, 18.

Lord. sig:
A word of reverence, given to Prophets, and public Teachers, and men of
sort. Thus is Elias called Lord, and Abraham of his wife is called Lord. 1.
Pet. 3, ^.

2 A Title of honor, given to great men in respect of their rule and command
over others. Genesis 42, 30, 33. The man who is Lord of the Land. Genesis 4^, 16.

3 An absolute Ruler over the whole world, upholding all things in their
beings. Thus God only is a Lord. Psalm 110, 1. The Lord said to my Lord.

4 An under Ruler, which in stead of God, and for him, and under him, has Rule
and Dominion over al things; but more especially over his church. Romans 1, 3.
Concerning his son Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus Christ only is a Lord.

Lord of all. sig:
Christ, who is Lord of all. Act. 10, 36. By right of
1. Creation, al things being made by him. John 1, 3. 2. Preservation,
upholding all things. Heb. 1, 3. 3. Dominion, governing al things. Ephe. 1,
22. 4. Redemption, ransoming all men by the price of himself. 1. Tim. 2, 5.
Lord of hoasts. sig:
The mighty and strong God, under whose power and disposition, all creatures be
as an host of Soldiers under their Emperor, to execute his Judgments. Psalm.
24, 10. The Lord of Hoasts, he is the King of glory.

Lord of life. sig:
One, who lives of himself and is author, giver, and preserver of life in all
living creatures, having the lives of all creatures under his power; being the
only procurer of eternal life to the elect. Acts 3, 18. ^e have killed the
Lord of life.

Lord of heaven and earth. sig:
The Maker, Commander, and disposer of all things in heaven and earth. See
Possessor.

Lord of glory. sig:
A glorious renowned Lord, worthy of renown, and full of glory. 1. Cor. 2, 8.
They would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

Lord of Lords. sig:
The highest Ruler, far above all other Governors and Rulers whatsoever.
Revel. 19, 16. Who has his name written on his thigh (The Lord of Lords.)

in the name of the Lord. sig:
At the Commandment of God, by his blessing, and unto his only honor and
glory. Col. 3, 17. Do all in the name of the Lord Jesus.

many Lords. sig:
Many, which be like unto Lords, and reputed so of the world, being not so
indeed: for to us there is but one God, and one Lord. 1. Cor. 8, 5. As there
be many Gods, and many Lords.

Lords supper sig:
That Sacrament of the New Testament, which seals to us our spiritual
feeding and growing in Christ. 1. Cor. 11, 20. See more, in the Supper of the
Lord. Papists offend, which transform this Supper of spiritual refreshing,
into a Sacrifice propitiatory for sin.

to Loose. sig:
To suffer one to perish, and to go on to destruction. John 6, 39. Of all that
he has given me, I should loose nothing.

to loose life. sig:
To lay down our life willingly for Christ his Gospel. Math. 10. He that
loses his Life for my sake.

2 To destroy it, and cast it away for ever. Mat. 10, 39. He that will find
his Life, shall loose it.

Lost. sig:
Elect, which see and feel themselves lost and quite undone, because of their
sins. Luke 19, 10. The son of man is come to seek, and save that which is
lost. Math. 18, 11.

Lot. sig:
Some square thing, as a Dye or other thing, cast into a Pitcher or Pot, thence
to be drawn out again (as a means to end strife) in cases of doubt, as in
divisions of lands, choice of officers, etc. Pro. 16, 33. The Lot is cast into
the lap, but the disposition is of the Lord. Prou. 18. Acts 1, 26.

2 That which falls out to be ones proper portion or part. Psalm. 16, 8. The
Lord is my Lot. Deuteronomy. 32, 9. Israel is the Lot of his inheritance.

3 That which is ones cheifest good and commodity. Psalm 125. 3. The Rod of
the wicked shall not rest on the Lot of the righteous; that is, upon
themselves and their good things.

4 The inheritance of any person, either earthly or heavenly. Hence come those
phrases in the Book of Joshua. The Lot of Ephraim, of Zabulon, of Judah, etc.
Also Acts 26, 18. 1 Col. 12. That which is translated [ The inheritance of the
Saintes] in the Original is [ The Lot of the Saints.]

5 The reward and recompense which is rendered to any for their sins. Esaias
17, 14. This is the Lot of them that are Robbers of us.

6 Fellowship, or participation in any good thing. Acts 8, 21. Thou have
neither part nor Lot: for so the word is in the Original. That is, no
fellowship.

to cast Lots sig:
To divide a thing by Lot. Math. 27, 35. Upon my vesture did they cast Lots.
Prou. 1, 14.

Love referred to Man. sig:
An affection of the heart, moving and stirring us to wish well and to do
good unto something which we justly like and find contentment in. ^. Sam. 1,
26. Thy Love to me was wonderful, like to the Love of Women. This is Natural
Love, such as a Woman bears to her Husband; a Mother to the Child, etc.

2 An holy affection of the heart, causing us to delight in God for his
goodness sake, and in our Neighbor for Gods sake. 1 John 4, 19. We Love him,
because he Loved us first. Verse 21. He that Loves God, should Love his
Neighbor also. This is Christian Love, which is a fruit and sign of a
justified person, but is not our Justice before God.

3 That affection, which more nearly and straightly binds Friend unto
Friend. 1. Sam. 18, 1. And Jonathan Loved him as his own Soul. This is, Love
of Friends.

referred to God.
4 His Divine Essence, infinitely delighting himself in his Son Christ, who
is his wisdom; and in his Spirit, which is his power also, in his Creatures
and Children. 1 John 4, 16. God is love.

5 His purpose and decree, to choose some unto salvation by Christ. Romans 9, 13.
Jacob have I loved. This Love, is elsewhere called the good pleasure of his
will, and foreknowledge of God. Romans 8, 29. Romans 11, 2. Ephe. 1, 4.

6 The fruits and effects of that Loving purpose. First, in the regeneration of
the elect. Secondly, their Justification. Thirdly, their Sanctification.
Fourthly, in the grace of perseverance. Fi^tly, in the hope of Glorification.
Romans 5, 6. He has shed abroad his Love in our hearts.

7 The proceeding of these former fruits of grace, till they come to perfection
of glory. John 1, 2. Them he Loved to the end.

8 Inordinate delight and contentment, in some person, or thing. 2 Samuel 13, 1.
And Amnon Loved his Sister Tamar. Here it is taken in evil part.

Lowliness. sig:
The humbleness of mind, and modesty of godly persons. Math. 11, 29. For I am
lowly in heart.

2 An abject and vile estate, subject to the contempt of the world. Luke 1, 52.
And exalted them of Low degree.

Loins. sig: pro
A part of the Body which (as a pillar) strongly vpholdes the whole body.

2 The whole man, by a Sinedoche. Acts 2, 30. Out of the Fruit of his Loins,
etc. Deuteronomy. 33, 11.

3 A readiness with all our might, to execute a charge or duty committed to
us. Luke 12, 35. And your Loins girt, etc.

L. U.
Lust. sig:
The desire of some lawful thing tending to preservation of Nature; that is,
natural Lust: in it self good. Psalm 106. 14. And Psalm 78, ^8. Requiring
meat for their Lusts.

2 Corruption of Heart, coveting things forbid. Romans 7, 7. Thou shall not
Lust. This is Original Lust, or Birth-sinne.

3 All evil desires and affections, whether without consent, or with consent.
1 Pet. 2, 12. Abstain from fleshly Lusts. This is Actual Lust.

4 The desire of good things according to Gods will, with a loathing of the
contrary. Gala. 5, 7. The Spirit Lusts against the Flesh. This is Spiritual
Lust. See Concupisence. Here it is taken in good part.

5 Will and pleasure. Psalm. 27, 14. Give me not to the Lust of mine adversary.

L. Y.
Lie. sig: an officious Lie, is a sin.
Any untruth or falsehood, though unwittingly spoken. This is the largest
signication of a Lie. Romans 9, 1. I speak the truth, and Lie not. Genesis 31, 32,
33.

2 An untruth, conceived and uttered with a purpose to deceive. Ephesians. 4. Lie not
one to another. Acts 5, 3. This is a most strict signification, and contains
under it, all the branches following.

3 Deceitful words and falsehood, in bargains, contracts, and other affairs
of this Life. Such was Abraham's Lie. Gene. 12, ^12. And the Lie of Gehesa. 2
Kings 5, 25. This is a ^iuill Lie in men's matters; and it is either sportfull,
and in jest, or hurtful, and dangerous, or officious, being made in favor of
others, for their help and benefit: This last kind, howsoever it carry a show
of honesty and charity, because it is beneficial to our Neighbor; yet,
indeed and truth, it is evil and damnable; because it is against the
commandment which forbids Lying* and has appearance of evil. Also,
Charity rejoices in the truth, and not in Iniqui^^; And lastly, because we may
not tell a Lie, no no^ in favor, and for the glory of God, much less for the
benefit of man. Job 13, 7. Will you tell a Lie (or talk deceitfully) for God?

4 An untruth or falsehood in matter of doctrine, when some opinion is held
contrary to the word of God. 1. John 2, 21. No Lie is of the truth. Reu. 22,
15. Such as love and make Lies. 2. Tim. 2, 18. This is an heriticall Lie in
matter of Christian doctrine.

5 A counterfeit profession of Religion, when Faith and repentance be
dissembled. 1 John 1, 6. If we say we have fellowship with him and walk in
darkness, we Lie. Romans 3, 4. Such a Liar was Judas, Demas, Ananias and
Saphira, and all Hipocrites, who profess and appear to be that they are not.
This is an Hypocritical Lie, in matter of Christian profession.

6 An Image, Lyingly or falsely representing God. Romans 1, 25. Which turned the
truth of God into a Lie.

Father of Lies. sig:
The first Liar, and author of Lies in others. John 8. See Father.

to Lie unto God. sig:
In speaking of a Lie, to forget that he had to do with God. Acts 5, 4. Thou
have Lied unto God.

Lying words. sig:
Deceitful and false words, which beguile our selves and others. Jeremy 7, 8.
You trust in Lying words.

Liar. sig:
A vain, deceitful, dissembling, unconstant person, speaking otherwise then
he does think, and doing otherwise then he speaks, apt to broach and receive
false opinions. Such an one is every man naturally. Romans 3, 4. Let God be true,
and every man a Liar.

2 One, who accustometh himself to Lies. Reu. 21, 8. And all Liars.

Lion. sig: pro
That which excels all other in courage and strength, being the King of
Beasts, full of fiercenes and violence, given to destroy and devour. D^^. 6,
16. They cast him into a D^^ of Lions. Verse 24. And they brake all their bones
in pieces. 1. Sam. 17, 34, 35.

2 Jesus Christ, who for his invincible courage and fortitude, is likened to a
Lion; as also, for his great might and power, in defending his flock from
bodily and spiritual enemies. Reu. 5, 5. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

3 A King, or mighty Prince, to rule over others. Genesis 49. 9. Judah as a Lion,
etc.

4 Every godly person, for boldness like a Lion. Pro. 28, 1. The righteous is
as bold as a Lion.

5 Satan, or the Devil, who for his extreme fierceness and cruelty, joined
with force to hurt and annoy mankind, is like a Lion. 1 Pet. 5, 6. As a roaring
Lion.

6 Tyrants, and violent oppressors, which for their cruelty, are compared to
Lions. 2. Tim. 4, 17. I was delivered from the mouth of the Lion. Psalm. 10, 9.
Psalm 34, 10.

7 Extreme, fearful, true evils and dangers. Psalm. 91, 13. Thou shall tread
upon the Lion, and the Aspe; that is, thou shall overcome all evils whatsoever.

8 Some great danger pretended, only to keep one from doing his duty. Pro. 22,
13. The sluggard says, there is a Lion in the way.

Lips. sig:
Speech, words, or the act of speaking. Romans 3, 13. The poison of Aspes is
under their Lips; that is, they utter malicious and dangerous words. Pro. 10,
21, 18, 6.

2 The mouth, with faculty and ability, to speak to Gods honor. Psalm. 51,
15. Open thou my Lips.

3 All the Instruments of speech. Psalm. 34, 14. And thy Lips, that they speak
no guile.

Lips of truth. sig:
A true and faithful person, whose words are without deceit and Lies. Prouer.
The Lyps of truth shall be for ever.

Calves of our Lyps. sig:
Thanksgiving and praise offered to God. Ose. 14, 3. So we will render thee
the Calves of our Lyppes.

a lying Lyp. sig:
Deceitful, false, vainglorious, boasting words. Prou. 4, 22. The Lying Lyppe
is abomination to the Lord.

the talk of the Lyppes. sig:
Idle, vain, and bragging words, without action, endeavor, and performance.
Prou. 14, 23. The talk of the Lyps brings one to want.

to refrain the Lyppes. sig:
To govern the tongue wisely, knowing when to keep silence, and when to
speak. Prou. 10, 19. He that refraineth his Lyps is wise.

M. A.
Made. sig: pro
A Causing something to be, which was not before, Acts 4, 24. Thou art God which
made the Heavens. Genesis 1, 26. God made man, etc. Here it respects the work of
creation.

2 A causing a thing to be something, which it was not before. Psalm. 101, 3.
God has made us, not we our selves. Here it respects the work of
regeneration, whereby we become new creatures, being sinners before, and
ungodly.

Magistrate sig:
A person, greater then others, being above others in authority and power. Romans
13, 3. Magistrates are to be feared. Of Magistrates, some be chief, as the
King: Others, be Governors under him, all being sent for the punishment of evil
dooers, and for the praise of them that do well. 1. Pet. 2, 14. Unto the chief
Magistrate, who is called the King, all persons (without exception or
exemption) are to submit in all causes. Romans 13, 1.

Majesty. sig:
The greatness of ear^hly Princes. Ester 1, 4. And the honor of his Majesty.

2 The incomprehensible greatness of God. Jude. 25. To God only wise, be
Glory and Majesty.

to magnify sig:
Not to make great what before was little, but to declare and set forth ones
greatness. Luke. 1, 46.

to Make request. sig:
To cause the believers to Make request, by ingendering prayers aod Godly
desires in them. To. 8, 26. The spirit it self Makes request for us. Gal. 4,
6. compared with Romans 8, 15. does give light to this Interpretation; namely
that the Spirit his crying, is, to cause us to try the action of a faithful
person, being affirmed of God himself, from who^ it comes.

Maliciousness. sig: pro
The whole prauity and naughtiness of sin. James 1, 21. Lay apart all
superfluity of Maliciousness. Romans 1 29. 1. Cor. 5, 8.

2 A particular vice, called Malice, or hatred, which makes us wi^h or work
evil to ones person. 1. Pet. 2, 1. Laying aside envy, Maliciousness.

Man. sig:
A male-childe, grown to ripe age, and full stature.

2 Both man and woman; the better sex used for both sexes. Psalm. 1, 1. Blessed
is the Man.

3 One complete and full of true knowledge of God, and of holiness, without
any the least want or defect. Ephe. 4, 13. To meet together to a perfect Man.

4 One, that is manly, strong, and valourous. 1. Cor. 16, 11. Quite your selves
like Men.

5 A Magistrate. Genesis 9, 16. By Man his blood be shed.

6 A certain man whosoever. Math. 16, 20. What shall it profit a man, etc.

7 A particular person. Math. 12, 45. The end of that Man.

8 The corruptions and errors of human Nature. Math. 15, 9. Men's precepts.
Romans 3, 4. And very often [ Men] does signify perverse and wicked men. Mat.
10, 17, 22. Hated of all Men.

9 The Church, gathered, as it were, into one body, out of Jews and Gentiles.
Ephe. 2, 15. Make of twain, one new man in himself.

10 The body, which is but one part of a Man. 2. Cor. 4, 16. Though our outward
man perish.

11 Christ Jesus, who is called man, by an excellency. Mark 15, 39. This man
is the son of God. Also it signifies an Angel, appearing in form of a man.
Genesis 32, 24. A man wrestled with him.

12 A son. Math. 10, 35. I am come to set a man at variance against his
Father.

13 An Husband. 1. Cor. 11, 3. The Man is the woman's head.

son of Man sig:
One, that is a very man, descended of mankind, being partaker truly of man's
Nature. Math. 16, 13. What do they say, that I the son of man am?

Good Man sig:
A Man, endued with spiritual good, ready to do good to many. Acts. 11, 24.
For he was a Good Man.

Man of god sig:
An Interpreter of the will of God, as the Minister of the word is. 2. Tim. 3,
17. That the Man of God may be absolute.

inner Man, and new Man sig:
The whole person, body and soul, with all faculties, so far as they be
regenerate by the spirit. Rom, 7, 22. I delight in the Law of God, concerning
the Inner man. It is called the New-man. Col. 3, 10. partly because the quality
of holiness, given by grace of regeneration, comes in after our old deformity
and corruption; and partly, because it makes us new creatures, begetting in us,
as it were, another new Nature.

spiritual Man. sig:
One, who being borne anew by the Spirit, is led and governed by the same. 1.
Cor. 2, 15. He which is spiritual, discerns all things.

Old Man. sig:
The unregenerate part of our Nature, as it is corrupt with sin. Romans 6, 6.
Knowing that your Old Man is crucified with him. This is called [ Old] because
it is ancient, even from and since the time of Adam. Secondly, because it is in
every elect person, before their New Birth. And it is called [ Man] to show,
how near sin and corruption cleaues unto us, being even as the man himself.
And also, that it is a thing subsisting, and forcible, even strong as a man.

Man of sin. sig:
Antichrist, a man wholly co^pounded of sin, loving and striving mightily and
cunningly how to commit and maintain sin in himself and others. 2. These. 2,
3. And that that man of sin be disclosed.

natural Man. sig:
A person, endued with no other light of soul then that which is natural. 1.
Cor. 2, 14. The Natural man perceiues not the things of God. Jude. 19.

man of war sig:
A great and valiant Warrior, subduing his enemies before him. Ex. 15, 3. The
Lord is a man of war.

2 Persons apt and fit for war. Deuteronomy. 2, 14. Till the men of war were
wasted.

man of blood Man of death. sig:
That is, a blood-thirsty man, or a murderer. 2. Sa. 16, 7

One guilty or worthy of death: 1. Kings 2, 26. For thou art a man of death.

Man of Beliall. sig:
A wicked man. 1. Kings 21, 13. And there came to him wicked men, or men of
Beliall.

a Man of renown. sig:
A man that is very famous and renowned. Genesis 6, 4. They were men of renown.

Manna. sig: pro
Bread given from heaven, by the ministry of Angels. John 6, 32. Our Fathers
ate Manna. Psalm. 78, 25. Man did eat the Bred of Angels. This is corporal and
Typical Manna.

2 Christ Jesus. Revel. 2, 17. To him that ouercomes, will I give the hidden
Manna. Christ is called Manna, because he is the bread that came down from
heaven, the only soule-food. And he is called, hidden Manna, because no man
can have this bread by Nature; and it is revealed to none but to Gods children.

Manifest. sig:
Easy to be known, being always open to every man's understanding. Gal. 5, 19.
The works of the flesh be manifest.

2 Declared, and made known, being kept secret before in the Counsel of God.
2. Tim. 1, 9. But now is made manifest. 1. Tim. 3, 16.

Many. sig:
All men, and every man which comes of Adam. To. 5, 19. By the disobedience of
one, many are made sinners.

2 Not a few, but a great number, or all believers only. Romans 5, 19. By the
obedience of one, Many shall be made righteous. Mat. 26, 27. Which is shed for
Many. These Many are all believers; which are not a few, but Many, being simply
considered, and vncomparatiuely. See Revel. 7, 6, 7.

Marriage. sig:
A lawful knitting or joining together of one man, and one woman, in
vndiuidable fellow-ship, for remedy of lust, comfort of life, and bringing
forth of Children. Heb. 13, 4. Marriage is honorable. Math. 19, 3, 4, 5. This
is civil Marriage and worldly, which by the word of God is allowed, to all
orders and sorts of men, without exception.

2 The uniting of every elect soul to Christ, by the spirit, and faith, which
is done now in part only, but perfectly shall be done at the last Judgment.
Hosea 2, 20. I will even Marry thee to my self in faithfulness. Revel. 19, 7.
The Marriage of that Lamb is come. This is spiritual marriage.

3 The conjunction of God and the visible church, upon earth, by the band of
his holy worship. See Ezech. throughout the 16. Chapter. And Iere. 3, 1, 2.
Hence is God called a Jealous God. And the Church observing his worship, is
called his Spouse or Wife; but swaruing from his worship to Idols, she is
termed an Harlot, an Whore, and charged with Fornications and Whoredoms; and
finally, ^reatned and plagued with divorce and separation from God her husband;
as Israel was first, and Judah after.

The lawful joining of man and wife, is vndeuideable, Note.
according to the institution of God. Yet it has two exceptions: one, of
Adultry, by Christ. Math. 19, 5. The other, of wilful desertion by Paul. 1.
Cor. 7, 15.

Mark. sig:
A Token or sign. Revel. 13, 16. To receive a Mark in their right hand and
fore-heades. Allowance of, and subscription to, the false Doctrine and false
worship of the Romish Sinagogue; is a mark, sign, and Token, of the servant
of Antichrist.

Martyr. sig: pro
Any witness, which by his testimony confirms any truth.

2 Such a witness, as gives his life unto death for the name of Jesus, to
testify the truth of his Doctrine by his blood. Revel. 2, 13. My faithful
Martyr Antipas,

Master. sig:
One, that has rule over servants. Ephesians. 6, 5. Col. 4, 1. Ye Masters, do
unto your servants that which is just.

2 Any Teacher or Minister of the Word, who for reverence sake, is called
Master. Math. 8, 19. Master I will follow thee where ever thou go.

3 Such, as ambitiously affect rule and superiority over others. James 3, 1.
Be not many Masters. Math. 23, 8, 16.

Mass Popish. sig:
Neither this word, nor the subject, matter, and thing, signified by it, is to
be found in all the Old or new Testament; and in truth, it is a mass of most
horrible sins: as invocation to Saints, intercession of Saints; adoration of
Creatures; profanation of Scriptures, and of the Lords Supper; delusion and
mocking the people, with idle and superstitious shows; and inumerable other
wickednesses to be abhorred.

M. E.
Meat. sig: pro
Something prepared to eat for bodily nourishment. Luke 24, 41, Have you here
any Meat?

2 Christ his flesh crucified. John 6, 55. My flesh is Meat indeed; that is,
the true and effectual food to the faithful soul. John 6, 27. What Meat is
to the body, that is Christ to our soul.

3 Something, which is as pleasant, dear, and delightful to us, as our Meat
is. John 4, 32, 34. My Meat is, that I may do the will of him that sent me.

Strange Meats. sig:
The doctrine of the word, deeply, exactly, and largely taught and entreated
of. Heb. 5, 13. Strong Meat belongs to them that are of age.

Measure. sig:
Some kind of Vessel appointed by common consent, to Mete and deliver out a
certain rate and proportion of Corn, Wine, Oil, or the like, at a certain
price. Leuit. 19, 35. Do not unjustly in measure.

two Measures. sig:
A small and great measure; one for Friends and Neighbors; another for Enemies
and Strangers. One to buy withal, and another to sell withal. Deu. 25, 4.
Thou shall not have diverse Measures, etc.

With what Measure you Mete, etc. sig:
Such dealing shall be requited to us, as we use toward others. Math. 7, 2.
With what Measure you Mete, it shall be measured to you again.

to fulfill the Measure of their fathers. sig:
To follow the sins of their Ancestors, going on to do evil as they did,
till at length their wickedness comes to the full. Math. 23, 32. Fulfill ye
also the Measure of your Fathers.

a perfect Measure. sig:
An equal Measure, free from deceit and wrong. Deutro. 25, 15. A perfect and
just Measure shall thou have.

full Measure pressed down, etc. sig:
Plentifully, richly, exceeding abundantly shall God deal with such as give
liberally to his Children. Luke 6, 38. Give, and it shall be given to you full
measure, pressed down.

a Measure of Wheat. sig:
An ordinary portion and small quantity of Wheat, used to be given as a stint
for one day. Reu. 6, 6. A Measure of Wheat for a Penny.

Mediator. sig:
A Middle person, that comes between two other persons that be at variance,
to be a mean of atonement and peace. Gal. 3, 20. A Mediator, is not a
Mediator of one.

2 One that came between the Lord and his people, to declare unto them the
word of the Lord. Thus was Moses a Mediator at the giving of the Law. Gal. 3,
19. And it was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

3 A reconciler or Peacemaker, between God and elect Sinners. 1 Timothy 2, 4.
There is one Mediator between God and Man. Col. 1, 20. Peace being made by
the blood of his Cross. Thus is Christ alone our Mediator, both of Redemption
and Intercession: for he alone, both has made peace for us, and does maintain
it perpetually.

one Mediator. sig:
One alone, or one only, and no more, by whose intercession, our Prayers
please God. 1 Timothy 2, 5. There is one God, and one Mediator. What becomes of
the many Mediators, set up by the Romish Sinagogue, by a rotten distinction;
of Mediator, of Redemption, and Intercession?

to meditate sig: pro
To Muse, and think earnestly upon any matter which we desire to know
thoroughly.

2 To ponder and seriously think upon, either the word of God, that we may
understand and practice it, or upon the just and merciful works of God, to
be humbled or comforted by them. Psalm. 1, 2. And in his Law does he Meditate
day and night. Psalm. 77, 12. I will Meditate all thy works. Psalm 119, 99, 97.

Mediation, What?

It is an action or work of the Soul, bending it self often, earnestly, and
orderly, to think upon a thing; and it is either of Gods word or works.

Meditation of Gods word, what?

It is a frequent, earnest, and orderly thinking upon that, which we read or
hear, to search it out. First, whether we understand the meaning of it.
Secondly, whether we have found proofs of it. Thirdly, how we may remember that
we do understand. Fourthly, how we may make use of it for comfort,
instruction, etc.

Meditation of Gods works, what?

It is a stirring up of our Souls to trust and love: to fear and obey God, at
the sight or hearing of some work, either of his Mercy or Justice. Acts 5, 11
And great fear came on al the^ that heard these things.

Meek. sig:
Such persons as are not easily provoked by injuries, but rather suffer wrongs
peaceably, studying how to overcome evil with good. Math. 5, 5. Blessed are
the Meek. Romans 12, 19, 20, 21. Number. 12, 3. But Moses was a Meek Man.

2 Godly persons, which quietly yield their reason and will, to be obedient to
the direction and wisdom of the word. Psalm. 25, 8. He will teach the humble
and Meek. Psalm: 147. 6.

Meekness. sig: pro
A gift of God, enabling us to suffer abuses and injuries from men, without
desire of revenge. Col. 3, 12, 13. Put on Meekness.

2 A quiet and willing submission of our judgment and affections to the rules
of the word. James 1, 21. And receive with Meekness the word, etc.

Member. sig: pro
Any part of a natural body. 1 Cor. 12, 26. If one Member suffer, etc.

2 Every faculty of Soul and Body. Romans 6, 12. Give your Members. Romans 7, 23.

3 Every sinful Lust annexed to our corrupt Nature, as a Member to a Body.
Col. 3, 5. Mortify your Members on Earth.

4 Every Christian faithful Man or Woman, knit to Christ their head by a
lively Faith as his Members. 1 Cor. 12, 17. Now ye are the body of Jesus
Christ, and Members for your part.

to give our Members. sig:
To present all our powers and faculties of mind and body (as a Servant
presents himself before his Lord) ready to take command and charge. Romans 6,
19. As you have given your Members Servants to sin, so give your Members
Servants to righteousness.

Members on Earth. sig:
Earthly, sensual, and corrupt affections, which are as Members of our
sinful Nature, to serve it, and show forth their force in the Members of our
bodies. Col. 3, 5.

Memory. sig: pro
The faculty of the Soul, whereby we remember and call to mind things past;
or keep in mind things against time to come.

2 Memorial, Name, or report, which causes one to be had in Memory. Prou. 10,
7. The Memory of the just shall be blessed. Psalm. 34, 16. To cut off their
Memory from the Earth.

Mercy, as it is referred to Men. sig:
Grief and sorrow of our hearts for other men's sins and miseries, whereby we
are moved to help and pity them if we may. Luke 10, 37. He that had Mercy on
him. In Mercy. There is the affection of pity, and effect of help and succor.

2 That clemency and favor, which Kings and other Magistrates show unto good
Subjects for their encouragement in well doing. Psalm 101, 1. I will sing of
Mercy and Judgment. Proverb. 20, 28. By Mercy and Truth is the Kings Throne
established.

3 All duties of Charity toward our Neighbor, by a Sinedoche. Math. 9, 13. I
will have mercy, and not Sacrifice.

4 Kindnesses and benefits bestowed to the hurt of others. Pro. 12, 10. But the
Mercies of the wicked are cruel.

Mercy, as it is referred to God.
5 The Diuine-Essence, inclining it self to pity, and relieve the miseries of
all his Creatures: but more peculiarly of his elect Children. Psalm. 100, 5. His
Mercy is everlasting. Psalm 145, 9. His Mercies are over all his works.

6 Grace. Jude 2. Mercy and peace be multiplied unto you.

7 All the benefits of God, both bodily and spiritual: which be called
Mercies, because they come from his Mercy and good will. Romans 9, 18. He has
Mercy on whom he will. 1. Tim. 1, 13. I found Mercy, because I did it
ignorantly. In both these places [ Mercy] is put for a calling to Christ, and
all Graces, which follow calling. Also Psalm 136. Throughout: by Mercy; Is
signified the blessings which proceed from his Mercies.

8 Eternal bliss in Heaven, as the chief fruit of Mercy. 2. Tim. 1, 18. That
he may find Mercy at that day.

In the Mercy of God, consider: First, the decree. Note.
Secondly, the Act according to the decree. A decreed Mercy, and an executed or
exercised Mercy. Romans 9, 15.

Merciful. sig:
A pitiful person, easily moved to grieve at the miseries of other, and to
succor them. Luke 6, 36. Be ye Merciful, as your heavenly Father is
Merciful.

Father of Mercyes. sig:
One, who is in himself most pitiful, and Author of all Mercy in all men. 2
Cor. 1, 3. Father of Mercies.

To have Mercy. sig:
To execute and perform the whole counsel of election upon the Vessels of
Mercy, by bringing them into the World, by calling, inwardly and outwardly, by
justifying, sanctifying, etc. Romans 9, 18. He has Mercy, etc.

Bowels of Mercy. sig:
Most inward and tender affections; or most near touch and feeling of the
miseries of others. Luke 1, 78. Through the bowels of the Mercy of our GOD.
Coloss. 3, 12. Put on the Bowels of Mercy.

Uessels of Mercy. sig:
The elect. Romans 9, 23. Upon the Vessels of Mercy; that is, such, upon whom God
has decreed to show Mercy unto eternal Salvation.

to Merit. sig: pro
To make something due to us, which was not due; or of less due, to be more
due.

2 To deserve something of God, by the worthiness of the thing done. Thus
Christ alone Meriteth, because there is an equal proportion between his
perfect righteousness, and the merit of it, which is aeternall glory. Revel.
5, 12.

3 To obtain and get a thing. Thus the fathers often use this word in their
writings: and thus, all Christians in a good sense, may be said to merit,
because good works, at last obtain Heavenly bliss, though they cannot merit
it by desert.

This word [ Merit] is not found in Scripture, but Note.
the matter signified by it, both for the second and third signification, is
found there. Acts. 20, 28. Ephe. 1, 14. Math. 25, 30, 31, 32.

M. I.
Milk. sig: pro
A kind of food which we have from Kine and Sheep, to nourish Babes and
children withal.

2 The Doctrine of the Gospel, easily taught unto the capacity of such as be
children in understanding. Heb. 5, 12. Ye have need of Milk; that is, of the
Catechismes or beginnings.

3 The Doctrine of the word delivered, howsoever; either exactly, or easily;
profoundly, or plainly. 1. Pet. 2, 1. Desire the sincere Milk of the word.

4 The graces of the holy Spirit, which are as necessary to a heavenly life,
as Milk is to this natural life. Esaias 55, 1. Come buy of me Wine and milk.
Metaphors.

Mil-stone. sig:
Either a stone in a Mil to grind corn withal; or any thing whereby a man
gets his living, by a Sinecdothe. Deuteronomy. 24, 6. No man shall take the upper
Mil-stone to pledge.

2 Some severe punishment for a notable crime. Math. 18, 6. Better a Millstone
were hung about his neck, etc.

the Mind. sig:
That part of the soul, whereby we understand and conceive things, called
the understanding. Titus 4, 15. Even their minds are defiled. Col. 1, 21. Your
Minds were set in evil works.

2 The whole faculties of the soul, both understanding, reason, will, and
affections, as they are renewed by grace. Romans 7, 25. I serve the Law of God
in my mind.

3 A thought, cogitation, or purpose. Mat. 22, 27. Love the Lord with all thy
Mind.

Mind of Christ. sig:
The whole truth of the word concerning Christ. ^. Cor. 2, 16. We have the
Mind of Christ. Christ's Mind being otherwise unsearchable (as our mind and
thought is) is made known to us by the scriptures, through the Holy Ghost,
opening our wits to understand them.

will of the Mind. sig:
Evil reasonings, thoughts, and desires, which arise from our minds, being
corrupted with sin. Ephe. 2, 3. In fulfilling the will of the Mind.

Minister. sig:
A person appointed to serve the Commonwealth, in ministering Justice for the
punishment of vice, and praise of well-dooers. Romans 13, 2. He is a Minister of
God for thy welfare.

2 A person ordained to serve the Church in To offer up propitiatory Sacrifice
for fin, no part of ministers duty
administering the holy things thereof. 1. Cor. 4, 1. We are the Ministers of
Christ.

to Minister unto the Lord. sig:
To serve God in preaching the word. Thus Chrysostom expounds it. Act 13, 3.
Now as they ministered to the Lord.

Ministry, what it is.

It is a public and sacred function, wherein men furnished with meet gifts,
and duly called, do serve God and his Church, by dispensing and giving forth,
faithfully and wisely, the word, Sacraments, and other holy things, to the
gathering of the Saints, and for the edification of the body of Jesus Christ,
until we meet all in heaven. Ephesians. 4, 11, 12, 13. This function is wickedly
turned in the Romish Sinagogue, into a Sacrificing Priesthood, of man's
devising, being no more like the ministry of the Gospel, then darkness to
light.

Ministering spirits. sig:
The blessed Angels, sent forth to Minister for their sakes, which shall be
heirs of eternal salvation. Heb. 1, 14. Are they not all ministering spirits,
etc.

Ministration. sig:
Distribution of Alms to the poor. Acts 6, 1, 2. The widows were neglected
in the daily Ministration. 2. Cor. 8, 4.

Mirror. sig: pro
A clear and bright glass, wherein we look upon our faces, to behold our
selves in them.

2 The Doctrine of the Gospel, wherein Christ is manifestly and effectually to
be seen and looked upon. 2. Cor. 3, 18. We do behold, as in a Mirror, the
glory of the Lord.

Miracles. sig:
Some strange works done by divine power, contrary to the ordinary course of
nature. John 2, 11. This is the first Miracle that Jesus did. Miracles are
wrought for two ends: First, to cause the beholders to wonder: Secondly, to
confirm our faith in Jesus Christ. Mark 16. verse last.

Mystery. sig:
A thing kept secret and hid from our understanding, till it be revealed to
us. 1. Cor. 2, 7. We speak the wisdom of God in a Mystery, even hidden
wisdom. The whole Doctrine of Christ.

2 The vocation of the Gentiles, which is called a Mystery, because it was hid
and kept secret from many Ages. Romans 16, 25.

3 The spiritual union between Christ and his Church. This is called a
Mystery, because it exceeds human understanding, and is revealed only to
Gods children. Ephe. 5, 32. This is a great Mystery, but I speak of Christ and
his Church. Foolishly then, and ignorantly, do Papists hence gather their
Sacrament of Marriage. For not the conjunction of man and wife, but of Christ
and his Church, is a Mystery.

Mystery of iniquity. sig:
False Doctrine, and corrupt worship, cloaked and covered with the name of
Christ, and of Christian Religion* 2. These* 2, 7. The Mystery of Iniquity does
already work.

Mystery of godliness. sig:
The Doctrine of free salvation through faith only, in the blood of Christ, or
the whole Doctrine of Christianity. 1. Tim. 2, 16. Great is the Mystery of
Godliness. 1. Cor. (...) Math. 11, 25. 1. Cor. 2, 10, 14.

M. O.
Mock. sig:
A bitter taun^ or scornfullieast, either for some natural infirmity, or for
piety sake. In the former kind, the children Mocked Elizeus. 2. Kings 2, 23.
C^^e up Bald-head. In the latter kind, Is^aell Mocked Isaac. Genesis 21, 19.
Sarah saw Ismaell mocking. This is called persecution. Gal. 4, 29. Thus Jews
and Gentiles mocked Christ.

Modesty. sig:
That grace of the Spirit, which enableth Christians, so to moderate their
affections, as that they keep a comely mean in all parts of their behavior.
Acts 20, 19. Serving the Lord with all modesty.

Moloch. sig:
An Idol of the Ammonites, shaped like to a man, being made hollow within,
having seven Clossets. It was made of Copper; and the Israelites offered their
sons and daughters unto it. Leuit. 18, 21. Offer not thy children to Moloch.
See Bible-note upon this place.

2 Any kind of Idol whatsoever, by a Sinecdoche. Leuit. 20, 2.

Moon. sig:
That great light, which puts difference between nights and days; and bounds
years and months by her course. Psalm. 121, 6. Nor the Moon by night. Genesis 1.

2 The world, and all earthly things, which for their changeableness, are
likened to the Moon. Revel. 12, 1. The Moon was under her feet. A Metaphor.

to turn the moon into blood. sig:
To give some fearful token of divine wrath, as if the course of Nature
should be altered. Acts. 2, 10. The Moon shall be turned into blood. The same
thing is meant, by the darkening of the sun and Moon. A Metaphor.

Morning. sig:
That part of the day, which is first after the rising of the Sun. Mark 16, 2.

2 An whole Artificial day. Sinechdoche. Genesis 1, 5.

Morning and Evening. sig:
A natural day, consisting of day and night. A Sinecdoche. Genesis 1, 5. The
Morning and the evening were the first day.

in the Morning. sig:
The time of the Resurrection, when Christ the Sun of righteousness shall
arise, to the full comfort of the chosen. Psalm. 49, 15.

every Morning. sig:
Daily, or from one day to another. Lament. 3, 23. Thy mercies are renewed
every Morning.

early in the morning. sig:
Seasonably, and in due time. Psalm. 5, 3. Early in the Morning (O Lord) thou
shall hear my voice.

2 Quickly, speedily, and in short time. Psalm. 30, 5. Joy comes in the morning.
Psalm. 90, 5.

3 Diligently, with great study and care. 2. Chro. 36, 15. Rising Early, etc.

the outgoings of the mornings and Euenings. sig:
The whole course of the day, and all things that fall out in it. Psalm. 65, 8.
The outgoings of the euenings and the Mornings, praise thee.

More abundantly. sig:
More then was needful, were it not for the wickedness of men, who will not
believe God. Heb. 6, 17. God willing, More abundantly, etc.

from Morning to evening. sig:
Every hour, moment, and minute of time. Job 4, 20. From morning to Evening,
they be destroyed; that is, every moment they hasten to death.

to take the wings of y^ Morning. sig:
To use exceeding great speed and celerity, doing a thing so suddenly, as
the beams of the Sun are scattered thorough the Air. Psalm. 139, 8.

to Mortify. sig:
To kill, and to break the strength and rage of sin, by the spirit. Romans 8,
13. Ifye Mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, you shall live. Colos.
3, 5.

Mortification, what it is?

It is that work or action of the spirit of God, in the heart of a sanctified
man, enabling him by little and little, to crucify and destroy the Old Man,
with all his affections and lusts, which be either in his reason or will, till
they be wholly abolished and taken away at the time of our death. Se^ Romans 6,
5, 6, 7.

Mortality. sig:
An estate subject to death. 1. Cor. 15, 53. This Mortal, must put on
immortality.

Moses. sig: pro
A person so called, being a singular Prophet, by whom the Law was given.

2 The Books and writings of Moses. Luke 16, 29. They have Moses, and the
Prophets. John 5, 45.

Mote. sig: pro
A thing so small, that it cannot be divided into parts.

2 Either some small sin espied and resisted, or some great sin unknown
and hidden from our sight. Math. 7, 3. Let me pull the Mote out of thy eye. A
lesser sin, willingly and wittingly continued in, is a beam, when a great
sin (as Polygamie of the Fathers) not disce^ned to be a sin, is but a Mote.

Mother. sig: pro
One, that bears children naturally. Thus was Sarah, Isaacks Mother; and
Marie, Christ's Mother.

2 One, that brings forth children spiritually. Thus Jerusalem which is
above, is said to be the Mother of us all. Gal. 4, 26.

3 One, that cares for, instructs, and defends others, as a Mother her
children. Thus is Deborah called a Mother in Israel. Judge. 5* 7. That is, a
Governor which bare a Motherly affection.

4 Ancient women, which excel in years. 1. Tim. 5, 2. The elder women, as
Mothers.

5 A Stepmother, and one that is to be honored, loved, and cherrished as a
Mother. The fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy mother. John 19, 27.
Behold thy Mother.

6 One, that is near and dear unto Christ (as a Mother to the child.) Math.
12, 50. They that do the will of my Father, they are my mother, and my
brethren.

Mother of us all. sig:
The holy invisible Catholic Church, which (as a common Mother) brings
forth children into the Christian world. Gal. 4, 26.

Nurcing Mothers. sig:
Queens, and Princesses: which like Nurcing Mothers, foster and maintain the
Church of God by their authority and good Laws. Isai. 49, 23.

the Mother of whoredoms. sig:
The Author, inuenter, and cherrisher of superstitions and Idolatries (which
are spiritual whoredoms.) Revel. 17, 8. Mother of whoredoms and abominations.

Mountains sig: pro
The highest places of the earth. Prou. 8, 25. Ere the Mountains were.
Mountains have eminency and firmness, they be high and immovable or
lasting.

2 Great men, and Rulers. Ps. 72, 3. The mountains may bring peace. Esaias Tell
the Mountains, etc. Potentates of the earth are exalted as Mountains, and
think themselves strong.

3 Arrogant and proud Tyrants, swollen like Mountains, with ambition. Job. 9,
5. God translateth Mountains, and overthrows them in his wrath.

4 The invisible, even the holy Catholic Church, eminent and dureable as a
Mount. Psalm. 15, 1. and 1, 25, 1.

5 The visible Church. Esaias 2, 3. Let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord.

Mountains and valleys. sig:
Men of all sorts, high and low, rich and poor. Esaias 40, 4. Ualeyes shall be
exalted, and all Mountains and hills shall be brought low. Luke 1, 16, 17.

Mountain of God. sig:
Horeb, where God appeared to Moses, and gave his Law to the people. Exodus 3, 1.

Mourning. sig:
A godly grief or sorrow, for our own or for the sins of others. Mat. 5, 4.
Blessed are they that Mourn.

2 A moderate sorrow, for the worldly euilles that do befall our selves or
others. Mat. 2, 18. Mourning, and weeping. Genesis 23, 2. To Mourn for Sarah.

3 Unmeasurable and grievous lamentation and heaviness, expressed by smiting
the body, tearing the hair, renting the Garments, etc. Math. 24, 30. Genesis 37,
35.

4 Judgments, and calamities, which cause Mourning, by a Metanimie. Eze. 2,
10. Mourning, lamentation, and woe.

Mouth. sig:
That part of the body, which is the Instrument of speech.

2 Speech or words uttered by the mouth, which is the Instrument of speech.
Esaias 49, 2. He has made my Mouth like a sharp sword; that is, my words were
as sharp and piercing as a sword. Psalm. 73, 9. They set their Mouth against
heaven.

to be with ones mouth sig:
To instruct and teach one, what, and how to speak. Exodus 4, 12. I will be
with thy Mouth.

Mouth of the Lord. sig:
The Lord himself, revealing and opening his will unto the people. Esaias 40, 5.
The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Augustine, by the Mouth of the Lord,
understands Christ the son of God, who declared his father unto us. John 1, 18.

breath of his Mouth. sig:
The Doctrine of the Gospel, uttered by the Ministers thereof. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 8.
Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit or breath of his mouth.

rod or staff of his Mouth. sig:
The mighty and powerful word of God. Esaias 11, 4. He shall smite the earth
with the rod of his Mouth.

Mouth of the earth. sig:
Earth it self, taking in (as a mouth) the blood of Abell to hide it. Genesis 4,
11. The Earth opened her Mouth.

to open the Mouth. sig:
To begin to speak, or to make an entrance into speech, after good
deliberation taken. Math. 5, 1. Then Jesus opened his Mouth. Acts 10, 34. Peter
opened his mouth.

2 To restore the use of speech. Luke 1, 64. His mouth was opened immediately.

to stop the Mouth. sig:
To put to silence, or to make dumb, through astonishment of Gods works. Job.
5, 16. Iniquity shall stop her Mouth. Psalm. 107, 42.

Mouth of wickedness. sig:
A very wicked man, which with his Mouth speaks forth wicked things. Psalm.
107, 42.

M. U.
Multitude. sig:
The greatest and mightiest men, which by might bear down right, oppressing
the poor by fraud or force. Exodus 23, 2. Thou shall not follow a Multitude to
do evil.

2 The common people, or vulgar sort of men, because they are the greatest
number. Math. 9, 8. When the Multitude saw it.

Multitude of people. sig:
Abundance or great store of people. Prou. 14, 28. In the Multitude of people
is the honor of a King. But multitude of people, is no note and mark of a true
Church; for so much as many walk in the broad way, whereas few walk in the
strait way.

Murder. sig:
The taking away of man's life unlawfully. Romans 1, 29. Full of Murder.

2 All cruelty in deed, word, or thought. Exo. 20, 13. Thou shall not murder. 1
John 3, 15. He that hates his Brother in his heart, is a Murderer. A
Sinecdoche.

Murmr. sig:
A grutching discontented person, which is displeased with Gods dispensation
and dealing. 1 Cor. 10, 10. Neither Murmr ye, as some of your fathers
Murmured. Math. 20, 11.

to Murmur sig:
To grieve in mind secretly, for want of some good thing which we desire; or
for feeling some evil things which we would not have. 1. Cor. 10, 10.

to Muzsle. sig:
To deny and keep back, meat and maintenance from Laborers: men, or
beasts. Deuteronomy. 25, 4. 1. Cor. 9, 9. Thou shall not Muzsle the mouth of the Ox.

Must. sig:
A necessity of that thing, whereunto it is applied. Heb. 9, 16. Where there is
a Testament, there must be the death of him, etc. Acts 12, 22. We must thorough
many afflictions, enter into Heaven.

2 A duty, and that which ought to be. 2. Tim. 2, 6. The Husbandman must
labor, before he receive the fruit.

N. A.
Naked. sig:
ONE that is void of all Clothing to cover his body. Genesis 2, 25. Adam was
Naked, and was not ashamed.

2 One, that has laid aside and put off the chief of his Garments. 1. Sam.
19, 24. Saul fell down Naked; that is, he put off his kingly apparel.

3 One, which lacks Christ, the wedding and best Garment. Revel. 3, 17. Thou
art poor and Naked; that is, void of Christ and his Graces.

4 Such as want the favor and protection of God, which is our best covering.
Exodus 32, 25. When Moses saw the people Naked.

5 One, which is not yet clad with immortal glory. 2 Corin. 5, 3. We shall not
be found Naked.

Nakedness sig:
Lack of bodily clothing, in whole or in part. 2 Cor. 11, 27. And in
Nakedness.

2 Want of Christ Jesus, his Merits, and Graces of his Spirit: which are the
Souls deckinges and ornaments. Reave. 3, 18. That thou may hide thy filthy
Nakedness. This is spiritual Nakedness.

Name. sig: pro
That, whereby one person is known from another; as Peter, Paul, etc. Mat. 1,
21. His Name shall be Jesus. Luke 1, 6. He shall be called John.

2 Testimony, or report given of any Man, which if it be for good things, and
given by good Men, then it is a good Name; otherwise, it is an evil Name.
Prou. 2^, 1. A good Name is better then riches. This is that, whereby we are
made known and manifest to others, as Men by their Names.

3 Our selves, or our own persons. Luke 10, 20. Rejoice, that your Names be
written in the Book of Life; that is, that ye are known before, and loved of
God from everlasting. Reave. 21, ver. last.

4 Honor, renown, praise, or glory. Deutro. 26, 19. To make thee high above
all Nations in Name.

5 Appearance, show, and seeming. Revel. 3, 1. Thou have a Name to live.

6 Memory, mention. Prou. His Name shall be put out.

7 The most Noble and powerful Creatures in Heaven and Earth. Acts 4, 12.
There is given none other Name under Heaven. Ephe. 1, 21. Above all Names.

8 Great excellency and Dignity. Phil. 2, 9. And given him a Name, etc,

9 Knowledge. Romans 1, 5. For his Name among the Gentiles.

Name, when it is referred to God. sig:
Any thing, whereby God and his will is made better known to us. Thus his
Titles; as God, Jehovah, Lord, etc. Also, his properties; as Mercy, Goodness,
Truth: his works, his word, his Sacraments, his Religion, his doctrine; All
these are his Name. Exodus 20, 7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord, etc.
Exodus 3, 18. This is my Name for ever. And 33, 19. and 34, 6, 7. Psalm. 8, 1.
John 17, 26. 1 Timothy 6, 1. Elsewhere often.

2 The aid and help of God. Psalm. 44, 5. In thy Name we shall tread down
our Enemies. 1 Samuel 17, 45. I go against him in the Name of my God.

3 His honor, renown, and glory. Psalm 76, 1. His Name is great in Israel.

4 The renowned virtue and power of God. Mat. 7, 22. In thy Name, etc.

Name of Christ, of Jesus, of lord, of God sig:
Christ, or Jesus himself, or God himself. Acts 9, 14, 16. Psalm. 124, 7, 22.
Tim. 2, 19. The meaning hereof, is, to admonish us to seek to understand no
more of God and of Christ, then is made known unto us in the word.

my Name shall be in him. sig:
Christ, to be very true God, Coessentiall with his Father: also, his lively
Image by whom he is known; and lastly, his Vicegerent authorized to be Lord
and Ruler over his people. Exodus 23, 21. Because my Name is in him.

to give ought for the Name of Christ. sig:
To entertain one for the love and sake of Christ, because he honors him.
Mark 9, 41. Whosoever shall give a Cup of cold Water for my Name.

In the Name of a Prophet, disciple, righteous man. sig:
As a Prophet, as a Disciple, as a righteous man, because they be such. Math.
10, 41, 42. He that receives a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, etc.

A Name, above every Name. sig:
Such dignity and renown, as far excels all earthly and heavenly dignity
and renown, whatsoever is in any Creature. Ephe. 1, 21. He has given him a
Name above every Name.

to come in the name of the Lord. sig:
To be sent of God, or to come from him, furnished with Divine authority as his
peculiar Messenger. Mark 11, 9. Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the
Lord.

to be baptized in the name of the Father, etc. sig:
To be dedicate, and set apart by Baptism unto God, as his peculiar people and
worshippers. Mat. 28, 19. Go teach all Nations, and Baptize them in the Name
of the Father, of the Son, and Holie-Ghost.

to be baptized in the Name of Christ. sig:
To give our Names to Christ by Baptism, and therein to be made partakers of
his death, burial, and resurrection. Acts 8, 16. They were only Baptized in
the Name of Christ. Acts 19, 5.

Name of blasphemy. sig:
One full of Blasphemies against God, against goodness, and against good men.
Revel. 13, 1. And upon his head a Name of Blaspemies.

to be Named with ones Name. sig:
To be taken and accounted for ones Child, no less then if he were borne of
him. Gene. 48, 16. Let my Name be Named upon them.

New Name: See New. sig:
The Child of God. Revel. 2, 17. I will give unto him a new Name. Some others
expound it of the spiritual benefits of Christ, and the dignity that follows
them.

Nature. sig:
Our state by birth, being borne into the World corrupt and sinful. Ephe. 2,
3. We are by Nature children of Wrath; that is, such to whom the wrath and
judgment of GOD is due, even from our Birth, through the guilt of that
corruption, which by sin fell into our Nature. Romans 11, 24. Wild by Nature;
that is, by impurity and uncleanness of Nature.

2 Sensuality. 2 Pet. 2, 12. As Natural brute Beasts.

3 A prerogative gotten by Birth, or Natural descent and generation. Gala. 2,
15. We which are Jews by Nature.

4 Natural reason or judgment, showing men what is honest, what dishonest.
Romans 2, 14. Gentiles do by Nature things contained in the Law.

5 A long continued and commonly received custom. 1. Corin. 11, 14. Does not
Nature teach you? etc.

6 In truth, or in very deed. Gala. 4, 8. Ye did service to them, which by
Nature are no Gods; that is, not Gods indeed and truly, but by opinion and
estimation of Men.

7 Godly qualities and good dispositions put into our Nature, by Divine power.
2 Pet. 2, 4. Partakers of the Divine Nature; that is, of righteousness and true
holiness, wherein we resemble God, as Children their Father.

8 Essence or substance. Hebr. 2, 16. He took not the Angels Nature. James 3,
7. The whole Nature of Birds, and of Beasts, has been tamed by the Nature of
man.

Natural Son. sig:
One, truly and indeed begotten by the Gospel. Titus 1, 3. Titus my Natural
Son.

Natural body. sig:
A body quickened by the Soul, and maintained in life by Natural and ordinary
means; as meat, drink, sleep, etc. Contrary to this, is a spiritual body,
which is preserved alive without such means by the immediate work of the
Spirit. 1 Cor. 15, 44. There is a Natural body, and there is a Spiritual body.

Natural care. sig:
True and faithful care, void of counterfeiting and negligence. Phil. 2, 20.
Which has a Natural care of your matters.

Natural use. sig:
A custom agreeable to the Law of Nature. Romans 1, 26. Did change the Natural
use, into that which is Unnatural.

Natural Man. sig:
The unregenerate Man, who still sticks in the old corruption of Nature, his
ignorance and obstinancy which he brought with him into the World. 1 Cor. 2,
14. The Natural man perceives not the things which be of God.

Naturalnesse of love sig:
Truth and sincerity of love. 2 Cor. 8, 8. I prove the Naturalnesse of your
love.

Naturally. sig:
By light and instinct of Nature. Jude 8. What things they know Naturally.

Nation. sig:
Either the Country, or the people which inhabit it. Psalm. 117, 1. Praise him
all ye Nations. Reu. 7, 9. Of all Nations, Kindreds, and people. Exo. 19, 6. Ye
shall be an holy Nation.

2 The author and head of a Nation or people. Genesis 25, 23. Two Nations are in
the Womb. This is meant (by a Metanimie) of Jacob and Esau, the two roots of
the Israelites and Edomites.

Nauill. sig:
That member and part of the body, which is in middle of the belly, etc.

2 The extreme impurity and deformity of our corrupt Nature. Ezekiel. 16, 4. Thy
Nauill was not cut; that is, thy impure and sinful Nature, was not corrected
and healed.

3 The middle part of any thing. Judges 9, 37. I see folk come down by the
Nauill (or middle) of the Land. Metaphor.

4 The whole body. Job 40, 11. His force is in the Nauill of his belly.
Sinecdoche.

5 Both body and mind, and whatsoever is within or without a man. Prou. 3, 8.
So health shall be to thy Nauill. An Allegory. As Infants in their Mothers
Womb, by the Nauill take in nourishment from the Mother to strengthen the most
inward parts; so the godly in the Church, are fed, strengthened, and put in
good plight every way, through the true Knowledge and reverence of God.

N. E.
Neighbor. sig: pro
One that dwells nigh, or near to us, in the same borrow or street.

2 One that is near unto us in kind or blood: even every man and woman that
comes of Adam. Math. 22, 39. Love thy Neighbor as thy self.

Net. sig: pro
An Instrument which Fishermen use to catch Fish in.

2 The vsiible Church, which is like a Net, that brings to Land both Fish and
other things. Math. 13, 47. The Kingdom of God is like unto a Net cast into
the Sea.

3 Means and helps to live by. Hab. 1, 16. He sacrificed to his Net.

Never. sig:
Not for a long time. Leuit. 6, 12, 13. The Fire shall never go out.

2 Not at all. Mark 3, 29. Shall never have forgiveness.

New. sig:
That which is not old, and comes in the stead of the old. 2 Cor. 5, 17. All
things new.

2 Unwonted, never seen or heard before. Eccl. 1, 9. No new thing under the
sun,

New Creature. sig:
One regenerate by the Spirit, or endewed with New qualities of righteousness
and holiness. 2. Corin. 5, 17. He that is in Christ, let him be a New
Creature.

New Birth. sig:
The begetting of those. New qualities by the work of the Spirit. John 3, 3.
Except ye be borne anew.

New Covenant. sig:
The agreement which God has made with his people for Salvation by Christ. See
Covenant.

New doctrine. sig:
Every doctrine not heard of before. Acts 17, 19. We will know what this New
doctrine means. Also, every doctrine, how ancient soever it be, if it be
contrary to that which is taught in the word, it may be called New.

New-hart. sig:
A Soul renewed and changed, not in the substance and faculties of it, but in
qualities, being framed anew after God, in knowledge, righteousness, and true
holiness. Ezekiel. 11, 19. I will put a new heart in thee.

New lump. sig:
The whole body and Mass of the Church, renewed and purged from the old Leaven
of sin and corruption. 1 Cor. 5, 7. Purge out the old Leaven, that ye may be
a new Lump.

New Jerusalem. sig:
The City of God, or the heavenly City. Reu. 3, 12. I will write upon him the
Name of the City of my God; that is, the New Jerusalem.

New Name. See Name.

New Song sig:
A Song, which does not wax old and vanish, but is continually revived by the
godly, by reason of Gods continual fresh Mercies and benefits toward them.
Psalm. 33, 3. Sing unto him a New Song. Psalm. 96, 1.

New Heavens, and New earth. sig:
The estate and condition of the World after the last Judgment, when it shall
be purged from vanity and corruption, and They err which think the heavens
and earth shall be brought to nothing.
restored to such glorious perfection and proportion, as if Heaven and earth
were created anew. 2 Pet. 3, 13. Reave. 21, 1. I saw a New Heaven, and a New
Earth. Romans 8, 20, 21.

2 The blessed estate of the elect under the New Testament, being quite
altered and framed (as it were a new) by the Spirit and Gospel of Christ. Esaias
66, 22. The New Heavens and the New Earth which I shall make, shall remain
before me.

New tongues. sig:
Strange Languages, which they had not known nor used before, being suddenly
taught them by the singular gift of the Spirit. Mark 16, 17. And shall speak
with New tongues. These are called other tongues. Acts 2, 4.

New wine and New cloth. sig: pro
Wine newly pressed out of the Grape, and raw Cloth before it be Fulled.

2 Strict and severe Laws, about Ceremonies and things indifferent. Mark 2,
22. No Man puts New Wine into old Vessels, etc.

Newness of life. sig:
A conversation, pure, and unblameable, such as Gods Children live, after their
New Birth. Romans 6 4. That we should walk in Newness of life.

N. I.
Niggard. sig: pro
A Churl, who spares more then is fit.

2 A wicked man, by a Sinerdoche. Esaias 32, 5. A Niggard shall be called no more
liberal.

Night. sig:
That space of time wherein darkness covers the face of the Earth, the Sun
being absent from us. 1 Cor. 11, 23. The same Night when he was hetrayed.

2 The time of Ignorance and unbelief. Romans 13, 12. The Night is passed. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 7. Sleep, and be drunk in the Night.

3 Time after Death, or Death it self. John 9, 4. Night will come, when none
can work.

of the night sig:
Blind and ignorant persons, overwhelmed with the darkness of ignorance and
infidelity, having the Sun of the Gospel hid from them. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 8. Ye are
not of the Night.

N. O.
Noble. sig:
A person advanced to honor by descent or merit. Dan. 3, 2. He sent forth to
gather together the Nobles.

2 One of excellent piety and virtue, renowned and ennobled for special
Graces. Acts 17, 11. These were more Noble then they of Berrea.

3 Renowned, famous, and glorious. Psalm Our Fathers have declared thy Noble
works.

4 Men picked and singled out from others, chosen men to accompany Moses. Exodus
34, 11. Upon the Nobles of the Children of Israel he laid not his hand.

Not. sig:
An absolute denial. Exodus 20. Thou shall Not kill. As in all prohibitions.

2 A conditional denial. 1 Corin. 6, 10. Covetous Thieves shall not inherit.
As in many threatenings and Comminations.

3 A respective and comparatiue denial. 1 Cor. 1, 17. Sent not to baptize, but
to Preach. Psalm. 5, 16. Sacrifices thou would not. ^er. 31, 34. Every Man
shall not teach his Neighbor. Ios. 6, 6. Desired mercy, and not Sacrifice.
Likewise in sundry other speeches of comparison, where a thing is not simply
denied, but in some respect.

Nothing in me. sig:
No power over me, no matter nor cause against me, being the innocent Lamb of
God, and the eternal Son of God. John 14, 30. And has Nothing in me.

Nouice. sig:
A young scholar, one newly or lately planted into Christianity. 1. Tim. 3, 6.
He may not be a Nouice or young Scholar; that is, a Child in vnderding.

N. V.
Nurce. sig:
A godly Queen. Esaias 49, 23. See Nurcing Mother.

2 A Minister of the word, loving and tender as a Nurce. 2 These. 2, 7. We were
gentle among you, as a Nurce cherishes her Children.

O. O.
O. sig:
THe voice of one lamenting. Luke. 13, 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem. 2. Sam. 18,
33.

2 The voice of one praying, and calling upon another. Math. 6, 9. O our Father.

3 The voice of one wondering, and exclaiming with admiration, as at some
strange thing. Romans 11, 33. O the depth of his wisdom.

4 The voice of one chiding or speaking to another, in way of reprehension.
Gal. 3, 1. O ye foolish Galathians. Luke 24, 25. O ye foolish and slow of
heart.

5 The voice of one exhorting and encoraging to duty. Psalm. 95, 1. O come
let us sing unto the Lord.

O. B.
Obedience. sig:
A readiness to do the will of God in things commanded or forbid by him, be
they never so troublesome, and never so much against our reason and liking.
Romans 5, 19. As by the Obedience of one man. 1. Sam. 15, 22. To Obey is better,
etc. Exodus 24, 7. We will do it, and be Obedient.

to obey Ministers. sig:
To submit with readiness to their authority, suffering their words of
exhortations and rebukes to take place with us, for our reformation. Heb. 13,
17. Obey them who have the ouer-sight of you, and submit your self.

to Obey the doctrine sig:
To believe it, and live after it, when our reason, mind, conscience, will,
affections, and members, are brought under it, to stoop to it, and be governed
by it. Romans 6, 16. Ye have obeyed from the heart the Doctrine, etc.

to Obey Parents, Magistrates, and Masters. sig:
Willingly to perform their just commandments, and patiently to bear even
their unjust corrections. Ephe. 6, 1. Ye children, Obey your parents.

to Obey the lusts of sin. sig:
In will to consent unto, and in works to practice the evil and sinful
desires of our hearts. Romans 6, 12. That ye should Obey the lusts of sin.

Oblation. sig:
Some external thing, offered and given unto God to pacify and appease his
anger against sin, or to witness thankfulness for some benefit. Psalm. 51,
19. Burnt Offering and Oblation.

Observation sig:
Outward pomp and show of Majesty to be known by. Luke 17, 20. The Kingdom
of God comes not with Observation.

to Observe days. sig:
To attribute holiness and virtue, to days, which belongs not to them; or to
put Religion in difference of days. Gal. 4, 10. Ye Observe days and months,
etc.

to Observe the tradition of men. sig:
To keep and hold superstitiously the rules and precepts delivered unto us by
men. Mark. 7, 8. Ye Observe the Traditions of men.

Obeisance sig:
Civil reverence, by bowing the body, in token of the regard which we owe to
some* person of dignity and worship, for his years, gifts, or place. Exodus 18,
7. And did Obeisance.

Odor. sig:
The efficacy of Christ's death, appeasing the wrath of God, for the sins of
the elect, causing themselves and their Prayers, to be acceptable to God.
Revel. 8, 3. Much Odors was given unto them. Ephe. 5, 2. A Sacrifice of sweet
smelling Odors.

2 The works of Charity, which being done in Faith, are unto God (through
Christ) as a pleasant Odor. Phil. 4, 18. That which came from you, was an Odor
that smells sweet.

Of. sig:
Efficient, cause, or Author and chief worker of a thing. Mat. 1, 18. And she
was found to be with child of the Holy Ghost. Romans 11, 36. Of him are al
things.

2 The Isntrumental cause. Acts 19, 11. God wrought Miracles by the hand of
Paul.

3 The material cause or matter whereof any thing is made. Romans 1, 4. Borne
of the seed of David.

Offense. sig:
A stone, block, or some other thing, whereat men may stumble.

2 Every occasion of sinning given to others. Math. 18, 6. Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones. verse 7. Woe be to them by whom Offenses
come. Romans 14, 21. 1 Cor. 8, 13. Give no Offense to the Church of God. Every
hinderance in the course of godliness, offered unto us by another, is an
Offense; and (as it were) a stone cast in our way, to make us stumble. This is
an Offense given.

3 Every hinderance and let in our course, not offered by others, but laid
hold of by ourselves, without just cause; as when the Jews were offended with
Christ's Doctrine. Mat. 15, 12. The Pharisees are Offended in hearing this
saying. John 6, 61. Does this Offend you?

4 Every sin or fault against God, or our neighbor, how secretly or privately
soever done. Romans 5, 15. The gift is not so, as is the Offense.

5 Knowledge of an Offense. Romans 5, 20. The Law entered, that the Offense might
abound. Romans 3, 20. For by the Law comes the knowledge of sin.

to Offend. sig:
To do any sin, in thought, word, or deed. James 3, 2. He that Offends not
with his tongue, is a perfect man. Psalm. 19, 12. Who can tell how often he
Offends? Math. 23, 16.

2 To Minister or give occasion of sin, either by word or example. 1. Cor. 8,
13. That I may not Offend my brother.

3 To take occasion of sinning, when none is given, as the Pharisees at the
disciples plucking the ears of Corn on the Sabbath. Mark. 2, 23. As before
Math. 15, 12. They were offended at that saying.

Office. sig: pro
Some function or calling, which binds to duty.

2 Some duty, which is to be done in regard of some charge or function which
we bear in church Commonwealth* or family. Romans 12, 7. He that has an Office,
let him wait on his Office.

Officers. sig:
Servants and Ministers, which attend upon Magistrates, to expect their
Commandments. Mat. 26. The Officers of the High Priest. Acts 5, 22.

wild Olives. sig:
Gentiles, which were strangers from Gods Covenant. Romans 11, 17, 24

right Olives. sig:
The Jews, which were the people of his Covenant. Romans 11, 17, 24

Olive branches, or Plants. sig:
Children, which (as Olive Branches) are an Ornament and delight to their
Parents. Psalm. 128, 3. As Olive branches round about his Table.

Old Man. sig:
Our natural disposition to evil. See Man.

Old vessels sig:
A mind, nourished in blind superstition, and Idle Ceremonies. Math. 9, 17.
Neither do we put new Wine into Old vessels.

Old things sig:
Natural corruption, and the fruits of it. 2. Cor. 5, 17. The same is meant
by Old Leaven.

Once and twice. sig:
Often, or many times. 62, 11. God spoke once or twice.

Once. sig:
A thing (which being done) is not iterated or gone over again. Thus Christ
is said to be Once offered; to have died Once; to have suffered Once. Romans 6,
10. Heb. 9. two last verses. Hebr. 10, 10. Once, and no more. Therefore, the
Sacrifice of the Mass is abominable, charging Christ's death with
insufficiency, and the word with untruth. Their distinction of bloody and
unbloody Sacrifice, is also directly against the Scripture; which teaches,
there is no remission, without shedding of blood. Heb. 9, 22.

One. sig:
One only, so as there is no more of that kind; as One God, One Mediator, One
Oblation, etc. 1. Tim. 2, 5. 1. Cor. 8, 4. Heb. 10, 14.

One accord sig:
Common agreement and unity of mind in Religion. Acts. 2, 46. And they
continued daily with One accord.

One heart. sig:
Consent in Religion and affection. Ezekiel 11, 19. I will give thee One heart.

One sheep sig:
One Catholic Church, consisting of believing Jews and Gentiles. John 10, 16.
And One Sheepfold.

One spirit. sig:
Spiritual union, being knit to God by one spirit. 1. Cor. 6, 17. Is one
spirit.

One thing is needful. sig:
The sound and saving knowledge of Christ by the word preached. Luke 10, 42.
There is One thing needful. Psalm. 27, 4. One thing have I desired.

One way. sig:
The Doctrine of Godliness, which is but One, as there is but One God. Ier.
32, 39. I will give the^ One way.

O. P.
to Open. sig: pro
To unlock something, shutvp and locked fast from us.

2 To give unto us what we desire in Prayer. Thus God opens to us. Math. 7,
7. Knock, and it shall be opened.

3 To let in and receive Christ, to dwell in our hearts by Faith. Thus we open
to Christ. Revel. 3, 20. I stand at the door and knock, if any man open, etc.
Psalm. 24. 9.

to Open the ear. sig:
To give power unto our soul, to understand and obey what we hear of Gods
will out of his word. Psalm. 40, 6.

to Open the eyes. sig:
To give light of Divine knowledge to such as were wholly blind before, through
Ignorance. Acts 26, 18. To open the eyes of the blind.

2 To help and increase their knowledge which do already see, that they may
know the truth more fully then before. Psalm. 119, 18. Open my eyes that I may
see the wonders of thy Law. Luke 24, 45. He Opened their understanding, etc See
fu^ther for this phrase, in [Eies.]

Opening the hand. sig:
The large bounty and rich liberality of God, distributing good things to all
living creatures. Psalm. 104, 28. Thou Openest thy hand, and fillest all things
with thy blessing.

to Open the heart. sig:
To enable and give power to the soul to behold, and through faith, to embrace
Christ as our Savior, with good feeling of his saving mercies. Acts. 16, 14.
God Opened the heart of Lydia. Our hearts are locked up by unbelief, and Opened
by Faith.

Opening of heaven. sig:
The parting of the Firmament. Acts 6, 56. He saw the Heavens Open.

to Open the lips. sig:
To give sufficient matter by blessings from God, and ability by the spirit of
God, to utter the praises of God. Psalm. 51, 17. Our wickedness locks our
lips, which are set open by grace. This is one Key. The second Key is, Gods
benefits.

to Open the mouth in parables. sig:
To utter and speak Parables. See Parables. Mat. 13, 35. I will Open my mouth
in Parables.

to Open the scriptures. sig:
To interpret and make plain the true meaning of the scripture. Lu. 24. He
opened unto them the scriptures.

Opportunity sig:
The fittest and most meet time for the doing of any thing. Romans 13, 11.
Considering the Opportunity or season. The time of preaching the Gospel, is our
Opportunity or season, wherein to seek our own salvation.

Oppression. sig:
The wringing and crushing of others, when great ones of the world deal
extremely and cruelly with the poor and needy. Esaias 5, 7. Behold Oppression.
1. These. 4, 3.

2 Any violence, offered either to men's bodies, estates, or consciences. 1 Timothy
13. Before I was an Oppressor of them.

O. R.
Oracle. sig:
The aunsweres of the Heathenish Gods, delivered in prose or verse.

2 The answers of God, declared to his people, by the mouth of Moses, or by
his own mouth; even the whole Covenant of the Law. Acts 7, 38. Who received
the lively Oracles to give to us.

3 The whole word of the Law, delivered to Moses from Gods mouth, together with
the promises concerning Christ, and salvation by him. Romans 3, 2 To them of
credit, were committed the Oracles of GOD.

lively Oracle. sig:
Making alive, or giving life. Such the words of the Law are, in their own
Nature; and also, to such as perfectly keep them. Acts 7, 38. Romans 7, 10. The
Commandment was ordained to life. If it be occasion of death to any, it is
their own fault.

Order. sig:
A mean of peace, and of avoiding confusion. 1 Cor. 14, verse last: Let all
things be done in Order. It is Order for one to pray, and the rest to say Amen.
For one to speak; and the rest, to hear. For many to sing together.

Ordinance. sig:
Appointment, decree, and determination, touching things to be; or to be done,
or not to be done. Psalm. 119, 91. They continue to this day by thine
Ordinance. Exodus 18, 16. And declare his Ordinances. Thus Gods decrees are his
Ordinances, though unwritten.

2 Some function and estate of life, appointed for the good of mankind. Thus
Magistracy, Ministry, and Marriage, be Gods ordinances. Romans 13, 1, 2. The
powers that be, are Ordained of God; whosoever resists power, resists Gods
Ordinance.

3 Any Commandment of God, appointed (as a path) for us to walk in. Deuteronomy. 6,
2. That thou should keep all his Ordinances and Commandments. Gen: 26, 5.
Thus Gods written precepts, are his ordinances.

to Ordain sig:
To appoint and decree something to some special end. Romans 7, 10. The
Commandment was ordained to life. Acts 16, 4. Decrees Ordained of the
Apostles, etc.

Original sin. sig:
That transgression, which has in it, 1. Adams disobedience imputed to us, 2.
want of his perfect righteousness, 3. Corruption of Nature, 4. Desert of
punishment. Psalm. 51, 45. Romans 5, 12.

Oath. sig:
A calling of the name of God (the searcher of the heart) to witness a
needful truth, for the ending of strife and controversies. Hebr. 6, 16. An
Oath for confirmation, is the end of all strife. Deuteronomy. 6, 13. The end and use
of an Oath, is either for the Denial of Maiestracy and Oaths unto Christians,
is the error of Anabaptists.
ending of controversies, or for the performing of promises. An Oath may be
taken, either publicly, or privately, if cause be. Joshua 2. 20. Romans 9, 1.

2 A wicked or false taking God to witness, for some evil end; as either to
do some wickedness, or to hinder some good thing. Math. 14, 9. For his Oaths
sake. Herod's Oath.

Oath of God. sig:
An Oath which God exacteth of his people; and they willingly give unto God,
for performance of obedience unto him. Eccles. 8, 2. Take heed to the word of
the Oath of God. They err, which deny unto Christians the lawful use of an
Oath.

Oven. sig:
The burning lusts of Adulterers. Hos. 7, 4. The Adulterers are as an Oven
heated. And verse 6. Their heart is ready as an Oven.

2 The earnest hot desire of Innovation. Hos. 7, 4. The Adulterers are as an
Oven heated. And verse 6. Their heart is ready as an Oven.

fiery Oven. sig:
Gods burning Wrath, consuming his enemies. Psalm. 21, 9.

Own. sig:
Gods chosen in Christ, which Paul calls a peculiar people. Tit. 2, 14. John
17, 10. All thine are mine. John 13, 1. For as much as he loved his own.

2 Such as bear the name of his people; to wit, the Israelites, with whom God
had made a Covenant, and to whom he gave his word and Sacrifices. John 1, 11.
He came unto his Own, and his Own received him not.

Ox. sig:
The Minister of the word, which labors in the word and Doctrine. 1. Cor.
9, 9. Thou shall not muzsle the mouth of the Ox. Has God care of Oxen.

O. Y.
Oil. sig: pro
The juice of the Olive, which is natural Oil. Ps. 104, 15. And Oil, to make
the face of Men to shine.

2 That Oil confected and made (by Gods appointment) to anoint the Priests,
their Garments, and holy things about the Tabernacle. Exodus 30, 25, 26. So thou
shall make of it, the Oil of holy Ointment. This was Artificial and Typical
Oil.

3 The Holy Ghost, with his spiritual guistes, whereby the soul is refreshed
and cheared. Psalm. 45, 7. Thou have anointed him with Oil of Gladness above
his fellows. This is spiritual Oil. As Math. 25, 4. Oil in their Lamps.

4 That Oil, wherewith the sick were anointed in the Primitive Church, for
healthes sake. James 5, 12. Anoint them with holy Oil, in the name of the
Lord. This was Myraculous Oil, given for a sign of health, not as a medicine;
and it lasted but for a time, till the gift of miracles ceased. Therefore, the
immitation hereof by the Papists, is absurd and impious. For, the gift being
ceased, there is no sense to use the sign; especially, at point of death, when
there is no more hope of health.

5 A person anointed with Oil; to wit, Christ, upon whom the spirit of the
Lord rests, because he has anointed him. Esaias 10, 27. The yoke shall be
destroyed, because of the Oil, or anointing.

6 Sweet alluring words. Prou. 5, 3. Her mouth is softer then Oil.

Oil of Gladness. sig:
The Spirit of God, enabling us to comfort the weake-harted, making our selves
and others glad with his grace. Psalm. 45, 7.

to anoint with Oil. sig:
To furnish and beautify one with the gifts of the spirit. Psalm: 45, 7. Acts
10, 38. God anointed Jesus; that is, bestowed gifts upon him in all fulness.

rivers of Oil. sig:
Earthly things of all sorts, in great abundance. Job 29, 6. The rock poured
me out rivers of Oil. In Micah, Chap: 6, 7. it signifies plentiful store, of
Oil only.

Ointment. sig:
The Spirit of illumination and discretion, enabling us to see and discern the
truth of the Gospel, from all errors and lies. 1 John 2, 20. Ye^ have an
Ointment, etc.

2 Christ, who is more sweet to the soul, then any Ointment can be to the
senses. Cant, 1, 3. He is as an Ointment poured out.

anointed of God. sig:
Called and ordained of God, to do his will. Esaias 45, 1. Cyrus mine anointed.

2 One, furnished vnmeasurably from Heaven with the Holy Ghost, and with power,
to do the whole work of a Mediator, between God and man; so is Jesus only,
therefore called Christ; that is, Anointed. Psalm. 45, 7. God has anointed
thee with the Oil of gladness, etc. Acts 10, 38.

P. A.
Painted wall. sig:
AN Hypocrite, who seems to be that which he is not; as a wall which is rough
and rotten, yet by painting makes a fair show. Act 23, 5. God will smite thee
thou painted Wall.

Parable. sig:
A similitude or comparison, fetched from earthly things, which be in common
use, to help our understanding in spiritual things. Math. 22, 21. Luke 15,
3. Then spoke he this Parable to them. And elsewhere very often.

2 A dark speech, and (as it were) a riddle, when the truth is wrapped up in
obscure and hard words. Math. 13, 13, I spoke to them in Parables. Psalm. 49,
4. I will incline my ear to a Parable, and utter my dark saying upon the
Harp. John 16, 29. Now speak thou plainly, and thou speak no Parable.

3 Grave and short sentences and words, serving to direct our life and
actions. Prou. 1, 1. The Parables of Solomon the son of David.

Paradise. sig: pro
That most pleasant and fruitful Garden, wherein Adam and Eve were placed in
the Creation. Genesis 2. This is earthly Paradise.

2 The third Heaven, which for the fullness of pleasure and joy, is called [
Paradice] 2 Cor. 12, 2, 4 He was taken up into Paradise. Lu. 23, 43. This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise. This is Caelestiall Paradise. Revel. 2, 7.

Some, to avoid the passage of Christ soul with the Thieves, immediately upon
their death, going to heaven have expounded (grossly) Paradise to be Hell;
others have thought that Christ in his soul went (...)

Parents. sig:
Father and Mother, which beget and bring forth Children. Ephe. 6, 1. Children
obey your Parents.

2 Forefathers or Ancestors, which were alive and are dead. Psalm. 45, 16. In
stead of Parents (so Tremellius reads it) thou shall have children; that is,
when Forefathers are dead, their posterity shall come in their stead, and thus
thou shall always continue.

Passover. sig:
The Lamb slain, and eaten; which is called the Passover, because it was a
sign of God his passing over the houses of the Israelites, when he slew the
first borne of Egypt. Exodus 12, 11. For it is the Lords Passover. 2. Chron.
35. 1. 1. Mat. 26, 17. 18. Christ eat the Passover, etc. This is the Typical
and Sacramental Passover.

2 Christ, by whose death we escape the wrath to come. 1. Cor. 5. 7. Christ our
passe-ouer is slain for us. This is our spiritual pascall Lamb, who was the
substance of the Jewish Passe-ouer, and of al other Legal sacraments and tipes.

What the Jewish Passe-ouer was.

Their Passover was an holy action, ordained of God, in the killing and eating
of a Lamb, partly to the end the Jewish Church might keep in memory the
benefit which God did for them in the Land of Egypt, when he passed over
their houses, and slew the first borne both of man and beast of the Egyptians.
Also, to be a Testimony of Gods good will toward the^, and to be a Tipe of
Christ the true Paschal Lamb. Moreover to gather all the partakers thereof into
the fellowship of one body: and finally, to put them in mind, to be thankful
and innocent in their conversation.

Passion or suffering. sig: pro
A suffering, or any thing that is painful and greiuous unto us.

2 The whole suffering, and affliction of Christ Christ's bodily suffering not
sufficient price of man's redemption.
in his body and soul, but especially that which he suffered about the time of
his death. 2. Peter, 1. 11. Should declare the suffering, or [ Passions] should
come to him, Pathemata in the Greek.

3 The sufferings which Christ's members endure for his sake. Col. 1. 24. To
fulfill the rest of the Passions of Christ. 1. Pet. 4, 13. Ye are partakers of
Christ's ( Passions) or sufferings.

4 Every motion of the mind being out of his due course, and every sinful
affection; which are called Passions, because they pain the mind and make it
suffer grief. Romans 7. 5. The affections (or Passions) of sin, etc. for the
word in the original is Pathemata.

Passions. sig:
Both Natural and sinful infirmities. James, 5. 17. Elias was a man subject
to like Passions as we be. Acts, 14, 15.

Pastor or Shepherd. sig: pro
A Shepherd, which keeps watch over a flock of sheep, to see them fed with
good pasture, and kept safe from wild beasts. Luke, 2, 8. Genesis 47, 3. Thy
servants are Shepherds.

2 Christ, the chief Shepherd of our souls, who having fed and taught his
flock, in his own person, did afterward give his life for his Sheep; and
now, being in Heaven, does continually feed them by his Ministers, and protect
them by his power. John, 10, 11. That good Pastor (or Shepherd) gives his
life for his Sheep. 1 Pet. 2, 25. And returned to the Pastor and Bishop of
our souls, Jesus Christ.

3 Every true Minister of Christ set over a particular flock, to rule and
feed it with the healthful word of God, as with the green Pastures. Ephe. 4,
11. Some Pastors, and teachers. Acts 20, 20.

4 A King, that has the ouer-sight and government of a Kingdom, as a
Shepherd of his flock. Esaias. 44, 28. I said to Cyrus, thou art my Shepherd.

5 God himself, caring for his people, and watching over them, as a Shepherd
over his flock. Psalm. 23, 1. The Lord is my Shepherd.

Green Pasture. sig:
All things, belonging to spiritual and bodily rest, and refreshing. Psalm. 23,
2. He makes me to rest in green Pastures.

gods paths sig:
Either his Doctrine and precepts, wherein we walk and come to him; or his
providence and works of mercy and justice, wherein he comes to us. Mark 1, 3.
Make his Paths straight. Our Paths, signify our thoughts, words, and deeds,
Psalm. 119. 105. A light to my Paths.

Patience. sig:
A suffering, and bearing long with such as do provoke us, waiting till they
amend. Mat. 18, 29. Have patience with me and I will pay thee all.

2 The slownesse of God to anger, bearing with, and sparing sinners, that they
may have space of repentance. Romans 2, 4. Despisest thou the riches of his
Patience? Romans 3. 26. Through the Patience of God. Psalm. 103. 8, 9. 2. Pet. 3.
9.

3 Quiet and constant suffering of afflictions for godliness. Iam. 1, 3. Let
Patience have her work. Heb. 10. 36. Ye have need of Patience. 2. Pet. 1. 6.
Luke. 8, 15.

4 Hope, expectation, or waiting. Romans 8, 25. We do with Patience abide for it.
Heb. 6, 12, 15.

5 Perseverance in weldoing unto the end. Iam. 5, 7, 9. Be Patient unto the
coming of our Lord.

What Patience is.

Patience, is that gift of God, which enableth the Christian soul to endure
crosses, quietly, and with ready submission to the will of God, because it is
his pleasure to have it so, for our trial, or chasticement; and for the
manifestation of his own power and goodness, to the praise of his glory; and
finally, for a Testimony against those that do trouble and vex his children.

Patient mind. sig:
Quiet and settled mind, waiting for help from God, in due time. Phil. 4, 5.
Let your patient mind be known to all men.

P. E.
Peace. sig:
Atonement with God, by Christ, through who^, God and the elect, are, of
enemies, made friends. Hence is Christ called Prince of peace. Esaias 9, 6. And
our Peacemaker. Ephe. 2, 14. And to have made Peace by his blood. Col. 1, 20.
Romans 5, 1.

2 That sweet and comfortable quietness and tranquillity of Conscience, which
is the immediate fruit of our atonement with God. Romans 14, 17. The Kingdom
of God, is Peace, Joy. Phil. 4, 7. Peace of God that passes all understanding,
etc.

3 The mutual concord and agreement of Christian brethren. Gal. 5, 22. The
fruit of the Spirit is Peace. Psalm: 34, 14. Seek Peace, and pursue it.

4 Prosperous and happy success of things, when they fall out well and
blessedly, for the best to us. In this sense, Paul in his Apostolical
salutations, wishes Peace unto the Churches: and the Jews one to another in
their ordinary greetings. Math. 10, 13. And let your Peace come upon it. 1 Cor:
1, 3. Grace, and Peace. Ephesians. 6, 23. And often elsewhere, it is used in the
same signification.

5 Perfect rest and joy, which elect souls shall have in heaven, this life
being ended. Esaias 57, 2. Peace shall come. Romans 8, 6.

6 The public tranquillity and quiet State of the Church, when it is not
trobled within, by Schisms and Heresies; or without, by persecuting Tirants.
Psalm. 122, 6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem. Acts 9, 31. The Churches had
rest, throughout all Judea and Galily.

7 The tranquillity of the public weal, or politic State, when it is free
from foreign and Civil wars. 2 King. 20, 19. Is it not good there shall be
Peace in my days? Ier. 29, 7. In the Peace thereof shall you have Peace.

8 The private agreement with all sorts of men, good and bad; Christians, and
Infidels. Romans 12, 18. Have peace with all men as much as in you is.

9 Security, when the heart free from the fear of dangers, does falsely
promise safety to it self. 1 These. 5, 3. When they shall say, Peace, etc.

10 True safety, wealth, prosperity, and earthly felicity. 1 Samuel 25, 6. Be in
Peace, wealth and prosperity. 1 Samuel 29, 7. Go in Peace. Genesis 26, 29, 31.

11 A solemn covenant and society, between prince and prince; person and
person. Judge. 4, 17. For Peace was between Iabin the King of Hazor, and
between the house of Hebor. Psalm. 41, 9. Yea, the man of my Peace; that is,
my familiar friend, which had made a Covenant of society with me.

12 Silence, by means whereof, many times quietness and Peace is procured.
Prou. 17, 28. A Fool when he holds his Peace, is thought wise. Genesis 34, 5.

13 Mutual agreement of wicked men in evil things. 2 Kin. 9, 22. Is all Peace
Iehu? What peace?

To swear Peace. sig:
To accept the conditions of Peace offered, and to promise the keeping of them.
Deu. 20, 11. Offer it peace, and if it answer thee Peace again, etc.

chasticement of Peace. sig:
The sufferinges of Christ, procuring and meriting atonement and friendship
with God his Father, for elect sinners. Esaias 53, 5. The chastisement of our
Peace was upon him.

god of Peace. sig:
God, to be the author and giver of peace, and the rewarder of such as live in
Peace. Phil. 4, 7. The God of Peace shall be with you.

to hold peace. sig:
To rest in the will of God. Leuit. 10, 3. And he held his Peace.

Gospel of Peace. sig:
The word of reconciliation and atonement. Ephe. 6, 15. Your feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. Thus it is called, because it works
(as an instrument) atonement with God, peace with our brethren, and our own
conscience.

to go or return in Peace: sig:
With good safety to pass to and fro: also to be quiet and well. 1 Samuel 1 17.
1 Samuel 29. 7.

Multitude of Peace. sig:
Great good success, and abundance of prosperity. Psalm. 37, 11. They shall
delight in the multitude of Peace.

prince of Peace. sig:
The worker and author of peace, or reconcilement between God and us. Esaias 9,
6. Prince of Peace. Thus is Christ alone.

son of Peace. sig:
One that favors and embraces the gospel of Peace and reconciliation by
Christ, loving and living in Peace with others. Luke, 10, 6. If the son of
Peace be there.

to speak Peace. sig:
To promise tranquillity, rest and happiness, to soul and body, and to
perform it. Psalm. 85. 8. He shall speak Peace to his people, and to his
saints.

2 To speak and talk with one lovingly and kindly. Genesis 37, 4. They could not
speak Peace unto him.

way of Peace. sig:
The doctrine that leads to eternal salvation, also faith it self, remission
of sins, and repentance: by the which we are at length brought to heaven.
Luke, 1. 79. And to guide our feet into the way of Peace.

2 A quiet and peaceable life, free from quarrels and contention, full of unity
and good agreement. Romans 3. 17. The way of Peace they have not known.

Pearl. sig: pro
A thing of great value and price, called a Pearl, for the orient brightness of
it.

2 The precious doctrine of salvation, or any godly admonition. Math. 6. 6.
Cast not your Pearls, before swine.

3 The glorious and most happy estate of the saints in heaven. Revel. 21, 21.
The twelve gates were twelve Pearls.

People. sig:
The elect given to Christ. Math. 1, 21. He shall save his People from their
sins.

2 Pillars, which resembled the People. Metanimie, of the sign. Leu. 24 8.
Sprinkled on the People.

Peculier. sig: pro
The choice of, and most precious part of a man's substance, severed from the
rest, and laid up for a man's self.

2 Gods chosen and faithful People, precious in his sight. Titus, 2, 14. And
purge us to be a Peculier people.

Perdition. sig:
Destruction or eternal punnishment in hell fire. John, 17, 12. Child of
Perdition. Here, Perdition is used passiuely, for one destroyed suffering
perdition, to which he was appointed.

2 Destruction or downfall of other men, both in body and soul. 2 Thessalonians. 2,
3. Even the son of Perdition. Here the word is used actiuely, for a
destroyer who works Perdition.

Perfection, or perfect. sig:
An absolute fullness of grace, when there is not the least want. Phil. 3, 12.
I am not already Perfect. 1. Corinthians. 13, 10. When that which is Perfect is come.
Math. 19, 21. If thou will be Perfect.

2 A good degree of perfection in grace, and a striving Such as have taught an
absolute perfection of inherent grace in this life, as if men could be without
Sin, as Familists, or keep the whole Law as papists ^^ow, they rise up
against the light both of Scripture and of their own conscience, which does
witness the contrary to every man.
toward the absolute fulness of it, though still there be many wants. Phil. 1,
5. Let us therefore as many as be Perfect. 1. Cor. 2, 6. We speak wisdom
amongst those which be Perfect. Heb. 5, 14. In these places, Perfection is set
against weakness and rudeness: and signifies, no more but a good measure of
present profiting in the knowledge of God; in Faith, Wisdom, Repentance and
Obedience; and a tending or striving to further perfection, in these graces of
Regeneration.

3 Uprightness and sincerity, as when perfection is set against hypocrisy. 2.
Kings 20, 3. Ezekiah served God with a perfect heart. 2 Chro. 28, 9. My son
serve God with a perfect heart. That is, sincerely and in truth.

4 That good order, which by the word of God is settled in any Church, when all the members thereof keep their due place and standing, and perform their
functions duly. 2 Cor. 13, 5. This I wish men your Perfection.

5 One well furnished with knowledge of the word, how to perform all parts of
his function in the Ministry. 2 Timothy 3, 17. That the man of God (that is the
Minister) may be absolute, being made Perfect to every good work.

6 One which so governs his words, as no fault may be found with his speech.
Iam. 3, 2. If any man sin not in word, he is a Perfect man.

7 The things of this world, which be most glorious, and excellent. Psalm. 119,
96. I have seen an end of all Perfection.

Perfect charity. sig:
That love which is unfeigned, accomplished in the effects and fruits of love,
being (not equal) but like to that love wherewith God loves us; which he
showed in deed, by giving his son for us. 1 John 4, 18. Perfect Charity
castes out fear.

Perjury sig:
Forswearing, or a false oath, when the party that swears, either knows the
matter to be false, or thinks it so to be. 1 Timothy 1, 10. To the Perjured.
Math. 5, 33. Though the matter be true, yet if he that swears do think it
be false, or not know it certainly to be true, Perjury is committed in the
Court of Conscience. He that swears by the name of God falsely, or
doubtfully, he forsweareth.

to Permit. sig:
To suffer, and not to let a thing when one might hinder it. Heb. 6, 3. If God
Permit. Permission in God, has two things; first, patience or suffering. 2.
might, or efficacy. God wills whatsoever he Permits; because nothing can
be, unless he will have it to be. The dotage of an unwilling Permission is to
be avoided.

Persecution. sig:
An obstinate pursuing others, to hurt or destroy them, without giving rest or
quietness. Math. 5. 10. Blessed are they which suffer Persecution. Gal. 4. 29.
It is either by word, or sword; by deceit, or violence; open, or disguised;
for Religion, or for righteousness; from false brethren, or professed enemies.

Perseverance. sig:
The continuing in grace to the end. Perseverance may stand with many deep
falls, but it keeps from falling away. Math. 10, 22. He that Perseuereth (or
endures) to the end, he shall be saved. See Confirmation. It is an error, to
hold, that true believers may fall from grace, either wholly for a time, or for
ever.

Person. sig:
Some particular man, or woman. Genesis 14, 21. Give me the Persons, etc.

2 The divine essence, subsisting by it self. Heb. 1, 3. The ingraued form of
his Person.

3 Outward qualities; of country, riches, friends, poverty, and such like
external circumstances. Romans 2, 11. God is no respecter of Persons. Acts 10.
34. Luke 20, 21. God does not measure and accept men by their riches, worship,
poverty, Nation, or such things.

Perverse. sig:
One whose heart is turned from the wisdom of the word, to follow crooked and
evil counsels and ways

to Pervert. sig:
To put out of order, to turn vp-side-downe, to bring in that which should be
kept out. Pro. 10, 9. He that Peruerteth his way, shall be known.

Pestilence. sig:
An infection and deadly disease, sent of GOD upon men for their sins. Leuit.
26, 25. I will send the Pestilence among you. Deuteronomy. 28. 21. See plague.

to be Persuaded. sig:
To be infallibly assured of a thing, by demonstratiue certainety. Romans 8, 37.
I am Persuaded. This is the perswation and certainety of faith.

2 To be probably assured of a thing, by coniecturall certainety. Heb. 6. 9.
We have persuaded our selves better things of you. This is persuasion of
charity.

Physician. sig: pro
One that by Art, helps the decays and defectes of nature, curing bodily
diseases, by bodily Medicines.

2 Christ Jesus, the only true Sovereign soul Physician, who by his blood
and Spirit, cures all our spiritual sicknesses. Math. 9, 12. The whole need
not the Physician, but the sick. I came not to call the righteous, etc.

Philacteries sig:
A Thread, or band of blew Silk, in the ^ringes of a Garment, by the beholding
whereof, the memory of Gods precepts was kept, and preserved; Or frontlets of
Parchment between the eyes, as signs of remembrance. Math. 23, 5. Make their
Phylacteries broad. Deuteronomy. 6, 8. They shall be as frontlets between their eyes.

P. I.
to Pierce. sig:
To offer violence to the body, by digging through or opening some part of it.
John 19, 34. One of the Soldiers pierced his side.

2 To cause or work any extremity whatsoever. Psalm. 22, 16. They Pierced my
hands and my feet.

Piety. sig:
A true worshipping of God, soundness of doctrine and a pure life: which
things, do follow faith and hope. 1 Timothy 4, 8. Piety (or godliness) is
profitable to all things.

2 Natural love toward parents, and Kinsefolkes. 1 Timothy 5, 4. Let them
learn to show Piety (or godliness) toward their own house, and to
recompense their Kindred, See godliness.

Pilgrim. sig:
One that trauaileth far from home, in Foreign Countries, without any
certain, or settled dwelling place. Genesis 47, 9. The whole time of my
Pilgrimage, etc.

2 Every godly person, which dwelling here in earth, as touching his body,
has his desire, love, and hope fixed in heaven, as in his proper Country. Heb.
11, 13. They confessed that they were strangers, and Pilgrims in earth. Psalm.
39, 12. For popish Pilgrims, and pilgrimage, there is no ground and footing in
all the Scriptures.

Pillar of truth. sig:
The Church of Christ on earth. 1 Timo. 3, 15. The Pillar and ground of truth,
which is the church of the living God. In this Metaphor, he borrows his
speech from an old custom of the Gentiles, who were wont to write their Laws
in Tables, and so to hang them upon Pillars (as we do Proclamations on posts)
that they might be read: hereby to teach us, that the Church is but a witness
and preserver, and no rule of truth, (as Papists say) as the Pillar was not the
Law, but that whereon the Law hung: so the true Church (less the false Romish
Church) is that which shows the truth, and vpholds it by her Ministry, but it
self is not the rule of truth; for that is the holy Scriptures.

Pit. sig:
Any mischief or affliction, either spiritual or bodily; temporal or
eternal. psalm. 7, 15. They dug a pit, and themselves are fallen into it.
Mat. 15 14. If the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the pit (or
Ditch.)

P. L.
Place. sig:
A portion of joy in the kingdom of Heaven, or a room in that kingdom, John
14, 3. I go to prepare a place for you.

2 A portion of torment, in the kingdom of hell, or a room there. Act. 1, 25.
That he might go into his own place.

3 A Tent, House, City, or dwelling. Gen 18, 33 Abraham returned to his place.
Genesis 19, 13.

Plague. sig:
Any great judgment of God, sent for sin; as Famine, War, Sword,
Sickness, or any other Judgment of God. psalm. 38, 11. My friends stand aside
from my plague. In this sense, the ten Judgments of Egypt are called plagues.

2 That infectious disease, commonly called, the Pestilence. 2 Samuel 24. 25, 15.

A Plant. sig:
The people of Israel, which were as Plants sowneand set in the Vineyard of
the Church. Esaias. 5, 2. And planted it with the best Plants.

2 Any false calling, false Doctrine, or Worship. Math. 18, 13. Every Plant
that my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out.

3 Children. Psalm. 44, 12. Thy sons shall be as Plants.

to Plant. sig: pro
To remove and translate young trees from one earth to another, that they may
increase and fructify.

2 To bring a people from one Country into an other Country, there to place
and settle them, that they may increase and multiply. Psalm. 44. 2. Thou have
planted them. 88. 8. Thou have planted it. This is a terrestrial and earthly
Planting.

3 To unite and join the elect (being taken out of the rotten stock of old
Adam) unto Christ and his Church, by the spirit and faith. Psalm. 92, 13. Such
as be Planted in the house of the Lord. Romans 6. 5. For if we be Planted with
him into the similitude of his death. This is a spiritual inward planting of
God himself.

4 To preach the word plainly and easily, for the entrance of the ignorant
into the knowledge of Christ. 1. Cor. 3, 6. I have Planted, and Apoll^s has
watered. This is an outward Planting, by the Ministers of God.

5 To denounce, and foretell the will of God, for the continuance and
prosperity of kingdoms and people. Ierem. 1, 10. I have set thee over nations,
to build and to Plant.

Planted by the rivers of waters. sig:
One rooted into Christ by the grace of regeneration, that drawing from him
lively juice, and continual moisture of the spirit, he may be abundantly
fruitful in good works. Ps. 1. 3. He shall be like a tree Planted by the
rivers of waters.

to Plead ones cause. sig:
To undertake the defense of ones cause against his enemy. Psalm. 35, 1. Plead
thou my cause O Lord, etc.

to Plead. sig:
To expostulate, or quarrel, or contend and stand in strife against one. Romans
9, 21. O man, who art thou that Pleadest with God? Michah. 6, 2. He will plead
with Israel.

to Please. sig:
To conform (as much as we may) our thoughts, words, and deeds, to Gods will.
Col. 1. 9. That you may Please God in all things. When we allow that which God
allows, and hate that which God hates. This is to Please God.

2 To purpose and will, to do some things, or not to do other things. Psalm.
115. 3. Our God is in heaven, he does whatsoever he Pleases. Psalm. 135, 6.
Whatsoever pleased the Lord, etc.

to be Pleased. sig:
To accept and approve in mercy such duties, as are done to God. Heb. 13. 16.
With such sacrifices God is Pleased.

to be well Pleased. sig:
To be thoroughly satisfied, and fully pacified, in respect of a price paid
unto justice for sin. Mat. 3, 17. This is my beloved son in whom I am well
pleased. God looking upon Christ crucified, and us in him, lays aside his
whole displeasure and wrath conceived against us for sin.

Pleasure referred to men. sig:
Any manner of sinful delight agreeable to our corrupt nature. 2. Timoh. 3, 4.
Lovers of Pleasure more then of godliness.

2 Honest delights, serving for the solace and comforts of man's life. Genes.
49. 20. He shall give Pleasures for a king.

3 The most free and just decree and determination referred to God.
of God, touching all things. Mat. 11, 26. Even so father, because so it was
thy Pleasure. And not because men were worthy. All merits of works is shut out
by the doctrine of grace, rightly understood.

good Pleasure. sig:
The free and loving purpose of God for the salvation of the elect. Ephe. 1. 5.
According to the good Pleasure of his will. The high and first moving cause of
election.

2 The delight and contentment which God takes in the work of his purpose,
regenerating and creating faith in his elect. 2, These. 1, 11. Our God fulfill
all the Pleasures of his goodness, and the work of faith, with power.

Pleasures of gods house. sig:
Every spiritual blessing. Psalm. ^65, 4. Satisfied with the Pleasures of thine
house.

Pleasures of sin. sig:
Such delights, benefits, and commodities of this life, as be kept and held
with sinful conditions. Heb. 11, 25. To enjoy the Pleasures of sin.

Ploughe. sig:
The preaching of Christ, and the profession of Christianity. Luke. 9, 26. He
that puts his hand to the Plough: That is, either to preach or profess Christ.

to Pluck up. sig:
To destroy and overthrow. Math. 15, 13. Shall be Plucked up.

2 To denounce and foretell destruction. Iere. 1, 10. I have set thee over
Nations to Pluck up.

Policye. sig:
Counsel or advice, either good or evil. Prove. 21 30. There is no Policy or
counsel against the Lord.

to Ponder. sig:
To weigh and consider a thing in our mind, before we do agree and consent to
it. Luke. ^, 19. Mary Pondered these sayings in her heart.

Poor. sig:
Such as are needy, though they be not utterly destitute. Psalm. 82, 2. Do
justice to the Poor and needy.

2 Such as have extreme want of earthly things, even unto beggary. Math, 26.
11. The Poor ye shall have always with you. Luke 16, 29. There was a
certain beggar.

3 The godly, being afflicted, who put their trust in no worldly thing, but
cleave to God in all their trouble and calamity. Psalm. 9, 12. He forgets not
the complaint of the Poor. And 10, 14: The Poor commits himself unto thee.
verse, 18. Judge the Poor O Lord: that is, such as feel their afflictions, and
fly to thee only for succor, being forsaken of the world, as godly persons
commonly be for their well-doing, hated, despised, and cast off.

4 All men, both rich and Poor, but especially the needy. Exodus 22, 25. If
thou lend Money to the Poor with thee.

Poor in spirit. sig:
Such as being tamed by their worldly poverty, or other miseries, and having a
lively feeling of their spiritual poverty and wants, are humbled and made
lowly thereby. Math. 5, 2. Blessed are the poor in spirit; that is, the humble
hearted.

thy Poor. sig:
Such Godly poor, as Religiously worship God, committing themselves wholly to
his protection. Psalm. 72, 2. He shall Judge thy Poor with equity.

Pope of Rome. sig:
A Monstrous person, neither man nor woman; God, nor Devil; but partaking in a
devilish and brutish Nature: being a man of sin, wholly compounded of
impiety, and iniquity; the Son of perdition, himself appointed to destruction,
and thirsting after the ruin and destruction of others, whom he desires to
lead (with himself) unto the pit of perdition; being the head of that
universal Apostasy and falling from the Faith and Religion of Christ, which he
impugneth and resists (in a most disguised sort) under the Title of the Vicar
of Christ, and by pretense of defending the Holy Catholic Faith, and Church;
yet being (indeed) the maine Adversary of Christ, sitting in the Temple of God,
as God; exercising Tyrany over men's Consciences, usurping to be Judge of the
Scriptures, and Lord of the Princes of the earth, to depose them at his will.

Portion. sig: pro
A share or part in Lands or goods. Luke 15, 12. Give me the portion of the
goods that falls to me.

2 God himself, who is the life and portion of his people. Psalm. 16, 5. The
Lord is the Portion of my Inheritance. See Lot.

Possession. sig:
Lands, which men hold and keep by some proper right which they have in them.
Acts 4, 32, 34, 37. and 5, 1.

2 The Sacrifices offered up to God, which were the Levites possession. Ezekiel.
44, 28. For I am their Possession.

3 All the faithful people, both of Jews and Gentiles. Psalm. 2, 8. For thy
Possession.

to Possess. sig:
To hold some thing, as our own. 1 Cor. 7, 30. And they that buy, as if they
Possessed not. Math. 10, Possess no Gold in your Girdles.

2 To be constant. Luke 21, 19. Possess your soul in Patience: that is, be
constant in patience. 1 These. 4, 4. Possess your Uessels in holiness; that
is, keep so constantly, and with continuance.

3 To be content with that one has, as if he had all things, and lacked
nothing. 1 Cor. 6, 10. Having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

4. Fully to enjoy or inherit, by desert. Mar. 10, 17. What shall I do to
Possess eternal life? The man which put this question, dreamed of deserving
Heaven, by works; therefore, Christ fitting his answer accordingly, sends
him to Moses Law, not to himself.

Possessor of heaven and earth. sig:
The most just owner, Lord, and disposer of heaven and earth, and all things in
them, by right of creation and preservation. Genesis 15, 19, 22. The great
Possessor of heaven and earth.

to give a Possession. sig:
To make sale of it, or to give it for a just price. Genesis 23, 4. Give me a
possession to bury my dead in.

Possible. sig:
That which may be done, though it never be done. Math. 19, 26. With God all
things are Possible.

not possible, or impossible. sig:
Some thing which cannot be done, no not of God himself, in respect of his
decree, and revealed will; though it might be done in respect of his absolute
power. Heb. 6, 4. It is not possible, that they which were once enlightened, if
they fall, etc.

2 That which can never be do one by any human strength. Math. 19, 26.

Power. sig:
Divine might, whereby God can do, and does all things whatsoever he has
purposed to do, and hinders whatsoever he will not have done. Math. 6, 13.
Thine is the Kingdom, power, and glory. See Almighty.

2 Absolute right and authority to do a thing. Math. 9, 6. The son of man
has Power on earth to forgive sins; that is, he which is the son of man
(being God) has this power.

3 The effectual force of the holy Spirit, working mightily in the hearts of
the elect, both for their conversion from sin to grace, and confirmation in
grace. Ephesians. 1, 119. According to the working of his mighty power. 2. These. 1,
11.

4 Prerogative or dignity. Ioh. 1, 12. To so many as received him, he gave
power to be the Sons of God.

5 A mighty Instrument of Gods power. Romans 1, 16. The Gospel is the power of
God to salvation. 1. Cor: 1, 18. To us that are saved, it is the Power of God.

6 Inward strength of a renewed soul, whereby it is able to resist evil, and
to do good. 2. Tim. 1. 7. God has given to us the spirit of Power.

7 That most excellent strength and agilitie, wherewith the bodies of the elect
shall be endued after the resurrection. 1 Cor. 18, 43* They shall be raised
again in Power.

8 Signs and wondrous works, done by the mighty hand and power of God. 1 Cor:
12, 10. Effects of his Power; called [ Power] by a Metanimie.

9 Such persons, as have the gift and power to do Miracles and works of
wonder. 1 Cor. 12, 28. He has ordained Powers; that is, some to do Miracles.

10 A lawful Magistrate, enabled of God with authority and might, to execute
his judgments. Romans 13, 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers.
Also, it signifies the authority it self, and public right of Governors.
John 19, 10, 11.

11 A veil or covering, which Women did wear, as a Token of that power which
their Husbands had over them; and of their subjection thereunto. 1 Cor. 11, 10.
For this cause, a Woman ought to have Power upon her head; that is, a sign of
Power.

12 Extraordinary strength, given of GOD to some persons, therewith either to
do great good, or great harm. Luke 9, 1. He gave them power over all Devils.
Acts 1, 8. Revel: 9, 3. Unto the Locustes was given Power, as the Scorpions of
the earth have Power.

13 Wicked or good Angels, which are of exceeding strength, and have leave
and Commission of God, to do mighty things; and therefore are called powers.
Col. 1, 16. By him were created Powers, Principalities. Ephe. 6, 12. We wrestle
against Principalities and Powers.

14 Excellent and singular gifts of the Spirit. Acts 6, 8. Steven full of
faith and Power, did signs and Miracles, etc.

15 Kingdoms and Nations, which have great power. Luke 3, 6. All this Power
will I give thee.

all Power. sig:
Universal power over every thing, in heaven and earth, without exception of
any. Math. 28, 18. All Power is given unto me. This Power, the Father (as God)
gives; the Son (as Mediator) receives it.

Power of God. sig:
The most mighty and powerful God. Mat. 26, 64. Sitting at the right hand of
the Power of God.

2 That notable Virtue and might given to the Apostles; not only to work
Miracles, but also to tame and bridle the wicked. 2 Cor. 6, 7. By the Power of
God.

Powers of heaven. sig:
The Heavens, or Celestial Orbs and Spears, being exceeding firm and strong
creatures, and exercising great strength upon these inferior earthly bodies.
Math. 24, 29. And the Powers of heaven shall be shaken.

to Pour out sig:
To give and bestow liberally and franckly. Esaias 53, 12. He Powered out his
soul to death. Acts 2, 17. I will Pour out my Spirit upon all flesh.

Poison of Aspes. sig:
Malicious and bitter words, cast out against such as be absent to their great
hurt. Romans 3, 13. The Poison of Aspes is under their lips.

Poison of Dragons. sig:
The wicked ungracious works of ungodly men, which are as unpleasant to God,
as the poison of Dragons to men. Deuteronomy. 32, 33. Their Wine is the poison of
Dragons.

P. R.
Praise. sig:
A confession and due acknowledgement of the great and manifold excellencies
and perfections that be in God. Ps. 136, 1. Praise the Lord because he is good,
for his mercies endure for ever. Psalm. 117, 1, 2. 103, 1, 2, 3.

2 Commendation, and speaks forth the good things that be in other men. Prou.
27, 2. Let another man praise thee.

3 The matter, argument, and occasion of praise. Exodus 15, 2. The Lord is my
strength and praise. Psa. 118, 14.

Prayer. sig:
The whole service of God, and every part of it. Math. 21, 13. An house of
Prayer.

2 That one part of his worship, called Prayer and Petition. Iam. 5, 15. Prayer
of faith.

to Pray. sig:
To desire some lawful thing of God alone, with trust* to have it, for the
merit of Christ only. Acts 10, 9. Peter went up on the house to pray. Math, 6,
9. After this manner pray ye. Acts 12, 12. Mark 11, 24.

2 To crave something with the voice only, without Faith in Christ. Luke 18,
10. They went up into the Temple to Pray. Verse 11. This is vocal Prayer
only; and the former, is both Vocal, and Mental.

3 To worship God. A Sinechdoche of part for the whole. Luke 19, 46. A house of
Prayer.

Prayer, what it is?

Prayer, is a work of the believing soul, desiring of God Prayer being a
chief part of Gods service, may not be made to any creature.
alone, things lawful and needful: with confidence to obtain them, through
the alone mediation of Christ, to the praise of the mercy, truth, and power of
God. Prayer, is either private, or public; for our selves, or others; for the
having of good things, or remoouing things evil. Whence arises the
difference, and diverse kinds of Prayers, mentioned 1. Tim. 2, 2. Let
supplications and Prayers, Intercession and giving of Thanks, be made for all
men.

to preach. sig:
To declare the will of God by voice, for the instruction of the Church. Mark
1, 49. He Preached in their Synagogues.

what Preaching is.

Preaching, is an action of the Minister of the word, soundly interpreting and
opening the sense of the Scriptures, by the Scriptures; with application of
them unto the use of the Church, by Doctrine, Exhortation, reprofe, conuincing
and comfort. Mar. 2, 2. He Preached the word to the^. Lu. 4, 18, 19, 20, 21. He
took up the book, and read, and said; this day is this Scripture fulfilled in
your ears. Also, 1 Cor. 14, 3. He that professes (that is, Preaches)
speaks to men, to edifying, to exhortation, to comfort. See Nehe. 8, 8. And
he read in the book of the Law, Thus Tremelius translates it out of the
Hebrwes
and gave the sense according to Scripture. Acts. 9. 20, 22. He Preached
Christ Thus Master Beza reads, and expounds it according to the greek.
confirming that Jesus was this Christ (that is to say.) He compared Scripture
with Scripture, conferring them together, as cunning Craftsmen which join all
parts together, to make them agree one with another. This is Preaching in the
ordinary phrase of the Scriptue. Indeed every declaration of Gods will, either
by afflictions, blessings, readings, and creatures; or otherwise, may generally
and improperly be called Preaching.

Predestination. sig:
The fore-appointment of every thing, to certain ends. Acts. 4, 28.

2 The fore-ordaining of some persons, to obtain eternal life by Christ. Romans
8, 30. Whom he Predestined them he called.

Predestination what it is.

Predestination, is a most righteous decree of God, freely, according to his
own good pleasure (without any respect of forseene faith or works, as moving
causes) ordaining from all eternity out of the whole lump of lost mankind, a
certain number, to obtain eternal life in heaven, by Christ (having first
called, Justified, and Sanctified them) unto the praise of his glorious grace.
Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 7.

Predestination, is the most wise purpose of God, Predestination what it is,
according to Peter Martyr.
whereby he has before all eternity, constantly decreed, to call those whom
he has loved in Christ, to the adoption of his children, to Justification by
Faith, and at the length to glory, through good works, that they may be made
like to the Image of the Son of God, and that in them should be declared, the
glory and mercy of the Creator.

to Predestinate. sig:
To determine and appoint before, most firmly, some persons to be saved by
Christ. Romans 8, 29.

Prepare. sig: pro
To make a thing ready before hand. Math. 26. 17. Where will thou that we
prepare for thee. 1 Chro. 29, 19. To build the house which I have prepared.
Math. 20 23.

2 To fit effectually and mightily, the elect of God, unto that blessedness
which they were appointed unto, from everlasting. Romans 9, 23. Vessels of mercy
which he has prepared to glory. And to make meet the Reprobates, unto that
wretchedness unto which they were ordained before. Romans 9, 22. Vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction. Or thus more briefly; to purpose, and make meet
heaven for the elect, and the elect for it. Math. 25. 34, 41. Prepared for you,
etc. Also Hell for the Reprobate, and them for it. Prepared for the devil and
his Angels. Romans 9. 22. 23.

3 To make us meet or fit, either for doing good duties, or for suffering
afflictions. 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. Prepare their hearts unto thee.

4 To make ready, either some things which belonges either to Gods service, or
to the service of the Saints. 2. Cor. 9, 2. Achaia was prepared a year ago.
John. 19, 42. Because of the Jews preparation day.

to Preserve sig:
To keep one free and safe, from taking hurt by any enemies, or dangers. Psalm.
16. 6. Preserve me o Lord, for I trust in thee.

2 To sustain and uphold all things in their being. Job O thou preserver of
men. Psalm. He Preserves both man and Beast. Nehe. 9, 6. Thou Preseruest them
all. This is general preservation.

3 To keep constantly the faithful, unto the possession of eternal life. 1
Pet. 1, 8. Preserved, or kept through the power of God, by faith, unto eternal
life. This is special preservation.

to Presume sig:
Either to take too much upon us, out of a vain confidence in our selves; or
to take too much heart and boldness to us. Psalm. 73, 8. They talk
presumptuously. 1 Cor. 4, 6. Let none Presume above that is written.

What Presumption is.

It is a vice, whereby many men, in regard of Gods blessings and patience
toward them, have their hearts too much lifted up in vain confidence of
their own sufficiency, and Gods goodness; waxing secure, haughty, and
careless, in the course of their lives, without any fear of sin, or Gods
judgments for them.

Presump. tuous sins. sig:
Sins of contumacy, which come from a stubborn and malicious heart. Psalm.
19, 13. Keep me from Presumptuous sins. Note, that he gave not his body or
blood, but himself; that is, his whole manhood, as the price (the only
all-sufficient.)

Price of redemption. sig:
Satisfaction or payment, made to the Justice of God for the hurt done to it
by the sins of the elect; that so they may be redeemed and set free. 1 Timothy
2, 6. He gave himself a price of Redemption. Note, that he gave not his body
or blood only, but himself; even the whole manhood; to be the price; the
only all-sufficient price to God, for sin; adieu, to al Popish satisfactions.

Prick. sig: pro
A sharp piece of wood, a pole, stake, or sharp thing, which pricketh one, as
he goes thorough bushes, or thick places.

Prick in the flesh. sig:
Inbred corruption, or natural Concupisence, which sticks fast in us, as it
were, a prick molesting and vexing us, by evil motions, as the flesh is
galled and pained, with a Prick or sharp stub sticking in it. 2. Cor. 12.
There was given unto me, a Prick in the flesh. A Metaphor.

Pricked in heart. sig:
Persons, stricken with great grief, and soulesorrow, in the sense of Gods
displeasure, for sin; as if their hearts had been pricked through with a
sword. Acts 2, 37. And being Pricked in heart, they said, etc.

Pride. sig:
Haughtiness or loftiness of mind, being puffed up and swollen with a high
conceit of our own excellency, to the contempt of God, and the disdain of
men. Pro. 16, 18. Pride goes before a fall, and an high mind before
destruction. 1. Cor. 4, 6. Swell not one against another. Luke 18* 9.

Pride of life sig:
Vain boasting and arrogance, wherein they please and delight themselves,
which do abound in the things of this life. 1 John 2. 16. And the pride of
life.

Pride, as a Chain. sig:
The arrogance of wicked men, glorying in their Pride, as one would glory in a
Chain of Gold. Psalm. 73, 6.

Priest. sig:
A Sacrificing person, ordained of God, not only to teach the people, and pray
for them; but also to offer up outward and bodily Sacrifices for his own
sins, and the sins of the people. Leuit. 5, 4, 2, 5. Such were the Priests
of the Law, and old Testament; Legal and Leuiticall Priests.

2 A Sacrificing person especially ordained of God, that by the Sacrifice of
himself, once offered by himself; and also, by his intercession, he might
reconcile unto, and keep in favor with God, for ever, all believing sinners.
Such a Priest is Christ only, being the alone Priest of the New Testament,
propperly so called. Heb. 7, 17. Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedek. Also verse 23. 24, 25, etc. See Chapter 10. from verse 5. unto the
15. These two significations of Priest, be proper.

3 Every faithful Christian man or woman, of what calling soever, enabled by
the authority and commandment of God, to offer up themselves and their
Good-works, as spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God, through Christ. 1 Pet.
2, 5. Revel. 1, 6, He made us Kings and Priests to God. Romans 12, 1. Heb. 13,
15, 16. This is an improper figurative sense of the word, by resemblance and
likeness.

4 A man of great dignity, a chief Ruler or officer. Exodus 2, 15. And the
Priest of Midian had seven Daughters. Genesis 41, 45. The Daughter of Potipherah
the Priest, or Prince of Onn. Exodus 18, 1. lethro the Priest of Midian.

5 The first borne of the male children, whom God did consecrate and set
apart, to do the Office of Priests, in administering holy things, until Aaron
and his sons were sanctified to that end. Exodus 19, 22. And the Priests also
be sanctified. Exo. 13, 2. Sanctify to me the first borne, etc.

high, Priest sig:
The chief amongst and over the Priests of the Law, who in a special manner,
was a figure of Christ, both in his garments, public works and actions; and
also, in his eminent place, Christ being chief among the Pastors, as Aaron
was among the Priests. Heb. 5, 1, 2, 3. unto the 10. verse. For every
High Priest is taken from among men. 1 Pet. 2, 25.

The difference, between a Priest properly, and Note this.
improperly taken, is this. The former has an external and bodily Sacrifice,
to give and offer unto God, as Christ did give his own body; and the Priest of
the Law, the bodies of beasts. The latter, offers spiritual Sacrifices only;
as their Prayers, praise, obedience, alms, and all other Goodworkes and duties
of their callings, which every Christian (as well as a Minister) is bound to
offer. The popish Priesthood is an immaginary and blasphemous fixion, having
no ground, neither any color and show of ground and proof, in the whole
Book of God.

Princes. sig:
The true believers, the children of the Church. Psalm. 45, 16. Whom thou may
make Princes in all Lands.

2 Men of principal gifts, chief and choice persons. Eccles. 10, 7. Princes
walking, etc.

Prince of God. sig:
A man singularly loved, and exceedingly blessed of God. Genesis 23, 6. Thou art a
Prince of God.

Prince of peace. sig:
Procurer, ground, and cause of Peace, which also causes his subjects to
continue in peace and quietness. Such an one is Christ, and he only. Esaias. 9,
6. Prince of Peace.

Profession. sig:
An action of a Christian, plainly and openly declaring and uttering with his
mouth, that which he believes and hops in his heart, concerning Christ and
salvation by him. 1 Timothy 6, 12. And have professed a good Profession, before
many witnesses. There may be a profession made before men, with the mouth, when
the truth of it is not to be found in the heart, before God. Tit. 1 16. They
Professed to know God, when in their works they denied him.

2 The doctrine of the Gospel, which we do profess. Heb. 3, 1. Consider the
High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus.

3 A way, or Sect. Math. 23, 15. To make one of your Profession.

Promise. sig:
A word, passed from man to man, for performance of some lawful thing; as in
Contracts, Bargains, Marriages, and other affairs of common life. This is a
civil promise: Such Laban made to Jacob for giving his Daughter: Saul to
David: David to Jonathan.

2 Our word passed and given unto God, for some duty which we will do unto
his honor. Psalm 66, 13, 14. I will pay thee my vows which my lips have
promised. Numbers. 30, 3. He shall not break his Promise. This is a religious
or holy Promise, called a Vow in Scripture. See Vow.

3 The word of God, given or plighted unto men, for the performance of some
good, or for removing some evil, spiritually or bodily. Psalm. 119. 130. How
sweet are thy promises to my mouth? And ver. 49. 50. 38. This is a divine
promise. Which is two fold: Legal and Evangelical.

Gods Promise is two-folde: first Legal, when Note this.
he passes his word for the giving of eternal life, and other temporal good
things, upon condition of fulfilling the law. Leuit. 18, 5. Ephe. 6, 1. This
is the first commandment with Promise. Gala. 3. 12. Do this and live.
Secondly Evangelical; when he passes his word for the giving of Christ, and
together with him, remission of sins, righteousness, and eternal life, as also
the blessings of this life, upon condition of believing the Gospel. Romans 1. 2.
Which he promised before by his Prophets. And Romans 4, ^6. That the Promise
might be sure to all the seed: That is, to such as walk in the steps of
Abraham's faith. Galat. 3, 14. That we might receive the Promise of the spirit
through faith. This latter promise, is called the Promise of grace, because it
is freely given, and freely performed. Also Galat. 3, 14. It is called the
Promise of the spirit, because the spirit is both the author and applier of
it. More over the things Promised, come from the spirit. This Promise is also
called the word of faith. Romans 10, 8. Because the word of this Promise, is
made with condition of faith, which is the only instrument to apprehend and
receive it. Lastly, it is termed the Promise of Christ, because he is the term
and end of it.

Profane. sig:
An unholy person which refuses heavenly things, for enjoying of earthly. As
Esau cast away his Birthright for a mess of pottage, and therefore in Heb.
12. 16. He is called a profane person for his labor.

2 Common, or something appointed to common use, as Profane hands, Profane
authors, profane meats, put for common, or serving to common use. Mark. 7,
2. Acts. 10, 14, 15.

Prophet. sig: pro
One, which tells or speaks before what things shall afterward come to
pass. This is the general signification of the word [Prophet.]

2 An extraordinary minister of the old Testament, ordained for the instruction
of the Church, by interpreting and applying the law, and foreshewing the
sufferings and glory of Christ. Acts. 3, 24. All the Prophets have foretold of
these days. And 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness. 1. Pet. 1, 10 11.
Such Prophets were Esaias, Jeremy, etc.

3 A person under the new Testament, endued with a special gift to foretell
things to come, for the behoof, either of the whole Church, or some members
of it. In this sense, Agabus is called a Prophet, because he forewarned the
Church of a famine. Acts. 11, 27. And Paul of his bonds. Acts. 21. 10. Also the
daughters of Philip were such prophets.

4 One that interprets the scriptures of the Prophets, with a singular
dexterity and readiness, besides the praediction or foretelling future events.
Ephe. 4. 11. He gave some to be Prophets. 1, Cor. 12 28. He ordained some
Prophets. These were men that not only signified what things should come, but
excelled also in expounding Prophesies concerning Christ. In this sense, is
Christ called a Prophet. Acts, 3, 22. And not only for declaring the will of
God touching things to come.

5 All those holy men of God, who be the penmen of the holy scriptures, for the
common use of the Church to the worlds end. Luke. 13, 28. All the Prophets
shall sit down in the kingdom of God. 2, Pet. 1, 19. We have a most sure
word of the Prophets.

6 Every true minister of the gospel, endued with wisdom, to interpret and
apply the scriptures. 1. Cor. 14. 32. The spirits of the Prophets, are subject
to the Prophets.

7 The writings, books, or sayings of the Prophets. Romans 3, 21. Having witness
from the law, and the Prophets. Luk, 16, 31.

8 A Southsayer or teller of fortunes. Tit. 1, 12. One of your own Prophets.

sons of the Prophets. sig:
Such as be trained up in the Schools or Colleges of the Prophets, to the
knowledge and study of the Scripture. 2. Kings, 2, 7, Fifty men of the sons
of the Prophets. Amos, 7, 14. I was no Prophet, nor was I a Prophets son.

children of the Prophets. sig:
Such as were instructed and taught by the Prophets their scholars; being
begotten a new by their doctrine. 2. Kin, 2, 3, 5. The children of the Prophets
that were at Jericho.

2 The people of the Jews, for whose instruction the Prophets were specially
appointed. Acts. 3, 25. Ye are the children of the Prophets.

to Prophecy. sig:
To fore-shew something that afterward should be fulfild. Acts. 21, 9. He has
four Daughters Virgins which did Prophecy. Here the word (Prophecy) is
taken in a strict sense; as also elsewhere very often.

2 To expound and apply the Scripures to the edification of the Church. 1 These.
5, 20. Despise not Prophesying. 1 Cor. 14, 3, 24. Here the word is taken in a
larger sense.

3 To be present at the public ministry, and partake in the Doctrine
thereof. 1 Cor. 11, 5. She that prays or Prophesies with her head bare. Here
it is used in the largest signification.

Prophecy. sig:
Prediction, or foretelling.

2 The word or doctrine written by the Prophets. 2 Pet. 1, 20. 21. No Prophecy
is of private interpretation, etc.

spirit of Prophecy. sig:
A gift proceeding from the holy Spirit, enabling men to foretell things to
come. 1 Cor. 12. 10. To another Prophecy (by the same spirit.) See verse 8. 9.

Prosperity. sig:
Good success in the affairs of our soul and body. Psalm 1. 3. Whatsoever he
does shall prosper. Pro. 28, 13. He that hides his sins shall not Prosper.

2 Wealth and abundance of earthly benefits. Psalm. 73, 3. When I saw the
Prosperity of the wicked.

3 Rest and peace. Psalm. 30, 9. I said in my Prosperity.

Proselite. sig:
One, converted from the Heathenish Religion, unto the Jewish Religion. Acts.
2. 10. Acts. 13, 43. Many of the Jews, and Proselits that feared God.

to Prove. sig:
To examine, search and try himself, whether he be in Christ. 2 Cor. 13, 5.
Prove your selves. This is our proving of our selves.

2 To sift us by some affliction, that we may know our own hearts. Deuteronomy. 8,
2. To humble thee, and to Prove thee.

3 To look nearly into ones cause, and to take knowledge and defense of it.
Psalm. 26. 2. Prove me o Lord and try me. This is Gods proouing us.

to Provide. sig:
To have a forecast in the affairs of this life, as how to maintain our
charge. 2. Timothy 5, 8. If there be any that provides not for his own.

2 To fore-thinke, what things we may lawfully and justly do. Romans 12, 17.
Provide (or procure) honest things before men.

3 To fore-appoint and give a good issue, in perplexed and troublesome cases.
Genesis 22, 8. God will provide, etc. And verse 14. In the Mount will the Lord
Provide or see.

Providence, what?

Providence, is not only Gods foreknowledge of things to come, and his wise
appointment before hand, how every thing in the world shall be: but his
powerful and most just discerning and disposing of all things and persons,
according to that his eternal and unchangeable knowledge and will; whereby
all things that have been, have been; and all things that are, are; and all
things that shall be, shall be; for such ends as himself has purposed from
everlasting. Mat. 10, 29 Acts 2, 23. Acts 4, 28.

to Provoke sig:
To give God occasion of anger or punnishment, by some sin obstinately
committed. Ps. 106, 26. They Provoked him unto anger, with their inventions,
Deuteronomy. 32, 19.

2 To move or to stir up ones care. Romans 11, 18. If by any means I might
Provoke them of my flesh; that is, make the Jews, my Kins-men, careful to
seek after Christ in his word.

P. U.
Publicans. sig:
One, who bought (in great) the Emperors tribute. Math. 21, 31. Math. 9, 9, 11.
Why eats your Master with Publicanes and sinners. These Publicans were held
of the Jews for the vilest men that lived, in two respects. First, because
they were Servants to the Romans, whose yoke the Jews could not abide.
Secondly, because they exacted more then their due, for their own advantage.

to Punish. sig:
To chastise and correct, as a Father does his Children, for their humbling
and amendment. Psalm. 73, 14. Daily have I been punnished and chastised every
morning.

2 To take vengeance upon Sinners, as a Judge upon Malefactors. Genesis 4, 13. My
Punnishment is greater then that I can bear. Thus Tremellius reads it.

to purchase. sig:
To obtain a thing, by laying down the due price of it. Genesis 49, 32.

2 To obtain the inheritances of the Church, and of Heaven, by Merit. Acts
20, 28. Ephesians. 1, 14,

Pure. sig: pro
Unmixed, sheere, or like it self; as Wine without water; Silver without
dross.

2 Without mixture of sin, either more or less; according to that whereof it
is affirmed. Thus it is written of God, that he is pure. Psalm. 51, 4. Thou
art Pure when thou Iudgest. Psalm. 19, 8. The Commandment of the Lord is
Pure. For GOD, and his Word, are without all mixture of sin and iniquity.
Also, we read of a Pure heart. 1. Timot. 1, 4. Math. 5, 8. Blessed are the
Pure in heart. Whereby is meant, a heart partly freed from the mixture of
sin, and endeavoring still to be more free. Lastly, we read of Pure
Religion, and Pure Doctrine. James. 1, 27. When it is free from Error,
Idolatry, and Hypocrifie. Also, of pure Prayers, and of Pure Hands lifted
up, when our Prayers are unmixed with wrath and doubting. Job. 16, 17. 1 Timothy
2, 8. James 1, 27.

Purge. sig:
To make clean without guilt, by free forgiveness of sin, thorough the
blood of Christ. Psalm 51, 7. Purge me with Hysop. The property of Hysope,
is to Christ his blood, is the Christians Purgatory.
purge, whereunto Christ his his blood is compared.

2 To make clean, and free our hearts from corruption of sin (that it reign
not) by grace of sanctification. Titus 2, 14. And purge us to be a peculiar
people.

3 To cast out the filth of sin, by our own best endeavors. James 4, 8. Purge
your hearts you Sinners.

4 To cast offensive sinners out of the Church, by excommunication. 2. Cor. 5,
7. Purge out the old Leaven.

5 To make clean from Ceremonial pollution and uncleanness. Leuit. 12, 7. So
shall she be Purged from the Issue of her blood.

Purgatory. sig:
A place, devised by Popery, for purging of sin, by Torments, suffered of
souls which die in mortal sin, without absolution.

to Purify. sig:
To make clean and pure that, which before was foul and defiled. This was
done, either by the blood of Goats, Bulls, and Beasts. Hebr. 9, 14. Or by
Faith, in the blood of Christ: which makes us perfectly pure, by imputation;
and imperfectly pure, by sanctification. Acts. 15, 9. After that by faith he
had purified their hearts.

Purity. sig:
Vnmixednesse with sin, as far, as our frailty will suffer, 2. Cor. 6, 6.
By Purity.

Purpose. sig:
A firm thought or determination of our mind, touching something which we mean
to do. Eccles. 3, 1. A time for every Purpose under Heaven. Prou. 16, 9.

2 The Decree of GOD, touching the eternal estate of all reasonable creatures.
Rom 9, 11 That the Purpose of God might remain, according to election.

3 The Decree of God, touching the endless salvation of the elect. Romans 8, 28.
To them that are called of his Purpose.

Puffed up. sig:
One houen and swollen, by arrogance and pride. 1 Timothy 6, 4. He is Puffed up.

Q. V.
Quarrel. sig:
STrife, or controversy, between man and man. Col. 3, 13. If any man have a
Quarrel to another.

2 An action or Controversy between God and us. Micah 6, 2 The Lord has a
Quarrel against his people.

Queen. sig: pro
A woman married to a King, as Bethsheba to David: Iezabel to Achab.

2 The true Church, espoused unto Christ the King of his people, as to an
Husband. Psalm 45, 9. Upon thy right hand does stand the Queen. Cant. 6, 8

3 The false Antichristian Church, boasting of her might, riches, and pomp.
Revel. 18, 7. I sit being a Queen: I am no widow.

the Queen of heaven. sig:
The work of Heaven (so Tremellius translates it out of the Haebrew) or
heavenly and Caelestiall things; as the Sun, Moon, Stars, and other heavenly
bodies. Ier. 7, 18. To make Cakes to the Queen of heaven.

to Quench. sig: pro
Either somewhat to slake the heat of the fire, or else wholly to put it out.

2 To loose some fruits and effects of the spirit, and to abate the working of
grace; as if one should somewhat slake the heat, and lessen the light of the
fire, 1 Thessalonians 5, 19. Quench not the Spirit. Thus the Godly by their security,
Quench the Spirit.

3 To loose wholly the grace of the spirit which once he had; as if one should
put out fire with water. Thus the wicked, by their obstinacy in sin, Quench
the spirit, as Saul and Judas did. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 19. Quench not the Spirit. And
thus a godly person never can quench the spirit; for the Spirit abides in them
for ever. John 14. And 1 John 3. The seed of God remains in them. Of this
seed, Peter says, it is immortal. 1 Pet. 1, verse last. Also Christ makes
request for believers.

Question. sig:
A demand, or asking; which when it is of things necessary to be known, out
of a desire to learn, it is good; otherwise, it is either vain or foolish.
Tim. 3, 23. Foolish Questions of vanity eschew.

to quicken. sig: pro
To give life to the dead, or to revive that which is dying.

2 To put the life of grace into a soul dead in trespasses and sins, when
one spiritually dead, is made to live to God by the life of faith. Ephe. 2, 1,
5. You has he quickened, which were dead in trespasses and sins.

3 To put heart and comfort by deliverance, into such as have grief and fear
thorough great dangers. Psalm. 119, 149, 154. Quicken me according to thy word.

R. A.
Rabbi. sig:
ONe, that is above others, and in sted of a number. Math. 23, 7. Rabbi, Rabbi.
A proud swelling Title, wherein the Pharisees gloried very much.

Race. sig:
The course of Christianity and godliness. Heb. 2, 1. Let us run the Race.

to Reign. sig: pro
To command with power, as King; and with readiness to be obeyed. Thus David
reigned in Israel. Josiah in Judah. 1 Kings 11, 42.

2 To command and rule in the soul, without opposition or resistance. Romans 6,
12. Let not sin Reign in your mortal bodies. Sin, is said to reign, when
the lusts and motions of sin be readily obeyed, as one would obey the Law and
command of a King. Thus sin reigns.

Death, is said to reign, because it exercises Note.
over all mankind, that power which through sin it has gotten. Romans 5, 14.
Death reigned from Adam to Moses. Thus death reigns.

Grace, is said to reign, when the righteousness of Christ, being freely
imputed, his Spirit reigns in our hearts, and we be governed by the motions
and impulsions thereof; so as now sin cannot condemn us to death; nor rule
over us, as it did before grace, which has quit the believers from the reign
of sin and death. Romans 5, 21. So might grace Reign by righteousness, to
eternal life. Thus grace reigns.

3 To govern and dispose all things, in Heaven and earth, according to his
royal decrees. Thus God Raigns over the world. Psalm. 93, 1. The Lord Reigns
and is clothed in majesty. The whole Psalm throughout.

4 To govern and rule the faithful, by the word and holy spirit: thus Christ
Reigns over his Church. Psalm. 97, 1. The Lord Reigns, let the earth rejoice.

Railer. sig:
An evil speaker, which vpbraideth others with their true faults in a
reproachful manner; or else casts upon them false crimes to defame them. 1
Cor. 6, 10. Extortioners, Railers.

White Raiment. See White.

to Rain. sig: pro
To power down water plentifully out of the clouds, to refresh the earth with
all. Deuteronomy. 28, 12.

2 To give plentifully. Psalm. 78, 24. He Rained down Manna. And verse 27. He
reigned down Flesh; that is, he gave it liberally like Rain.

Rain. sig:
The fruitfulness of the Earth, which follows moderate seasonable Rain.
Math. 5, 45. He sends rain on the just and unjust.

2 The doctrine of the word, which falling upon the consciences of men, does
refresh and make them fruitful, as Rain does the Grass. Deu. 32, 2. My
doctrine shall drop as the Rain.

to Raise. sig: pro
To lift up, or set up something which is down, or fallen.

2 To make a body which is dead, and fallen into the grave, to live and rise
again. Acts. 2, 32, 24. Whom God has raised up. John. 6, 40. I will Raise
them up at the last day.

3 To make a soul, which is spiritually dead, to live unto God, and to arise
unto a new and godly life. Romans 6. 4.

4 To restore and lift up such as be fallen into calamities. Psalm. 113, 7. He
raised the needy out of the dust. 1 Samuel 2, 6.

Rapine. sig:
A greedy, and violent affection, of taking and pulling from others that which
is theirs. Luke. 11, 39. Full of Rapine.

2 Something, which is taken or pulled from others by force and violence.
Psalm. Rapine is in their houses.

Rasor. sig: pro
A sharp instrument, wherewith hair is shaven and clean cut off by the
stumpes.

2 A fierce and cruel enemy, which destroys and cuts down all, as a sharp
Rasor shaues and cuts all bare. Esaias. 7, 20. In that day the Lord shall shave
with a Rasor, etc. This is meant by the King of Assiria, by whom God would
plague Israel.

3 A malicious tongue, which secretly wounds and cutteth ones name, as a
Rasor ones flesh. Psalm. 52, 2. Thy tongue is like a sharp Rasor, which cutteth
deceitfully.

R. E.
to Read. sig:
To recite distinctly, the sillibles and words of Scripture. Reading is
nothing else, but such a recital and speaking forth the letters and sillibles.
Luke 4, 6. He took the book, and Read. Acts. 15, 21. Moses in every
Synagogue has such as Read him. 1 Timothy 4, 13. Attend to reading. Reading is
not the word of God, but an action about it: neither is it preaching in the
proper acception.

to Reap. sig: pro
To gather the fruits of the earth, as Corn, Hay, etc.

2 To take such gains and fruits of our work, as the nature of the work is*
good, or evil. Gal. 6, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 96. Pro. He that sows iniquity shall
Reap affliction.

Reason. sig:
That faculty and power of the soul, whereby we debate and discourse of things
and objects, that we may be able soundly to judge of that which we rightly
understand.

2 The use of this faculty; to wit, discretion. Acts. 25, 28. Me thinks it is
against Reason. That is against discretion, or very absurd.

3 The cause and ground of a thing. 1 Pet. 3, 15. To them which ask you a
Reason of that hope which is in you.

Reasonable service. sig:
The spiritual sacrifice of a Christian, offering not the bodies of beasts,
which have no reason (as they were wont to do under the Law) but himself wholly
(being a Reasonable creature) as a sacrifice unto God, his Creator and
Redeemer (which is a most Reasonable thing) to do him service and obedience in
all things, according to his revealed will (which is a very Reasonable rule)
Romans 12, 1. Which is your Reasonable service of God.

Reasoning. sig:
An evil discourse or disputing against God, or his word. Phil. 2, 14. Let all
things be done without Reasonings. Math. 15, 19. Out of the heart comes evil
Reasonings.

to Rebel. sig: pro
To fight or make war against his lawful Sovereign, as Absolon Rebelled
against his Father David: or to cast off the yoke of a lawful Gouerner, as
Corah, and Abiram. Numb. 16, 1, 2.

To strive or rise up against the government of the spirit, in the mind of a
regenerate man. Romans 7, 23. A law in my members Rebelling against the law of my
mind. Thus sin Rebelleth against grace.

Rebellion. sig: pro
To vnloyall action of subjects, unlawfully rising in Arms against their
lawful Sovereign.

2 Every sinner, great and little; which in some sort is a Rebellion, because
we all owe allegiance to God by the law of our creation, and have vowed it in
our Baptism, and also have so many means against sin, as unless we purpose
to Rebel, we could never so commit it. Esaias. 59, 12, 13. We have spoken of
cruelty and Rebellion.

3 Those sins which are more greiuous and gross, being committed through
infirmity, upon no great temptation, as it was in David. Psalm. 25, 7. Remember
not the sins of my youth, nor my Rebellions.

4 Obstinacy and stiffenes in gross sins. Deuteronomy. 21, 27. I know thy Rebellion
and thy stiff neck. Deuteronomy. 9, 24. Ierem. 3, 22. Return and I will heal your
Rebellions.

to Rebuke. sig:
Privately to reprove such, as sin privately. Pro. 24, 28. and 28, 23. He
that Rebukes one shall find more favor at the last. Math. 18, 15.

2 To censure by public reproof, such as sin before others. 1 Timothy 5, 10.
Such as sin Rebuke openly.

3 To put one to some great shame, by some judgment from God. Psalm. 6, 1.
Rebuke me not in thine anger. Jude. 9. The Lord ^ebuke thee Satan.

to Receive. sig: pro
To take a thing with our hand, being given us or offered of another.

2 To understand and yield general assent unto the Doctrine of the word.
Matthew. 13, 20. Hebrews. 10, 26. After they have Received the truth.

3 To believe the word and promises of Christ, with particular application.
John. 1, 12. Gal. 3, 14. By faith we receive, etc.

4 To bestow some kindness or entertainment upon the godly. Math. 10, 40,
41. He that Receives a Prophet, etc.

to Reconcile. sig: pro
To restore all former love, concord, and familiarity that was wont to be; (all
hatred and discord set apart.) Mat. 5, 24. Go, be Reconciled to thy Brother.

2 To take to grace and favor, such as were enemies through sin. 2 Corin. 5,
19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself. God is reconciled to
Man, when forgiving his sins unto him, he takes him unto his favor. Man is
Reconciled to God, when believing the forgiveness of his sins, he accepts
the love and favor of God, and forbeareth (what he can) to offend him. Col. 1,
20. and 2 Cor. 5, 20.

Reconciliation. sig:
An agreement of parties which were at variance, as God and the elect were
through sin, till of Enemies they became friends, through the atonement made
in the blood of Christ, and received by Faith. 2 Cor. 5, 19. And has committed
to us the word of Reconciliation.

day of Reconciliation sig:
A time set apart of the Jews, once a year, by Gods appointment, to seek
atonement for sins, by Prayer and Fasting. Leuit. 23, 27. The tenth of this
seventh month shall be a day of Reconciliation.

Ministry of Reconciliation. sig:
The Ministry of the Gospel, announcing and declaring atonement with God, by
free forgiveness of sins, and justification offered unto us by Christ. 2
Cor. 5, 18. And has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation.

Word of reconciliation sig:
Message or doctrine of atonement. 2. Corin. 5, 19. The word of Reconciliation.

Reed. sig: pro
A Rush or kind of Straw, shaken with every puff of wind.

2 An unconstant man, wavering with the wind. Math. 11, 7. A Reed shaken with
the wind.

3 An helper or friend, which does rather hurt then help, such as use him. 2
Kings 18, 27. Thou trustest on this broken staff of Reed.

Reed bruised. sig:
Infirm and weak believers, which Christ did not contemn but mercifully
bear withal and support. Math. 12, 10. A bruised Reed he shall not break.

to redeem. sig:
To buy again something which we had once sold, by giving back the price
unto him that bought it. Leuit. 27, 20. and 25, 24. Also, to give the true
valuation of a thing. Exo. 13, 13, 15. Leu. 27.

2 To pull out of Captivity with a strong hand, and without any ransom, such
as are violently held Prisoners by their enemies. Thus God redeemed Israel out
of Egypt. Deuteronomy. 32, 6. Is not he thy Father, and thy Redeemer?

3 To free the elect from the tyrranny of Satan, by a price and ransom given
and paid to Gods judgment. Luke 1, 68. Blessed be the Lord God, because he
has Reedeemed his people. Titus 2, 14. Thus is Christ our Redeemer.

4 To deliver some out of an outward trouble and danger. Psalm. 25, 22. Redeem
Israel out of all his trouble.

5 To recover by diligence, something lost by our own sloth. Ephe. 5, 16.
Redeem the time.

Redeemer. sig:
A deliverer, or one that pays a ransom to set free such as are bound. Psalm.
19, 14. O GOD my my strength, and my Redeemer.

redemption sig:
The freedom of sinners, both from the guilt and power of sin, by forgiveness
and sanctification, as touching the beginning and first Act of our Redemption.
Ephe. 1, 7. By whom we have Redemption.

2 The whole work of a Sinners salvation, comprehending all things that
belongs to it. Heb. 9, 12. And obtained eternal Redemption for us. Our whole
Redemption, from the first act to the last, is wholly from the mercy of God in
Christ, and not at all from our selves; not any part of it.

3 The last act, only of our salvation in the Resurrection of our bodies, and
in the sentence of the last judgment, when being freed from all misery,
perfect felicity shall begin, as the full fruit of our Redemption. Lu. 21, 28.
Lift up your heads, for our Redemption draws near. 1 Cor. 1, 30. He is made
unto us Righteousness, Wisdom, Sanctification, and Redemption. Our whole
Redemption, from first act to the last, both for merit and efficacy, it is
wholly from Christ, and not at al from our selves; no not in any part, or least
degree.

Redemption of our bodies. sig:
Either deliverance from our body, by death, that our Soul may be received
into Heaven; or rather, that perfect consummation of our bliss, when our
bodies shall be delivered from the Grave at the last day. Romans 8, 23. Looking
for the Redemption of our bodies.

Reformation. sig:
Framing again, or bringing back, of persons and things disordered and out
of course, unto their first form and state wherein they were set, either by
Gods Creation, or institution and ordinance. Psalm. 50, 17. Seeing thou hate
to be Reformed. Hebr. 9, 10. Until the time of Reformation.

to Refresh. sig:
To give rest or make fresh again, after some bodily or spiritual decay and
weariness. Psalm 60, 9. Thou did refresh thy Land when it was weary.

Refreshing. sig:
That most comfortable rest and repose, which the elect shall have at their
Resurrection, for ever, after all their labor and miseries of this life. Acts
3, 19. When the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Refuge. sig: pro
A place to fly unto, for succor and defense in dangers.

2 The defense and protection of God, who is our best refuge. Psalm. 59, 16.
Thou art my refuge in the time of trouble. Psalm. 32, 7.

Regeneration. sig:
New birth, after we are once born naturally, to be borne again spiritually.
Titus 3, 5. By the Lauer of Regeneration, or by the washing of New Birth.

2 The day and time of the last Judgment, when our whole Nature, being
perfectly restored, both body and Soul, shall enjoy the heavenly inheritance.
Matthew 9, 28. You which have followed me, shall in the Regeneration sit upon
Thrones, etc.

Regeneration, is commonly put and used by Note this.
Divines, for Sanctification and Renouation; and then it imports and signifies
as much, as the reformation of a Man; which consists in the Mortification of
sin, and newness of life. Whereas, if we speak exactly, and as the thing
is, this renewing of our Nature, is but an effect and fruit of our
Regeneration, which properly is, our incorporation and ingrafting into Christ
by Faith, whereby we have our spiritual being of Children in the Kingdom of
grace, as by Carnal generation we have Natural being in the Kingdom of this
world. See John 1, 12, 13, 14. Regeneration may therefore thus be defined.

Regeneration what?

Regeneration, is a work or act of Gods wonderful power, begetting the elect
again to himself, by the ministry of the word, through the spirit, that of the
Children of wrath (by the desert of sin) they might be made (by grace, through
faith in Christ) the Sons and Daughters of God. James 1, 18. Of his own will
begat he us by the word of truth. Titus 3, 4, 5, 6. Therefore, the confounding
of Regeneration, with Sanctification, I do take to be an ouer-sight: but I
judge it a gross error, to think our selves to have any stroke in our
Newbirth; so much as to assent to it; til of unwilling, we be made willing.

to be Regenerate. sig:
To be borne again by the Spirit, that we may be the Children of God. John ^,
3. Unless a Man be Regenerate and borne again, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God.

Rejoice. sig:
To take comfort and be made glad, by the opinion, presence, or hope of some
good thing; earthly or heavenly. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 16. Rejoice evermore. Lu. 1, 58.
They Rejoiced with her.

to rejoice in Christ. sig:
To rest wholly in him and his sufferings, with full comfort and contentment of
mind. Gal. 6. 14. Phil. 4, 4. Rejoice in the Lord.

Religion. sig:
Godliness, even that inward piety of the heart, whereby God is truly
acknowledged and farred. James 1, 27. Pure Religion, and undefiled, is this.

2 The outward lawful worship and service of God, prescribed in his word, and
professed by men. James 1, 26. That man's Religion is vain.

3 The Doctrine which teaches Religion. Acts 25, 19.

4 The whole Jewish external worship of God, as it was corrupted by the
Tradition of the Pharisees. Acts 26, 5. I lived a Pharisie, after the perfect
Sect of our Religion.

5 Superstition. Col. 2, 18. By the Religion of Angels. verse 23. In voluntary
Religion.

Religious. sig:
A worshipper of God outwardly. James 1, 26. If any among you seem Religious.

2 A true worshipper of God, or a godly person. Acts 10, 5. A Religious or
devout man, one that fears God.

3 A person devoted to Religion, and studious to know better the way of Gods
worship. Acts. 2, 5. There were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, Religious men.

4 Superstitious and hypocritical persons, which would seem to be lovers of
Religion, and be not. Acts 13, 50. They stirred up certaiue Religious or devout
women against Paul.

to Remember. sig:
Either to call to mind something past, or to keep in mind something for the
time to come. Exodus 20, 8. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath. Math. 26, 75.
Then Peter Remembered the words of the Lord.

2 To make mention with liking; to praise, commend and celebrate a thing. Psalm.
Remember the wondrous things that he has done. Psa. 6. 5. In death there is
none Remembers thee. Esaias 26, 8. Eccl. 1^, 1. Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy youth; that is, worship and praise him.

3 To trust or put confidence in another. Psalm. 20, 7. Some trust in horses,
but we Remember thee, O Lord. In this sense, we are commanded to eat the
Lords Supper, in Remembrance of his death and passion: For we are warned
thereby, and stirred up, both to call to mind his sufferings, and to trust in
them for salvation. 1 Cor. 11, 25.

to Remember, as it is referred to God. sig:
To care for one, to deliver, succor, and save him. God Remembered Abraham, or
thought upon him. Genesis 19, 29. Also in Luke 23, 41. Lord Remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom. Heb. 13, 4. And in all places of the Psalms, where
the Prophet prays to be remembered; it has this meaning to be blessed, cared
for, and comforted. If we speak properly, there falls into God no
forgetfulness, but as men use to help such as they remember and think upon;
so, the helps, blessings, and comforts, which God does afford to his people,
shows and makes it known, that he Remembers them. 1 Samuel 1, 19. And the Lord
Remembered Hannah.

2 To punish or correct sin. Psalm. 25, 7. Remember not the sins of my
youth; that is, Remember them not to punish me for them. Iere. 31, 34. I will
not Remember your Iniquities.

3 Graciously to accept, and favorably to fulfill. Psalm. 20, 3. Let him
Remember all thy burnt Offerings.

Rembrance sig:
A calling to mind, or keeping in mind. This is the proper signification.

2 Memory, good name, and report. Eccl. 9, 5. Their Remembrance is forgotten.
Exodus 17, 14.

3 Having in mind, with faith and love. 1 Cor. 11, 25. Do this in Remembrance
of me.

Remission of sins. sig:
Forgiveness of sin, when both the guilt and We have Remission fr^ Christ,
both of fault, and the whole punishment, temporal and eternal.
punnishment are freely pardoned, for Christ, alone, to such as believe in him.
Acts 10, 43. All that believe in him, shall receive Remission of their sins.
These are our spiritual debts, which being wholly pardoned by Christ only;
what place is there for Popish satisfaction.

2 All the merits and benefits of Christ, by a Sinecdoche of a part for the
whole. Math. 26, 28. Which is shed for many, for Remission of sins. Under
this one benefit, is comprehended the whole Mass of his merits.

to Remit, or forgive. sig:
To forgive, or not to require the payment or debt of sin, at our hands. John
20, 23. They are Remitmitted. Thus God alone Remitteth authoratiuely.

2 To declare and pronounce sin to be forgiven, to such, as show their faith
by true Repentance. John 20, 23. Whose sins ye Remit. Thus Ministers are
said to remit declaratiuely, as witnesses only.

3 To put wrong done us out of our Rememberance. Math. 18, 21. And I shall
forgive or Remit him. Thus one man forgiues another.

4 To receive an excommunicate person into the Church, upon his Repentance. 2
Cor. 27. Ye ought rather to forgive him. And verse 10. Thus the Church
forgiues scandalous livers. See Forgiveness.

Remaining sig:
A portion of time which is behind, how little soever. 1 Pet. 4, 2. That time
which Remains.

2 Constant continuing and abiding for ever. John 16, 15. And that your Fruit
Remain.

Remnant. sig:
Certain persons, reserved out of a great number and mass of people. Romans 9,
27. Though Israel were as the sand of the Sea, yet but a Remnant shall be saved.

to Remove sig:
To put a thing out of his due place. Prou. 23, 10 Remove not the ancient
bounds.

2 To destroy and to confound. Psalm 15, 5. He that does these things shall
never be Removed.

to Render. sig:
To give something back where we had it. Psalm. 116, 16. What shall I Render
unto the Lord? That is, by way of Thankfulness, to return unto his praise,
all those graces and good blessings which we receive of him.

2 To requite, or recompense, or to do one like for like. Psalm. 94, 2.

Renewing. sig:
That work of the spirit, whereby the elect, of the enemies of God, Children
of his Wrath, ungodly, and sinners, they are become the Children of God,
Citizens with the Saints, Heirs and Coheires with Christ; being made
partaker, through faith of Christ, his Righteousness, and his sufferinges,
unto perfect reconciliation with GOD. This is the first work of Grace, and is
the same with in graffing it into Christ, or regeneration. Ioh. 3, 3, 4, 5, 6,
etc.

2 The restoring of our corrupt Nature to our first Image, when Satan's Image
being defaced and blotted out; instead thereof, there is printed in our
breasts, Gods Image, consisting in true Righteousness, Holiness, and
Knowledge. Titus 3, 4, 5. By the Renewing of the Holie-Ghost. Coloss. 3, verse
10. Put on the New-Man, which after God is created in knowledge. Ephesians 4,
24. This is an effect of the former Renewing, as a second work of Grace, yet
done at the same time.

3 The refreshing and strengthening of that which is somewhat decayed and
blemished, by our daily slippes, stains, and falls. Psalm. 21, 10. Renew a
right spirit within me. To. 12, 2. Be Renewed in the spirit of your mind. 2
Cor. 4, 16. The inner man is Renewed daily. This third Grace, is the proceeding
of the second work of grace, till it be perfected.

Renting of garments. sig:
Some great indignation and heaviness, conceived for some horrible crime done,
or supposed to be done; or some great and extraordinary calamity and judgment.
Math. 26, 62. They Rent their clothes, saying he has spoken blasphemy. Acts
14, 14 When they heard that, they Rent their clothes. Genesis 37. 34. Jacob Rent
his clothes, and sorrowed for his son a long season.

to Rent the heart. sig:
To endeavor by Prayer, Meditation, and Fasting, to bring the heart to an
unfeigned and deep sorrow and mourning, for the offense of a most gracious God
by our grievous sins. Joel 2, 13. Rent your hearts. etc.

to Rent a kingdom. sig:
To take away and deprive one of his kingdom. 1 Samuel 15, 28. The Lord has Rent
the Kingdom of Israel from thee this day.

to Repair. sig:
To build up and raise that which is fallen down. Amos 9, 11. I will Repair or
build up the decayed Tabernacle of David.

to Repay. sig:
To pay back again, or ^o pay a man with his own Money (as we use to say)
Romans 12, 19. I will Repay says the Lord. This is to meat sinners their own
measure.

to Repent, referred to to men. sig: pro Referred to God.
To be wise after the fact, and to come to our selves again. 2 Cor. 7, 8. I
Repent not, though I did Repent. Luke 15, 17. And he came to himself. Mat. 21,
29. Yet afterward he Repented.

2 To wish with grief, something which is done, to be undone; in regard of
the hurt that comes of it. Math. 27, 2. Judas Repented, etc.

3 To change the mind being sorry for sin, (as it is sin and the offense of
God) with purpose of amendment. Acts 8, 22. Repent, that thy wickedness may
be done away. And 17, 30. Now he warns every man every where to Repent.

4 To repair and refresh Grace, being decayed by negligence or security. Reu.
2, 5. Repent and do thy first works.

5 To alter our purpose and counsel. Thus God is said not to repent. 1 Samuel
15, 29. The eternity of Israel cannot Repent; For God never alters his purpose.

6 To undo that which was once done. Thus is God said to Repent after the
manner of men, who repenting themselves of that was done, they do undo, and
afterward overthrow their first work. Gene. 6, 6. God Repented that he had
made man.

repentance. sig:
Any change of mind or purpose, in any matter whatsoever. Hebr. 12, 17. Esau
found no place for Repentance.

2 A great grief of mind, through the sense of Gods wrath threatened to sin,
without any true hatred of sin. This is a Legal Repentance. Mat. 27, 2.

3 The whole change of a Sinner, in mind, will, and actions, from evil to good,
at his first conversion. Acts 11, 18. Has God given the Gentiles Repentance to
life. This is Evangelical Repentance, and comprehendes faith under it. Math.
3, 8, 11. This Repentance is wholly the work of Gods grace; for in that we are
willing to turn to God, it is, because grace, of unwilling, has made willing.

4 A reparation of our daily spiritual decaies, by a turning from some
particular sins after our first conversion. 2 Cor. 7, 10. Godly sorrow
bringes forth Repentance, not to be repented off. This is the Progress of
Evangelical Repentance.

Repentance what?

Repentance, is a very sore displeasure which man has in his heart for his
sins (even because they are the breach of Gods holy Laws, and the offense of
God his most merciful Father) which ingendereth in him a true hatred against
sin, and a settled desire to live better in time to come, ordering his life by
the will of GOD revealed in his word.

Reprobate. sig:
A refused one, or one cast out and rejected: Also one, not being found such an
one as he ought to be. 1 Cor. 9, 27. Least I be found a Reprobate, or be
reproved; that is, not such as I should be, by living otherwise then I teach.

Reprobation what?

Reprobation, is the most wise purpose of God, Reprobation for foreseede
Infidelity and Sinners, against Romans 9, 11, 12, 13.
whereby he has before all eternity (for his own wills sake) constantly
decreed, without any Injustice, not to have mercy on those Angels and men whom
he has not loved, but has passed them over when he did choose others; that by
their just condemnation, he might declare his wrath toward sin, to the glory
of his Justice. Romans 9, 10, 11, 18, 22, 23.

Reprobate mind. sig:
A mind, destitute and void of judgment and common reason, to discern
between good and evil. Romans 1, 28. Delivered into a Reprobate mind.

Reprobate to good works sig:
Counterfeit and insincere professors, which know not how to do or go about
any good work. Titus 1, 16. And to every good work Reprobate.

Respect of persons. sig:
The preferring of one before another for some outward qualities, of riches,
poverty, etc. Iam. 2, 1. Have not the faith of Christ in Respect of persons.
Deuteronomy. 16, 19. See Acception of Persons.

Rest, as it is referred to men. sig: pro
A ceasing from labor or work, of mind or body.

2 A ceasing from bodily labors, or a refreshing (after weariness) by sleep.
Psalm The day for man to labor, also he has given the night for Man to rest
in: Luke He called them aside to rest awhile. This is Natural Rest. Psa. 127,
2. He will give Rest to his beloved. Math. 8, 20.

3 A ceasing from outward works of our worldly calling, for a certain time,
to ^^t us for Gods service. Thus the Jews seventh day, and our Lords day
with us, is a day of Rest. Commandment the fourth. This is Ceremonial Rest.

4 A ceasing from disobedience to God and the works of sin. Heb. 4, 3. We
which have believed do enter into Rest. Also verse 10, 11. When an elect Soul
cease from the works of corrupt Nature. This is spiritual Rest.

5 A perfect ceasing and full freedom, from all sins, sorrows, and
miseries. Reave. 14, 13. They that die in the Lord rest from their labors. This
is aeternall Rest.

6 Peace and quietness of a good conscience, under sure hope of aeternall
Rest. Math. 11, 29. And ye shall find Rest to your Souls.

7 The quietness of the mind being freed from all worldly cares and fears
of enemies and dangers. Psalm. 116, 5, 6. Take thy Rest o my Soul, for God, etc.

8 The doctrine of God, whereupon we ought to stay and Rest our selves. Esaias
28, 12. This is the Rest, etc.

9 A place of quiet and constant abode. Psalm. 132, 8. Psalm. 95, 11. So was
Canaan to Gods people, and Jerusalem to the Arc. Psalm. 132, 14.

10 A ceasing from Tillage and Husbandry. Thus the ground is said to Rest.
Leuit. 25, 5, 6. A year of Rest to the Land.

11 Ease and idleness. Genesis 49, 15. He shall see that Rest is good. Thus the
wicked Rest.

Rest. sig:
The Church and house of God, wherein Christ Rests. Psalm. 13, 14. Esaias 10,
11. And his Rest shall be glorious. The Papists which translate, This his
Sepulcher shall be glorious, to prove the adoration and religious worship of
our Saviors Sepulcher; deal both ignorantly and superstitiously therein.

Rest referred to God. sig:
A ceasing from his work of Creation at the end of six days. Heb. 44. Genesis
2, 1. He Rested the seventh day from his work.

Restitution orrestoring. sig: pro
The setting in joint again, or placing in good estate that which was once
fallen down and decayed. Genesis 40, 21. And he restored the chief Butler. In
this signification, God is said in Scripture to Restore his people: and thus
are we commanded to Restore such as sin by infirmity. Gal. 6, 1. Ye that are
spiritual Restore such an one. This Acts 3, 21. Romans 8, 20, 21, 22, 23.
shall be perfectly done at the last day, when every thing (now corrupted)
shall have due perfection and proportion.

2 A giving again that which one had before lost. Psalm. 5, 12. Restore to me
the joy of thy salvation.

3 Returning that which is not a man's own to the proper owner. Luke 19, 8. I
will Restore fourefold. Ezekiel. 18, 7. If he Restore the pledge, etc.

Resurrection. sig:
An action of divine power, quickening dead bodies, and raising them to life. 1
Cor. 15, 12. How do some say that there is no Resurrection? This is the second
Resurrection.

2 Restoring dead Souls to the life of grace, that they may live to God,
being moved by his spirit. Revel. 20, 6. Blessed are they that have part in
the first Resurrection. John 5, 25. This is the first Resurrection.

Resurrection of condemnation. sig:
Such a Resurrection as has condemnation and eternal death to follow it.
John, 5, 29. Others shall rise to to the Resurrection of condemnation.

Resurrection of life. sig:
Such a Resurrection as has eternal life following it. John, 5. 29. Which
life, because it belongs only to the just, it is therefore called the
Resurrection of the just. Luke. 14, 14. At the Resurrection of the just.

Resurrection from the dead. sig:
The whole mediation of Christ in his Incarnation, Nativity, Life, Suffering,
Death, Burial, his remaining in the Grave under the power of death, Ascension,
return to Judgment. Romans 10, 9. And raised him from the dead.

to Return. sig: pro
To come back again, after one is departed or gone out of the way.

2 To repent, as when a sinner which has erred from the way of Gods
Commandments, does come home again by unfeigned repentance. Acts. 3, 19.
Return, and repent, etc. Ezekiel. 18, 32. Thus sinners Return to God.

3 To yield or give consent to the mind or desire of another. Ier. 18, 19. Do
not Return to them, but let them Return to thee. Thus the people Return to
their Minister.

4 To show fresh signs of favor, after some judgments for sins. Psalm. 61,
20. Thou will Return. Psalm. 40, 13. Joel. 2, 14. Who knows if God will
Return? Thus God Returns to us.

Revelation sig:
An uncovering or opening something that is hid, and secret. Revel. 1. The
Revelation of John the Divine. That is, which was showed to him. How do some
teach, that this book is so hard that it cannot be understood, if the holy
Spirit have entitled it the Revelation? that is, a Declaration, or a thing
Revealed.

the day of Revelation sig:
A time of declaration appointed in Gods Counsel, for the manifesting of dark
things which be hid and kept close. Romans 2, 5.

the Revelation of Jesus Christ. sig:
That prophecy, which Jesus Christ has opened unto us out of the bosom of
his Father, by the ministry of the Angels. Revel. 1, 1. The Revelation of Jesus
Christ.

2 His declaring himself unto us to be our redeemer by his word and spirit,
even in this life. 1 Pet. 1, 13. Trust perfitly in the grace brought you in the
Revelation of Jesus Christ.

3 The glorious appearing of Jesus Christ at the last day. 1 Pet. 1, 13. Tit.
2, 13.

to Reveal. sig:
To make us understand any part of divine truth which we knew not before. Phi.
3, 15. God shall Reveal the same unto them.

2 To open a secret committed to us. Pro. 20, 19 Reuealeth, or discovers
secrets.

to Reveal Christ in us sig:
To open the eyes of our mind by the spirit, that we may see him to be the
only Savior, and to be our Savior. Gal. 1, 15. It pleased God to Reveal his
son in me.

to Revenge or avenge. sig:
To punnish sin, commonly with some judgments like and proportionable to the
sin it self. Psalm. 94, 1. Revenge thy self o God: or, o God the Auenger.

2 To requi^e an Injury done us, out of some hate against our person. Romans 12,
19. Revenge not your selves; that is, recompense not evil for evil. Romans 12,
17.

Reverence. sig:
A holy fear of the heart toward God, witnessed by all seemly Behavior,
Gesture, Attire, Countenance, Attention, and such like. Psalm. 2, 11. Serve the
Lord with Reverence. Mal. 1, 8. Heb. 12, 28. That we may please him with
Reverence.

2 All comely behavior toward men, which is meet for their gifts and places.
As Solomon did Reverence to Bethsheba his Mother. Abraham to the Rulers of
Sichem. Math. 21, 37. They will Reverence my Son. Genesis 33, 7. They drew near
and did Reverence. Heb. 13, 9. And we gave them Reverence.

Reward. sig: pro
A Just recompense, given to laborers at the end of their work, as the
laborers. Math. 20, 8. Received their wages in the eeuen.

2 A free recompense, given of mercy unto the godly after all their labors,
and travails in the service of God (as laborers use to be Rewarded at the
end of the day, when their work is done.) Mat. 6, 6. Shall Reward thee openly.
Math. 10, 41. This is far from Popish merit and deserving, by worthiness of
the work done. We teach Reward by favor from God, not by desert of our own
work. That which Christ in Math. 6, 1. calls Reward, in Luke, 6, 32. is called
in the Greek Karis; that is, Grace; which we translate Thanks.

Reins. sig:
Privy and secret thoughts. Ier. 11, 20. God searches the heart and Reins.

2 Secret inspiration of God. Psalm. 16, 7. My Reins teach me in the night.

3 Affections of the heart. Psalm. 26, 2. Examine my Reins and my heart.

R. I.
Rich. sig: pro
One that abounds in earthly blessings. 1. Tim. 16, 17. Warn them that be
Rich, etc.

2 One that abounds in spiritual good things. 1 Cor. 1, 5. Ye are Rich, etc.
Eccl. 10, 6. The Rich sat in the low place. That is, men stored with all kind
of wisdom.

3 Such, as by their Riches are puffed up and presume to much upon themselves,
that they have good store of goodness and grace, when they have little or none
at all. Revel. 3, 17. I am Rich. Luke. 1, 53. He sends the Rich empty away.

4 Such as put their trust in their own goods. Math. 19, 24. Luke. 6, 24. Then
for a Rich man to enter into heaven.

Rich grace. and rich mercy sig:
Most abundant or plentiful grace and mercy. Ephesians. 2, 4. According to his Rich
grace.

Rich to god sig:
One that wholly relieth upon Gods godnesse, being plentifully furnished with
faith, hope, love, fear, and other graces. Luke 12, 21. So is it with every
one who is Rich to himself, and not rich to God; that is, in respect of God.

Rich to himself. sig:
One that depends not upon Gods providence, but upon his own wisdom and
wealth, caring for, and storing only such things as belong to this life. Luke
12, 21.

rich in faith sig:
Such as have a great measure and portion of Faith, by which they are made
partakers of Christ's Riches. James 2, 5. That they should be Rich in Faith.

Rich in knowledge. sig:
Such as have a great measure of understanding in heavenly things. 1 Corin. 1,
5. Ye are Rich in all knowledge.

Rich in good works. sig:
Such as be full of good works, abundantly doing good to others. 1 Timothy 6, 18.
And be Rich in good works.

Rich in this world. sig:
Such as abound in things appertaining to this life. 1 Timothy 6, 16. Charge them
that be Rich in this World.

Riches. sig:
Store of worldly goods heaped together. Luke 12, 15. Man's life is in his
Riches. 1. Tim. 6, 17. Trust not in thy Riches.

2 The merits and graces of Christ. Ephe. 3, 8. That I should Preach the
unsearchable riches of Christ.

3 The knowledge of the Gospel unto life aeternall. Romans 11, 12.

Riches of Gods bounty sig:
A plentiful large abundance of his bounty and goodness. Romans 2, 4. Do thou
despise the Riches of his bounty?

Riches of iniquity. sig:
Worldly goods, kept, or spent and used wickedly. Luke 16, 9. Make thou
friends with the Riches of iniquity.

Uncertain Riches. sig:
Unstable, fleeting, and inconstant Riches. 1 Ti. 6, 17.

Unsearchable Riches. sig:
The most precious benefits of Christ, the worthiness and depth whereof, no
human wit can find out. Ephesi. 3, 8. Unsearchable Riches of Christ.

Riddle. sig:
Some dark and hidden saying or question, not easy to be understood of us,
without an Interpretation. Judge. 14, 12. I will put forth a Riddle unto you.
See Parable.

Righteousness unto thee. sig:
A just work, and pleasing to God. Deuteronomy. 24, 13. It shall be Righteousness unto
thee, before the Lord thy God.

Righteous. sig: pro
One, that gives to every one that which is his own.

2 One just, perfectly, and infinitely of himself, and in himself; doing
always that which is righteous unto others. Psalm. 11, 7. The Righteous God
loves Righteousness. And Dan. 9, 7.

2 Equal, rightful. Thus the Judgments and Laws of God, are called
Righteous. Psalm 119. Thy Righteous Judgments. Deuteronomy. 4, 8. Laws so Righteous.

3 One, accounted Righteous, by imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto him.
Psalm. 32, 11. Be glad ye Righteous.

4 One, that performs just and righteous works in his own person, though
imperfectly. 1 Ioh. 3, 7. He that does Rigbteousnes, is Righteous. Genesis 7, 1.
For thee have I seen Righteous before me.

5 One, that is just in his own opinion. Math. 9, 13. Christ came not to call
the Righteous, but sinners to Repentance.

6 One, that is less faulty and blame-woorthy, then another. Genesis 38, 26. She
is more Righteous then I.

Righteousness. sig:
The Divine essence, or God himself, who is Righteousness it self; and the
Author of al righteousness in others. Ier. 22, 6. Jehovah our Righteousness.

2 Our whole Justification, which is our deliverance from guilt and punnishment
of all sin; and our being accounted Righteous, by the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us. 1 Cor. 1, 30. Christ is made unto us Righteousness.

3 The fidelity or truth of God, in keeping his promise. Psalm. 4, 1. O God of
my Righteousness. And 51, 14. My tongue shall sing of thy Righteousness.

4 The benefits of God, which declare him to be righteous and just of his word.
Psalm. 24, 5. He shall receive Righteousness from the God of his salvation.

5 The perfect conformity of Christ, his human Nature and life unto the will of
his Father, which is called the Righteousness of Christ, because it was in him
as the proper subject, and the Righteousness of Faith; because faith is the
only instrument to apprehend it, and receive it; and the Righteousness of God,
because it can only satisfy and answer the rigor of Gods Righteous Law.
Romans 3, 21, 22. The Righteousness of God, is manifest without the Law, and it
is our Justification before God.

6 The thorough conformity and agreement (in some part and measure) of our will
and actions, unto the whole just Law of God. Romans 6, 18, 19. Being free from
sin, ye are made the servants of Righteousness. etc.

7 That just and upright dealing which is between man and man. Luke 1, 75. To
serve God in Righteousness, and true Holiness. And in all places, where the
word Righteousness, is joined with Holiness or Godliness.

8 Righteousness of works and faith. Romans 930.

9 The just and right distribution of punnishments and rewards, by public
Governors. Psalm. 72, 2. Then shall he Judge thy people with Righteousness.
Acts 17, 31. He will Judge the world in Righteousness; that is, most
Righteously punishing the wicked, rewarding the godly.

Righteousness of the Law. sig:
That perfect uprightness in Nature and actions, which is commanded in the Law
of Moses; and was at first written in man's heart by Law of Nature. Romans 8, 4.
That Righteousness.

Right hand of God. sig:
The infinite strength and power whereby God works all things effectually.
Psalm. 118, 6. The Right hand of the Lord, has brought mighty things to pass.

2 Help and succor, proceeding from his power. Revel. 1, 17. He laid his
Right hand upon me; and said, Fear not. Psalm. 138, 7. and 139, 10.

3 The high and exceeding great glory of God the Father. Psalm. 110, 1. Sit on
my Right hand.

4 Everlasting joy and bliss in the life to come. Math. 25, 33. He shall set
the Sheep on his Right hand.

Right, and left hand of Christ. sig:
The highest and greatest worldly preferment, which Christ (as King) can give
to his chief favorites and servants. Math. 20, 21. Grant that these my
Sons may sit, one on thy Right hand, etc. The Woman that made this request,
did think Christ to be an earthly King; and therefore, desired for her sons
(not a Tyranicall Government, which had been unnatural for her to ask; unfit
for Christ to give; and unprofitable for her sons to receive) but the highest
lawful dignities under Christ: such as Joseph had under Pharaoh in Egypt; and
Daniell, under Darius in Babylon. It is a fault in the Rhemists, who think
Heathenish Tyrannic forbidden here, which the other Apostles would have
pitied, not disdained. Mark 10, 41.

2 The cheifest glory and bliss in the kingdom of heaven. Math. 20, 23. To sit
on my Right hand, and on my left, shall be given to them, for whom it is
prepared of my Father. These words teach plainly, two things: First, that there
shall be differences and degrees of glory in heaven: Secondly, that they are
prepared and appointed of God, in his aeternall purpose.

3 Thoroughly, at all hands, or on every side. 2 Cor. 6, 7. On the Right Hand,
and on the left.

River. sig: pro
A brook, or course of water, issuing out of the Sea, or some great water.

2 The whole people of God, dwelling in Jerusalem and Jury. Psalm. 46, 5. There
is a River, whose streams shall make glad the City of God.

3 The promises of the word, whereof the faithful drink to their full content
and refreshing. Psalm. 23, 2. He leads me by the pleasant Rivers, or still
waters.

River of God. sig:
Store and plenty of Rain, sent of God. Psalm. 65, 9. The River of God is full
of water.

R. O.
to Robor spoil. sig:
To take something from others by violence. Math. 27, 44. Between two Robbers.
So it is in the Original Greek Text. Luke 10, 30. They Robbed him of his
Raiment.

2 To take something from others, which is theirs, by the consent of the
Owners, at the appointment of God. Exodus 3, 22. Thou shall Rob or spoil the
Egyptians.

White-Robe. See White.

Rock. sig: pro
A strong defenced place of stone, serving for safety against enemies and
dangers. 1 Samuel 14, 4. There was a sharp Rock on the one side.

2 The mighty help and defense of God. Psalm. 18, 1. Thou art my Rock; that
is, succor and defense.

3 Christ Jesus, who is called a Rock, in two respects. First, because we
have from him our soule-refreshing; as water gusht out of the Wilderness, to
refresh the people being thirsty. 1 Cor. 10, 1. The Rock that followed them,
was Christ. Secondly, because he alone strongly sustaines and bears up his
Church, built upon him by faith; as a house upon a Rock. Math. 16, 18. Upon
this Rock will I build my Church. The Papists, which expound this, not of
Christ believed on, and confessed by Peter, but of the person of Peter: they
deal reprochfully with Christ, by lifting the creature and servant of Christ,
into the room and place of his Creator and Lord. Also falsely with the Text,
which says, not [ upon this Peter,] but [ upon this Rocke] that is; not upon
thee Peter, but upon my self (as Augustine expounds it.) Lastly, they offer
wrong, and deal injuriously with the Church, to build it upon so feeble,
frail, and weak a Rock as Peter; who failed more often then any of his
fellow* Apostles, ( Judas excepted.)

4 Such comfortable succor, as godly Princes do afford to good men, oppressed
by the wicked. Esaias 32, 2. As the shadow of a great Rock in aweary Land.

Rod. sig:
A little twig, or wand, which was wont to be carried before Princes and
Rulers, as a sign of their authority and dignity. This is a Civil Rod.

2 Correction, discipline, punishment. 1. Cor. 4, 21. Shall I come to you with
a Rod? This is an Ecclesiastical Rod.

3 Afflictions, wherewith God chasteneth his Children, for their amendment.
Psalm. 89, 32. I will visit their transgressions with a Rod. Job 21, 9. This is a
Divine Rod.

Rod of Gods power. sig:
The preaching of the word, whereby God is mighty and powerful among his
people. Psalm. 110, 2. Thou shall send the Rod of thy power. See Scepter.

the Rod and staff of God. sig:
The direction of Gods spirit and word, leading and restraining us: or (as some
think) the providence of God in his word, corrections, and deliverances. Psalm.
23, 4. Thy Rod, and thy Staff comfort me.

Roaring sig:
Satan, very terrible in his temptations and assaults. See Lion.

Lion. Root. sig: pro
That whereby Herbs and plants are firmly fastened to the earth.

2 Steadfastness, or constant and immovable stablenesse. Math. 13, 6. Because
it had no Root. Col. 2, 7. Rooted and built in Christ; that is, firmly settled
and fastened unto him by faith, as a Tree by the Roots.

3 The beginning and cause of a thing. 1 Timothy 6, 10. Desire of Money, the Root
of evil.

Root of bitterness. sig:
Some Haeresie or grievous sin, which (like a bitter Root) brings forth
bitter fruits of defilement in the Conscience, and disquiet to the Church.
Heb. 12, 15. Let no Root of bitterness spring up.

Root of Jessee. sig:
Christ Jesus, who according to the flesh, came of David the Son of Iessee.
Esaias 11, 1. A graffe shall grow out of the Root of Iessee.

R. U.
Rudiments sig: pro
The first beginninges in any Science, which be first to be learned.

2 The Jewish Ceremonies and Rites; or any other external human observations,
urged with an Opion of merit, necessity of salvation, and as parts of Gods
service. Gal. 4, 9. Weak and beggarly Rudiments. Col. 2, 8.

Rule. sig:
Government, Divine or humane; as Ruler signifies any Governor; and to rule,
is to Govern. 1 Timothy 5, 17. Elders that Rule well. Romans 12, 8. He that Rules
with Diligence. Exodus 22, 28. Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
people. Exo. 18. 21. Appoint such to be Rulers over thousands.

2 The direction of the word of God, as a Rule to go and work by. Gal. 6, 16.
As many as walk according to this Rule (or Canon.) Hence the Scriptures are
called Canno^ic^ll; because they contain and give a perfect Rule of faith and
manners unto the Church, which is bound obediently to walk according to this
Rule, and to give Testimony to it, and not by her authority to overrule it,
and the sense of (...).

Rumor. sig:
(...), vo^ce, or report.

to Run. sig: pro
With great speed and celerity, to pass through a Race, until they come unto
the Goal. 1 Cor. 9, 24. They which Run in a race, Run all.

2 To keep and hold on in the Race of Christianity* with diligence and
constancy, until we come to the end of it. 1 Cor. 9, 24. So Run, that ye
may obtain* Heb. 1^, 1. Run the Race that is set before the^*

not in him that wills, nor in him that Runs. sig:
That in the matter of our election, and those things which depend thereon for
perfect salvation in Heaven, to wit, our calling* Justification, adoption,
sanctification: in these things nothing at all is to be attributed, either to
our willing; that is; to free will, desires, affections, and endeavor of the
heart: or to our running; that is to our outward endeavors, by outward actions,
labors, study, and working, but all wholely to be attributed unto the mercy of
God: Therefore Pelagians and Papists are hereby fully confuted.

S. A.
Sabbath. sig:
A Day of rest, or a time set apart for holy Rest. Exodus 20, 8. Remember the
Sabbath to keep it holy. Mark 2, 27. Sabbath was made for man. The seventh
day from the Creation, was the Sabbath of the Jew, as a type and token of
spiritual Rest. But Jewish Rites being abolished in the death of the Christ,
which brake down the partition wall: Now we Christians have the first day of
the week for our Sabbath, in remembrance of Christ his resurrection that day.
Acts 20 7. 1 Cor. 16, 2. The Jewish Sabbath was abrogate, by authority of God,
and not of the Church; without Scripture, as Papists faigne and imagine.

2 The whole week, by a Sinecdoche, of a prat for the whole. Luke 24, 1. In
the first day of the Sabbath. Also 18, 12. I fast twice every Sabbath; that
is, every week. So our Translation reads it, but the Greek word signifies [
Sabbath.]

to break the Sabbath. sig:
To offend against the ordinance of God, concerning the Sabbath, by doing some
servile and forbidden work. Neh. 13, 17. Why break ye the Sabbath day?

2 To do some outward bodily work, commanded of God. Math. 12, 5. The
Priests on the Sabbath day, do break the Sabbath in the Temple, and yet
are blameless; that is, they do a bodily work in killing beasts for
sacrifice, which though it break the rest of the day, yet is not against the
holiness of the day.

Sabbath of the Lord. sig:
A day of rest, appointed to be kept holy to the Lord, being spent in his
service. Exodus 20, 10. It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.

to sanctify the sabbath. sig:
Either to ordain the Sabbath unto holy uses; or to apply it unto such uses
as it is ordained for. In the former sense, God does sanctify the Sabbath,
and we do sanctify it in the latter. Exodus 20, 11. God Sanctified it.

From Sabboath to Sabbath. sig:
Everlastingly, without intermission or ceasing of time, even so long as that
blessed rest of Heaven does continue. Esaias 66, 23. From Sabbath to Sabbath
shall all flesh worship before me, says Jehovah.

second sabboath. sig:
The latter solemn day of a Jewish Feast, wherein they rested from bodily
labors, and kept a public assembly, as was used to be done upon the
Sabbath day. Luke 6, 1. It came to pass on a second Sabbath day. Leuit. 23,
3. Deuteronomy. 16, 8.

* Sacrament
Sacrament what?

A Sacrament, is a visible sign and seal of an invisible grace: or more
largely thus. It is an ordinance of God, in the right use whereof, the partaker
has assurance of his being in the Covenant of grace, and salvation by Christ.
Of such Sacraments there be two only under the New Testament; Baptism, and
the Lords Supper. The former, being a Seal of our entrance into the Covenant;
the other, a Seal of our continuance in the Covenant. Math. 26, 26, 27. Also
28, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 10, 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 12, 13. The seven Sacraments of
Papists, are too many by five, which either lack an outward sign, or
institution by Christ, or be no Seals of saving grace.

Sacrifice. sig: pro
A sacred action, wherein the faithful Jews did voluntarily worship God, by
offering some outward thing unto his glory, thereby to testify his chief
dignity and dominion over them, and their servitude and submission unto him.
Such Sacrifices, were either propitiatory, to procure favor and pardon, after
some sin: or gratulatory, to give thanks and praise after some benefit.
Psalm 50, 8. I will not repoooue thee for thy Sacrifices. And 51, 16. Leuit.
31. And 4, 2. This is Legal Sacrifice, and typical. Christ Jesus being the
truth and substance, who in the offering of himself once upon the Cross,
has fully appeased Gods wrath.

2 Our whole spiritual service and Christian duties of all sorts, within our
general and special callings. Psalm 51, 17. The Sacrifices of GOD are a
contrite Spirit, etc. 1 Pet. 2, 5. Heb. 13, 15. This is Evangelical Sacrifice.
But touching Papisticall Sacrifice of the Mass, the Scripture is altogether
mute and dumb, save to cry out against it.

Living Sacrifice. sig:
Our selves, even our bodies and Souls, being consecrate and given to God.
Romans 12, 1. That ye offer your bodies a living Sacrifice.

to Sacrifice unto Nets. sig:
To ascribe Divine power unto our selves, and to the Instruments of our life.
Hab. 1, 16. Therefore they Sacrifice to their Net. This is by putting
confidence of our hearts, in means, depending upon second causes, God being
neglected.

Sacrifice of righteousness. sig:
A lawful, due, or righteous Sacrifice, such as God himself requires. Psalm.
4, 5. Offer the Sacrifices of righteousness.

Sacrilege. sig:
An usurping to our selves by fraud and covetousness holy things, which are
dedicated unto God, either by vow or course. To. 2, 22. Thou committest
Sacrilege.

Saint, or Saints. sig:
An wholly one, or a person called to holiness: such is every faithful person,
having the perfect holiness of Christ put upon him, by imputation of Faith,
and the quality of imperfect holiness, powered into his heart, by the Spirit of
sanctification. Psalm 16, 2. To the Saints which are in earth. Psalm. 132, 12.

2 The holy Angels. Deuteronomy. 33, 2. He comes with thousands of his Saints; that
is, with innumerable Angels.

3 The whole body of a particular visible Church, consisting of good and evil;
of private and public persons, set apart to administer holy things, and all
professing holiness. Phil. 1, 1. Ephe. 1, 1, 17. 1 Cor. 1, 2. Saints by
calling.

Salt. sig: pro
A Creature, whose property is sharpness; and the effect to kill corruption.

2 The doctrine of the word, because it seasoneth, not only the corrupt
manners and conuersations of men, but the rotten heart within, even corrupt
reason and will, that all may become sauory to God. Math. 5, 13. Ye are the
Salt of the Earth. Ministers are so called, in respect of their doctrine.

3 Godly wisdom, which seasoneth our communication (as Salt does meat.) Col.
4, 6. Let your speech be poudered with Salt.

4 Christ, by whom all that believe in him are made sauory, and pleasing to
God. Leuit. 2, 13. Upon all thine offerings thou shall bring Salt.

the Covenant of salt. sig:
A firm, sure, and incorruptible Covenant, which lasts for ever. Numb. 18, 19.
It is a perpetual Covenant of Salt to the Lord.

to sow salt. sig:
To make the ground barren, or unapt to bring forth any thing, by casting Salt
upon it. Judge. 9, 45. He destroyed the City and sowed Salt in it.

to Salute no man by the way. sig:
Speedily to dispatch a journey without negligence. Luke 10, 4.

Salvation. sig:
Outward safety and deliverance, from outward dangers and enemies. Exo. 14, 13.
Behold the Salvation of the Lord. Psalm. 3, 8. Psalm 51, 12. The joy of thy
Salvation.

2 The state of blessed and happy life, as touching the entrance into it, when
we begin first to believe and repent. Luke 19, 9. This day Salvation is come
to thine house. Ephe. 2, 8. Luke 1, 77. As there is no other Savior but Jesus,
so our Salvation, in whole, and every part, is from the merit of his own
sufferings and works, done in his own self.

3 The perfection of blessed and happy life, at our glorification in Heaven.
Here of there are two degrees; the first is, at the time of our death, when the
Soul being losed from the body, is carried by elect Angels into the third
Heavens. Luke 16, 22. The second degree is, at the day of the Resurrection,
when our whole person, body, and Soul, shall be received up into Heaven with
Christ, into everlasting bliss. Hebr. 1, 14. Which shall be Heirs of
Salvation. Romans 5, 10.

4 Our blessed life, both as touching the entrance and perfection, the
beginning and end of it (even our full happiness.) Heb. 2, 3. If we neglect
so great Salvation. Romans 5, 10. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 15. No To ascribe salvation in any
part or mesure unto works of grace done by us, it is to make our selves our
own Sauiors.
part of this Salvation is merited by works of grace which we do, but from
Christ's works in his own person.

5 The author of Salvation. Psalm. 27, 1. The Lord is my Salvation.

6 The person of him who is our alone Savior. Luke 2, 30. Mine eye has seen
thy Salvation; that is, him, which by thy decree, brings, works, and gives
Salvation, or the person appointed to be our Savior.

to sanctify, referred to God. sig: referred to men.
To appoint and separate a thing from a common, to an holy or religious use.
Com. 4. Exodus 20, 11. God Sanctified the Sabbath. Thus Priests, under the
Law, Ceremonies, Temple, Vessels, were sanctified. Math. 23, 17.

2 To make holy, by putting holiness Morrally into one: of unclean, making us
clean. 1 These. 5, 23. The God of peace Sanctify you throughout. 1 Cor. 6. But
ye are Sanctified. 1 Cor. 1, 2. Jude 1. John 17.

3 To bless something to us in the ordinary use. 1 Timothy 4, 4.

4 To cleanse and purify, both ceremonially and spiritually. Exodus 19, 10. Go
to the people, and sanctify them to day and tomorrow; that is, let them
perform outward and ceremonial pureness, to admonish and stir up to inward
use.

5 To acknowledge holy. Math. 6, 9. Sanctified be thy Name, or hallowed; when
we acknowledge something to be holy, which before was so in it self. Leu. 10,
3.

6 To apply to such holy and divine use as God appointed. Com. 4. Exodus 20, 8.
Sanctify ye my Sabbath; that is, employ it to the holy uses for which I have
ordained it.

Sanctification. sig:
A freedom from the tyranny of sin, into the liberty of holiness, begun
here, and daily to be increased till we be perfect. 1 Cor. 1, 30. Christ is made
to us of God Sanctification.

2 The separation of things or persons, from common or profane use, that they
may remain holy unto the Lord for a time, or for ever. This belonges to the
Priests, Levites, and Ceremonies of the Law, etc. This is Ceremonial
Sanctification, whereof in Exodus and Leuiticus.

3 The whole work of grace, whereby Sinners, of the Children of wrath, and
Bond-slaues of Satan, are consecrated and dedicated unto God, (being purged
and cleansed in the blood of Christ) that they may become his Children and true
worshippers. In this sense it comprehends regeneration, Reconciliation,
Justification, and Adoption. 1 Pet. 1, 2. Elect unto Sanctification. This is
Universal Sanctification, comprehending the whole work of grace.

4 That peculiar work of the Spirit, creating in the elect, converted Souls;
that new quality of holiness, whereby they can in some measure truly hate
their own sins, with firm purpose to leave them, and love Gods Law, with
resolution to do it in some good measure. 1 Cor. 6, 11. Justified and
Sanctified. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 13. Through the Sanctification of the Spirit. This is
Sanctification, particular and inherent, and peculiar to the elect.

5 The perfect purity of Christ's human Nature, reckoned unto believers by
free imputation of faith. 1 Cor. 30. Christ is made unto us Sanctification.
This is Sanctification imputed.

6 The work of general illumination and reformation. Heb. 10, 29. Wherewith
he was Sanctified. This is external Sanctification, common to reprobation.

Spirit of Sanctification. sig:
Both the work of killing our corrupt Nature, and raising it up to holiness;
and the author of this work; to wit, the holy Spirit. 1 Pet. 1, 2. Elect unto
Sanctification of the Spirit. That is, unto that Sanctification which the
Spirit works, setting us apart from the wicked world, and dedicating us to
God.

Sanctuary. sig:
The holy of holiest, or the most holy place of the Tabernacle, wherein God
gave visible tokens of his presence. Psalm 20, 2. Lord send thine help from
the Sanctuary.

2 The holy assemblies of Gods people, and the wholesome doctrine taught there.
Psalm 73, 17. Until I went into the Sanctuary of God.

Satan. sig:
A special adnersary to God and Man. 1 Cor. 5* 5. To deliver him to Satan.
Job 1, 6. One of the Names of the Devil.

2 Any person, that does any way hurt or hinder another in the course of piety.
Math. 16, 23. Come after me Satan.

* Satisfaction. sig:
A work done by virtue, and merit, whereof Gods wrath against the sins of
the elect is fully and sufficiently appeased. This work is Christ's Oblation
of himself upon the Cross. Col. 1, 20. Peace made by that blood of his
Cross. Here is the truth of Christ's Satisfaction, though the word be wanting.

2 An amends made privately unto our neighbor, for some wrong done him in word
or deed: Or publicly to the Church, by confession voluntarily made of some
scandal, after the example of David. Psalm 51.

Savior. sig:
A person, which both by merit and efficacy, makes and keeps us safe from
spiritual Enemies. Luke 2, 11. To you is borne a Savior. Such is Christ
only. A Savior, from sin, hell, and destruction, by such things as he
suffered and did in his own person, not by works of grace in us, as Papists
teach.

2 One, which by his proper power, makes safe from outward evils and enemies.
1 Timothy 4, 10. God the Savior of all Men.

3 Captains and Governors, which are called [ Sauiours] because they are Gods
Instruments to save from outward dangers. Iud. 3, 9. God raised up a Savior to
the Children of Israel. Others, are said to do that, which it pleases God to
do by them.

4 Ministers of the word, which are Instruments of eternal Salvation, by
calling men unto it. (...) 4, 16. So thou shall Save thy self and others. Thus
that is attributed to the Instrument, which is proper to the principal Agent.
Obadiah 21.

to Save. sig:
To deliver from the guilt and condemnation of our sins. Acts 4, 12. No Name
whereby to be saved. Thus only Christ saves us. Math. 1, 21. He shall Save
his people from their sins.

2 To preserve us against some bodily hurt. Mat. 14, 30. Save Lord, or I
perish. Psalm. 6, 4. Save me for thy mercies sake. Thus God saves, as the
author of our preservation.

3 To serve the providence of God, as a means in the preservation of others;
either spiritually, or bodily. 1 Timothy 4, 16. So thou shall save thy self, and
them that are with thee. James 5, 20. Saves a soul. Thus Ministers by
preaching; Magistrates by protecting; Christians by admonishing: do save; as
Instruments under God, who for their service heerin, honors them with the
Title belonging to himself.

to save life. sig:
To regard ones life more then Christ, so as he will not put his life in
ieopardy for Christ. Luke 9, 24. He that will save his life, shall loose it.

Savor of* death. sig:
A deadly savor, killing spiritually with the scent of it. 2 Cor. 3, 16. The
savor of death to death. Thus is the Gospel to the Reprobate, thorough their
own default; because they are disobedient to the truth. 1 Pet. 2, 7.

savor of life sig:
A lively quickening Savor, giving life, and keeping alive to God. 2 Cor. 3,
16. The savor of life to life. Thus is the Gospel to the elect believer.

Savor of rest. sig:
An acceptable Sacrifice, appeasing Gods anger. Genesis 8, 21. A Savor of rest.

sweet Savor. sig:
A pleasing, grateful, and delightful Savor. 2 Cor. 2, 15. A sweet Savor to
God.

^Sauour the things of the spirit and flesh. sig:
To mind, think, love and practice, good things, pleasing to God. And to
Savor the things of the flesh, signifies; to think, affect, and follow
earthly sinful things, agreeable to corrupt Nature. Romans 8, 5. Savor the
things of the spirit.

Scandal. sig:
Every occasion of sin, taken or given. See Offense. Whatsoever hinders us
in our Christian course, is a Scandal or stone to stumble at.

Escape goat sig:
Christ Jesus, whereof it was a sign. Leuit. 16, 8, 10. And the other for the
Scapegoat.

Scepter. sig: pro
A little wand or rod, which Princes were wont to bear in their hands, as a
sign of their government.

2 Kingdom or Government. Genesis 49, 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah.
Psalm. 45, 6. A Metanimie of the sign, put for the thing signified.

Scepter of his mouth. sig:
The preaching of the Gospel, whereby the ungodly are spiritually killed, and
the faithful spiritually quickened, and mightly directed. Esaias 11, 14. He
shall smite the earth with the Scepter or Rod of his mouth.

Scepter of righteousness. sig:
A just Government, full of righteous Ordinances, being duly and rightly
executed. Hebr. 1, 8. Such is the Government and kingdom of Christ: wherein
be ordained Righteous Laws and Statutes, for the well ruling of his people.

Schism. sig: pro
A rent, division, breach, or cutting off.

2 A division in the Church, or a rent amongst Christians. 1 Cor. 1, 10, 11,
12. That there be no dissentions among you. In the Original Greek Text, the
word [ Schism] is expressed; which imports a separation from the society of the
Church, about external things.

Schism, what it is?

Schism, is a dissension or separation, when one or more, separate and rent
themselves from the outward fellowship of the faithful, cutting assunder the
peace and unity of the Church, upon some dislike of some Rites and Orders,
therein lawfully received and observed; or else, upon different opinions about
their teachers. As Heresy is a departing from the Communion of the Church, in
respect of Doctrine; so Schism is a cutting off ones self for external
things. An example hereof, we have. 1 Cor. 1, 10, 11, 12. Every one of you
says, I am Paul's; I am Apollos, I am Cephas, and I am Christ's.

Scorner. sig:
One that scoffeth or flouteth at the infirmities and miseries; or at the
graces and good acts of others. Such were they which scorned Christ and his
Apostles. Luke 8, 53. And they laughed him to Scorn. Math. 27, 39, 40. Acts 2,
13.

2 A contemptuous proud person, presuming of his wit, that by it he will
compass any thing, without such means as GOD has appointed. Prou. 14, 6. A
Scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not.

3 A malicious incorrigible person, which makes a mock of the word of God,
scorning all Note.
good counsel. Such Christ calls Dogs and Swine. Psalm. 1* 1. And sit in
the seat of the Scornful. Prou. 9, 8. Rebuke not a Scorner. In the first
Psalm, the first verse, there be three gradations to be well marked* One, of
sins; Counsel, way, and seat. Secondly, of actions: Walk, stand, sit.
Thirdly, of persons; Ungodly, Sinners, Scorners.

Scorpion. sig:
A vile and venomous Creature, which has a mortal and deadly sting. Revel. 9,
5. As the Scorpion, when he has stung a man.

2 Heretics and Hypocrites; especially, the Disciples of Antichrist, which
(like Scorpions) privily and deadly, sting and wound men's consciences, with the
venom of their false poisoned doctrine. Revel. 9, 3. Unto them was given power,
as the Scorpions of the earth have power.

Scribe. sig:
One skillful in the Law of Moses, able to interpret it rightly to the
instruction of the Church in godliness. Nehe. 8, 4. Ezra the Scribe stood upon
a Pulpit of wood.

2 One, which pretended much skill and ability to interpret the Law of Mosos;
yet corrupted it with many glosses and false interpretations. Mat. 23. The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair. See Math. 5. throughout.

2 Every one, that expounds or declares the will of God; whether Apostle,
Evangelist, Propher, etc. Mat. 13, 5, 2. Every Scribe taught to the Kingdom of
heaven.

Scripture. sig: pro
Any written thing, or written book.

2 The word, inspired of God, written for the perfect and perpetual
instruction of the Church, in Godliness, by the Prophets and Apostles, the pen
of the Holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3, 16, 17. The whole Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable Whatsoever belonges to faith or manners,
is sufficiently taught in Holy Cannonicall Scripture, where all things be
plain, which be necessary. Papists, do wrongfully charge Scripture, with
imperfection and darkness, to make way for their unwritten Verities and
Traditions.
to teach, etc. All diuine-sauing-truth, sufficiently taught in the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament. I adore the fullness of Scripture says one.

3 Some one particular Book of Scripture; to wit, the Books of Moses. Gal. 3,
22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin. A Sinecdoche.

4 Some one sentence or saying, cited out of Scripture. John 10, 35. If he
called them Gods, to whom the word of God was given, and the Scripture cannot
be broken. A Sinecdoche.

5 Gods speaking in the Scripture. Galat. 3, 8. For the Scripture foreseeing.
This is a Metanimie. Also Romans 9, 17. The Scripture says to Pharaoh. Compare
Gal. 3, 22. Scripture has concluded all under sin, with Romans 11, 32. God
has shut up all in unbelief.

S. E.
Sea. sig:
The gathering of the Waters into one heap. Gone. 1, 10. And he called the
gathering together of the waters, [Seas.]

2 A Lake. John 6, 1, 18. Sea of Galilee, and of Tiberias.

3 This present world, which is like a Sea, for the unstable and unquiet
condition thereof. Revel. 21, 1. And there was no more Sea.

Sea of Glass. sig:
This brittle inconstant estate of the world, mixed with troubles and
afflictions, through the cruelty of wicked men. Revel. 15, 1. I saw as it were
a glassy Sea, mingled with fire. See the word (Sea) in the Dictionary of the
Revelation.

Seal. sig: pro
An Instrument, wherewith bonds or Letters be sealed and ratified.

2 Some outward holy thing, or work done, by the appointment of God, for
confirmation of weak faith. Thus Sacraments are called Seals. Romans 4, 11. He
received the Seal of Circumcision.

3 Some inward work of the Spirit, by his secret, powerful, and evident
inspiration and witness, assuring every elect believer of his own adoption
and salvation by Christ. Ephesians. 1, 13. Ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise. and 4, 30.

4 The firm stablenesse of Gods free predestination to life. 2 Timothy 2, 19. The
foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal; God knows who are his.

Seal of the spirit. sig:
An inward grace or work of the Spirit, assuring to every regenerate Child of
God, his own adoption. 2 Cor. 1, 22. Papists, foolishly expounds this, of the
outward Seal of Baptism.

to Seal one sig:
To put a mark upon one for difference sake, and to distinguish one from all
other men. John 6, 27. Him has God the Father Sealed. It is one use of a
Seal, to put difference between things which be authentical and warrantable,
and which be not. The Seal set upon Christ (for distinguishing him from all
other men) is the Holy Ghost, given him above measure. John 3, 34.

Seared. sig: pro
Burnt with a hot Iron, till it be cut off.

2 Extinct and utterly put out, as the horns of a beast use to be burnt off
with an hot searing Iron. 3 Tim. 4, 2. And have their Consciences seared or
burned with an hot Iron; that is, his Conscience is cut off, so as he has none
at all.

to Search. sig:
Diligently to look into a thing, to understand or find it out; as the Woman
did search her lost Groat. Luke. 15, 8. and as offenders must search their
sins. Lamen. 3, 40. Let us search and try our ways.

2 To know a thing perfectly and exactly. 1. Chron. 28, 9. The Lord searches
all hearts. This is a speech borrowed from men, who are said thoroughly to
know what they diligently search.

to Search the Scriptures. sig:
To look into them carefully, with an earnest desire and endeavor to try and
find out the truth contained in them. John 5, 39. Acts 17, 11.

Season. sig:
A fit and convenient time or occasion of doing things. Romans 13, 11. See
Opportunity.

Seat. sig: pro
A place to sit in. Math. 23, 6. They love upper Seats.

2 A Chair to teach out of. Math. 23, 2. They sit in Moses Chair.

3 The Glorious state of believers, partaking with Christ in his Dominion and
Rule. Luke 22, 30. And sit on Seats, and Judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

4 The desperate, malicious, and incorrigible contempt of Gods word. Psalm 1,
1. Nor sit in the Seat of the scornful.

Seven. sig:
Many times, or often; a certain number, put for an uncertain. Math. 18, 21.
Forgive him unto seven times. Esaias 4. 1. Prou. 24, 16. 1 Kings 2, 5.

Seven candlestickes. sig:
The seven Churches of Asia. See Candlestick.

Seven Churches. sig:
All the Churches of the world. Revel. 1, ver. last. Are the seven Churches. A
Sinecdoche.

Seven eyes. sig:
The most perfect providence of God. Zach. 3, 9. Seven eyes shall be upon one
stone.

Seven heads. sig:
Either seven forms of Government, wherewith Rome was governed; or the seven
hills with which that City was compassed. Revel. 17, 9. The seven heads, are
Seven Mountains; they are also Seven Kings.

Seven spirits. sig:
The manifold graces of the spirit; or (as some do judge) the innumerable anger
of God, which are as a Guard to wait about his Throne. Revel. 1, 4.

Seven Stars. sig:
The several Ministers of the Churches, which for their lightsome Doctrine and
life, are likened unto Stars. Revel. 1, 20. See Stars.

Seauenty times seven times. sig:
Continually, and always. Math. 18, 22, 23. I say unto thee seauenty times
seven times; that is, so often as one trespasseth against us, and repents; so
often are we bound to forgive him.

Secret. sig:
Things hid from the understanding of all men, and known only unto God. Deuteronomy.
20, 29. Secret things belong to God. Thus Gods Counsels and Decrees are called
secrets, till events declare them.

2 Dark things, being hid from natural men, and hard to be understood without
special illumination of the Holy Ghost. Psalm. 25, 14. The secret of the Lord
is revealed to them that fear him. Math. 13: 11. Thus is the Gospel a secret.
See Mystery.

3 Things kept close from the knowledge of al others, whereof our selves only
are privy. Eccle. 12, 14. He will Judge every secret thing. Romans 2, 16. Thus
our own thoughts and purposes are secrets, even sometime to our selves. Psalm.
19.

4 Such tidings as few do know, and ought not to be made common to many, but
kept private. Prou. 20, 19. He that discovers a secret, etc. Judges 3, 19. I
have a secret errand to thee, (o King.) Thus infirmities and Counsels; our own,
or others, are called secrets. As Genesis 49, 6. Ier. 15, 17.

Sect. sig:
A faction, study, or course of life, singled and chosen out to be followed of
us. Acts. 5, 17. Which was of the Sect of the Saduces.

2 A form of Doctrine. Acts 28, 22. We know that this Sect is every where
spoken against; that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel, is generally spoken
against.

to See. Exo. 18, 14 sig: pro
To behold with bodily eye any object. Also, to see a thing with consideration
and observation. Math. 22, 11. The King came in to See the Guests. Psalm. 46, 8.
Come and See the works of God.

2 Hear. Revel. 1, 12. I turned, to See the voice that spoke.

3 To know, or to understand. Exodus. 24, 10. They Saw the God of Israel; that
is, they knew that he was present with them, by some visible signs of his
presence. John 9. 41. But now you say, we See; that is, we know.

4 To believe in Christ. John 6, 40. This is the will of my Father, that every
one that Sees the Son, and believes in him, etc.

5 To See with the eye; to know with understanding; to believe with the heart.
Math. 13, 13.

6 To have the perfect and immediate enjoying or fruition of the glorious
presence of God in heaven. Math. 5, 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall See God. 1 Cor. 13, 12.

7 To live. Genesis 16, 13. Have I not Seen? After God saw me? A Sinecdoche.

8 To know a thing with approbation and love to it. John 14, 9, 7. He that Sees
the son, Sees the Father; that is, he which knows the son, approoues and
embraces him for the true God, etc.

9 To take heed or beware, or carefully look to our selves. Mat. 9, 30. See
that no man know it. Revel. 22, 9. See thou do it not. Mat. 27, 3. See thou to
that.

10 Try or feel by experience. Psalm. 77. The waters saw thee and fled. Psalm.
90, 16. According to the years which we have seen evil.

Referred to God.
11 To take knowledge of men and their doings; to bless, prosper, and help
them, if they be good; to punish and destroy them, if they be evil. Genesis 31,
12. I have seen all that Laban has done. Exodus 3, 7.

seeing, they may not See. sig:
Such a knowledge of Gods will revealed in his word, as is without use and
profit to such as have it. Math. 13, 14. Acts 28, 27. Esaias 6, 9. Ye shall See,
and not See.

Seer. sig:
A Prophet, to whom God did make known himself and things secret, by
visions. 1 Samuel 9, 9. He that now is a Prophet, was in old time called a
Seer. Numb. 12, 6.

Seed. sig: pro
That thin fluent substance in man's body, which is the matter of generation.
Genesis 38, 9.

2 A Son, or a Daughter. Genesis 38, 9. To raise up Seed to thy Brother. Romans 1,
3. Of the Seed of David; that is, his Son.

3 Posterity, as Nephews or Neeces, or Childrens Children. Psalm. 24, 13. His
Seed shall inherit the Land. And Psalm. 112, 2. His Seed shall be mighty upon
earth.

Seed of Abraham. sig:
The whole posterity of Abraham; in which, many bad were mixed with good. Romans
9, 7. Which are the Seed of Abraham.

2 The faithful only, whether Jews or Gentiles, which walked in the steps of
the faith of their Father Abraham. Romans 4, 13, 16.

3 Christ, which came of Abraham, according to the flesh; and was specially
promised to Abraham, that he should come. In thy Seed shall all the Nations of
the earth be blessed. Gal. 3, 16. Genesis 12, 3.

godly Seed sig:
The Seed of God, or such a posterity and issue, as God will allow of and
bless, Mala. 2, 15. Because he sought a godly Seed.

Seed. sig:
Some kind of Grain, wherewith the earth is sown. Genesis 47, 19. And give us
Seed.

2 The word of God. Luke 8, 11. The Seed is the word; which is cast into the
heart by the Ministers, as Seed is into the ground, by the Husbandman.

3 The promise of salvation by Christ, being received into the heart by the
spirit and faith. 1 Pet. 1, 23. Begotten of immortal Seed; that is, of the
word of God. John 1, 3, 9. His Seed abides in them; that is, the Virtue of the
Holy Ghost, working Faith and holiness by the word preached.

4 Bread, or some other thing, distributed to the relief of the poor. Eccl.
11, 1, 6. In the morning sow thy Seed.

seeds of diverse kinds, or mingled Seed. sig:
Hypocrisy in the Doctrine or worship of God, or in manners and life; when
false Doctrine is mixed with true, and men's inventions with Gods worship; and
curiosity, with honest simplicity. Leuit. 19, 19. Deutro. 22, 9. Thou shall
not sow thy Uineyard with diverse kinds of Seed.

Seeking. sig: pro
An action of a man, that desires to find something which he lacks, as
Saul did seek his Fathers Asses. 1 Samuel 9, 3, 4. and the woman sought her
lost Groat. Luke 15, 8.

2 The action of a godly person, springing from an earnest desire of having
some excellent and needful grace, which is absent and wanting to him, either
in whole or in part; in substance, or in degree. Thus we are commanded to
Seek the Kingdom of Heaven. Math. 6, 33. to Seek Wisdom. Prou. 2, 4. to
Seek God and his face. Psalm. 27, ^8. Esaias 55, 6. Also, to Seek Christ, etc.
For these things are still wanting to the Godly, who have them not in such
measure, as they would and should.

3 Praying, or asking by Prayer. Math. 7, 7. Seek, and you shall find.

4 An action of Gods love, toward such as have forsaken him. Luke 19, 10.

The actio^ of our seeking has these degrees. First, the feeling of the want
of some excellent and needful thing. Secondly, an ernest desire of finding.
Thirdly, Note.
a diligent use of all good means whereby to attain it; as Prayer, reading,
hearing, etc. Fourthly, constancy till we find. Fifthly, a love of the thing
found. Sixthly, care to keep, and loathnesse to loose it. This whole action, is
shaddowed in the example of Mary, in seeking up of Jesus. Luke 2, 44, 45, etc.

First, that we are either lost (as all are before Seeking referred to God,
does imply and contain under it, these five several things.
their conversion) or stragled from him (as every converted person is more, or
less; at one time or other.) Luke 19, 10. Luke 15, 3, 4, etc.

2 A desire and care in God, to recover us, and to bring us back to himself
(as an Hen is careful to gather her Chickings.) Math. 23, 37. How often etc.

3 The offering and continuing unto us means, that he may find us; to wit, his
Word, Ministers, blessings, corrections, motions of his spirit, checks of our
Conscience, admonitions of the godly: By all which, we are sought up and called
to him, as thorough the whole Scripture manifestly appears.

4 His great love toward us, being found and recovered. This is expressed, in
the father of the lost son. Luke 15, 22.

5 Lastly, care to keep us still, with unwillingness to loose us again. John
10, 28. None shall take them out of my hands. All these things are shaddowed out
unto us, in him that fought his lost sheep. Luke 15, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

Seeking (as it is affirmed of Hypocrites and wicked Note.
men) is nothing else, but the making of a show, as if they felt a want of God,
and his good gifts, and were desirous to find them, when in truth they seek
not him, for himself, but for some other thing, as their own case and
commodities, etc. Or they Seek other things more then him, or before him, as
worldlings; or Seek him amiss, not in his word, as Heretics; or not in all
his word, as Hypocrites Seek him: or lastly, they Seek him too late, when he
is not to be found; as the five foolish Virgins did, and all secure Christians
do. Of these, and such like Seekers it is written. Prou. 1, 20. They shall
Seek me early, and shall not find me.

to Seek God. sig:
To ask Counsel at his word, concerning both civil affairs, and things to be
done in Religion. Exodus 18, 15. The people come to me to Seek God. See face.

Self. sig:
Ones person, soul, and body. Math. 22, 39. Love thy Neighbor as thy self.

2 Ones wife. Ephe. 5, 18. He that loves his wife, loves himself,

3 Our reason and will, as it corrupted with sin, which cleaues so close to us,
and we make so much of it, as if it were our own self. Luke 9, 23. Let him
deny himself.

4 The mercies of God, or his truth and justice. Esaias 43, 25. I will put out
his iniquity for my self. 2 Timothy 2, 13. He cannot deny himself. His Mercy
and Justice be himself.

to Sell. sig: pro
To depart from some commodity, in respect of a due price given us for it.

to Sell the truth. sig:
To make slight reckoning of it, as men commonly do of those things which they
Sell. Prou. 23, 23. Buy the truth, but Sell it not.

to Sell all we have. sig:
To pull our hearts from the things we possess, and to be ready indeed to
make Sale of them, when Gods glory, and the necessity of our Neighbor
requires it. Mark 10, 21. Sell all thou have and give to the poor. Acts 2,
45. and 4, 34.

2 Willingly to depart from, and forsake al our sins, both of Nature and
action, open and secret, and al our pleasures and profits too, which we cannot
hold without sin. Math. 13, 44. He Sells all that he has, and buyeth the
field where the Treasure was hid.

to Send. sig:
To appoint and put forth (of favor) any person unto some public function,
furnishing him with gifts and authority thereunto. Thus God sent his Son to
do the office of a Mediator. Gala. 4, 4. God sent his Son borne of a Woman.
Also, thus he sends Ministers to preach the Gospel. Romans 10, 15. How can
they Preach unless they be sent? Ier. 14, 14. I have not Sent them.

2 To endow and furnish one with authority and guiftes, for execution of a
public function. Romans 10, 15. How shall they Preach except they be Sent.

3 To appoint a person (in wrath) unto some public function, for the which
he is not fitted of God: after this sort God sends forth foolish Shepherds
and unjust Princes, for the punishment of Sinners. Esaias 10, 6. I will Send him
to a dissembling Nation, etc.

4 To fulfill some promised good thing, or some threatened evil. Thus it is
written, that God Sendes his Spirit. John 16, 7. If I depart, I will send him
unto you: Thus God is said to send the Sword or Famine, etc. Amos 8, 11. I will
Send a Famine, etc. 2 Samuel 24. The Lord Sent a Pestilence.

5 To commit something over to others of trust and charge. Acts 11, 30. They
Sent it by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

Sentence. sig:
Judgment. 2 Cor. 1, 9. For we received the sentence of death.

Seraphims sig:
Elect and good Angels from Heaven, burning like fire, for the purging of the
godly by the calling of God, and the consuming of the wicked. Esaias 6, 2.
Seraphims stood by him.

Serpent. sig:
A Creature, so called, being full of venom and subtlety, of all other
Creatures most contrary and dangerous to mankind: whereof there be sundry
kinds. Genesis 3, 1. And the Serpent was more subtle then all the beasts of the
field.

2 Satan, for his deep wiliness and craft, likened to a Serpent. Reu. 12, 9.
That old Serpent. To the wiliness of his Nature (being exceeding crafty)
Satan has joined the experience of some thousand years; therefore called [
an old Serpent.] O be watchful and pray.

Wise as serpents. sig:
Such as be provident and circumspect (as Serpents be) to see to themselves,
that they be not circumuented by crafty ones of this world. Math. 10, 16. Be
wise as Serpents.

Servant. sig: pro
A Bondman, one conquered in wars, or bought for Money; and in that regard,
bound to serve him by whom his life was preserved. 2 Kings 5, 2. The Arramites
had gone out in Bands, and taken a little Maid of Israel, and she served
Naamans wife. Exodus 21, 2. If thou buy an Hebrew Servant. Ephe. 6. 5. Col. 4, 1.

2 Every faithful person, being bought and redeemed from the bondage of sin
and Satan, to serve and obey God in righteousness and true holiness. Romans 6,
22. And made Servants to GOD. Luke 1, 74, 75. Being delivered from our Enemies,
we should serve him without fear, in righteousness, and holiness of truth.

3 One, that serves and obeys God, not only in the common profession of
godliness, but in some particular function and calling. Thus Paul calls
himself the Servant of God. Romans 1, 1. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ. In
this sense also, Christ is termed the Servant of his Father, to execute his
will (as Mediator) in working man's redemption. Esaias 53, 11. My righteous
Servant.

4 One, whom God does use as an Instrument and means, to effect and perform
his will in the work of some particular mercy, or some particular judgment.
Thus may Cyrus be called the Servant of God, his Shepherd and anointed. Es.
44. Last. 45, 1.

5 Every Creature of God obeying his will (as a servant obeys the will of his
Master.) Psa. 119, 91. For all are thy Servants.

6 One, that is in bondage under the Ceremonies of Moses Law. Gal. 4, 7. Thou
art no more a servant, but a Son.

7 One, which is of a base mind, having mean or no gifts, being a man of no
worth or respect for good qualities. Eccles. 10, 7. I have seen Servants on
Horses.

8 One of inferior condition and low degree. Eccle. 10, 7. Princes walk as
Servants.

Servant of righteousness. sig:
One, who obeys God, in doing righteous works commanded in his Law. Romans 6,
18. Ye are made the Servants of righteousness; that is, ye live righteously.
Such are called the Servants of God, to teach, that God is served, when
righteous works are done and performed.

Servant of sin. sig:
One, who of his own accord, readily obeys the desires and motions of sin.
Romans 6, 20. For when ye were the Servants of sin; that is, when ye lived in
sin, doing that willingly which it commanded.

to Serve. sig:
To submit our selves to obey such who are Lords over us, and bought us with
their Money. Exodus 21, 6. And he shall serve him for ever: This is done
willingly, or unwillingly.

2 To obey, and do the revealed will of God, in the general calling of a
Christian. Hebr. 12, 28. Let us have Grace, that we may Serve GOD. This is our
service of God, in respect of our common vocation.

3 To be obedient unto God, by doing readily and constantly the duty of some
public calling, to the honor of God, and the good of his people. Romans 1, 9.
Whom I Serve in the Gospel of his Son. Acts 13, 36. After he had Served
his time. Math. 20, 28. This is our service of God, in respect of a particular
function.

4 To yield our selves unto God, by the inward obedience of the conscience,
witnessed by the outward gesture of the body; in kneeling, bowing, lifting up
eyes and hands to him, as to one that has absolute power over us, and
knowledge of us. Mat. 4, 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou Serve. Exodus 20, 5. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor Serve
them. This is our religious service of God, in his public worship.

5 To stick unto, and to follow the true God and his true worship, forsaking
all strange Gods, or strange worship of the true God. Josh, 24, 15. I, and my
house will Serve the Lord.

to serve at the Altar. sig:
To perform the whole office of the Leuiticall Priest, whereof oblations or
Sacrifices (being a chief part) are put for the whole, by a Sinecdoche. 1
Cor. 9, 13. They which Serve (or wait) at the altar, are partakers of the Altar.

to Serve lusts. sig:
To obey wicked motions, by consenting to them or practicing them. Tiuis 3, 3.
Serving diverse lusts and pleasures.

to serve our Neighbor. sig:
To apply our selves cheerfully and diligently, to do him all the good we
can. Gala. 5, 13. Serve one another through love.

to Serve riches. sig:
To love Riches, obeying the covetous desire thereof. Math. 6, 24. Ye cannot
Serve God and Riches.

S. H.
Shadow. sig: pro
A cool place, feruing for bodily refreshing in time of great heat.

2 A refreshing or comfort from God, after, or in some hot affliction or great
danger, as the Shadow is comfortable to the Trauailer in time of extreme
heat. Psalm. 91, 1. Thus is God a Shadow, in respect of his protection and
deliverances.

3 Such Instruments as God uses, to give comfort and refreshing by, to
troubled and afflicted persons. Lam. 4, 20. Under his Shadow shall we be
preserved. Esaias 32, 2. Thus good Kings and godly Rulers are Shadows.

the shadow of death. sig:
Extreme spiritual affliction, through temptation and sin. As Psalm. 23, 4.
Though I walk through the valley of the Shadow of death.

2 Worldly trouble and calamities, through the cruelty of malicious enemies.
Jeremy 13, 16. Whilst you look for life, he turns it into the Shadow of death
and darkness.

the shadow of my roof. sig:
Mine House, therein to take his rest safely. Gene. 19, 8. Seeing they are
come under the Saddow of my Roof.

to Shake Earth. sig:
To move men unto great admiration and astonishment, as it happened at the
publishing of the Law. Hebr. 12, 26. Whose voice then Shook the Earth.

to Shake Heaven and Earth. sig:
To move with admiration both men and Angels, as it came to pass at the
publishing of the Gospel. Heb. 12, 26. I will Shake Earth and Heaven. See 1
Peter 1, 12. Acts 2, 7.

things shaken, and not shaken. sig:
The whole Ceremonial law abolished, and the aeternall Kingdom and Priesthood
of Christ. Heb. 12, 27.

Shame. sig: pro
An affection which springs, by reason of some civil dishonesty or*
filthiness, appearing in the countenance by blushing. Gene. 2. last ver. and
3. They were naked, and were without Shame. This is Shame of face, or natural
Shame; and it is either of fear that we should do dishonestly, or of grief
that we have done dishonestly.

2 Trouble, and perturbation of mind and conscience, being grieved and cast
down at the remembrance of sin against God. Roma. 6, 21. This is Shame of
conscience, which in wicked men is an evil affection, and part of the torment
of Hell: but in the godly it is a good affection, a sign and fruit of their
repentance. Ier. 31, 19. Ephraim smote his thigh, and was ashamed. 1 Corin. 15,
34. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 14.

3 Making void, or forgoing that we hope for, whereof follows Shame. To. 5,
5. Hope makes not ashamed; that is, does not deceive and frustrate us, so as
we need to be ashamed.

4 Punishment or judgment from God, which makes the Sinner ashamed. Iere. 13,
26. That thy Shame may appear.

Shamefastness. sig:
A grace which well becomes and beautifieth Women, making them of a modest
and reverent behavior. 1 Timothy 2, 9. Deck themselves with shamefastness.

in shape as a man. sig:
A very true natural man. Phil. 2, 7. And was found in shape as a Man; that
is, one who in truth had the nature of a man, like other men (saving for sin.)

Shed. sig:
The plentiful largeness, or abundance of Gods grace powered on believers.
Romans 5, 6. Tit. 3, 6. Which is Shed on us abundantly.

Sheep. sig: pro
A Creature, so called, of a meek and harmless Nature, very profitable to the
owner every way, both alive and dead. Job 1, 3. His substance was 7000. Sheep.

2 Such as be members of the visible Church, prosessing to follow Christ* John
21, 16, 17. Feed my Sheep. These be Sheep by profession,

3 Faithful Christians, which not only profess Christ, but meekly and in
truth submit themselves, both in their judgment and affections, to the
doctrine of Christ their chief Pastor. John 10, 27. My Sheep hear my voice,
and I know them, and they follow me. Sheep by effectual calling.

4 The elect Gentiles, not yet gathered into the Fold of the visible Church.
John 10, 13. I have other Sheep that are not of this Fold. Sheep of Gods
purpose and election.

5 A people innocent or harmless. 2. Sam. 24, ^7. These Sheep, what have
they done?

Sheepefold. sig:
A Fold wherein to keep Sheep safe from the Wolf, and other wild beasts.

2 The whole Catholic invisible Church, consisting of believing Jews and
Gentiles. John. 10, 16. That there may be one Shepherd, and one Sheepfold.

Shepherd. See Pastor.

Shield. sig: pro
An Instrument of war, made for defense, to award and keep off the blows of
an enemy.

2 Faith, which is as a Shield, to bear off and beat back the fierce
temptations of Satan. Ephesians. 6, 16. Above all take the Shield of Faith. A
Spiritual Shield.

3 Divine defense and protection. Psalm 18, 2. The Lord is my Shield. An
heavenly Shield.

4 Magistrates, being Instruments of safety and defense to good men. Psa. 47,
9. The Shields of the World belong to God. An earthly Shield.

Ship. sig:
Mariners and Merchants which Traffic in Ships. Esaias 23, 14. Houle ye
Ships of Tarshis.

2 The Riches, strength, and glory of Gods enemies. Psalm. 48, 7. Thou shall
break the Ships, etc. Esaias 2, 16.

Shipwreck sig: pro
The loss, wrack, and overthrow of a Ship by tempest, or otherwise. Acts
27, 44.

2 The loss or falling from that doctrine which once Men did believe and
profess. 1 Timothy 1, 19. And concerning faith have made Shipwreck. Thou shall
break the Shield of Tarshis.

Shoes. sig:
That part of our clothing, which couers and defends our feet from stones,
thorns, and other injuries which they are subject unto. Exodus 3. Put off thy
Shoes.

2 The Gospel of peace and atonement, which (being believed in) prepares and
armeth the feet, or the affections of a Christian Soul, to go thorough all
difficulties of their way, being many and sharp. Can. 7, 1. How beautiful are
thy goings with Shoes. Ephe. 6, 15. Your feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace.

to shut up y^ kingdom of Heaven. sig:
To keep men from hearing and receiving the word preached, whereby the door
of the Kingdom of Heaven is set open unto us. Math. 23, 13. Because you shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven before men.

Sick. sig:
One that lackes bodily health, either in whole or in part. Luke 8, 1, 2. His
Sick Servant. Phil. 2, 27. He was Sick near to death.

2 Sinners which feel their sins with grief, and desire of remedy from
Christ. Mat. 9, 12. The whole need not the Physician, but the Sick. Ver. 13.
For I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.

Sickness. sig:
Ill disposition of the body. John 11, 4. This sickness is not to death.

2 The infirmities of the Soul. Mat. 8, 17. He bare our sicknesses.

Sickle. sig: pro
An Instrument to reap and cut down Corn withal.

2 The sharp severity of divine justice and vengeance, cutting down the wicked
in the day of his judgment, as Corn is cut down with a Sickle in the
Harvest. Roma. 14, 19. And the Angel thrust in his sharp Sickle on the earth.

In the sight of God. See before God.

Sign. sig: pro
Some outward sensible thing, whereby some other thing is brought to mind.
Mat. 16, 1, 2, 3, 4. Desiring him to show them a Sign from Heaven. Can ye not
discern the Signs of the times. Gene. 9, 13. It shall be for a Sign. These
be either natural or civil Signs.

2 Some strange miraculous work, which (as a Sign) shows forth Christ's
divine power. Mark 16, 20. He confirmed the work with Miracles and Signs.
These be miraculous Signs.

3 A Sacramental token, to witness the Covenant of free Salvation by Christ.
Romans 4, 11. The Sign of Circumcision. Genesis 17, 11. This is a mystical Sign.

4 Some outward declaration of Gods Mercy or judgment. 1 Corin. 14, 22.
Strange tongues are for a Sign.

to bind as a sign. sig:
To have a thing always in ^ight, or ready in our remembrance. Exodus 13, 9.
Deuteronomy. 6, 8. Bind them as a Sign to thy band.

Silver. sig: pro
A precious Metal, whereof Money uses to be made.

2 The cheifest and choicest persons in a Kingdom, as Princes, Rulers, and
Priests. Esaias 1, 22, 23. Thy Silver is turned into dross, thy Princes are
rebellious.

Simple. sig:
One, endewed with a very mean and slender wit and capacity. Prou. 9, 16. Who
so is Simple let him come hither, and he that is destitute of wisdom, etc.

2 One, that has a plain heart, void of wiles and wrinckles, having not the wit
and skill to contriue any mischief or harm to others. Romans 16, 9. As
concerning evil be simple.

Similitude. sig:
Likeness, when one thing is declared by another like it. As Math. 20, 1.

2 Form, together with truth of the thing. Romans 8, 2. Made in the Similitude
of Sinful Flesh. Here is meant a true human Nature, made unto the form of
our Nature.

Sincere. sig: pro
That which is pure and without mixture. See Pure.

Sincere faith. sig:
Unfeigned faith, which is without mixture of Hypocrisy. 1 Timothy 1, 4, 5. Pure
heart, good conscience, Sincere faith; or faith unfeigned.

Sincere Milk. sig:
The doctrine of the word, as it is unmixed with errors, traditions, and
heresies. 1. Pet. 2, 1. Desire the Sincere Milk of the word; that is, such as
there is no deceit in it.

Sincerity. sig:
Truth or uprightness, without counterfeiting. 1 Cor. 5, 8. Keep the Feast of
unleavened Bread with Sincerity. 1 Cor. 16. Verse last.

Single life. sig:
An unmarried life, or life of such as live out of marriage; which none stand
bound to do, unless they can forbear by special gift. 1 Cor. 7.

Single. sig:
True, or without guile; it is the same with sincere.

Singular. sig:
That which is not common and ordinary; but peculiar and proper to a godly
person. Mat. 5, 47. What Singular thing do ye? Here it is taken in good
part; But in the evil part, it is put for one conceited and peevish, bent to
his own way and will, without reason.

2 That which is excellent and precious. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 13. That ye have them in
Singular love for their work sake.

Sin. sig:
The transgression of Gods Law. John 3, 4. Sin is the transgression of the Law.

2 The guilt of sin, making us subject unto, and worthy of punnishment. Roma.
5, 12. By one Man Sin entered into the world, in whom all have sinned.

3 The punishment due to sin. Gene. 4, 7, 13. Sin lies at the door; and my
Sin is greater then I can bear, ver. 13.

4 Both guilt and punnishment. Gene. 26, 10. Thou should have brought Sin
upon us. Psalm 32, 1. Blessed is the man whose Sin is covered. Mat. 9, 2.

5 Original corruption, or the prauity and naughtiness of our corrupt Nature,
being prone to all evil. Romans 6, 1, 12. Let not Sin reign. Roma. 7, 8. And so
throughout that Chapter. Psalm. 55, 7. Romans 3, 9, 23.

6 Actual Sin, when evil thoughts are consented unto, and performed in
outward deeds. James 1, 15. Lust, when it has conceived brings forth Sin.

7 Any sinful act or deed. Romans 5, 12. By Sin death entered.

8 A continual course of Sinning, or a constant service of Sin. Romans 5, 15.
Romans 6, Verse 15. Shall we Sin? Also Romans 6, 1. Shall we continue in Sin?

9 A Sacrifice offered, to make atonement for Sin. 2 Cor. 5, 21. He has
made him Sin, to be sin for us. Exodus 29, 14. Exodus 30, 10. Psalm. 40, 6.
and often else where.

not to have Sin. sig:
Not to have so great a sin, as contempt of Christ and his Doctrine. John 15,
22. Not have had sin.

to loose sins sig:
To assure a repentant sinner of forgiveness, by applying the promises of
mercy in the public ministry. Math. 16, 19. Whatsoever thou shall loose. The
Papists do build their indulgences on this this loosing, and their Tyranny,
on binding.

Sin to death. sig:
The blasphemy of the holy spirit, which is Capital, without all recovery. 1
John 5, 16. There is a sin to death, for which ye shall not pray. See
Blasphemy.

to Sin. sig:
To break or transgress some commandments of God. 1 John 1, 8, 9, 10.

2 To follow sin with pleasure, not studying to live holily. 1 John 2, 1.
That ye sin not.

to commit Sin. sig:
Willingly, with the whole will, to fulfill the desires of lust and sin. 1
John 3, 8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil.

to Sin no more. sig:
To increase our care and endeavor against our sins, that the force of them
may be weakened, and their number lessened, and occasions avoided. John 5, 14.
Go, and Sin no more; that is, resist and strive against thy Sins.

not to Sin. sig:
To endeavor the cleansing our selves from sin, following Holiness of life. 1.
John. 3, 6. Sins not.

to Sin against one. sig:
To give him occasion of sinning by our evil example, in word, or deed. Math.
18, 15. If thy Brother sin, or trespass against thee.

to have cloak for sin sig:
To have something to plead for excuse. John 15. 22.

Sinner. sig:
Every man, being subject to sin, and to the transgression of the Law. Luke
18, 13. God be merciful unto me a Sinner. Thus all men be sinners. Romans 5, 8.
When we were Sinners.

2 The Gentiles, which be strangers from the Covenant of God. Gal. 2, 15. And
not Sinners of the Gentiles. Thus Heathens only be sinners.

3 One that lives in sin, and makes a trade of sinning, having Sin reigning
and raging in him. John 9, 31. God hears not Sinners. Math. 11, 19. Psalm. 51,
13. Psalm. 1, 1. That stands not in the way of Sinners. Romans 5, 7, 8. Thus
wicked men only be Sinners.

4 One, wounded with a sense and feeling of Sin, hungering after Gods mercies
in Christ. Math. 9, 13. I came to call Sinners to Repentance. Thus the godly
be Sinners.

Sinners in the sight of the Lord. sig:
Such as Sin openly, declaring their sins impudently, without any reverence
of divine Majesty, or of men in earth. Genesis 13, 13. They were great sinners in
the sight of the Lord. Thus Tremelius reads it. See Genesis 6, 11. Corrupt in the
sight of God; that is, impudent Offenders.

Sion, or Mount-Sion. sig:
An hill in the City of Jerusalem, whereupon the Temple was built. Earthly
Sion, as a Type and figure of another Sion. Psalm. 125, 1.

2 The visible Church of God here on earth. Psalm. 51, 20. Be favorable to
Sion. and 12, 9, 5. As many as bear ill will to Sion.

3 The Caelestiall City, Heavenly Sion, most excellent for glory, and
permanent for stablenesse, like to a Mountain which is high and firm. Reu.
14, 1.

Sir. sig:
A term of reverence given to Teachers and men of authority and wealth. John
12, 21. Sir, we would feign see Jesus. Thus Sarah called Abraham, Sir, or
Lord. 1 Pet. 3, 5.

Sirtes. sig:
Perilous places in the Sea, like unto Whirlepooles. Acts 27, 17. Fearing
least they should have fallen in Sirtes.

sig: pro
A Daughter of the same Father; so was Marie to Martha and Lazarus. John 11, 1.
And her Sister Martha. A Sister by Nature.

2 A Kinswoman; so was Sarah to Abraham. Gen 12, 10. Say thou art my Sister.
Also Math. 13, 56. His Sisters, are they not with us? A Sister, by affinity and
consanguinity.

3 Every true Christian that does the will of God. Math. 12, 50. He that does
the will of my Father, is my Sister. A Sister by profession.

4 Any thing that is dear unto us, and unto which we are nearly joined in love
and affection. Prou. 7, 4. Say unto wisdom, thou art my Sister. A Sister by
affection of love.

5 The Church, to be gathered out of the Gentiles. Cant. 8, 8. We have a little
Sister. A Sister, by spiritual union with Christ.

to Sit. sig: pro
To rest after labor. John 4, 6. Jesus being weary, sat thus upon the Well.

2 To have Dominion and Rule (whereof sitting is a Token.) Math. 19, 28. And
Sit upon seats, and Judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Revel* 20, 4.

to Sit in the dust. sig:
To fall from high estate and degree, to the lowest and poorest condition. Esaias
47, 1. Come down, and Sit in the dust.

to sit in heavenly places. sig:
To possess Heaven in Christ our head, and by hope to look to possess it in
our own persons. Ephesians. 2, 6. And has made us Sit in Heavenly places.

to Sit at the right hand of God. sig:
To partake with God, in the fullness of his Glory, Majesty, and Rule, over all
creatures, as Christ only does. Psalm. 110, 1. Ephesians. 1, 20. And set him at his
right hand, in heavenly places.

2 To have part in the blessedness and glory of heaven, with God, by his free
mercy. Mat. 20, 23. To Sit on my right hand shall be given, etc. Math. 25, 32.
To them on the right hand.

to sit in the Temple of God. sig:
To rule and command in the Conscien^ the Church, where GOD alone ought to ^^t
as chief Ruler. 2 These. 2, 4. He Sits as God, in the Temple of God.

Six troubles. sig:
Sundry and many afflictions, from al which God will deliver the upright man.
Job 5, 19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles.

S. L.
Slack. sig:
One, that lingereth and puts off to do a thing beyond the appointed and due
time. 2. Peter 3, 9. God is not Slack; that is, he is not one that neglects
his season, to come later then he should. God is not such a Slack one.

to Slander. sig:
To raise and give out an evil report of others, to their reproach. Psalm. 15,
3. He that Slandereth not with his tongue. Psalm. 50, 20. One may Slander his
Neighbor, in speaking the truth of him, if it be done with a mind to disgrace
and hurt his name, by discovering his faults.

Sleep. sig:
The binding of the senses, to give the body rest after labor. Ester 6, 1. His
Sleep went from him. Psalm. 3, 5. I Slept, and rose again. Psalm. 4, 8. This is
Natural Sleep, which is the rest of the body in the bed.

2 Sin, ruling and ouer-ruling in men's hearts, which makes the soul secure
and senceles of God, as if it were asleep. Romans 13, 11. It is now time we
should arise from Sleep. Ephe. 5, 14. Awake thou that Sleep. This is
spiritual Sleep, which is the rest of the soul in sin.

3 Negligence and carelessness, more or less. Math. 13, 35. While men slept.
Math. 25, 5. While they Slept. This is also the Sleep of the Christian soul,
ouer-taken with some security, thorough abundance of peace and pleasures.

4 Death, or dissolution of the soul from the body. Dan. 12, 2. Acts 7, 60.
John 11, 11. 1. Cor. 11, 30. And some Sleep. This is mortal Sleep, the rest
of the body in the grave,

to Sleep. sig:
To rest; Secondly, to sin and live securely; Thirdly, to dye. Thus men
Sleep, as before is showed.

2 To be slow, and put off long, to help one out of troble. Ps. 44* 23. Why
Sleep thou O God. Thus God is said to Sleep.

to Slip. sig:
To fail in some duty toward God, or our neighbor, or our self. Psalm. 73, 2.
My foot had well nigh slipped.

Slow to anger. sig:
One loath to punnish, deferring his vengeance. Psalm. 103, 8. The Lord is slow
to anger.

Sluggard. sig:
One, that is idle, loving ease and bodily rest. Prou. 6, 6. Go to the Pismire,
O sluggard.

2. One, that is careless and negligent in the duties of godliness. Prou. 23,
13. The Sluggard says there is a Lion in the way.

S. M.
to Smite. sig.
To accept and take favorable. Genesis 8, 23. God Smelled a savor of rest.

to Smoke. sig:
To strike one with the hand, or with a rod. Mat. 26, 27. They Smote him with a
Rod.

2 To witness soule-greefe, and sorrow for sin. Ier. 31. 19. Ephraim Smote
his thigh.

3 To kill. Genesis 32, 11. Least he will come and smite me.

to Smite with blindness. sig:
To strike and plague men with darkness, not of bodily eyes only, but of
mind; to troubling their wits, and dazeling their sight. Genesis 19, 11. And he
smote the men with blindness.

Smoke sig: pro
The reeke and vapor, arising out of the fire, being hurtful to the eye; and
suddenly vanishing to nothing.

2 The unstable and vanishing condition of the wicked. Psalm. 37, 20. Even with
the Smoke shall they consume away.

3 A sloathfull Messenger, who is as irksome and grievous to him that sends
him, as Smoke is to the eye. Prou. 10, 26. As Smoke to the eyes, so is a
sloathfull man to him that sends him.

3 The hot and fiery anger of God, against the wicked. Psalm 18, 8. Smoke went
out at his Nosthrils.

4 A visible sign and Token of Gods presence. Esaias 4, 5. A cloud, and Smoke by
day.

S. N.
Snare. sig: pro
A Ginne, or Trap, to catch something in privily.

2 Some secret assault of an enemy. Psalm. 91, 3. From the Snare of the Hunter.

3 Sinful temptations of Satan, and worldly lusts, wherein sinners are
entrapt and held fast (as Birds in a snate.) 1. Tim. 6, 9. They that will be
rich fall into temptations and snares. 2 Timothy 2, 26. And come out of the Snare
of the devil.

4 Worldly riches and pleasures, which to wicked (through their own fault)
prove Snares, by Gods just judgment. Psalm. 69, 2, 22. Let their table be made
a Snare.

S. O.
So. sig:
In such sort, or such wise. Math. 20, 26. But it shall not be So among you;
that is, not in such sort and fashion as it is with earthly Princes.

2 Likeness, or unlikeness, when it is a note of comparison. Luke 17, 26. So
shall it be in the days of the Son of Man.

3 A condition to be performed. Romans 8, 18. If So be ye suffer with him.

Sobriety. sig:
A power* or gift, enabling men to use moderately all lawful pleasures of
this life, and to refrain from all unlawful. Titus 2, 12. To live Soberly,
justly. and godly. 1 Pet. 5, 8. Watch, and be Sober.

2 The moderation of the mind in the use of inward gifts, without pride or
swelling against others. Romans 12, 5. Be wise unto Sobriety. Acts 26, 25. I
speak the words of truth and Sobriety.

Sold. sig: pro
That which passes over to the possession of another, who with his money has
purchased the property and use of it. Acts 5, 1. Sold a possession.

Sold under sin. sig:
A Bondman, or one in bondage to sin, as a Slave bought with Money is bond
to his Lord: Regenerate persons are such in part. Romans 7, 14. I am carnal,
Sold under sin. But the wicked are such wholly. 1 Kings 20, 21. Thou have Sold
thy self to do wickedness. Ahab was a voluntary Bond man unto sin,
fulfilling the lusts of it with greediness. Paul was vnuoluntary, being
forced to do the will of sin, for he did the evil which he hated and would
not have done, because he was regenerate in part. Romans 7, 15, 16.

Some. sig:
The greater number or more part. Romans 3, 3. What though some did not believe.

Some. sig: pro
Any Man-child begotten in lawful Marriage: as Isaac to Abraham. Gene. 22, 8.
My Son.

2 A Nephew or a Grand child. Gene. 46, 7. Gene. 31, 43. These Sons are my
Sons. 2 Samuel 19, 24. Mephibosheth the Son of Saul.

3 One, that lineally descends from the loins of another. Math. 1, 1. The
Son of David; that is, one of his posterity.

4 A Child, either Son or Daughter. Romans 8, 17. That we are the Sons (or
Children) of God. Also verse 18. Reu. 21, 7. And he shall be my Son.

5 One, spiritually begotten by the preaching of the Gospel. Titus 1, 3. Titus
my Natural Son. 1 Timothy 1, 2, 3. So every true Christian may be called the Son
of his Pastor, which begot him to God.

6 One, that has the affection of a Son, and submits himself to another,
as a Son to his Father. Phil. 3, 22. He has been with me, as a Son with his
Father. Prou. 3, 1. Hearken my Son. So is every good subject a Son to his
Ruler. Josh. 7, 19.

7 Some most excellent Creature of God, as an Angel, or some other. Cant. 2,
3. So is my beloved among the Sons.

8 A Successor, one who succeeds or comes after another in government.
Thus it is written, that Iehoiakim begat Ieconiah, and his Brethren. Mat. 1,
11. A Legal, and not a Natural Son.

9 One, which is so called Ironice in derision, because he falsely boasted to be
a Son, when he was not. Luke 16, 25. Son remember that thou, etc.

Son of God. sig:
One, begotten of the substance of God, by an unspeakable and eternal
generation. Math. 3, 17. This is my well-beloved Son. John 1, 14. As the glory
of the only begotten Son of God. This is a son by Nature; and thus Christ
alone is the Son of God, according to his Divine Nature. Arrians deny this,
most falsely and impudently.

2 The Man Christ, or the Manhood of Christ, which is the Son of God by the
grace of personal union, being united unseparably, to the person of the Son
of God. Luke (...) 1. ^^at holy thing which is borne of thee, shall be called
the Son of God. A Son by grace of personal union.

3 One, that is taken of favor to be a Son, being by Nature a Child of
wrath. John 1, 12. Gal. 4, 5. Romans 8, 14. As many as are led by the Spirit,
they are the Sons of God. Thus every true believer is a Son, by grace of
adoption.

4 One, framed and made after the Image of God, in perfect righteousness and
holiness. Luke 3, verse last. Adam the Son of God. Thus Adam was the Son
of God, a Son by Creation. In this sense also, the Angels are the Sons of
God. Psalm 89, 6.

5 One, that comes of godly Parents, and is a worshipper of the true God
outwardly, though not in truth. Genesis 6, 1. The Sons of God saw, etc. This is
a Son by profession only.

God has given his Son. sig:
That God, most freely, out of his favor and eternal mercy (without all
respect of our works and merits) has bestowed his Son upon us, to be our
Savior. Romans 8, 32. God spared not his Son, but gave him for us.

Sorrow. sig:
A natural affection, whereby the heart is grieved, in respect of some evil
thing which troubles us. Genesis 37, 34. And sorrowed for his Son a long
season. Gene. 42, 38. Ye shall bring my Gray-head with Sorrow to the Grave.
This is a natural Sorrow.

2 A grief arising out of the fear of punnishment, breeding desperation unto
Death. 2 Cor. 7, 10. Worldly Sorrow causes death. This is worldly Sorrow.

3 The grief and displeasure of mind, which we feel, for offending God our
merciful Father, by our sins. 2 Cor. 7, 10. Godly Sorrow causes repentance
to Life. This is godly Sorrow.

4 Misery, which is cause of Sorrow. Reu, 21, 4. No more crying, nor Sorrow. A
Metanimie of the cause for the effect.

Sorrow of death sig:
A death full of Sorrow, both of body and mind. Acts 2, 24. He loosed the
Sorrows of death. Deadly Sorrows, such as a Woman is tormented with in her
travail: these were loosed by Christ's victory over, and deliverance from
death, which for a time held down Christ as one oppressed by those deadly*
so^^owes.

Soldier* sig:
One, that fights in war against a worldly enemy. Acts 10, 7. Luke 7, 8. I
have Soldiers under me.

2 A Spiritual Warrior under Christ, against Sin and Satan. 2 Timothy 2, 34.
Suffer affliction as the Soldier of Jesus Christ. Such is every Christian, but
especially the Ministers of Christ.

Soul. sig:
That spiritual and best part of man (which is distinguished from the body)
whereby we understand and discourse of things. Genesis 2, 7. Mat. 10, 28. Which
is able to destroy Body and Soul.

2 The whole man, consisting of body and soul. Romans 13, 1. Let every Soul be
subject, etc. Ezekiel. 18, 20. The Soul that Sins shall dye. By a Sin^^^doche
of the part for the whole. Gene. 46, 26, 27. Genesis 27, 6. Also 1 Pet. 1, 9. and
1 Pet. 2, ver. last. Bishop of your Souls.

3 The will and affections, whereof the Soul is the seat. Luke 1, 46, 47. My
Soul does (...) the Lord. 1. Samuel. 18, 1. The Soul of Jonathan was knit to
the Soul of David. 1 These. 5, 22. Gene. 34, 8. A Sinecdoche of the whole for a
part. Heb. 4, 12.

4 Life. Psalm 16, 10. Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell; that is, suffer
my life to be always oppressed with Death. Psalm 7, 2. Least he devour my
Soul. And often elsewhere in the Psalms, Soul is put for Life, for a man's
person and self: By a Metanimie of the cause. The soul being cause of life.

5 The breath which men breath in and out. Acts 20, 10. His Soul is in him.

6 God himself. Prouer. 6, 16. Yea, his Soul abhors seven.

Soul (in the Haebrew and Greek tongue) is Note.
often found to signify the carcass or dead body of a man; also, any living
thing. As in Leuit. 19, (...). and 21, 11. Revel. 16, 3.

To Sow. sig: pro
To scatter Seed in the earth, that it may grow and bring forth fruit. Math.
13, 3. The Sower went out to Sow.

2 To disperse worldly goods among the poor. 2 Cor. 9, 6. He that Sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly.

3 To distribute the word by preaching. Luke 8, 5. And as he Sowed, etc.

to Sow iniquity. sig:
To perform, and do wicked works with diligence and pleasure. Pro. He that
Sowes iniquity, shall reap affliction.

to Sow to the Spirit. sig:
To do good works by the help and aid of the Spirit; or to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit. Gal. 6, 8. If ye Sow to the Spirit; that is, if ye do
wisely and carefully give your selves to spiritual exercises, that ye may
bring forth fruits of the Spirit.

to Sow in tears. sig:
To serve God through afflictions and heaviness. Psalm. 126, 5. They which Sow
in tears, do reap with joy.

Sower. sig: pro
An Husbandman, which Sows and manureth his ground.

2 A Minister, who dispierseth the Seed of the word. Math. 13, 7. The Sower
went out to Sow.

S. P.
Span-long. sig:
A short time or small continuance. Psalm. 39, 6. Thou have made my days as a
hand-bredth, or Span long.

to Spare. sig:
To forbear such as have sinned with offense to others, not censuring them. 2
Cor. 13, 2. If I come I will not Spare. Thus man Spares man.

2 To hold back correction from Sinners. Lam. 3, 42. Thou have not Spared.
Thus GOD Spares Man.

to speak, or to say. sig: pro
To utter some word with our mouth, thereby to express the inward thought.
Genesis 34, 3. And he Spoke kindly to the Maid.

2 To declare, witness, and signify ones mind by another. Psalm 62, 12. God
Spoke once or twice. Ier. 10, 1. Exodus 21, 1. God Spoke these words, etc. Thus
God Speaks by his Angels, Ministers, word, works, and Signs.

3 To utter some weignty thing with deliberation. Psa. 49, 3. My mouth shall
Speak of wisdom.

4 To Preach. Acts 14, 1. He so Spoke, as many believed. Acts 11, 20. They
Spoke to the Graecians, and Preached the Lord Jesus.

5 To confess with our tongue, before men, what we believe with our heart,
before God. Psalm. 116, 1^. I believed, therefore I Spoke. 2 Cor. 4, 13. We
believed, therefore we Spoke.

6 To entreat or pray, God for our selves or others. 1 Samuel 1, 12, 13. For Anna
Spoke in her heart, and verse 16. Of the abundance of my grief have I Spoken
hitherto.

7 To think or muse upon a thing. The thought of the heart is an inward
speech; and the word of the mouth, is as a thought outward or uttered. Mar. 5,
28. For she said, If I may but touch, etc. Math. 9, 3. They said or Spoke
within themselves.

8 To work and effect something. Heb. 12, 24. The blood of Christ Speaks
better things.

Speed. sig:
Success, good or ill. 2 John 10. Neither bid him good Speed.

to Spew. sig:
To distaste, loath, and detest; or with loathing to reject one. Reave. 3, 16. I
shall Spew thee out of my mouth. A speech borrowed from a stomach evil
affected, which perbreakes and casts up that thing which offends it, and is
loathsome to it.

Spices. sig:
The graces and fruits of the Spirit, mentioned in Gala. 5. Which for their
comfortable taste and delight, are likned unto Spices. Cant. 4, 16. That the
Spices may flow out.

Spiders web. sig:
A vain or trifling thing, which is of no value nor strength. Esaias 59, 5. And
Weaue the Spiders-Web.

Spirit. sig: pro
The wind or air, breathing or blowing upon us with might and secretly. John
3, 8. The Wind or Spirit blows where it list.

2 The whole Essence of the Godhead, as it is common to all the three persons.
John 4, 24. God is a Spirit. Romans 1, 5. 1 Timothy 3, verse last. 1 Pet. 3, 18.
Heb. 9, 4. John 6, 63.

3 The third person in the Trinity. 1 John 5, 6. That Spirit is truth: and
verse 7. Inspiring all good thoughts in our hearts.

4 The gifts and graces of the Spirit. Luke 1, 15. John was filled with the
Spirit. Also Acts 6, 5. and 2, 18. 1 Cor. 14, 32. Gal. 3, 2. Received you the
Spirit. And elsewhere often. A Metanimie of the cause for the effect.

5 The work of the Spirit; to wit, the new quality of holiness, created by
the Spirit in the hearts of the elect. Gala. 5, 17. The Flesh lusts against
the Spirit. Also verse 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the
Spirit. Romans 8, 1. This is a supreme work of the Spirit, peculiar to the
elect.

6 An excellent and most singular efficacy and working of the Spirit unto the
sanctification of Christ's human Nature, filling it with holiness above
measure. Romans 8, 2. The Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus;
that is, the work of perfect holiness wrought in the Manhood of Christ, by
his own lively quickening Spirit, which is like a Law, mightily governing and
moderating.

7 The spiritual work of the Gospel, being set against the carnal
shadowish Ceremonies of Moses Law. Gala. 3, 3. That after you have begun in the
Spirit.

8 An inferior work of the Spirit; generally, and slightly enlightening and
reforming the reprobate. 1 Samuel 10, 10. The Spirit of God came upon him. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 19. Quench not the Spirit. Hebr. 6, 4. And were made partakers of the
holy Ghost. This is an inferior work of the Spirit, common to the elect, with
many reprobates.

10 The motions of the mind, stirred up by the Spirit. Psalm. 51, 11. Renew a
right Spirit within me. Roma. 8, 14. Luke 9, 55. Judges 3, 10. And the Spirit
of the Lord came upon him; that is, he was stirred up or moved by the Spirit,
to do that he did.

11 Instinction or inspiration of the Spirit. Mar. 22, 43. How did David in the
Spirit. Acts 28, 25. Luke 2, 26. It was declared to him by the holy Ghost. 1
Cor. 14, 14, 15, 16.

12 That which is spiritual or pure. John 3, 6. That which is borne of the
Spirit, is Spirit; that is, clean, holy, and pure; like to the cause whereof
it springs.

13 Revelation of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 12, 12. By the Spirit we know what things
are given us of God. For the Spirits reveal the hidden things of God. Verse 10.

14 An holy Angel. Heb. 1, verse 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits? Also,
it signifies a wicked Angel; to wit, the Devil. Acts 12, 43, 45. He took
seven other Spirits.

15 The Soul of man. Luke 23, 46. Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.
1 Pet. 3, 19. And Preached to the Spirits that are in Prison; that is, to the
Souls which were in the Prison of hell, now at this time, when Peter wrote this
Epistle, but were alive, at what time the Son of God did Preach unto them by
his Servant Noah. For in Hell there is no place of Preaching or repentance.
Roma. 8, 10.

16 That high and Noble faculty of man's soul, called the understanding, or
mind, with the most inward cogitations thereof. Luke 1. 47. My Spirit
rejoices. Romans 12, 2. Be renewed in the Spirit of your mind. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 23.
1 Cor. 2, 11. And in all places where Spirit and Soul are mentioned together.

17 Purpose, thought, will, and consent. 1 Cor. 5, 3. But present in Spirit.
Also verse 4.

18 With all the heart, or with a true affection. Romans 1, 9. Whom I serve in my
Spirit; that is, cheerfully, and with a good will.

19 The conscience sanctified and renewed by the Spirit. Romans 8, 16. Gods
Spirit bears witness with our Spirit; that is, to our sanctified conscience.

20 The means and devises of men, covered and cloaked with pretense of
spiritual revelation. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 2. Nor be troubled, neither by Spirit, nor
by word.

21 The spiritual worship of God. John 4, 24. Must worship him in Spirit and
truth. Phil. 3, 3.

22 The Gospel. 2 Cor. 3, 6. Has made us able Ministers of the Spirit.

23 One, that pretends to have the gift of the Spirit to do the office of a
Prophet and Teacher, yet indeed has it not. 1 John 4, 1. Believe not every
Spirit.

24 Doctrine, delivered by him, which is endewed with the gift of the Spirit,
for instruction of the Church. 1 John 4, 2. Every Spirit which confesses that
Jesus is come in the Flesh, is of God. Here is meant, both doctrine, and
person that bringes it.

25 Spiritual exercises, of Prayer, Meditation, hearing, etc. Gala. 6, 8. He
that Sowes to the Spirit; that is, he that exercises himself in spiritual
duties.

26 Skill of working in Gold, Silver, Iron, and Brass. Exodus 31, 3. Whom I
filled with the Spirit of God.

Spirits. sig:
The most inward, and secret conceptions and thoughts of the Soul. 1 Cor. 12,
10. To another discerning of Spirits.

Spirit of adoption. sig:
An effect of the holy Spirit, to wit; a witnessing unto the believers, that
God has adopted them, and taken them for his Children. Romans 8, 15. Ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption; that is, the spirit which witnesses unto you
your adoption, to be Gods Children.

to be borne after the spirit. sig:
To be borne into this elementary World, by the virtues of Gods promise, and
after a spiritual manner, and not by ordinary course of Nature. Gal. 4, 29.
Persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit.

borne of the spirit. sig:
One, regenerate and borne into the Christian World by the holy Spirit, the
Author of our newbirth. John 3, 6. That which is borne of the Spirit.

Earnest of the Spirit. See Seal, and Earnest.

spirit of fear. sig:
An effect of the Spirit, to wit; fear and terror wrought in the hearts of Men
by the holy Spirit, in the Ministry and Preaching of the Law, revealing our
sins, and Gods wrath due unto them. Romans 8, 15. Ye have not received the
Spirit of fear again.

Thus the Spirit of a sound mind, the Spirit of Note.
wisdom and meekness, the Spirit of knowledge, the Spirit of grace and
prayer, the Spirit of Prophecy, and such like, signify several effects,
works, and gifts, together with the Author and cause, which is the holy
Spirit: and on the other side, the Spirit of Pride, Covetousness Fury,
uncleanness, and the like* do signify these vices, and the Devil that wicked
Spirit the author of them.

Spirit of the Gods. sig:
A divine force and virtue. Genesis 41, 38. In whom is the Spirit of Gods.

holy Spirit. sig:
That Spirit of God, which in himself is most holy, and worker of holiness in
all others. Ephesians. 1, ^3. Ye were sealed with the holy Spirit.

to be led by the Spirit. sig:
To follow the direction of the Spirit, having his good motions for the guide
and governor of our whole life. Romans 8, 14. They that are led by the Spirit,
are the Sons of God.

Spirit lusting against the Flesh. See Lust.

ministering of the spirit. sig:
The Preaching of the Gospel, whereby GOD gives his quickening Spirit, working
the life of Grace in the elect. 2 Cor. 3, 8. How, shall not the Ministry of the
Spirit be more glorious.

meaning of the Spirit. sig:
Inward sighs, and earnest desires, proceeding from the instinct of the
Spirit. Romans 8, 27. Know the meaning of the Spirit.

new nesse of the Spirit. sig:
Such a new life, as becomes them whom the Spirit has renewed; or a new and
holy life wrought by the Spirit of God. Romans 7, 6. That we should serve God in
newness of Spirit.

Spirit of promise. sig:
That Spirit, which brings not the Law to terrify us, but the promise of free
adoption to confirm and comfort us. Ephe. 1, 13. The holy Spirit of Promise.

Spirits of ye Prophets. sig:
The doctrine which the Prophets bring through the inspiration of the holy
Spirit. 1 Corin. 14, 32. The Spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the
Prophets.

to receive the Spirit. sig:
To feel the efficacy and power of the Spirit, working in us, faith, hope,
love, joy, fear, grief, and such like graces and affections. Romans 8, 15. Ye
have not received the Spirit of bondage, but ye have received the Spirit of
adoption.

Spirit of slumber. sig:
Spiritual slumber and blindness, caused by the wicked Spirit. Esaias 29, 10.
The Lord has covered you with the Spirit of slumber.

Spirit of southsaying sig:
Such an evil Spirit as can tell things past, and guess at things to com.
Acts 16, 16. Having a spirit of South-saying, or divination.

sword of the Spirit. sig:
The word of God, which is a spiritual Sword, to defend us, and offend Satan.
Ephe. 6, 17. Take to you the Sword of the Spirit.

Spirit of truth. sig:
The holy Spirit being himself most true, even truth itself, also the
author and teacher of truth to all others. John 14, 17. Even the Spirit of
truth.

unclean spirit. sig:
A wicked Angel or a Devil, unclean in himself, and author of uncleanness
in others. Math. 10, 1. Luke 9, 1. And gave them power against unclean Spirits.

to walk after the spirit sig:
To be led by the Spirit, when we follow (in ordering our lives) the good
motions thereof. Romans 8, 1. Which walk after the Spirit.

to worship in Spirit. sig:
To give and offer unto God a spiritual service, agreeable to his Nature,
being himself a Spirit. John 4, 23. The true Worshippers, shall worship the
father in Spirit.

Spiritual. sig:
That which is most pure, being given not to our bodies only, but to our very
Spirits and secret thoughts. Romans 7, 14. The Law is Spiritual.

2 Persons endued with great measure of godly knowledge and spiritual graces.
1 Cor. 1, 3. I cannot speak unto you, as unto Spiritual.

3 One, mightily ruled and governed by the Spirit. Gala. 6, 1. You which are
Spiritual, restore such an one.

4 One, that has the true sense and interpretation of the word in his heart,
by which he can try all doctrines. 1 Cor. 2, 15. The Spiritual man discerns
all things. The Papists appropriate this term [ Spirituall] to their
Clergy, which of all other men, are most carnal every way.

Spiritually sig:
By the virtue and special enlightening of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 2, 24. Because
they are Spiritually discerned.

Spirtuall things. sig:
The matter of doctrine, and the words whereby it is delivered and taught, both
being spiritual and heavenly. Comparing Spiritual things, with Spiritual
things.

Sporting. sig:
Some token or sign of marriage love. Genesis 26, 8. He saw Isaac Sporting with
Rebecca.

Sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. sig:
The purifying and cleansing of our consciences from the guilt and filthiness
of sin, by the merit of Christ's bloud-shedding, effectually applied through
the Spirit and Faith. 1 Pet. 1, 2. Through the Sprinkling of the blood of Jesus
Christ.

S. T.
Staff of Bread. sig:
The strength of Bread which nourishes us. See Bread.

to go with a Staff. sig:
To go simply, barely, without any riches, or sterngth, pomp, or power. Gene.
32, 10. With my Staff I came, etc. Mark 6, 8. A Staff only.

Stained Cloth. sig:
Imperfect inherent righteousness of the Saints mingled with many sins, as it
were so many stains. Esaias 64, 6. Our righteousness is like a filthy or
stained Cloth.

to stand in grace. sig:
To persevere and continue in the state of grace. Romans 5, 2. In which grace we
Stand. They do err, whosoever, that think believers and justified persons can
fall, either wholly for a time, or finally for ever, from the grace of
Reconciliation with God.

to Stand in the liberty of Christ. sig:
To settle the affections of our heart fast in our Christian liberty (as it
were) in a Station wherein Christ our Captain has placed us. Gal. 5, 1. Stand
fast in the liberty, etc.

Star. sig: pro
A bright Creature, set in the Firmament to adorn and give light to us here
below. Gene. 1, 15, Job 25, 5. and 38, 31.

2 A Minister of the Gospel, shining as a Star, by his pure doctrine and good
life. Reuela. 1, 20. The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches.

to shine as the Stars sig:
To be clothed with heavenly glory. Dan. 12, 3. And they that turn many unto
righteousness, shall shine as the Stars, for ever and ever.

Day Star. sig:
The clear doctrine of the Gospel. 2 Pet. 1, 19. The Day Star arise in your
hearts. How then? do the Papists well to keep the Scriptures from the people
of God, under pretense of obscurity and darkness?

wandering Star. sig:
An unstable man, or one of an unconstant mind. Jude 13. They are wandering
Stars.

Steward. sig: pro
An officer in a great family, put in trust with dispensing and laying out of
his Masters goods. Luke 16, 1. A certain man had a Steward, etc.

2 Every Christian which has received a calling and gifts from God, but
especially the Ministers of the Gospel, trusted with the Mysteries of Christ,
to dispose and dispense them to the people. Luke 16, 2. For thou may be no
longer Steward. And 12, 42. Who is a faithful Steward, and wise.

to Stir up. sig:
To foster and keep burning, the fire of Gods Grace, which Satan and the
Flesh go about to put out and quench. 2 Timothy 1, 6. That thou Stir up the gift
of God which is in thee.

2 To bring one into the World, advance him to authority, and to harden him in
his Sin, as a punishment of his former lusts. Romans 9, 17, For this same
purpose have I stirred thee up.

Stone. sig: pro
A Creature so called, being strong, hard, and stiff, whereof there be many
kinds.

2 Hardness of heart, or a stiff and vnyeelding that. Ezekiel. 36, 26. I will
take from you your hearts of Stone.

how Christ is called a Stone.
3 Christ, who is likened to a Stone, because he bears up the whole building
of the Church, and ioynes together Jews and Gentiles, as two Walls in one.
Hence he is called the Head-stone, or the the Cornerstone. Math. 21, 42. And
because this Stone is not set up by man, but sent by God, therefore he is said
to be a Stone cut out of the Mountains without hands. Dan. 2, 45. And because
Unbelievers refuse to be laid upon this Stone, and so perish; therefore it is
called, A Stone of offense. Esaias 8, 4. 1 Pet. 2, 8. A Stone to stumble at, and
a Rock of offense. Moreover, because he is of exceeding great value and
excellency: thence is he called an elect and precious Stone. 1 Pet. 2, 6.
Behold, I put in Sion a chief Cornerstone, elect and precious. Whereunto add
this, that he is termed a Living Stone, because by his everliving virtue, he
preserues in life of grace all the faithful, till he bring them to the life of
glory. 1 Pet. 2, 4. To whom we come, as to a living Stone. Lastly, because
the most perfect providence of GOD watches over the Church, and every faithful
person built upon this Stone; therefore it is said, that seven eyes shall
be upon it. Zacha. 3, 9. Upon one Stone shall be seven eyes. Zach. 4, 10.

Stone of Israel. sig:
God, who was the strength and refuge of Isreal's people. Gene. 49, 24. By the
Stone of Israel.

Living Stones. sig:
All true believers, which by the doctrine of the Gospel, are quickened with
the life of God, being founded upon Christ the Head-Stone. 1 Pet. 2, 5. As
living Stones are made a Spiritual House.

White Stones. sig: pro
A Stone of this color, given in old time, to witness the acquitting or
absolution of one from some crime, unjustly laid to him.

2 Absolution of Sinners, which do believe in Christ, from guilt and
punnishment of all their finnes. Revelation 2, 17. I will give him a white
Stone.

Straight gate. sig:
Mortification of our evil lusts, or denial of our selves, when our reason
and will are made subject to Gods word. Math. 7, 13. Enter in at the straight
gate.

Stranger. sig:
One, that is not a Jew, but of some other Nation. Math. 27, 7. To bury
Strangers in.

2 One that comes to us from another Country, though he be a Jew. Heb. 13, 2.
Be not forgetful to entertain strangers.

3 A Woman that is not a man's own Wife. Prou. 5, 20. Why should thou embrace
the bosom of a Stranger?

4 One, that uses this World as if he used it not, setting his mind upon his
Country, which is above. 1 Pet. 2, 11. I beseech you as Pilgrims and
Strangers. Heb. 11, 13. Confessed they were Strangers and Pilgrims upon earth.

5 Uncircumcised Gentiles, who had nothing to do with the Covenant of
Salvation by Christ. Ephe. 2, 12. And were Strangers from the Covenants of
Promise.

To Stretch the hand. See hand.

Subjection, or submission. sig: pro
The placing and setting one thing under another in a due order, as the Water
under the Earth, the Earth under the Air, the Air under the Firmament, and
this under the third Heaven: children under Fathers, Servants under Masters,
Subjects under Princes, etc.

2 That obedience that all Creatures yield unto their Sovereign Christ, either
voluntarily, or vnuoluntarily. Ephe. 1, 22. He has made all things subject
under his feet. Phillip. 2, 10. That at the Name of Jesus every knee should
bow.

3 Reverence and obedience toward God. Heb. 12, 9. Be in Subjection to the
Father.

4 The willing obedience yielded in word or deed, by doing and suffering, from
Inferiors toward their Superiors. Romans 13, 1. Ephe. 5, 22. Wives, Submit
your selves to your Husbands.

5 In ordinate and prepos^erous, yielding to the wicked desires of others, or
to the bondage of such things as ought not to rule over our consciences. Gala.
2, 5. To whom we gave no place by Subjection. 1 Cor. 6, 12. I will not be
brought under the power of any thing.

to Submit. sig:
To yield obedience to all lawful Governors, with a willing acknowledgement
of their just authority over us. Colo. 3, 18. Wives Submit your selves to your
Husbands.

2 To serve one another through love for Gods sake. Ephe. 5, 21. Submitting
your selves one to another in the fear of God.

Subtlety. sig:
A singular wit or natural policy, wherewith Serpents were endued at their
Creation. Genesis 3, 1. And the Serpent was more subtle then any Beast of the
Field; That is, more provident and wise: for Subtilty here is taken in good
part, because the Serpent was thus made of God, and God made every thing good,
but Satan abused this good quality, to a bad end.

2 Craft and wicked wiliness, whereby men are made fit to deceive others. Acts
13, 10. O full of all Subtilty and mischiefs. Here the word [ Subtilty] is
taken in ill part for guile and deceit.

to Suffer. sig:
To give leave to do a thing. Luke 9, 59. Suffer me first to go bury my
Father.

2 To endure pain with patience. 2 Timothy 2, 3. Suffer affliction as a good
Soldier, etc.

to Suffer in the flesh. sig:
To dye a painful death according to his human Nature. 1 Pet. 4, 1.
For So Much as Christ has Suffered in the flesh.

2 To mortify our sinful corruption, which is so painful a thing, as may
well be called a suffering. 1 Pet. 4, 1. He that has Suffered in the flesh,
has ceased from Sin.

to Suffer with christ. sig:
Either to be a Companion with Christ in suffering, or to endure patiently
painful things for his sake. Romans 8, 18. If so be you Suffer with him.

Sufferings of Christ. sig:
All the painful and reproachful afflictions which Christ felt in his own
person, for our Redemption; or with his members, to wit; the faithful do
feel for exercise and trial of their faith, patience, and love. Col. 1, 24.
Fulfill the rest of the Sufferings, or afflictions of Christ. 1 Pet. 1, 11. See
Passion and Affliction.

Summer. sig:
The hottest season in the year. Genesis 8, 22. And Summer and Winter.

2 Opportunity and fit time to do things in. Prou. 6, 8. Prepares her meat
in Summer.

drought of Summer. sig:
Extreme dryness. Psa. 31, 4. My moisture was consumed into drought of Summer.

Sun. sig:
That great light, which gives light by day, a most pure, bright, and glorious
creature. Genesis 1, 16. The Sun to rule the day.

2 Christ Jesus, the Sun and light of the world. John 1, 5. And that light
shines in darkness.

3 The bright and glorious presence of God. Revel. 21, 23. This City has no
need of the Sun, for the glory of God did light it, or was a Sun to it.

4 Worldly prosperity. Job 31, 26. I did not regard the shining of the Sun.

5 The inward beauty and purity of the Church of God. Cant. 6, 9. Pure as the
Sun.

Supererogation. sig:
A work of Counsel, done by perfect ones, being more then they were bound
unto, by any precept of the Law of God. [Popish.]

Superscription. sig:
A Title written over ones head, showing the cause of his death. Luke 23, 38.
This Superscription was written over him.

2 A Title engraven in Coin, to show whose it is. Mat. 22, 21. Whose Image or
Superscription is this?

Superstition. sig:
A form of Divine worship, devised by men, beside, or beyond the Commandment
of God, breeding in the followers of it a servile fear. Acts 17, 22. I
perceive you are in all things too Superstitious.

2 True Religion, reproached and slandered with the name of Superstition. Acts
25, 19. About some words of their Superstition. Thus the Heathen man termed
the Religion of Mose^.

Supremacy sig:
That high and Sovereign power and authority which Kings and Princes have
under and from God immediately, as chief and Supreme Governors over all
persons, and in all causes temporal and Ecclefiasticall, according to the word
of God, and good customs of several Countries where they reign. This does
that man of Sin most falsely claim to himself, by virtue of Succession to Peter
the Apostle, who was subject to seculer power in his life and death.

to sup with Christ. sig:
To communicate in all the Spiritual delicates of Christ (as they which sup
together, partake in bodily food.) Revel. 3, 20. He shall Sup with me.

Christ's supping with us. sig:
His cheering and delighting himself, with his own graces and gifts of his
Spirit, bestowed upon us (as one that eats sweet and pleasant meat.) Revel.
3, 23. I will come and Sup with him.

Supper of the Lord. sig:
The Sacrament of Bread and Wine ordained by the Lord. 1 Cor. 11, 20. This is
not to eat the Lords Supper. This Sacrament is called a Supper, because Christ
ordained it at his last Supper. Secondly, because it is a spiritual banquet,
or soule-Feast. Mat. 26, 26. And as they did eat, Jesus took the Bread, etc.

to sustain or support. sig: pro
To bear or hold up a thing, as a prop or shore, to keep it from falling.

2 To uphold one, either that he take not a fall by sin and calamity, or that
he take no hurt by such falls. Psalm. 3, 4. The Lord Sustained me. Psalm 23, 1,
3.

Sure. sig:
Certain, firm, and constant. 2 Pet. 1, 19. We have a most Sure word of the
Prophets. Ver. 10. Make your election Sure; that is, firm to your selves.

Surety. sig:
One, that undertakes for the debt of another Man. Pro. 6, 1. If thou be
Surety for thy Neighbor.

2 Christ, who undertook to answer the debt of our sins to Gods Justice, by
his obedience to death. Heb. 7, 22. Jesus is made Suerty.

S. W.
to Swear. sig:
To use the Name of God in mouth, to witness some matter in controversy, for
the ending of strife. This may be done, either vainly and falsely, or
reverently and truly. Math. 5, 34. Swear not at all. Zache. 5, 3. Deuteronomy. 10,
20. Eccle. 9, 1.

2 To worship and serve God, whereof lawful Swearing is a part. Deuteronomy. 6, 13.
Thou shall Swear by my Name.

to Swear unto y^ Lord sig:
By sollemne Oath, to bind out selves wholly unto God, to serve him only with
a pure heart. 2 Chronicles. 15, 14. And they Swear unto the Lord. Also verse 15.

to Swear by the Lord sig:
To call upon the name of the Lord, as a witness and judge against us, if we
do not deal and speak truly. Josh. 2, 12.

to Swear by Malchan sig:
To halt between the service of the true God and Idols. Zeph. 1, 5.

Sweat of face. sig.
Great labor and hard pains, such as cause sweat and weariness. Gene. 3,
19. Thou shall eat thy Bread in the Sweat of thy face.

Sweet. sig:
Grateful, acceptable. Leuit. 1, 9. An offering of Sweet odor unto the Lord.
Here it is taken in good part.

2 Pleasant and delightful. Thus is wickedness Sweet unto the mouth of a
wicked man. Job 20, 12. Here it is taken in ill part, and Gods Statutes to the
Soul of a righteous man. Psalm. 19, 10.

Swine. sig:
Obstinate and desperate Sinners, which scorn and deride the word of
admonition, rouling and tumbling with pleasure, in the mire of their old,
filthy, and rotten conversation. Math. 7, 6. Cast not Pearls before Swine.

Sword. sig: pro
A sharp Instrument of Iron, made for defense and offense. Luke 22, 49. Shall
we Smite with the Sword?

2 The word of God. Ephe. 6, 17. The Sword of the Spirit, etc. Heb. 4, 12. For
the word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged Sword.

3 An Instrument of Justice, or ensign of public authority. Romans 13, 3. They
bear not the sword in vain.

4 The judgment of wa^re. Leu. 26, 25. I will send a Sword.

5 The sharp justice and vengeance of GOD, hewing down Sinners. Deuteronomy. 32, 41,
42. I will whet my glittering Sword, and my Sword shall eat their flesh.

6 Death executed by the Sword. Exodus 18, 1. And delivered me from the Sword of
Pharaoh.

to live by the Sword. sig:
To lead a restless life, being driven to maintain his own by war. Genesis 27,
40. He shall live by the Sword.

T. A.
Tabernacle sig:
A Place, purposely built and appointed under the Law, therein to do
Sacrifice, and to serve God openly, as afterward was done in the Temple, and as
we now use to do in our Churches. It was made like a Tent, to remove too and
fro as occasion required; it had in it one room, called the Holiest of al,
wherein the High Priest entered once a year: And another room called the holy
place. Heb. 9, 2, 3, 4. For the first Tabernacle was made, wherein was the
Candlestick: And after the second veil was the Tabernacle, which is called
the holiest of all. This was the public Tabernacle, for public uses of divine
service.

2 A place or Tent to dwell in. Math. 17, 4. Make us three Tabernacles. Psalm.
132, 3. This was a private Tabernacle for private use of human life.

3 Christ's human Nature, which is the true incorruptible Tabernacle, wherein
the Son of God dwelt substantially. Heb. 9* 11. And 8, 2. And is a Minister
of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man.

4 Our natural body, wherein our Soul dwells for a time, as in a frail
brittle Tabernacle. 2. Corin. 5, 1. When our earthly Tabernacles be dissolved.

5 Heaven, which is appointed to be the everlasting Tabernacle and habitation
for the Saints ^o dwell in. Revel. 21, 3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with
men, he will dwell with them.

6 The visible Militant Church Way, faring as a Pilgrim here upon earth.
Psalm 15, 1. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle. The Church is called a
Tabernacle, because of many mutations and changes it is subject unto, and
because it has here no abiding place.

Tabernacle of Congregation. sig:
That part of the Tabernacle, whether the people resorted and gathered together
at an appointed time; or else, whether God resorted to speak with Moses and
his Successors. Exodus. 27, 21. Numb. 7. 89. When Moses should enter into the
Tabernacle of the Congregation to talk with God. This part was called the
Sanctuary.

Tabernacle of David. sig:
The Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is as a Tabernacle or place of
refuge to the godly, howsoever it be contemptible in the eyes of the World.
Amos 9, 11. In that day I will raise up the Tabernacle of David which is fallen.

feast of Tabernacles. sig:
That Feast, at which the Jews dwelt seven days in Tents, to put them in
remembrance, that God made their Fathers to dwell in Tents when he brought
them out of Aegipt, and that here they had no abiding place. John 7, 2. Now the
Feast of Tabernacles drew near. Leuit. ^3, 34.

Table. sig: pro
A frame of Wood, made to eat meat upon.

2 All earthly benefits, serving for necessity, or honest delight and ornament.
Psalm. 23, 5. Thou have prepared a Table for me. Psalm. 69, 22.

Table of Devils. sig:
Fellowship with Devils, by being present at the Sacrifices offered unto Idols.
1 Corin. 10, 20, 21. These things that the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice
to Devils. Ye cannot be pertakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils.

to eat and to drink at Christ's table. sig:
To communicate and have fellowshippe with Christ in heavenly joys. Luke 22,
30. That ye may drink at my Table, in my Kingdom.

the table of the Lord. sig:
The company of Gods people, assembled to partake in the Lords Supper. 1 Cor.
1^, 21. Ye cannot partake of the Lords Table; that is, ye cannot have society
and fellowshippe with Christ and his members in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, if you partake of the Table of Devils. What reason have Papists to
scoff at our Communion-Tables, seeing Scriptures bear out this Name. Have not
we cause rather to abhor their sacrificing Altars?

to sit or be at Table. sig:
To partake or have society with others, in eating and drinking. John 13, 28.
But one of them that were at Table, knew for what cause he spoke it unto him.

to spread, or prepare a Table. sig:
To make liberal provision of meat and drink, and of other necessaries for
this life. Psalm 78, 19. Can God prepare a Table in the wilderness?

Tables of testimony. sig:
The two Stones (as two Tables) wherein the Law was written, which bare
testimony of Gods will. Exodus 32, 15. And Moses returning, descended from the
Mountain with the two Tables of testimony in his hand.

to Take in ill part. sig:
To wrest words and actions to an ill purpose, when they might be taken well.
Romans 1, 29. Taking all things in evil part.

to Take the armor of God. sig:
To put on all our spiritual Harness, fitting it close to our hearts, and
using it for our defense and safety against sin and Satan. Ephe. 6, 13, 11.
For this cause take to you the whole Armor of God.

to Take the Foxes. sig:
To remove, or take out of the way whatsoever hurts the Church, in doctrine
or manners. Cant. 2, 15. Take the Foxes.

to Take heed. sig:
To be wary or watchful, for the preventing of some sin or danger. Ephe. 5*
15. Luke 12, 28. Take heed and beware of Covetousness.

to Take thought. sig:
To vex and disquiet the heart with fear and grief. Luke 12, 25, 26. Why take
you thought for the remnant?

to Take in vain. sig:
To abuse a thing, by using it rashly or to wicked purpose. Exodus 20, 7. Thou
shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; that is, either lightly,
or wickedly.

talebearer. sig:
One that goes about (as a Peddler with wares) with reports and tales. Leuit.
16, 19. Prou. 20, 19.

Talent. sig:
A certain piece of Gold, which weyed sixty pound, as the common Talent did,
or 120* pound, as did the Talent of the Temple. 2 Samuel. 12, 30. Exodus 25, 39.
Of a Talent of pure Gold thou shall make it.

2 A free and frank gift of God, bestowed on men, in a certain portion and
measure, to be used to his own glory, and the profit of others. Matthew 25, 15.
And to one he gave five Talents. There is no man but has some Talent
committed to him, whereof he must make use here, and account heere-after.

Tares. sig: pro
A kind of grain in the East-Countries, so like to Wheat (whiles it is in
the blade) as hardly the one can be discerned from the other, being also a
very hurtful thing.

2 The Children of this World, but especially Hypocrites. Math. 13, 36. The
Tares are the Children of that wicked one.

3 All offenses in manners and doctrine, being so colored and disguized, as
hardly can virtues be known from vices, and errors from truth. Mat. 13, 25.
And sowed Tares among the Wheat. False doctrine when it is disguized, is fitly
signified by Tares, both because it is the root and seed of wicked men: Also,
for that it does besot the mind, as Tares (being taken in drink or bread) do
make giddy the brain.

to Taste. sig: pro
Take some slender trial of meats or drinks, how good they be, before we
receive them into our bodies.

2 Slightly to know and believe generally, the doctrine and promise of Christ,
as a man that Tastes of a Cup and drinks not; or as a Cook, who Tastes the
meat, and eats it not; or lastly, as a sick man, who does Taste meat, which
he does puke back, or cast up again. Heb. 6, 4. 5. For it is impossible,
that they which were once enlightened, and have Tasted of the heavenly gift.

3 To take experience of a thing, having indeed tried it. Psalm 34, 9. Taste and
see how good the Lord is.

to Taste death. sig:
To die, or to feel death. Mat. 16, 28. There be some here that shall not
taste of death.

T. E.
to Teach. sig:
To cause to learn; which God does effectually, by enlightening the heart unto
knowledge and faith of the word: and men instrumentally, by interpreting the
word, and by propounding instructions to the outward ear. Iere. 13, 13. They
shall be all taught of God. Psalm 119, 26. Teach me thy Statutes. Acts 20, 21.
Math. 28, 9. Go Teach all Nations. Teaching, is by public and private
persons; by words, works, signs, and Creatures etc.

Teacher. sig:
A public Minister, which by wholesome Doctrine instructs the Church,
beating down errors. Ephe. 4, 11. He gave some to be Teachers.

2 Such, as by private instruction help others to know the things of God.
Titus 2, 3. Teachers of honest things. Thus Parents, and Masters, and common
Christians, are Teachers: The former by public: the latter by private
authority.

Tear. sig: pro
A Water issuing out of the eye from the moystnesse of the brain, as witness
of some inward grief. Psalm. 6, 6. I water my couch with my Tears. And 42, 3.
My Tears are, etc.

2 Sorrow and afflictions, the cause of Tears. Reave. 21* 4. All Tears shall
be wiped from their eyes. Psalm. 126, 5. If ye sow in Tears, etc.

to Tear in pieces. sig:
To destroy utterly and unrecoverably, as when a Lamb is torn in pieces of a
Lion or Bear. Psalm 50, 22. Least I Tear you in pieces.

temperance sig:
A moderation of the mind in the use of outward blessings, holding us back
from excess, causing us rather to refrain from that we may lawfully have,
then in our delights and pleasures to go so far, as our abilities, estates,
and the times would give us leave. 2 Pet. 1, 6. Join with your knowledge,
Temperance. Gal. 5, 23. See Sobriety.

Temple. sig:
Material house, built of Stone and Timber, to worship God publicly therein.
Acts 7, 48. God dwells not in temples made with hands. An external temple.

2 The whole outward Legal service, to be performed in the Temple by the
commandment of God: Also, the promises made unto the Temple, and his
worshippers there. Ier. 7, 4. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord.

3 The bodies and souls of the faithful, wherein God dwells, as in an house
or Temple. 1 Cor. 6, 19. Know ye not that your bodies are the Temple of the
holy ghost. 2 Cor. 6, 16. This is a spiritual temple.

4 The inward, pure, and spiritual worship, where of the ceremonial law was
a tipe. Reu. 11, 1. A rod to measure the Temple.

5 The most mighty and holy God, full of Majesty, power, and glory,
communicating himself to the Saints and Angels in Heaven, for their full
happiness. Reave. 21, 22. For the Almighty and the Lamb, are the Temple of it.

Holy Temple. sig:
An house appointed to holy uses, even to the service of the most holy God.
Psalm. 5, 7. I will worship toward thine holy Temple.

Temple of Idols. sig:
An house erected for the service of Idols. 1 Cor. 8, 10. Sit at Table in the
Idols Temple.

to Tempt. sig: pro
To make proof of a thing, by question, or otherwise for knowledge sake.

2 To make trial and proof of our faith, patience, and love toward God.
Gene. 22, 1. GOD Tempted Abraham. This Temptation is commonly by prosperity or
affliction: and the end of it is to make it known to our selves what is in us,
either good or bad. Deuteronomy. 8, 2. Tempting thee, that he might know what is in
thy heart; that is, make it known to thy self, for the all-seeing God cannot
be ignorant what is in us. Thus God is said to Tempt.

3 To sift us by subtle suggestions, that all grace may be shaken out of our
hearts, and nothing left but the Branne or Chafe of corruption. 1 Thessalonians. 3, 5.
Least the Tempter had Tempted you in any sort. Thus Satan Tempts, not to
try, but to destroy.

4 To entice and move one to sin. James 1, 4. And every man is tempted when he
is drawn aside of his own concupiscence. Thus Lust Tempts; but God tempts
not thus.

5 To make trial of Gods power and justice, whether he can and will help, or
hurt. Exodus 17, 2. Wherefore do ye Tempt the Lord? Thus men Tempt God through
distrust.

6 To forsake the ordinary means of our good, presuming too much upon Gods
help. Math. 4, 7. Thou shall not Tempt the Lord thy God. Thus men Tempt God by
curiosity and presumption, to try whether God will use any way to succor
them, other then is appointed.

7 To seek matter and occasion against other men, for which to reprehend and
accuse them. Mat. 16, 1. Then came the Pharisees to Tempt him. Thus Man
Tempts Man, by captious and subtle questions.

temptation. sig:
Probation, trial, or proof, of any thing or person, to get the true knowledge
of it, for knowledge is the end of Temptation.

2 Afflictions and crosses, by which men are tried. James 1, 2, 14. Count it
exceeding joy when ye fall into sundry Temptations. This is Tentation of
probation.

3 Inward suggestions of Satan, or outward prosperity of life, as baits and
Snares to catch us. Math. 6, 13. Lead us not into Temptation. Math. 26, 41.
Pray, least ye fall into Temptation. Luke 4, 13. When he had ended his
Temptation; that is, Tentation to perdition.

to fall into temptation. sig:
To be overcome, when through weakness we yield unto wicked motions and
affections, and unto occasions of evil* Math. 26, 4. Least ye fall into
Temptation, for the flesh is weak.

Human temptation. sig:
Some trial, wherein does appear great weakness, such as accompanies the Nature
of man. 1 Cor. 10, 13. No Temptation has taken you, but such as is human, or
which pertains unto Men. The meaning is, that the Christians of Corinth,
which for fear of giving offense to their Idolatrous Neighbors, went into
their Temples of Idols, there to eat meat sacrificed to Idols, had herein
showed themselves men, yiedling to human frailety; and therefore it behooued
them to be more constant afterward, that God might be with them in all
Temptations that should befall them, for the time to come.

to lead into temptation. sig:
To put or bring one in the power of Satan the Tempter, delivering him as a
just judge, to the will and pleasure of the Devil, to be carried Captive of
him. Math. 6, 13. Lead us not into Temptation. God puts one in the power of
Satan, as a Judge does put a malefactor over unto the Hangman.

the tempter sig:
The Devil, by his wicked suggestions proouing and seeking whom he may
destroy. 1 Thessalonians. 3, 5. Least the Tempter had Tempted you in any sort. 1. Pet.
5, 8. Mat. 4, 3. Then the Tempter came to him.

Ten days. sig:
A certain space of time (very short) wherein God would afflict his Church.
Revel. 2, 10. And ye shall have tribulation Ten days. Gene. 31, 7. Numb. 14,
22. Job 13, 3. Ten times, put for oftentimes. A finite number, put for an
indefinite.

Ten horns sig:
Many Kings and Provinces, which did give their authority, power, and force,
(meant by the Horns wherein lies the strength of Beasts) to erect, enlarge,
and establish the tyranny of Ecclesiastical Rome. Reu. 7, 12, 13. And the Ten
Horns which thou saw, are ten Kings.

ten virgins. sig:
The visible Church, consisting of wise and foolish; that is, godly and wicked.
Math. 25, 1. Then the Kingdom of Heaven shall be likened unto ten Uirgins.

Tender mercies. sig:
Most inward feeling and affectionate compassions, like unto motherly
pittifulnesse and kindness, which is hard to tell how tender and great it is.
Luke 1, 7, 8. The Tender mercies of our God.

Tent. sig:
A place to dwell in, so made, as it might be removed and carried too and
fro. Numb. 5, 3. Genesis 4, 20. Iuball was the Father of such as dwelt in Tents.
Exodus 18, 7. See Tabernacle.

Tents of wickedness sig:
A place without the Church of God, wherein dwells no goodness nor holiness.
Psalm 84, 10. Then to dwell in the Tents of wickedness; that is, among
Infidels and wicked men.

to live in Tents. sig:
To exercise the Trade of a Shepherd. Genesis 25, 27. Jacob dwelt in Tents.

2 To look unto Household affairs, that they be well governed. Genesis 4, 20.
Iuball was the Father of those which dwell (or live) in Tents.

Testament sig:
That which we commonly call a man's will, and appointment for the bestowing of
his goods amongst his Children, or Kindred and Friends. Gal. 3, 15. Though it
be but a Man's Testament. Heb. 9, 16, 17.

2 An appointment or agreement between God and Man, touching free salvation by
says in Christ. Math. 26, 28. For this is my blood of the New Testament. This
is called a Testament, because it was ratified and confirmed by the death and
bloodshed of him, who made the Covenant or agreement with us; to wit, of
Christ, and contains (as it were) his last will written down.

Did Testament. sig:
The agreement or Covenant of God, which is called [ Old] in regard of the
first dispensation of it by Moses, toward the Jews, in many figures and
shadows of Rites and Sacrifices, and with other obscure and dark Revelations
by Prophesies; which dispensation is now ended. Hebr. 8, 13. In that he says,
a New Testament, he has abrogated the Old.

New Testament. sig:
The Covenant of God, in regard of the dispensation of it under the Gospel, by
Christ, toward Christian people, without such Tipes and Prophesies. Also, with
few Ceremonies, and with more cleerenesse and fuller revelation of the truth,
and more plentiful graces of the Spirit, to endure always new, and the same,
to the end of the World. Iere. 31, 33, 34. Acts 2, 17, 18. This diverse manner
of administration and delivery of the Covenant or Testament, causes it, that
being but one in substance (to wit, salvation by faith in Christ) yet it is
called Old and New Testament, as if it were two. Heb. 8, 8, 9, 10. See
Covenant.

to Testify. sig:
To bear witness of any person or thing, by word or work. 1 John 5, 9. Which
he Testified of his Son.

Testimony sig:
The whole Scripture or word of God. Psalm. 19, 7. The Testimony of the Lord is
sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple. The word of God is called a
Testimony, because it contains Articles of the Testament or Covenant, both on
Gods part and ours; witnessing his good will to us, and our duty to him, what
good he means us, and what duty we should do to him. Sometime this word [
Testimony] signifies doctrine, agreeable to the word. These. 1, 10.

2 The word of precepts and commandments, which are witneses of Gods will what
he would have us do. Psalm. 119, 2. Blessed are they which keep his
Testimonies. Psalm. 25, 9.

3 The Arc. Exodus 16, 34. So Aaron laid it before the Testimony.

4 A good report from others, witnessing well. 2 Timothy 1, 8. Acts 16, 2.

5 The two Tables of Stone wherein the Law was written. Exodus 10, 20. And he
took and put the Testimony in the Arc.

Arc of Testimony. sig:
A Chest, wherein were put the Tables of Stone containing the Law, which is
the Testimony of his will. Exodus 30, 6. After thou shall set it before the
veil that is near the Arc of the Testimony. Also God did there use to give
his people visible Testimonies of his presence.

T. H.
Thanksgiving. sig:
An acknowledging and confessing, with gladness, of the benefits and
deliverances of God, both toward our selves and others, to the praise of his
Name. 1 Timothy 2, 2. Let supplication, and Prayer, and Thanksgiving, be made
for all men. 1 Thessalonians. 1^ 4. Thanksgiving has in it. 1. Remembrance of the
Note.
good done to us. 2. Mention of it. 3. Confessing God to be the Author and
giver of it. 4. Cheerfulness, being glad of an occasion to praise him, and
doing it gladly, with joy.

to Thank. sig:
To recompense a gift freely given. Luke 17, 9. Does he Thank that Servant?

That. sig:
The excellency of some particular person or thing, good or evil, as that
light, that Son of God, That Lamb of God, That life, That Antichrist, etc.
That notable adversary of Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3. That Man of sin; that is,
That most notorious Sinner, exceeding all other in sin. Oftentime [ That] is
read without any Emphasis, only to note some ordinary thing, or person.

The^t or stealing. sig:
The withholding of that which is another man's, against the owners will; the
drawing unto us other men's goods by injury, or not distributing that which is
our own when need requires. Hose 4, 2. By swearing, and lying, and killing,
and stealing. Exodus 20, 15. Thou shall not steal. All manner of wrong, done to
our selves, in respect of our own substance, or to the substance of others, is
Stealing.

Thief. sig:
One, that takes to himself the goods of other men without the priuity of the
owner. Pro. 6, 30. Men do not despise a Thief which steals to satisfy his
Soul.

2 One, that deals unrighteously in his own temporal goods, or spiritual
gifts, by keeping in and hiding them from such, to whom we owe them by virtue
of our calling: or one, who behaues himself unjustly in other men's goods,
impairing them, either by deceit or violence. John 12, 6, 1. Cor. 6, 10.
Thieves, Extortioners.

3 A Seducer, which by corrupt glosses and false interpretations, steals from
the Chuch of GOD the true meaning and doctrine of the Scripture; Iere. 32.
so spoiling Souls, as Thieues spoil men's bodies. John 10, 8. All which came
before me, are Thieves. Hose 6, 9.

4 Hipocrites, which under show of Piety, seek their own gain with the loss
of others. Matthew 2^, 13. Ye have made it a Den of Thieves.

Then. sig:
That a thing is so, or seeing it is so. Romans 6, 1. Also 7, 7. What shall we
say Then?

2 Some certain time wherein something was done. Math. 4, 1. Then was Jesus
led aside. And elsewhere often it is thus taken, to note a certain time.

3 Therefore, and is a note of an inference or conclusion, gathered from some
promises. Romans 8, 1. Now Then there is no condemnation.

Theraphim sig:
An Image, made in the likeness of a man: and all instruments belonging to
false Religion. Judges 17, 5. Made an Ephod and Theraphim.

Thing. sig:
Some real substance or quality, either good or evil. Ephe. 1, 11. Which
works all things after the counsel of his will.

2 Some word spoken of God, touching that which was after to be done. Luke 1,
37. With God shall nothing be impossible. In the Greek Text it is read (no
word shall be impossible.)

3 The doctrine of the Gospel. Acts 17, 32. We will hear thee again of this
Thing.

to Think any Thing. sig:
To conceive or have in our minds a good thought, pertaining to salvation. 2
Cor. 3, 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of
our selves.

2 To judge, and certainly determine. 1 Cor. 7, verse last. I think I have
the Spirit of God.

3 To make our thoughts known by boasting and glorying. Math. 3, 9. Think not
to say in ynur hearts.

to Thirst. sig: pro
To desire drink, out of a feeling or want thereof by some natural drought or
dryness. John 19, 28. I Thirst.

2 Very earnestly to desire and long for Christ and his spiritual graces, out
of a sense of our sins and miseries. Math. 5, 6. John 7, 37. If any Man thirst,
etc. Esaias 55, 1. Ho, every one that Thirsts come.

to Thirst no more. sig:
To find al contentment and satisfaction to our souls in Christ only,
without seeking further for it then in him alone. John 6, 35. He that
believes in me shall Thirst no more.

Thought. sig:
The least motion and stirring of our mind: which, when it is by the holy
Ghost made agreeable to Gods word, then it is a good thought, but if the motion
be from our corrupt heart, and be disagreeable to the word, then it is an evil
thought, whatsoever good pretense it have. Math. 15, 19. For out of the heart
comes evil Thoughts.

2 Our counsels, touching matters to be done, or not done. Psalm 146, 4. Then
his Thoughts perish.

3. The grief of an afflicted mind. Psalm. Amidst the Thoughts of my heart,
thy comforts have refreshed my Soul.

4 Reasoning inwardly in the Soul. Luke 9, 46, 47. When Jesus saw the
Thoughts of their hearts.

5 Purpose joined with endeavor. Genesis 50, 20. When you Thought to do me evil.

6 Carking, or immoderate care, or care with anxiety. Math. 6, 31. Take no
Thought. Mat. 19. Take no Thought what ye speak.

Referred to God.
7 The will, counsel, purpose, or decree of God, touching all things which he
will do, or not do. Psalm 33, 11. The Thoughts of his heart (shall stand)
for ever. It does sometime signify Gods disposition, when his purpose is
executed and brought unto effect. As Genesis 50, 20. But God Thought, etc. So
Tremelius translates it.

Thousand years. sig:
The space of ten hundred years.

2 An exceeding large space of time, a finite number being put for an
indefinite. Psalm 90, 4. A thousand years is but as yesterday, when it is
past. 2 Pet. 3, 8. A thousand years as one day.

Through, or by, in the doctine of justification. sig.
The chief efficient cause; to wit, the grace and free favor of God. Romans 3,
24. We are justified freely, by, or Through his grace.

2 The outward meritorious cause; to wit, Christ Jesus our redeemer. Reu. 3,
24. Through the redemption which is in Christ. Ephe. 1, 7. Through his blood.

3 The inward isntrumental cause; to wit, our Faith. Romans 3, 28. We are
justified Through Faith, without the works of the Law. Verse 25. Through Faith
in his Blood.

4 The signs and fruits of our justification; to wit, good works. James 2,
21. Was not Abraham justified Through works?

Through him. sig:
By his administration or powerful government. Romans 11, 36. Through him are
all things.

Thorny ground. sig:
An heart stuffed with the cares of this World, which choke the seed of the
word, as Thorns choke the Corn springing out of the ground. Mat. 13, 22.
That which fell among Thorns, or thorny ground.

Threatening. sig:
A denunciation of some judgment, temporal or eternal, from God.

2 Hard and cruel speeches from one man to another. Acts 14, 17. Let us
Threaten and charge them. 1 Pet. 2, 23. When he suffered, he Threatened not.

to Thresh the Mountains. sig:
To destroy and afflict grievously, even strong and mighty enemies. Esaias 41,
15. Thou shall Thresh the Mountains, and bring them to powder.

Throne. sig:
A high Seat, full of Majesty and glory, fit for earthly Kings or Judges. 1
Kings 10, 18. Then the Kings made a great Throne of Iuory, and the Throne had
six steps.

2 Some visible token or representation of Gods power and Majesty. Reave. 4, 9.
They gave honor to him that sat on the Throne. Revel. 15, 1. Metaphor.

Thunder. sig:
A great noise and sound caused in the Clouds, by the breaking out of hot and
dry ex^alations, beating against the edge of the Cloud. Psalm 18, 13. The Lord
Thundered in the Heaven. Exo. 16, 19. There were Thundrings and lightnings.
Thunder, is a witness of Gods power, and serves to strike terror and fear
in men; that the godly may be humbled, and the better subdued unto God; and
the wicked confounded and left without excuse.

T. I.
Time. sig: pro
Some certain space, as hour, day, week, year, etc. Dan. 2, 21. He
changes the Times and seasons. Dan. 4, 20. And let his portion be among the
Beasts, till seven Times pass over him; that is, seven years. Exodus 2, 23.

2 Term, period, and shutting up of ones life. Psalm 31, 15. My Times are in
thy hands O Lord.

3 Opportunity, or fit and convenient season to do things in. John 7, 6. My
Time is not yet come. Acts 1, 7. The Times and seasons.

4 The whole term or space which a man lives. Psalm. 90, 10. The Time of our
life, is threescore years and ten, etc.

Time, and times, and part of time sig:
Three years, and ten days. Dan. 7, 25. And they shall be given into his
hands until a Time, and Times, and the dividing (or part) of Time.

Tithes. sig:
The tenth part of our goods. Deuteronomy. 14, 28. Heb. 7, 8. Men that did receive
Tithes.

T. O.
To. sig:
The means that lead to the end. Ephe. 2, 11. Created To good works.

2 The end and final cause. Romans 9, 22. Prepared To destruction. 1 Thessalonians. 5,
9. Appointed To salvation. Ephe. 1, 6. To the praise of his grace.

To day. sig:
All the time that the doctrine of grace is Preached. Psalm 95, 7. To day if
ye will hear his voice.

the morrow sig.
Time to come. Mat. 6, 34. Care not then for the Morrow.

Tongue. sig: pro
The prinicipall instrument of speech. Psalm 45, verse 1. My tongue is the pen
of a ready Writer James 3, 5. The Tongue is a little member.

2 Speech itself. Iam. 3, 6. The Tongue is fire. Iere. 18, 18. Smite him with
the Tongue. A Metonimie, of the cause for the effect.

3 Strange language, or the gift of speaking with a strange language. 1 Cor.
14, 2. He that speaks a Tongue.

deceitful Tongue. sig:
A tongue, uttering crafty and guilefull words. Psalm 52, 4. Thou love all
words that may destroy, o deceitful Tongue; that is, a man speaking deceit
with his Tongue.

Tongue imagines mischief. sig:
The Tongue to be the Instrument to utter that mischief which the heart has
thought and imagined. Psalm 52, 2. Thy Tongue imagines mischief.

Tongue of the learned. sig:
That singular skill which Christ had in his own person, above measure, and
which he gave to his Ministers (according to measure) that they might know how
to comfort and pacify afflicted consciences. Esaias 50, 4. The Lord has given
me a tongue of the learned.

Tongues of men and Angels. sig:
Such an excellent faculty of speech, as might not only become men, but even
the Angels if they could speak: yet were it nothing worth, unless it were
employed (through love) unto the edification of others. 1 Cor. 13, 1. If I
could speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, and had not love, I were as
sounding Brass, and tinkling Cimball. An Hiperbole.

to smite with the Tongue. sig:
To utter malicious and slanderous words, which hurt a man's name (as blows or
strokes hurt a man's body.) Ier. 18, 18. Let us smite him with the tongue.
Metaphor.

to Touch. sig:
To feel a thing lightly with the finger. Luke 8, 44. She Touched the Him of
his Garment.

2 To hurt or offer the least violence. Psalm 105. Touch not mine anointed,
do my Prophets no harm.

T. R.
Tradition. sig:
A doctrine, first delivered from God by speech, and written down afterward in
his Book for the use of the Church. 1 Cor. 11, 2. And keep the ordinances (or
Tradition) for so it is in the Original. This is a written Tradition, we are
bound to believe this absolutely.

2 An human ordinance, not written in the word, but delivered from man to
man. Math. 15, 2. The Tradition of the Elders. Tradition so taken, is either
good or evil, according to the subject, matter, and intention of men. This is
an unwritten Tradition. This we must believe conditionally, as it agrees with
the word.

Transgression. sig:
That which goes beyond, and exceedes due bounds and limits.

2 Every sin, small and great. 1 John 3, 4. Transgression of the Law is
sin. Hebr. 2, 2. Sin is called Transgression, because it exceedes the
bounds and marks which God by his Law has appointed unto us, for the
moderattng of our desires and actions.

Travail. sig:
Iournying or passing on foot or by Horse, from place to place.

2 The pain of Childbirth. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 3. As travail upon a woman with
Child.

3 Troubles, dangers and evils, which happen in ones journey. Exodus 18, 8. He
told all the travail had happened to them.

Treasure. sig:
Some earthly thing of price, which men make great account of, and therefore
lay it up till afterward. Math. 6, 19, 21. Lay not up Treasure for your self
in Earth. Math. 13, 44. An earthly Treasure.

2 The wholesome precious doctrine of the word. 2 Cor. 4, 7. We have this
Treasure in earthly Uessels. Metaphor. An heavenly Treasure.

3 Everlasting life, with the graces and good works that lead thither, and
shall be there freely rewarded. Math. 6, 20. Lay up Treasures for your selves
in Heaven. When Christians do carefully employ their graces, fludying to abound
in good works, they do herein Treasure and hoord up joys, in life heavenly,
and everlasting.

Good and evil Treasures. sig:
The abundance, either of graces or vices, stored up in the hearts of men, good
and evil, to be vented and uttered by their Tongues. Mat. 34, 35. A good Man,
out of the good Treasure of his heart, brings forth good things etc.

to treasure up. sig:
To gather together into one heap Romans 2, 5. Ye Treasure up vengeance against
the day of vengeance. The meaning is, that wicked men by continuing in sin,
heap and stacke up punnishment; even as worldly men do heap up and gather
treasure.

Transubstantiation. sig:
A change of one substance into another: as of Bread into the body of Christ;
of Wine, into the blood of Christ, according to that monstrous doctrine of
Popery, and contrary to the wholesome words of Christ, which teach, Sacraments to
be not the things themselves whereof they be pledges and Seals.

Tree. sig: pro
A Plant, grown up to a great height and measure.

2 Every person, Man or Woman, good or bad. Math. 3, 10. Every Tree that
brings not forth good fruit. Metaphor.

Corrupt Trees. sig:
Ungodly persons, that are unfruitful and good for nothing, like to rotten and
dead Trees. Jude 12. Corrupt Trees, and without fruit.

tree of knowledge, of good and evil. sig:
The miserable experience, of good lost, and of evil which should come upon
Adam and Eve, and all mankind, by breaking Gods commandment, in eating of
that Tree, which was forbidden them to eat of. Genesis 2, 9. The Tree of
Knowledge, of good and evil.

many trees. sig:
A multitude of people, to be refreshed with the spiritual water of the word.
Ezekiel. 47, 7. At the brinke of the River were very many Trees.

Tree of life. sig:
That happy life that Adam received of God by Creation, wherein he was to be
confirmed, by eating the Tree of life, which was appointed to be a Sacrament
thereof. Gene. 2, 9. And the Tree of life in the middle of the Garden.

2 Christ Jesus, who himself is the eternal life, and from whom the faithful
receive it. Reave. 2, 7. Was the Tree of life.

tree planted by the Rivers, etc. sig:
A faithful person, ingrafted into Christ, to be made one with him by
regeneration, and to become fruitful in good works. Psalm 1, 3. He shall be
like to a Tree planted by the Rivers of Water.

Trees of righteousness. sig:
Righteous Men and Women, who being justified by Faith in Christ, do live
righteously, and bring forth much good fruit. Esaias 61, 3. That they may be
called Trees of righteousness.

Trespass. sig:
An hurt do one to our Neighbor in his estate, name, or person. Numb. 5, 6.
Leuit. 6, 2, 4. Mat. 6, 15. If you do not forgive Men their trespasses.

2 Any sin or offense, either against God or man. Math. 16, 15. Neither will
your Father forgive you your trespasses.

To Try. sig:
To search, examine, and prove every thing, to find out what is good, what
evil; what true, what false, that we may embrace the one, and eschew the
other. These. 5, 21. Try all things. 1. John 4, 7. Try the spirit.

2 To look into one nearly, to take knowledge of him, and his cause. Psalm. 26,
2. Prove me, try me O Lord.

Trial of Faith. sig:
Afflictions which are sent of God, for trial and proof of our faith. 1 Peter
1, 7. The Trial of your faith being much more precious then Gold.

Fiery trial. sig:
Most sharp, bitter, and grievous afflictions. 1 Pet. 4, 12. Think it not
strange concerning the fiery Trial.

tribulation. sig:
A temporal affliction in this life, either inward to the Soul, or outward to
the body. Romans 5, 4. We rejoice in Tribulations. This sometime happens for
trial, sometimes is a forerunner of Hell.

2 Part of that eternal pain and torment, reserved for the wicked in Hell.
Romans 2, 9. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the Soul of every Man that
does evil.

Tribute. sig:
A sum of Money paid unto Princes (for their better maintenance) according to
the proportion of men's substance. Romans 13, 6. For this cause ye pay Tribute.

* Trinity. sig:
The distinction of the persons, in the Unity of the Godhead; one, and the
selfsame God in Essence, being for substance three; to wit, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. 1 John 5, 7. And these three are one. How three,
remaining three, may yet be one; and one abiding one, be three, and all this at
once. This is a Mystery, rather to be religiously adored, then curiously
searched into; requiring rather faith to believe, then reason to comprehend and
judge it.

Trumpet. sig:
An hollow Instrument, of Silver, Brass, or some other Metal ^giuing a great
sound through the breath of a man's mouth, wherewith public Magistrates are
wont to proclaim their Laws in the time of peace. Dan. 4. 2, 3, 4. After the
example of God. Exodus 19, 16. And the sound of the Trumpet exceeding loud. Also,
Captains were wont to encourage their Soldiers in the time of war, after
the example of Gedion. Judges 7, 18. And Hippocriticall Pharisees did call the
poor together to receive their Alms. Mat. 6, 2. When thou give thine Alms,
make not a Trumpet to be blown before thee. This is a material Trumpet,
whereof we read in Scripture of their good uses; and of one abuse.

2 The Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of the word, which are commanded to
publish the message and mind of Christ to his people, with great vehemence of
voice. Esaias 58, 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet.
Revel. 8, 2. And to them were given seven Trumpets. This is by some expounded,
of the Ministers of the Gospel, whereof there was a tipe and figure under the
Law in the Silver Trumpets, by the noise whereof, the people of God were called
to the public assemblies in Earth, as now by the Preachers of the word, they
are called to the Kingdom of Heaven. Numb. 10, 2. Make two Trumpets of Silver,
for the assembling of the Congregation. An immateriall and heavenly Trumpet,
whereof there is direct use for salvation.

the trumpet of God. sig:
Amost mighty noise (like to the noise of a Trumpet) made of God
extraordinarily, for the quickening or raising up of the dead. 1 Thessalonians. 4, 16.
The Lord shall come with the Trumpet of God. 1 Cor. 15, 52. The Trump shall
blow, and the dead shall rise. This is expounded to be the voice of Christ
himself. In John 5, 28. All that are in the Grave shall hear his voice.

to blow a Trumpet before us. sig:
To seek fame and renown of men, by doing of good things. Math. 6, 2. When
thou give thine Alms, thou shall not make a Trumpet to be blown before thee.

not to blow a Trumpet before us. sig:
To do the works of mercy, and all other good works, as secretly as we can,
without seeking any vain glory from man, or receiving it being proffered. Mat.
6, 2. When thou give thine Alms, make not a Trumpet to be blown before
thee. This is the same meaning of that ( Let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand does.)

Trust. sig:
The credit which one of us puts in another, in our mutual worldly dealings.
Prouer. 31, 1^. The heart of her Husband Trustes in her. This is civil Trust.

2 The affiance and confidence of our hearts, relying upon the merciful and
true promises, and most powerful, wise, and good providence of God, both for
the remoouing and keeping from us evil things, and for the giving and
bestowing good things. Psalm 37, 3. Trust thou in the Lord. And 34, 22. None
that Trusts in him shall perish. 1 Timothy 6, 17. This trust is religious, and
cannot be put in any creature without Idolatry. Hence we are forbidden to trust
in riches, in the arm of flesh, in Princes, or in any Son of man.

Truth. sig:
The most perfect Essence of any thing, or the most absolute perfection it
self of any matter. John 18, 38. What is Truth?

2 The most perfect Divine Essence; which is Truth it self, and the Author of
all Truth in his Creatures. Psalm 31, 5. Thou have redeemed me o Lord GOD of
Truth. John 14, 6, I am the Truth, etc. Exodus 34, 6.

3 The constancy of God, in keeping his promises. Romans 3, 7. If the Truth of
God has more abounded through my lie. The word [ Truth] is taken in this sense
in all places of Scripture, where Mercy and Truth are matched and mentioned
together.

4 The substance and body of that, that was shaddowed under the Ceremonies of
Moses Law. John. 4, 23. The true worshippers, shall worship the Father in
Truth.

5 The whole word of God, both Law and Gospel; which is called [ the Truth]
because it contains the firm and sure doctrine, which teaches the true way
how to attain eternal salvation* John 17, 17. Thy word is Truth. John 8, 31,
32. Col. 1, 5. Whereof you have heard before by the word of Truth, which is the
Gospel.

6 Christ and his doctrine. 2 John 1. But also all that have known the Truth.

7 The true understanding of things necessary to salvation. John 17, 17.
Sanctify them with thy Truth.

8 That light of Nature, left in man since his fall, to help him to know God,
so far as to leave him without excuse (but not so far as is needful to
salvation.) Romans 1, 18. Which withold the truth in unrighteousness. Rom: 2,
8.

9 True Religion. Gala. 3, 1. Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey
the Truth. Titus 1, 1.

10 Integrity of life, or uprightness and sincerity, void of deceit and
counterfeiting. 1. Cor. 5, 8. With the unleavened Bread of sincerity and truth*
Ephe. 4, 24. Esaias 38, 3. I have walked before thee in Truth.

11 Justice or righteousness, as it is contrary to iniquity. 1 Cor. 13, 6. It
rejoices not in iniquity, but in Truth. Psalm. 51, 6. Thou love Truth in the
inward parts. It is a part of the Image of God. See Ephe. 4, 24.

12 Fidelity and faithfulness between man and man, in keeping just covenants,
promises, and bargains. Iere. 5, 1, 3. O Lord are not thine eyes set upon
Truth.

13 A just and true sentence, pronounced by a Magistrate in cases of Justice.
Pro. 20, 28. Mercy and Truth preserues the King.

14 Plainness and simplicity of speech, when things are uttered as they be,
without fraud and falsehood. Psalm. 15, 2. He that speaks the Truth from his
heart. Ephe. 4, 25. Speak Truth one to another.

15 Most True, and far from all deceit. Psalm. 19, 9. The judgments of the
Lord are Truth.

16 Indeed, and in good earnest; when the inward belief and obedience of the
heart, does answer the outward profession. Ephe. 4, 21. And have been taught
in him, as the Truth is in Jesus.

Word of Truth. sig:
The Gospel, Preached and published by the true Ministers thereof. 2 Cor. 6,
7. By the word of truth. Col. 1, 5. Whereof ye have heard by the word of truth;
that is, the Gospel.

True. sig:
That which is perfect, faithful, sound, and sure, not counterfeit nor false.
Psalm 119, 151. Thy Commandments are True. To. 3, 4. Let God be True, etc.

Truly. sig:
Sincerely and uprightly, without lies and deceit. Math. 22, 16. Thou teach
the way of God, Truly; that is, true doctrine, for the matter; and sincerity
for the manner. 1 John 1, 6. They lie and do not truly; that is, they play the
Hipocrites.

to do Truth sig:
To deal truly and sincerely, leading an honest life, void of all craft and
deceiving. John 3, 21. He that does Trush, comes to the light.

Full of Truth. sig:
One, full of the very substance of Truth; to wit, Christ, being the perfection
and accomplishment of all Legal Ceremonies. John 1, 14. Full of Grace and
Truth.

Truth of the Gospel. sig:
The true and sincere doctrine of the Gospel. Gal. 2, 5. That the Truth of the
Gospel might continue in you.

to hold the Truth in unrighteousness. sig:
To suppress the light of knowledge, naturally shining in men's hearts,
forcibly keeping it back from showing it self, in words and deeds, as it
desires to do. Romans 1, 18. Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven upon men,
which hold the Truth in unrighteousness.

to tell the whole truth sig:
To declare and lay open the whole matter as it was done. Mark 5, 33. She
told him the whole Truth.

to walk in Truth. sig:
To live uprightly, without Hypocrisy. 1 Kings 2, 4. That they walk before
me in Truth.

to worship God in Truth. sig:
To serve God with an inward pure worship, and without such Ceremonies as were
under the Law. John 4, 24. And will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth.

T. V.
to Turn. sig:
To call one back that erreth, into the right way. James 5* 19. He that
Turns a Sinner, saves a soul. Thus Ministers and Christians Turn one
another.

2 To endeavor ourselves to leave the by-path of sin, and to turn to God by
repentance. Acts 3, 19. Turn, that your sins may be put away. Thus are men
said to turn themselves. Jonas 3, 10. They Turned from their evil ways.

3 To change man's heart from evil to good, by putting into it the grace of
repentance. Iere. 31, 18. Turn us o Lord, and we will return. Thus God alone
turns Sinners. Acts 26, 18. 2 Cor. 3, 16. When their heart shall be Turned to
the Lord.

4 To give some mercy after some judgment, as if God did Turn and change his
mind. Psalm 8, 7. Turn us again. Lament. 3, 21. Jonas 3, 9. In these and
many other places, the word [ Turne] signifies, to restore such as be in
calamity, showing some new favor after some affliction.

T. W.
Two. sig:
The least number, consisting of Two Unites, or Two ones. Luke 10, 1. He sent
them out Two by Two.

2 Many joined together in society. Eccle. 4, 9. Two are better then one: that
is, society is better then a solitary life, though this be especially meant of
marriage society.

They two shall be one. sig:
The strait and most near conjunction between Man and Wife, by the band of
marriage, which makes Two to be (as it were) one person. Mat. 19, 5. They Two
shall be one flesh.

Two Witnesses. sig:
A competent or sufficient number of Witnesses, to testify any truth, Human
or Divine; Civil or Religious. Deu. 19, 15. In the mouth of Two Witnesses
shall the matter be stablished. Ruel. 11, 3. I will give power to my Two
Witnesses. Which the Remists do falsely expound, of Henoch and Eliah, preaching
and striving against Antichrist, and by him to be martyred, etc. All mere
forgeries, without warrant of Scripture.

V. A.
Uagabonds sig:
SVch Companions, as do nothing but walk the streets; which commonly be called
the Rascals and Dunghil-Knaues of all Towns and Cities. Acts 17, 5. The Jews
took unto them certain Uagabonds.

Uaile. sig: pro
A certain cloth, hanged before the light to hide it from our eyes, or put
upon women's heads for a Covert, in token of subjection to their Husbands. Genesis
24, 65. So she took a Veil and covered her.

2 A costly and precious hanging, made of purple and blew Silk, Scarlet, and
fine twined Linen, etc. whereby the most holy place was divided and separated
from the holy place. Exodus 26, 31, 32, 33. And the Veil shall make you a
separation from the Holy place, and the most holy place. This was the Veil
that rent in twain at the death of Christ, to show the determination and end
of the whole Leuiticall and Ceremonial Law, as one says. In morte
Christiomnia legaliater minantur, a bodily, material, and Typical Veil.

3 Blindness and hardness of heart. 2 Cor. 3, 16 When their hearts shall be
turned to the Lord, the Uaile shall be taken away. As the Veil kept men from
looking upon the things which were in the Holy of Holiest; so the hardness of
heart, and unbelief, kept the Jews from acknowledging and submitting
themselves to Christ. A Spiritual Veil.

4 The defense and preservation, which Husbands owe unto, and afford their
wives, against the injuries of others. Genesis 20, 16. He is the Uayle of thine
eyes to all that are with thee, and to all others. A Metaphor. A civil Veil.

Uaine. sig:
Something which is not firm and constant, but subject to decay, being of a
perishing and vanishing condition. Psalm. 108, 12. Vain is the help of man.

2 Unprofitable and needless, of no use, and to no purpose. Psalm. 127, 1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it.

Uanitie. sig:
A thing of no force, use, or continuance. 1 Sa. 20, 23. Why will you follow
vanity, which profits not, nor can deliver? In this sense, Idols are often
called Vanity. Jonas 2, 8. Romans 8, 20. The Creature is subject to Vanity; that
is, to a vanishing and fleeting estate.

Uanitie of Uanities. sig:
Most vain, and exceeding full of vanity. Eccl. 1, 2. Vanity of Uanities (
says the Preacher.) In the Haebrew phrase, two positiues be equivalent to the
superlatiue: As Servant of Servants, Vanity of vanities; signifies most
servile, most vain.

Uapor. sig: pro
A dewy Mist, as the smoke of a seething pot.

2 The frailty of man's life, being of short continuance, and suddenly extinct
and put out (like a Vapor) James 4, 14. It is even a Vapor that appears for a
little time.

V. E.
Uengeance sig:
Law, and divine right. Acts 28, 4. Vengeance has not suffered him to live.

2 Punnishment, inflicted and taken upon the wicked for their wickedness.
Romans 12, 19. Vengeance is mine. Romans 13, 3. To take Vengeance on them which do
evil.

Virtue. sig: pro
The natural vigor and strength which is put into every creature, for such
use as it is appointed unto of God; as the Virtue of Herbs, Plants, etc.

2 Power and might, or the effect of power. Luke 8, 46. Virtue is gone out of
me; that is, there is some healthful effect wrought by my power.

3 Honesty of life, and good manners. Phil. 4, 8. If there be any Virtue, etc.

4 Christian Valor, Courage, and Fortitude, (as Uirtus is derived of Vir) 2.
Pet. 1, 6. Ioyn to your faith, Virtue.

Uessell. sig: pro
Any instrument of use in an house, for the good of this life. 2 Titus 2, 20.
In a great house are Uessels of Wood and of earth. These serving to common use,
were profane Instruments. Mark 11, 16. Neither would he suffer them to carry
Uessels through the Temple.

2 Natural Instruments, which receive and contain the matter of generation. 1 Samuel 21. And the Uessels of the young men were holy. 1 Thessalonians. 4, 4. That you
know how to keep your Vessels in holiness and honor. A Metaphor.

3 Wives, which howsoever they be the weaker sex, yet are Instruments of great
and manifold use. 1 Pet. 3, 7, 8. Giving honor unto the woman as unto the
weaker Vessel. A Metaphor.

Uessels of earth. sig:
Frail and brittle men, subject to mortality. 2. Cor. 4, 7. We have this
Treasure in earthen Vessels.

Uesselles of mercy. sig:
Elect and chosen ones, ordained to Mercy, even to obtain honor and salvation
in heaven, through Christ. 9, 23. That he might show the Riches of his glory
upon the vessels of mercy. These be also called vessels of honor. Verse 21.

Uesselles of wrath. sig:
Persons, men and women prepared to destructi on. Romans 9, 22. What if God would
to show his wrath, and to make his power known suffer with long patience the
Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction. These are also called Vessels made to
dishonor. Verse 21.

U. I.
Uile. sig:
That which is of no worth, or price, being contrary to precious. As Vile
Sacrifice.

2 Base, rotten, corruprible, being set against glorious. Phil. 3, 21. Our Vile
bodies shall be like the glorious bodies, etc.

Uine. sig: pro
A Tree or Plant, bearing Grapes, whereof wine is made.

2 A Country abounding with Vines and Pastures. Genesis 49, 11. He shall bind
his Asses Foale to the Vine.

3 Christ, who is like a Vine, resembling it in property, giving life of grace
to all his members, as a Vine gives juice and life to all his branches. John
15, 1. I am that true Vine. A Metaphor.

4 Particular Men and Women, which bring forth fruit (as Grapes) according as
the persons are, good or bad. Deuteronomy. 32, 33. Their Uine excels the Uine of
Sodom. etc. Esaias 5, 1, 2, 3.

5 The visible Church. Psalm. 80, 9. Thou have brought a Vine out, etc. Verse
14. Visit this Vine.

empty vine sig:
The wicked Israelites, who resting from afflictions, gathered strength to
bring forth new wickedness instead of being better by their corrections: even
as Vines after Grapes be gathered, being empty, renew their strength to bring
forth more Grapes next year. Osee 10, 1. Israel is an empty Vine.

Uineger sig: pro
A sharp, sower, Tart, liquor, made of Wine. Math. 27, 48. And presently when
one of them running had filled a Sponge with Vinegar.

2 Any bitterness, or grievous affliction of body or soul. Psalm. 69, 21. In
my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink. Spoken of such as vex the afflicted.

Uineyard sig:
The visible Church in earth, like a Vineyard in many respects; as for
spreading, fruitfulness, manner of husbanding, exposition to danger, etc. Esaias
5, 12. Psalm 80, 15. Behold and Visit this Vine.

Uintage. sig:
The time of gathering, or the act of gathering Grapes.

2 Many overcome in battle or fight. Judge. 8, 2. Are not the gle^nings of the
I phramites better then the vintage of the Abihhezerits.

Uiper. sig: pro
A poysonful creature, so called, which is brought forth very violently with
the death of the Dam, by gnawing out her bowels.

2 Cruel, unnatural, and vngratefullmen, which wrong their Parents, Teachers,
and Benefactors, etc. Math. 3, 7. O generation of Vipers.

Uirgin. sig: pro
One that keeps her self chaste in a single life. 1 Cor. 7, 37. And has so
decreed in his heart, that he will keep his Virgin.

2 One, who keeps himself to Christ, by pure belief, and vncorrupt Doctrine;
either person, or particular Church. 2 Cor. 11, 2. To present you as a pure
Uirgin to Christ. Thus every godly person is a Virgin.

3 The whole company of faithful, whose consciences are preserved without
spot. Psalm. 45, 14. The Virgins that follow after, etc. Thus the holy
Catholic Church is a Virgin.

Uision. sig:
An extraordinary action of God, manifesting himself and his will to his
Prophets, to be seen and thoroughly known of them. Numb. 12, 6. If there be a
Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be known to him in vision.

2 An ordinary action of the Prophets and Ministers, deelaring the mind of
God to the people that they may see, and know it. Prou. 29, 18. When vision
fails, the people perish.

to Uisit. sig:
To perform some promised good thing. Genesis 21, 1. God Visited Sara. 1, 68.
Has Visited his people, etc. that is, sent the Redeemer promised.

2 To fulfill some threatened evil. Exodus 29, 5. I will Visit the sins of the
Fathers upon the Children. Gods visiting us; is either by benefits, or
judgments.

3 To look into, and view thoroughly the estate of the flock, and charges under
us. Acts 13, 13. Thus Apostles visited Churches.

V. N.
Unbeleefe. sig:
A privation, and utter want of faith, when Gods promises are wholly
distrusted. Hebr. 3, 12. An heart of unbelief. This is total unbelief: the
next, is partial, or but in part.

2 Infirmity and weakness of faith. Mat. 9, 24 Lord help my Unbelief.

3 Perfidiousnesse and Rebellion against God. To. 3, 3. Shall their Unbelief
make the Faith of God of none effect?

Unbeleeuer or Infidel. sig:
An unconverted Idolatrous Gentile. 2 Cor. 6, 14. Be not Unequally yoaked with
the Infidels.

2 A Christian, whose heart is hardened by unbelief. 2 Cor. 4, 4. Blinded the
minds of Infidels.

Unblameable or with out blame, and reproof, or unrebukable. sig:
An upright person, whose life cannot be noted and charged with any reigning
finne, after his calling. Luke 1, 6. Both were just before GOD, and
unblameable, or without reproof. Such are the Saints in this life by inherent
righteousness.

2 A person that cannot be charged, with ough^ that is amiss in him, being
void of all faults. Ephesians. 5, 27. A glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle:
but that it should be holy and unblameable. Such the Saints are now, by imputed
righteousness; and such they shall be in Heaven, by proper and personal
holiness.

Uncircumcised. sig:
Persons, in whom the whole corruption of man's Nature is unreformed, but
powerfully breaks out in thoughts, words, looks, deeds, and senses. Acts 7,
51. Ye stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears. These Jews were
circumcised outwardly; yet because their hearts were not renewed, they were
inwardly uncircumcised. *

2 Gentiles, which had not the fore-skinne of their flesh cut off. Ephesians. 2,
11. Ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, called uncircumcision. 1 Samuel
17, 26. Who is this uncircumcised Philistim? This is the proper signification
of the word uncircumcised. *

Uncircumcision. sig:
The Gentiles, even all people which were not Jews. To. 3, 30. And
uncircumcision through faith. Ephe. 2, 11.

2 The skin of the secret parts, with the estate and condition of
uncircumcised men. Romans 2, 25. Thy circumcision is made Uncircumcision.

Unclean. sig:
Such persons or things as are Ceremoniously polluted by touching a dead
carcass of man or beast, etc. Hag. 2, 14. If he that is polluted touch any of
these things, shall it be unclean? Leuit. 13, 46. He shall be polluted, for he
is Unclean. Acts 10, 14. Any thing which is polluted or Unclean; that is,
which may not be eaten.

2 Such as are spiritually defiled with sin, either totally, as the wicked,
which still (like Hogs in the mire) wallow in the filthiness of fin; or in
part only, not having the corruption of their sin wholly purged out, as the
godly. Esaias 64, 6. We have all been as an Unclean thing.

Unclean spirits sig:
The Devil, who is himself most Unclean and foul; also he inspireth
uncleanness into others. Math. 10, 1. And gave them power against Unclean
Spirits.

2 The vices of covetousness, drunkenness, infidelity, whoredom, hypocrisy,
etc. by which the Devil holds possession of men's hearts. Mat. 12, 43 When the
evil Spirit is gone out of a man. Metonimie of the cause for the effect.

three Unclean spirits sig:
A strong number of the Ambassadors of Satan. Revel. 16, 13. And I saw three
Unclean Spirits (like Frogs) come out of the mouth of the Dragon.

Uncleanness. sig:
Generally all sins whatsoever, which make Unclean both ourselves and every
thing we touch; but particularly, such sins as tend to our wicked pleasure
and commodity. Romans 6, 19. Z^chariah 13, 1. For sin, and for uncleanness;
that is, for sin which is it self unclean, and makes us unclean.

under grace sig:
One, to whom sin is graciously pardoned by the merit of Christ, and who is
also freed from the dominion and strength of sin by the aid of Gods grace and
spirit. Romans 2, 14. Ye are under Grace.

Under the hand of God. sig:
One chastened and judged for sin, to his humbling. Judge. 2, 15.

2 One that is defended by the great power and providence of God. 1 Peter. 5,
6. Humble your selves Under the hand of God.

Under hope sig:
One, not without hope; or one who hops well in respect of Gods power and
promise. Romans 4, 18. Which Abraham above hope, believed under hope. Under hope,
in respect of God; above hope, in respect of man.

Under the Law. sig:
One, subject to the doctrine, instruction, and government of the Law. Romans 3,
69. Gala. 3, 23. We were kept Under the Law.

2 One subject to the Cu^se, rigor and compulsion of the Law, and, as it is the
strength of sin; And not to be Under the law, is to be freed from al these by
faith in Christ, and his sanctifying spirit. Romans 6, 14. For ye are not under
the Law, but Under grace.

Under Tutors. sig:
A Child in his nonage, being under the tuition of a Governor or Guardian.
Gal. 4, 2. But is Under Tutors and Governors.

2 One subject to the regiment of the Ceremonial Law (as to a ^utor) Gal. 4, 2.

Under the unjust. sig:
Before the unjust in their Courts, and at their judgment seat. 1 Cor. 6, 1.
Dare any of you having business against another, be judged Under the unjust.

Ungodly. sig:
Every sinner that is unregenerate, whether he be Elect or Reprobate. Romans 4,
5* and 5, 6. Christ dyed for the Ungodly. Such we are all from our birth, even
the Infant newborn.

2 A person of years, who is a wicked liver, in whom Birth-sinne still
reigns. Psalm. 1. verse last. The way of the Ungodly shall perish. Jude 15. To
rebuke all the Ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds.

ungodliness sig:
Wickedness or sin, immediately done against God in the breach of the first
Table. Titus 2, 11. Teach us to deny Ungodliness and worldly lusts. Romans 1, 18.

all Ungodliness. sig:
All kind of Ungodliness, or Ungodliness of all sorts: for Ungodliness has
sundry parts and branches; as Ignorance, Infidelity, Superstition, Idolatry,
Hypocrisy, Contempt of God, Prophana^ion of his Name and Sabaoths, etc. Romans
1, 18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all Ungodliness.

Union of 2 natures. sig:
An action of God the Father, by the secret and mighty work of the Spirit;
joining the manhood unto the person of his son, unseparably, at the instant
of his conception. Luke 1, 31. Lo thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear
a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus. Rom 1, 3. Concerning his Son Jesus which
was borne of the Seed of David.

Unjust, or Unrighteous. sig:
An Infidel, or Pagan. 1 Cor. 6, 1. Before the Unjust.

2 A Sinner void of all righteousness, even from his birth. 1 Pet. 3, 18. He
dyed, the just, for the Unjust. Unjust by Nature.

3 One, who being of years, does lead his life Unrighteously, doing wrong to
others in their dignity, person, wife, substance, or name. 1 Cor. 6, 9. The
unjust (or Unrighteous) shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. Unjust both
by Nature and action.

Unknown. sig:
One which is hid from us, or of whom we are ignorant. Acts 17, 13. To the
Unknown God. Gal. 1, 21.

2 One obscure, and vnrenowned, or that cares not to be renowned and famous. 1
Cor. 6, 9. As Unknown, yet known.

Unlearned. sig:
One, that is void of learning; a vulgar or unlettered person. Acts 4, 13. 1
Cor. 14, 23. There come in they that are Unlearned.

Unrighteousness. sig:
The violation and breach of the second Table of the Law. Romans 1, 18. And
Unrighteousness.

2 Perfidiousnesse of Unbelievers. Romans 3, 5. If our Unrighteousness comm^nd,
etc.

Until. sig.
A certain and appointed time. Genesis 44, 10. Until Shiloh come. Romans 11, 25.
Until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Here and elsewhere it does
note a determinate time, with an exclusion and shutting out of succeeding time.

2 Infinite, without end or ceasing, where there is no time following. 2 Samuel
6, 23. Micholl had no child Until her death; that is, she never had any.
Math. 28, 20. I am with you always, Until the end of the world; that is, for
ever. Psalm 110, 1. and 123, 2. In which of these two significations, we
should understand, that in Math. 1, verse last. Until she had brought forth
her first begotten Son. As it is doubtful among Divines: so is it not needful
for us to know, being no Article of our faith, nor any branch of the Morrall
Law; yet it is commonly received (as I take it) that Marie was a Virgin before
the birth; in the birth; and ever after the birth; but not by the Vow of
perpetual virginity, whereof there is no ground in all Scripture.

Unwise. sig:
Such as either wholly want the knowledge of the word, or having it, do not
submit themselves to be ruled by it. Ephesians. 5, 17. Be not Unwise.

2 An unlettered and ignorant man. Romans 1, 14. A debtor to the wise and Unwise.

unworthily sig:
Vnmeerely, or other-wise then is beseeming, without due reverence and regard.
1 Cor. 11, 27. He that eats the Bread of the Lord Unworthily.

Unity of spirit. sig:
Godly agreement, both in Religion and Affection, whereof the Holy Spirit is
the Author. Ephesians. 4, 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit.

V. O.
Uocation. sig:
The common calling of Christianity. Ephe. 4, 1. Walk worthy of the Uocation
whereunto you are called. This is a general Vocation, whereby the elect are
called to be faithful and holy, as God is Holy.

2 The particular calling and course of life, wherein every Christian lives;
as a Magistrate, or Minister, Captain, soldier, etc. 1 Cor. 7, 29. Let every
man abide in the same vocation wherein he was called. This is our special
calling.

heavenly Uocation. sig:
A calling from Heaven, tending to Heavenly glory and bliss, and requiring a
heavenly conversation, led according to the Laws of Heaven. Heb. 3, 1.
Partakers of the Heavenly Uocation.

A wish, or desire.

Uow. sig: pro
2 An holy promise made unto God of Thankfulness for his benefits, either by
words of praise, or by offering something to his service. Psalm. 50, 14. Pay thy
Vows to the Lord. Eccl. 5, 3. Deuteronomy. 23, 21 When thou have vowed a Vow to the
Lord, be not slack to pay it.

3 Some gift* freely promised by Vow, and offered to God. Leuit. 7, 16. If
the Sacrifice of his Offering be a Vow.

What a Vow is.

A Vow, is a testification of a willing promise, made devoutly and properly
unto God, of some lawful things which do belong unto God, and being in our
own power, unto the service and honor of his name. Such a Vow, is either
Legal, appertaining to the Law, or Evangelical pertaining to the Gospel; and
this latter is either general to all Christians, as that of our baptism; or
else particular and special; as when we bind our selves to a greater
endeavor to leave some sin, or to do some duty. Psalm 116, 18. Eccl. 5, 4.
The Vows Of Popish Uowes.
of perpetual Chastity in single life, of wilful poverty, and the like, they
are unlawful, as not being in our own power, nor required of God; much more
unlawful are the promises and Vows of massacring Innocent Christians, and
killing lawful Kings, under pretense of advancing the Holy Catholic faith,
as they falsely call their Romish Idolatrous Religion.

Uoyce. sig. pro
The speech of one calling us to him, or calling unto one. Acts 9, 7. Hearing
his Uoyce, but they saw no man. A Natural created voice.

2 The Doctrine of Christ, uttered by his own, or by the Voice of the
Apostles, Prophets, and Ministers. Psalm 95, 7. If ye will hear his Voice.
John 10, 27. My Sheep hear my Voice. And John 5, 15. A Spiritual Voice, or
Voice of Doctrine. It also signifies the Statutes and Commandments of the
Law. Exodus 19, 5. If ye will hear my Voice.

3 An exceeding great tetrible sound of words, made of God at the delivery of
the Law. Heb. 12, 26. Whose Voice then shook the earth? An uncreated
supernatural Voice.

4 The dreadful noise of Thunder. Psalm. 29, 3. The Voice of the Lord is above
the waters, the God of glory makes it to Thunder. Also verse 4, 5. Uoyce of
Thunder.

5 Almighty, loud, and inexpressible noise, by speech or words, which Christ
shall utter at his coming for the raising of the dead. John 5, 28. The hour
shall come, in which all that are in the grave shall hear his Uoyce. An
extraordinary supernatural Voice.

6 Words of Counsel and advise. Exodus 18, 24. Moses obeyed the Voice of his
Father.

V. P.
Upright. sig:
One godly sincere, when the heart is right both toward God and men, studying
to do all duties in soundness and truth, for the pleasing of God, and not
for by-respects. Genesis 6, 9, Noah was upright in his time. This is general
Uprightness, belonging to the whole life of a man, and cannot be but in Gods
children.

2 One innocent, in some one particular case and matter. Genesis 20, 5. With an
Upright mind have I done this. This is special Uprightness, in some one
thing, and may be in the wicked ones.

U. R.
Urim and Thummim sig:
A light of the knowledge of Christ, by the word, together with perfection of
virtue and holy manners. Exodus 28, 30. Thou shall put in the Breastplate of
Judgment the Urim and the Thummim. Who made this ( Vrim and Thummim) what it
was, and of what it was made, is very hard, if not impossible to find out.

V. S.
Usury. sig.
Biting, (in the Haebrewe tongue) because the gain which is taken fot Money or
Wares, in respect of lending, does gnaw, bite, and wring him that gives it;
especially if he be a poor man, and brings home a bit or morsel from the
rich man. Psalm. 15, 5. He that lends his Money upon Usury. Note.
The word [ Vsury] is never used in good sense or part by the Scripture; where
also no Usury is to be found but one; to wit, a biting and gnawing Usury,
which is never practiced without hurt, either to rich or poor; to private
persons, or public weal.

What Usury is.

Usury, is any increase or vantage, for lone of Money, or other things, imposed
or laid by the lender upon the borrower only, in consideration of the
lending. Ezekiel. 18, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 13, 19, 20. Or more breefely thus: Usury, is a
certain gain above the principal, exacted upon Covenant for the use of
money, or other things lent. Exodus 22, 25. Thou shall not impose Usury upon
him. Thus it is in the Haebrew Text.

Five things belonging to Usury.

Unto Usury these five things are necessarily required. 1. A principal, as
wares, or sum of money. 2. Lending. 3. Gain. 4. A chief purpose by lending to
increase our stock. 5. a Covenant for that end.

As the very desire and expectation of gain, for lending only, is mental
and intentionall Usury: Note.
so the imposing, or by Covenant before hand, agreeing for increase above the
principal, is of the Nature of actual Usury.

In all these three cases, there is no Imposition of increase, that is, no
fore-Couenant, binding absolutely the borrower to pay gain with the stock.

There are three cases wherein increase may be Note.
taken by a lender without danger of Usury. First, when the borrower having by
lawful means, made some great gain by money freely lent, does by way of
Thankfulness, out of the voluntary motion of his own heart, return
something above the principal unto the lender, by whose means he had such a
blessing.

2 When it may be duly and apparently proved, without pretense and collusion,
that the borrower by holding back the money lent him after the day agreed upon
for payment, without the leave of the lender, does become hereby a direct and
effectual cause of hinderance to the Lender, either by damage arising to him,
or by foregoing some commodity which he might well have made with his money,
had it come home at the appointed time.

3 When the Lender is content to hazard the principal, and to bear part of
the loss, if any fall to the borrower, without his own default. Here he
lawfully may take part of the gain which comes by good means.

W. A.
Wages. sig: pro
HIre, due to one for the merit of his labor, upon compact or bargain. Romans
4, 23. To him that works, Wages is not counted by favor, but by debt.
Haggai. 1, 6. He that earneth Wages.

2 A recompense or reward, given to Soldiers in liew of their service in
War. Hence the punishment of aeternall death, due by the desert of serving
sin, is called Wages. Romans 9, 19. The wages of sin is death. Thus Wages in
a borrowed sense, does signify aeternall life due to the merit of works (if
one could do them) or aeternall death, merited by the service of sin.

Waiting. sig:
Abiding with patience, and expectation of help from God. Psalm. 40, 1. I Waited
patiently upon the Lord, etc.

2 Vehement and continual looking for some thing. Romans 8, 19. The Creature
Waits when the Sons of God shall be revealed.

3 Gods patience, expecting long the repentance of a Sinner.

Walking. sig: pro
A motion of the body, going forward from one place to another. Mark 16, 12. As
they Walked into the Country.

2 The whole course or progress of a man's life, from step to step, till he
come to the end of his race. It is applied to those, which take either a good
or a bad course. Psalm. 1. Blessed is the man that does not Walk in the
counsel of the ungodly. Psa. 11^, 1. Leuit. 26, 27. But Walk against me
stubbornely.

3 The proceeding of Gods providence, either for our good or evil. Leuit. 26,
28. Then I will Walk stubbornely in mine anger against you. And ver. 12. I
will Walk among you and be your God.

4 The presence of God. Gene. 3, 8. When they heard the voice of the Lord
Walking in the Garden.

to Walk by Faith. sig:
To live and pass over our days here, in belief of such things as are
promised in the word, and not yet performed, but by hope looked for. 2 Cor. 5,
7. We Walk by faith, not by sight.

to Walk after the flesh. sig:
To set and order the course of our life after our corrupt reason and
affections, following them as our guids. Romans 8, 1. Which walk not after the
Flesh.

to Walk in the flesh. sig:
To be Weak and feeble, like unto other Men. 2 Cor. 10, 3. Though we Walk in
the Flesh: yet we do not war after the flesh.

to Walk with God. sig:
To live a godly life through continual Meditation of Gods presence, whom we
have to be Witness of all; even our most inward thoughts. Genesis 5, 24. Henoch
Walked with God. We be, or Walk with God, two ways. First, when we desire to
please him and depend upon him, because we are persuaded that he sees us, and
cares for us. Secondly, when we are held back by a secret bridle of his
grace, we little thinking of him. Psa. 73, 23.

to Walk after the spirit. sig:
To order and dispose our conversation, according to the motions and affections
stirred up in us by the holy Spirit, or to live in newness of life. Romans 8, 1.
See Spirit.

to Walk in the dark. sig:
To live without the bright shining light of Gods word. 1 John 2, 11.

Wall. sig: pro
Some frame of Woodor Stone, reared and built, word. either for division of
places, or defense of persons.

2 The cause of division which was between the Jews and Gentiles, by the
Ceremonial Law. Ephe. 2, 14. And has broken the stop of the partition Wall;
that is, the Law of Ceremonies, which did divide between the Jews and
Gentiles.

3 Safeguard and defense, affoorded from one man to another. 1 Samuel 25, 16.
They were as a Wall to us by night and by day.

4 The surety and strength of a political estate, as good Laws, execution of
Justice, good education of Children, Magistrates, Riches, etc. Psalm 51, 18.
Build up the Walls of Jerusalem.

5 A spiritual City, consisting of Jews and Gentiles (as the Inhabitants.)
Cant. 8, 9, 10. I am a Wall. By a Sinecdoche and Metaphor.

Wantonness. sig:
Rankness in bodily L^st, effeminate living in Letchery. 1 Pet. 4, 4. In
Wantonness.

Wantons. sig:
Effeminate persons, given to ribauldry and lust, and delighting in soft and
delicious things. 1 Cor. ^, 10. Wantons.

War. sig:
Battle and fight, between two Princes and their people. Eccle. 3, 8. A time
of War, and a time of peace. Luke 14. Worldly war, which is lawful or
unlawful, according as the occasion is.

2 The conflict and strife of godly Ministers with the World, to subdue it unto
Christ* Cor. 10, 3. Yet we do not War after the slesh. A spiritual War,
simply, and always lawful.

3 Taking part, and fighting for our own unlawful lusts. James 4, 2. Ye fight
and War, and get nothing. This is a carnal War, always, and simply
vnla^full.

War after the flesh. sig:
To strive and fight, not (as men do) with such strength as may be resisted,
either by craft or force: but with divine and invincible Weapons, which cannot
be matched with human power and policy. 2 Cor. 10, 3, 4. We War not after
the Flesh, for the weapons of our Warfare are mighsy through the power of God,
etc.

Warfare. sig:
Condition, of such as live and serve in the wars. 1 Cor. 9, 9. Who goes to
Warfare.

2 The course and condition of a man's whole life, being subject to outward and
inward battles and conflicts. Job 1.

3 The condition of the Ministers of God, in regard of the st^ong opposition
and resistance made against them by Satan and the wicked. 2. Cor. 10, 4. The
Weapons of our Warfare. 2 Timo. 2, 3.

Wast. sig:
Superfluous expense and cost upon things lawful, or charge upon things
unlawful. Lu. 15, 13. He wasted his goods upon Harlots. Math. 26, 8. What
needed this Wast.

2 Overthrown and quite destroyed, when God threatens to lay Wast their
Cities and Houses. Leuit. 26, 33. And your Lands shall be Wast.

Washing. sig:
Ceremonious cleansing from Legal pollution and uncleanness, through the
touching of dead Corpse, etc. Exodus 19, 10. Let them Wash their Clothes. Exodus
30, 18. A Lauer to Wash.

2 Justification or Remission of sins, being cleansed and forgiven in the
merits of Christ's blood. Psalm 51, 7, Wash me, and I shall be whiter then
Snow.

3 Sanctification or newness of life, through the work of the Spirit. Psalm.
51, 2. Wash me from my sins. This Washing and the former, are Gods proper
work.

4 Serious repentanc^* for daily and particular slips and spots. Esaias 1, 16.
Wash you, make you clean. This Washing is our endeavor, to make our selves
clean. Of these four Washings. The first is Legal; the three last
Evangelical. The second of Justification. The third, of Sanctification. The
fourth, of daily Repentance.

to Wash ones feet. sig: pro
To endeavor the conrinuall purging of our selves from our daily sins. See
Feet. John 23, 10. Needs not, save to Wash his feet.

2 To show forth the works of mercy and Christian love. 1 Cor. 5, 10. If she
have Was^^d the Saints feet. A Sinecdoche.

to Wash ones hands. sig:
To live purely, or to lead a pure conversation among men. Psalm. 26, 6. I Wash
my hands in innocence. Psalm 23, 13. Job 9, 30. Hands, being chief Instrument
of action, are put for our outward doings toward men, which when they are
upright, then our hands are washed. A Metaphor and Sinecdoche.

to Watch. sig: pro
To keep ones self awake, to shake of natural sleep. Luke 2, 5, Keeping
Watch by night. Mat. 26, 40. Could you not Watch with me one hour? This is
bodily Watching.

2 To shake off security, as one would shake off sleep, taking all good heed
and care, least Satan or sin deceive us, and overcome us. Mat. 25, 13. Watch,
etc. 1 Pet. 5, 8. Watch, and be sober. Math. 26, 41. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 4. This is
spiritual Watchin^*

3 To lay in wait, observing how to accuse and hurt others. Thus the Pharisees
watched Christ, and the wicked Watch the righteous. Luke 11, 54. Laying wait
for him, or Watching him: This is Diabolical Watching.

watchman. sig: pro
One, who in the night keeps Watch in a City or Army, to warn others of
dangers if any be. A civil Watchman.

2 Gods Prophets and careful Ministers of Christ, which warn the people of
spiritual dangers and enemies. Ezekiel. 3* 17. Esaias 52, 8. The voice of thy
Watchmen shall be heard. A religious faithful Watchman.

3 Careless guides, which are Watch men in Name, but not in Truth. Esaias 56,
10. Their Watchmen are all blind. A rechlesse and secure Watchman.

4 An Angel of God, ever ready to do his will. Dan.

Watchful^esse. sig:
An earnest care and bending of the mind, to live every day as one would live
upon his dying, or upon his judgment day, which may fall out to be every day,
for ought we know. This is true Christian watchfulness.

Water. sig: pro
An element cold and moist, contrary to fire. Psa. 65, 9. The Rivers of God is
full of Water. John 13, 5. Poured Water into the Basin.

2 Afflictions and troubles which threaten dangers, as Waters do threaten
drowning. Reave. 12, 15. The Serpent cast out of his mouth Water after the
Woman. Psalm 69, 1. The Waters are entered even into my Soul. Often in the
Psalms and elsewhere it is so used. Here is the phrase in the gospel, of
being baptized with Christ's Baptism; that is, dipped and plunged into
afflictions as he was. Math. 20, 22. Are ye able to be baptized with the
Baptism that I shall be Baptized with.

3 Several Countries and Nations, which are the gathering of many people into
one place, as the Sea is the gathering together of many Waters. Reave. 17, 1.
The great Whore sits upon many waters; that is, has rule and power over many
Nations and people.

4 The true doctrine of the word, and the holy Spirit with his saving graces.
Esaias 55, 1. Every one that thirsts, come unto the Waters. Eze. 36, 15. I will
pour clean Water upon you. Ioell 2, 28. I will power out of my Spirit, etc.

5 Justification by Christ, when his perfect righteousness is imputed to such
as believe. 1 John 5, 6. This is that Jesus Christ that came by Water and Blood.

6 The efficacy of the holy Ghost, cleansing the Soul, as Water does the body.
John 3, 5,

7 Abundance of tears. Iere. 9, 1. O that my head were full of Water, and mine
eyes a Fountain of tears.

8 Jacob, of whom (as from a Fountain the Israelites did descend and come.
Esaias 48* 1. Which came out of the Waters of Judah. Deuteronomy. 33, 28. The Fountain
of Jacob.

9 All kind of drink. Exodus 23, 25. He shall bless thy Water.

deep Waters. sig:
The Sea. Psalm. 107 23. And occupy by the great Waters, and see his Wonders in
the deep.

2 The hidden ^s and counsels of man's heart. Prou. 20, 5. The counsel in the
heart of man, is deep Waters.

3 Most grievous dangers and great afflictions. Psalm 42, 7. One deep calls
another deep, etc. Psalm. 69, 2. I am come into deep Waters.

4 Great plenty and store of most pure Water. Ezekiel. 34, 18. And to have drunk
of the deep Waters.

Waters of a full Cup. sig:
Many and bitter afflictions. Psalm. 73, 10. Waters of a full Cup wrung to them;
that is, a great portion of sharp troubles.

living Waters, or waters of life. sig: pro
Springing and running Waters. Gene. 26, 19. And found there a Well of living
Water.

2 The benefits of Christ communicated to the faithful unto eternal life, by
the Fort of the holy Spirit. John 4, 10. And he would have given thee water of
life.

still waters. sig:
Pleasant and refreshing Waters. Psalm. 23. 2. He leads me by the still Waters.

fountaina of living Water. sig:
God himself, the Author and Giver of true life, and of all things that
belong thereunto. Iere. 2, 13. They have for saken me the Fountain of living
Water.

swelling Waters. sig:
Most mighty, cruel, and fierce persecutours and Enemies. Psalm. 24, 5. Then
had the swelling Waters gone over our Souls.

Waters. sig: pro
The variable stirring and swelling of great waters, moved and tumbled too and
fro ragingly, with the violence of the wind. Math. 8, 24. Covered with Waves.

2 Unstable men, of unconstant minds. James 1, 6. He that wauereth like a Wave
of the Sea, shall receive nothing.

3 Grievous afflictions succeeding one another (like Waves) and putting men in
danger. Psalm 42, 7. All thy waves are gone over me.

4 Ungodly cruel men. Jude 13. They are the raging Waves of the Sea.

wavering. sig:
The unsettled vnstedinesse of unbelievers. James 1, 6. He that wauereth, is
like a wave of the Sea; that is, he is of an unsettled and unsteady mind.

Wa^. sig: pro
That path, wherein men go and travail from place to place. Luke 10, 31.
There came down a Priest that same way.

2 Conversation or course of life. Prou. 21, 2. Every Man's way is clean in his
own eye. Prou. 21, 8. Psalm 119, 1. Blessed are they which are upright in
their way.

3 A good conversation or godly life. Psalm 2, 6. God knows the way of the
righteous. Matthew 7, 14. Narrow is the way that leads to life. This is called
by sundry names; as way of righteousness, way of wisdom, way of the Lord,
good and right way, way of light, etc.

4 An evil conversation. Psalm. 1, 1. Nor stand in the way of Sinners. And
verse ^. The way of the wicked shall perish. This way, also has sundry Names
and additions in Scripture; as evil way, broad way, way of wickedness, etc.

5 Godly profession or doctrine of Christ. Acts 19, 9. Speaking evil of the
way of God. The doctrine of the Gospel is as a way to lead us unto God: (so we
believe it.)

6 The work which men are to do, either in Religion or common life. Exodus 18,
20. Show them the way; that is, the work.

7 The Commandments of God, which are (as the way) to lead us unto our
Country above, so we walk in them. Rom 3, 12. They are all gone out of the
way. Psalm 119, 1. Blessed are they that are upright in their way, and walk
in the Law of the Lord.

8 Christ, by whom alone (as the true way) even in this life we come to God to
be one with him. John 14, 6. I am the way, no man comes to the father but by
me.

9 Custom. Ios. 23, 14. I do enter into the way of all the earth. 1 Kings. 2,
2. That is to say, I die shortly, after the custom of all other men.

Ways of darkness. sig:
Wicked and crooked Ways, or Ways of Sin. Pro. 2, 13. To walk in the ways
of darkness.

Gods Ways. sig:
The deep and unsearchable counsels of God. Romans 11, 33. His Ways are past
finding out.

2 His works of Mercy and Judgment; his blessings or punnishments. Psalm
145. Verse 17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways. This is the Way of Gods
providence, whereby he comes to us.

3 The word of God, in the promises and precepts thereof. Psalm. 51, 15. I will
teach Sinners thy way. Psalm. 25, 4. This is the way whereby we go to God.

Good way. sig:
Every duty or good work, as a step of our way to Heaven. Prou. 2, 9.
Every good Path or Way.

to go out of the Way. sig.
To turn aside, and play Apostate from God, his Law, and worship Idolatry.
Romans 3, 12. They are al gone out of the way.

Ways of judgment. sig:
Approved and righteous ways, such as can abide the trial of the light. Prou.
2, 8. That shey may keep the ways of Judgment. These also in ver. 13. Are
called the Wages of righteousness.

the Way of man. sig:
The success or event of a man's purposes or actions. Ier. 10, 23. The Way of
man is not in himself.

the Way of peace. sig:
A peaceable quiet life. Romans 3, 17. And the way of peace they have not known.

to come in the way of righteousness. sig:
To lead a righteous life, being of upright life, and good conversation. Math.
21, 33. For John came in the way of Righteousness.

their Way. sig:
The event and success of their course of life. Psalm. 49, 13. This their Way,
utters their foolishness.

W. E.
Weak. sig:
One, who is made feeble, and brought low with sickness. Psalm. 6, 2. Have
mercy on me Lord, for I am weak. And 38, 8. Bodily weakness.

2 One of little faith and knowledge. Romans 14, 1 He that is weak in the Faith,
receive unto you. Spiritual weakness in part.

3 One, who wants all strength bodily and spiritual. 1 Cor. 15, 43. It is
sown in Weakness. Romans 5, 6. When we were yet weak (or of no strength.) This
is spiritual Weakness totally, unto which, al men from their birth, be
subject.

Weak flesh sig:
Corruption of Nature, which makes us Weak either to do good, or to resist
evil. Math. 26, 41. The flesh is Weak. Metonimie of the cause.

Weaned Child. sig:
One of a lowly and humble mind. Psalm. 131, 2. I am in my self, as one that is
Weaned.

Weapons sig: pro
Instruments of War.

2 All the faculties of soul or body, fighting either for sin in a man
unregenerate, or against sin in one regenerate. Romans 6, 12. Neither give your
members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin, but give your Members as
Weapons of Righteousness to God.

3 Preaching of the Word, Prayer, Patience in suffering, etc. 2 Cor. 10* 3. The
Weapons of our warfare are mighty through God.

Weary. sig: pro
One made fai^t with labor and ttauell. John. 4, 6. He thus sat on the well
Weary. Bodily Weariness.

2 A soul faint and burdened with the load of sin, being as desirous of
ease by forgiveness, as a weary man is of rest after great labor. Mat. 11,
28. Come unto me all ye as are weary. Spiritual weariness.

3 Slack* careless, and fainting in well-doing. Gal. 6, 7. Be not Weary of
well-doing. Carnal Weariness.

Wedding Garment. sig:
Christ Jesus himself, whom we put on by faith. Math. 22, 11. Which had not on
the wedding Garment. Romans 13, 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus. The Papists do
err, in judging love and Good-Workes to be this Wedding Garment.

Week. sig:
The space of seven days. 1 Cor. 16, 1. Every first day of the Week.

2 The number of seven years. Thus seauenty Weeks in Leuit. 25, 8. signifies
seventy times seven years. Also Dan. 9, 25

Wells of salvation. sig:
Either the Doctrine of the Gospel, wherewith afflicted Consciences are
refreshed (as with water out of a Well) or the plentiful graces of the Spirit,
powered out* as water out of a Well. Esaias 12, ^3. Ye shall draw waters out of
the Wells of Salvation.

Well of water springing up. sig:
The exceeding rich love of God, continually ministering to the faithful new
supply of healthful graces. John 4* 14. Shall be in him a Well of water,
springing up to eternal life.

Wels with out water. sig:
False Prophets, which be void of wholesome Doctrine. 2 Peter. 2, 17. These
are Wells without water.

W. H.
Wheat. sig: pro*
A precious Grain, whereof bread is made for the strengthening of man's heart.
1 Cor. 15, 37. Bare Corn of Wheat, or some other.

2 All elect and faithful persons, which are fruitful in good works. Math. 3,
12. The Wheat he will gather into his Barn.

Wheel. sig:
An Instrument of wood, or Iron, turning round, serving either for work or
punishment.

2 Punishment it self, inflicted upon malefactors. Prou. 20, 26. A righteous
King will turn the Wheel upon the ungodly.

3 The whole mass and body of all things under heaven, subject to continual
change and mutation. Ezekiel. 1, 15. There appeared a Wheel unto me upon the
earth, by the Beasts, having four faces.

Wherefore sig:
A Consequent, or that which follows, as an effect of some foregoing cause.
Romans 1; 24. Wherefore also God gave them up, etc. Here it is an Illatiue
particle.

2 A cause or reason of some thing. Romans 1, 21. Wherefore (or because) when,
etc.

to Whet the sword. sig:
To prepare, and make ready some great Judgment. Psalm. 7, 12. He has whet
his sword.

Whetting their teeth. sig:
Indignation, or wrath of the wicked. Psalm 112, 10. The wicked whets his
teeth at the Righteous.

White. sig: pro
A color, bright, and lightsome, contrary to black.

2 That which is pure, without blemish, or glorious without infirmity. Reu. 3,
18. White Raiment. Math. 28, 3. His Raiment white as Snow. It is usual in
Scripture [ by white] to signify, Purity and Glory. See Raiment and Robe.

3 Ripe and ready to be cut down, and carried into the barn. John 4, 35. They
are white already to the Harvest.

white horse sig:
The Ministers of the Gospel, made pure by Christ, and preaching Christ purely.
Revel. 6, 2. Lo, there was a White horse.

Wholesome sig:
Sound or healthful, making spiritually sound, or bringing health to the soul.
1 Timothy 6, 3. And consented not to the wholesome words of Christ. Tit. 2, 1.
Wholesome Doctrine.

Whore. sig:
An unchaste woman, taking money for the use of her body. Deuteronomy. 23, 17, 18.
There shall be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel, nor any hyre of a whore
brought into the house of God.

2 The Sinagogue of Antichrist, or the Romish Church, as it stands now
corrupt, with horrible Idolatry and Heresy, obstinately maintained. Reu. 17,
1. I will show thee the condemnation of the great Whore.

Whoredom sig:
The uncleanness of such as make their bodies common for money. Deuteronomy. 21, 23.

2 Generally, all uncleanness about generation. Heb. 13, 14. Hosea. 4, 11.
Whoredom and new Wine take away the heart.

3 Idolatry, in the worship of strange Gods, or in the strange worship of the
true God. Reu. 17, 5. That Mother of Whoredom. Ezekiel. 16, 25. And multiplied
thy Whoredom. Verse 17. And made to thy self Images of men, and did
commit whoredom with them.

to go a Whoring. sig.
To fix our affection upon the creatures (more then the Creator) and
especially to put our trust and confidence in worldly men, and worldly things.
Psa. 73, 27. Thou destroyest all them which go a Whoring from thee. All
confidence in the creature. It is a spiritual whoredom.

2 To fall in love with Idols, and to worship contrary to our faith, plight
with God. Ezekiel. 16.

W. I.
Wicked. sig:
Every Natural man, who is not regenerate. To. 4, 5. Justifies the Wicked.

2 All impenitent persons, who keeps on in a sinful course, without returning
to God. Psa. 51, 13. I will teach thy Ways unto the Wicked. Psalm. 1, 1. and
112, 10. The Wicked shall see it.

3 That which is ungodly or against God. Jude 15. Of all their Wicked deeds
which they have ungodly committed.

wickedness. sig:
An ungodly work. Genesis 39, 9. How can I do this great Wickedness? Acts 8, 22.

2 A course of Iniquity, continued without Repentance. Daniell 9, 5. We have
done Wickedly. Psalm. 125, 3. Least the righteous put out their hand to
wickedness. Psalm. 52, 1. Why do thou boast thy self in thy Wickedness?

Wife. sig:
A married woman; or the Church, being married to Christ. Ephesians. 5, 23. The
Husband is the Wives head, as Christ is the head of the Church, etc. Here the
married woman is called a wife, explicit or expressly; the Church is
so-called implicit, and by consequence.

Will. sig:
A faculty of man's soul, moving and inclining it self freely to choose such
things as it does embrace, or to eschew freely such things as it does refuse.
Or more breefely thus. Will, is that faculty of our soul, whereby we will
and nill things. It is of the Nature of will, to will freely, whatsoever it
wills; for the will cannot be compeld. It is unable (til it be changed by
grace) to move it self toward God, and to will any good thing pleasing Note.
to him. Simply to will any thing, is of Nature; but to will well, is of Grace.
Our will being free in respect of sinful acts, but bond in respect of
Good-workes, till it be set free by Christ. John 8, 36. If that Son therefore
shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. John 15, 3. Without me you can
do nothing. Therefore, the * Popish Doctrine of When grace is offered, we may
refuse it, if we will: and if we will, we may receive it: This is popish
Divinity.
free will to that which is good, is to be abhorred, as contrary to the
Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Church of God. Aug. voluntas libera quia
liberata libera ad peccatum, serua ad iustitia.

2 Motions and purposes to good, or good affections. Phill. 2, 13. God works
in you the Will and the deed. These be the effects of a renewed Will. 2. Cor.
8, 9. Romans 7, 15, 16.

3 Wicked desires and Lusts, flowing out of Corrupt Nature. Ephesians. 2, 3. In
fulfilling the Will of the Flesh. John 1, 13. These be the fruits of an
unregenerate Will. Metonimie.

4 Natural inclination of any creature. Romans 8, 20. Not of it one Will.

5 Thoughts and endeavor of the heart. Romans 11, 16. It is not in him that
Wills.

Will of God sig:
The purpose and decree of GOD, touching all things. Ephesians. 1, 11. After the
Counsel of his Will. Romans 9, 15, 18. Whom he Will he hardens. This is the
will of his good pleasure, which is secret till events declare it.

2 The word of God, Promising or Commanding. Matthew. 7, 21. He that does my
Fathers Will. Romans. 12, 2. This is his revealed or signified Will, which is
known by the Word, as our Will is manifested by our speech.

Wilderness sig* pro
A wast and desert place, not inhabited. Psalm 95, 8. As in the Wilderness.
Psalm 107, 33, And 35. Mat. 15, 33. Whence shall we have so much bread in the
Wilderness?

2 A Country full of Hills, Mountains, and Forests, like to a Wilderness.
Math. 3, 1. He preached in the Wilderness of Judea. This Wilderness had some
Inhabitants. Zachary dwelt there. Luke 1, 40. Also, Ioab had his house there. 1
Kings 2, 34. And there are six Towns being in this Wilderness, rehearsed in
Josh. 15, 61. Therefore, from hence there is no ground for Popish Heremites,
that live in solitary places.

3 The Country of Heathen and Pagan people, which were void of grace, and
barren in good works (as a Wilderness.) Esaias 35, 1. The Wilderness shall
rejoice. And 41, 18. I will make the Wilderness (as a poole of water.) A
Metaphor.

Wind. sig: pro
The moving of the air too and fro, which if it be temperate, it refreshes
with his blastes; if violent, it proves troublesome and dangerous. Acts 2, 2.
As of a rushing and mighty wind. Gene. 3, 8. Math. 8, 26. He rebuked the Winds.

2 The mighty and powerful working of Gods Spirit, quickening or reviving our
hearts to Godward. John 3, 8. The wind blows where it lists. Acts 2, 2.

3 The doctrine of the Gospel, and the Preaching thereof. Reu. 7, 1. Holding
the Wind that it should not blow upon the earth.

4 All manner of temptations. Math. 7, 27. The Winds blow, etc.

5 Parts and quarters of the World. Iere. 49, 32. I will scatter them to all
winds.

Wind of doctrine. sig:
Men's devises, which carry away unstable men, as a Boat is carried away with
the Wind. Ephe* 4* 14. With every wind of doctrine.

to hold the winds. sig:
To stop and hinder the passage and course of heavenly doctrine. Revel. 7, 1.
Holding the Wind that it should not blow upon the earth.

to sow the Wind. sig:
To busy and bestirre our selves in things that profit not, as Idolatours
do, who must reap according as they sow. Hose 8, 7. They have sown the
Wind, or to the Wind.

to walk in the Wind. sig:
To be a rash and unfaithful Teacher. Micah. 2, 11. If a man walk in the
wind.

Wine. sig:
The fruit of the Vine, or the juice of the Grapes. 1 Timothy 5, 23. Drink a
little Wine for thy stomach. Mat. 26, 29. I will not drink henceforth of the
fruit of this Vine.

2 The blood of Christ shed to death, rejoicing the faithful Soul, as the
Wine does the heart. Math. 26, 28. For this [Wine] is the blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many. See Mark 14, 24, 25. A Metanimie.

3 The comfortable doctrine of free salvation, by faith in the bloodshed of
Christ. Cant. 2, 4. He brought me into the Seller of Wine. A Metaphor.

4 The graces and fruits of the Spirit, which are sweet and delightful, as
Wine. Esaias 55, 1. Come buy Wine and Milk without Money. A Metaphor.

5 Gluttony, or excess in eating and drinking. Ose 4, 11. Wine takes away the
heart of man. Here it is taken in ill part.

6 Ungodly and unrighteous works, as the bitter fruit of impenitent and
obstinate Sinners. Deu. 32, 33. Their Wine is the poison of Dragons, and the
cruel Gaul of Aspes. It is also taken in ill part here.

to drink wine. sig:
To fare liberally. Job 1, 13. Were eating and drinking Wine, in their elder
Brothers house. Here it is used in good part.

2 To have the heart cheared with godly joy. Zac. ^, 10. 7. There hearts shall
rejoice as one that drinks wine. Here it is taken in good part.

3 To play the Glutton and the Drunkard. Esaias 5, 22. Woe be them that are
mighty to drink wine. Here it is taken in ill part.

to drink the wine of giddiness. sig:
To trouble and astonish the mind (as men are troubled with excessive drinking
of New Wine.) Psalm. 60, 3. Thou have made us drink of the Wine of Giddiness.

Wine mixed with water. sig:
The chief Rulers and Governors of the people, to have been corrupted and
perverted. Esaias 1, 22. Thy Wine is mixed with Water.

wine of violence. sig:
Wine gotten by oppression and extremity, or violence. Prou. 4, 17. And they
drink the Wine of violence.

Wing. sig:
That part of a Bird wherewith it flies, and under which it hides her young.
Math. 23, 37. As a Hen gathers her young under her wings.

2 The protection of Almighty God, under which his people be (as it were) hid,
and kept safe. Psalm 91, 8. He will cover thee under his wing. Psa. 17, 8.
Hide me under the shadow of thy wings. Ruth. 2, 12. Under whose wings thou art
come to trust.

3 The great readiness of the Angels, performing the will of God with all
speed and celeritie. Esaias 6, 2. Every one had six wings.

4 The defense, which Princes, Rulers, Magistrates, Masters, and Husbands,
etc. do afford unto their inferiors. Ruth 3, 9. Spread the Wing of thy
garment over thine hand-maide.

Eagles wing. See Eagles.

to take wings. sig:
Speedily and suddenly to depart and fly away. Prouer. 2, 5. Riches take unto
them wings. Prosopopaeia.

to walk upon y^ wings of the wind. sig:
To use great celerity and speed, in executing his works of judgment and
mercy. Psalm. 104, 3. He walks upon the wings of the wind. Psalm. 18, 10. He
came flying upon the wings of the wind.

To win. sig:
To gain, or to get worldly things by our labor. Mat. 16, 26. What shall it
profit a Man, though he win the whole world, and loose his soul.

2 To gain a Soul to God. 1 Cor. 9, 22. That I may win the weak. 1 Pet. 3,
1.

to Wipe all tears. sig:
To deliver perfectly and fully from all tears, and all sins, sorrows, and
miseries, the cause of tears. Revel. 21, ^. I will wipe tears from your eyes.

Wise. sig:
One, prudent and circumspect, who can forecast dangers and evils to prevent
them. Mat. 10, 16. Be wise as Serpents.

2 Every godly person which fears God and obeys his word. Pro. 10, 1. A
wise Son makes a glad Father. And 9, 9, 10. Give admonition to the wise.
Ephe. 5, 15.

3 One which swells, and is puffed up with opinion of wisdom. 2 Cor. 11, 19.
Because that ye are wise. An Itonie.

4 Astronomers and Priests of the Persians. Math. 2, 1. There came wisdom
from the East; that is, such as were learned in the sciences of this World.
Romans 1, 14.

5 One, subtle and crafty. Exodus 1, 10. Let us work wisely. 2 Samuel 14, 2. And
brought thence a wise Woman, and said to her.

6 A cunning Artificer. Exodus 28, 3. And 35, 10. And all the wise hearted among
you shall come.

7 Sorcerers and Magicians. Exodus 7, 11. Pharaoh called forth the wise men.
Gene. 41, 8.

to be Wise for thy self. sig:
To apply thy wisdom for thine own good and benefit. Prou. 9, 12. Thou shall
be wise for thy self; that is, make use of thy wisdom: not for others only,
but the right direction of thine own ways.

Wise to salvation. sig:
A true believer, who by the eye of faith, does behold and know, Jesus to be
the Christ and his own Savior. 2 Timothy 3, 15. Which is able to make thee wise
to salvation through faith.

wise Steward. sig:
A Minister of Christ, having skill to fit and give every one within his charge,
his due portion of food agreeable to his strength and age; Milk to whom Milk,
and strong meat, to whom strong meat belongs. Luke 12, 42. Who is a faithful
Steward and wise.

wise to that which is good sig:
One, furnished with knowledge and wisdom, to embrace good, and eschew evil,
to bewray and beware the deceit, both of sin and of false Prophets. To. 16,
19. I would have you wise to that which is good.

Wisdom. sig:
The Divine Essence, beholding and infinitely knowing himself and all things
else, which he most wisely disposes, being Author of wisdom in all others.
Psalm. 147, 5. His wisdom is infinite. 1 Timothy, 1, 16. To God only wise.

2 Christ Jesus (as God) by whom the counsel of God touching man's salvation,
is declared. Pro. 8, 14. I have counsel and wisdom.

3 The most perfect knowledge, which Christ (as Man) has of the will of his
Father, imputed to the faithful, to cover their ignorance of God. 1 Cor. 1,
30. He is made unto us of God wisdom.

4 The Scriptures or word of God written, which are called wisdom, because
they teach true wisdom, and lead us to God the Fountain of true wisdom.
Luke 11, 49. Therefore said the wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets.

5 The knowledge of faith, whereby the elect see and behold God to be their
Father in Christ. This is the chief Wisdom. Ephe. 1, 8. He has abounded
toward us in all Wisdom. 2 Timothy 3, 15.

6 The doctrine of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 2, 6, 7. We speak the wisdom of God
in a Mystery.

7 The sound understanding and knowledge of the word. Prou. 4, 5, 7. Get
wisdom, get understanding. Pro. 14, 6. A Scorner seeks wisdom, and finds
it not.

8 True godliness, or the sincere fear of God, wherein consists a great part
of wisdom. Prou. 10, 21. The Fools shall dye for want of wisdom. Also
verse 13, 23. Prou. 1, 7. Fools despise wisdom. Psalm 90, 13. We may apply
our Hearts to Wisdom.

9 Prudence and discretion, enabling men to perceive what is fit to be done,
according to the circumstances of time, place, persons, manners, and end of
doing. Eccle. 2, 13, 14. I saw that there is profit in wisdom, for the wise
Man's eyes are in his head. Knowledge directes us to see what is to be done, and
what not to be done; but wisdom directs us how to do things duly
conveniently, and fitly. Knowledge is of genetals; Wisdom of particulars.

10 That gift, whereby a public person, Prince, or Counselor, is enabled to
advise soundly and readily, of matters of State and Commonwealth. 1 Kings 3,
28. And they saw the wisdom of GOD was in him to do Justice. Prouer. 21, 30.
There is no Wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.
Achitophell had this kind of Wisdom as well as Solomon.

11 Human learning, or skill of profane Arts and Sciences. Acts 7, 22.
Learned in all the wisdom of the Aegiptians. This Wisdom also is common,
both to good and bad.

12 Affection, lust, desire, or study. Romans 8, 6. Wisdom of the flesh is
death; that is, lust of sin leads to death.

Earthly wisdom. sig:
Such Wisdom as earthly minded men have, which they learn not from God, but
from the Devil. James 3, 15. This wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, and deuillish.

wisdom of the flesh. sig:
Such Wisdom as unregenerate men are endued withal, whose wit and reason, as
well as their will and affections, savors only of earthly things. Romans 8, 6,
7. The Wisdom of the Flesh is death.

hid wisdom. sig:
The Gospel which is hid from all natural men. 1 Cor. 2, 7. We speak the hid
Wisdom.

wisdom of God. sig:
Singular and excellent Wisdom. 1 Kings 3, 28. The Wisdom of God was in
them.

meekness of Wisdom. sig:
Such Wisdom as makes meek, and is joined with meekness. James 3, 13. Let
him show his works with meekness of wisdom.

Spirit of Wisdom. sig:
That lively faith, whereby we embrace Christ, offered in the Gospel, by the
gift and working of the Spirit. Ephe. 1, 17. Might give unto you the spirit of
Wisdom; that is, of true and lively faith, which makes wise to salvation.

2 Great cunning and skill, to do the work of the Tabernacle, through the
gift of Gods Spirit. Exodus 28, 3. Whom I have filled with the Spirit of
Wisdom.

to sit in the seat of wisdom. sig:
To be a chief Counselor of Estate unto any King. 2 Samuel 23, 8. He that sat
in the Seat of Wisdom.

treasures of Wisdom. sig:
Exceeding great plenty and store of heavenly and divine knowledge. Col. 1, 3.
In whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge.

wisdom of the world. sig:
Such understanding of divine things, as men may attain to by virtue of
natural wit, without revelation of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 2, 6. We speak not the
wisdom of this World. or that is the knowledge of things pertaining unto this
World.

Wisdom of words. sig:
Affected eloquence, or pompous and painted speech, whereby carnal men use to
show forth their carnal wisdom. 1 Cor. 1, 17. Not with wisdom of words.
1 Cor. 2, 1, 4. Excellency of words, and words of man's wisdom.

Witness. sig:
One, called to testify a truth in any matter. 1 John 5, 8, 9. John 8, 18. I
bear Witness of my self.

2 The true record and Testimony that GOD bears of Christ, and Christ of
himself. 1 John 5, 9. This is the witness of God, which he testified of his
Son. John 8, 14. And 18.

3 The record which Gods Spirit and a sanctified conscience do bear to the
godly, of their own adoption. Romans 8, 16. The same Spirit bears Witness with
our Spirit, that we are the Sons of God.

4 The true Ministers of Christ, who by their doctrine, lives, and death, do
bear witness unto the doctrine of Christ. John. 15, 27. Ye shall bear
witness also. Reave. 11, 3.

faithful witness. sig:
One, which plainly and sincerely does utter the whole needful truth,
eschewing deceit and falsehood. Prou, 14, 5. A faithful Witness will not lie.
This is a civil Witness.

2 Christ jesus, who bears a true Testimony of his Fathers will. Reave. 3, 14.
The faithful and true Witness. This is a Divine Witness.

false Witness. sig:
One, who in the record and Witness which he bears, does utter lies, or
conceales a necessary truth. Proverbs 14 5. But a false Witness will speak
lies. Prouer. 12, 17. But a false Witness speaks deceit.

2 One which wresteth the words spoken by another man, unto a contrary meaning.
Math. 26, 60, 61. At the last came two false Witnesses, etc.

A Witch. sig:
One, which coniectureth by the Clouds at things to come giving too much to
observation of times and days. Leuit. 19, 26. Ye shall use no Witchcraft, nor
observe times.

2 One, that exercises deuillish and wicked Arts, such as be named in
Deutro. 18, 10. Exodus 22, 18. Thou shall not su^ier a Witch to live.

W. O.
Woe. sig:
The threatening or denouncing of judgments. Ezekiel. 2, 10. There was [ Woe]
written therein.

2 The judgments threatened, either temporal or eternal. Math. 23, 23, 25. Woe
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hipocrites. 1 Cor. 9, 16. Woe to me if I Preach
not.

3 Sorrow of heart, in regard of some sin committed and judgment deserved.
Lam. 5, 16. Woe now unto us that we have sinned.

Wolf. sig: pro
A cruel and savage Beast, delighting in slaughter, blood, and devouring.

2 Unregenerate men, which be of a fierce and cruel disposition, like Wolves.
Esaias 11, 6. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together. Also Chap. 65, 25.

3 A false Prophet or heretical Teacher, which with his errors and lies,
seeks greedily how to destroy souls. Acts 20, 29. Wolves shall come in among
you.

4 A valiant and terrible Captain, snatching and dividing his pray among his
Soldiers, as a Wolf among his Whelps and young ones. Genesis 49, 27. Benjamin
is a ravening Wolf.

5 A Tyrant or cruel persecutor. John 10, 12. Sees the Wolf coming and
flies.

a Wolf in sheeps clothing. sig:
A false Prophet, setting abroach damnable errors, to the destruction of men's
souls, under pretense of truth. Math. 7, 15. Beware of false Prophees, which
come unto you in Sheep clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

wolves in the evening sig:
Tyrannous Rulers, and most cruel Enemies, exercised to mischief, like unto
an old Wolf, beaten and long exercised to spoil in the evening. Iere. 5, 6.
Zepha. 3, 3. Her Judges are as Wolves in the evening.

Ravening wolves. sig:
Most savage, fierce, and cruel men, whose pleasure is in hurting the
salvation of others. Math. 7, 15. Are ravening Wolves.

Woman* sig: pro
A Female by Sex, made of God to be an Helper to man. Genesis 2.

2 A Wife joined in Marriage to a Man. 1 Peter 3, 5. Thus holy women did attire
themselves, and were subject to their Husbands.

3 A Virgin, being a Mother. Ier. 31, 22. Awoman shall compass a man.

4 The visible Church of God Militant in earth. Revel. 12, 1. A Woman clothed
with the Sun; that is, the Church compassed about with Christ the Son of
righteousness. This is the true Church, decked spiritually with heavenly
Ornaments.

5 The Pope, and the whole body and mass of his filthy Creatures, Cardinals,
Massing-Priests, Monks, Friars, and Jesuits. Revel. 17, 3. And I saw a Woman
sitting upon a Scarlet colored Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, etc. Verse
5. In her forehead was a Name written [ Mystery.] This is plain, that it cannot
be meant but of the Romish Church, that false Church, decked, not with
spiritual Garments, hid from the eyes of the World, but outwardly with Gold,
Pearl, Purple, Scarlet, Crimson, and all pompous apparel, glorious to the
eye of Flesh, being inwardly most filthy and full of abominations.

a foolish Woman. sig:
Wicked Teachers, who set forth their devises in stead of Gods word. Prou. 9
13.

a strange Woman. sig:
One, who is not thy own Wife, being a Strumpet. Prou. 2, 16. He shall deliver
thee from the strange Woman.

a virtuous Woman. sig:
A Woman endued with honest and holy manners. Prouer. 31, 10. Who shall find a
virtuous Woman.

Womb. sig:
That part of a Woman, wherein she contains and nourishes her Infant, before
it be borne. Luke 1, 31. Thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bear a Son.
Luke 21, 23.

2 The Church, wherein (as in a Womb) the elect are borne again, by the
incorruptible Seed of the word. Psalm. 110, 3. The youth of thy Womb shall be
as the morning dew.

from the Womb. sig:
From the time of our birth, ever since we were borne. Psalm. 58, 3. The wicked
are strangers from the Womb.

to shut and open the womb sig:
To make one barren and Childlesse, or to give one Children. 1 Sa. 1, 6. The
Lord had shut her womb.

Wonder. sig:
Some strange unwonted work of God, moving and deserving admiration. Acts 2,
19. I will show wonders in Heaven above. Acts 4, 30.

lying wonders. sig:
A false iugling wonder, or a true wonder and miracle, done to confirm false
doctrine. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 9. With all power, and signs, and lying wonders.

Word.
Some speech uttered by the mouth, to declare the intent and meaning of the
heart. Psalm 52, 4. Thou love all words, etc. This is a natural word.

2 The Son of God, the second person in the Trinitity, by whom the will of
God is declared to the Church, as our minds are expressed to other men by our
words. John 1, 1, 14. The Word was made Flesh. This is the Essential, Divine,
and uncreated word.

3 The Scriptures of Old and New Testament. Luke 11, 28. Blessed are they that
hear the Word. Acts 11, 19. This is the inspired and created word.

4 The decree, ordinance, will, and beck of God, touching any thing that he
will do, or not do. Mat. 4, 4. Man lives by every word that comes out of the
mouth of God. Heb. 1, 3. Bears up all things with his mighty Word. This is
the word of Gods ordinance and purpose.

5 The divine Law, teaching and commanding good things, and forbidding evil.
Psalm. 119, 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might
keep thy word. This is the Word of precept and commandment.

6 Every promise of God, touching any good things temporal, and eternal. But
especially, the promise of free Justification by Christ, received by faith.
Psa. 119, 8, 9. I Wait for thy word. Also V. 25 Thy Word has quickened me.
Luke 1 38. Ephesians. 5, 26. By the washing of water through the Word. This is the
word of free promise, whereof in Romans 10, 8.

7 A word of prediction or foretelling things that are to come. Esaias 2, 1.
The Word which Esaias saw upon Judah. Ezekiel. 3, 4. Declare unto them my Words.
This is the word of Prophecy.

8 A Commandment for doing anything in the matters of this life. Luke 5, 5.
At thy Word we will let down our Nets. Luke 7, 7. Say the Word, and my
Servant shall be whole. This is a word of Authority, charging things to be
done effectually.

9 A Grave, wise, and pithy sentence. Prou. 1, 6. To understand the Words of
the wise, and their dark sayings. Eccl. 10, 11. The Words of the wise, are
like Goads. Acts 20, 35. This is a word of godly instruction and persuasion.

10 Anything or matter, that is either said or done. Luke 1, 65. And all these
Words were noysed abroad throughout all the Hill-Country.

11 The voice of God, calling a man to do the work of a Prophet. Ier. 1, 4.
Ezekiel. 1, 3. This is the word of Vocation.

the Word of faith. sig:
The Gospel or the Doctrine of free salvation, upon condition we believe. Romans
10, 8. This is the Word of faith which we preach.

idle Word sig:
A vain unprofitable speech, whereof there is no use for soul or body; for
this life or the life to come; for ourselves or others. Math. 12, 36. Men shall
give an account for every idle word which they speak.

A Work. sig:
Some outward deed or action, Divine or Human, Good or Evil. Genesis 2, 2.
When God had made an end of all his Work. James 2, 18. Thou have the Faith and
I have Works; Show me thy Faith out of thy Works. Revel. 2, 23. I will
render to every one of ye according to your Works.

2 The free reward, which follows Goodworkes, in life everlasting. Revel. 14,
13. And their Works follow them.

3 Such servile work, as is proper to every man's calling, which may be done
in the six days. Exodus 4, 5. Also Exodus 20, 9. Thou shall do all thy works.

4 Merit, or deserving by works. To. 3, 20. Therefore by the Works of the Law
shall no flesh be justified. Verse 28. Chap. 4, 2. Also 11, 6. If it be of
Grace, no more of works. Thus is [ Worke] taken in all places, where it is
opposed and set against Faith or Grace.

5 Wicked and dishonest manners. Titus 1, 16. They deny him in their Works.

6 Stuff or matter, needful to build withal. Prou. 24, 27. Prepare thy
Work without.

Works of darkness. sig:
Sinful works which come from ignorance and unbelief. Ephe. 5, 11. See
Darkness.

Work of faith. sig:
A true lively faith, which is the work of Gods wonderful power in the elect.
2 Thessalonians. 1, 11. The Work of Faith with power. John 6, 29. This is the Work of
God, that ye believe in him, whom he has sent.

Works of the flesh. See Flesh.

Works of God. sig:
Such deeds, as God commands, allows, loves, and will reward. John 6, 28. What
shall we do, that we might Work the works of God.

2 The actions of Gods mercies toward the Elect, and of his judgment toward
the wicked. Psa. 145, 17. The Lord is holy in all his works. Also verse 5, and
10. All thy Works praise thee.

Good-Workes. sig:
All manner of duties inward and outward, as well thoughts, as words and actions,
toward God or man, which are commanded in the Law of God, and come from a
pure heart, and faith unfeigned, being referred to Gods glory. Ephe. 2, 10.
Created to Good Works. Blind Christians, which think only Alms deeds to be
Good-works, or our outward actions at utmost, be deceived.

Work of the ministry sig:
The whole duty which a Minister by virtue of his calling is bound to perform
to his Flock; as to Preach, to Rule, to Pray, to administer the Sacraments, to
exhort and comfort privately, etc. Ephe. 4, 12. For the Work of the Ministry.

according to our works sig:
As our Works shall be good or evil, so shall our judgment and doom be.
Romans 2, 6. Who will reward every man according to his Works. Psa. 62, 12 Mat.
16, 27. Howsoever, the form of the sentence at last day shall pass according
to the condition of our works, yet works merit not as causes, but witness as
Tokens.

to Work, referred to God. sig:
To execute and fulfill something, decreed from everlasting in Gods Counsel.
Ephesians. 1, 11. God works all things after the Counsel of his will.

2 To govern and rule the world by ordinary administration. John 5, 17. My
Father works hitherto, and I work.

3 To do some extraordinary thing, which may in a special manner, declare,
either Gods mercy or wrath. Acts 13, 41. I Work a work in your days; a
work, which ye will not believe if a man would tell it you.

to Work, referred to men. sig:
To do some good action approved of God, and pleasing to him. John 6, 28. That
we might Work the works of God.

2 To deserve something by his work, or to rest upon the merit of his work.
Romans 4, 4. To him that works, wages is counted by debt.

3 Diligently to labor in a good vocation. Acts 18, 3. He abode with them and
wrought, for their craft was to make Tents.

to Work out. sig.
To be constant in doing Good-workes to the end of ones life. Phil. 2, 12.
Work out (or make an end) of your salvation, with fear and trembling.

Working together. sig:
The meeting of many causes, to bring forth one common effect. Romans 8, 29. All
things work together, etc.

Work of our hands. sig:
The duties, both of our general calling, as we are Christians; to wit, to
believe in Christ, and to repent of our sins, bringing forth the fruits
thereof by a godly and upright life; and also of our special and particular
callings, as we are Magistrates, Ministers, Fathers, Masters, Subjects,
Children, etc. Psalm. 90, 18. Direct thou the works of our hands upon us.

World. sig:
The whole frame of heaven and earth, with all Creatures above and below. John
1, 10. The world was made by him. Heb. 11, 3. This is the Elementary World.

2 All the people or inhabitants of the world, men and women, even whole
mankind. Romans 5, 12 By one man sin entered into the World. 2 Pet. 1, 14.
Lusts which be in the World. A Metanimie. This is the reasonable world, or
world of men.

3 All unregenerate men, be they Elect or Reprobate. John 15, 18, 19. I have
chosen you out of the world. 1 John 5, 19. The world lies in wickedness. This
is the world of the wicked.

4 The Elect only. John 3, 16. God so loved the world. 2 Cor. 5, 9. God was in
Christ, reconciling the world. This is the world of the Elect. John 3, 16.

5 The company of true believers only, whether they be Jews or Gentiles. 1
John 2, 2. Not for our sins, but for the sins of the whole world. This is
the world of the faithful; or believers.

6 The Reprobate only, and the whole company of them. John 17, 9. I pray not
for the world. John 14, 17, 22. Whom the world cannot receive. This is the
world of the Reprobate.

7 Wicked lusts, such as reign in evil men, the children of this world. 1
John 2, 16. Love not the world, nor the things of the world. Often it
signifies that sinful and miserable condition which all men lie under,
through Adams fall. John 14, 15. and elsewhere.

8 The condition and state of this terrene earthly life. 1 Cor. 7, 33. Cares
for the things of the world. That is, things which belong to relieve us whiles
we live here in this frail contention.

9 Earth it self. Math. 4, 8. And showed him all the Kingdoms of the world.
This is the Terrestrial world.

10 The unbelieving Gentiles only, being dispersed throughout the world. Romans
8, 10. If the fall of them be the Riches of the world. Sinecdoche of a part for
the whole.

11 Every person indefinitely, without respect of sex, age, degree, or
country. John 18, 20. I spoke openly to the world. John 3, 17. That the world
through him might be saved; that is, whatsoever persons should believe in him
at anytime.

12 The pomp and glory that is in men, and in all earthly things. Gala. 5, 14.
Whereby the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.

13 The things that God gives us here to use, for the maintenance of this
life. 1 Cor: 7, 31. They that use this world, as if they used it not. This is
worldly goods.

14 The state and condition of such as shall be glorified in heaven. Luke 20,
35. They that shall be counted worthy to enjoy that world. This is the
Celestial world.

all the world sig:
Believers of al sexes, ages, times, Countries or degrees. 1 John 2, 2. Of all
the World.

ends of the World. sig:
The latter days and times of the world. Hebr. 9, 26. But now in the end of
the World has (...) (...) made manifest.

2 The certain period and point of time, when the world (as it now stands)
shall be dissolved. Math. 24, 4. And of the end of the World.

foundation of the world sig:
The beginning of heaven and earth; or the time when they were first framed.
Hebr. 9, 26. For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the
World.

God of this World. sig:
The devil, or Satan, whom wicked men serve and obey as their God, and in whom
he rules and works effectually, as in his own people and subjects. 2 Cor. 4,
4 In whom the God of this world has blinded their mind.

a friend of the World. sig:
One, that loves and embraces the lusts and pleasures of sin. James 4, 4.
Whosoever will be a friend of the World, makes himself an enemy to God.

goods of this World sig:
Riches, wealth, even all things pertaining to this life. 1 John 3, 17.
Whosoever has this Worlds good.

present evil World. sig:
The sinful miserable condition of such as live now in the World, without the
knowledge of Christ, being subject to the malice of Satan and the corruption of
sin. Gal. 1, 4. From this present evil World.

spirit of the World. sig:
That Spirit, which teaches such things as the men of this world do delight
in. 1 Cor. 2, 12. We have not received the spirit of the World.

that world. sig:
Eternal life in heaven. Luke 20, 35. They shall be counted worthy to enjoy that
World.

children of this world. sig:
Such as live in the world, whether they be good or bad. Luke 20, 34. The
children of this world mary wives, and are married.

2 Such as are wholly given to the things of this life, and to this present
world. Luke 16, 8. The children of this world, are wiser in their generation,
then the children of light.

Worthy. sig:
One that deserves, by merit of some Work done. Revel, 5, 12. Worthy is
the Lamb to receive power. Also verse 4, and 9. Thou art worthy to take the
Book. Likewise, in all places of Scripture, where [ Worthy] is affirmed of
Christ, and denied unto men, it has this signification; One worthy by
approbation of strict Justice.

2 Equal, or proportionable. Romans 8, 18. The afflictions of this present time,
are not worthy the glory that shall be showed; that is, not equal in the
balance of Justice.

3 One reckoned and accepted as worthy, thorough the worthiness of Christ
imputed unto him. Luke 21, 36. That ye may be counted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass. Worthy, by acceptance in mercy.

4 Fit or meet. Math: 3, 8. Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance; that
is, such works as be meet and beseeming those that do repent.

5 One of excellent valor and courage, deserving great praise, for doing
hardy and valiant exploits. 2 Samuel 23, 9. One of the three Worthies.

to Walk worthy of the Lord, and of the Gospel. sig:
To live in such sort as is meet and seemly, for such as have the mighty God
for their Lord, and are professors of the glorious Gospel of Christ. Col. 1,
10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord. Phil. 1, 27. As becomes the
Gospel.

Worm. sig: pro
A contemptible base creature creeping upon the ground, etc.

2 A person contemned in the world, and had in vile account. Psalm: 22, 6. But I
am a Worm, and not a man, a shame and contempt of men.

Worship. sig:
Civil reverence due unto men for their authority and gifts. Math: 9, 18.
There came a certain Ruler, and worshipped him. This is civil worship.

2 Outward religious service, due unto God for the greatness of his Majesty.
Math: 4, 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God. This is outward Divine
worship.

3 Inward Religious honor of the heart, sincerely loving, fearing, and
trusting in God, because of his infinite knowledge, mercy, and power. John 4.
24. Must worship him in Spirit and Truth. This is, inward divine worship.

4 Immoderate reverence toward Creatures. Acts 10, 25. He fell down at his
Feet, and worshipped him. Revel: 22, 8. Neither Cornelius nor John, did take
Peter or the Angel to be God, they failed in excess of reverence, and were
rebuked.

to Worship the Church. sig:
To give honor to Christ, dwelling and reigning in his Church, and to honor the
Church in Christ her head. Esaias 49, 23. They shall Worship thee with their
Faces toward the earth. Revel: 3, 9. And worship before thy Feet.

W. R.
Wrath. sig:
Just Vengeance taken upon sinners in this world. Psalm. 9, 11. Who knewes the
power of his Wrath? Ephesians. 5, 6. Romans 3, 5. Which punishes.

2 Eternal death in hell fire. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 9. God has not appointed us to
wrath. 1 Thessalonians. 1, 10. Which delivers us from that Wrath to come. Romans 2, 5.

3 The perturbation of mind, which moves men to revenge their own wrongs.
Gal. 5, 30. Hatred, Debate, Wrath.

Children of wrath. sig:
Those that are guilty of eternal death, through the just anger of God,
against sin, as all men be by nature and birth. Ephesians. 2* 3. And were by
Nature the Children of wrath, as well as others.

to Wrestle. sig:
To strive together, one man with another, which should overcome the other by
strength. Ge. 32, 24. There Wrestled a man with him, till the breaking of the
day.

2 To fight and strive against the spiritual enemies of our salvation. Ephesians. 6,
12. We Wrestle against Principalities and Powers.

to be written in earth sig:
To be forgotten before God and his Church. Ier. 17* 13. All that forsake thee
shall be written in the earth.

to be written in Heaven. sig:
To be predestined and elected eternally, by the firm counsel of God, to
obtain salvation by Christ. Luke 10, 20. Rejoice that your names be written in
heaven.

to be written in the book of remembrance. sig:
To be loved, respected, cared for, rewarded and remembered of God. Mala. 3, 16.
A Book of Remembrance was Written before him, for such as fear the Lord. See
Remembrance.

to suffer Wrong. sig:
To bear, and put up quietly, and patiently, any harm done unto us, without
seeking revenge. 1 Cor. 6, 7. Why rather suffer ye not wrong?

Y. E.
Year. sig: pro
THe space of twelve months. Luke 3, 23. Jesus began to be about 30. Years of
age.

2 The whole space and time of our life. Psalm. 60, 9. We have spent our Years
as a thought.

Y O.
Yoke. sig: pro
An Instrument of Wood or Iron, to join men, or Oxen, or other creatures
together; serving, either ^o tame, or to punish. A material yoke.

2 Afflictions for sin, or the Cross sent from God. Lam. 3, 27. It is good
for a man to bear the Yoke from his youth. This is the Yoke of Tribulation.

3 Our grievous sins, which be the cause of our afflictions. Lamen. 1, 14.
The Yoke of my transgressions is bound upon my hands. This is the Yoke of our
sins.

4 The cruel bondage, wherein Tyrants keep Gods people* Esaias 9, 4. Thou have
broken the Yoke of their burden. This is the yoke of oppression.

5 Fellowship or agreement in any thing, good or evil. 2 Cor. 6, 14. Bear not
the Toake unequally with Infidels.

6 Gods Commandments, that we should believe in Christ, and live uprightly.
Mat* 1* 29. Take my Yoke upon you. Also verse 30. This is the Yoke of Gods
promises and Precepts, which is not heavy to the regenerate man.

7 The Law of Moses, with a strict condition of performing it perfectly. Acts
15* 10. To lay a Yoke upon them, whith neither our Fathers, nor we, were able
to bear. This is the Yoke of perfect obedience to the Law. A Metaphor.

Y. R.
Iron bar. sig:
That which is hard to be broken, or overcome. Proverbs.

Iron Furnace. sig:
Careful grief, anguish, and sorrow of heart, for great and grievous thraldom
and slavery. Deuteronomy. 4, 20. The Lord has brought you out of the Iron furnace.

Iron sinew sig:
An obstinate sinner, which will not yield to the word of God, no more then an
Iron sinnew will yield.

Iron yoke sig:
A Yoke most strong and heavy; that is, some grievous and cruel bondage.
Deuteronomy. 28, 48. And he shall put an Iron yoke upon thy neck.

Young men. sig:
Such as for years were but young, being grown past Child-hoode, and entering
into man's estate. 1 Samuel 21, 5. The Uessels of the Young men were holy.

2 The first borne of the Israelites, which executed the holy things, till
Priests and Levites were consecrated. Exodus 34, 5. He sent Young men of the
children of Israel which Offered burnt Offerings.

Z. E.
Zeal. sig:
INncrease of affections; as of grief, joy, hatred, love. John 2, 17. The
Zeal of thy House has eat me up. Reu. 3, 19. Be Zealous and amend.

2 An honest and commendable desire kindled in our hearts, to imitate or go
beyond others in well doing. 2, Cor. 9, 2. Your Zeal has provoked many.
Titus. 2, 14. Zealous of good works.

3 An earnest desire of doing good things belonging unto us, and of hindering
evil things, being joined with sound knowledge and hearty love of Gods glory,
and of our Neighbors good. 2, Cor. 7, 11. Yea; what Zeal? Col. 4, 13. I bear
him record, that he has a great Zeal for you. Thus far it is taken in good
part.

4 Earnestness of affection in good things, when neither the manner nor end of
doing is good. Such was the Zeal of Iehu. 2 Kings 10, 6. And of the Jews.
Romans 10, 2. They have the Zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. Also of
Paul being a Pharisie. Acts 22, 15. And was Zealous toward God.

5 Fierce and fiery bitterness, when men are earnest and hot in a bad cause.
Phil. 3, 6. Concerding Zeal, I persecuted the Church. Here it is taken in ill
part.

6 Envy, indignation. Acts 5, 17. Also 7, 9. And 17, 5. The Jews moved with
Zeal or Envy. The Greek word translated Envy or Indignation, does signify
Zeal, in ill part.

7 The most earnest love of God, for the good of his Church, and his own
glory. Esaias 9, 7. The Zeal of the Lord of Hoastes will perform this. Esaias 37,
32. Here also it is taken in good part.

Unto true Christian Zeal, there be these six Note.
things required. First, a desire and lust after some thing which is truly
good, or against something which is evil indeed. Secondly, that in this
desire, there be earnestness and vehemence. Thirdly, that there be a grief
for the want of this good thing we desire, or for some abuse done to it.
Fourthlie, that this desire and grief be tempered with Charity and discretion.
Fifthly, that we seek not our own but Gods glory. Lastly, that all this do
proceed, and come from sincere and distinct knowledge of the word. Gal. 4, 18.
Romans 10, 2. 1 Cor. 10, 31. Acts 14, 14.

FINIS.
A Dictionarie, for that Mystical Book, called the Revelation of Saint John.
OF this Book it has been said, that every word is a Mystery, and surely not
without cause: for not only is the truth of it hid from the natural man (as
all other divine truths be, which concerns our salvation by Christ.) 1 Cor. 2.
but being a prophetical Book, of things long after to be done and penned, in
dark phrases* borrowed from the old Prophets. The understanding of it has
been found hard, even to the godly, and the learned. Whence it is, that some
eschew the reading of it privately, others decline the public reading, others
forbear to Comment upon it, and some have refrained from Preaching out of it.
Howbeit, it being a part of holy Scripture, penned (...) ^^e Spirit, for the
comfort and instruction of the Church, in these ^d worst days, there being a
gracious promise of a precious blessing, m^^e to the reading and hearing of it,
and the event of the Prophesies, therein n^w for the most part fulfilled (the
best Commentary of prophetical writings) giving great light to the true
knowledge of things; therefore, as their labor is to be much commended, who
have by their Sermons and interpretations (Preached and Printed) endeavored to
make clear this obscure Scripture: so let not me be thought to have taken in
hand, a bold or needelesse enterprise, by aduenturing to anatomize and vnbowell
this whole Book in a short Dictionary, pulling the words in ^under, and
putting them in Alphabeticall order, for help of young Students in Divinity,
and vulgar Christians, which will more willingly assay to read and study this
book* when they shall have at hand a declaration of all mystical words
familiarly delivered. Howsoever I please or profit others by my endeavor; yet I
hope to offend the less, because I tread in the steps of our most learned and
soundest expositours, whose opinions, with their reasons, I do report, leaving
it to the Reader to consider of.

A. B.
Abaddon, and Apollyon. sig:
ONE, that burns with a desire of hurting and destroying men; such an one is
the Devil, principally, and his Vicar Antichrist, or the Pope. Revel. 9, 11.
They have a King over them, whose Name in Haebrew is, Abbaddon, and Apollyon.

Abomination. sig:
That which deserves to be abhorred and held as loathsome, for some great
spiritual filthiness. Revel. 21, 8. Abominable, etc.

Abundance of pleasures sig:
All kind of earthly delights, which the Church of Rome most riotously and
excessiuely being given unto, did by that means enrich the Merchants of the
Earth which sold such Wares. Revel. 18, 3. And the Merchants of the Earth have
waxed rich of the Abundance of her pleasures; that is, (says Brightman) by the
great plenty of all sort of de^icacies, by immoderate lust of enjoying the^,
entising men, like Zerxes, to devise and invent new kinds of pleasures. This
(upon the matter) is all one with the former signification.

A. C.
According to their works. sig:
As the thoughts, words, and works of men, have been good or evil; so they
shall receive at the hand of the Lord. Revel. 20, 12. And they shall be judged
According to their works.

Accuser of the Brethren. sig:
Satan or the Devil, who (ever since the fall of our first Parents whom he
deceived) does incessantly, day and night, complain of the godly unto God,
requiring him by his Justice, to condemn them all. Reu. 12, 10. The Accuser of
our Brethren is cast down.

A. I.
Air. sig: pro
That Element wherein we breath, called the Air, which spreading it self
over the Earth and Water, does compass them in both on every side.

2 The dominion and power of Satan (the Prince that rules in the Air) upon
the which; and namely, upon that part of it which is the kingdom of Antichrist,
Almighty God, toward the end of the World, will pour out a most grievous
vengeance, and universal wrath, which shall most fearfully strike the whole
body of Antichrist, so as he shall not have so much as the Air for him to
breath in, otherwise then as a Creature armed against him for his destruction.
Reave. 16, 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his Uioll into the Air.

A. L.
Almighty sig:
One, of infinite power, most able to defend his poor Church, and to break
down and destroy the power of the Dragon, of Antichrist, of Sin, of Death,
even of all our Enemies. Revel. 19, 6. The Lord God Almighty has reigned.

Alter, Golden Altar. sig:
Christ, his Priesthood and Mediation, which was shaddowed under the figures
of the Law, whereunto this Scripture alludeth. Therefore, here is no ground
for Popish Priesthood, Sacrifice, and Altar; for the which, seeing there is no
Scripture at all, neither is there any allusion in Scripture to such things,
as the Rhemists foolishly dream upon this place. Re. 8, 3. Another Angel
stood before the Altar, and upon the Golden Altar. Other Divines, understand by
the Altar, and Golden Altar, the selected company of Saints, or the company of
most holy Men. The former is the more received signification.

Alas, alas. sig:
A voice of lamentation, and exceeding great grief of heart, is signified
thereby, in respect of great loss unto Merchants by the fall of Rome. Revel.
18, 16. Saying, Alas, Alas, that great City, etc.

Alpha. sig:
Christ, that most mighty and aeternall Son of God, who gave beginning to all
things (for all things are of him) and at his pleasure can put an end to all
things. Revel. 22, 13. I am Alpha and Omega, the first and last, the beginning
and the end. Alpha, one of the first Greek Letters; and Omega, one of the
last, be here expounded, to be that first and last, beginning and end; that
one aeternall and Almighty God, which never changes his mind, and is able to
perform what he promises. Such an one is Christ, therefore worthy to be
believed when he speaks of things past, or to come. See Chap. 1, 8.

A. M.
Amen. sig:
The constant truth, even Christ faithfully fulfilling his promises, which are
all; yea, and Amen. Reu. 3, 14. These things says, Amen.

2 Sobeit, or let it be so. Revel. 22, 21. Amen.

A. N.
Angel. sig:
A created Spirit, or spiritual substance, which is called a Man, because it
assumed and took the shape of a man. Revel. 21, 17. By the measure of man;
that is, of the Angel. This same is understood of the Ministers of the Gospel,
which do nothing in their service after their own pleasure, but (as Angels of
God) in all things do respect the will of God.

2 The Minister of the word, which is Gods Messenger, sent to declare his will
to some Church over which he is set by the holy Ghost. Revel. 2, 1. Unto the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write.

3 The Lord Jesus Christ, our King and Savior, who makes intercession for the
Saints, with God the Father, offering up their Prayers (as the Calves and
Sacrifices of their lips.) Reu. 8, 3. Then another Angel came. By the
mediation of this Angel, the Church is kept safe amiddest great dangers, and
receives many heavenly gifts. Some by this other Angel, understand a certain
man, after the use of Scripture; to wit, Constantine the Great. Other, take the
word properly for a created Spirit. Foremost, is the most received exposition.

Seven Angels. sig:
So many created Spirits, as Servants and Ministers of God, being always in
readiness (which is meant by standing before God) to execute his heavy
Judgments upon the wicked, namely, Antichrist and his members. Revel. 8, 3. I
saw seven Angels which stood before God. These Angels, whether good or bad,
it appears not by the Text.

four Angels. sig:
Four unclean Spirits, or Devils of Hell, as appears by this, that the
plagues which these four Angels must execute, are spiritual, tending to the
destruction of sules, such as Devils do execute. Re. 7, 1. I saw four Angels
stand upon the 4. corners of the earth. These four Angels were four Wicked
Spirits. 1. of Contention. 2. of Ambition. 3. of Heresy. 4. of War. Also in
Chap. 9. verse 14. By four Angels is meant, the four chief Heads or
Authors of the Turkish Government, ruled by Devils.

Another Angel. sig.
Christ Jesus, who is another differing from the common Angels, not only in
number, but in Essence, Office, and operation, exceeding al Angels being an
eternal Angel or word of God, Mediator of the Covenant. Reu. 7, 2. I saw
another Angel come up from the East. So is another Angel taken. Cap. 8, 3.
and 10, 1. but others do understand that other Angel. Cap. 7, 1. of
Constantine the Great, who came out of the East parts, and succeeded Dioclesian
in the Empire. Howbeit, sithence it is Christ alone, who has the Seal to set
upon all the elect; therefore the former signification, is to be received in
mine opinion.

2 A created spirit, thoroughly furnished with power, and with slight of glory
(as ensign of Power) deputed and appointed to this service of ruinating
Babylon. Reu. 18, 6. I saw another Angel. This is Note.
to be noted through this Book, that the Angels, both holy and unclean
Spirits, according to the Nature of the work to be done, are the adminsters
and Executioners of Gods decree and counsel, both for safety of his true
flock, and for the ouer-throw of the false Antichristian Church and Turkish
conuenticles, assembled against Christ.

3 The Ministers of the truth, which lived in the succeeding age: whereof John
Husse and Hieromne of Prage were chee^e, mightily striving against the Primacy
of the Pope. Revel. 14, 8. And there followed another Angel.

an Angel standing in the Sun. sig:
An heavenly Spirit, Minister and Proclaimer even in the Sun; that is,
openly, and in the sight of all (as Proclamations are wont to be made by one
standing in some high place, where he may be heard) of a glorious Conquest and
victory, which Christ and his Church should have and get, over the Beast and
the false Prophet, his strong enemies. Revel. 19. 17. And I saw an Angel stand
in the Sun. Yet some Divines, interpret this of some particular man, which
should be a member of some particular Church, brightly shining above other
Churches, in purity of heavenly doctrine, and light of the holy truth. By
comparison with Reu. 12, 1. this rare Man should arise out of the Western
Church, to call Christians of the West unto battle, or rather to take the
spoil of the Beast and the false Prophet, being subdued in War. The former
exposition, is of Interpretors more commonly received: yet both may stand
together, for Christ, the Author and giver of the victory over the
Antichristian Army, and his Instrument whosoever are not contrary.

Another Beast. sig:
The Ecclesiastical Dominion and Kingdom at Rome, exercised with tyrannous
and beastly fury and fierceness. It succeeded the politic power of the
Emperors, being now to be found resident in the corporation of the Pope and
his false Prophets, and forgerers of false doctrine. This Dominion and power
Ecclesiastical, though it be the same with the former politic power of
Emperors, in nature and constitution, both being bloody and beastly; yet it is
called another Beast, because this power had another Original and beginning.
For the former Beast with seven heads came out of the Sea: this other Beast,
came up out of the Earth; that is, his authority was increased and raised up
even above Laymen, not exempting the Emperor himself, which became underling
and Vassal to the Pope, having before great authority over the Clergy alone.
This happened in the time of Gregory the second. Hence it is, that the Monarchy
and Dominion of the Pope, was both the seventh head of the former Beast
described in the beginning of the thirteenth Chapter: And also, a Beast of
himself, even in respect of the double power which this second Beast did
challenge; that is, the highest power civil over all Emperors and Kings; Also,
the highest power spiritual over the Faith, over the consciences and Souls of
all men. Reave. 13, 17. And I behold another Beast coming up out of the Earth,
etc. It is usual in Scripture, by Beasts, to understand Kingdoms and Dominions
ruled in a beastly fashion. As in Daniell often, and in the Revelation.

A. P.
Apples desired or lusted sig:
The fruits, desired and lusted after, by a Sinecdoche of the part for the
whole. When it is said here, these are departed, it signifies, either that
their desired and longed for Harvest of all ripe and delicate fruits was
perished, so as they had not their wonted ability; or else their wanton lust
after such fruits (about which they spare no cost to procure them) was now
extinct and quenched, which causes the friends of Rome to mourn. Reave. 18,
14. And the Apples which thy Soul lusted after, are departed from thee.

A. R.
Armageddon. sig:
The Mountain of Some think it to be allusion to Dan. ca. 11, 45.
Megiddo, where Josiah was slain. 2 Chronicles. 35, 22. (as some think) or the
destruction of an Army (as others think) or (as others think) a cutting down
subtly: or the town Megiddo, mentioned. Judges 5, 19. Where Debora and
Baruch, with a small number overthrew Sisera. Certain it is, that by this name,
is signified the place of that unrecoverable destruction, given to such wicked
Kings and their forces, assembled in battle, for that great Whore of Rome,
against the Lord and his people: which affords a special comfort to Gods
Church. Reu. 16, 16. And they gathered them together into a place, called in
Haebrew, Armageddo.

A. S.
to Ascend into heaven sig:
After much labor taken in preaching the Gospel, and many reproaches suffered
for it, to be raised up to great Dignity and honor here in the Church (which
is called Heaven in this Book of Revelation) and after this life ended, to be
made partakers of heavenly glory. This is the portion and comfort of all the
faithful Witnesses of Christ, as experience of all times do prove. It was
fulfilled to Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Peter Martyr, Bucer, and many others.
Revel. 11, 12. And they shall Ascend up to Heaven in a Cloud.

A. T.
Athirst. sig:
One, who feeling a great want of the Waters of life (the graces of the Spirit)
does highly value them, and earnestly covet and seek after them, never giving
over till they be satisfied. Revel. 22, 17. Let every one that is athirst come.
Reave. 21, 6.

A. U.
to Avenge. sig:
To recompense unto the wicked after their merits, punnishing justly the cruel
injuries done by them to the Saints, for the Name of Christ. Reu. 19, 2. And
to Avenge the blood of his Servants.

B. A.
Babylon. sig:
THE City of Rome, and the Romain power, exercised there by the Pope and his
Clergy. For Rome the Wester ne Mystical Babylon, was to the Christians, in
respect of tyranny and cruel persecution, what the Eastern Babylon was to the
Jews: being also like unto that Babylon in Assiria, for Idolatry,
superstition, and worship of diuils, as it must at last be like it for
fearful events, in a grievous ruin and downfall, and for this likeness
sake, Popish Rome bears the Name of Babylon. ( the kingdom of Antichrist,
worthily called Babylon, because it is a Kingdom of confusion.
) Revel. 14, 8. Babylon that great City is fallen. Also Chapter 17, 5, 9, 18.
Where it is plain to him that will understand, that by Babylon is meant Rome;
this being the only City in the World, which in Saint John's time, seated on
seven Hills, and which reigned over the Kings of the earth, and by a strong
hand, or cunning entisements, compelled Kings and nations to admyt her
Idolatries and Haeresies; which is, to commit fornication with her, as it is
said in verse 2. of the 17. Chapter of this Book.

Balaams Doctrine. sig:
The Doctrine taught by the Nicholaitans, touching the lawfulness of
fornication, and of eating things offered to Idols: which Doctrine, to make it
more odious, is here called the Doctrine of Balaam, who gave counsel to
Balaac, to entice the Israelites to fornication, so as afterward they might
more freely commit Idolatry. Revel. 2, 14. Thou have them which maintain the
Doctrine of Balaam. Other Divines, do distinguish between the Doctrine of ye
Nicholaitanes, which was touching bodily fornication, in the promiscuous use of
women and the Doctrine of Balaam, which beside the defiling of the body, tended
to the polluting of the mind, by Idolatry. And thus it seems to me, the
Holy Ghost does distinguish them in this Epistle, to the Church at Pergamus,
speaking of them severally; of the one, verse 14. of the other, verse 15. The
Church of Ephesus was troubled with the error of the Nicholaitans. Chap. 2, 6.
This Church of Pergamus, with the Doctrine of Balaam that cursed Charmer.

Balance. sig:
The tongue, stalk, or handle of the Balance, and by Sinecdoche of the part,
the whole Balance: an instrument apt for waighing of Victuals, as it uses to
be done, in time of great famine and derth, represented here by the Black
horse, and the Rider with, Balances in his hand. Revel, 6, 5. He that sat on
him, had Balances in his hand.

Battle in heaven. sig:
That great strife and combat, either with Christ in his own person, fought
with the great Dragon the devil, when Jesus spoiled him, and triumphed over
him on the Cross. Col. 2, 15. whereof the Psalmist prophesied. Ps. 60, 8, 9.
or that, which is in the militant Church, fought continually between the godly
and ungodly; elect and reprobate; under the conduct of those two great
Captains, Christ, and the Dragon. Or finally, that war, which Constantine
the Great, as Christ's Champ^on, armed with his Virtue, did make first upon
Maxentius, the wicked Emperor; and after, upon two other Tyrants, persecutours
of the Christian Church, Maximius and Licinius. And some Divines, will have
this battle in heaven, to be that most dangerous endeavor and attempt of
Satan, when he first (in the very Spring of the Church) labored to destroy
the aeternall salvation thereof, being founded in Christ. Reu. 12, 7. And there
was a Battle in heaven. Let the learned Judge of these several
significations; whereof the two first (in mine Opinion) cannot be meant,
because this part of the Revelation, it is of things to come, and of
particular events.

B. E.
four Beasts sig:
The Angels of God, those heavenly spirits, the chief and principal
Ministers of Gods power, always attending about the Throne of God, being most
vigilant servants, full ready with all expedition, to serve God in the
Government of the world, and of all creatures: which are here expressed, by
four most noble amongst others; to wit, Lion, Calfe, Man, Eagle: to show,
that over these and all other creatures (even to the least) God rules by the
ministry of his Angels. Or else, as some will have it, the Lion, resembles the
noble courage of Angellicall Spirits; a Calfe, their strength; an Ox being
the strongest of beasts, as a Lion is most coragious; a Man represents their
Wisdom and great understanding, wherein man excels al inferior creatures,
and an Eagle which soareth aloft, signifies their knowledge of high and great
secrets. Howbeit, some there be, which think these four beasts to be all
such servants of God, as have employed their labor faithfully, in delivering
unto the church the truth of Doctrine, and in administering other holy things.
The first signification, is most commonly embraced. Reu. 6, 7. Round about the
Throne were four Beasts, full of eyes before and behind; the first Beast was
like a Lion. They do err, which apply these four Beasts to the four
Evangelists.

that Beast. sig:
All the Heathen Emperors of Rome, with all them that joined with them in the
persecution and murder of Gods servant. Revel. 20, 10. Where that Beast and
that false Prophet are. Here note, that false Prophet, being distinguished
from the Beast, signifies the Pope with his Clergy. All these shall suffer
eternal pain, together with the Turk, for corrupting the world with lies,
errors, superstitions, and destroying the Saints.

a Beast rising out of the Sea. sig:
The Roman Empire or civil monarchy of Rome, which should be a main Instrument
of the Dragon to make war against the Church. This Empire, is likened to a
beast, because it should (without al humanity or sense of reason) in a furious
brutish manner persecute Gods people. It is said to come up out of the Sea; to
signify, that at first, it did arise out of the contentions and divisions of
other Nations (which are as a raging Sea) and that the Rule and kingdom of the
Emperors, should be turbulent, tempestuous, variable, and unconstant. Of this
Empire, the estate, acts, effects, and use, for instruction of the Godly, are
described in the 10. verse of this 13. Chapter, where begins the History of
another Beast, the Ecclesiastical and Prophetical body, or corporation; to
wit, the Pope of Rome, and his Clergy. Others, expound this Beast of that
Antichrist, and apply to him the things here spoken, but the former is
plainest and soundest: for having in the 12. Chapter, described the Archenemy
to the Christian Church; to wit, the devil, good order required the two
principal instruments; to wit, the civil and ecclesiastical estate of Rome
should be opened, which is done in this 13. Chapter. Revel. 13, 1. And I saw a
Beast arise out of the Sea, having seven heads, and ten horns.

a Beast coming out of the bottomless pit. sig:
Antichristian kingdom and power, which in the spiritual combat, shall be
inferior to the witnesses or servants of Christ, but not so in the bodily and
carnal war, wherein Antichrist shall prevail. He is said to come out of
the bottomless pit, not to signify (as some think) that the great Antichrist
should be a devil, but because the beastly power of Antichrist should be given
him of the Devil. As Chap. 13, ^. and exercised for the devil, to establish
his kingdom of darkness, by fighting (against the true Doctrine and Religion)
with the faithful followers of it, for the upholding of Haeresie and Idolatry.
Revel. 11, 7. And the Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, shall
war against them, and kill them. In Chap, 9. he is there called the Angel
of the bottomless pit.

Bed. sig:
Not pleasure and delicacy, but affliction and calamity, as punishment of
adulterous Doctrine. Revel. 2, 22.

Beginning sig:
Christ, the eternal son of God, (in respect of his aeternity) who himself
is before all things created, and of whom all things which be made, had their
beginning, and without whose sustaining Virtue, they all should quickly come to
nothing. See John 1, 1, 2. also Col. 1, 15, 16. Therefore such as covet to be
blessed, must resolve to cleave to him, out of whom there is nothing save
corruption and destruction, Ren. 1, 8. I am Alpha, the beginning and the end.

2 Christ, in respect (not so much of aeternitie) as of his pre-eminence and
principality which he holds over all things, even as Mediator, God and man,
having all things subject unto him. See Ephe. 1, 22. And has made all things
subject unto him, etc. Therefore all Creatures, reasonable and unreasonable,
owe to him their whole entyre obedience, as Phil. 2, 10. That at the name of
Jesus every knee should bow. Revel. 3, 14. That beginning of the Creatures of
God.

Behold.
See the word [Behold] in the common Dictionary.

Be with you all. sig:
The continual presence of all spiritual blessings, even unto the salvation
of the Church, and every member of it. Revel. 22, 20. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you all.

bitter Belly sig:
The indignation and grief of godly ministers, to see the Doctrine of the word
despised, and errors preferred. Also, the molestations which they are put to
suffer, for the publishing of it. Revel. 10, 9. It shall make thy Belly bitter.

B. L.
Black horse sig:
Famine, dearth, which is full of sorrow, therefore resembled by a black
color, which is a sad and doleful color, and well agrees to persons
famished, whose bodies lacking ^uyce and blood, are discovered and become
blackish. Lam, 4, 7. Revel. 6, 5. Lo a Black horse.

to Blaspheme. sig:
To utter reproachful and railing words against God, as the Papists do, sundry
ways. First, they ascribe the plagues wherewith God plagueth them to his
injustice, not to their own iniquities. 2. they rail upon the holy Gospel,
and charge it to be the cause of all evils in the world. 3. It is an usual
thing with Italians and Spaniards (the Popes creatures) in their rage and fury,
to utter blasphemous speeches against God. Revel. 16, 9. They boiled in great
heat, and Blasphemed the name of God. Again, verse 11.

name of Blasphemy sig:
The unlawful primacy, and damnable Sovereignty, whereby* civil Rome first,
and afterward Rome Ecclesiastical, ambitiously exalted it self above God,
even to the reproach of God, according to that in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Revel. 13, 1.
Upon his head, the name of Blasphemy. Thus Romish Synagogue Bellarmine lib. 4
de Romans pont cap. 4.
boasts it self to be the Church of Peter, the foundation and form of all
Churches which took their beginning, that she only cannot err, that they
are to be judged Haereticks who dissent from her in articles of faith, or
Sacraments.

names of Blasphemy sig:
Infinite Blasphemies, and most plentiful reproaches, which in progress of
time, the Antichristian Kingdom did abound in, being full of all kind of
impieties and iniustices in the Pope their head and in the whole body: in their
orders, decrees, Doctrines, worship and manners; nothing amongst them free
from Blasphemies. Rome now (especially since the Counsel of Trent) being an
heap of most execrable Blasphemies, having many names, whereas at first it had
but a name of Blasphemy borne in the head only. Revel. 17, 3, Full of names
of Blasphemy. Who so considers with how many horrible errors (says one) the
three great Volumes
of Bellarmine bestuffed, will say, there is not one leaf, but it is spotted
with blasphemy.

to* be Blessed. sig:
To be endowed in this life with spiritual and heavenly blessings, and after a
short life led in the favor of God, stored with graces and comforts of the
Spirit, to be at last lifted up into bliss and glory, in the kingdom of
God; first in soul, afterward in body. This is the fruit which is promised to
them, who in all ages since Christ, read and keep, know and do, the words of
this Revel. See Chap. 1, 3. Blessed are they which read and hear the words of
this Prophecy. Also Chap. 22, 9, 13. Chapter 14. Away then with that dotage of the
Jesuit, who straineth this prophecy and the fruit of it, unto the three
years next before the coming of Christ to judgment.

to be Blessed fully, or to be henceforth Blessed. sig:
To be perfectly happy, when the souls of the faithful, after martyrdom
constantly suffered, shall enter into that Celestial glory, which they had
long looked for, and greatly longed after. Revel. 14, 13. The dead which dye in
the Lord, are fully blessed. If it be translated, are [ Blessed from
henceforth] that is; presently or forthwith, the Greek Word [ a parti] will
bear it well, and the truth also. What then becomes of Popish Purgatory,
wherein souls departed are sore tormented with infernal pains, (if we
believe them) and do not rest from their labors.

Blood. sig:
Cruel slaughter and death, which should happen by the plague of War upon
the Antichristian armies or soldiers, which fight for the pope, as a just and
meet recompense of their cruel slaughtering and shedding the blood of Gods
children. Reu. 16, 4. The Rivers and Fountains of Water becam blood. These
rivers and fountains, some expound of the Jesuits; whence other Papists draw
instructions (as the Sea is nourished by Fountains and Rivers) the turning of
these into blood, is the putting of those to death which were chief Masters
in Popery, which was done in this our Kingdom and Dominion, 1581, when an Act
was made, to make their coming into the Realm, (to dissuade subjects from
their allegiance) to be treason.

Blood of a dead man. sig:
The cruel Wars which God would send upon the Popish Kingdoms, which should
be as a Sea of blood, wherein men should dye by the sword, as the Fishes dyed
in Egypt when the Waters were turned into blood. Ren. 16, 3. The Sea became
the blood of a dead man.

to shed the Blood of the Saints. sig:
To exercise cruelty upon the Saints and Prophets of God, even to death; yea,
and to torment also, many times by the Antichristian, Popish, or any other
Tyrants, to satisfy their own fierce and bloody disposition and malice,
conceived against them for Christ and his Gospel sake. Revel. 16, 6. For they
shed the blood of the Saints, and the Prophets. Revel. 6, 10.

to drink Blood. sig: pro
To take in blood, as men take in other drink, as Cyrus did by the compulsion
of Tomyris.

2 To have their own blood abundantly shed, till they swim in it, and do
drink (as it were) their own blood. A fit punishment, for Popish and all
other cruel persecutors, that they should one slaughter another, til they be
bathed in their own bloods, as happened to the Midianites in the Judges; and to
Papists also, as Stories witness. Revel. 16, 6. Thou have given them blood to
drink. This Phrase, seems to be fetched from Ezekiel. 16, 38. I will give thee
the blood of wrath; that is, I will cause thee be cruelly slain, as they which
are killed in fury and wrath.

Blood of the Lamb. sig:
The Sacrifice of Christ his death, together with his perfect Justice and
holiness imputed. Reu. 7, 14. They washed their Robes in the Blood of the
Lamb. Revel. 1^, 11. The Saints overcame the Dragon and his army, not by
their constancy to death, but by their faith, in the blood and death of the
Lamb Christ Jesus. 1 John 51, 5.

to Blow. sig:
To breath, or inspire the heart with graces, as the holy Spirit uses to do
by the Ministry of the word, which is here threatened, to be for a time
removed and hindered. Revel. 7, 1. That the Winds should not Blow.

B. O.
Book. sig:
This Prophecy, or Book of Revelation (as appears by the opening the seals
of this Some think this Book to be the whole Bible: others think it to be the
New Testament, but they do err.
Book here showed John in a Vision) containing the Decrees, Counsels, and
will of God the Father, touching the Government of the world; namely, of his
Church till Christ come. Whereas these counsels are written in a Book, it
signifies the certainty of them, that they are surely determined: And whereas
the Book was written within and without, (after the fashion of writing in
Parchments, usual in those times) it signifies, the largeness of this
Prophecy, that there be many things to be revealed. And whereas, it is sealed
with seven seals, it signifies these Decrees, only to be known to God,
until he was pleased to manifest them: And whereas no creature was able to
open the Book, or to look on it; this signifies both the difficulties and
dignity of these secrets, that they must be with great honor reverenced.
Revel. 5, 1. I saw a Book Written, etc.

little Book. sig:
The Scripture, containing the doctrine of grace, by the powerful preaching
whereof, in the latter end of the world, Antichrist is to be overthrown, as
has bin begun to be fulfilled, through the pubshing of the Divine truth,
written in that Book, by Luther, Wicliffe, and others. Revel. 10, 8. Go and
take the little Book. Also verse 9, 10. Some expound the taking of this little
Book, to be the restoring of prophecy, or preaching the truth unto the
Church, which is all one with the former.

to eat this Book. sig:
To hide the knowledge of it in the heart, and to digest it by godly
Meditation. Revel. 10, 9 Take it and eat it up. The effect of this Book,
should be sweetness (like the sweetness of Honey) in the mouth, but
bitterness in the belly. To know and believe it, bringes exceeding delight to
the Christian mind; but the earnest desire to vent and publish it to others,
the heaviness and sorrow, for the contemning of it, and preferring errors
before it, shall be as Gawle to Gods Servants. In this phrase there is allusion
to that in Ezekiel. 3, 3. Jeremy 15, 16 Job. 32.

Books opened. sig:
Men's Consciences, or records and Testimonies of every man's conscience, being
vn^olded and manifested through the mighty power of God, wherein (as in Books)
are written all men's thoughts, words, and works. Revel. 20, 12. And the
Books were opened.

Book of life. sig:
Gods immutable and aeternall Decree, wherein (as in a Book) the names of the
elect are written, (as Soldiers names use to be written in a Muster Book.)
Upon this most firm and merciful decree of salvation to aeternall life by
Christ, does depend the election of the godly, who otherwise are not without
many blots, and very foul ones too, in their Consciences, which yet are wiped
out by the blood of Christ, according to Gods everlasting love and purpose.
Revel. 20, 12. Another Book was opened, which was the Book of Life. Also,
Revel. 22, 19.

Bottomless pit. sig:
Hell, where the Devils be tormented, and whence comes all Tyranicall and
wicked beastly seruage, both power and practices of the cruel enemies of the
Church. Hell, for the largeness of the place, and deepenesse of the pain
suffered there, is called [ Bottomlesse] and a [ Pit] because it is below, in
the nethermost parts of the world, a darkish uncomfortable place, like a pit or
dungeon. Revel. 11, 7. The Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit.

2 The company of Reprobates and earthly minded men, among whom Satan reigns
as king Revel. 20, 3. And cast him into the bottomless pit. Comparing this
place with Chap. 12. verse 13. It is plain, that Bottomless pit, signifies
the earth; that is, earthly minded men, which are but Christians in show only,
and name; for unto such Satan is sent.

Bought from the earth. sig:
The elect of God the Father, redeemed by Christ, fealed up to the day of
Redemption by the holy Spirit, by whose effectual sanctification, they have
escaped the fellowship of the false church, signified by earth, as it were
brands pulled out of the fire, and are made members of the true Church, even
his sincere worshippers. These alone can praise the Lamb with joyful hearts.
Reuelat. 14, 3. Forty four thousand, which were bought from the Earth.

Bow. sig:
The Tongues of Gods Ministers, out of which, wholesome Words (as sharp
Arrows) are sent to pierce even the hearts of men. Revel. 6, 2. Had a Bow.

to Boil in great heat. sig:
To feel great distemper and torment in the body (upon the extreme heat of
the Sun) scorching and drying up the fruits of the earth, and all green
things, whereof commonly follows, grievous diseases; as burning pestilences,
hot Agues, with other noisome pains, which cause Idolaters, though not openly
and directly, yet obliquely and secretly to blaspheme God. Even as Herodotus
reports of the people Athlantici, that they use to ban and curse the Sun,
because it broils them with the too much and immoderate heat thereof.
Reuelat. 16, 9. And men boiled in great heat, and Blasphemed God.

B. R.
Bright morning Star. sig:
Christ Jesus, who to us (being covered with the night of spiritual
darkness) is the beginning of all Light, both of Holiness and Happiness
(even as the Morning Star, is to the day) and at length, all Darkness, both
of Sin and Misery, being utterly dispersed, he shall bring us to the full
brightness of heavenly glory, where there shall be no night, but a perpetual
and most clear light of blessedness, Revel. 22, 19. I am that Bright morning
Star. In the same sense, he is called. John. 1. The Light of the world; and
by the Prophet, the Son of Righteousness, See Revel. 2, 28.

Brimstone. sig:
The extreme cruelty of the bloody enemies of Christ and his Church, in
terrible manner destroying men's bodies with death, and their souls with false
Religion. Revel. 9, 17. And of Brimstone. Also verse 18, 19.

2 The sharp and bitterness of helpaines. Revel. 21, 8. With fire and
Brimstone.

to Bring forth. sig:
To beget children spiritually unto God, as the Church does by the Ministry of
the Gospel, thorough the power of the Spirit. Revel. 12, 3. To devour her
child, when she had brought it forth.

B. U.
to Buy and sell. sig:
To exercise Arts belonging to the sustentation of this life; or to have
Traffic and enter-course of Merchandise with men, which was denied to al,
save such as were subject to the Roman Popish power. Revel. 13, 17. That no
man may buy and sell, etc. whereof we read in their Decrees, that no man might
have to do with him, to whom the Pope was enemy.

to Buy ware. sig:
To entertain the Doctrine and superstitions of Rome, and all means which
served outwardly and pompously to deck the Church of Rome, and to set forth
her Idolatry. All these shall wax vile, no man shall give any more price for
them, after the full fall of the Romish City, and impiety. Revel. 18, 11. For
no man buyeth their ware any more.

Burden. sig:
Affliction and Tribulation, by exile, imprisonment, etc. for the Gospel.
Revel. 2, 3. Thou wast Burdened, and had patience.

2 Prophecy of calamity. Reu. 2, 24. I will put upon you no other burthan;
that is, I will speak to you no worse thing, but only to require what to do;
no Calamity I will Prophecy and denounce against you, as against other
Churches. In this phrase, there is allusion and respect unto the form of
speech used by the old Prophets, who used to call the prophetical predictions
of public calamities, by the name of Burden; as the burden of Babell, the
Burden of Moab, of Egypt, etc. Esaias 13, 6, 15, 1, and 19, 1.

C. A.
Cage of unclean birds. sig:
NOt a place, commonly called a Cage, wherein Birds are so kept as they cannot
fly out, but some hollow, vast, ruinous place, wherein ravenous and
ill-fauoured Birds; as Vultures, Owls, Kites, Ravens, etc. use to nestle and
abide.

2 A seat, of fierce, cruel, savage, and unclean men, which live by spoil
and violence; of which kind of men, Rome, the Western Babell, is as full as
Eastern Babell was, of ugly, horrible Birds, when it was desolated, whereof we
read in the prophets. Esaias 13. Ier. 51. unto which places, John alludeth,
Revel, 18, 2. Babylon is a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird.

Calfe. sig:
Strength, because among Beasts, Calves and Oxen be strong; and because the Ox
is profitable, therefore some Divines think, that under this one kind by a
Sinecdoche, are meant, al Beasts which are for use and profit. Revel. 4, 7. The
second Beast like a Calfe.

Candlestick sig:
An Instrument to bear a Candle, representing the Church, wherein the eternal
light of truth shines. Revel. 11, 20.

Carkases, or Corpse. sig:
The dead bodies of the Saints, but especially of the Prophets of God, exposed
and laid forth to opprobry, and the scorn of the World, by the followers of
Antichrist. Revel. 11, 8. And the Carkases shall be in the streets of the
great City. Verse 9. And they shall not suffer their Karkases to be buried.
Hereby is expressed, the great cruelty of the Papists, not content to kill the
Servants of God, and that with torment, but dishonor their dead bodies, by
casting them in the streets, and denying burial to them. Also, by a
proportion, these Carkases may be expounded of the holy Scriptures; whereof the
Papists have but (as it were) the bare and naked Corpse, having by their
Glosses and Interpretations, of the falsely (so called) Apostolic Sea,
corrupted the sense and true meaning of them, which is the life and Soul of
the Scriptures, which consist in sense; not only in Letters and Sillables.

Carried away of the flood. sig:
To be overcome and maistered with grievous persecutions, as a House drowned
and carried away with a violent flood. Revel. 12, 15. That he might cause her
to be Carried away of the flood.

to be carried by the spirit sig:
To be ravished after a Divine extraordinary sort, as the Prophets were, when
Visions were showed unto them. Thus was John ravished here, when he must see
the Vision of the great Whore. Revel. 17, 3. So he carried me away in the
Spirit.

to be carried into the wilderness. sig:
Either the place where John must see this Vision, to be solitary, as aptest
for contemplation; or that this great Whore was seated in the Visible Church,
being nov^ laid wast and desolate as a wilderness, or else, that the
manifestation and knowledge of this Whore, and her Dominion, must be
fetched from men living in some obscure place (as it were in a desert) from
whence there was no such matter to be looked for. Reu. 17, 3. He Carried me
away into the Wilderness.

to be Cast into the earth. sig:
To be thrown out of the bounds of the true and holy Church, to exercise his
rage among the Reprobates, both Heathen and all others, seeming godly, yet
strangers from true godliness. Reu. 12, 9. He was even Cast into the earth.

to be Cast into the lake of fire, etc. sig:
To be tumbled and thrown down into Hell, which is here called a Lake of
fire, and bottomless pit, to signify, the horror and sharpness of infernal
pain. Revel. 20, 14. Death and Hell were
Cast into the Lake of Fire.

to Cast out water. sig:
To inflame the Nations, and put them into raging tumults against the Church of
Christ. Thus Satan did, when he stirred up many people to persecute the
Christian Church; even in her Infancy and Cradle. Revel. 12, 15. The Serpent
Cast a Water out of his mouth after the Woman. Some, by these Waters,
understand, great store of Heresies, lies, slanders, reproaches, wherewith the
Serpent sought to drown the poor Church.

to Cast out. sig.
To be refused as profane. Revel. 11, 7. The Court which is without the
Temple, Cast out.

great chain. sig:
The doctrine of the Gospel; and namely, that part of it which concerns
Christian liberty, whereby (as it were by a Chain, and fast bound) Christ kept
Satan fast bound for a long time. Revel. 20, 1. And a great Chain in his hand.

C. H.
Chalcedone sig:
A rich, precious, pure, and glorious Stone and Pearl, representing the
spiritual purity of the holy Church on earth, and the Caelestiall glory of the
triumphant church in heaven. So much is meant also by the Jasper, Chrysolite,
etc. Re. 20, 19, 20.

Child, or man-child. sig:
Either Christ alone, or joined to the Church hi^ body, to which he
communicates his own power, according to his promise. Revel. 2, 27. Revel.
12, 5 She brought forth a Man-Child.

Crystal. sig: pro
A most clear Glass, through which, our eyesight may run to espy every the
least spot.

2 Either the whole World, through which Gods sight pierces, seeing every
thing more clearly, then we see a spot in a Crystal; or as some Divines
think, the most holy and pure doctrine of the Gospel, in which, as in a
Chrystall-Glasse or Mirror, we see the glory of God with open face, and not
darkly, as the Jews did before, under shadows of the Law. Revel. 4, 6. And
before the Throne was a Sea of Glass like to Crystal.

Clear as Crystal. sig:
The Water here spoken of, not to be foul and troubled, like muddy Water and
puddle of Man's inventions, but most pure, and of excellent cleerenesse. Reu.
22, 1.

Church. sig:
A company of Men. called out of the World by the voice of Christ, to know and
worship one true God, according to his word. Revel. 1, 20. Seven Stars, are
the Angels of the seven Churches.

Church of Ephesus, Pergamus, etc. sig:
That particular company, gathered at Ephesus, Pergamus, etc. unto the Faith
and Religion of Christ. Reu. 2, 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus.

C. I.
City beloved. sig:
The holy Church here Militant upon Earth, which because it is loved of God,
through Christ; therefore neither the Turk, from the East; nor Antichrist from
the West, shall utterly destroy it, howsoever they fiercely assault it. Revel.
20, 9. And they compassed the Tents of the Saints about, and the beloved
City. Some Divines understand this, not of the whole Church, but by an
excellency of the company of believing Jews, which toward the end^ of the
World, shall be gathered and joined to the Church of believing Gentiles.

holy City. sig:
Jerusalem which is above, or the Caelestiall Church, whereof Jerusalem, that
holy City, in earth was a figure. Reu. 22, 19. He shall have no part in the
holy City.

2 The Church of Christ here on earth, consisting of holy members, sanctified
by the blood and Spirit of Christ. Reave. 21, 2.

Cities of Nations. sig:
The company of such people as join to Antichrist, and fight against Christ.
Revel. 16, 19. The Cities of the Nations fell. These Cities, some others
expound, to be the whole regiment of wicked men; as of Turks, Jews,
Barbarians, and others, that embrace false and strange Religions. All which, it
is certain, that they must perish at the second coming of Christ, though all
be not alike Christ's adversaries.


that great City. sig:
Not any one Town environed with Walls, the people whereof are linked together
by bonds of the same Laws: but the entire and full jurisdiction of some one
Town (as namely of Rome, the seat and place of Antichrist) together, with the
whole Company of them that are subject to the proud power of Antichrist. Reu.
16, 19. And the great City was divided into three parts.

C. L.
Clouds. sig:
Powers, Dignities, Honors, Principalities, in high place, yet not Supreme,
as Clouds which be placed high, yet are under the Heavens. Revel. 11, 15. The
Angel cried to him that sat on the Cloud.

Clothed with a cloud sig:
One, full of Majesty. A Cloud in Scripture being a visible sign, to represent
Divine Majesty. As Exodus 33, 9. 1. King. 8. Revel. 10, 1. I saw another mighty
Angel, Clothed with a Cloud. Some other Divines, expound this Clothing with
a Cloud, to signify the obscure knowledge of Christ, being yet not so fully
known, as afterward. The former is the more received exposition.

Clothed in sackecloath. sig:
Men, full of grief and lamentation, as if they did always fast and mourn.
Also, stirring up others to repent, and be sorrowful for their Idolatry, and
other works of darkness, whereof wearing Sackcloath is a sign and token.
Finally, this Clothing his Witnesses with Sack, admonishes, that Christ
would call men to repentance, even by very mean and contemptible Servants,
covered, not with Purple, but with Sack. Reu. 11, 3. They shall prophecy
1260. days, Clothed in Sacke-Cloath. This alludeth to the fashion of the old
Prophets, who were thus apparrelled.

to come with clouds sig:
To return as Christ shall do, with great glory to judge the World, having
ready before him, Storm, Tempest, and Thunder, to revenge himself upon the
wicked his enemies. Revel. 1, 7. But comes with Clouds, and every eye shall
see him. In this speech, there is an allusion unto the praise of the Prophets,
who thus describe the notable judgments of God, using the Clouds, and all
other creatures for the good of his own, and destruction of the ungodly. See
Dan. 7, 13. Also Psalm 18, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.

sitting on a Cloud. sig:
A glory peculiar to Christ, who as he ascended sitting on a Cloud; so at his
second coming, he shall return gloriously (a Cloud being to him in stead of
a Chariot or Throne rather.) As in Acts 1. and Revel. 1, 7. Revel. 14, 15.
Crying to him that sat on the Cloud. Some Divines (not without great show of
reason) Interpret this Cloud here spoken of, of civil powers, lifted up as
Clouds in the Air; and him who sat on it, to be such Rulers and Princes, as
Christ did use, for the furthering of his Church, and hindering the Kingdom of
Antichrist; the reason is; because the Son of Man, who sat upon this Cloud,
doing all at the commandment of the Angel, as appears in the words of
this Text, cannot be Christ Jesus, who is subject only to his Father, and
that as he is Mediator. This latter exposition, seems for this reason, to
be the better.

white cloud sig:
The uprightness and integrity (represented by White) of Christ the Judge, not
miscarried in his sentence by ignorance or crooked affections (in their
opinion, who understand this Text of the last Judgment.) But such Divines as
referred this text, to things done between the first and second coming of
Christ, do Interpret this White Cloud, of courteous, loving, beneficial, and
healthful Princes and Estates; as Saxony, Hassia, Prussia, the free Cities of
Argentorate, Tiguris, Berne, etc. With their good and religious Governors; as
they expound the Angel coming out of the Temple, to be Iustus Jonas, Phillip
Melan^thon, Bucer, Zuinglius, and others, which stirred up good Rulers to
abolish Popery, and erect the Faith and Religion of the Gospel, in their
Jurisdictions and Dominions.

the Clusters of the Uineyard. sig:
The wicked Men of the World, which are compared to Clusters, because they grow
so thick, even on heaps (like Grapes.) Do but consider how many renounce the
Name of Christ, as Turks, etc. How many are Idolators amongst such as
acknowledge his Name; how many Hyppocrites and wicked men, even where the
Gospel is maintained, and this will appear a meet comparison. Revel. 14, 18.
Thrust in thy Sickle, and gather the Clusters of the Vineyard. Some very
learned, restrain these Clusters, unto Popish religious buildings and persons,
which did abound and flourish, even as a vine spread full of Clusters, and that
in this our Kingdom, till the days of Henry the eight, when thorough the zeal
and courage of Cranmer and Crumwell (two great men) this Popish Vine was lopped
and cut; yea, rooted out.

C. O.
to Come down from heaven. sig:
To have God for the Author and founder (not men) of anything, or to have an
heavenly original and beginning. Revel. 21, 2. And I saw new Jerusalem come
down from heaven.

2 To be deputed and assigned to some great service and work, about the
ruinating of Babylon, by the appointment of God. Revel. 18, 1. I saw an Angel
come down from Heaven. Thus also is the Devil said to come down into the
Earth. Revel. 12, 12. To signify, that he was sent amongst the Reprobate, the
Children of this World, by the just judgment of God, to execute his vengeance
on their Souls and bodies.

to Come. sig:
To invade and take upon him, the tyrannical government and power over Gods
people, as Antichrist shall do. Revel. 17, 10. Another is not yet come, but
when he comes, etc. Some understand this of the Emperor Nerua, and his short
and cruel reign; but the former is better and fitter.

to Come a. none. sig:
To follow, or fall out shortly within a small time. Thus the Scripture uses
to speak of the last day, when aeternall Woe (here called the third Woe)
shall be executed upon Reprobates; as, the end at hand; the Judge is at door;
these be the last days, etc. because in Gods account, a thousand years to
be but as a day. Reu. 11, 14. The third Woe shall Come anon. Other learned
men think, the meaning to be, that the calamities which shall happen to Gods
Enemies before the coming of Christ, shall be but short, in comparison of some
miseries which shall happen under the second trumpet. Both expositions may stand
well together.

to Come. sig:
To approach, draw near, or be present; so do the whole Church present, and
that which is to succeed, and every true member in whom Christ his Spirit
dwells, all and every one, earnestly desire the full accomplishment of good
things, promised and prophesied of in this Revelation, to be present, and to
draw near; especially the marriage of the Lamb. Revel. 22, 17. The Spirit and
the Bride say; Come, and let him that hears say; Come, etc.

to Commit fornication. sig:
To partake with the Romish Church in her spiritual Woredome; namely, in the
corruption of true Faith and Religion, by Heresy and Idolary. This is one
cause of Babylons Downe-fall, that she was not content only to adulterate and
deprave Gods worship, but drew people; yea, Kings and Princes, into society of
her errors and superstition. Revel. 18, 3. The Kings of the earth have
committed Fornication with her.

to compass the Saints. sig:
To bring the Church into a narrow straight, being beset with the Devils Army
on every side. Reu. 20, 9. And they Compassed the Tents of the Saints about.

to Conquer sig:
To overcome the Enemies of God by Arrows of Pestilence (as some think) shot
out of the Bow of Gods wrath, but (as it is more reasonable to think) by the
glad tydinges and promises of the Gospel, shot (as Arrows) out of the tongues
of the Apostles, and other Ministers of the word (as out of a Bow,) whereby the
Nations were speedily subdued under Christ. Revel. 6, 2. He went forth
Conquering, that he might overcome.

to continue. sig:
To last, remain, or abide. Reu. 17, 10. He must Continue a little space.


to corrupt the earth. sig:
To defile and pollute men of earthly minds, both with bodily and spiritual
Adultery, whereinto the great Whore; to wit, the Romish Sinagogue has led
Nations and Kingdoms. Revel. 19, 2. He has Condemned the great Where, which
has corrupted the Earth with her Fornication. Of their bodily Fornication,
their Vaults and Priuies were witness, and their Temples of Spiritual.

to Count. sig:
To reckon, or to make a Computation of a number. Revel. 13, 18. Let him that
has wit, Count the number of the Beast.

C. R.
Crown. sig:
Victory, Triumph, and heavenly glory, which shall be given to faithful
Ministers at the end of their labors; as a Crown or reward. Reave. 3, 11.
Hold that which thou have, that no Man take thy Crown. Some do refer this
Crown, not to the reward of aeternall life, but to that honor mentioned in
verse 9. It may be both; the one a forerunner and pledge of the other.

2 A sign or token of Conquest and victory. Revel. 6, 2. And a Crown was
given unto him.

Crown of twelu stars upon her head. sig:
The bright, shining, and glorious Ministers of the Gospel; to wit, the twelve
Apostles cheefely, and other Apostolical men, which all received from that same
most bright Sun, the Fountain of all Divine Wisdom, the heavenly doctrine
(as their chief ornament and Crown) even as the Stars do borrow their light
from the Sun. Revel. 12, 1. And upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars.

Crucified sig:
Slain and put cruelly to death, either by the death of the Cross, or any
other kind of violent death. Revel. 11, 8. Where our Lord also was Crucified.
Christ our Lord was not slain at Rome (whereof this Text speaks, by the figure
of Sodom and Aegipt) otherwise then in his members, according to that which is
said. Acts 9, 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me.

C. U.
Cup. sig:
A portion or measure of Vengeance and Judgment allotted unto Romish Babylon,
by the severe Justice of God. Revel. 16, 19. To give unto her the Cup of Wine,
of the fierceness of his wrath.

Cup of gold sig:
The Title of the Catholic Church, of Peter's Chair, of Christ's Vicar, and
the whole external profession of Christian Religion, whereby, as by a fine
goodly Cup, both people and Princes of the World, have been entised to drink
up and draw in, most abominable filthy superstitions, Idolatry, and Heresies,
which the Romish Church offered unto them, in that golden Cup of fair goodly
Titles and shows. Reave. 17, 4. And had a Cup of Gold in her hand, full of
abominations.

Curse. sig:
Separation and casting forth from Heaven, or any other danger or evil
whatsoever; Spiritually or bodily. Revel. 22, 3. And there shall be no Curse
there.

D. A.
day smitten sig:
THE light of Divine truth, obscured and darkened by a most thick Cloud of
filthy ignorance, sent by the just judgment of God, to punish such as were
willingly blind at the shining forth of the Gospel. Reave. 8, 12. And the Day
was smitten. Some other, by the [ Day smitten] do understand, the taking away
of the gladness and joy which men had in the fruition, and inioying of the
light of the Gospel. These two senses, though they seem to differ, yet they
do after a sort meet in one: the latter, being as the effect; and the former
as the cause. For the darkning of the truth of God, must needs diminish the joy
of Gods people.

Days. sig:
A certain compass and space of time, appointed of God for certain purposes.
Revel. 10, 7. In the Days of the voices of the seventh Angel.

Day and night. sig:
Continually, or time without any end, or any ceasing; even for ever and ever.
Reave. 20, 10. And shall be tormented even Day and night, for evermore.

Day nor night. sig:
Never, at no time ceasing to praise God, but keeping on there in a perpetual
tenor. Reave. 4, ^8. And they ceased not Day nor night; saying, Holy, Holy, etc.

D. E.
Death. sig:
A most grievous plague, more speedily bringing Death then the other plagues
fore mentioned, and vexing by more sorts of killing then one. Reu. 6, 8. And
his Name that sat thereon, was Death. A Metonimie of the effect for the cause.
See the like. Reave. 18, 8. Death, being there put for the plague or Pestilence
happening in Rome, during the siedge thereof, as the cause of ensuing Death.

2 Persons, Men and Women, guilty of the sentence of the second Death; which
is, aeternall torment in Hell. Revel. 20, 14. Death and Hell shall be cast into
the Lake of Fire. Others, in a good sense, do expound it thus; after the
vocation of the Jews, there shall be no torment of Death and Hell, saving in
the burning Lake, where Death shall for ever feed upon the Reprobate: But the
first exposition is best in my judgment.

3 Dissolution of Soul from body, and separation of both from God for ever.
Reave. 21, 4. There shall be no more Death, nor crying, nor pain, etc.

second death sig:
The aeternall separation of Soul and Body, even of the whole Man, from the
glorious presence of God, to be delivered unto endless pain and torment in
Hell. Revel. 2, 11. He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second Death.
Reave. 20, 6. On such the second Death has no power.

to Deceive. sig:
To lead into error, by making men believe they see true Miracles and signs,
when they see only a show and false appearance; or by some signs, which be
not fained and false, to establish men's minds in false Doctrine and Idolatry;
therefore called by the Apostle. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 9. Lying wonders. Such are all the
wonders done in Popery. Reu. 13, 14. And Deceived them which dwell on the earth
by signs and wonders, which were permitted them to do.

to Deceive no more. sig:
Not to be able to seduce and mislead men so strongly and openly, as had been
suffered Satan to do, by that we read. Chap. 12. But now being fast Chained
up, and mightily by the power of Christ restrained, he had no might for a
thousand years so to prevail. Reu. 20, 3. He should Deceive the people no
more.

Deepnesse of Satan. sig:
Either the vain bragging, as of some, which boasted of great and plentiful
knowledge in the secrets and Mysteries of God, which yet in truth, deserved to
be called no better then the deepenesse of Satan; or else, the sleightes and
subtilties of Satan, which certain Men presumed alone to be privy too, and of
the manner how they were to be resisted; under which pretense, they permitted
the promiscuous and common use of Women in the Church of Thyatira, esteeming
all other Teachers as simple fellows, in comparison of themselves. This latter
exposition is very probable, but the former is more received. Revel. 2, 24.
Neither have known the Deepenesse of Satan as they speak.

not to deny Christ's name. sig:
Not to give place to the punishments and threatenings of Tyrants, as by the
fear thereof to be moved to forsake the truth. Revel. 3, 8. Thou have kept my
word, and have not Denied my Name.

Desolation sig:
Want, poverty, emptiness, and extremity of need. Reave. 18, 16. How are such
great Riches come to Desolation?

to Devour by fire. sig:
By some extraordinary judgment to destroy, as God did the Turkish Armies,
when he powered out his wrath from Heaven upon them, according to that which is
written. Revel. 16, 21. and Ezekiell 38, 19. Reave. 20, 9. Fire came down from
Heaven from God, and Devoured them.

to Devour the Enemy. sig:
By fervent Prayer, and publishing the judgments of God, to threaten and
procure Gods vengeance upon their heads, that maliciously resist the truth
spoken by his Witnesses. Revel. 11, 5. If any Man will hurt them, fire
proceeds out of their mouths to Devour their Enemies. In this, there is an
allusion unto that which was done by Moses. Numb. 16. And by Elias. 2 Kings 1.

to Devour her Child. sig:
To take out of the way and destroy, either by fraud or open face, all that
should spiritually be begotten of the Church, especially such as should stand
up, to maintain the Religion of Christ. Thus has Satan always attempted to
do, but especially, in the first age of the Church. Revel. 12, 4. The Dragon
stood before the Woman to Devour the Child.

Devil. sig:
An egregious and notorious Calumniatour, delighting exceedingly in accusing
and detracting others. Thus has Satan done from the beginning, accusing God
to man, of Envy. Genesis 3, 3, 4, And Men to God, of Hypocrisy. As Job. Chap. 1.
Hence he is called the Devil. Revel. 12, 9. That old Serpent called the
Devil. Reave. 20, 10.

D. O.
to Do his commandments. sig:
To endeavor obedience unto the voice of Christ, by keeping his praecepts, and
believing his promises, according to the measure of grace received. Revel. 22,
14. Blessed are they that Do his Commandments.

Doctrine of Balaam. sig:
That which the Nicholaitans taught (after the example of Balaam) touching the
common use of Women, and that all things offered to Idols without difference,
might lawfully be eaten. Revel. 2, 14. That maintain the Doctrine of Balaam.
See Balaam.

Dogs. sig:
Obstinate and impudent Sinners, which like Dogs bark against the truth.
Reu. 22, 15. Without shall be Dogs.

Door. sig:
The conscience and heart of Sinners, whereby Christ finds entrance into us.
Revelations 3, 20. He stands at the Door. According to some, [ Doore]
signifies all hindrances, inward and outward, to keep Christ from entering.
This is a good Interpretation, because our heart is the House, rather then the
Door.

2 An open way, mean, and passage, given of God to John the Evangelist, that
he might see and understand such deep and hidden secrets, so shut up in
Heaven, as no human capacity could ever have reached to perceive them. Revel.
4, 1. Behold, a Door was open in Heaven.

D. R.
Dragon. sig:
The Devil, for his terrible fierceness likened to a Dragon, being the
Prince of that Army, that maintains war against Christ. Revel. 12, 7.
Michaell fought against the Dragon. Some other, by the Dragon, understand
unrighteous and cruel Princes, assisted and strengthened by false Teachers,
Corruptors of the Truth, Heretics, etc. Al which, join in battle together
against the truth, and the sincere maintainers of it: but in Chapt. 20. Ver. 2.
the Dragon is there expounded, to be the Devil and Satan, who yet must work
by meet Instruments. All which, having one common work, and being but one
corporation with the Devil their Captain, are therefore, well comprehended
under one Name; as the whole company of faithful, bears the Name of Christ
their head. 1 Cor. 12.

drunk with the blood of the Saints. sig:
The blood of the Saints to be so abundantly shed by great Babylon (the
Mother of Whooredomes, the Romish Church) as she was wholely imbrued and
colored in blood. Re. 17, 6. I saw the Woman Drunk with the blood of the
Saints. The meaning is, that so great was her cruelty, as intemperate persons,
do not more greedily draw in the most Delicate Wine, then she shed the blood
of Gods people.

drunk with the wine of fornication. sig:
Such as are never satisfied with Idolatry (spiritual fornication) which they
Drink in (as men Drink in Wine.) Reu. 17, 2. The Inhabitants of the Earth are
Drunk with the Wine of Fornication.

D. W.
to Dwell on the earth. sig:
To be a Reprobate, not praedestinated to life aeternall, nor regenerate by
the Spirit, whom Antichrist shall have power to seduce and corrupt, and to
lead to destruction. Reave. 17, 8. They that Dwell on the Earth shall wonder.

to Dwell with the Saints. sig:
To have communion with the elect, and holy Men and Women, by a most perfect
and immediate fellowship, such as shall be in Heaven between God and his
people after the last judgment; whereas they are knit together now imperfectly,
and by means of the word and Sacrament. Revel. 21, 3. And he will Dwell with
them.

D. Y.
to Dye in the Lord. sig:
Either to suffer Death as the Martyrs do for the Lords cause, in defense of
his truth, against Antichrist; or to fall asleep in Christ, dying in his
Faith, as all the Saints do. Revelation 14, 13. The dead which Dye in the
Lord, are blessed henceforth.

E. A.
Eagle. sig:
EIther all Fowls and Birds (by a Sinecdoche of one principal Bird the Eagle,
named in stead of all) as being all, both great and little, governed by the
providence of god: or else the knowledge of great and high Mysteries,
represented fitly by the Eagles mounting aloft in the Air. Others, by the
Eagle understand,
John the Evangelist, who diued deepest into that high Mystery of the Divinity
of Christ, and his Incarnation. The middle signification is best, the last is
worst; because these words must be taken of Ministers, which should be after
this Vision, not of such as had been before (as Apostles were) as it is
written in the first verse of the fourth Chapte. Come and I will show the
things that must be done hereafter. Secondly, such as apply these four
beasts to the four Evangelists, do varry much. One says Mark is the Eagle,
as Aretas: other say, the Eagle signifies John. Some say John is figured by the
Lion, as Aretas: Others say Mark: And Augustine says Math. is the Lion. Re. 4,
7. The fourth beast an Eagle.

Ear. sig: pro
The outward Organ of the body; to wit, that sense which is the Instrument of
understanding.

2 The mind, wherewith we understand things, and attend to get more
understanding. Revel. 2, 7. He that has an Ear, etc.

to have ears sig:
To have the mind prepared, or the understanding opened, obediently to hear
and attend the things of God; such are called upon to mark, in the conclusion
of every Epistle. Others will but contemn the word. Re. 2, 11. Let him that
has an ear to hear.

Inhabitants or dwellers in the earth. sig:
Men and Women, whose Names are not written in Heaven in the Book of life;
Reprobate persons, which mind earthly things, and embrace false Religion for
filthy lucre sake. Thus also the word [ Earth] often signifies in this
Revelation, Men of Terrene and earthly minds. Reave. 12. 9, 12, 13, 16. Woe unto
the Inhabitants of the Earth. Also 8, 5. Fire cast into the Earth. Also verse
7. also Chap. 13, 8. also 16, 2. In all which places, by the Earth, and such as
dwell in it, is meant the wicked World, or the Church falsely (so called,)
consisting of earthly minded men, which are not chosen and sanctified of GOD,
to have their conversation in Heaven.

Earthquake. sig: pro
A most vehement shaking of the Earth, with horrible trembling. Revel. 6, 12.
Lo, there was a great Earthquake. This is a fearful judgment, whereof many
examples, in all Ages, and a forerunner of great mutations.

2 Great alterations and changes of Religion and civil governments throughout
the World, after the custom of the Scriptures, which use to call some notable
change, a shaking of the Earth. As Heb. 10, 26. And Psalm. 68, 9. The
delivering the Children out of Aegipt, is called the moving of the Earth. Reu.
16, 18. And there was a great Earthquake, such as was not since men were upon
the Earth. Meaning hereby, some extraordinary punishment inflicted upon the
ungodly World, by some great and unlooked for alteration of State.

to come up from the East. sig:
Christ Jesus our Lord, the Sun of righteousness, to arise in the doctrine
of the word, and to shine upon the Christian Churches, to expel from them
spiritual darkness, even when a whole rout of infernal Spirits are let loose
to fill the World with the darkness of Hell; to wit, with Ignorance,
Superstition, Idolatry, and Haeresie. Re. 7, 2. I saw another Angel come up
from the East. Thus the Scripture elsewhere, speaks of Christ; as in the
Song of Zachary. Luke 1. alluding unto the custom and manner of the Sun, which
from the East seems still to arise, and ascend till it come to the midst of
heaven: which some do Interpret of Constantine, who ascended out of the East
parts of the World, as Stories show, namely Eusebius; and by whom, as a maine
Instrument of God, the light of the Gospel did break forth, to the
scattering of the mists of errors, and the enlightening of the Church after
most darkesome times. This Exposition, differs herein from the former (which
is more commonly received) in pointing to the Minister, or Instrument; whereas
the former, points to the Author of such a mercy. In which case, both
significations agree well; because Author and Instrument be not contrary, but
subordinate one to the other.

East, west, North-gate sig:
The commodious situation of the Spiritual City, the Church (as some think)
or the Caelestial City, the Kingdom of Heaven (as others think) by
comparison to the convenient site of earthly Jerusalem, where the entrance by
Gates, disposed in all four quarters of the Wind, was very convenient for the
Comers unto it from all Coasts of the Country of Iudaea. See Ezekiel. 48, 30.
Reu. 21, 13. On the East part there were three Gates, etc.

to Eat the flesh of the Whore. sig:
To endeavor (out of a deep detestation) the utter ruin of Romish Dominion
and Popish Prelates; by cutting short their Reuennues, refusing their pardons,
forbidding appeals to Rome, and to go to Rome for consecration of Bishops,
casting down their superstitious buildings, and conferring their Demains and
Livings to better uses denying Peter pence; which all, and much more, has
already bin done in our Realm of England, and in some other Nations and free
Cities, which have called back the profits that went from amongst them, to seed
and enrich Rome. This is here called the eating of her Flesh. Revel. 17, 16.
They shall Eat her Flesh.

E. G.
Egypt. sig:
Rome, together with Romish jurisdiction, which in Saint John's time did reach
unto Jerusalem, where Pontius Pilate was Deputy to Caesar, the Emperor of
Rome; which is likened to Aegipt in respect of Idolatry, and the bondage
wherewith she held Gods people, most cruelly enthralled. Revel. 11, 8. Which
Spiritually is called Aegipt.

E. N.
Enemies. sig:
Wicked Men, Pope, Popelings, and other ungodly persons, which hated,
afflicted, and killed Gods Servants. Revel. 11, 12. And their Enemies see it.

to enter into the temple. sig:
To be able to have access to the Majesty of God, and to abide his glory.
Others take it, to mean thus much, to be kept from having approach unto the
Church of Christ here on Earth for a time, as yet the Jews are. Revel. 15, 8.
No Man was able to enter into the Temple. Here is an allusion to that which is
written. 1 Kings 8. 10, 11. Where it is said; The Cloud filled the house of
the Lord, so as the Priests could not stand to Minister.

E. U.
Euphrates. sig: pro
A River, called by that name, being both broad and deep, which did run along
by the great City* Babell, seated in Assiria, and was thereunto such a great
defense, as when Cirus and Darius, Kings of the Medes and Persians, would take
Babylon, they had this devise, to cut out great Ditches and Trenches, and so
let out the River above, before it came to the City, by which means the
Waters being made shallow and almost dried up, the Soldiers waded over, entered
the City, and surprised it.

2 All impedimentes, lets, and hindrances, whereby the passage unto Rome, the
mystical Babylon and Seat of Antichrist, was stopped up against the Kings
of the East, that they could not come at it to besiedge and subdue it; the
remoouing of these impediments; to wit, (the great Honor, glory, riches, and
strength of Rome) is here signified by the drying up of Euphrates. Revel. 16,
12. The sixth Angel powered out his Violl upon the great River Euphrates, and
the Waters thereof dried up.

Excellent. sig:
That which in his kind is best and most worthy. Revel. 18, 14.

Eye-salue. sig:
That spirit of light and of true wisdom, which does open and illuminate the
eyes of our Soul, being before utterly blind. Revel. 3, 18. And anoint thine
Eyes with Eye-salue, that thou may see. It is a speech, borrowed from a
Medicine, proper and peculiar to the curing of the eyes, called of Physicians
Collyrium.

F. A.
Face. sig:
THE bright countenance of Christ shining upon the faithful, to the exceeding
comfort and rejoicing of their hearts, expelling and driving from them
heaviness and sorrow. Revel. 1, 16. And his Face shone as the Sun in his
strength. Some other Divines, by the Face of Christ, do understand, the pure
worship of Christ (as it is commanded in his word) wherein he is to be seen
and known of his, as clearly and as plainly, as we may know any one by his
Face. And touching this interpretation, the very truth is, that the Scriptures
by the Face of God, do often signify his worship; therefore Caine being
separate from Gods public worship, is said to be hid from Gods Face. Gene. 4,
14. And to go out from the presence of the Lord. Ver. 16. Again, the
employing of our selves in Gods worship, is called in the Psalms, the seeking
of his Face. Psalm 27, 8. Psalm 156, 2.

2 The terrible dreadful presence of Christ, being through his might and
Majesty, very fearful to al things, and persons, save his own. Revel. 20, 11.
From whose Face fled away the Earth and Heaven.

Men's faces sig:
Dissembled humanity, counterfeit courtesy, when the countenance and behavior
is not terrible and fierce, nor words rough, but all in show amiable, and
fair, yet without all truth and sincerenesse, the sooner to allure and entize
men to fall in and join unto them, the Ministers of Antichrist. Religious Men
(as they are called) do excel in this kind of shaddowish humanity, being
most notorious flatterers for their own gain, and to draw mighty ones to
their side. Reu. 9, 7. Their Faces were like the Faces of men.

Face as the Sun. sig:
The exceeding great glory of Christ, being to such as know him by faith, the
same, for sweet and comfortable aspect to cheer their hearts in tribulations,
that the Sun is to the world after clouds, mists, and darkness. Revel. 10,
1. His Face was as the Sun.

to be faithful unto death. sig:
Constantly to keep and hold the Faith of the Gospel, not being driven from
Christ for any fear, or persecution, or death it self; seeing, such as are
courageous should be richly rewarded. Reu. 2, 10.

Is Fallen. sig:
Rome, and Romish, both City and Dominion, (as it stands now under the Pope
and his Mitred Bishops and Clergy) not only to be subject unto ruin and
destruction, but that most certainly it is to be pulled down, loosing by
little and little their riches, glory, strength, credit of Religion, and
holiness, which made them honored, followed and feared of Kings and Nations,
and for the undoubted truth hereof. Therefore (as if it were down and fallen
already) the Holy Ghost in the present time, says; It is Fallen; yea, doubleth
it (to note the certainty and greatness of the Fall) saying the second time,
It is Fallen. And because all men should take knowledge, believe, and mark the
better, Gods rare judgment upon Romish Babylon, therefore her Fall is
proclaimed by an Angel from Heaven, and with a mighty loud voice. The event of
which Prophecy, as in a good part we have seen already fulfilled, in the
decay of their religious Houses, of their reuennues, and falling of many Kings
and people from that Whorish Sinagogue, through the Doctrine of the Gospel: so
the full Fall draws on apace, God hasten it. Revel. 18, 2. Babylon is Fallen,
etc.

Fat things. sig:
Things of the best, most pleasurable and commodious to the flesh; as
Monasteries, Abbeys, goodly Dignities and promotions, which raised much pomp,
delight, and pleasure. Popery was full of such Fat things, the loss whereof,
shall make them mourn. Reave. 18, 14. All things which were Fat are departed.

F. E.
Fear of torments. sig:
The dread and horror which the friends of Rome shall conceive, for the
horrible vengeance which God in his appointed time shall take upon her, for her
Idolatry, luxury, and cruelty, so as they shall not dare come near to rescue
her, but shall keep aloof. Revel. 18, 15. They shall stand a far off for
Fear of her torment.

great Fear sig:
That terror and trembling of heart, which should possess the Enemies of
Christ, upon the restoring to life of the two dead and slain Witnesses, which
was fulfilled in the year of our Lord 1550. when God maruellously revived the
fainting Spirits of the Professors of his Name at Meydenb^row, who so
courageously defended the Doctriue of the former Prophets and Witnesses which
were slain, as the King of the Romans, the Emperor also, and the Fathers of
the Counsel of Trent, thorough great fear, conceived of their valor, and
forces of the godly professors of Christ, were driven to their heels; as is to
be seen in Sleyden. Reave. 11, 11. And great Fear shall come upon them who
see them. Others, refer this to the days of Calvin, Martyr, Bucer,
Wicklisse, Husse, etc. who so stoutly maintained that truth against
Antichrist, which others before (guided by the same Spirit, and were now dead)
had now done, as it caused the friends of Antichrist much to fear.

to fear his great name sig:
To worship God by a true Faith, serving him according to his word, and
studying to live godly. Revel. 11, 18. To them that Fear thy Name, small and
great. Some do restrain, those that Fear Gods Name, more specially, to the
Jews which should believe.

Fearful. sig:
Such timorous faint-hearted men (Emperors or Subjects) who for fear of them
which can kill the body, denied Christ before men. Reu. 21, 18. But
unbelievers, fearful, etc.

to fall before ones Feet. sig:
To prostrate the body before one, in sign of religious Divine worship, which
John of infirmity did to an Angel. Revel. 19, 10. And I Fell before his
Feet. It is a sign of submission to the true God alone. Revel. 5, 8. They
Fell down before the Lamb.

Fellow-seruant. sig:
One, who in common with the Prophets and Ministers, serves the same God, as
Angels do, especially in reporting the secrets of God unto his Prophets, which
might declare them to the Church. Revel. 19, 10. For I am thy Fellow-seruant,
etc.

Feet like fine Brass. sig:
The constancy of Christ, in an unwearied desire of providing for the good of
his Church: Also, his firm power, to tread down all the enemies thereof,
together with the most excellent purity and brightness of his ways. All this
is represented by the metal of Brass, Fine burning, etc. Revel. 1, 15. His
Feet like to Fine Brass, burning as in a furnace, etc. Other do interpret
these Feet of Brass, of the stablenesse of the Churches; Namely, of Smyrna
and Pergamus, firmly and with invincible constancy, abiding afflictions for
the Name of Christ, when they were not only, not hurt, but did shine more
brightly like Fine Brass; As if allusion herein were made, to those visions
of Ezekiell, chapter 1, 7. and of Daniell. Chapter 10, 6. both these Interpretations
may well stand together, for the perseverance of the Church in tribulations;
and their being more purifyed by their afflictions, may and does proceed from
Christ his invincible power, supporting them, and exceeding purity communicated
to them.

Feet like Bears feet. sig:
Continuance and stablenesse, joined with cruelty. For Bears Feet being
plain, flat and long, with broad Nails, do afford him more strength, and
enable him to more fierceness. This is applied to the Roman Empire, which
exceeded the Persians, Medes, Assyrians and Babylon, in rapacity and stability.
Reu. 13, 2. His Feet like Bears Feet.

F. I.
to Fight. sig:
To proclaim and make war, in the behalf of Antichrist, against Christ and
hi^ Church. Revel. 17, 14. These shall Fight with the Lamb.

to Fill double. sig:
To inflict and bring upon the great Whore; to wit, Rome, most grievous
calamity, with extreme sharpness and rigor, in recompense of all her
abominable* wickednesses. This must be done to Rome in the last laying of it
wast; and it is to be done, by those which were sometimes Citizens and
Subjects of Rome. Revel. 18, 6. In the Cup that ske has filled to you, fill
her double.

Filthiness. sig:
Sin and iniquity, either Original, or actual. Revel. 16, 15, Least he
walk nakedly, and men see his Filthiness. See the common Dictionary, in the
word [Filthinesse.]

to Finish their Testimony. sig:
To accomplish and perform the charge and function, delivered unto them, by
giving bold Testimony unto Christ and his Gospel. Revel. 11, 7. And after they
have Finished their Testimony, etc.

Fire of the Altar. sig:
A holy and constant profession of the truth, proceeding from the Spirit of
Christ, which is like a fire enflaming the hearts of the faithful, and
stirring up troubles among the wicked. Revel. 8, 5. He Filled it with Fire from
the Altar.

Fire and Brimstone. sig:
The most extreme and sharp torments wherewith the wicked, but especially the
Turk, the Roman Antichrist with their servants, shall be tormented in hell.
Revel. 20. 10. Was cast into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

burnt with Fire. sig:
Some extra ordinary and fearful Judgment, which shall so destroy Romish
Babylon, as things be burnt in a Fire. Revel. 18, 8. And he shall be burnt
with Fire.

flame of Fire. sig:
Most lightsome and piercing, entering into all things, even the most secret
and hidden, bringing darkness it self into light. Of this property be the
eyes of Christ. Revel. 19, 12. And his eyes were as a flame of Fire.

Fiery Habergions. sig:
The terrible cruelty and fierceness, both of the Horses, and such as sat
upon them, fighting for the wicked Religion of Mahomet under the Turk. Revel.
7, 19. Having Fiery Habergions.

Fire and Hayle mingled with blood. sig:
A spiritual Tempest and storm, of erros, lies, and strong delusions, casting
down, ouer-spreading and wasting grievously, men's souls, even as if Fire,
Blood, and Hayle, were all mingled together, and cast down unto the earth, to
beat down, corrupt, and wast the fruit thereof, Reu. 8, 7. There was Hail and
Fire minglea with blood.

Fire from heaven. sig:
Such lieng signs and wonders, as Antichrist and his Ministers should be
suffered to do; thereby to deceive the world with errors. See Math. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 12. Revel. 13, 13. He made Fire to come from Heaven.

Fire out of their mouth sig:
The Doctrine of the Gospel, devouring and consuming, as Fire, such as resist
and fight against it: for that word which is the savor of life to some, is the
savor of death to others. Revel. 11, 5. If any will hurt them, Fire proceeds
out of their mouth, and deuoureth their enemies.

Fire and smoke. sig:
The sower bitterness of Gods plagues, even unto choking, and strangling of
men, which is the property of smoke. Reu. 9, 17. Out of their mouths wpet
forth Fire and smoke.

First Beast. See Beast.

First Heaven. sig:
Heaven, as it is now under Vanity; Or as some think, the former good and pure
estate of the Church, giving place to a purer, or to the calling of the Jews.
Reuelat. 21, 1. First Heaven is passed away.

First love. sig:
Charity toward God, and toward our neighbor, which the Angel of the Church
of Fphesus did show forth at the beginning of his Ministry, very zealously
performing all good means, and using all duties, for the furthering Gods
glory, and the good of his flock. Revel. 2, 4 Because thou have left thy First
Love.

first works. sig:
Great diligence in preaching the word, and administering the censures of the
Church, for the preventing of crimes, orrecouery of such as be fallen. Reu. 2,
5. And do thy First works.

First voice. sig:
That Revelation which from heaven John did First receive, touching those
things which were to be done for the time to come. Revel. 4, 1. And the First
voice which I heard, was like a Trumpet.

fiuemonths sig:
A short space of time, a definit number, put for an indefinit, for the comfort
of the faithful, least they should imagine that this plague was to increase
without measure. Reu. 9, 5. That they should be vexed Five months. Others, by
Five months, do understand 150. years, reckoning every day for a year.
Others, by Five months, do think Five ages to be signified. But M. Bullenger,
does interpret the Five months, wherein these Locustes here spoken of should
be suffered to rage and vex men, of that whole space of time, whatsoever it
was, wherein it should continue, which yet is limited by a few months, for the
consolation of the Elect. This is the best exposition as I do Judge.

F. L.
Flame of Fire. See Fire.

Flesh of Kings, captains, etc. sig:
The Great dainties wherewith God will feed such as he calls to this Feast;
even al sorts of men which fight for Antichrist. See such a description, Ezekiel.
1, 39. 17, 18. Revel. 19, 18.

F. O.
form of the Locusts. sig:
The Figure, likeness and guise; to wit, such as be strong Horses, prepared to
battle: such are the Popish Clergy, strongly linked together with ready and
prepared minds, against all such as should any way mutter against the usurped
power of the Pope, and Sea of Rome. This has been, and is apparent enough,
though the fierce incursions of the Saracens have been more famous. Revel. 9,
7. And the Form of the Locustes, was like unto Horses prepared to battle.

fornication. sig:
All sorts of bodily uncleanness about generation; whether Whoredom, Adultery,
Rape, Incest, Buggery, or Fornication. For all these (as it is too well known)
were rife, and still be, in the kingdom of Antichrist. Revel. 9, 21. They
repented not of their Fornication.

Forehead. sig:
Openly, before men, in profession and practice. Revel. 17, 5. And in her
Forehead was a Name written.

four Angels bound. sig:
Administers of the wrath of God (in that number that is convenient) for the
slaughtering of the four quarters of the world; these Angels being restrained
before by the power of God, were now to be stirred up, and have the Bridle
given them licentiously to practice tyranny, as God had ordained. Romans 9, 14.
Loose the Four Angels which are bound.

Four corners of the Earth. sig:
The chief quarters and coasts of the World, which were occupied and possessed
by the four Angels, sent with Commission to stop the Four winds. Revel. 7, 1.
I saw Four Angels stand on the Four corners of the earth.

Four horns of the Altar sig:
The highest part or top of the Golden Altar of Incense, which stood before the
Veil, against the Arc of the Covenant, where solemn Prayers once a year were
made by the High Priest unto God, who heard and accepted them, through Christ,
represented by the Golden Altar; in whom, and by whom alone, the Oblation of
our Prayers are pleasing unto God. Revel. 9, 13. I heard a voice from the Four
horns of the Golden Altar.

Four winds. sig:
One, and the selfsame Wind, in Nature being diverse, according to the
Regions and Coasts from when they blow, as from East, West, etc.

2 The efficacy and secret mighty force of the Holy Spirit, which, by Christ
himself is compared unto wind. John 3, 8. The Wind blows whether it list;
so is every one borne of the Spirit. Revel. 7, 1. Holding the Four Winds of
the earth.

Fourth part of the earth. sig:
The fourth part of men, dwelling in earth, which by the just judgment of God,
were to be punished, for the contempt of the gospel; with those Four great
plagues, spoken of. Leuit. 26. and here again distinctly mentioned; to wit,
the Sword, Famine, Pestilence, and wild Beasts. Romans 6, 8. Power was given to
them over the Fourth part of the earth.

Foursquare sig:
That which is steady, of continuance, and profit, such is the true Church,
leaning upon Christ as foundation. Revel. 21, 16. And the earth lay
Fouresquare.

Four and twenty Elders. sig:
The Holy Catholic Church, even the whole Company of Gods elect; especially,
such as having now ended their warfare, do triumph in Heaven gloriously, every
one (as it were) sitting upon a Throne as a King; which Honor, the Elect do
attain unto, by and thorough Christ, who has made all the faithful, Kings
and Priests unto God. In the number of 24. there is an allusion unto that
distribution of Sacred Offices, and the Servants of the King, mentioned in the
1. Chron. 24, 25, 26, 27. Chapters. Revel. 4, 4. Upon the seats I saw Four and
twenty Elders sitting. Whereas some, by 24. Elders, understand the 12.
Prophets, and the 12. Apostles. It cannot stand with the scope of this Vision
here showed to John, which respects not any number or company which were past
and gone; but rather, which was to come, even the whole number of believing
Gentiles, which as Kings and Princes should Minister to God their Sovereign
King.

Found no more. sig:
To be no more at all, to be utterly rooted out, as if it had never been.
Revel. 18, 21, 22. And shall be Found no more.

Fountain of waters. sig:
The Springs, from whence do flow and issue Waters and Rivers, for the use of
men. This is the proper signification.

2 The Ministers of the Gospel, from whom (as Fountains and Springs) the
Doctrine of life does flow forth unto others, by a continual Flux or issue,
which were to be depraved and corrupted by Heresy and impiety. Revel. 8, 10.
And it fell into the third part of the Rivers, and into the Fountain of Waters.

foundation sig:
The Groundwork of a building. Revel. 21, 19 Foundation of the Wall of a
City.

from the Foundations of the world. sig:
Before the beginning of the world, even from al aeternity God chose certain
unto salvation, whose names are said to be written in the Book of life, and
the other not written. Revel. 17, 8. Whose Names are not written in the Book
of life, from the Foundation of the World. Ye have the like Phrase Reuelat. 13,
8. to note the aeternall Decree of God, touching the force and efficacy of his
Sons death.

F. R.
Freely. sig;
By the mere mercy of God, without any of our merit, and desert of our
endeavor and working at all. Reu. 21, 6. It shall be given him of the well of
life Freely.

Fruit every month. sig:
Such Fruit, as shall be continually new and Fresh. This Tree here spoken
of, being laden with Fruit all the year long. Revel. 22. 2. Bring Fruit
every month.

F. U.
Full of abomination sig:
Abounding in abominable and most filthy errors, Superstitions, Idolatries.
Revel. 17, 4. A Cup in her hand Full of abominations.

Full of names, etc. sig:
Most plentiful blasphemies, all being replenished with horrible impieties and
iniquities, Full of reproach unto God. Revel. 17, 3. Full of names of Blasphemy.

Full of eyes. sig:
One, most watchful and quicke-sighted, beholding and knowing, not only
manifest and open things, but even inward and hidden things, which be
furthest off from our knowledge. Revel. 4, 8. They were full of eyes within.
See ver. 6. Full of Eyes before and behind.

to fulfill the will and words of God. sig:
To execute and accomplish the decrees and Prophesies of God, both touching the
exalting of the great Whore; (to wit, Rome,) and touching her pulling down and
destruction. Revel. 17, 17. God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will,
and to do with our consent, etc.

to fulfill the wrath of God. sig:
In due time to execute the full punishment upon the great enemies of his
Church: which for the certainty of it, John utters in the time past, though
it were yet to come, when he wrote this Book of Apocalipse. Revel. 15, 1. For
by them is Fulfilled the wrath of God.

G. A.
Garment dipped in blood sig: pro
A Warlike and fierce attire, such as Warriors wear, which have overcome
their Enemies in battle, having their Garments sprinkled and stained with the
blood of the slain.

2 The vengeance, which Christ as King and Conqueror will take upon the Beast,
and upon the Kings of the Earth which take his part. This is represented by
this bloody Garment, wherein there is an alluding to that ancient figure in
Esaias. Chapt. 63. Where Christ is brought forth with his Garments dipped in
blood, having made slaughter of the Enemies of the Church. Fearful is the end
of Christ his Enemies. Revel. 19, 13. He was clothed with a Garment dipped in
blood. Some expound this Garment of Christ, his Human Nature, wherein by his
bloodshed he reconciled the elect to God. But the former signification agrees
best with the Text.

Garment down to the Feet. sig:
The perfect righteousness of Christ, imputed, wherewith his Spouse the Church
(for whose covering this Garment serves) is clothed from the Crown of the
head, to the Sole of the Feet. Re. 1, 13 He was clothed with a Garment down to
his feet. Some expound this of the purity and innocence of that Priest-hoode,
which Christ did exercise for his Church. Others, of the venerable Dignity and
Majesty of Christ, as King of his Church; and indeed, Kings did wear long
Robes in token of Majesty. Also, Priests by Gods appoiniment. But the first
Exposition I hold best, we often find Christ his imputed Justice, compared to a
Garment. Psalm. 32, 1. Math. 22, 12. And Reu. 16, 15.

to keep his Garments. sig:
To hold fast and preserve, without loss (and spot as much as may be) such
guiftes and graces (of righteousness and forgiveness of Sins by Faith) as
Christ gives to cover and deck the soul withal. Reu. 16, 15. Blessed is he
that watches and keeps his Garments.

to Gather together. sig:
To bring such as were far scattered asunder, into one place, either to make
War, or Arm them against the people of God. As Revel. 20, 8. Gather them
together to battle: Or else, to help to effect and work the worthy and most
deserved destruction of the Enemies of Gods people, which fight for the Beast,
and to take their part in the prey. Revel. 19, 17. Come and Gather together
your selves unto the Supper, etc.

G. E.
Gentiles. sig:
The people and Nations subject unto Romish Tyranny; and namely, such as were
out of all Regions gathered to the Counsel of Trent, who tryumphed over the
Scriptures, being now smothered and strangled (as it were) and the Interpreters
thereof also murdered. Reu. 11, 9. And they of the Gentiles shall see their
Corpse.

G. I.
to give glory to God. sig:
To glorify God, by renouncing Idols, superstitious vices, and errors, and to
turn to the Creator of the World, to confess and worship him after his
own will. This fruit, is known to have followed upon some great plague,
inflicted and sent to the Antichristian rout. Revel. 11, 13. The remnant were
sore feared, and gave glory to the God of heaven. Reu. 16, 9. And they repented
not to Give glory to God.

to Give. sig:
To recompense and reward good things to the godly, according to mercy: or out
of Justice, to render evil unto the ungodly. Revel. 22, 6. I will Give to,
etc. And Chap. 22, 12. To Give, etc.

G. L.
Glory, honor, etc. sig:
Praise increased, when the holiness, Majesty, and truth of God, is
acknowledged and much extolled. Revel. 4, 11. To receive glory, honor, and
power.

Glory of God. sig:
His glorious presence, testified by some visible sign like unto that. Exodus
40, 34, 35. Reave. 15, 8. And the Temple was full of the smoke of the Glory of
God. The presence of God in and with his Church, now under the Gospel, though
it be with more brightness of knowledge, and more plentiful graces then it
was under the Law; yet it is obscure, in respect of that Revelation which the
Saints shall enjoy in Heaven. With all, this smoke of Gods Glory in the
Temple, may import, that howsoever Gods glorious presence with his Church, now
be manifest enough; yet the wicked cannot see it, as if their eyesight were
darkened with smoke; which lastly may show forth his anger (usually signified
in Scripture by Smoke) against such Enemies.

2 The brightness of God (or Divine brightness) immediately communicated unto
the Saints in Heaven, who shall have so exceeding great light from the most
perfect presence of God, and Christ the Lamb, as they shall need, neither Sun,
Moon, or Star. Revel. 21, 23. For the Glory of God did light it. Also verse
11. Having the Glory of God; that is, most admirable, Divine, and Caelestiall
Glory. Some do so understand this, of a most glorious Divine brightness of
Gods presence, as withal, they restrain it to the Ages of the Church, which
shall be next before the end of the World. Both may be understood; the one, as
a forerunner and preparation to the other.

Glory and honor of Kings and Gentiles. sig:
All that Majesty, with those great and excellent things, which Kings and
people had, shall be laid down, at what time the glory of the heavenly City is
given them. Reave. 21, 24, 26. Shall bring their Glory and honor to it.

to Glorify her self. sig:
To exalt and lift up her self, her Doctrine and decrees, with great pride and
insolency, preferring her Traditions and ordinances, above Gods written word
and his sacred ordinances, as Ecclesiastical Rome has done. Ren. 18, 7.
Insomuch as she Glorified her self, etc.

to Glorify his Name. sig:
To set forth the Glory of Gods great Name, by acknowledging and praising his
Justice, in his vengeance upon the wicked, and his exceeding love and
benignity toward the Saints. Revel. 15, 4. Who would not fear thee, and
Glorify thy great Name.

G. N.
to Gnaw their toongs sig:
To take most grievously the fall of their pomp, Dignity, and authority; also,
furiously, for extreme sorrow, to bite their own tongues. Revel. 16, 10. And
they Gnawed their tongues for sorrow. Some expound this, of renouncing their
own proud words and writings. But the former signification is the better,

G. O.
^^ Go out no more. sig:
To remain for ever in the Church Triumphant, being most firmly joined unto
Christ, and immediately. Revel. 3, 12. And he shall Go no more out. He alludeth
unto. 1 Kings 7, 15. Some understand it, of the stablenesse of Gods Children in
the Church Militant; namely, of such faithful ones as were Members of the
Church at Philadelphia. But it may well bear both significations, for Christ's
true Members shall continue stead-fast in the Church Militant, till they be
translated into the Church tryumphant.

to go out of Babylon. sig:
To depart as far as may be, from all society and fellowshippe with the
Romish Sinagogue, in their Haeresies and Idolatries. Revel. 18, 4. Go out of
her my people, etc. This Exhortation and charge here in the Apocalipse, is like
to that in Jeremy* Cha. 51, 45. My people, Go out of the midst of her. This of
Jeremy was spoken, touching departing from Babylon in the East, when it was to
be destroyed; and that in the Revelation, concerns the ruin of Babylon in
the West, to forwarne the godly to avoid it, by departing away.

to go into destruction. sig:
To perish, finally, and utterly to be destroyed. Revel. 17, 11. And shall Go
into destruction.

god Almighty sig:
A God of infinite power. S^^ Almighty.

God of heaven. sig:
The true God, Creator of the whole World, whereof Heaven is a chief and
principal part. Revel. 11, 13. And gave Glory to the God of Heaven.

His God. sig:
A God, favorable unto him in Christ, even so far, as to make him
everlastingly happy. Reu. 21, 7. And I will be his God.

to be their God. sig:
To be joined unto God, by perfect and immediate fellowship, which shall be the
portion of the faithful in Heaven. Revel. 21, 3. And God himself shall be
their God with them.

before God sig:
In the presence of Christ, the Judge of the World, being God, equal to his
Father. Re. 20, 12. I saw the dead stand before God. 2 Cor. 5, 10.

Gog and Magog. sig:
All the secret and open enemies of Christ and his Church, both Papists and
Turks, banding themselves against the Gospel in these last times, since the
loosing of Satan. And thus much the very Names themselves import: for Gog,
signifies one covered; and Magog, signifies one uncovered. Reu. 20, 8. Even Gog
and Magog togather them to battle. For the better understanding this place,
we must have recourse to Ezekiell. Chapter 38, and 39. where under the Names
of Gog and Magog, are comprehended such Princes, as gathered great Armies to
fight against Israel, after they came from the Captivity of Babylon. This
Story, is here in the Revelation, applied to those Enemies, as Satan should
muster together against the Church of Christ, a little before his coming to
judgment. Other Authors, refer Gog and Magog, to the Turks and Persians,
and such Regions as are at their command. Certain it is, that a mighty Army
of such Heathenish people, stirred up by the Devil (being now let loose) is
meant here.

Golden Alter. sig:
Christ Jesus, who is both High Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar. This place
alludeth to Exodus 30, 3. Unto the Altar of Incense which was before the Uaile.
Some expound it of the select company of Saints, the first fruits of the
World. See Altar. Reave. 8, 3. To offer upon the Golden Altar.

Golden Censor. sig:
An Instrument (belonging to the holy of Holies) whereon the Priest did burn
sweet Incense before the Lord, which did figure the Mediation of Christ, in
which the Prayers of the Saints were acceptable. Revel. 8, 3. Having a Golden
Censor.

Golden Crown. sig:
Kingly Dignity and power, wherewith Christ himself, or the Executioner of
his judgments shall be endowed. Reu. 14, 14. Having on his head a Golden
Crown.

Golden reed sig:
An Instrument to measure withal (which being of Gold) do signify the Church,
measured, to be of a most excellent work, and of a worthy workmanship. Reu.
21, 15. And he had a Golden Reed to measure the City withal.

streets of pure Gold. sig:
All, even the meanest parts (as Streets in a City) of the Church, to be
most precious, beautiful, and glorious. Revel. 21, 21. And the street of the
City is pure Gold. Some hereby understand, that the actions of Gods Children,
shall be pure, holy, and unblameable.

everlasting Gospel. sig:
The gladsome tidings of everlasting reconciliation with God, through Faith, in
Christ alone, according to the eternal decree of God. Reave. 14, 6. Having an
everlasting Gospel. This gives a sore check to such, as charge the doctrine
of salvation by faith in Christ, with nouelty, slanderously calling it, a
yesterdaies Bird, a start-vp doctrine.

Golden Girdle. sig:
The diligence and readiness of Christ, in governing his Church, whose work
herein is precious and acceptable to God. Reu. 1, 13. Girt with a Golden
Girdle.

G. R.
Great Babylon. sig:
Rome, as it is now governed by the Pope, being like unto Babylon (a great
City in Chaldea) for tyrranny, pride, power, power, Idolatry, superstition,
impiety. Revel. 17, 5. That Great Babylon, Mother of Whoredom. This cannot be
meant of Heathenish Rome, under the Emperors, who did not thrust their Idolatry
upon other Nations and Kings, but left them every one to their religion:
neither had Heathenish impiety any such Mystery in it, as with show of piety,
it should deceive numbers, seeing Heathenish superstition was palpable and
execrable to all sorts of Christians; therefore this must signify Popish Rome,
which with her Great show of Religion and godly devotion, entised Kings and
people unto her way.

Great City sig. pro
Some large Town, environed with Walls, and inhabited by Citizens, joined
together by the band of some Laws, etc.

2 The whole jurisdiction and regiment of Antichrist, sitting at Rome, and
reigning with great tyranny over men's consciences, and raging cruelly against
the bodies of the Saints. Revel. 11, 8. Their Corpse shall lie in the Streets
of the Great City.

3 Whatsoever Domination, Power, and Government; either of Pope or Turk, or
which any enemy of the Church does enjoy and exercise against Christ and his
Church. Revel. 16, 19. And that great City was rent into three parts.

4 The Town and Jurisdiction of Rome as it was governed by the Emperors, which
had Empire and Rule even in John's time; over not people only, but Kings also,
Rome then, being the Queen of Nations, and Mistress of the world. Revel. 17, 18
The woman is that Great City.

5 The Holy Catholic Church, consisting of believing Gentiles and Jews,
called and joined unto the Communion of Saints in the latter end of the world.
Others understand it, of the Celestial Church. Revel. 21, 10. And showed me
that Great City.

Great day. sig:
That time, wherein Christ shall show his terrible vengeance and power, for the
destruction of such as hurt his Church, and for the deliverance of his people.
Revel. 6, 17. The Great day of his wrath is come.

2 The time, wherein the enemies of the Church shall assemble themselves
together, by the appointment of the mighty God, to endanger the safety of the
Church by bloody and cruel war. Revel. 16, 13. To gather them to the battle
of the Great day of God almighty.

wings of a great Eagle sig:
The swiftness which the Church used, in avoiding the malice and Tyrany of
Satan, that old Serpent, furiously pursuing her, while she was yet (as it
were) in her swathing Clouts. Revel. 12, 14. To the woman were given the wings
of a Great Eagle.

Great Earthquake. See Earthquake.

Great hail sig:
Stones of a marvelous greatness, sufficient not only to kill, but even to
crush and bruise men in pieces. Revel. 16, 21. A Great Hail.

Great and marvelous sig:
That which for the exceeding greatness and greeuousnesse of it, does deserve
to be wondered at, and admired. Revel. 15, 1. I saw another sign in heaven,
great and marvelous.

great white throne. sig:
A seat Royal, full of exceeding Majesty and greatness, such as Kings and
Judges use to sit in. Revel. 20, 11. And I saw a Great white Throne.

Great voice sig:
A voice or speech most plain, clear, and easy to be understood. Revel. 11,
12. After this, they heard a great voice. This was a commanding voice, from God
to man.

2 A voice of exceeding joy and gladness, arising and springing up in the
faithful, for the reformation of the Church, according to the word of God.
Revel. 11 15. There were Great voices in heaven, saying, etc. This is a voice
of Thanksgiving and praise, from men to God.

Great Whore. sig:
The City of Rome being become Ecclesiastical and Pontificiall, by the
Government of the Pope and his Cardinals. For she it is, that sits upon many
Waters, ruling over many nations, kingdoms and tongues, and has committed
spiritual fornication with the Kings of the earth, enticing (by marvelous
craft) both Princes and people to her Idolatry. Revel. 17, 1. Come and see the
damnation of the great Whore.

great wrath sig:
Plentiful indignation, anger, and fury, which the devil has conceived
against the church of Christ. Revel. 12 12. The Devil is come down unto you
full of great wrath.

Green Grass. sig:
The fruits of the earth, of all sorts by a Sinecdoche of the part for the
whole. Revel. 8, 7. And all Green grass was burnt up. Some do understand
this, spiritually, of the great famine and scarsity of the word, and of
Christians in show which have taken no sound root, but were (as Green grass)
soon scorched and signed with the heat of persecution.

G. V.
no Guile. sig:
Sincerity, truth, uprightness in Doctrine and conversation. Revel. 14, 5. In
whose mouth is found no Guile. Some understand this, of the most pure integrity
which believers have, not by perfection of their own Virtues, but by imputation
of Christ's perfect holiness. Both these significations may well stand
together. For the Saints themselves have an imperfect vprightnes, by infusion
of grace, and a perfect integrity from Christ, by imputation of his
righteousness.

H. A.
Habergions of Iron. sig:
THe well-fenced estate of Popish Clergy, Monks, Friars, etc. who were as
safe, as men armed with iron Habergions; and vain was all endeavor against
them, til the time of their kingdom was expyred, Revel. 9, 9. And they had
Habergions, like to Habergions of Iron.

Habitation of Devils. sig:
A place or house haunted by Devils, or wherein Devils were shut up as in a
prison. Revel. 18, 2. And is become the Habitation of Devils. Such a City now
is Rome, where their Doctrine, is the Doctrine of Devils, being flat contrary
to the written word; their worship, the worship of Devils, being but of Idols
and rotten bones; and their works, works of the Devil.

Half an hour. sig:
A very short space of time, wherein the Church should enjoy an happy rest,
after the open enemies thereof were bridled, and Constantine the great arose
out of the East. Revel. 8, 1. There was silence in heaven, about Half an hour.

Halleluia. sig:
Praise ye the Lord. It is an Haebrew voice or word, whereby the people of
God, were wont mutually to exhort and stir up one another joyfully to praise
God, for his vengeance against his and their enemies (as here against the great
whore) and for their merciful deliverance. Revel. 19, 1. Saying Halleluia. The
cause of receiving these Haebrew words in Scripture (as Osanna, Abba, Amen,
Alleluia, etc. It is, to be as signs and Tokens of that conjunction, which
believing Gentiles have, with the holy Nation of the Jews, to whom there is
but one God, and one Religion.

Harpes. sig: pro
An Instrument used in the Temple under the Law, whereon they praised God,
according to those times, when the Church was in her infancy.

2 Praise and Thanksgiving, offered up to God by the Church (represented by the
24. Elders) for the opening of the Book and the Seals thereof. Revel. 5, 8.
Having every one of them Harpes.

3 The sweet consent of Godly Teachers in Churches, making a pleasant
Harmony. Revel. 14, 2.

to Hate the Whore. sig:
To have (the Church of Rome degenerated) in execration, even with loathing; to
abhor her as a Whore, a Mother of Whoredom, which has bewitched the Kings
of the earth with her Golden Cup, the Butchery of Gods Saints, like to Sodom
and Egypt, therefore worthy to be Hated. Revel. 17, 16. They shall Hate the
Whore.

Hateful birds. sig: pro
Unclean and evil favored Fowls, such as haunt and frequent forsaken and
desolate places, being odious to all other Fowls, for their ravening; such be
the Vulture, the Crow, the Raven, the Owl, the Kite, etc.

2 Unclean and filthy men (such as the now Romish Synagogue does, and long
has abounded with) which live by Rapine and Iniquity; and in that regard are
hateful to all civil honest men, but most hateful to the Saints. Revel. 18,
2. Unclean and Hateful Birds.

H. E.
Heads. sig:
All Turkish Princes, Bassaes and Begles, together with their Emperor the
Grand-Sultan, all alike Instruments and Ministers of execrable cruelty and
fury, exercised both by themselves, and others under them. Reu. 9, 19. Having
Heads wherewith they hurt.

over his Head. sig:
Above him, or upon his head. Revel. 10, 1. The Rainbow was over his Head.

Heads of Lions. sig:
Most notable cruelty and fierceness, wherein the Turks do excel all other
Nations and people that ever were heard of, both Sarazins and Romans. Revel. 9,
17. The Heads of the horses, were as the heads of Lions. Hereby is noted unto
us, that to the stearnnesse of their countenance, they had added the strength
of their jaws, to express their singular inhumanity.

Heads seven. sig:
Seven hills, and seven Kings. Revel. 17, 9. Seven Heads, are seven hills;
They are also seven Kings.

to Heal the nations sig:
To preserve in health, and keep from all diseases, preventing them, and
remoouing all causes of them. Revel. 22, 2. And the Leaves to heal the Nations
with. This health, Christ does affoorde the souls of believers, imperfectly
here, and most perfectly in heaven.

to Hear. sig:
To bend the mind inwardly, to heed well, and mark the admonitions of the
Spirit in the word. Revel. 2, 7. Let him that has an Ear, Hear. Revel. 13,
9, Let him Hear; that is, let him be attentive.

2 To receive a thing, by the outward sense of hearing. Revel. 22, 18. I
protest to every one that Hears the word of this Prophecy.

Heat of the fire. sig:
Inward indignation, blind zeal, and bitterness of mind, together with
outward strife, contention, and debate, wherewith not only open enemies, but
Hypocrites should be vexed, for striving against the Sun and light of the
Gospel, shining upon their Consciences, and checking them. Reu. 16, 8. It was
given him to Torment men with heat of fire.

Heaven. sig:
The Church on earth, and the godly, which be the true members of it. Revel.
12, 12. Rejoice the Heavens, and ye that dwell therein. Also, Reuelat. 13. 6.
And them that dwell in Heaven. Revel. 6, 13 Stars of Heaven; that is, the
Ministers of the Church. The reason why the Church reformed here on earth, is
called [ Heaven,] is, because of that Heaven (which is the seat and habitation
of the Saints.) There is no more lively Image and Picture here in earth, then
the universal Company of Saints, which is the true militant Church of Christ.

Heaven departed. sig:
The whole face of the Church (and not the Ministers alone) to be covered with
that black darkness of calamity which is here threatened. Revel. 6, 14. And
the Heaven departed.

first heaven sig:
Heaven, as it is now subject to vanity and corruption. Revel. 21, 1. First
Heaven, etc.

midst of Heaven. sig: pro
The middle space or distance between heaven and earth.

2 An estate of a Church, somewhat purged from filthy corruption, yet not so
purified as it ought. Revel. 8, 13. Heard an Angel flying from the midst of
Heaven.

new Heavens. sig:
The Heavens, which are now under vanity and corruption, restored into a
perfect estate and liberty. Revel. 21, 1. I saw New Heavens. Some Interpreters,
which think this Chapter, to give (not a description of Heaven, the seat of
the blessed, showing what shall be the happiness of the Saints, after the
Resurrection and Judgment) but of the Church which shall be on earth, a little
before the Judgment, when the Jews shall be restored to the Communion of
Saints, do interpret New heavens, of the most pure way of worshipping God, and
the New Earth, to signifye a new people; in whose assemblies God will be
honored. Let the learned Judge which signification is fittest, for both are
true.

Heavens open. sig:
The great glory of Christ his holy Church, manifested and apparently showed to
the eyes of all. Revel. 19, 11. After I saw the Heavens opened.

Heaven to receive. sig;
The company of the godly, to leap for joy and gladness, because of the
victory and salvation which Christ gives them over their spiritual Enemies,
delivering and saving then from their fury. Reave* 18, 20. O Heaven, rejoice
over her.

Hell. sig:
The Grave, which is the companion of Death, or the estate which follows after
Death; both the Greek word signifies Grave, and the matter requires this
sense. For many Saints were to dye amongst others, but it were wickedness to
think the Saints to be devoured of the Hell of the damned. Revel. 6, 8. And
Hell followed after him. Reave. 20, 13. Death and Hell delivered up their Dead.
Also, verse 14. If here we should understand Hell for the place of the damned,
it would be absurd to say; That Hell was cast into the burning Lake, That were
to say; Hell was cast into Hell.

H. I.
high mountain. sig;
The eminency of the Christian Church (as it shall be restored before the
coming of Christ) excelling whatsoever dignity is in Earth: or the place and
stately Seat of the Church (more purely reformed) shadowed out by a Mountain.
Revel. 21, 10. And carried me to a great and hie Mountain. Herein, there is an
allusion unto that which is written. Esaias cha. 2, 2. In the last days, the
Mountain of the house of the Lord, etc. The meaning of both places is, that
the glory of the spouse of Christ, shall be revealed in the sight and face of
all the world; so as no hie Mountain shall be more eminent and conspicuous
or easy to be seen and be held.

H. O.
to Hold the Stars. sig:
To defend and uphold the Ministers of the Church, with special care of them,
and mighty power. Revel 2, 1. These things, says he, which holds the seven
Stars.

to Hold the four winds. sig:
To stop the course of the Gospel, and keeping back of the Heavenly
inspiration of the Holye-Ghost which goes with it. Revel, 7, 1. Holding the
four winds of the earth.

an Hold of foul spirits sig:
A prison or strait place, fast kept, where the Devils are pend and shut up,
at the pleasure of the Sovereign Judge of the world. Such a place shall Rome
(now fallen) be unto the Devils, which raigued once there; but now, that they
have none, so to abuse and deceive as before, it shall be as a prison, hell, or
place of torment to them. Revel. 18, 2. An Hold or Cage of foul Spirits.

Holy. sig:
A true believer, or Godly Christian, who is pertaker of Christ his Holiness,
by imputation; and has Holiness begun in his own soul, by the spirit of
sanctification, separating him from the world and study of worldly things, that
he may be dedicate unto God, both in body and soul to serve him. Revel. 20,
6* Blessed and Holy is he, which has part in the first Resurrection.

Holy Apostles. sig:
Not those twelve, which in an excellent degree were Holy, and laid the
foundation of the Christian Church after Christ his Ascension; but such godly
men, as shall execute the function of Teaching in the latter ages of the world;
who, because they are as dear and precious in Gods sight, as the old Apostles
and Prophets (though they be inferior in gifts) they are therefore called here
holy Apostles and Prophets, by the spirit, who provoke them by name to
rejoice, because the great Whore had more specially Hated and molested them.
Reuelat. 18, 20. Rejoice ye Holy Apostles and Prophets.

Holy City sig:
The Church, in singular manner renewed and purged in earth, a little before the
last day, as a type and sign of that most holy and glorious Church, which
shall be in heaven, after the last Judgment. Revel. 21, 2. And I saw that Holy
City. The same is meant by holy Jerusalem. verse 10.

Holy Jerusalem. sig;
The universal Church then being on earth, far more excellent and glorious, by
a more illustrious presence of God, then before was wont, as an Image of the
Caelestiall Church. Reave. 20, 10. That Holy Jerusalem.

to be Holy still. sig:
To increase, proceed, and persevere in a godly life. Revel. 22, 11. Let him be
Holy still.

Honey in the mouth. sig:
The sweetness of Divine truth, which in the study, finding out, and
knowledge of it, is delightful and joyous. Revel. 10, 9. But it shall be in
thy mouth sweet as Honey.

ten Horns sig:
Ten Kings. See ten Kings.

Horses. sig:
The Sarazens, likened to Horses for their swiftness and promptness to
battle. See Job. 39, 25. Revel. 9, 7. The form of the Locusts was like unto
Horses.

black Horse sig;
Famine, dearth, which is full of sorrow; therefore, fitly resembled by a
black color. Reave. 6, 5. I beheld, and lo a Black Horse.

to the Horses Bridles. sig:
Very deep, very far and wide: It is an excessive speech, noting the
greatness of the slaughter, as also the greatness of spoil, like to the
ouerflowing of Grapes pressed in a Wine Press, wherein Horses may swim even
to the Necks. Such abundance of spoil should arise by the fall of the
Clergy, and superstition of Rome. Reave. 14, 20. Blood came out of the
Wine-presses unto the Horses Bridles.

a pale horse. sig:
Pestilent diseases, whereof they that die do look pale. Revel. 6, 8. And
behold a pale Horse.

a red horse. sig:
Bloody Wars, Sword, and cruel slaughters, one killing another. Reave. 6, 4.
There came out another Horse which was red.

White horse sig:
The Ministry of the Gospel, being committed unto the Apostles, Evangelists,
and other teachers, who very speedily and swiftly (like an Horse) by the
doctrine of Christ (whose purity and integrity of it, is likened to White)
conquered the whole World to Christ. Revel. 6, 2. And lo, there was a White
Horse. Some, by this white Horse understand the Pestilence, by Darts whereof,
suddenly and mightily should be beaten down the rebellious World: But the
Scripture never uses to represent any doleful thing by the White color
(which figureth purity, joy, and gladness.) Again, under the other three
Horses, are shaddowed, judgments to fall upon the World for contempt of the
Gospel. Therefore, the Ministers of the Gospel, which speedily spread the
pure word of God in the time of Traianus the Emperor and his Successors, be
signified by the White Horse.

2 Christ, subduing and tryumphing swiftly and mightily by his word, not over
the profane Gentiles (as was figured in the Vision. Chapter 6, 2.) but over
the obstinate Jews, being now converted to God. Reuelati. 19, 11. And behold
a White Horse.

Hoasts. sig:
Armies, or companies of Warriors and Soldiers, prepared unto battle under
Anti-christes Banner. Re. 19, 19. I saw their Hoasts gathered together to make
battle.

Hoastes in Heaven. sig:
Christ's retinue or company of Saints, Citizens of his Church, here, being
holy, innumerable, royal, and pure. Revel. 14, 14. The Hoastes which were in
Heaven.

Hot. sig:
One, truly zealous, who with right affection, does vehemently love God and
godliness, abhorring, and not being able to abide, impiety, Idolatry, and
superstition; his fervent mind being like to hot Water, boiling, and ready to
bubble and play over. Reuela. 3, 15. I would thou were either cold or Hot.

Hour. sig:
Any moment of time, which comes suddenly upon men when they look not for
it. Reuelati. 3, 3. Thou shall not know what Hour I will come.

at an hour, at a day, etc. sig:
In a short time, and with speed, being ready to do mischief when the
determined time is come, and so to continue with out weariness, till their
appointed time is expired; which is thought will be, when the year of our Lord
shall be 1696. For so long the Name and tyranny of the Turks shall endure.
Reu. 9, 15. Which were prepared at an Hour, at a day, at a month, at a year.

Hour of Judgment. sig:
The certain time appointed of God, to bring some grievous vengeance on the
followers and friends of Antichrist, for their horrible impiety and
unrighteousness. This is called Revel. 10, 7. The finishing of the Mystery of
God. Reave. 14, 7. For now comes the Hour of his Judgment.

Hour of temptation. sig:
A time of trial, by great calamities, but very short, being to last but an
Hour (as it were.) Reu. 3, 10. I will keep thee in the Hour of tentation.
What is a great time in respect of aeternity?

an hundred forty four thousand. sig:
A certain number, which does arise just (of twelve times twelve thousand,)
to note unto us, not that the twelve Apostles did multiply their Talents every
one twelve times: but that the number of the elect and faithful amongst the
Jews, in the days of the Gospel, should be not only certain to God, but
such as might be measured and told of men; whereas the number of elect
Gentiles (howsoever certain to God, yet impossible to be numbered of us.) See
Verse 9. of this Chapter. Revel. 74. And there were sealed an hundred and forty
four thousand.

H. V.
Husband. sig:
Christ Jesus, which has by Faith espoused the Church unto himself, who
decketh, and spiritually trimmeth herself in this her Pilgrimage, that she may
be ready and prepared at that great and solemn Marriage day. Revel. 21, 2. As
a Bride trimmed for her Husband.

H. Y.
Hyacinth. sig:
Smoke, which is of color like to Hyacinth; to wit, Blew, and Red; one of the
Instruments of Turkish tyranny and cruelty, in killing men, which they shall
do, by Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone. Revel. 7, 17. Having fiery Habergions, of
Hyacinth and Brimstone.

I. A.
Iacinth. sig:
A Precious Stone, called a Iacinth. One of those Stones, whereof is made the
Gate, which signifies Christ, the only way and door unto life, by whom if any
enter, he shall be safe. Reave. 21, 20. The eleauenth a Iacinth.

Jasper stone. sig* pro
A most renowned and Noble Jewel, (being the Mother-Pearle) both for
Antiquity and Variety. For there be diverse sorts; one kind is here mentioned
like to Crystal, most clear, and of a thorough and most pure light, which
cannot be darkened and obscured by any other color.

2 The bright glory of GOD shining in his Church, being now more exactly purged
from all filth of man's inventions, then ever before. Revel. 21, 11. Her shining
was like to a Stone most precious, as a Jasper stone clear as Crystal.

3 The exceeding glory and Majesty which God has of himself, and in himself,
incommunicable to any Creature. Reu. 4, 3. And he that sat was to look upon
like a Jasper Stone. Some Interpretours think by these th^^^ pre^ious Stones;
Jasper, Sardine, and Emra^de the Mystery of three persons in one glorious
Godhead to be resembled, and in some sort opened. The Father, fountain of
Deity, shaddowed by the Jasper, (which is Matter gennuarum) most ancient, and of
greatest variety. The Son (who was made flesh for us) signified by the
Sardine, which is of a fleshy color; therefore called a Carneoll. The Spirit,
by the Rainbow or Emera^d, which ^is for beauty and pleasure, most
delightful; to note the inexpressible sweetness of the holy Spirit. Such
then is God; one in Essence, three in person.

Idolatour. sig:
One, who makes Images for religious use, or, who worshippeth the Image of
true GOD, or of false. Reu. 21, 8. And Idolatours.

I. E.
Iesabell. sig: pro
A Woman of that Name, Wife of Achab King of Israel, whom she drew on to most
horrible Idolatry; being one also, which withstood and persecuted the Lords
holy Prophets, and kept a Table for four hundred false Prophets; whereof she
was a Ringleader and a Captain, bearing herself as an open professed Enemy
of God and his truth.

2 A certain notorious evil Woman, (not named Iesabell) yet bearing her name
for likeness in qualities; being a Whore, a Witch, and Idolatrous; faining
herself to utter doctrine from the holy Ghost (as a Prophetess) yet she had
it from the Devil himself. Her Doctrine was the same, which before is called
Balaams Doctrine. See there. Revel. 2, 20. Thou suffer the Woman Iesabell,
which calls herself a Prophetess. What she was, it is not known, but some
notable filthy Woman, which seduceth and poisoneth many.

I. M.
Image of the Beast. sig:
Not a Picture, set up to represent one (such as Painters make for their gains
sake.) Neither any bodily Image, made to be worshipped and honored (as
corporal Images set up in the Churches for religious worship be.) But the
express and lively purtrature and representation, of that Honor, Kingdom,
Power, and Soueraignety, which the first beast; (to wit, the Roman Heathenish
Empire had,) and the second Beast; (to wit, Ecclesiastical Rome) fought to
revive. Revel. 13, 14. That they should make an Image of the Beast.

to give life to ye Image sig:
Not to cause an Image, by counterfeiting and craft, to move, and nod, and
speak, as if it were alive (though the Spirit does allude to such deuillish
drifts:) but with authority and power, to speak, command, and forbid, in all
Kingdoms, in such sort, as all were put to death that would not obey and
worship the Beast; (to wit, the Pope and Papacy) which spoke and affirm, that
even Kings and Emperors have from them whatsoever they have. Revel. 13, 15.
And it was given to him to give life to the Image of the *Beast, and that the
Image of the Beast should speak.

Images of silver, gold, etc. sig:
Pictures made of Gold and Silver, for religious use and Divine adoration,
whereof Papistry is full. Reu. 9, 2. That they should not worship Images of
Silver, Gold, etc.

to worship the Image of the beast. sig:
To adore and give Divine honor unto the Pope, (who bears the Image of the
Heathenish Emperor) by acknowledging a Divinity in him; which whosoever
refused to do, though they were Kings and Emperors, they lost, not only their
living and Dignity, but their head and life too; whereof the Ecclesiastical
Stories give plentiful proof. Revel. 13, 15. As many as would not worship the
beast should be killed. Reu. 16, 2.

I. N.
Enchantment. sig.
Spiritual Witchcraft, whereby Papists bewitched, both Kings and people,
that they should be deceived with such gross trumpery, and dote upon such a
foul Strumpet as Rome is. Reave. 18, 2. And with thine Enchantments were
deceived all Nations. Yet even the other kind of Witchcraft, condemned in
Moses Law, was much practiced in Rome, not by Monks and Friars only, but even
by some Popes, who were known Sorcerers, and Inchanters. Howsoever, this is
not meant here.

Inahbitants of the earth. sig:
Not such as do dwell and abide here on earth, for so the faithful do, but
such as mind earthly things, being reprobate and unregenerate Men. Revel.
12, 12. Woe be unto the Inhabitants of the Earth.

to say in her heart. sig:
To think with herself. Reave. 18, 7. Because she says in her heart, etc.
There is an inward speech conceived in the heart, as there is a speech outwardly
uttered with the mouth.

none in heaven, earth, etc. sig:
Neither Angel nor Man, good nor evil. Reave. 5, 3. But none in heaven nor in
Earth was able to open the Book.

In heaven. sig:
In the Church of Christ, and company of the Saints, with exceeding great
Harmony and consent praising Christ. Reu. 19, 1. I heard a great voice in
Heaven.

In the spirit sig:
One, ravished by the Spirit, as the old Prophets were. Reu. 17, 3.

I. V.
to Judge. sig:
To be revenged, to punish, or take punishment, according to the use of the
Haebrew tongue. See Genesis 15, 14. Deuteronomy. 32, 36. Reu. 16, 5. Because thou have
Judged these things.

2 To give an upright sentence upon our persons and works, being first laid
open. Reu. 20, 12. And the dead were Judged according to the things which were
written in the Books.

3 To moderate and govern his own, by framing and ordering their lives unto
Justice and righteousness. Reu. 19, 11. He Judges righteously. These words
are drawn from Psalm. 96, 10, 13. He shall Judge the people in righteousness.

Judgment in one hour sig:
A great and sudden vengeance, even the fall and ruin of Rome, which shall
come in a moment when it is not looked for. Revel. 18, 10, For in one hour is
thy Judgment come.

to manifest his Judgment. sig:
To open and make known, the Arguments and sure tokens of Divine Justice,
which may declare God unto the whole World, to be a most just Judge. Reave. 15,
4. For thy Judgments are manifested.

Judgments true and righteous. sig:
Gods deliverance of his Saints, which are true, because they are performed
according to his promises; and being fulfilled, by destroying his and their
Enemies, according to their merits. Hence they become righteous. Revel. 19, 2.
For true and righteous are his Judgments.

Just. sig:
One, extremely hating bloody cruel men, and punishing Romish Murderers,
with due and demerited punishment of death. Reu. 16, 5. Lord, thou art Just.

K. E.
to Keep his word,. sig:
TO abide in that duty which the word commands, and to believe that doctrine
which it teaches. Reave. 3, 10. Because thou have Kept the word of my patience.

to Keep, or deliver out of tentation sig:
Not wholly to free from trial, by affliction, but to bestow strength to abide
the combat and get the victory. Revel. 3, 10. I will Keep thee out of
temptation.

Key of David. sig:
All power and rule, in commanding, forbidding, delivering, and punishing,
loosing and binding: (by a Metaphor of Keys which were a sign of government)
to represent the Regal power of Christ, whereby he casts out of his Church,
or receives into it, as he thinks good. Revel. 3, 7. Which has the Key of
David, etc. These words are taken out of Esaias. Chap. 22. ver. 22. This power of
opening and shutting, he bestows on his sincere Ministers, who execute it;
especially in that part of Church-gouernment, whereby obstinate Sinners are
delivered to Satan; and truly-repentant ones, are restored to the Church.

Key of pit bottomless sig:
Power over the darkness of Hell, which is shut up in the the deepest and
innermost part or Gulf of Hell. Revel. 9, 1. To that Angel was given the Key
of the bottomless pit.

Keys of hell and death. sig:
The power of Christ, in delivering unto death and Hell such as have sinned.
Revel. 1, 18. I have the Key of Death and Hell. Fearful is this power,
whereby Christ is able to shut the Gate of glory upon such wicked men, as are
thrust into Hell, and to open the Gate to the godly, whereby they may enter
into life.

K. I.
to Kill with the sword. sig:
To put to any violent death; one kind of violent death being named to
signify the rest. Revel. 13, 9, 15. If any Kill with the Sword, he shall be
Killed with the Sword. ver. 15. Should be Killed.

King. sig:
Principally Satan (that great destroyer, who drives the whole World, both
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles into destruction) and under him Mahumet, whom
the Saracens obey as their King. Also the Pope (namely Boniface the fifth, and
Hildebrand) Bonifacius quintus Monachos assumit in suum Clerum.
whom religious Locustes; to wit, Monks and Friars, acknowledge as their King
and Founder, from whom they receive (as from their King) institution and
orders. Revel. 9, 11. Now they had a King set over them.

2 Such as rule, as Princes over their Subjects here in Earth, under whom (by
Sinecdoche) comprehend Emperors, Dukes, and all earthly principalities. Reu.
10, 11. Over Nations, and tongues, and many Kings. Reu. 19, 18. The flesh of
Kings.

3 Elect partakers of Christ his kingdom, in whom they conquer Sin, the
World, and Satan. Reave. 1, 6. Made us Kings to God.

Kings of the earth. sig:
The mighty men, which have greatest power here in the Earth, being
themselves wicked and earthly minded men, Vassals unto their own lusts, and
unto the lust and will of the Devil, Pope, or the false Prophet Mahumet.
Revel. 16, 14. And go to the Kings of the Earth. Revel. 18, 3. The Kings of
the Earth have committed Fornication with her. Also verse 9. and ver. 23. The
great men of the earth. Reu. 19 19. 6, 15.

2 Chief Christian Rulers, and godly Princes of the Gentiles, who shall bring
their whole power, and riches, and whatsoever glorious thing they have, to
amplify and beautify Gods Church, collected now out of Jews as well as
Gentiles. Re. 21, 29. The Kings of the earth shall bring their honor and glory
to it.

King of Kings. sig:
Christ Jesus, a Sovereign King, to whom all other Kings are but Subjects,
receiving their Kingdoms from him. Revel. 19, 16. King of Kings. This is a
Name of Supreme Majesty and government, written in Christ his Garment, to
manifest unto all, that he is above all: and in his Thigh, to signify, that
which may be thought lowest, least, and meanest in Christ (this most mighty
King) to be higher then the greatest height and dignity which is in earth. This
Sovereign Empire of Christ, (whereof we read. Dani. 2, 44, 45.) shall appear
far more gloriously in the latter ages of the church, by subduing his Enemies,
and protecting and purging his Church, then ever it did in former Ages.

King of Saints. sig:
God himself, to whom all the Saints yield obedience (as to their Sovereign
King.) Re. 15, 3. Just and true are thy ways o King of Saints. The Saints,
having the Almighty God for their king and Protector, and living according to
his most pure Laws (as good Subjects) they need not fear what Devils or men
do against them.

seven Kings. sig:
Seven sorts, degrees, or orders of government and rule, which are the
special marks, to discern what City that is, which is the Seat of that
Antichrist; namely, that, which together with seven Hills (a permanent mark,
which even in Saint John's time was to be seen) has also for a flitting mark,
seven forms and sorts of Regiments and Dominations; whereof, six had been
whilst John was alive; to wit. 1. of Kings. 2. of Consuls. 3. of Dictators.
Tacitus, in the beginning of his History, reckons fix, for the seventh was
not in his time.
4. of Decemuiri. 5. of Triumuiri, or Tribuni militum. These five were now
already past and abolished, before the time that Saint John lived. As it is
written; Five are fallen. Chapt. 17, ver. 10. The sixth was of Caesar's or
Emperors, who governed Rome when John wrote the Apocalipse; therefore he
says: One is. Verse 10. The seventh was of the Pope, of which he says in the
same verse; Another which is not come, etc. because the Pope reigned not in
Rome, til a good while after the death of S. John. Here then is a plain
description of Rome, to be the seat of the Beast, even of that great
Antichrist; no other City in the World* having seven Hills, and seven kinds
of government successively, saving the City of Rome. Reave. 17, 10. They are
also seven Kings. Such then are deceived, as do think, by these seven
Kings to be meant, either the first seven Kings, who in the beginning did
sway the Scepter in Rome, or the seven Electors of the Empire: The former were
past; and the latter remain all still. Or they, who restrain it to seven
several and singular persons; which should be, Galba, Otho, Uitellius,
Uespatianus, Titus, Domitianus, and Nerua: All which were Emperors of Rome,
between Nero and Traianus. But of all other, they most err, who interpret
these seven Kings (as Ribera the Jesuit, and Claudius, a Friar Carmelite of
Paris do) of seven ages of the World, whereof, five should be expired at the
first coming of our Lord, the sixth should last from thence to the coming of
Antichrist: And the seventh from thence to the end of the World. This to be
rejected as a Popish dream, fitting these seven heads to any City in the
World; whereas the holy Ghost purposed here, to give an evident note, to know
where the Throne of the Beast (that is, Antichrist) should be.

Kingdom of our God. sig:
The royal administration of God in the Church, (the tyranical enemies there
of being extinct, which delighted to glut themselves with the blood of the
Saints) and godly Kings set up, to govern his people in his ways. Revel.
12, 10. Now is come the Kingdom of our God.

not to receive a kingdom. sig:
To want, and to be without that Regal and princely power, which enableth men
to rule over kingdoms and people. Revel. 17, 12. Which yet have not received
the Kingdom.

Kingdoms of this world are Christ's. sig:
Heathenish Kings, converted to Christ, who after a sort, makes his royal
Majesty visible in such godly kings, framing their hearts so, as to cause them
to cast down their Crowns and Scepters at Christ's feet; and both in themselves
and their subjects, to study chiefly how to promote his glory. Thus Christ
reigned by Constantine the Great, and other godly Emperors of old time: and of
late, by sundry worthy and religious Princes, in Germany, England, Scotland,
Poland, and Denmark. Reave. 11, 15. The Kingdoms of this world are our Lords,
and his Christ's, who shall reign for evermore.

L. A.
Lake of fire burning. sig:
THE extreme torments of Hell, called before the second death: also,
destruction. Chapt. 17, 8. To be cast into this Lake, is to be adjudged to most
grievous damnation and pain there, by an unrecoverable sentence. This shall be
done, as a most just reward to Antichristian doctrine and tyranny, which shall
be most severely punnished without any hope of recovery, either for the Papacy
it self, or the men, which embraced it and fought so fiercely for it. For out
of Hell no redemption. Revel. 19, 20. These both were cast alive into a Lake of
fire burning, etc.

Lamb. sig.
Christ and his Church, humble, mean, and meek as a Lamb. Revel. 17, 14.
They shall fight against the Lamb.

Lambs marriage supper sig:
The participation and fellowship with Christ, in his heavenly joys and
bliss, when the Church (his Spouse) shall be fully blessed. Revel. 19, 9.
Called to the supper of the marriage of the Lamb. Some understand this, to
belong to the time of the calling of the Jews, which shall be before Christ his
coming to Judgment, in which calling, they shall not refuse upon vain
excuses, as at first. Math. 22. But at the first hearing (through the most
effectual grace of Christ) they shall very readily obey the doctrine of Faith,
wherein they shall jointly delight themselves, as men which sit together at a
great Supper, which being in the Evening and end of the day, does signify:
that this calling of the Jews, shall be in the Evening and end of the World,
as a forerunner and representation of the great Supper, which the Church and
Christ shall have together in Heaven. This Exposition is not rashly to be
rejected.

L. E.
to lead into Captivity. sig:
To expel, or drive out of ones Country, and to make them bondmen and slaves.
Revel. 13, 10. If any Lead into Captivity.

Leaves of the Tree. sig:
The most certain hope which the faithful have by Christ, of the glory to
come, which as a fruit, follows after a Christian hope, as fruit in the
season, does accompany and follow leaves and flowers. Revel. 22, 2. And the
Leaves of the Trees healed the Gentiles. Some understand this, of the graces
and merits of Christ, fully enjoyed (not in hope only) in heaven. Where,
seeing there shall be no difference between Jew and Gentile, nor any sores to
be healed; therefore, the former signification is better.

Length, as large as the breadth. sig:
The durable continuance of the Church of Christ, (meant by length:) Also the
comely beauty and form which it shall show (meant by the breadth) and the one
being as large as the other, signifies a wonderful proportion in the durance
and comeliness of the Church. Reu. 21, 16. The Length was as large as the
breadth.

Leopard. sig: pro
A certain beast (which some call the Cat of the Mount, others, a Libbard)
very full of spots, diversely colored; also, exceeding swift, subtle, and
fierce, being most furiously enraged against men, so as if it see but the
picture of a man on a Table, or Paper, it will most fiercely run against it to
tear it. Lastly, it is of such a sweet savor, as allureth all other beasts
unto it, by which means they are caught and devoured.

2 The Romish Bishop with his assistants, his Popish Clergy, even that
Antichrist consisting of that corporation; which very fitly is likened to a
Leopard, whose spots, represent the horrible filthiness Plinius refert de
Pardis seu pardali^, eorum odore solicitar^ quadrupedes ^unctos sed capitis
tor^^tate terreri; quam o^ (occultato ^^) reliqua d^lce^ine ^nuitato^
corripi^nt.
which sticks in that Romish Beast, so fast, as there is no more hope they
will change, then that a Leopard will forsake his spots. Also, that Romish
Rabble be most hateful to true Christian men, not being able to endure the
Image of such, (being adorers of all other Images:) They are swift to
mischief, using not more celerity in effecting cruelty, then they do subtilty
in contriuing it, entising many thousands into their snares, by a kind of
venerable Majesty, and counterfeit piety. Finally, they be ravenous as Bears,
proud, stout, and intollerably insolent, and savage with all, as Lions, having
(to be short) al such immanities and deformities in them alone, as Dan. 7, 4,
5, 6. Under several Beasts, severally applied to those three great Monarchies;
to wit, Assyrians, or Chaldees; Persians, or Medes and Greeks. Reu 1;. 2. This
Beast was like a Leopard, his Feet like a Bear, and his mouth was like the
Mouth of a Lion. Whereas some Interpretors understand this Leopard, of the
Roman Empire, civil, or become Christian, but tainted with corrupt error;
it does not so well agree, as to that Antichrist, to the corporation of the
Papacy, whereof the Bishop of Rome is head and chief, who has exercised, and
does practice cruelties of all sorts, wanting no kind of spiritual nor bodily
spots and filthiness.

L. I.
Lies. sig.
Error in doctrine, Haeresies, dissimulation in Religion, and counterfeit
manners. Revel. 22, 15. And such as love and make Lies.

Liars. sig:
Hypocrites, dissemblers, and all which delight in error and false doctrine.
Revel. 21, 8. And Liars.

Light of a Candle. sig.
The very least commodity of this life, as a Candle lighted in the night, which
the poorest will not be without. So great shall be the fall of that City,
wherein the least good thing shall be wanting, and cannot be had. Reu. 18, 23.
And the Light of a Candle shall shine no more in it.

to lighten the earth with his glory. sig:
To illuminate men's minds by the brightness of the pure word of God,
expelling darkness of ignorance, and damnable Haeresies, which had long
covered the face of the World. Revel. 18, 1. And he lightened the Earth with his
glory.

Lightnings sig:
The terrible and unavoidable punnishments, which God from Heaven shall send
upon the persecutours of his Church. Revel. 4, 5. Out of that Throne came
Lightnings.

linen pure and bright. sig:
Angelical purity, by the alone imputation of Christ his holiness to the
Saints, who be al Priests to God, all now entering into Gods Temple whereinto
the Leuitical Priests only were wont to come. Revel. 15, 6. Clothed in pure
and bright Linen. He alludeth herein, to the Clothing of the Priests under
the Law. Exodus 28, 42. Some understand by this pure Linen, the Equity and
Integrity of Gods judgment upon his Enemies. Iunius writes, that this kind of
Clothing with fine pure Linen, it was of old time, a sign of royal and
Priestlie Dignity.

to lift up the hand to heaven. sig:
To swear, or by oath to confirm a thing. It was a gesture of old, used by
such as did swear, and at this day is in use with the Aethiopians. Revel. 10,
5. He Lift up his hand to Heaven. Very often in the Old Testament, Lifting up
the hand is put, to signify swearing. Gene. 14, 22. Numb. 14, 30. Ezekiel. 20, 5.
To these Texts does John allude.

little book. sig:
A special Book, concerning the affairs of Gods Church, which is kept with
Christ the Redeemer, out of which he took this Apocalipse. Thus Master Iunius.
Revel. 10, 2. And he had in his hand a little Book open.

2 The holy Bible, which, though a large book considered by it self, yet if
it be compared with the huge volumes of Popish ordinances and decrees, it is
but little. Master Gifford takes it thus.

3 All Divine Mysteries, which to reveal, is in Christ's power. Claudius does
thus interpret it.

4 All consolatarie Scripture, or Evangelical promises, which are written in a
Book, that they might be extant to comfort Christians in all Ages; And because
they lead as directly, a ready way to the Throne of grace, (through one
Mediator*) and not by long windlesses and circuits; therefore it is said to be
a little Book. Master Fulke expoundes it thus.

5 An uncertain work, or Book, written very anciently, touching the estate
of latter times; affirming, that as the doctrine of grace was preached, first
to the Jews; then to the Greeks; and lastly, to the Latins: so contrariwise,
it should return, from Latins to the Greeks, and so back again to the
Haebrewes, whence it first came; says an unknown Author.

6 The slender, mean and weak knowledge of divine truth given to some one
certain Age, whereof John speaks. Master Bright-man takes it thus. Let godly
Readers take what sense of these they shall think meetest, I most incline to
Master Giffords Exposition. That the holy Bible, which long had been shut up
from the people, by the craft and malice of Antichrist, should at length be
clearly known to the people.

little season sig:
A short space of time, wherein the tyranny of Antichrist should last, which of
the learned, is accounted to be about 390. years, or four hundred. In which
time the Devil let loose, did deceive the World with abominable superstition,
Idolatry, wicked errors, and such strong delusions, as was wonderful. Reave.
20, 3. And afterward he must be loosed a little season.

Lively fountains. sig:
All good things (which the memory of former evils cannot diminish) and to be
led to these Fountains, signifies to be partakers of all those good things;
and that by the Lamb Christ, his Mediation only. Revel. 7, 17. And shall
lead them to the lively Fountains. These words, contain the cause of the
felicity described in the former verses. See John 7, ver. 33, 39. What is meant
by the Waters of Life. All spiritual good things, or graces of the spirit,
abundantly shed upon the thirsty Souls which desire them, and feel an
extreme need of them.

every living thing. sig:
All the worshippers of the Beast, as well the Clergy and Popish Teachers
(signified by the Sea) as the Laicall Papists (signified by the earth) one and
other shall be horribly slaughtered in the great day of Gods vengeance upon
them (for which, God is praised in the next verse) even as Fishes dyed in the
Sea, turned into blood in Aegipt, and men were driven to drink blood when the
fresh Waters were smitten. Revel. 16, 3. And every living thing dyed in the Sea.

L. O.
Locuste. sig:
The false Prophets, and all the worshippers of Mahomet in the East, arising
out of gross errors and ignorance, flying (as it were) by companies, and
feeding, not upon their own, but the things of others, like Locusts, till
they had in a manner, devoured, and miserably wasted, both the East Regions of
the World, and the West Countries of Europe. Also, by these Locustes, are
meant, especially the great swames of Popish Priests, Friars, Monks, and
Cardinals, even the whole Popish Hirarchie, and pontifical Clergy in the
West. These are fitly likened unto Locustes, which are a little and vile
vermin, springing (as some say) out of Smoke, flying together by great heaps
and swarms, eating up and destroying green things and fruits of the Earth,
being a very sloathfull and idle Creature: Even such for all the World, are
the Popish Clergymen. They are bred out of the Smoke and darkness of Hellish
ignorance; they are slow-bellies, living upon the Sweat of other men's brows:
whatsoever in any Region or Country is most pleasant, they draw it unto them,
and eat it up, laying wast all the green things in the Church, * ouerspreading
the Earth in great heaps and rablements, ( a) V^a secta minoritarum quadraginta
prouincias obtinebat Sabel. ^neid. 9. lib. 6. V^a haec Franciscanorum familia
totum terrarum orbem imple^it Polid^ Virgil. de Invent. lib. 7. cap. 4.
^tinging thousand thousands with their damnable devises, and devilish
inventions. Revel. 9, 3. And there came out of the Smoke Locusts, upon the
Earth, which have power, as the Scorpions of the Earth have power. The Popish
Writers themselves do acknowledge, by these Locusts, to be meant the Masters
of errors, Heretical Teachers, such as should give heed to spirits of error,
and doctrines of Devils, bringing in dangerous errors, and denying the Lord;
as Franciscus Claudius, a Carmelite Friar has expounded this place. The
Rhemists also upon this Text, confesses thus much in their Marginall Notes.

Long white Robes. See Robes.

to Loose. sig.
To give liberty and power, more fully to execute his rage and cruelty against
the truth, and professors of it, to vex them by all the means he can. Reu. 20,
3. He must be Loosed.

Lord of Lords. sig:
A Sovereign Lord, to whom belongs all power and Domination, over all
Emperors and Kings of the Earth. Reu. 17, 14. For he is the Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings.

strong Lord sig:
Christ Jesus, infinite in power, which no earthly or hellish power is able to
resist; therefore, howsoever it seem impossible, that Rome, being proped up
with the might and riches of many great friends and confederats, should be
destroyed; yet it must be so, sithence he that executes the judgment is so
strong a Lord. Reu. 18, 8. For be that condemns her is a strong Lord.

not to Love their lives. sig:
To prefer the truth of the Gospel and faith in Christ, before their own
lives; being prodigal, to spend even their blood, rather then by any torments
to be removed from the Gospel. Reu. 12, 11. And they Loved not their lives
unto death; that is, not their Lives more then Christ. A comparatiue speech,
like that in 1 Cor. 1, 17. Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach; that
is, rather, and more sent to Preach, then to Baptize.

to lust after. sig:
Wantonly, to desire things delicate and pleasant. Revel. 18, 14. That thy
Soul Lusted after.

M. A.
to Make al. sig:
TO compel and enforce every person, one and other, of what sex or condition
soever. Revel. 13, 16. He made all, both small and great.

2 To create things of nothing, as where it is said, Thou, O God, Made Heaven
and earth.

3 To restore and renew things decayed and corrupt. Revel. 21, 5. I will Make
all things new. Some understand this, of the restoring the Doctrine, worship,
and people of God, to more purity here in earth, before Christ his second
coming. Others, of the Renouation of the world at the last Judgment. Both
methinkes, may well be comprehended in these words [ of Making all new.]

to Make the Image of the beast. sig:
To have any Image in honor and great price, giving to it great glory and
respect. Revel. 13, 14. That they should Make the Image of the Beast. What this
Image signifies, See before in Image.

Measure of a Man. sig:
A description which shall be made by Godly Ministers, doing in all things
(which concern the administration of the Church) after the will of God, even
as the Angels do continually respect Gods pleasure. Revel. 21, 17. By the
measure of a Man; that is, of an Angel.

number of a Man. sig:
Not any particular individual man, living at such time as John wrote (as
Peter, Thomas, James) but a Kingdom, whose name may be sought out by a man;
and being found out of the Letters numerall, of that name, there will arise
just the number of six hundred sixty six. This Name is Latinus, as shall be
showed in the word [ Number.] Reu. 13, 18. It is the number of Man.

Many waters. sig:
Many people, Nations, Languages, over which the great Whore reigns. Revel.
17, 1. The great Whore sits upon Many waters. These Waters are expounded,
verse 15. The Waters are people, multitudes, Nations, and tongues. This proves
Rome to be the great Whore and Throne of the Beast; for does not that City sit
upon Many waters? Are not now Many Countries and Kingdoms subject to the
Bishop of Rome? And Many more have been subject to him heretofore.

Marriage of the Lamb. sig:
Most near and strait conjunction between Christ and his Church, to be
gathered out of believing Jews and Gentiles; not Gentiles alone. Revel. 19, 7.
The Marriage of the Lamb is come.

Marriage Supper. See Supper.

Mark of the beast. sig;
Some public sign or Token, whereby men were known to others, and did
profess themselves to be the servants of the Beast; as the Jews were severed
from other people, by the Mark of Circumcision, and Christians are Marked by
the sign of Baptism, whereby they are sealed to Christ. So the followers of
Antichrist are Markable and known by some external sign and Ceremony; but
what this Mark is, Divines do not all agree. Some, will have the Mark to be,
the profession to be a Member of the Latin Church, or Roman Church. Some, the
Chrisme in the Sacrament of Confirmation. Some say, the Mark to be all one
with the name of the Beast. But I like best of them, which think, that the
Beast had sundry Marks, wherewith he branded his worshippers; because we see
in the Text, the Mark, the Name of the Beast, and the Number of his name,
distinguished by the Holy Ghost. And it is known by experience, that some were
more nearly Marked to the Pope, and with a more special brand, then others
were. For, Emperors, Kings, and other great men of the earth, were obliged to
the Pope, by the Mark of a solemn oath, promising and b^ding themselves, to
be Distinct. 63. c. tibi domino.
Defenders and Protectors of the chief Bishop and holy Church of Rome: As did
the Emperor Otho, the first of that name, in the year of our Lord, 1442.
swear to Pope John the Clement libr 2. titul^ de Iure Iura^d^.
twelfth, that to his utmost power, he would extol him and the holy Church.
Now, the Popes Clergy of all sorts; as Cardinals, Friars, Monks, Nuns, etc.
they had their peculiar Mark, even the Ceremony of Popish Orders, called among
themselves, an Indelible Carracter. Furthermore, the Lay-Papists, profess
themselves to be the Popes vassals, Character indelebil^s.
Worshippers of him, as of their Spiritual Lord, by calling themselves after
his name [Catholicke Papists:] as their High Priest the Bishop of Rome, does
entitle himself the [Catholicke Bishop.] Finally, the Greek Church, which a
great while withstood the power of the Pope, at the length took upon them the
number of his name, when Michael Paleologus the Grecian Emperor, promised, for
himself and all his subjects, to submit himself and yield the Primacy to the
Latin Bishop, to be subject unto the Mother Church of Rome. Thus, of these
three signs, the Carracter or Mark of the beast, belongs to the Princes and
Clergy, as unto Sons; his name, unto the people and vulgar sort, as unto his
Slaves; and the number of his name unto the Graecians, as unto strangers.
Revel. 13, 17. That no man might buy or sell, save he that had the Mark, or
the name of the Beast, or the number of his Name.

to receive a Mark in the right hand and in the forhead sig:
To witness their submission unto Antichrist, by the Romish Beast, by
reserving unto him and his Sea (the Church of Rome) their prerogative in all
their actions, aduauncing and preferring it with their best might and force;
which is, to receive the Mark in the hand (the Instrument of steength and
action.) Also, publickely every where, professing their homage and subjection
to the holy-Apostolicke-Catholicke Sea of Rome (as they calit) which is, to
have the Mark of the Beast imprinted in the forehead. Revel. 13, 16. And he
made all to receive a Mark in the right hand, and in the forehead. Some
understand this, of having their forehead and hand signed with their Chrisme in
Confirmation; or with their greasy Ointment. Others, interpret it, of
maintaining Papisme, both secretly and openly. But the first Interpretation is
best.

Martyr faithful. sig:
A constant witnesse-bearer to the truth of God, which he is ready to give
Testimony unto, with loss of his life, and does it indeed when need is.
Revel. 2, 13. When Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain.

M. E.
a Measure of wheat. sig;
Such a portion of Bread as would serve a man for a day, if he eat Wheat; And
three measures of Barley, signifies, three men's Bread-Corne, if they would eat
Barly-bread. This great scarsitie of victuals, is threatened as a plague, for
contempt of the word. Revel. 6, 6. A Measure of Wheat for a penny.

to Measure the City. sig:
To describe accurately the Church of Christ. Revel. 21, 15. He had a Golden
Reed to Measure the City withal.

Measure of a man. See Man.

Merchants of the earth. sig: pro
Such as transport and import, for money, wares, and commidities by Shipping,
thereby to enrich themselves.

2 Such as make Merchandise and sale for filthy gain of men's souls, thorough
false Doctrine and Idolatry, and by this kind of ware, gain great glory and
wealth to themselves; therefore, are called the great men of the earth. Verse
23. See Verse 13. Such were the rich Cardinals, and other popish Prelates.
Revel. 18, 3. And the Merchants of the earth waxed rich, by the abundance of
her pleasures.

M. I.
Michaell with his Angels. sig:
Christ Jesus, that great and strong Prince and Captain of the host of God,
head of the Angels and of his Church. Reu. 12, 7. Michael and his Angels
fought, etc. Some by Michael, understand the faithful, who profess the mighty
God, and are assisted with the Angels, in the battle against Satan. Others
think, Constantine the Great, to be noted out by Michael, because of the
great strength wherewith he was endowed of Christ (who therefore lent his own
name) to fight his battles against Maxentius, and other cruel enemies of the
Christian church. We may well understand both him as Instrument, and Christ as
Captain and chief Commander, in this battle.

Midst of heaven.
See Heaven. Revel. 8, 13. Chap. 14, 6. Chapter 19, 17. All these places have one
meaning; to wit, of such as have avoided gross superstition, but not attained
such purity as is meet; and therefore hang in the middle, as ye would say,
between heaven and earth; purity and impurity.

to be in Midst of the throne, of 4. beasts, and of the Elders. sig:
The equality of Jesus Christ (that Lamb) with the Father, in the essence and
glory of the Godhead. Also, his special and gracious presence in the assembly
of faithful ones in the midst of his Church. Revel. 5, 6. And lo, in the
Midst of the Throne, and of the four Beasts, etc. stood a Lamb.

Midst of the 4. beasts sig.
The Company of the Saints, the Church of Christ, which only knows the
Counsel of God in his plagues which he sends upon the unthankful world,
for what causes they are sent, and what use is to be made of them. Revel. 6, 6.
And I heard a voice in the Midst of the four Beasts, say.

Mightily. sig:
Forcibly, with a strong voice, and great vehemence of speech, to stir up
attention, and to note the efficacy and unchangeable certainty of the things
denounced by this one Angel. Revel. 18, 2. And he cried out Mightily with a
loud voice.

Mingled with fire. sig:
The Doctrine of heavenly truth (clear as Crystal) colored with hot
contentions and strife (as it were with fire:) or (as others expound it)
accompanied with bitter persecutions, as sharp as fire. For it is usual in
Scripture, by the term of fire, to understand both seruent contention, As
Math. 10. Luke 12. and also, fierce tribulations, as in Job. 1. 1. Pet. 4, 12.
Reu. 15, 2. I saw a sea of glass Mingled with fire. Iunius, by mingling of
fire, understands the Treasures of Gods Judgments, to be dispensed at his
pleasure.

Mind having wisdom. sig:
The most wise Interpretation of that secret, touching the seven heads here
mentioned; or a mind endued with understanding from God, wisely to know and
mark this secret. Revel. 17, 19. Here is the Mind that has wisdom. It is
a Praeface to prepare attention, like to that Revel. 2. He that has ears to
hear, etc. So here; Attend to the interpretation of these things, in the
understanding whereof, there is wisdom.

a Mystery. sig;
A Mystical name, which is discerned and known only by wisdom. Thus Beda
says of it. Or a name, which is otherwise to be interpreted, then the show
and appearance of it is, deceiving men under the Title of Religion, S. Hierom,
thought this Mystical name, to be that inscription, Rome aeterna. As it was by
Heathens called Vrbe aeterna, and of Papists the aeternall rock of the church.
being most abominable indeed. Revel. 17, 5. And in her forehead a name
written: a Mystery. Some Interpreters think, that the name of the Woman is
called a Mystery, because her Description is set down in a figurative speech,
and not in plain terms: And this does well agree with the former
significations. They are deceived therefore, which read mystery with a great
Caracter, as if [ Mystery] were the name of a woman; whereas it shows out the
condition of her name, that it is secret and removed from common,
understanding, needing Interpretation.

the Mystery of God. sig:
The restoring of the Jews, by their calling to Christ, which being a thing
far from all thought and hope of men, is therefore called a Mystery. Revel.
10, 7. The Mystery of God shall be finished. Some, by this Mystery, understand
the Doctrine of the last Judgment, touching the rewarding of good and evil.
Others, the whole Doctrine of the glorious Redemption of the Church of Christ;
which things, because none comprehend, so as they shall be, are therefore
called Mysteries. But I prefer the first signification.

the Mystery of ye woman sig:
That which is secret or hid from our understanding (through our negligence and
unskillfulness) concerning the Woman and the Beast; that is, Rome; which God
promised here to open and declare unto John, and by him to the Church. Revel.
17, 7. I will show thee the Mystery of the woman, and of the beast that
bears her. No marvel then, if so many be ignorant still of the Woman and
the Beast, seeing her name is Mystical; and what thanks owe the faithful to
God, for deelaring this Mystery of the name unto them, to keep them from being
deluded to their destructions, as thousand thousands be.

M. O.
Moon. sig. pro
That creature or great light, which gives shine by night. Revel. 21, 23.
Neither of the Moon to shine in it.

2 The vanity of all earthly things, subject to changeableness; as Riches,
Honors, etc. which the members of the primitive Apostolical Church despised,
being far from that ambition and lust after Honors and wealth, which has
since entered in, and raged. Revel. 12, 2. And the Moon was under her feet. It
is a Godly and Learned exposition, by the Moon, to understand that light of
truth and doctrine, concerning manners, received from the Word (as the Moon
borrows her light of the Sun) after which, the members of the first
Apostolical Churches directed their feet and steps; being for worship,
government, life, and manners, both uniform, and (as yet) undefiled with human
inventions. But the first signification is godly, and also more usual.

song of Moses the Servant of god. sig:
Such a song of rejoicing and triumph, for delivery out of the cruel Jaws of
Antichrist; as Moses (who for honor-sake, by an excellency, is called the
servant of God. Deuteronomy. 34, 10.) did sing with the Israelites, after their
deliverance from the Egyptians. Exodus 15. There being no less power and
goodness of God, showed forth in saving from Antichrist, then from Pharaoh.
Revel. 15, 3. And they sung the song of Moses the servant of God.

Mother of whoredoms etc. sig:
One, that is the Mistress and Teacher of Idolatry, (which is spiritual
fornication.) As also the Mother and the Nursse of wickedness of all sorts and
kinds. Such an one is Rome, the Synagogue of Antichrist, boasting herself to
be the Mother Church, the Pillar of truth; out of which, there is no
salvation; yet indeed, approues her (...) to be that Stepmother of all those
superstitions and impieties, which of long time have been derived and spread
abroad into the Western and Eastern Churches, under the appearance of Piety,
and the title of the holy Church. Revel. 17, 5. That great Babylon, that Mother
of Whoredoms, and the abominations of the earth. This is that Mystical name,
which John in a Vision saw, written in the forehead of the great Whore: and it
is of great force, to serve us how to find out who that Antichrist is; even
such an one, as does not openly and professeoly, but secretly and in a Mystery
fight against Christ, his truth, al Religion and honesty: which how it does
fit Papifme, one with half an eye may easily see. For Heathenish Rome, which
Papists would have to be this [ Mother,] did not put her superstitions upon
other Cities and Countries which they conquered, but left them to their own
Religion, neither were their superstitions any Mysteries.

to see no Mourning. sig:
To taste or feel any want or calamity, which may cause men to mourn and to
grieve. Reu. 18, 7. I shall see no Mourning.

Mount Sion. sig:
The true Church of Christ in this world, prefigured by Mount- Sion, and like
to it for firm stablenesse, being unremovable and invincible by any assaults
of afflictions. Revel. 14, 8. A Lamb stood upon Mount-Sion.

Mountain burning with fire. sig:
Proud Tyrants and arrogant Princes, swollen with ambition and lust of honor,
like Mountains: also eagerly and fervently studying and striving (as men set on
fire with desire of Hic meus ardens preiectus in mare cum de dignitate and
honor dimi cabatur inter ecclesiastico^ tanquam pro a^^ and locis De quare
vide Canones Ni^ae^i Con^tlij quibus de primatu statutum est.
Dignities) forgetting and maintaining their pomp and promotion. Reu. 8, 8. A
great Mountain burning with Fire was cast into the Sea. It is usual in
Scripture by Mountains, to describe mighty Kingdoms, Empires, and
Principalities; Also haughty and high-minded Princes, as in I say 2, 14, 15. To
what kingdom does this so fitly agree, as to that proud kingdom of
Antichrist, aduauncing it self, not only over earthly Emperors, Kings, and
their Empires and Kingdoms, but even above Heaven.

2 Great and strong hills, which by Gods horrible Indgement shall be so
swallowed up, as they shall be seen no more, or be any more extant. Revel. 16,
20. And the Mountains were not found.

Mountains sig: seven. Names of the 7. Mountains. 1 Palatinus 2 Quirinalis 3
Auentinus. 4 Coeluis. 5 Viminalis 6 Aesculinus 7 Ianicularis Lege virg. Geor.
2. Ovid lib. 2. Ovid. Tristum Eleg. 4. lib. 3. eleg. 7. Roman vrbs vbi tipa
manent capita. Antichri. gone seeds Antichristi.
Those seven Hills, on which Old Rome was built, having just seven
Mountains, neither more nor less; whose Names are known to this day, when
that City was called, Septiceps and Septicollis Orbis, and by the Greeks
(...). These hills are inhabited to this day, and never a one of them, but
either a Monastery, or a Church, or some other Religious house stands upon it.
Therefore the Papists cannot avoid, but the seat of Antichrist, of the Beast
and the Whore, is at Rome; there being no City in the world, that was known to
be situated upon seven hills when the Apostles wrote this Book, neither more
nor fewer. Revel. 17, 9. The seven Heads are seven Mountains. In S. John's
time, of all Cities in the world, Rome only was built on seven hills; it only
reigned over the Kings of the earth; it only had seven forms of government;
it only compelled other people to their Idolatry; and such a City must be the
seat of the Whore.

Mouth of the Dragon sig:
The Commission, authority, and commandments of the Devil and his
administers (called here the Beast and the false Prophet.) Reu. 16, 13. I saw
three unclean Spirits, like Frogs, come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and
out of the Mouth of the Beast, and out of the Mouth of the false Prophet.

2 Railing slanderous speeches, and wicked blasphemous calumniations and
reproaches, wherewith the devil (as with a flood) endeavored to bring the
Christian Church into great hatred and danger among worldly men. Reu. 6, 12,
and 16 Which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth.

A Mouth was given him. sig:
Power of blaspheming, with reproachful words, was by Gods just judgment
permitted unto him, for the just punishment of the wicked world. Reu. 13, 5. A
Mouth was given him to speak great things and blasphemies.

to open his Mouth to blaspheme. sig:
To spread abroad and cast out by speeches, execrable contumelies and
reproaches against the Divine Majesty, his religion, his true Church in which
he dwells by his spirit, and against all the true members of his Church, the
Saints of God. Reu. 13, 6. Sixtus Papa se cum spiritu Sancto aequat. Tom. 1. in
Purgat: Sixti.
And he opened his Mouth against God, to blaspheme his name, his Tabernacle,
and them that dwell in heaven. How justly may this be verified upon the Pope
and his creatures, boasting himself as God, reproching the Christian Church as
a Couenticle of heretics, and with their vnpure Mouths, traducing all for
Haereticall, Scismaticall, and most wicked men, which separate themselves from
their Synagogue. A plentiful proof of these blasphemies, is extant, in one
Bull of Leo the tenth against Luther.

Out of his Mouth went a sword. sig:
The Doctrine of the word of God, which is (as a spiritual sword) and
proceeds from the mouth of Christ the son of God, subduing al people to the
obedience of his Ordinances and Laws. Revel. 19, 5. And out of his Mouth went
there a sharp sword, that with it he might smite the Heathen.

N. A.
Naked. sig:
ONE, exposed and laid open to shame, reproach, and contempt. For Garments are
used to hide shame. Reave. 3, 17. Poor, Naked.

Name. sig:
Opinion, report, or account of Men. Revel. 3, 1. Thou have a Name to live;
that is, thou art thought to live to God, in the opinion and account of men,
but art not indeed what thou seem to be.

2 The truth of the Gospel, or Faith of Christ. Revel. 3, 8. Thou have not
denied my Name.

3 God himself, who is become (through Christ) a Father of the faithful.
Revel. 14, 1. Having his Fathers Name written in his Forehead. Revelation. 22,
4.

4 Persons of the elect, and Reprobates; Men and Women, so perfectly known to
God, as Soldiers to their Captain, who has mustered their Names in a Book.
Revel. 13, 8. Whose Names are not written in the Book of life.

Name of Blasphemy sig:
The arrogant boasting, and Titles full of reproach, to God, to Christ, and the
Christian Church. For example: In that the Pope is entitled, to be neither God
nor Man, but one between both. Also, our Lord God, the Vicar of Christ upon
earth; the universal Bishop; the Head of the universal Church. Also, the
particular Church of Rome, which vanteth herself to be the foundation of other
Churches; the Mother Church, from whence Peter's Chair cannot be sundred, that
she cannot err; and all to be Heretics, who in Articles of the Faith and
Sacraments, thinks otherwise then she does: besides innumerable more
blasphemous names which that Beast bears in his Forehead. Revel. 13, 1. And
upon his heads the Name of Blasphemy.

N. E.
New Jerusalem. sig:
That City, wherein the Saints shall live blessedly after this life. Reave. 2,
12. and Reu. 21, 2. Some, by New Jerusalem, understand a Church in earth,
toward the end, which for purity of doctrine and manners, shall exceed all
Churches, that ever were, being a lively Image of Caelestiall purity.

New name sig:
The Title and Name of the Children of God, by grace of Adoption. Reave. 2, 17.
In the Stone a New name written.

2 The society of that glorious Kingdom, which Christ shall in this World
comm^icate to his, as far as they be capable of it. Revel. 3, 12. I will put
upon him my New Name.

Name of my God. sig:
A manifestation to the World, that God will take his chosen ones under his
special protection. Revel. 3, 12. I will write upon him the Name of my God.

N. O.
Noise of thunder. sig:
A mighty and glorious voice, like to the noise of Thunder. Revel. 6, 1. As it
had been the noise of Thunder.

N. U.
Number of a man. sig:
Such a number as a Man may be able to find out, not infinite and
unsearchable, but which the wit of a Man, endowed with wisdom, may find.
Revel. 13, 18. For it is the Number of a Man. Others interpret, the Number of a
Man, to be such a Name of a Man (as by the Numerall Letters, whereof this
Number of six hundred sixty six will arise) yet meaning, not the proper Name
of any particular person, but Nomen Gentile (as it is called of Grammarians)
the Name of Nation or Country, passing from the head to the rest of the people.

Number is six hundred sixty six. sig:
A Name, consisting of so many, and such Numerall Letters, as being counted
and summed up, do make the Number of 666. which is the Number of the Beast:
both the first Beast; (to wit, the Roman Emperor and Empire) and the second
Beast; (to wit, the Romain Pope and Papacy) for under the Beast is comprehended
no one particular Man, but an order and succession of Men, even a Kingdom.
Irenaeus, who lived near the Apostles time (having seen and heard Polycarpus,
who was one of the Disciples of Saint John, the Pen man of the Apocalipse) does
report, that before this time, this Name (out of whose Numerall Letters, should
arise 666.) was (...), and he himself judged it likely to be so indeed;
because (says he) the most true Kingdom has that name. For they be Latins
which now do reign, as he writes. Lib. 5. Cap. 29. Aduersus Haereses. (...)
nomen sex centorum sexaginta sex Numerum continet. Now the Pope is head of the
Latin Church, as the Emperor was of the Latin Empire. Therefore, if the
Emperor with his Empire (by Irenaeus indgement) might be called Latinos; much
more the Popedom and the Pope; who is so much a Latin, as he will allow no
exercise of Religion but in Latin. He compels all to pray in Latin. He has
the Bible of the Latin Translation, which he prefers before the Bible written
in the Haebrew and Greek tongues, by the Prophets and Apostles. His Laws,
decrees, and people, are all Latin. His Church Latin, and all condemned as
Schismatics which will not be subject to his Latin Law, and his Latin
Faith. The Greeks being odious to Papists, until they consented to submit
themselves to the Latin Bishop, as Primate and chief; and his Latin service.
May not then the Name Latin^s, well agree to Popish Hierarchy, and better then^
the Heathenish Empire? And that this should b^ the very Name (howsoever the
judgments of m^ much differ, and the Name may be fitted to oth^ words) which
has the Number of a Man, conta^ning 666* is apparent by these presumptions.
First* because the Name here spoken of, was such, as wise men might find, and
it was a Name which then might be found, when Saint John wrote (else in vain
had an Exhortation been to study and search it, had there been no hope to
find it.) Also, by Irenaeus himself, and before him, it was received by common
consent. Lastly, the Greek Letters of this Name being Numbered, amounts to
666. as may be perceived in this which follows.

His Number is six hundereth, threescore and six. Reu. 13, 18. l 30 666. Does
not this direct us by the finger, to the seat of Antichrist? a 1 t 300 e 5 i 10
n 50 o 70 200

O. D.
Odours. sig:
THe merits of Christ our Mediator, which (as sweet odours) make the Prayers
of the Saints plea^ing to God. Reave. 8, 3. Much Odours was given him.

O. L.
Old serpent sig:
The Devil or Satan, which thorough long experience (ever since the Creation
of Man) is wonderful deep in manifold crafts and subtilties. Reu. 12, 9. The
D^^ill that Old Serpent.

O. N.
One of the Angels. sig:
That Angel or Messenger of God, which was last of the seven Angels, that had
the seven viols, mentioned before. Chap. 15. Reu. 21, 9. And there came unto
me One of the seven Angels.

one consent sig:
The agreement of mind, and of affections, which shall be (by Gods spirit)
wrought in such Kings, as shall execute his deep decreed judgment upon the
Whore (the Romish Hierarchy) for her utter ruin and wasting. The Kings did at
the first, (...) more certainly consent for the exalting, then at length,
their Successors shall agree to pull her down. Revel. 17, 17. To do with One
consent* etc.

at One day sig:
Suddenly, in short space, at an instant (as ye would say) after the Whore
has long flourished and tyrannized, she shall be by a strange and sudden
calamity, destroyed, both the people, by death, sorrow, and famine, and the
City of Rome it self, by Fire, being burnt up by the Besiedgers, and turned
into Ashes. This shall be the perfect fall of Babylon, which is already much
decayed, and hastening to ruin. Reu. 18, 8. Her plagues shall come at One day.

One hour. sig:
The suddenness of the judgment, which should crush Rome, and make her
favorites mourn and dye for sorrow. Re. 18, 10. In One hour that judgment
shall come.

2 Either a short time, or at and about the same time. Reu. 17, 12. Shall
receive power as Kings at one hour with the Beast.

One mind. sig:
One Counsel, consent, or purpose, which all the ten Kings had with their
united forces and power, to defend the tyranny of that Beast, the Roman Bishop.
Reu. 17, 13. These have One mind.

O. P.
to Open the Book. sig.
To unseal the Book, by declaring and revealing unto John, and by him to the
Church, such secrets and Mysteries, as were before hidden in Gods counsel.
This no Creature could do, Christ the Mediator, he only was able; for he
came out of the bosom of the Father, to declare him to us, having all power.
Reu. 5, 2, 3, 5. Who is worthy to open the Book. Such a treasure is this Book
of Revelation, which is not otherwise communicated to the Church, but by the
Mediation of Christ, who is the only Interpretour of his Fathers will, and
Doctor of his Church.

to Open the bottomless pit. sig:
To set abroach, publish, and manifest such deuilish errors and Heresies as
came from the deep pit of Hell, which was done, when Antichrist got power and
strength to obscure the truth of heavenly doctrine, and to deceive the World
with strong delusions. Reuela. 9, 2. And he Opened the bottomless pit.

^n open door sig:
The liberty and faculty, which is given to the Church for Preaching pure
Doctrine, exercising sound worship, and an holy Discipline, with great
readiness and joy, both of Ministers and people. Reuela. 3, 8. I have set
before thee an Open Door. Some do too narrowly restrain this to the Preaching
of the Gospel only, which indeed is a door, whereby an entrance is given
into Heaven. It is better, more largely to take it, for the joining together of
word, worship, discipline, zeal of Ministers, Magistrates, and people. When
all this meets (as in this Church of Philadelphia it did) there is a large and
ready way made, for piercing into Men's consciences.

to Open the door or the gate. sig:
To receive and admit into the heart, the grace and power of Christ. Revel. 3,
20. If any Man hear and Open the Door. See Door Some understand this, of
admitting and receiving all such ordinances of Christ, whereby the door of our
hearts may be most speedily, and forceably cast Open.

to open the mouth to blasphemies sig:
To utter and b^lch forth reproachful and contumelious words (as Antichrist
does, boasting that he is God, above all Kings and Emperors.) Revel. 13, 6.
He Opened his mouth to Blaspheme.

Temple opened in heaven. sig:
The Tryumphall Caelestiall Church, Opened by the death of Christ to all which
believe in him, before he came in the flesh; and to all, who since his coming
are reconciled to God, thorough Faith in his blood. Revel. 11, 19. Then the
Temple of God was Opened in Heaven. Revel. 15, 5. Some understand this Temple
Opened (not o^ Heaven) but of the Christian Church in Earth, when it should lie
Open to receive a multitude of Saints, thorough Gods good providence,
scattering persecutions raised by Satan against the Church, being by his fury,
shut up for a time, none, or but few entering.

to ascend out of the earth. sig:
To have an original and beginning from earth, breeding and springing from the
sensuality of men, and increased by earthly power. Revel. 13, 11.

O. V.
to Overcome. sig:
To persevere in the Faith and obedience of the Gospel, unto the end of our
life; without fainting, because of tribulations. Revel. 2, 7. To him that
overcomes; that is, to him, who by Faith gets the victory, as a good
Soldier, over the Devil, Sin, and the World. Thus understand [ Ouercome]
throughout this Book.

O. Y.
Oil and Wine. sig:
Two Creatures (the fruits of Vine and Olive) of special use for necessity
and comforts of Man's life. Of these, God would have plenty remain, when there
was a famine and scarsity of other things. Reu. 6, 6. Oil and Wine hurt thou
not.

P. A.
Pale Horse sig:
PLague or pestilent diseases, (which make men pale and wanne) as a just
scourge from God, for despising the truth of the Gospel. Revel. 6, 8. And l^^
a Pale horse.

Palms. sig:
Testimonies and Ensigns of victory over spiritual enemies, namely, over
Antichrist. Revel. 7, 9. And Palms in their hands.

Paradise of God. sig:
Heaven, the seat of glory, whereof the earthly Paradise (in which Adam was
placed at his Creation) was a figure or type (as the Tree of life was a
Sacrament of aeternall life) Revel. 5, 7. I will give him to eat of the Tree
of life, in the midst of the Paradise of God.

Part in the first Resurrection. sig:
Portion, share and interest, in the Regeneration of the soul from death of
sin (as some expound) or in the restitution of the truth unto the world,
after long suppressing of it (as others think.) Both expositions may well
stand. Revel, 20, 6. Blessed and holy is he, which has Part in the first
Resurrection.

his Part. sig:
His portion, which he thought he had in Gods election, but he shall feel that
he had none. Revel. 22, 19. God shall take away his Part.

to Pass away. sig:
To vanish, or be abolished, in respect of the former vain condition whereunto
the World was subject, for sin. Revel. 21, 1. For the first heaven and first
earth are Passed away. Or if we understand by first heaven, and first earth
the Churches on earth (as some do interpret it) then by passing away is meant,
the darkning of the glory of the present churches in comparison of the
brightness which shall be in future Churches being restored to excellent purity in
Doctrine and manners.

Patience of our Lord Jesus christ sig:
A tollerance or suffering of Tribulations for the glory of Christ, and
promoting his Gospel, with a patient and constant mind. Revel. 1, 9. Your
Companion in the Patience of Jesus Christ.

Patience of the Saints. sig:
The trial and proof of their patience, which should be known to be true
and sound, if no threatenings nor cruelty of Antichrist should drive them from
Christ. Reu. 14, 12. Here is the Patience of the Saints.

P. E.
Peace. sig:
Love, concord, and good agreement amongst men; whilst they live without
hatred, bloody words, slaughters, tumults, and seditions, which the Devil had
power to raise, and to take; that is, to take away peace and quietness. Revel.
6, 4. Power was given to him, to take Peace from the earth.

Pearl. sig:
Christ Jesus, conceived in Caelestial sort by the Holy Ghost, in the womb of a
Virgin, as the Pearl (here mentioned) is begotten, not after an ordinary
fashion, but by a dew falling from heaven. Revel. 21, 21. Every gate of one
Pearl.

Pearl and precious stone. sig.
The ornaments and most costly deckings of the Whore or Beast, by the parts,
as Gold, precious Stone, Pearl, etc. all outwardly glorious, not spiritually,
that she may be thereby known, not to be the chaste spouse of Christ. Revel. 17,
4. And the Woman was arrayed with Purple, Gold, and Pearl.

his People. sig:
A people which shall willingly submit to be governed of God, who shall for ever
protect to have them according to his covenant. Revel. 21, 3. And they shall be
his people.

People out of 4. quarters. sig:
A Company of men, gathered out of many sundry Nations and Regions. Revel. 28,
8. He shall deceive the people of all quarters, etc.

People saved. sig:
Elect people of all Nations, preserved from the curse and tirany of sin, by
Christ; all these should be helpefull and favorable to the restored Church of
the Jews. Reu. 21, 24. And the People that are saved.

Perdition. sig:
Destruction and desolation, both temporal in this world, and aeternall
hereafter in the next life. Revel. 17, 8. And shall go into Perdition. Mark
this, that Rome and Papal Dignity, shall not always flourish, but shall have
a time of withering, as it had of rising and spreading.

to Permit. sig;
To give power and liberty to work strange things, as says Paul. 2 Thessalonians.
2, 9. Revel. 13, 14. Which were permitted him to do in the fight of the first
beast.

to persecute sig:
To offer violence and injury, to such as cannot repel it. Revel. 12, 13. He
Persecuted the Woman, which had brought forth the man-child.

to be Pertakers of sins. sig:
To have fellowship with others; namely, with Romish Idolaters, in their
haeresie and Idolatry; by committing, consenting, defending, etc. Revel. 18, 4.
That ye be not Pertakers of her sins.

P. I.
Pillar. sig;
One, which is firm, and does steddily abide in the Church, being rooted and
surely builte on Christ the foundation. Revel. 3, 12. I will make him a Pillar
in the Temple of God. Some think, that this place has allusion and respect
unto those two Pillars, placed by Solomon in the Temple, to represent the
stability of the Sons of God. Others do judge, that here is an allusion unto
the fashion of such Countries, where Pillars and Statues with inscriptions
upon them, by way of gratefulness to the honor of such as were Captains in
war, and returned home Conquerors, as used to be done at Rome, in foro and
campo Martio. Howsoever this be, the meaning comes all to one pass; to note
the great soliditie and immovable estate of Gods children.

P. L.
Place prepared of God. sig:
A place; to wit* a wilderness, or the Church (like to a Wilderness) for the
small number which did there abide, being assigned by the Wisdom of God, for
defense of the woman, and her manchilde. Revel. 12, 6. The Woman has a Plate
prepared of God in the Wilderness, whether she fled.

Place in heaven no more. sig:
Want of power and hope in Satan and his Instruments, so to assault the Church
any more, as to dispossess her of her blessed estate in heaven. Reu. 12, 8.
Neither was their place found any more in Heaven. Some refer this victory
over Satan, to the time of Christ his passion, whereupon it did depend.
Others, to the time of Constantine the great, whom Christ used as an
Instrument, to procure a victory over the enemies of his Church, which upon the
gate of his palace, he represented by the picture of a Dragon lying under his
feet, with a Dart thrust through him. Eusebius. in vitam Constantini. Oratione 3.
Fol 137. A. This latter, more agreeing to the truth of this Text.

Plagues. sig.
Torments and pains, to be inflicted on such, as shall have society with the
sins of Western Babylon. Revel. 18, 4. Least ye receive of her Plagues. This
alludes unto the threatening of God, touching Eastern Babylon, in Jeremy chap.
51, verse 45. My people go out of her, and every man deliver his soul.

Plagues comining. sig:
The sending and inflicting of heavy calamities upon Romish Babylon, for the
punnishment of her riot, security, and pride; like as God had before threatened
to do to Babylon in Assyria, for the like sins. See Esaias 47. Revel. 18, 8.
Her Plagues shall come upon her.

Plague of the Hail. sig:
An extraordinary, and some horrible judgment, such as never before was heard
of (as if Stones of a rare weight and bigness should fall down upon them, to
crush in pieces) sent upon the wicked enemies of his Gospel; namely, the Turk
and their Metropolitan City Constantinople, for her pride, cruelty and
Idolatry (called that great Babylon.) Revel. 16, 2. Men blasphemed God, because
of the Plague of the Hail.

last plagues sig:
Such torments, pains, and dreadful judgment as should be executed at length
after others, upon cruel Antichristian persecuters. Revel. 21, 9. Which had
the seven last Plagues.

to live in Pleasure. sig;
To pass over and lead her days in great delicacie, ease, and solace. Revel.
18, 7. Insomuch as she lived in Pleasure. And does not I pray you, the Romish
Clergy ouer-flow with great abundance of most dainty and delicate pleasures?
Her pain must be proportionable.

Plain of the earth. sig:
The large and spacious compass of Ground, which the Turkish Army should by
their huge multitude subdue, to their power and possession. Revel. 20, 9. They
went up into the plain of the earth.

P. O.
Power. sig;
Might, strength, and ability, to hurt and annoy other bodies (as Scorpions do
by a Natural strength) or souls and bodies both; as Turks, Sarazens, Popish
Monks and Friars, by their civil and spiritual strength, enabling them to
put forth the sting of their tyrany and Idolatry to the wounding and
destroying of innumerable persons. Revel. 9, 4. And power was given to them, as
the Scorpions of the earth have power. Revel. 17, 13. They shall give their
power to the Beast.

2 Rule and Dominion. Revel. 20, 6, On him the second death has no power.

3 Praise and confession of power and divine might and strength, to belong of
right to Christ. Reu. 5, 12, 13. Power.

Power of Christ. sig:
The unconquerable might, whereby Christ protecteth his members against all the
power of Devils and Hell. Reuelat. 12, 10. Now is the Power of his Christ.

power over the fire. sig:
The rule and authority, which by Gods dispensation, is given to some Angel,
over the Element of fire, for the ordering of it; as to some other Angel, is
like Power given over the Waters, as Reave. 11, 6. and Reave. 16, 5. The Angel
of the Waters. Angels being for this purpose, termed principalities, Powers,
and Dominations; because to them is committed, of God, the ordering and
conservation of the Creatures. Revel. 14, 18. An Angel which has Power over
the Fire. Some expound this, of Christ, who is said to come, to send Fire into
the Earth. Some, that the Angel should execute Gods vengeance upon the bloody
Kingdom of Antichrist, with fiery and fervent affection. But others, more
probably, yet understand this, of the ability and strength, whereby some
Martyr should bear and overcome the violence of the fire (which is to have
power over the Fire) applying it to Thomas Cranmer, sometime Archbishop of
Canterbury, who not only gave his body to be burned of the fire, for the
truth, but also first suffered his right hand to be first devoured, by which he
had subscribed against the truth, and thus had he Power over the fire.

power over Nations. sig:
Victory and Dominion over all the Enemies of the Church, whether open
Contemners (as then was Iezabell, Nicholaitans, and since Turks, chiefly the
Bishop of Rome and his Clergy) or such, as were members of the Church in Name
only and profession. These are here called Nations and Gentiles, (all Gentiles
sincerely professing Christ, being reckoned for Israelites.) Revel. 2, 26. I
will give them power over the Nations. These, are here threatened to be broken
in pieces as an earthen Vessel, (which is easily crushed and cannot be
repaired) by the power given to the Church.

power over Kindreds, and Nations, and tongues. sig:
The largeness of Antichrists jurisdiction, that he should stretch his Throne
far and wide, even into all the World, as verse 3. Also, the universality of
his tyranny, which should kill and destroy, not a few people (as all Histories
and lamentable experience witness) so as the Title of Catholic which he
assumeth, does well agree to him; to wit, a Catholic Tirant, and a man of
Catholic cruelty. Reu. 13, 7. And power was given him over every Kindred, and
tongue, and Nation.

power over waters. sig:
See Power over Fire. Howbeit, some expound these words more Mystically (not
improbably this Book being so mystical) for power, to turn the truth into
lies and errors, as Aegiptian waters were changed into blood. Revel. 11, 6. And
have power over waters, to turn them into blood. See Reave. 8, 8. The third
part of Water turned blood; that is, the sound doctrine corrupted, being turned
into a degenerous Nature.

P. R.
Praise. sig:
Confession of such perfections and excellencies, as be in God, or in Christ,
etc. and to acknowledge these excellencies, is to praise. Revel. 5, 13. Praise
and Honor. Revel. 19, 5. Praise our God.

to prepare a way. sig:
To make an easy and ready passage unto Rome, the Western Babell, to ransacke
it, to rouse Antichrist out of his Palace, when the hour of his downfall
comes, even as God, by drying up the great River Euphrates, made an entrance
into See Esaias cap. 44, 22 ca. 5^, 10, 63, 11.
Eastern Babylon, when he would destroy it. Reu. 16, 12. That the way of the
Kings of the earth should be prepared.

Presence of the serpent. sig:
The power of the Devil, and his murdering persecutors: for howsoever, the
Church can be no where, but Devils and Persecutors are at hand, present to do
mischief, yet the power to hurt, is not ever present, being restrained by the
providence of God. Revel. 12, 14. From the presence of the Serpent.

Priest to God, and of God. sig:
The elect believers, made partakers of the dignity of Christ his Priesthood,
having God propitious to them by his death, and allowed to have access to God
by Prayer, through his intercession. These elect, to signify, that they are
most excellent Priests; are therefore, called Priests of God. Reu. 20, 6.
According to the Haebrew Phrase: and Re. 1, 6. they are termed Priests to God,
to show that this honor is given them, not to disturb States and policies of
the earth.

Prison. sig:
The restraint, which Divine Power for a time, (as bands and imprisonment) had
curbed Satan withal, least he should rage against the Church. Revelation.
20, 7. Satan shall be loosed out of his Prison.

to prophecy sig:
To preach the word, opening* and applying it to the Church, for comfort,
exhortation, and conviction of Heresies. Reu. 10, 11. Thou must prophecy
again, etc. That is, the Preaching of wholesome Doctrine, should after
hindrances, be restored to the Church.

Prophecy. sig:
The particular Scripture of the Revelation of S. John, fore-shewing things
which were afterward to be done. Reave. 22, 7. Blessed is he that keeps the
words of the Prophecy of this Book. Also ver. 10. and 18. Reu. 11, 3, 6.

Prophets. sig:
The Ministers of the Old Testament, such as were Moses, David, Esaias, etc.
which instructed the people, and foretold things to come. Reave. 10, 7. As he
has declared to his Servants the Prophets.

2 All godly Ministers, who execute, now since Christ, the function of
Ministers in the Christian Church. Revel. 18, 20. Rejoice ye holy Apostles and
Prophets.

that false Prophet. sig:
That Antichrist; to wit, the Bishop of Rome, with the whole pontifical order
and Roman Prelacy, worthily comprehended under these two Names; Beast, and
false Prophet; in regard of their double Power, Political; and Spiritual.
Reu. 16, 13. Out of the mouth of the Beast, and that false Prophet. Also Reu.
19, 20. and 20, 10.

to Protest. sig:
To testify a thing together with another, as we see the authority of this
Book of Revelation, ratified by sundry witnesses. Reave. 22, 18. I Protest to
every one that hears, etc.

P. U.
Pure fine linen, and shining. sig:
The righteousness of Christ, imputed to the Saints, which is called Pure,
because it presents them to God without spot or wrinkle; and shining, in
respect of that glory which they have with God and Men, by the fruits of a
lively faith. Revel. 19, 8. That she should be arrayed with Pure fine Linen,
and shining also. Uer. 14.

to put into the hearts. sig:
To inspire the minds of Kings and Emperors with firm thoughts and purposes,
to execute Gods judgments on Antichrist, to whom, before they had submitted
themselves and their whole power by Gods just disposition. Reu. 17, 17. For God
has put into their hearts to fulfill his will, etc.

never to put out ones name. sig:
To preserve and keep for ever in the number of the elect, and in a sincere
profession of his truth (from falling away into errors) such as be once chosen
and called. Revel. 3, 5. And I will never put his name out of the Book of life.

to Put his right foot on the Sea, etc. sig:
Generally to rule (as King and Lord) over Sea and Land, standing firmly upon
both (as a Man stands on ground) more particularly, to raise up some, even
out of the Ecclesiastical State (noted by Sea) to be as feet and members. And
others out of the Lay People (meant by the earth) which likewise should be his
true members, though not so excellent and strong as the former, Revel. 10, 2.
And he set his right foot on the Sea, and his left upon the Earth.

Q. V.
Queen. sig:
ONE, full of outward pomp and earthly glory, and magnificence, challenging to
her self power and authority (as a Queen.) Thus does the Church of Rome,
proudly boasting herself to be the Mother Church, the head of Christianity,
and to have primacy over all other Churches, and many other like Thrassonicall
Blasphemies. Reu. 18, 7. I sit being a Queen.

R. A.
to Reign for ever. sig:
TO rule, not for a small time, but for ever; in those Kingdoms, which in
these latter days, before Christ's coming, shall receive the sincere profession
of his truth. Revel. 11, 15. Who shall Reign for evermore. And Revel. 22, 5.
These words teach, that the Kingdom of Saints begun in earth, shall never be
broken off, but continue still in heaven.

to Reign a thousand years. sig:
To rule by the Scepter of the word among the Gentiles, for a great
continuance of time, according as we have seen it come to pass in these our
Regions and Contries. Revel. 20, 6. And shall Reign with him a thousand years.
These words, must not be understood of the eternal bliss, wherein the Saints
shall reign in heaven, but of the Reign of the faithful here in earth, for
the space of those thousand years in which Satan should be bound, that the
Gospel might flourish. Some Interpretors, will have this thousand years of
Satan's binding, to begin when Christ first preached the gospel. Others, at the
death of Christ; others, at the time when the Apostles were dispersed, and
gathered Churches to Christ in all parts of the world. But all these
conjectures are crossed by the first verse of the 4. Chap: which teaches, that
the whole Prophesy (from the fourth chapter forward) does respect the years,
which followed the age and time of John the Evangelist, which wrote this
Prophecy. But hereof, more in the word [ A thousand years.]

to Reign upon earth. sig:
To be made Lords and Kings over earth and heaven (as all the faithful are by
Christ) thorough whom, they shall Reign in heavenly glory at last, and in
mean time, while they are in earth, though they be in warfare, yet they are
Kings, having Hell, Sin, Satan, and Death, subdued to them; and al things in
this world subject and put under them. See Col. 2. Psalm. 8. Reu. 5, 10. And we
shall Reign on the earth.

to Reign over the Kings of the earth. sig:
To rule and exercise Dominion and Empire, above and over the cheifest of
mortal men, over earthly Kings and Monarchs. Now, because Rome only, at that
time, when John wrote, had power over the great Kings of the earth, and the
great Antichrist must sit and Reign in that City, where the Heathen
persecuting Emperors were: Hence it clearly appears, that Rome is the
gorgious and filthy Whore spoken of in the Revelation. Revel. 17, 18. The
Woman which thou saw, is that great City, which Reigns over the Kings of
the earth. Papists are deceived, which interpret this City of the
universality of the wicked in the world.

Rainbow upon his head. sig:
That Testimony or Sacrament, which was between God and man, of his Covenant,
touching the destroying of the world by water: Whereas Christ had this Rainbow
about his head, it serves to testify, not only his Fidelity in keeping
promise, but his mercy also, toward his faithful servants, in chasing away
storms, and clearing the boisterous sky, making calm, and giving rest after
heavy times and tempestuous. Revel. 10. 1. And a Rainbow upon his head.

to be Ravished in the Spirit. sig:
To be moved and led by a sweet holy motion of the Spirit, to see and
understand hidden things, far exceeding human capacity and wit. Revel. 1 10.
And I was Ravished in the Spirit on the Lords day. Thus the ancient Prophets,
thus Paul, 2. Cor. 12. were made fit and capable of heavenly visions, even as
John is here, having the Spirit for his guide and teacher.

R. E.
Ready to die. sig:
Such, as through weakness and sinful infirmities, are likely and near
(without timely and diligent looking too) to fall into the destruction of
death. Revel. 3, 2. Strengthen the things which are ready to die.

Ready to be delivered sig:
One, being in travel near unto Childbirth. Revel. 12, 2. And was pained,
Ready to be delivered. Some expound this, both of the Virgin Mary (that blessed
woman, the Mother of Christ;) Also, of the Church of the Jews, who by their
vehement and seruent desire and expectation of the Messiah, were after a sort
in pain and travel, to bring him forth. This is a godly sense, but because in
the first verse of the 4. Chapter of this Book, John shows, that not things
past before, but things to be done after, were the subject of this Prophecy,
from the third Chapter forward. Therefore, their exposition is more fit, who
interpret it of the Christian Church, laboring and groaning under the cruelty
of Heathenish persecuters, being pained with grief, to see some one of her
Children, which might be a Defender of her against such injuries. And this
happened, when Constantine the great reigned, and put an end (at least a great
stop) to the bloody proceeding of the Roman Emperors.

Reed and Rod. sig:
An Instrument wherewith to meet or measure a thing withal; and because
things are not measured, but for repayring and building up, and not to throw
them down; Therefore, the further restoring of the Church, is signified, by
measuring the Temple with a Reed. Reu. 11, 1. Then was given me a Reed, like a
Rod, etc. This place has respect to Ezekiel. 40. Zach. 1. where the building and
restoring of the Church, is signified by measuring.

to Reap. sig:
To cut down Corn at the time of ripeness, which we commonly call Harvest.

2 To abrogate and abolish, the wicked Idolatrous worship in this world, by
such Instruments as God ordained to do it in his due time, and by his son
Christ to Judge and destroy the ungodly at his second coming to Judgment,
when the wickedness of the world will be fully ripe. Revel. 14, 15. Thrust in
thy sickle and Reap, for the time is come to Reap.

to Receive the Beasts mark in the forehead and hand. sig:
To consent to the Authority of Antichrist, and to Antichristian worship,
either secretly in heart, or by outward profession of mouth, and by
participation in external Ceremonies; whether it be by vulgar persons of the
Comminalty, barely professing it, or by Princes and Prelates with their hand
and power maintaining it also. Revel. 14, 9. If any man worship the Beast and
his Image, receiving his mark in his forehead or hand, etc.

to Receive ye print of his name. sig:
To yield subjection to Antichrist, and to testify it by any note. Revel. 14,
11. And whosoever receive the print of his name.

Red-horse. sig:
Cruel and bloody wars, for contempt of the Gospel. Revel. 6, 4. Another
Horse that was Red.

to Rejoice ever them. sig:
To make common mirth and joy among themselves, because the true Prophets of
God being slain (which were wont to vex and trouble the members of the
false Church, with their wholesome interpretations of Scriptures, and sound
reproof of errors and vices) the wicked Antichristian crew might now make
merry, being eased of that yoke, and depending only upon the Popes pleasure,
for sense of Scriptures. Revel. 11, 10. And they that dwell on the earth, shall
Rejoice over them, and be glad.

to Rejoice and be glad. sig:
To conceive sweet comfort and gladness, for the access of the Jews (so
long divorced) unto the body of the Church, and for the near approach of
Christ to judgment, when he will take his spouse (consisting of believing
Gentiles and Jews) into a most near society in heaven. Revel. 19, 7. Let us
Rejoice.

things which Remain. sig:
That little portion of graces, which was left in the Pastor of Sardis, and in
his flock. Reuelat. 3, 2. Strengthen the things which remain.

to come in Rememberance before God. sig:
To execute, either some promised mercy, or some decreed and threatened
Judgment, as here. For as God seems forgetful, whilst he defers the
punishment of wicked men; so his taking Revenge (as here he threatened to do
upon Constantinople the Turkish Babylon) is called his Rememberance. Revel. 16,
19. And that great Babylon came in Remembrance before God. Also Chap. 18, 5. And
God has Remembered her iniquities.

Remnant of men. sig:
So many men as were left alive, and not slain by the former Calamities
mentioned, in verses 16, 17, 18, 19. Revel. 9, 20. And the Remnant of Men. Also
Revel. 19, 21. The Remnant were slain with the sword.

Remnant of her seed. sig:
The rest of the saithfull, which being scattered abroad by the iniquity of
the time, cannot publicly assemble to worship God, but privately (as they can)
do exercise piety. Revel. 12, 17. And made war with the Remnant of her seed.

to Repent. sig:
To be truly touched with godly grief for sins, and to turn unto God to do
his will. Reave. 9, 20. And they repented not of the works of their hands.
Also, Revel. 16, 9. They Repented not to give him glory; that is, howsoever
they made a show of Repentance whilst God scourged them, yet they did not leave
their sin, and amend their lives.

Rest of the (...) (...). sig:
Such as for the 1000. years wherein Satan lay bound, were drowned in
ignorance and superstition, being fallen deadly asleep in their sins. Revel.
20, 5. The Rest of the dead shall not live again, till the thousand years be
finished.

no Rest. sig:
Eternal Torment, without any the least intermission or hope of any ease and
mittigation. Reu. 14, 11. And they shall have no Rest day nor night.

first Resurrection. sig:
The conversion of many, from errors, to the truth of the gospel (more
brightly shining forth) by the regeneration of the Spirit. Revel. 20, 5, 6.
Which has part of the first Resurrection.

Revelation sig:
The uncovering of something which is hid, as remoouing a Veil or Curtain
which hinders our eyesight. This is the proper signification.

2 A manifestation and discovery of Divine things, secret, in respect of men,
for the common good of the Church. Revel. 1, 1: The Revelation of Jesus Christ.
This Title of [Reuelation] being given to this Book of John and to the whole
gospel of God. Math. 11, 25. teaches us, that the search and understanding of
them, does as far exceed all mortal wit, as the knowledge of things to come
till they be opened; or things till they be covered; or dark Riddles till they
be declared.

to Revenge sig:
To take punishment at last upon the great whore the Romish Church, which had
so long with impurity vexed the Saints, to whom this should be a great matter
and occasion of joy. Revel. 18, 20. Rejoice, for God has punished her, to be
Revenged on her for your sake.

to Reward. sig:
To return and repay ertreame ignomy and pain, or vexation unto the
Antichristian crew and Popish Babylonish rout, in lieu and recompense of all
that vexation and injury, which either by entisement to their sins, or by
inflicting torment upon such as refused to submit to them, they had most
wickedly offered to the Saints. Revel. 18, 6. Reward her as she has Rewarded
you. It is worth our noting, that this charge is given to such as before were
bid come out of Babylon, verse 4. even to such as had been the Citizens of
Rome, members of the Papacy, that they should be the Ministers of this
punishment and revenge, being likely to do that more thoroughly, through the
fresh remembrance of their late oppressions. What may we think of them, who are
so favorable and indulgent to this City, that great Whore, as to wink at her
sins, not to execute sharp wrath against them, not to think of ruining, but
to attempt the reforming of that desperate Strumpet?

R. I.
Rich. sig:
One, who indeed is endued with spiritual store and plenty of heavenly things.
Revel. 2, 9. I know thy poverty, but thou art Rich. This riches is in two
things; First, in assurance of forgiveness of sins, reconciliation with God,
and eternal life. 2 Cor. 8, 9. Secondly, in having grace to do Good-workes. 1 Timothy 6, 18.

2 One, presuming of abundance of spiritual graces, which in truth they have
not at all; or not in such measure as they suppose. Revel. 3, 17. Thou say I
am Rich. This was a presumption in the heart of Laodiceans of spiritual
riches, upon occasion of their great earthly wealth, wherein they did ouer-flow.

Right foot. See, Put his Right foot, before past.

Right hand sig:
The powerful regiment and government which Christ has and exercises in
matters of the Church, to hold the Stars in this his hand, signifies, to give
the Ministers of the word, protection and defense, while they be faithful.
Revel. 1, 16. And he had in his Right hand seven Stars.

2 Confirmation, strength, and comfort, of mind and body, coming to John
(being cast down) from the power of Christ. Revel. 1, 17. And he laid his
Right hand upon me.

Right in the tree of life. sig:
Portion, part, fruit and fruition, of, and in Christ Jesus, who (as a Tree of
life in Paradise) shall satisfy all the faithful, with his fullness of gifts,
and most excellent beauty. Revel. 22, 14. That their Right might be in the Tree
of life.

Righteous. sig;
One made righteous by imputation of Christ his Justice, and endeavoring to
approve himself to be so to himself and other, by leading constantly a
righteous life. Revel. 22, 12. He that is Righteous, let him be righteous still.

Righteousness of the Saints. sig:
The washing away of sins by the blood of Christ, with the imputation of his
perfect obedience, to be our Righteousness; whereof seeing we give declaration
to the world, by such good-works as come from the Spirit of sanctification, as
we have an inward Testimony of it before God by Faith; therefore, it is in
the Plural number said, Righteousness or Iustifications of the Saints. Reu.
19, 8. For the fine Linen is the Righteousness of the Saints. See Revel. 7,
13. These places evidently show, that the Justification of the elect, is not
from within themselves, but sticks without in that external garment, Christ
Jesus, whom they put on by faith, whereof their Good-workes be fruits.

to judge righteously. sig;
To govern in Righteousness, when God frames his own to a rightnesse in all
their life, as it is written. Ps. 96, 10, 13. whereunto this Text alludeth.
Revel. 19, 11. And he judges Righteously.

to Rise out of the Sea. sig:
To take beginning out of the tempestuous and troublesome estate of the
Nations; out of which, (as it were out of a Sea) did spring at the first the
Roman Empire, which stories prove, to have grown from the divisions of
kingdoms. Revel. 13, 1. I saw a beast arise out of the Sea. Note, that out of
the sea of corrupt Doctrine, and the Clergy which at that time taught it, did
spring the other beast, the Romish Bishop and his Hierarchy, which for cruelty
and violence, is likened to a Beast, as the Roman Heathenish Empire, for like
respect, is compared to a beast.

Rivers and fountains. sig:
The Doctrine of Gods word, which are the Rivers whence we are to draw
spiritual waters for our soul to drink of; or the Ministers of the doctrine,
from whom, as Fountains and Rivers, the doctrine should flow to others, Revel.
8, 10. And it fell into the third part of the Rivers, and into the Fountains of
water. Reu. 16, 4. where, be signified by Rivers, not ordinary Teachers, but
principal ones (as Jesuits in Popery) upon whose mouth the multitude depend
in matter of Doctrine.

River Euphrates. sig:
A famous River (called Euphrates) near to the City of Babylon in Chaldea,
where-unto it was a mighty defense, so as Babylon could not easily be taken,
until trenches were made, and the Waters of that River derived another way.
This is the proper signification.

2 The power and force, wherewith Rome, (which is Babylon mystically, and in a
figure) does defend it self. Revel. 9, 14. Which are bound in the great River
Euphrates. Some do understand this Euphrates, of a famous River in Armenia,
and will have the binding of the four Angels there, to be meant (not of
Popish force) where the Devil lay bound, waiting by the power of that City
to do much mischief) but of the Turkish Army* driven through fear, to
reside near that flood of Armenia (called Euphrates) and for a time shut up in
prison (as it were) and kept in fetters. Of this, let the learned Judge; the
former, I have allowed as the more received exposition.

pure rivers. sig:
Those most pleasant good things, and full of joys, which the faithful shall
enjoy in the Kingdom of heaven, whereunto men are brought, by receiving that
plentifully-flowing Doctrine of Christ, with the which Christian hearts, are
refreshed (as Citizens are refreshed with a stream of pure and clear water,
running through the City.) Revel. 22, 1. And he showed me a pure River of the
Water of life.

R. O.
Rod of iron sig;
A mighty ouer-ruling power, subduing and compelling to obedience, or crushing
them in pieces (as a vessel of earth is broken) which obstinatly rebels.
Revel. 2, 27. And he shall Rule them with a rod of Iron.

to rule with a rod of iron sig:
To bridle and beat down, with a strong irresistable power, such as shall
stubbornely strive against Christ and his Church, being now in earth gloriously
restored. Reu. 19, 15. He shall Rule with a rod of Iron.

Root of David. sig;
Christ, who came of David (as he was man) and is the Root, Spring, and
Fountain of all life and salvation to David and all the elect. Revel. 5, 5.
The Root of David.

S. A.
Salvation. sig:
SAfety of the people of God, by their deliverance from cruel Tyrants, who
sought to destroy their bodies, and from Satan's malicious power, who would kill
their Souls. Revel. 12, 10. In Heaven there is Salvation wrought, etc. This is
the Song of victory, which the Church and multitude of Saints on earth, sing to
Gods* praise, like to that in Exodus 15, 1, 2. etc. Judge. 5. 1. Sam. 18, 1, 23.

2 The praise due to God, for Salvation given to his Church. Reu. 19, 1.
Salvation, and honor, and glory be to our God.

Sanctuary sig:
The Altar (placed in the Sanctuary) upon which Sacrifices were slain. This
speech agrees to such as were slain for Christ, to whom a place is allotted
under the Altar, as before. 6, 9. Revel. 16, 7. And I heard another Angel out
of the Sanctuary.

Sand of the Sea. sig:
A convenient or commodious place, whereon John should stand, to see the
arising or beginning of the Beast, mentioned in the next Chapter, or whereon
Satan should stand, to work and frame that Beast out of the Sea; that is, the
contentions amongst Nations. Revel. 12, 10. And I stood on the Sea-Sand. Some
Interpretors suppose, they have espied a farther Mystery in this Sea-Sand,
which signifies (as they deem) the truth of doctrine, which is as a shore or
Sand, whence to behold the arising and offspring of that Beast after spoken
of, being like to that. Seeing. Chap. 15, 2. They which got the victory of the
Beast, stood at the Glassie Sea.

Satanas. sig:
One, which is an adversary, burning with hatred of God and Man. Reu. 12, 9.
Called the Devil and Satanas.

Sinagogue of Satan. sig:
A company and assembly of men, which seemed to serve God, but they worshipped
the Devil. Reu. 2, 9. But are the Synagogue of Satan; that is, a company
gathered, not for God, but for the Devil.

Satan's Throne. sig:
Any place, where Superstition, Idolatry, and wickedness, is practiced,
without controlement: and from whence wickedness is conveyed to other places.
Such a place was Pergamus, and now Rome is. Revel. 2, 10. Where Satan has his
Throne.

S. C.
Scarlet colored beast sig:
The malignant Church, the Romain Sinagogue, the Kingdom of Antichrist,
persecuting with bloody cruelty (represented by Scarlet color) the Saints of
God. Reu. 17, 3. A woman sat upon a Scarlet colored Beast.

S. E.
sea of glass sig:
Sea Sand. See Sand of the Sea.

The World, fitly compared to a Sea, for the storms and tempests of troubles
raised up therein: and because all things in the World be clear, and open to
him that made it (howsoever secret to us) therefore it is likened to a Sea of
Crystal Glass. Reave. 4, 6. Before the Throne was a Sea of Glass like to
Crystal. Others, by the Sea of Glass (in this place) understand the fullness
of all gifts, which the Church draws from Christ, by an allusion, to that
large spacious vessel, called the Sea. 1 Kings 7, 23. But that was of Brass,
this of Glass; to signify the difference between the Gospel, and the Legal
Rites and Ceremonies, under which there was great obscurity, in comparison of
that cleerenesse which is under the Gospel. 2. Cor. 3, 13, 18.

2 The whole worship of God; namely, thanksgiving. Apoc. 15, 2. They that had
gotten victory of the Beast, they stood at the Glassie-Sea, having the Harpes
of God. Or it signifies, the Doctrine of godliness, through which, as a clear
Crystal, the faithful may and do behold, the merciful and loving
countenance of God the Father, reconciled in Christ, not altogether pure and
bright as Crystal, but somewhat colored and obscured with the fire of
contention, as Christ foretold. Luke 12, I came to send fire into the earth;
and as the godly have found by experience. Revel. 15, 2. I saw as it were a
Glassie Sea, mingled with fire.

Sea. sig:
The huge multitude of people, like unto a Sea, (which is a collection of many
Waters) fit to represent, an infinite company of people, distinguished into
Kindreds, tongues, and Nations. Revel. 8, 8. A great Mountain of Fire was cast
into the Sea. Others, by Sea in this place, and Reu. 7, 1. do understand, the
Doctrine of the false Church, being corrupt and troubled; This is said here, to
be turned into blood, being pure and sound (such as the Doctrine of the true
Church is;) It is by false Prophets changed into a quite other nature, as a
thing degenerate. In this sense also, some expound the word [Sea] in Chapter.
21, 1. For degenerate and corrupt Doctrine, which in that renewed age there
prophesed of, shall have no place.

2 The gathering of waters, wherein innumerable are drowned. Reu. 20, 13.

to stand upon Sea and earth. sig:
To have Dominion, rule, and power, over the World such, as Christ Jesus has;
as himself says, All power is given me in Heaven and Earth. Reu. 10, 8. Which
stands upon the Sea, and upon the earth.

to See his face. sig:
To have and enjoy a more clear Vision and sight of God then before, by such a
single and pure worship of God, as if he were familiarly beheld face to face.
Reu. 22, 4. See his face.

to Seal. sig:
To hide or keep back from others, the knowledge of some things, till there
come due and convenient time of revealing them. Reave. 10, 4. Seal up those
things.

sealed with seven seals sig:
That which is most perfitly closed and exceeding secret, that it may be had in
more reverence and Honor. Revel. 5, 7. Sealed with seven Seals.

not to seal. sig:
Not to hide and conceal, but to offer to free examination this Book of
prophecy. Revel. 22, 10. Seal not the words of this Prophecy.

Seal of the living God. sig:
The holy Spirit of promise, even the Spirit of adoption, wherewith all the
Saints are Sealed and set in safety in the midst of Antichrists tyranny.
Reu. 7, 2. Having the Seal of the living God. Also Reu. 9, 4.

to Seek death. sig:
With great desire to be carried after death, rather then to live in such
fear, pain, and torment. Reave. 9, 6. Men shall Seek Death.

Seven Churches. sig:
The whole Church Militant on Earth, the estate whereof is set forth of John,
by the condition of the Seven Churches in Asia, in his time. Revel. 1, 20.
Seven Candlestickes, are the Seven Churches.

Seven eyes. sig:
The Seven Spirits of God, or the manifold gifts of the Spirit, wherewith
Christ endoweth the faithful. Reu. 5, 6. Seven eyes, which are the Seven
spirits of God.

Seven Horns. sig:
The most perfect power, whereby the Man-Christ, sitting at the right hand of
his Father, ruling and governing all things, is become able to destroy his
Enemies, and defend his members. Reu. 5, 6. Which had Seven horns. It is a
Metaphor, drawn from Beasts, whose strength and might is in their horns.

Seven Lamps. sig:
The Gifts of Sanctification, flowing from the holy Spirit of Christ. Revel.
4, 5. And there were seven Lamps.

Seven heads. sig:
Seven Hills, and Seven Kings, or that City which should be famous.
Throughout Seven Hills, and Seven Kings; to wit, Rome, the Seat first of the
Empire. Secondly, of the Papacy. Revel. 12, 3. Having Seven Heads. Some,
expound these Seven heads, of the manifold subtilties, and crafty devices of
the Devil and his Instruments. The former Exposition is better.

Seven last plagues. sig:
The fullness (for Seven is a number of perfection) of Gods judgments, which
being poured out upon Rome, there shall follow happy days. Reu. 15, 1.

Seven Crowns. sig:
The Supreme Majesty of the Romish Emperor, subduing other Provinces and
Nations unto him, by innumerable and great victories. Revel. 12, 3. Having
Seven Crowns upon his heads.

One of the Seven. sig:
The Romish Bishop or Pope, exercising civil authority in temporal things,
like as the former Seven Heads or Rulers did; and yet said to be the eight:
either, because of his spiritual jurisdiction, or else; because he did
surpass all the former sorts of Governors, in impiety or tyranny. Reu. 17,
11. Is even the eight, and is one of the Seven.

Seven Spirits. sig:
The holy Spirit of God, plentifully enriching the Church with all kind of
spiritual gifts. It must be thus interpreted in this place, because the Spirit
is made Author and Giver of grace and peace, together with the Father and the
Son. Reu. 1, 4. And from the Seven Sptrits.

2 The several gifts which are derived from the three persons in Trinity, the
holy Spirit of GOD. Revel. 4, 5. Which are the Seven Spirits of God.

Service. sig:
Offices and duties of Charity, performed indeed toward the Saints, and not
only promised. Reu. 2, 19. I know thy service.

Servants. sig:
Such, as earnestly and constantly obey GOD. Revel. 22, 3. And his Servants
shall serve him.

Seven Thunders. sig:
Most grievous judgments of all sorts, which God shall proclaim and inflict
most severely, upon all wicked contemners of his Majesty; namely, the
Antichristian rabble. Revel. 10, 3. And when he had cried, Seven Thunders
uttered their voices. Some, expound this Seven Thunders, not of several
judgments of God, but of several zealous Instruments ordained of God, to
restore his Religion, and to terrify the wicked enemies thereof.

Seven Trumpets. See Trumpets.

S. H.
Shine no more. sig:
That is, never to give more light, but to be a place desolate. Reave. 18, 23.
Shall Shine no more in thee. This fore-tels, such horror and darkness to be
in Rome at her ruin, as none shall be there to light a Candle.

the third part of ships sig:
Towns and Cities, bordering upon the Sea; or as others judge, the Ministers
of the word (which preached in Europe, the third part of the World) were
corrupt with Haeresie, and swollen with ambition, having more care of worldly
Dignity, then of their offices. Reuela. 8, 9. And the third part of Ships were
destroyed.

Shortly. sig:
Quickly, speedily, without delay, in due convenient time, which is not far
off. Revel. 2, 5. I will come against thee Shortly, Reu. 22, 6, 7.

Short space sig:
A small space of time (as it were for an hundred year, or there about) which
howsoever, seems long to us, yet Short in Gods account. Reu. 17, 10. He must
continue a Short space.

sharp sickle. sig:
Either the severe sentence of the Judge, cutting down the wicked in the end
of the World (as Corn is cut down with a Sickle) or power and ability, to
gather the elect unto God, out of the Kingdom of Antichrist, by the preaching
of the word, according to that of Christ. Math. 9, 3, 7. Revel. 14, 14. He had
in his hand a Sharp Sickle. Also, in verse 18. it signifies power, to cut down
and destroy the wicked.

to shut heaven. sig:
To do that spiritually, by a drought of the word, for withering of piety; as
Elias did by his sensible Miracle of staying the Rain from the earth, and to
cause the Grass to wither. Reu. 11, 6. Have power to Shut the Heavens.

S. I.
Sign in heaven. sig:
Some token or wondrous testimony, affoorded the holy and purer Church (meant
by Heaven) out of which should come the word (as before out of Sion and
Jerusalem. Amos. 1, 2.) which should denounce and threaten vengeance, that
should vex and destroy the members of Antichrist. Revel. 15, 1. I saw another
Sign in Heaven.

Silence in heaven. sig:
Rest and peace, granted to the Church in earth for a short time, after that
the open Enemies of Gods truth were bridled by Constantine the great. Revel. 8,
1. There was Silence in Heaven about half an hour. Others say, this silence
signifies, consultation, or astonishment. Others refer it, not to Gods
consulting, or Caelestiall Creatures astonished, but to John, preparing
himself in this great quietness to more attention. The first agrees best
with the place.

to Sit upon a Throne. sig:
To be endowed with spiritual Majesty, such as belonges to him, who is King
and Judge of the World. Reu. 4, 2. A Throne was set in Heaven, and one sat
upon it. This is spoken for our understanding, after the custom of worldly
Kings, who by sitting in Thrones, declare their Majesty to the people.

six hundred threescore and six. sig:
That number which shall arise from the Letters of the Name of the Beast being
numbered. See the word number before. Revel. 13, 18. And his number is Six
hundred threescore six. The reason why the Name of the Beast is set down
mystically, and not plainly, (yet so plainly as the wisdom of Man may count
it) was, because it had been dangerous at that time (when the Roman Empire,
which was this Beast, flourished) to have published it, and openly laid it
forth. Therefore, to avoid unnecessary offense, as also, that worldlings,
which must fulfill this prophecy, might not see it; for these causes the Name
is obscurely put down.

S. M.
Small and great. sig:
Persons of all Ages, stature, and degree. Revel. 20, 12. And I saw the Dead,
great and Small, etc.

Smoke of odours. sig:
Prayers of the godly, ascending toward Heaven (as Smoke) and having pierced
the Heavens, prevail with God (thorough the intercession of Christ, sweetning
them as odours) to obtain things asked. Revel. 8, 4. The Smoke of the odours,
with the Prayers of the Saints, went up, etc.

to Smite the earth. sig:
To inflict plagues, both spiritual and visible, on men which dwell in the
earth, for the corruption of his Doctrine and worship. Reu. 11, 6. To Smite the
earth with all manner of plagues. Thus do Gods true Ministers, as his
Instruments. Therefore let all men reverence them greatly.

Smoke of her burning sig:
The destruction of Rome (that great City) by fire, sending forth a Smoke,
which shall astonish her friends, standing far off, and looking upon it with
sorrowful hearts. Reu. 18, 18. When they shall see that Smoke of her burning.

Smoke of the pit. sig:
The darkness of Satan's Kingdom, ignorance of the Ministers of Christ his
Gospel, Haeresies and superstitions arising from blind errors. Revel. 9, 2.
There arose the Smoke of the pit, as the Smoke of a great Furnace. How fitly
does this agree to Popery, where many and manifold Traditions, errors, lies,
superstitions, Idolatries, darkning the Sun and light of the Gospel many
years: Show, if they can any Kingdom that did the like? Or that this can be
meant of any other darkening, then of the Gospel.

Smoke of their torment, etc. sig:
That the torments and pain of the Servants and followers of Antichrist, shall
be perpetual, as men know the fire never to be quenched so long as the Smoke
ascends. Revel. 14, 11. And the Smoke of her torment shall ascend for ever.

S. O.
Song of the Lamb. sig:
That joy and gladness of mind, which the faithful express, in celebrating
God the Father, for the grace of adoption in Christ: who because he teaches
them to praise God, and stirs up this joy, and is the Author and finisher
of their Faith and Salvation; Therefore it is called, The Song of the Lamb;
that is, of Christ, and a new Song. Revel. 14, 3. Because the grace of
Adoption, by Christ, is communicated to far more now, since his death, and
the praise for this grace remains fresh, continuing without decay. Revel. 15,
3. And the Song of the Lamb.

Song of Moses. sig:
Such a Song of praise and Triumph, as Moses and the Israelites did Sing, at
their deliverance from Pharaoh at the Red Sea; which is far inferior to the
deliverance of Gods people from the red Dragon, and the Jaws of Antichrist
that Beast. Reave. 15, 3. And they Sung the Song of Moses the Servant, etc.

new Song. sig:
See Song of the Lamb. Spiritual joy, which always remains fresh in the
faithful, for the Redemption by Christ, is this new Song. Revel. 5, 9. And
they Sung a new Song.

Sore. sig:
Some loathsome disease, as the disease of Naples, which began there,
commonly called the [ French Pocke] rife amongst Papists; or some
Plague Sore. Or as some understand it, of some spiritual and figurative sore
(vexing the Papists no less then a Plague Sore, or the botch of Aegipt) as
the pulling down Abbeyes, etc. by Henry the eight, and depriving Popish
Bishops and Prelates of their dignities and liuinges, by Elizabeth his
daughter, of famous memory. Reu. 16, 2. And there fell a noisome and grievous
sore on men.

Sorrow. sig:
Grief and heaviness, and all causes of it. Reu. 21, 4. Neither Sorrow.

Sound of Charets. sig:
An huge, mighty, and terrible noise, such as many Charrets of horses make in
time of war. Reu. 9, 9. The Sound of their wings, was like the Sound of many
Charets.

Sound of many waters and of thunder, etc. sig:
Vndistinct and confused noise, whence profitable Nations hardly could be
gathered; such was the state of the Church in the Fathers time. As the sound of
Thunder, signifies a noise more distinct and dreadful, which yet lasted not
long; and the voice of Harpers, signifies the sweet voice of truth, fully
restored; and in the Harmony of Confessions, by several Churches sung to the
world. Thus was the progress of the Church of Christ. Revel. 14, 2. As the
Sound of many waters.

S. P.
Spirits seven. See seven Spirits.

to Spew out of the mouth. sig:
To abhor one, and to cast him out, with detestation and loathing (as things
which we vomit, are cast out and never taken in again) so shall the lukewarm
Gospeller be served. Revel. 3, 16, It shall come, that I shall spew thee out of
my mouth.

Spirits of Devils. sig*
The very members and Instruments of the Devils, inspiring Princes and great
personages with devilish counsel and advise. Revel. 16, 14. For they are the
Spirits of Devils.

spirit of life. sig:
That Spirit of fortitude and courage, which God gave to his Ministers and
Children, whom he raised up, as new witnesses of his truth, after other
witnesses had been slain by Antichrist. This was fulfilled about the time of
the Tridentine Counsel: and a little after, in Luther, Melancthon, Calvin,
Martyr, and Bucer. Revel. 11, 11. The Spirit of life coming from God, shall
enter into them.

Spiritually sig:
After a more secret kind of meaning and understanding, and not in proper
speech. Thus is Rome Sodom; by resemblance (being like it, for spiritual and
bodily uncleanness and filthiness.) Reu. 11, 8 Which Spiritually is called
Sodom.

to give a Spirit to the Image. sig:
To give life, as Iannes and Iambres imitated the Wonders that Moses wrought.
Revel. 13, 15. It was permitted him to give Spirit to the Image. It is an
allusion to the Diabolical practices of Idolaters, whereby they caused their
Idols to speak distinctly (as if they had been alive) the more easily to
bring men to admire their superstition. So the Pope having now raised
himself to the estimation (wel-nie) of a God, was no more, as a dead person,
but began to speak, to command, to forbid, to bless, to curse, to boast and
brag themselves, Lord of Kings and Emperors, as Pope Adrian did, when he
said; By us the Emperor reigns.

Spirit of prophecy. sig:
All which spoke by the Spirit of Prophesye. These shot at Jesus, as at a
common mark, to set forth him as only Redeemer and perfect Savior. Reu. 19,
10. The Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy; that is, such as
testify of Christ, by prophesying him, or preaching him, their function is
equal to the office of Angels revealing him. Therefore John may not worship the
Angel, being a fellow-seruant.

three unclean spirits sig.
Most wicked men, carried and led by the devil, and being his Ministers to do
his will as Jesuits, etc. Revel. 16, 13. Three unclean Spirits.

without Spot. sig:
Pure, and without blame, even before God, by the imputation of Christ his
perfect righteousness to them, wiping away all spots of sin, and clothing
them with innocence. Revel. 14, 5. They are without spot, before the Throne of
God.

S. T.
to Stand before the God of the earth. sig:
To Minister (as Instruments) unto him, who as God, rules not in heaven only,
but also in earth, even when Satan and wicked men seem to have their full
swinge, and to put all out of order. Revel. 11, 4. Standing before the God of
the earth. It is a speech, borrowed from servants and such as attend upon
Princes and Rulers, to Minister to them, and execute their Commandments. Thus
also, Reu. 8, 2. Seven Angels are said to stand before God, because they
appear before him, to minister to him.

to Stand a far off. sig:
To refuse and be affraide to approach, to rescue Rome and Romish Hierarchy
and Monarchy in the day of Gods horrible vengeance upon her. Revel. 18, 15.
The Merchants shall stand far off.

to Stand upon earth and Sea. See Sea.

to Stand upon their feet. sig:
To revive after one is dead, as the two witnesses did after a sort, when God
raised up others in their room, mightily to defend their Doctrine and cause,
by the word of God, and by giving their lives to death for that truth. Such
were Luther, etc. Also Wicliff, Hierom of Prage, Huss. etc. Revel. 11, 11. And
they shall stand up upon their feet.

to Stand before the woman. sig:
To be ready at hand, watching narrowly to destroy the blessed seed of the
woman. Revel. 12, 4. And the Dragon stood before the woman.

Star. sig*
A Minister of the word, which gives light to the flock, by Doctrine and good
example. Revel. 1, 20. The seven Stars, are the Angels of the seven Churches.

morning Star. sig:
Christ Jesus, who is himself the bright morning Star, having received
fullness of true glorious light, to communicate it to all the faithful. Revel.
2, 28. As I received of my Father, so will I give him the Morning Star.

great Star. sig:
Many Pastors of the Church declining together, but amongst them some one
Minister of especial account and anthority, drawing down others by his
corrupt teaching. Revel. 8, 10. And there fell a great Star from heaven. This
great Star, some do understand, of degenerating Bishops, who through Pride and
ambition, fell into Haeresie and Impiety. Others, do interpret it, of
Constantius, Valens, and other wicked Emperors, which favored the Arrian
Haeresie, and molested Orthodox Christians. And surely, the word Star, though
it often signify Teachers, yet sometime it notes such, as shine aloft in high
place (as it were in the air) as Nebuchadnezar is compared by the Prophet.
Esaias. chap. 14, 12.

Stars fallen from heaven. sig:
Ministers and Pastors of the Church, who (as Stars) did shine by sincere
Doctrine, and now through tentation and force of Persecution, declined and
turned from the truth, to errors and lies, which is meant by falling from
heaven. Revel. 6, 13. And the Stars fell from heaven to earth.

12 Stars sig:
The Doctrine of the twelve Apostles (as the Crown and glory of the Church)
which they borrowed from the most bright Sun (that Fountain of heavenly
wisdom) and preached to the World; afterward writing it in Books, called [
Scriptures.] Reuelat. 12, 1. Upon her head, a Crown of twelve Stars.

Stones precious. sig:
The excellent and rare gifts, wherein namely the Pastors of the Church shall
shine before others. Revel. 21, 19. With all manner of precious Stones.

Stings. sig.
Powwer to hurt, vex, and annoy others: bodily, as Sarazins; Spiritually, as
Popish Monks and Friars (which are the tails here spoken of.) Reave. 9, 10.
And there were stings in their tails.

Streets. sig:
Some part of the Romish jurisdiction, wherein this cruel spectacle was
exhibited to be seen. Revel. 11, 8. And their corpse shall lie in the Streets
of the great City.

2 A place, where the multitude of Citizens do dwell properly; and
figuratively, a liberty, which all the Citizens of heaven do enjoy. Revel. 22,
2. In the midst of the Street of it.

S. U.
Sun. sig:
The light of truth, obscured or extinct, rather by Haeresie in Doctrine, and
by superstition, in the worship of God. Revel. 9, 2. And the Sun and the air
were darkened. Revel. 18, 8.

2 Christ Jesus, the Sun of righteousness. Revel. 12, 1. Clothed with the
Sun.

Sun black. sig:
The prosperity and peace of the Christian church eclipsed, and taken away (for
a time) by most cruel persecutions, and bloody extreamities, exercised, as at
other times, yet especially in the days of Diocl^sianus and Maximinia^us,
Emperors. Revel. 6, 12. And the Sun was black as Sackcloath. Here is an
allusion to the Prophets. Ier. 4, 23, 28. Chap. 32, 7. 8. Esaias 50, 3.

S. W.
to swallow. sig;
To sink in and cause to vanish; as the earth or Land does to the floods of
Water which it drinks in: so did the earth; that is, (men of earthly Religion
and affections) swallow and drink i^ (as it were) the rage and persecution
intended by the Devil and his Instruments against the Church of Christ in
earth. Revel. 12, 16. The earth opened her mouth, and Swallowed up the flood.
This was verified in the Vandals, Goths, and other barbarous people, who
coming to dwell in ciuillized countries; and being turned (in show at least) to
Christian Religion, did much help the true Church, by stopping and allaying
the furious minds of her adversaries.

Sword sharp and sword of his mouth. sig:
The word of God, the force whereof is mighty, for the cutting down sin in
the repentant, and for cutting a pieces, spiritually, and destroying the
impenitent. Revel. 2, 12. Which has a sharp Sword with two edges. Revel. 1,
16. With the Sword of my mouth. This signifies the same thing with sharp
Sword, unless happily, some grievous Judgment of War be meant, which being
pronounced by the word, is therefore called the Sword of his mouth.

2 War and battle, or slaughter of men in war, executed by the sword. Reu.
6, 8. Power was given to kill with the Sword.

Wound of a Sword. See Wound.

S. Y.
Synagogue of Satan. sig:
A Company or assembly of men, indeed, worshipping and serving the Devil by
errors and profaneness, yet pretending themselves to be the holy people of
God. Reu. 2, 9. Which are not Jews, but are the Synagogue of Satan.

T. A.
Tabernacle sig;
THe dwelling of God, or (as some other Learned Divines Judge) the whole
worship of God (which under the Law) was exercised in the Tabernacle. Revel.
21, 3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men.

2 The Church of God, in her pilgrimage or wayfaring here in earth;
especially, when it is most obscure and least known of the world. Reu. 13, 6.
To blaspheme the Tabernacle of God.

Tail. sig:
Temptation, by Ambition, Vainglory, Covetousness, or by fear of
persecution, whereby (as by a Tail) the Stars or Pastors of the Church, were
stricken and pulled down from their brightness of Doctrine and life, into
errors and profaneness. Revel. 12. 4. And his Tail drew down the third part
of the Stars of heaven, for the fulfilling heerof. See Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 41.

2 The basest of any society, as begging Friars in Popery, etc. Amongst the
Turks, the Dregs of the Sarazins, Instruments of cruelty. Reu. 9, 19.

to be Taken up to God. sig:
To be myraculously protected of God (as Christ the son of Mary was) by
warning given to the Wisemen, and willing Joseph to fly, when Satan by Herod,
would have destroyed him. Mat. ^2. and afterward strangely kept, against the
subtle and cruel practices of the Herodians, Pharisees, Jews, and Gentiles.
If this Text be meant of Constantine the Great (because the Revelation speaks
not of things past, but fore-speakes things to come. Reu. 4, 1.) Then to be
taken up, signifies to be placed in height of earthly honor and Majesty, being
made Emperor when he looked not for it, and with more large power and dominion
(upon earnest request of the Romans, burdened and wearied with the tyranny of
Maxentius) being assured of victory against his enemies, by voice and token
from Heaven (as Stories report.) Revel. 12, 5. And he was taken up of God, and
to his Throne.

Talents. sig:
A Stone, or other thing of very great weight, (such as we read of Joshua 10,
11. to have bin cast upon the accursed Canaanites) and such as here are
threatened to be cast upon the Antichristian route, to break them in pieces
withal. Revel. 16, 21. There fell a great Hail like Talents.

T. E.
Tears. sig:
Calamity and sorrow, the cause of Tears. As Esaias 25, 8. Revel. 21, 4. And God
will wipe away all Tears.

Temple. sig:
The worship of God, freed from Legal or Mosaicall Rites, and all human
inventions. Revel. 21, 22. No Temple there.

2 The Holy of Holies, or most Holy place, where were the Mercy-seate and
Cherubims, and the Arc, kept in time of the Law, as a Figure and sign of
Gods presence. Reuelat. 15* 5. And I saw the Temple open, etc. And afterward,
in verse 8. The Temple is said to be filled with smoke; to signifye, a
manifest Token of Gods presence, such as was in the Tabernacle. Exo. 40, 34, 35.

3 Heavenly Kingdom of Glory. Revel. 11, 19. And the Temple of GOD was open
in Heaven.

Ten horns. sig:
Great strength, power, and might, to do much hurt. Revel. 12, 3. He has Ten
horns.

2 The first ten Christian Emperors, in whose days and reign the beast
increased in dignity and power greatly. Revel. 13, 1. I saw a Beast rise out of
the Sea, having Ten horns.

3 Ten Kings, which had not begun to reign, when John wrote the Book of
Revelation. Revel. 17, 3, 12. Seven heads, and Ten horns; the Ten horns,
are ten Kings.

ten crowns. sig:
Great and many victories got by mighty force and power. Revel. 13, 1. And upon
his horns Ten Crowns.

ten Thousand Thousand. sig:
An inumerable company, or infinite multitude of Angels. Revel. 5, 11. There
were Ten thousand times ten Thousand, etc.

Tenth part sig:
A very great portion of the Popish Kingdom, and superstition. Also
diminished by the falling away of sundry Nations; especially of the Germans.
Revel. 11, 13. The tenth part of the City fell.

to Testifye. sig:
To bear witness, as Christ did, both in respect of the whole Gospel
generally, and of this prophesy particularly. Revel. 22, 20. He which
testifies these Things.

Testimony of Jesus. sig:
The Faith and Doctrine concerning salvation by Jesus Christ. Revel. 12, 17.
And have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

2 The preaching of Christ, and salvation by him. Revel. 19. 10. The Testimony
of Jesus, is the spirit of Prephesie; that is, they which have the function to
reach Christ, are equal to such as have the gift to reveal things to come.
By which reason, the Angel disswades John from worshipping him.

T. H.
That beast and That false Prophet. sig:
The chief Instruments of the Devil, Heathenish and Turkish Emperors,
together with Pope and Popish Clergy, who with their chief Captain the
Devil, shall be cast into Hell. Reuela. 20, 10. With the Beast and that false
Prophet.

as a Thief sig:
Suddenly, when he is not looked for: for, beside all men's expectation, will
Christ come to be revenged on the ungodly, for the wrongs done to his Church.
Revel. 16, 15. Behold I come as a Thief.

Thigh. sig:
Properly the inferior part of the body, from the belly down to the feet.

2 Mystically and figuratively, the meanest and lowest things in Christ our K.
which shall be (in the glorious restoring of Religion to be performed, toward
the end of the World) superior and more excellent, then that which is highest
and most supreme in the Monarchs of the earth. Revel. 19, 16. Upon his Thigh
a Name written, King of Kings, etc.

Third part. sig:
The greatest part, or a very great part. Revel. 8, 7. And the Third part of
Trees was burnt up.

Third Beast. See Beast.

Third part of Creatures. sig:
All that live in Europe, the third part of the World; so understand. ver. 12.
also. Reu. 8, 9. The Third part of Creatures dyed.

Third part of Stars. sig:
Very many Pastors of the Church, sometime shining like Stars. Reave. 12, 4.
Strike down the Third part of the Stars.

to Thirst. sig:
To desire earnestly the graces of Christ, out of a feeling of our want. Reu.
22, 17. Let every one that Thirsts come.

Throne. sig:
The glorious Majesty of God, whereof the visible Thrones of Kings and earthly
Judges, bears a certain representation. Reave. 1, 2.

2 Dominion and glory of Christ, and his members in Heaven. Reave. 3, 21.

T. O.
Torch. sig:
A Lamp or great light, which gives forth apparently, a very clear and
shining fiery brightness, which yet lasts no longer then it has nourishment,
which once failing, the Lamp is extinguished. Such were certain Pastors of
the Church, which fell from the Doctrine of Faith, through ambition or fear.
Reu. 8, 10. A great Star burning like a Torch.

to be Tormented. sig:
To be most extremely pained and vexed, with most horrible and neuer-ending
pain. Reuelat. 14, 10. They shall be Tormented in Fire and Brimstone.

T. R.
to Travail in Birth. sig:
To covet and long to be eased, of that most heavy and grievous condition
wherein the Church should continue, under Heathenish Emperors; even as a Woman
that is in Travail desires to be eased of her pain. Reu. 12, 2. And cried
Travailing in Birth. Some, refer this to the longing and expectation of the
Church of the Jews, vehemently desiring and expecting to see the promised
Messiah: but Saint John here prophesied of things to come, as Chap. 4. ver. 1.
is signified to us plainly. Therefore the former interpretation seems to be
better.

to Tread under feet the holy City. sig:
To lay wast (as some think) the pure worship and true Worshippers: or (as
others judge,) to frequent the assemblies daily, under the pretense of
worshipping God, as false Christians do, which are here noted with the Name
of Gentiles: But both significations well agree together, (as I take it;)
namely, that such as in words profess Christ, yet for life and manners were
as the profane Gentiles, should both much haunt the place of Divine worship,
and yet as false hearted Hypocrites, tread down the truth, and true Servants
of God.

Tree of life. sig:
Christ Jesus, who shall be to all his members, as a Tree of aeternall life,
more plentiful then to-fore, satisfying and refreshing them with the
fellowship of himself, which is here meant by eating of this Tree. Reave. 2,
7. He that overcomes, shall eat of the Tree of life.

Trees. sig:
The company of Reprobates and ungodly men in the Kingdom of this World.
Revel. 8, 7. The Third part of the Trees were burnt.

2 The number of the elect, which are exempted from the hurt which the Locustes
should do. Reu. 9, 4. Neither any Tree.

True. sig:
One, which knows all things, as they be without error or ignorance, which
also wills and decrees whatsoever he wills; seriously, without fraud, and
performs all his promises without inconstancy or unfaithfulness. Such an one
is Christ. Revel. 3, 7. The things says he which is holy and True.

2 One, which fulfilleth his punishments which he has threatened. Reu. 16, 7.
True and righteous are thy judgments.

Trumpets seven. sig:
The Revelations of Gods judgments (by Angels or Teachers of the Church, who
are likened to Trumpets) and the manifest and famous events which follow such
Revelations, in all manner and kinds of vnpunnishments. Reuelat. 8, 2. And to
them were given seven Trumpets.

T. W.
Twelve Angels. sig:
The Keepers which Watch to open the Gates of the New Jerusalem, and to
receive the Citizens quickly, without delay. Revel. 21, 12. At the Gates
twelve Angels.

Twelve foundations. sig:
The Doctrine of grace, taught the Church first by the twelve Apostles, which
were isntrumental and ministerial foundations (Christ alone being the
principal Foundation and Head-corner stone, on which, even the Apostles
themselves as living Stones are laid) and afterward Preached by all faithful
Pastors in all Ages. Reave. 21, 14. And the wall of the City had twelve
Foundations.

Twelve Gates. sig:
The ready entrance and easy access (as by Gates into an House) which the
Children of God, the true Israelites shall find into the New Jerusalem from
above. Revel. 21, 12. And the Wall had twelve Gates. Here is an allusion to
the earthly Jerusalem in Iewry, where the Jews had free ingresse from all
quarters, by twelve Gates.

Twelve Pearls. See Pearls.

Twelve Tribes. sig:
The whole number of the faithful, both Jews or Gentiles, which walked the
steps of their Father Abraham. Revel. 21, 12. Which are the twelve Tribes of
the Children of Israel.

Twelve fruits. sig:
Variety of fruit, not one kind, but sundry, yet without satiety. Revel. 22,
2. Bearing twelve fruits.

Twelve thousand furlong. sig:
The unmeasurable greatness and largeness of New-Hierusalem, being for
multitude of Citizens without number, very spacious and capacious. Reu. 21,
16. And he measured the City Twelve thousand furlongs.

Two Candlestickes. sig:
All the faithful Pastors of the Church, from whom the light of Gods word
shines upon men, as Candlestickes bears out the light which be put on them.
Revel. 11, 5. These are Two Candlestickes.

Two horns sig:
The Two powers, Regal and Pontifical; Civil and Ecclesiastical, which the
Pope and Papal Clergy challenge to themselves, over the Emperors and Kings
of the earth. Also, over men's souls and consciences, and because they pretend
this double power, to be derived and received from Christ, (though indeed it
be from the Dragon) even from the Devil of Hell. Therefore be they called,
the [ Horns of a Lamb.] Reu. 11, 13. The Beast had Two horns, like the Lamb.
Some, understand these Two Horns, of Two French Kings; Pipinus, and Carolus
Magnus, who succored the Two Popes; Stephanus the second, and Adrian (whom
they took to be Innocents, and harmless as Lambs) against the Kings of the
Lombards: Aristulphus, and Desiderius.

Two and forty months. sig:
Three years and a half, which is half a prophetical week, according to
Daniell 9. and iumpeth with the other numbers; of a time, Two times, and half
a time; Also, a thousand, Two hundred, threescore days. Which several
numbers, do note and point out one thing; to wit, that the time of the tyranny
of Antichrist persecuting the Saints, is certain, fixed and determined, which
he cannot pass, and that it shall not be very long, which greatly makes for
the consolation of the Saints. Revel. 11, 2. The holy City they shall tread
underfoot Two and forty months. Where these months took their beginning, and
where they are determined, I take not on me to judge; certain it is, that in
these forty two months, every day is put for a year (as in the Prophecy of
weeks by Daniell) and every week for seven year, and every month to consist
of thirty days, according to the Aegiptian account; And finally, that it is
the whole space of time, wherein Antichrist shall arise, increase, or wax; be
wounded, revive, and take heart again, to execute his cruelty in that City
which was the Queen of the World (as it were) where he and his favorites
should bath themselves in pleasures. Therefore they do err, which do
precisely understand these months of three year and a half, where by this
number, mystically is fignified, the whole time of Antichrists reign; which is
by the former Computation, twelve hundred threescore years.

Two Witnesses. sig:
A competent number of faithful Preachers, which testify against the errors
of Antichrist, and for the Doctrine of Christ. Reave. 11, 3. I will give the
same to my Two Witnesses. These Witnesses, though few, weak and contemptible,
yet shall be a sufficient number to help and confirm one another.

T. Y.
Time of the dead. sig:
The time, when the Jews, strangers from Christ, without his Salvation* (and
therefore truly dead) shall be brought to the knowledge of the truth,
according to the Prophesies of Scripture. Revel. 11, 18. And the time of the
dead should be judged. Some, refer this to the last judgment, when every one
shall be rewarded according to his works.

Time and Times, and half a Time. See before in Two and forty months. Revel.
12, 14.

Time is come. sig:
The fit season and opportunity, wherein God, (according to his decree) will
prosper the endeavors of his Servants laboring in the word. Reu. 14, 15. For
the Time is come.

Time no more. sig:
Time shall be utterly abolished, the natural course of Sun and Stars
ceasing, whereby years, weeks, months, and days, were distinguished. Reave.
10, 6. He swore that Time should be no more. Some, translate for Time [ Delay]
and will have the meaning to be, that there should be a small delay, no long
space of Time til the consummation of the Mystery, and then it does not
signify the abolition of Time, after the consummation and end of all; but
breuity or short space of Time, until the consummation come. This latter,
seems better to agree with the circumstances of the Text.

V. I.
Uials golden. sig:
THE hearts of the faithful, filled by the Spirit with fervent Prayers, which
are pleasing to God thorough Christ (as sweet odours be to our sense.) Reave.
5, 8. They had Golden Vials full of sweet Odours, which are the prayers of the
Saints. These words, teach how precious Vessels the hearts of true believers
are, and how sweet the Prayers be which come from them, by allusion to the
manner of the Temple at Jerusalem. See Zach. 14, 20. Psalm. 141, 2.

2 The holy minds, not of all the faithful, but of the true Servants and
Ministers of Christ, filled not with seruent pure Prayers only, but with the
severe judgments of God, which they are ready to denounce by threatening with
integrity, against and upon the Kingdom of Antichrist, and Popish worshippers;
and because God is pure and holy, even in his judgments threatened and
executed on the wicked; Therefore, those Vials are said to be of Gold, and
because God will be thoroughly avenged on his Enemies; therefore, the Vials are
said to be full of wrath, which being the wrath of him who lives for ever,
amplifieth the grieuousnesse of it. Revel. 15, 7. Seven Golden Vials full of
the wrath of God, which lives for evermore. If the seven Angels, spoken of in
the former part of this verse, be properly taken, not for Ministers of the
word, but for Caelestiall Spirits, yet the matter is all one, that God is
decreed to execute his vengeance, silently and fully, as one would pour Water
out of Vials. Note, that the first events of Gods judgments in this Book,
were called Seals, because they were for confirmations of the future: Then,
Trumpets succeeded, to show, that the judgments following were not only
denounced with great noise, but grieuouslie executed. Thirdly, Vials, which
being capacious Vessels of Divine judgments, did serve as fit Instruments, to
consummate the destruction of Antichristian enemies, on who^ they* should
suddenly, rashly, and insensibly fall, to their utter confusion. Revel. 16, 1.
Also Revel. 21, 9. A Vial, is a Vessel, greater then a Cup, and contains
so much Liquor, as a Man can at a draught drink in.

Uictory of the beast. sig:
A preuayling over Antichrist, even by a full and absolute victory; for which
cause, here be reckoned up with the Beast, his Image, mark, and number of his
name. All which, these Conquerors shall abhor and have in utter execration.
Revel. 15, 2. And them that had gotten victory of the Beast, and of his Image,
mark, and name.

Uines of the Uineyards. sig:
The whole number of the Reprobate, whether Heathens, Jews, Turks, or heaps
of Hipocrites and wicked within the Church; or Idolators and Heritikes, which
renounce the Church and Name of Christ, though not in profession, yet in truth.
Revel. 14, 19. And cut down the Vines of the Vineyards of the earth. Some,
judges this Prophecy, not to be of the last judgment, when all the wicked
shall be cast into the large Wine Press of the pit of Hell, to be tormented
(as Clusters of Grapes cut off, are cast into a Fat or press, where they be
pressed,) but to have been fulfilled, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
five hundred thirty and nine, here in England; when Monasteries, Abbeys,
Fryeries, Nunneries, and other Houses (then falsely called Religious) were
pulled down, their Lands and Reuennewes, converted to other more honest and
public uses, by the advice and service of Lord Cromwell, who (as a sharp
Sickle) served the providence of God, not to lop and prime, but to cut down
the Vines, even the shining fat glory of the Popish pontifical Church, which
had taken and spread it self far and near in this rich and fruitful Island,
such a cropping of the Vines happened in Germany, much about the same time. Let
the learned judge which sense best agreeeth.

Uirgins. sig:
Such as are purged from the corruptions of the World, but cheefely from
Idolatry, which is spiritual Whoredom. Reu. 14, 4. For they be Virgins.

V. N.
unbelievers sig:
Such persons as will not embrace the doctrine of Christ, but openly refuse it.
Revel. 21, 8. Fearful unbelievers.

Unclean thing. sig:
Such as being themselves vnpure and filthy, are apt by contagion to infect
and pollute others whom they touch. Reuela. 21, 27. No Unclean thing.

Unjust. sig:
One, which is injurious, offering wrong and violence to the Saints, whom they
shall exercise for a time with their wicked dealing, and afterward be
recompensed at Christ's coming. Reu. 22, 2. Let him that is unjust, be unjust
still.

V. O.
Uoices. sig*
Strange stings and pricks of conscience, vexing men with continual
expectation of some evil to come. Reu. 4, 5. Out of the Throne proceeded
Lightnings, thundrings, and Voices. Some, by these words understand no other
thing, but the fearful judgments of God, threatened in most horrible manner
to the wicked, alluding to the terrible manner of delivering the Law, by
Thundering, Lightning, and sounding of a Trumpet. Exodus 19.

2 The glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, sounded forth by the operation of the
holy Ghost, to reprove the World* and to terrify Tyrants and Worldlings, who
thereuppon raise up all manner of tumults and vprores* persecutions and
slanders, represented by Thundering, Lightning* and Earth quake. Reu. 8, 5. And
there were Voices, and Thunderings, and Lightnings, and Earquakes.

3 A word or sentence, uttered miraculously from Heaven. Revel. 10, 8. And the
Voice which I heard from heaven, spoke to me again.

Uoyce of the Bridegroom. sig:
The mirth and gladness, such as uses to be expressed and exercised at
Marriages. Revel. 18, 23. The Voice of the Bridegroom shall be heard no more.
In these words he alludeth to Jeremy. Chapter 25, 10.

a Uoyce of Harpers and Musicians, etc. sig:
All manner of mirth and joy, expressed by any manner of Instruments, whether
touched by the finger, or made to sound by the force of the breath. Reu. 18,
22. And the voice of Harpers, Musicians, and Trumpeters shall be heard no more.

Great voice of a great multitude. sig:
A most great and cheerful noise of innumerable Citizens of the
Church-Militant, cheering and rejoicing themselves with the ruin and fall of
Babylon. Revel. 19, 1. I heard a great Voice, of a great multitude in Heaven.

Uoice of many waters, and of strong thunders. sig*
An effectual Voice, very terrible, piercing and striking* (like Thunder) and
making great noise, (like many Waters together) strongly provoking both the
Jews restored, and the unbelieving Gentiles, to sound forth the praises of
God, for his infinite mercies in Christ, and his great judgments against the
great Whore. Revel. 19, 6. I heard a Voice as the Voice of many Waters, and as
the Voice of strong Thunders.

a Uoice out of y^ throne. sig:
A most sweet Exhortation, uttered by some of those Angels which are said to
be amiddest the Throne, and about the Throne of God, stirring up the Servants
of God to praise him. Revel. 19, 5. Then a Voice came out of the Throne;
saying, praise the Lord.

Uoyce out of the temple. sig:
The faithful Prayers of the Saints prevailing with God, for the executing of
his judgments upon his, and their accursed enemies in Antichrists Kingdom.
Revel. 16, 1. And I heard a great Voice out of the Temple. Others, understand
this of Gods own voice, immediately thundering out of Heaven, the Temple of his
holiness: which cannot agree, seeing the Temple, signifies the Militant
Church in Earth. As Chap. 11, 1.

W. A.
to Walk. sig:
TO be always present in the midst of the church to bless, enrich, guide,
and protect the Ministers and members thereof. Revel. 2, 1. And Walks in the
midst of the seven golden Candlestickes. If Christ be always resident with
his Church himself, to look into every thing, what need a Vicar*

2 To line, or to order our life according to the direction of the word, which
is a light to our steps. Revel. 21, 24, And the people shall Walk in the light
of it*

Wall. sig:
The strength, defense, and safety of the Church, which is (as a City that
has walls for defense.) Revel. 21, 12. And had a great Wall on hie.

Wares. sig:
Not only outward Merchandise and stuffes; as Silks* (...) precious stones,
Pearls, Purple, Scarlet, and (...). The value whereof, shall much abate at the
fall of (...)* but spiritual Merchandise; as Masses, Dirges, and such trash,
which shall wax vile and nothing worth. Revel, 18, 11.

War. sig:
Battle, hostility, or enmity against the true preachers and professors of the
word, stirred up against them, by Romish Antichrist, who is therefore said to
be the Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, because his beastly and
savage power and Tirany, is from hell, which he shall exercise with bloody
cruelty. Revel. 11, 7. The Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, shall
make war against them. Revel, 13, 7. Make War against the Saints. This war,
is that hot opposition and bitter enmity, which the Tridentine Counsel, with
the Popes and Emperors forces, made against the Protestants in Germany, as the
learned collect, by comparing events with prophesies. There is another battle
mentioned, chap: 19, verse 19, 20, etc. wherein the Beast shall overcome and be
taken.

to Wash long robes. sig:
To have (being converted unto Christ by faith) the holiness and righteousness
of Christ alone imputed to them. Revel. 7, 14. And have Washed their long Robes.

Wa^, and is not, etc. sig:
The diverse condition of the Roman Empire, according to the change of 4.
several times, 1. flourishing in Majesty and power, under the reign of the
first Emperors, Julius, Augustus, Tiberius, Claudius, etc. 2. Ecclipsed and
diminished in glory and power, under the succeeding Emperors, Nero, Galba,
Domitian, etc. 3. But revived and raised up again in the Popes. 4. and
finally, in Gods just Judgment to be thrust down into utter destruction.
Revel. 17, 8. The Beast which thou have seen, was, and is not, and shall
ascend out of the bottomless pit, and shall go to perdition. Some other
Divines, understand this wholly of Antichrist, the Popish Empire, which began
after S. John's time, in the end of the reign of Constantine the Great; 2. and
afterward, by an incursion of Barbarians, Rome and Italy, being miserably
wasted, the pontifical Authority and Sea seemed, as it were not to be. 3. But
this hurt and wound was afterward cured by Justinian and Phocas, in the time of
Pope Gregory the second, which exercised a greater power (both Ecclesiastical
and Temporal) then any of his predecessors had done. 4. Yet this
newly-recouered dignity, was not always to last, but to be diminished by
little and little (as we see this day) till it wholly be extinct, which
posterity must see. That this is the truest interpretation, may appear, by
verses 10. and 12. of this chap. which make it manifest. This Beast here
spoken of, not to have been then when he wrote this prophecy, nor had not
then received his kingdom and power. Therefore, they are utterly deceived,
which expound this verse of the As Ribera the Jesuit does
Devil; or which do seek for the beginning or seat of Antichrist any
where, but at Rome, where all the four former mutations and chaunges are
evidently known to have happened, whether we understand these changes, jointly
of the Heathenish and Popish Monarchy, or of Ecclesiastical Empire alone, as
it seems that it ought to be, for the former reason.

to Watch. sig:
To shake off security and sluggishnesse, and with great care to preserve our
Garments of faith and innocence. Revel. 16, 15. Blessed is he that watches,
and keeps his Garments.

Waters. sig:
Peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and toongs; at a word, Countries of
every language, obeying Rome as their Queen or Mistress. Revel. 17, 15. The
Waters which thou saw, are peoples, and multitudes, etc.

2 All impediments and lets which hinder passage and access to a Region.
Revel. 16, 12. And the Water thereof was dried up.

3 The Doctrine of Gods word, which is like sweet and wholesome waters, but
being infected by corrupt Teachers, they become bitter as wormwood. Revel. 8,
11. Many died of the Waters, because they were bitter. Revel. 22, 1, 17.

4 Superstitions, errors, Haeresies, as a flood of water to drown the Church.
Revel. 12, 15.

Way. sig:
Commodity or opportunity of doing something. Revel. 16, 12. That Way might be
prepared for the Kings.

W. E.
Well of the water of life sig:
The sweetness of Christ, and his abundant graces, ouer-flowing, to the
satisfying of every thirsty soul, earnestly desiring to Communicate with the
good things of Christ, Revel. 21, 6. I will give to the thirsty of the Well of
the Water of life freely.

Weeping. sig:
Shedding of tears, together with sorrows and calamities, the cause of
tears. Revel. 18, 19. And cry, Weeping and wayling.

W. H.
What City like? sig:
No City at all to be compared with Rome, being most ancient, flourishing in
wealth and friends for many generations, accounted first the Queen of Nations,
and afterward the Chair of Peter, the terror of the world; Who would not have
thought this City far enough, and free enough, from all destruction? Revel,
18, 18. What City was like to this great City?

White. sig:
Pure* from all spot, by imputation of Christ's Righteousness and shining in
glory, both in themselves, by sense of Gods love; and with others, by praises
rendered to God for his grace toward them. Revel. 3, 4, And shall walk with
me in White.

white array* sig:
Eternal glory, happiness, and life, by a perfect participation with Christ.
Revel. 3, 5. He that overcomes, shall be clothed in White array.

white cloud sig:
Earthly Principalities, Powers, and Rulers, lifted on high (as a Cloud) and
for their benignity and clemency, compared to White clouds. Reu. 14, 14.
Behold, a White cloud. This is commonly understood of the last Judgment, and
referred to Christ, who shall come from Heaven in a cloud, representing his
uprightness, by the Whiteness. But this seems not to agree with verse 15.
Where he that sat on the Cloud, is said, to do nothing but by the
commandment of another Angel.

white horse sig:
The gladsome tydinges of the Gospel, by the Ministry of the Teachers and
Pastors, spread abroad with great celerity and power, converting and subduing
many people far and near unto Christ and his blessed truth. Revel. 6, 2.
Lo, there was a White Horse, and he that sat on him had a Bow. They seem then
to be wide, which understand this of the Arrows of Pestilence, mightily and
speedily striking men. Other, far more probably, refer this to the victory
which the truth had, under the Emperor Adrian, who by mediation of certain
Philosophers, pleading the cause of Christians before him, was moved to make a
joyful decree, that no Christian should be condemned, but for civil crimes
punishable by law. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 3. as afterward, by Edict of the next
Emperor, Antoninus Pius, at the motion of Justinius Martyr, it was proclaimed,
that no Christian should be troubled, because he was a Christian, and their
accusers should be judged to punishment. Eusebius. lib. 4, 11,

white robe. sig:
The holiness, purity, and innocence of Christ, put upon the elect by faith.
Revel. 7, 13. Arrayed in long White Robes.

White throne. sig:
A Tribunal seat, most Princely and glorious, as full of mercy, as of Majesty.
Revel. 20, 11. I saw a great White Throne.

Whore great. sig:
A notable Harlot, herself committing whoredom spiritually, and enticing
others high and low, Princes and people to partake with her in Idolatry. This
plainly is Popish Rome, for Heathenish Rome, left every people to their own
Religion. Revel. 17, 1. I will show thee the damnation of that great Whore.
Revel. 19, 2. He has condemned the great Whore.

W. I.
Widdowe. sig:
One, bereft of her dignity, as a Wife of her husband. Revel. 18, 7. No Widow.

Wife. sig:
The Church, collected of Gentiles and Jews, which being two Sisters, do both
make up but one Wife, as Leah and Rachell were to Jacob. Reu. 19, 7. And his
Wife has prepared her self.

Wilderness sig:
A solitary and secret place, fit for one to hide himself in, also free from
the pomp and glory of the world. Revel. 12, 6. And the Woman fled into the
Wilderness.

Wine of wrath. sig:
Idolatry, which is spiritual fornication, and kindles Gods indignation and
anger; yet superstitious persons drink it in, as Drunkards do draw in sweet
wine. Revel. 14, 8. To drink of the Wine of the wrath of her fornication.

2 The most severe pain, even Fire and Brimstone due to Idolatry, wherein
superstitious persons took not so great delight to practice it; but the
righteous God will take as much pleasure in punishing it. Revel. 14, 10. He
also shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, etc. and shall be Tormented
with fire and brimstone.

two wings. sig:
Means of flight, and swift escape: The two wings, be, Gods providence,
protecting, and his Oracles, directing the Church in her speedy flight. Revel.
12, 14. To the woman were given two Wings of a great Eagle.

Winepresse sig:
Hell, whereinto the Wicked enemies of the Church shall be cast to be
tormented, as Clusters of Grapes be cast into a Wine Press, to be there
pressed. Revel. 14, 19. Were cast into that great Wine Press of Gods wrath.
How some understand this; not of the last and great Judgment in the end of the
world, but refer it to that sharp judgment executed upon Popery, in the
days of Henry the 8. King of England, by the downfall of their religious
houses in this ours, and other Contryes of Europ, ye may read in the words [
Uine] and [ Uineyard.]

to Wipe all tears. sig:
To deliver and set free from tears, and from sorrows and calamities, the
causes of tears, and with all to restore unto a more joyful estate. Revel.

Wisdom. sig:
Understanding, Learning, and skill, to search, and by serching, to find the
number of the name of the beast. Reu. 13, 18. Here is Wisdom. Let him that
has understanding, let him count, etc. Learned Iunius gives this
Interpretation of this verse. The name and mark of the Beast (says he) do
easily happen to any; but it is wisdom to have the number of the Beast; that
is, only the wise, and such as have understanding, can come by that number:
for they must be most illuminated Doctors which attain thereto. But I like the
former better.

Witness. sig:
A Minister of the word, which by Doctrine and good life, and Martyrdom (if
need be) does give Testimony to the word of God. Revel. 11, 3. I will give the
same to my two Witnesses. See two Witnesses.

W. O.
Woe, woe, woe. sig:
Three exceeding grecuous plagues and evils to be sent upon the wicked world,
more fearful then any former calamities. The first Woe, was the sending or
stirring up of Antichrist, or the Kingdom of Popery, whereof chap. 9. verse
2, 3. The second, Turcisme. Chapter 9. v. 13, 14, 15, etc. The third is that most
dreadful Vengeance, both here and eternally executed on the wicked, whereof we
may read. Chap. 11. verses 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, etc. Revel. 8, 13. Saying with a
loud voice, Woe, Woe, Woe.

Woman. sig:
The true Church of Christ, often in the Scripture called his wife and his
spouse. Revel. 12, 1. A Woman clothed with the Sun.

2 Idols. Revel. 14, 4. These are they which are not defiled with Women. This
Text, no whit speaks against marriage, in any kind or degree of persons; but
as the Scriptures usually call [ Idolatry] Fornication and Whoredom; so after
the same form of speaking, Idolles are in this Verse, called [ Women.]

3 The City of Rome, as it is become the seat of Antichrist. Revel. 17, 3.
And I saw a Woman sit on a Scarlet colored Beast. This Woman, being all
glorious (not within) but outwardly, cannot be that true Spouse of Christ,
whose rare beauty is spiritual, and in word.

Wonder. sig:
Some strange and marvelous thing, worthy to be wondered at, for the
greatness and rareness of it. Revel. 12, 1. I saw a great Wonder in heaven.
Also, chap: 12. verse 3.

Word. sig:
The whole will of GOD, revealed in the law and the Gospel. Revel. 3, 8. Thou
have kept my Word.

2 That part of Gods will, contained in this Book of the Revelation. Revel.
22, 7. Which observes the Words of this Prophecy.

3 The eternal and infallible Decree of the most high GOD, concerning the
Conversion of the Jews, unto the Faith of Christ. Revelation 19, 9. These are
the true Words of GOD himself.

4 Christ Jesus, the Son of God, second person in Trinity, the aeternall
wisdom of his father, That word which was from the beginning, Revel. 9, 13.
The Word of God.

5 A particular Prophecy, touching the making of all things new; to wit, in
the restitution of the Jews; and after that, of the whole World. Revel. 21, 5.
Write, for these Words are faithful and true.

Works. sig:
The dealinges and practices of Ministers and people in their callinges and
affairs, wherein, whatsoever is done well, is both seen and approved of
Christ. Reuelat. 2, 2. I know thy Works.

2 A most large and blessed reward, by Gods free Mercy given to Good-Workes
after this life. Revel. 14, 13. And their Works do follow them. Not their
Merrites; but a free reward to their works.

3 The Merrite and desert of wickedness and cruelty. Revel. 18, 6. Give her
double according to her Works. Let such then see, what they will answer to
GOD, who would have Babylon to be favorably thought of, and dealt gently
withal.

4 Deeds and actions, evil or good. Revel. 20, 12 According to their Works.

World. sig:
The whole Company of the Reprobate, even whosoever are estraunged from Christ,
whether within or without the Church. Revel. 12, 9. Who has deceived all the
world.

wormwood. sig:
Properly, an Herb (commonly known by this Name) of quality very bitter,
making the liquor into which it is powered, more bitter, then that it can be
drunk.

2 Figuratively: false Doctrine, errors, lies, and haeresies, which (like
bitter Wormwood) corrupt and poison the sweet wholesome Waters of the word.
Revel. 9, 11. The name of the Star is called Wormwood.

to Worship the Angel. sig:
To offer Divine VVorshippe to the Angel, which was but a Creature, being too
much Ravished with his most Glorious brightness, and with the joy of his
gladsome Message, Reuelat. 19, 10. And I fell before his feet to Worship him.

to Worship the Beast. sig:
To acknowledge and reverence Antichrist, and by some outward Token or pledge
to profess subjection to him; Finally, to maintain him, with mind and might.
Reuelat. 14, 9. If any shall Worship the Beast or his Image.

to Worship Devils. sig:
To yield Religious or Divine Honor to Idols, which is a kind of serving of
Devils. Revel. 19, 20. That they should not Worship Devils and Idols of Gold
and Silver. Mark, that Popish Idolatry, as well as Heathenish, is a worship of
Diuelles, and no better; for all pretenses.

to Worship the Dragon sig:
To attribute supreme dignity and power unto Antichrist the Pope of Rome, in
this regard, that he succeeded the Heathenish Emperors in that City, which was
the Metropolis of the Empire. Reu. 13, 4. And they Worshipped the Dragon, which
gave power to the Beast.

to Worship God. sig:
To yield unto GOD alone Religious adoration, and Divine Honor. Reuelat. 9,
10. Worship God. Religious Worship, due to God alone.

Worthy. sig:
One, who by the Righteousness of Christ imputed, (and not by holiness
inhaerent) is worthy of aeternall glory. Revel. 3, 4. For they be Worthy.

Wounded to death. sig:
Greatly hurt and diminished by a grievous calamity, which both Rome, and the
Pope sitting there, received, by the space of one hundred thirty and two
years, by the violence of the Goths, Vandales, Hunnes, and other barbarous
people, which had surprised Rome and taken it. Revel. 13, 3. And I saw one of
his Heads, as it were, Wounded to death.

Written within and without. sig:
A large Writing, and copious, fully fore-shewing the things that should
befall the Church even unto the least matters. Revel. 5, 1. I saw a Book
Written within and without.

Written in the Book of life. sig:
The Elect, whom God out of his euer-lasting Decree, has chosen to
everlasting life, by Christ, being every one in their time, washed, justified,
and sanctified. Revel. 21; 27. But they which are Written in the Lambs Book
of life.

to Write. sig:
To Register or Record a thing in a Book, that posterity may know it. Revel.
14, 13. Saying unto me, Write.

not to write sig:
To keep and hold a thing for a while, secret and private to him self,
reserving it to a fit place. Revel. 10, 4. Saying, Write them not.

Finis,
Laus Deo.
A Dictionary, specially made, to give some light to the darkesome Book of
Salomons Song, called the Canticles.
Forasmuch, as this Book of Canticles is behind none, for worthiness of the
subject, or for use toward the Church, or authenticke authority; being inspired
of God, entreating of the most sweet and straight conjunction, between Christ
and his Church, and of their mutual interparting of duties; serving also, to
teach, improoue, instruct, correct, and comfort; And yet many are driven from
reading and study of it, through the difficulty of the style, and depth of the
argument: I have thought it worth the labor, to compose a short Dictionary,
expounding a part by themselves, the several words of this little Book,
thereby to encourage all Christians, more willingly to become studious in it,
under hope of attaining some benefit by their pains. Use this my travail with
good construction of my purpose, and thanks to God if thou get any profit by
it. Farewell.

All fair. sig:
THE absolute and perfect spiritual beauty of Christ's Mystical body his
Church, by imputation of his perfect holiness covering all deformities, and by
sanctification of the Spirit, renewing the Chuch, and every member in all
parts of Soul and body, though imperfectly. Cant. 4, 7. Thou art all Fair my
Love.

Aloes. sig:
The faithful, which like this most pleasant plant, [ Aloes] do bring forth
most delectable and sauoury Fruit. Cant. 4, 14. Myrrh, and Aloes.

A. N.
Ancient. sig:
Aged, such as be old and in years, who are slow of speech: Or (as others will)
such as be asleep and dead in sin, whose lips the Gospel does open to
sound forth the praises of God. Cant. 7, 9. And causes the lips of the Ancient
to speak. Of these two Expositions, the latter is most fit to the Text.

Not to Answer. sig:
Not to fulfill the desire of the godly Soul, or not so soon to grant her
requests as she would. Cant. 5, 6. I called him, but he Answered me not.

A. R.
Army with Banners. sig:
The Spouse or Church of Christ here upon earth, which being well constituted,
is strong and terrible to the host of Hell; even as an Army that is strong,
and marches with Banners and Ensigns, is very terrible to the Adversaries.
Cant. 6, 3. Thou art Beautiful my Love, terrible as an Army with Banners.

B. A.
Banner. sig:
THE love of Christ, dying for the elect, and in his word preached, drawing
them to Faith in him, to be washed, and justified, and sanctified by him; even
as bands and companies of Soldiers are gathered to their Captain under their
colors, by Banners spread and displayed. Cant. 2, 4. Love was his Banner over
me.

Barren. sig:
Unfruitful, unprofitable, and empty of graces and good works. Cant. 4, 2.
None is Barren among them.

Bar. sig:
Whatsoever Christ touches, though mean (as a Bar of a Door, or handle of
a Bar) he fills with abundance of his grace. Cantic. 4, 5. My Finger dropped
down Myrrh upon the handles of the Bar.

B. E.
Beams of Cedar. sig:
The great strength, continuance, worth, and commodity of the Church (that
house) and every faithful Soul, wherein Christ dwells by his Spirit, as in his
own Temple. Cant. 1, 16. The Beams of our house are Caedars. The Caedar is a
precious, durable, and commodious Wood for building.

our Bed is green. sig:
The procreation of Children unto God in Christ, in that spiritual birth, by
the immortal seed of the word. For the Church is so a Virgin, as she is the
Mother of all Gods Children. Cant. 1, 15. Our Bed is green.

Beautiful steps. sig:
Ways and works, seemly and right, such as be the ways of the godly,
whereas the ways of wicked ones be crooked and unseemly. Cant. 7, 1. How
Beautiful are thy goings or steps.

Bed by night. sig:
Drowsy security and coldness, in which all natural men do nestle, and all
Gods Children (accorcording to the flesh, so far as they be unregenerate) could
be content to be quiet, were they not moved by another Spirit. Cant. 3, 1. In
my Bed by night.

Bed of Spices. sig:
The Church, where graces (like sweet Spices in a Bed) do grow. Cant. 6, 1.
He is gone into the Bed of Spices.

Behold. sig:
Some rare thing, worthy to be wondered at, being also very evident and plain,
as this here mentioned; to wit, the excellent Beauty of the Church, and every
faithful Soul. Cant. 4, 1. Behold, thou art fair my Love.

Bether. sig:
All lets by sins, or any thing else, that might separate Christ and his
Church. Cant. 2, 17. Mountains of Bether.

B. I.
Birds singing. sig:
Pleasant and delightful times, such as be to the body, the spring time, after
Winter, when Birds make melody, chirp, and sing sweetly: and to the Soul,
the times which follow effectual vocation to Christ, when the bitter and
sharp Winter of an unregenerate estate being over the Soul, is all
replenished with comfortable graces and motions of the holy Spirit. Cant. 2,
12. The time of the singing of Birds is come. Peace and joy in the Holie-Ghost.

B. L.
Black as a Raven. sig:
The spiritual inward beauty of Christ, shaddowed and represented by
Blackness of hair, which in some countries was accounted a comely beautiful
thing in a young Man. Can. 5, 11. His Locks curled, and Black as a Raven.

Blackness sig:
Afflictions and crosses, which diminish the outward beauty of the Church, and
cause her (in a Worldlings eye) to seem Black and ill favored: Also, sins,
the causes of afflictions, which somewhat stain her inward beauty. Cant. 1, 4.
I am Black o Daughters of Jerusalem.

Blessed. sig:
Praise, worthy and happy* Canticles. 6, 8. The Daughters have seen her, and
counted her Blessed.

B. O.
Bords of Cedar. sig:
The Church wherein Christ dwells, as Kings in goodly and strong Palaces, made
of Bordes of Caedar. Cant. 8, 9. With Bords of Caedar.

Borders of Gold. sig:
The heavenly graces of the holy Spirit, wherewith (as with Gold and precious
Ornaments) Christ does more and more deck his Church and every faithful
Soul, which have well used their former guiftes. Cant. 1, 10. We will make
thee Borders of Gold.

to take hold of ye boughs of ye palms sig:
To dress, trim, and purge; by the Spirit, word, and afflictions, the
Militant-Church, which is like a Palm Tree, into which the Husbandman must
climb and lay hold on every Bough, that he may dress the same to make it
fruitful. Cant. 7, 8. I will take hold of her Boughs.

B. R.
no Breasts sig:
No true doctrine or sincere milk of the word, either to convert and beget
Children to God, or to nourish them up, being Borne anew. Cant. 8, 8. We have
a little Sister, and she has no Breasts. This was the case of the Gentiles in
the time of their ignorance, before their vocation to Christ.

Breasts as Towers. sig:
Plentiful doctrine, and spiritual Milk enough, both to beget, and nourish
multitudes of Children to God, the Breasts of the Church being waxed as big
as Towers. Cant. 8, 10. My Breasts are as Towers.

two breasts sig:
The two Testaments of the Lord, the Old and New, by the alone Doctrine whereof
(and by none other) the Church does both bring forth, and nourish Children to
God. Cant. 4* 5. Thy two Breasts are like two young Roes. Cant. 7, 7, 8, 10.
Also 8, ^. The Geneua Note, expoundes them, of knowledge and zeal: but the
former Interpretation is better.

Brother. sig:
One, that dwells with another familiarly, embracing him lovingly, as
Brothers and Sisters use to embrace one another. After this sort the Church
does wi^h to dwell with Christ; which is performed partly in this life, and
fully in the life to come. Can 8, 1. O that thou werest as my Brother that
sucked the Breasts of my Mother.

B. V.
Budding of the Uine. sig:
The fruits which the Church (as a Vine) after planting, wa^^ing and dressing,
ought to bring forth; namely such as are mentioned. Gala. 5 22. Ephe. 5, 9.
Cant. 7, 12. Let us see if the Vine flourish, if it have Budded the small Grape.

to Build. sig:
To erect and set up a Church out of the Gentiles, by the ministry of the word
to be joined with the Jews. Cant. 8, 9. We will Build upon her.

Bundle of Myrrh. sig:
The spiritual sweetness of Christ, whom the Church fixes between her
Breasts, as a Bundle or Bunch of Myrrh, or pleasant Nose-gay, continually to
refresh her self with his delectable sweetness. Cant. 1, 12. My well-beloved is
as a Bundle of Myrrh.

Bush of thine head. sig:
The Church to be beautiful in every part, and full of glory, not as natural
bodies which are not comely in all parts alike. Can. 7, 5. The bush of thine
head like Purple.

C. A.
Calamus and Camphire. sig:
THE excellent sweetness of Christ, who to a true Christian Soul, is like
Calamus and Camphire, which be very sweet and delightful things. Can. 1, 13.
My well-beloved is like a Cluster of Camphire. And Cant. 4, 13. Sweet fruits as
Camphire and Calamus.

to Call. sig:
To pray unto Christ, out of the want of him, being felt, and out of the sense
of our own misery. Cant. 5, 6. I Called him, but he answered me not.

C. E.
Cedar. sig:
That which in Christ or his Church is firm and fair, durable and excellent.
Cant. 1, 16. and Cha. 5, 15. Excellent as Caedar.

C. H.
Chains. sig:
The spiritual ornaments of the Church. Cant. 1. 10. Thy Neck with Chains;
that is, the precious merits and plentiful graces of Christ, which being put
upon the Soul of a Christian, are as Chains of Gold about the Neck.

Chambers. sig:
Heaueuly mansions, where great riches, treasure, and glory, are laid up and
kept, for the Saints. Can. 1, 3. The King has brought me into his Chambers.

Chariots of Pharaoh. sig:
The quick and speedy readiness, fortitude, and valor, which the Militant
Church shows in her spiritual warefare against the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh. Cantic. 1, 8. I have compared thee O my Love, to the Troops of
Horses in the Chariots of Pharaoh.

to Charge by the Roes sig:
To bind one by a solemn Oath to do a thing. Cant. 2, 7. I charge you o
Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the Field.

Cheeks with rows of stones. sig:
The incorruprible ornaments and deckings of Christian Souls. Cant. 1, 9. Thy
Cheeks are comely with Rows of stones.

Cheifest of ten thousand. sig:
One, that far excels in strength and glory, all men and Angels. This is
the man Christ. Cant. 5, 10. My well-beloved is white and ruddy, the cheifest of
ten thousand. Ephe. 1. Phil. 2, 9. And given him a Name above every Name.

Chrisolite. sig:
All things in Christ, to be rich and shining, beautiful and precious,
spiritually. Cant. 5, 14. His hands as Rings of Gold set with the Chrysolite.

C. I.
City. sig:
The visible Church (being like a City) which consists of one company, living
by the same laws, and under one Governor or Lord. Cant. 5, 7. The Watchmen
that went about the City.

C. L.
Clusters. sig:
That which in the Church is most comely. Cant. 7, 7. Thy Breasts like Clusters.

Clusters of the Uine. sig:
The Juice of heavenly Doctrine, abundantly issuing forth of the Old and
New-T-stament (as out of breasts like Clusters) to make all believers
fruitful. Cant. 7, 8. Thy breasts shall now be like the Clusters of the Vine.

C. O.
to Come leaping. sig:
To draw nie with great speed, or to make great have to come to one whom we
love. Cant. 2, 8. He Comes leaping.

Company of an army. sig:
A double Army, joyfully meeting Christ with his elect Angels, being one Army,
and the Church with her company, another Army. Cant. 6, 12. As the Company of
an Army.

Companions sig:
Counterfeit Teachers, Hirelings, and false Prophets, which in their pride,
advance themselves to be Companions to Christ, in Office of teaching. Thus
does the Pope, none more. Cant. 1, 6. To the Flocks of thy Companions.

Compassed with Lillies sig:
Abundantly blessed with pleasant sweetness, (such as Lilies yeald to the
body) for the spiritual delight. Thy belly is as an heap of Wheat, Compassed
about with Lillies.

to conceive. sig:
To beget, or become Mother of Children, as the Church is spiritually. Cant. 3,
4.

Concubins sig:
Women, which Princes and great persons were wont of old to keep, together
with their Wives, which were Queens. Cant. 6, 8. Even the Queens and the
Concubines.

C. R.
Crown. sig:
The honor, advancement and glory, given to Christ, both by his Father, in
setting him at his right hand above all things that be most excellent, and with
which the Church his Mother (Reu. 12, 1, 2. etc.) does honor and glorify him.
Can. 3, 11. And behold the King Solomon with the Crown.

C. V.
Cunning workman. sig:
One, endowed with skill, to do his work well and exquisitly. Cant. 7, 1. The
work of the hand of a Cunning Worke-man.

Curled Locks. sig:
A head beautiful and fair. It being counted of in those times as a grace, to
have Curled Locks. Cant. 5, 11. His Locks Curled.

Curtains of Solomon sig:
The whole outward glory of Salomons Court, and spiritually the inward beauty
and eomlinesse of the Church. Cant. 1, 4. And as the Curtains of Solomon.

D. A.
Damsel. sig:
A Virgin or Maid, waiting upon a Queen, or Concubine to a King. Cant. 6, 7.
Of the Damsels without number.

Daughters sig:
Strange Nations and people, which do admire the glory of the Church. Can. 6,
8. The Daughters have seen her, and counted her blessed.

Daughters of Jerusalem. sig:
Either false Sisters of the Church, the degenerate assemblies of Idolators; or
the particular Congregations, begotten of the word, which came out of
Jerusalem. The latter Interpretation is the better. Cant. 2, 7. I charge you O
Daughters of Jerusalem.

Day break. sig.
The clear day of Christ, his first coming in the flesh, by the fuller
Revelation of himself, to chase away the shadows of the Law, in dark Rites
and Ceremonies. Also, the perfect clear day of his second coming in glory,
when all obscurity being done away, there shall break forth a glorious light.
Cant. 2, 17. Until the Day break, and the shadows fly away.

Day of marriage. sig:
The last and great day, when the marriage begun here between Christ and his
Church, by betrothing, shall be perfited and consummate with exceeding glory,
to the great rejoicing, and making glad, both of Husband and Spouse. Therefore,
called the Day of the gladness of his heart. Cant. 3. verse last. Comeforth ye
Daughters of Zion, and behold the King. Solomon with the Crown, wherewith his
Mother Crowned him in the Day of his marriage.

D. E.
Dear. sig:
Entirely affected, and loved tenderly. Cant. 6, 8. And she is Dear to her
that bare her.

Dens of Lions. sig:
The multitude of the wicked Enemies of the Church, which like wild and savage
Beasts, exercise all cruelty against it. So much is meant by Mountains of
Leopards, from which Christ will deliver his people. Cant. 4, 8. From the Dens
of Lions, etc.

Desire. sig:
The exceeding great kindness, affection, and free love, which Christ
exercises toward his Church, for her preservation, in that estate of grace
wherein he has set her. Cant. 7, 10. I am my Welbeloueds, and his desire is
toward me.

to Despise. sig:
To contemn, set at naught, and by contumelies, reproaches, and proud
scornings, to bewray it. Cant. 8, 1. Then they should not Despise thee.

Dew. sig:
The inconveniences and discommodities, even all pains and sorrows, which
Christ did undergo for the love of his Spouse. Cant. 5, 2. For mine head is
full of Dew, and my Locks with the Drops of the night. There was no
inconvenience or evil so great, which could hold back Christ from expressing
his love to his Church.

D. O.
to Do sorone. sig:
To extend and bestow some favor* and blessing upon one. Cant. 8, 8. What
shall we do for our Sister when she shall be spoken for.

Door. sig:
A City, by Sinecdoche of the part. Cant. 8, 9. And if she be a Door, we will
keep her in with Bords of Caedar.

D. R.
to Drink Wine. sig:
To partake with Christ, in his exceeding comfort and joy which he takes in
his Spouse, as Angels and faithful Ministers do. Cant. 5, 1. I drank my
Wine: Eat o friends, Drink and make you merry, etc.

to Drop as honycombs sig:
To speak and utter words full of sweetness and good savor. Cant. 4, 11.
Thy lips my Spouse Drop as Hony-combs.

Drops of the night. sig:
All the evils, which Christ out of his love suffered for his Church. Ca. 5, 2.
My head is full of Dew, and my Locks with the Drops of the Night.

to Drown sig:
To extinguish and put out, or to overthrow; so can not Christ's love be to his
Spouse the Church, or hers toward him. Cant. 8, 7. Much Waters cannot quench
love, neither can floods Drown it?

E. A.
to Eat. sig:
TO communicate and take part with others, in their good and joyful things,
as they which Eat together are to take of one meat. Cantic. 5, 1. Eat, o
Friends, Eat, Drink, and make you merry.

to Eat pleasant fruit. sig:
To be present with the Church, to feast, and make merry with her, in
communicating of her graces. Cant. 4, 16. Let my well-beloved come to his Garden,
and Eat his pleasant fruit.

E. M.
to Embrace sig:
To comfort and uphold (as it were) being received into ones hands for that
purpose. Cant. 2, 6. His right hand does Embrace me.

E. Y.
Eyes like Doves. sig:
Gracious Eyes, simple and chaste, such as be the Eyes of Doves. Cant. 1, 14.
Thine Eyes are like (...) Doves.

F. A.
Fair. sig:
Beautiful, comely with spiritual beauty and decking. Cant. 1, 14. My love,
behold thou art Fair. The Church is Fair, both by imputation of Christ his
righteousness to Faith, and by sanctification of the Spirit.

F. E.
Fear. sig:
The dangerous troubles and disquietnesse, which causes Fear to the Church,
from which Christ will keept her safe. Cant. 3, 8. Every one has his Sword upon
his Thigh, for the Fear by night.

^o Feed. sig:
To take nourishment from the Doctrine of the word, which is the only pasture
wherein Christ's Flock Feeds. Cant. 1, 6. Show me (o thou) whom my Soul
loves, where thou Feedest.

F. I.
Fig Tree, young figs. sig:
Literally the Spring time, when Figge-Trees bring forth young Figs: but
Mystically the sweet Fruits which the faithful bring forth, after their
calling to Christ. Cant. 2, 13. The Fig Tree has brought forth her young
Figs.

Fine Gold. sig:
Most precious and bright Gold, or Gold which is purified. Mystically, it
signifies the glorious excellency of Christ, the head of the Church. Cant. 5,
11. His head is as Fine Gold.

Fish-pooles in Heshbon sig:
Pooles of goodly, pure, and clear Water, unto which the Spouse likeneth the
eyes of her Husband, for their rare cleerenesse. Cant. 7, 4. Thine Eyes are
like the Fish-pooles in Heshbon.

F. L.
Flock. sig:
The whole company of true worshippers of God. Cant. 1, 7. Get thee forth by
the steps of the Flock.

Flock of Goats. sig:
The multitude of the faithful, assembled to holy exercises, being like a
Flock of Goats spread abroad, and feeding upon a Mountain. Cant. 4, 1. Thine
Hair is like the Flock of Goats.

Flocks of Companions. sig:
Idolatours, false Worshippers, societies of Heritiques. Cant. 1, 6. For why
should I be as she that turns aside to the Flocks of thy Companions.

Floudes. sig:
Great and liberal store of Waters ouerflowing. Mystically, deep and grievous
afflictions. Cantic. 8, 7. Much Waters cannot quench love, neither can the
floods drown it.

Flowers appear. sig:
The time of the Spring: but figuratively the estate of a man regenerate and
called, who brings forth pleasant and sweet fruit. C^^t. 2, 12. The Flowers
appear in the earth.

to Fly. sig:
To come speedily to the Church, by grace to direct and govern her, that she
may be able to do that which Christ had commanded. Cant. 8, 14.

F. O.
Fountain of the Gardens. sig:
Christ, Author of every good gift, and the euer-running Wellspring, from
whence all particular Churches do fetch the Water of life to refresh them, and
make them fruitful withal. Cant. 4, 15. O Fountain of the Gardens.

Fountain sealed up. sig:
The Church, by the Ministry whereof, all such saving graces are derived to the
elect, as are kept from the Reprobate. Cant. 4, 2. My Spouse is as a Fountain
sealed up.

Foxes. sig:
Whatsoever hurts the truth of Doctrine, or honesty of manners; especially
Haeresies, and the Patrons thereof. Cant. 2, 15. Take us the Foxes.

little Foxes sig:
All occasions of offense, even every show and appearance of evil. Cant. 2,
15. The little Foxes.

F. R.
Friends. sig:
All that bea^e good will to Christ, and to the prosperity of his people,
whether they be Angels or Men. Cant. 5, 1. Eat o friends, etc.

to keep the Fruit. sig:
To do the office of a Pastor in the Church, (which is as a Vineyard.) Cant.
8, 12. Two hundereth to them that keep the fr^it thereof.

Fruits of the ^alley. sig:
Mystically, the godly works, and worthy graces, which (as Fruits) delight
Christ Jesus. Cant. 6, 10. I went down to the Garden of Nuts, to see the fruits
of the Valley.

G. A.
Garden. sig:
THE Kingdom of Heaven, where Christ (as Man) remains in glory till the last
judgment, when the ^arriage between him and his Church shall be accomplished
fully. Cant. 5, 1. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse.

2 The true Church here upon earth, which with firm faithfulness keeps
herself only to Christ, (lik^ an enclosed Garden) admitting none other to
enter, reserving all the fruits for him. Cant. 4, 12. My Spouse is as a Garden
enclosed.

Gates. sig:
House, or dwelling, a part put for the whole. Cant. 7, 13. And in our Gates
are all sweet things.

to Gather Lillies. sig:
To take pleasure in such holy graces and works, which (like sweet Flowers)
are to be found growing in the Garden of the Church. Cant. 6, ^. To gather
Lillies.

G. I.
to Give love. sig:
More fervently to affect and embrace Christ with greater measure of love, the
more near we are united unto him. Cant. 7, 12. There will I give thee my love.

G. O.
Goings. sig:
Ways, steps, and treadings, which are in the true members of the Church,
marvelous beautiful. Cant. 7, 1. How beautiful are thy goings with shoes.

Good order sig:
Even so, as one does answer another, all being like one to another. Cantic.
4, 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of Sheep, in Good order.

G. R.
Grape. sig:
Such holy works, as the Church (like Grapes) bears, upon the sending down
and shedding abroad the gifts of the Spirit upon her, in the assemblies, at
the preaching of the word. Cant. 7, 12. Let us see if the Vine flourish:
whether it had budded the small Grape.

to show himself through the Grates. sig:
To offer himself to be seen, not fully and clearly (as he did in the time
of the gospel) but sparingly and darkely in shadows (as in the time of the
Law.) Can. 2, 9. Showing himself through the Grates.

Green Bed. See Bed.

H. A.
Hand. sig:
THe Spirit of Christ, whereby he touches the inward parts of the heart. Cant.
5, 4. My well-beloved put in his Hands, by the hole of the door.

Hand, right, left. sig:
The virtue and might of Christ (as an Hand) sustaining and upholding his
members on every side. Cant. 2, 6, His left Hand is under mine head, and his
right Hand does embrace me.

Hands like rings of gold. sig:
All in Christ to be rich and shining. Cant. 5, 14. His Hands as Rings of Gold.

Hanginges of purple. sig:
Literally, the great Riches of Solomon: Mystically, the exceeding great
spiritual riches of the Church. Cant. 3, 10. The Hangings thereof of Purple.

Hair. sig:
The company of the faithful. Cant. 4, 1. Thine Hair is like the flock of
Goats.

like to the young Heart. sig:
Celerity and speed, used in coming unto the Church. Cant. 8, 14. Be like
unto the Roe, or to the young Heart upon the Mountains of spices.

H. E.
to Hear. sig:
The same that Hearken.

to Hearken sig:
Reverently to give ear unto the Doctrine of God. Can. 8, 17. The companions
Harken to thy voice: Cause me to Hear it.

Heart. sig:
The soul, with all faculties of mind and will. Cant. 5, 2. I sleep, but
mine Heart waketh.

Heart gone sig:
The deep grief and sorrow of a godly soul, in the sense of sin, and for
the absence of Christ and his comfort. Cant. 5, 6. Mine Heart was gone when he
did speak.

H. O.
Hole of the door. sig:
The Keyhole properly, whereby one may look in when the door is shut:
Mystically, a little creauice, whereby to wind into the heart, which is after
a sort shut, and locked up. Cant. 5, 4. My welbe- loved put in his hand at the
hole of the door.

Holes of the rock. sig:
The eternal Counsel and election of the Church unto glory, wherein (as in a
hollow Rock) it rests safe. Cant. 2, 14. My Dove, that art in the Hole^ of
the Rock.

Honey comb Honey. sig:
The sweet joys, of which the faithful with Christ shall enjoy in heavenly
glory. Cant. 5, 1. I ate mine Honey Comb, with mine Honey.

I. E.
Jealousy. sig: pro
SVspition between married folks, of their fidelity one toward another.

2 Vehement affection of love, in which the Church desires that Christ his
affection may be continued to her. Cant. 8, 6. Jealousy is as cruel as the
Grave.

I. N.
Mountain of Incense. sig:
Jerusalem, above our Caelestial habitation, where the Saints perform duties
most delightful to God. Cant. 4, 6. I will go to the Mountain of Incense.

I. O.
Joints and Jewels. sig:
Turnings, or things which compass about (as a Girdle) which the Bride was
wont to wear, full of rich Jewels.

2 All rich, and glorious inward graces, and spiritual Ornaments. Cant. 7, 1.
The Joints of thy thighs are like Jewels.

K. E.
to Keep. sig:
TO reserve graces, and all gifts unto Christ alone. Can. 7, 13. My well-beloved
I have kept them for thee.

Keeper of the vmyard sig:
A Godly, and faithful Minister, whom God trusts with the Vine of his
Church, to trim and dress it, to Keep and watch it. Cant. 8, 11. He gave the
Uineyard unto Keepers.

K. I.
Kiddes. sig:
The company of the faithful, and of the true Worshippers of God. Cant. 1, 7.
Feed thy Kiddes by the Tents of the Shepherds.

King Solomon. sig:
Solomon, who as King ruled over Gods people Israel: a glorious King, yet not
compareable to Christ in glory. Cant. 3, 11. Come forth ye daughters of Sion,
and behold King Solomon.

to Kiss. sig:
To show and express most near love, by presence, and near conjunction, and
all signs of love. Cantic. 1, 1. Let him Kiss me with the Kisses of his
mouth.

L. E.
from Lebanon. sig:
FRom remote parts, and out of places furthest off, so the elect are gathered
unto Christ out of all Nations. Cant: 4, 8. Come with me from Lebanon.

springes of Lebanon. sig:
The graces or waters of life, which do flow from Christ upon his Church, and
are never dried up; like to those clear springs which run and flow from
Lebanon. Cant. 4, 15. And the Springs of Lebanon.

Leani^g upon. sig:
Accompanying, or being in company with one. Cant. 8, 5. Leaning upon her
well-beloved.

Leaping. sig:
Great celerity and speed that Christ uses in coming to his Church for her
succor and solace. Cant: 2, 8. He comes Leaping by the Mountains.

L. I.
Licor. sig:
Nourishment, or continual supply of nourishment. Cant: 7, 2. Thy Navel is as
a round cup, wants not Licor.

Lillies. sig:
Pleasant sweetness, or glorious beauty. See before.

Lips of the ancient. sig:
The readiness of old men (whose spirits be dull) to utter the praises of
Christ; yea, they which sleep in death (as the word importes) by force of
preaching, shall be made to speak the truth and glory of Christ. Cant: 7, 9.
And causes the Lips of the ancient to speak.

Lips like Lillies, etc. sig:
The Doctrine of the word, sweet and precious to the elect, coming from Christ
(as Author;) from the Church (as Instrument,) having charge to teach and spread
it. Cant. 5, 13. And his Lips like Lillies, dropping down pure Myrrh.

Lips like honey. sig:
Sweet and delectable words. Cantic. 4, 11. Thy Lips my Spouse, drop as Honey
combs.

Little sister sig:
The Church to be gathered from amongst the Gentiles. Cant. 8, 8. We have a
Little Sister.

L. O.
Love. sig:
One most dear and affectionately desired. Cant. 5, 2. Open unto me, my
Sister, my Love.

Love better then wine. sig:
That Christ's love to his beloved church, in sweetness and wholesomenesse,
does excel any delicate banquet, noted by wine. Cant. 1, 1, etc. 4, 10. How
much better is thy Love, then Wine.

L. Y.
to Lie between. sig:
To be very dear and in precious account, always in sight and presence.
Cant. 1, 12. He shall lie between my breasts.

M. A.
Mandrakes. sig:
ALl amiable flowers, which be fair and lovely, by Sinecdoche of the part for
the whole.

2 All holy virtues and fruits of faith. Can. 7, 13 The Mandrakes have given a
smell.

Marriage. sig:
Betroathing, the first degree of marriage. Cant. 3, 11. Behold the King
Solomon, with the Crown wherewith his Mother crowned him in the day of his
Marriage.

M. E.
powder or dust of the Merchant, or spices. sig:
Those heavenly graces of the spirit, wherewith the members of the Church be
perfumed. Can. 3, 6. Spices of the Merchant.

M. I.
Mids. sig:
The inward parts of the Chamber, which were paued with love; that is, wrought
with lovely and most excellent works. Cant. 3, 10. Whose Mids was paued with
the love of the Daughters of Jerusalem.

Honey and Milk, etc. sig:
The speech or instruction of the Church, not only sweet as Honey, but also
wholesome and norishable as Milk. Cant. 4, 11. Honey and Milk are under thy
tongue.

Myrrh. See Jneense.

M. O.
Moon. sig:
The spiritual brightness of the Church, shining as the clear Moon, which
gives great beauty in the night. Cant. 6, 9. Fair as the Moon.

Morning. sig:
The same thing.

Mother. sig:
Jerusalem which is above, whereof the church on earth is daughter. Cant. 8. 1.
O that thou werest as my Brother, which sucked the breasts of my Mother.

Mountains sig:
Lets and difficulties that be in the way. Cant. 2, 8. He comes leaping by
the Mountains.

Mountains of leopards. sig:
The company of ungodly men, which like cruel and savage beasts would devour
the Church, were it not that God does myraculously keep it. Cant: 4, 8. From
the Mountains of Leopards.

Mountain of Myrrh. sig:
The Heavens, where the praise and honor given to God by Angels and just
Spirits, is like Incense and Myrrh. Cant. 4, 6. I will go into the Mountain
of Myrrh.

Mouth. sig:
Words which come from the mouth: or the Instrument of speech and words, which
in Christ, were sweet and gracious. Can: 5, 16. His Mouth is as sweet things.

N. A.
Navel. sig: pro
THat part whereby the child receives nourishment, whiles it is in the
Mothers womb. 2 An Instrument, by which spiritual norishment is conuayed to
the children of the Church; to wit, belief in the word preached.

N. E.
Neck. sig: pro
That part of the body next the head about which Chains use to be worn for
decking and Ornament.

2 The soul, decked and adorned with spiritual graces. Cant: 1, 9. Thy cheeks
are comely, with rows of Stones, and thy Neck with Chains.

New wine. sig:
The fruit of the Vine newly pressed, being to taste sweet and delightful.

2 The praises of Christ, most acceptable to him (as new Wine unto our
palate.) Cantic: 8, 2. New Wine of the Pomgranate.

Night. sig: pro
Time of rest, sleep, and ease to the body, wearied with labor.

2 Carnal delights and pleasures of this life, which for Christ his sake must
be forsaken. Cant. 3, 1. In my bed by night, I sought him which my soul loved.

N. O.
Noble people. sig:
A frank willing people, such as the faithful be, who voluntarily and
cheerfully follow Christ. Cant. 6, 11. My soul set me as the Charrets of my
Noble people.

No breasts. sig:
No Instruments or means, to bring up and norish children, as in a young Maid
Naturally: and Spiritually in the Gentiles, before their calling to Christ.
Cant. 8, 8. We have a little Sister, and she has No breasts.

North. sig:
A wind which purges the air, and blows upon Trees and Plants, to make them
fruitful.

2 The gracious inspiration of the Holy Ghost, to make Christians abound in the
fruits of the Spirit. Cant. 4, 16. Arise, O North.

O. I.
Ointment. sig: pro
Some sweet perfume or confection, made under the Law, by Gods appointment, to
anoint Aaron, and his sons; the Tabernacle and ministering vessels, etc.
Exodus 31, 11, 12.

2 The rich graces of the Spirit, powered upon Christ (our head) making
himself sweet, and the faithful also, which partake in them. Cant. 1, 2.
Because of the savor of thy good Ointments.

O. P.
to Open. sig:
To receive Christ into the heart by faith, to be joined more near to him,
that he may work more mightily, Cant. 5, 2. Open unto me, my Sister, my Spouse.

O. R.
Orchard. sig:
A Garden full of all pleasant and precious plants, of most sweet and
delectable Flowers and Spices.

2 The Church of Christ, whose plants are the faithful, which bear all
sweet and delectable fruits. Cantic. 4, 13. Thy Plants are an Orchard of
Pomgranats.

O. U.
to ouercom. sig:
To affect one with exceeding gladness. Cant. 6, 4. Turn away thine eyes, for
they overcome me.

P. A.
Palace of silver. sig: pro
A Most glorious and magnificent house set for a King.

2 The Temple and house of the most high God, wherein he delights to dwell by
his Spirit. Cant: 8, 9. We will build upon her a silver Palace.

Palm Tree sig:
A Tree, tall and strait, whose Nature is not to be pressed down with weight,
but to grow the more.

2 The Church, which is not made crooked with the weight of afflictions, but
rather becomes more upright and strong. Cant. 7, 7. This thy stature is like
a Palm Tree.

Pauement of Gold. sig:
Most rich and precious things, as shadows of the great glory which the
Cuurch shall enjoy with Christ in heaven. Cant. 3, 10. He made the Pillars
thereof, of silver; the Pauement of Gold. Pillars of silver signify the same.

P. E.
Peace. sig:
Tranquillity of mind, and felicity by Christ. Cant. 8, 10. Then was I in his
eyes, as one that finds Peace.

to Perfume with myrrh sig:
To make sweet, by pouring into the heart the heavenly graces of the Spirit,
like Incense and Myrrh. Cantic. 3, 6. Perfumed with Myrrh and Incense.

P. I.
like a Piece of a Pomegranate. sig:
A ruddy color, or white mixed with red. Cant. 4, 3. Thy Temples are within
thy locks, as a piece of a Pomgranate.

Pillars of Marble. sig:
Legs strait, and long as Pillars of Marble. Cant. 5, 15. His legs are as
Pillars of Marble.

Pillars of silver. sig:
The same that Pauement of Gold does.

Pillars of smoke. sig:
The Faith, Hope, Love, Prayer, and Thanksgiving of believing Christians,
which like Pillars of smoke, ascend up before the Lord. Cant. 3, 6. Who is she
that comes up out of the Wilderness, like Pillars of smoke.

P. L.
Pleasant. sig:
Beautiful, and delightful, as the Church is thorough graces and gifts of the
spirit. Cant. 6, 7. How fair art thou? And how Pleasant art thou?

Pleasures. sig:
Earthly delights, or such things as we esteem for dainties.

2 The Church, which is very pleasant and delightful in the eye of Christ.
Cant. 7, 60. My love, how pleasant art thou in Pleasures.

P. R.
Princes daughter. sig:
The Church, a most honorable Virgin, fit to be the wife of a King, because
she is borne of God. Cant. 7, 1. How beautiful are thy goings with Shoes, O
Princes daughter.

P. V.
pure myrrh sig:
That holy and heavenly word, which droppeth (as Myrrh) out of the mouth of
Christ. Cant. 5, 13 His lips like Lillies, dropping down Pure Myrrh.

Purple. sig:
Some rich and beautiful stuff, representing the inward beauty and
comeliness of the Spouse of Christ. Cant. 7, 5. The bush of thy head is like
Purple.

Q. V.
Queens. sig:
Wives of Kings, also Nations and Kingdoms, with all their glory.

2 The great dignity and beauty of the church, far exceeding all the glory
of Kingdoms and Nations which be in the world. Cant. 6, 7. There are
threescore Queens.

to Quench. sig:
To put out, and ouercom. Cant. 8, 7. Much water canont Quench love.

R. A.
Rafters. sig:
GAlleries, or goodly walks upon the top of Kings houses.

2 Every faithful soul, which is the habitation of God, or the heavens in
which Christ and his Church shall dwell together. Cant. 1, 16. Cant. 7, 5. The
King is tied in the Rafters.

Rain gone away. sig: pro
The passing away of Winter, and approach of the Spring.

2 The translating or passing of a soul from the estate of corruption, to the
estate of grace. Cant. 2, 11. Behold Winter is past, the rain is changed, and
gone away.

to Raise up. sig:
To ascend with Christ into heavenly places. Can. 8, 5. I raised thee up under
an Apple Tree.

R. E.
o Rejoice. sig:
To be made spiritually glad, by the sight of heavenly Treasures. Cant. 1, 3.
We will Rejoice, and be glad in thee.

to Remain in Uillages sig:
To lodge and abide (with fixed affections) in spiritual and heavenly things.
Cant. 7, 11. Let us Remain in the Uillages.

to Remember. sig:
To call to mind, and make mention of a thing with great delight. Cant. 1, 3.
We will Remember thy love more then Wine.

to Return. sig:
To repent of sin, by bewayling, confessing and forsaking it. Cant. 6, 12.
Return, Return, O Shulamite, Return.

R. I.
Right hand sig:
That mighty power, whereby the Lord vpholdeth and comfort his Church here,
in her warfare. Cant. 8, 3. His Right hand shall embrace me.

Righteous. sig:
Such as has Christ his Justice by faith, put upon them, and are by his
spirit framed to uprightness of heart and manners. Cant. 1, 3. The Righteous
do love thee.

Ringes of Gold. sig:
Rings made of Gold, which were worn on the hands, for Ornament sake.

2 All things in Christ to be spiritually rich and shining. Cant. 4, 14. His
hands like Rings of Gold set with Chrysolite.

Rivers of waters. sig:
Clear running waters, about which Doves delight to be. Cant. 5, 12. His eyes
are like Doves upon the Rivers of Waters.

R. O.
Rose. sig: pro
A sweet and beautiful flower. Cant. 2, 1.

2 Christ Jesus (like to a Rose) for spiritual fairness and comeliness.
Cant. 2, 1. I am the Rose of the field.

Roof of the mouth. sig:
That which proceeds out of the mouth; to wit, the holy Doctrine of the
Lord, which the Church does publish. Cant: 7, 9. And the Roof of thy mouth
like good Wine.

Round cup sig.
A vessel, containing liquor for nourishment. Cant. 7, 2. Thy Nauill is as a
Round cup, that wants not liquor. See Nauill.

Rows of precious stones. sig:
The spiritual Ornaments, as faith, sanctification, and al graces of the new
man, where with the church is decked by Christ her husband. Cantic. 1, ^* Thy
cheeks are comely, with Rows of stones.

R. V.
Ruddie. sig: pro
One of a lively color, fresh, and red.

2 One goodly, glorious, strong, and of perfect health every way, such an one
was Christ. Can. 5, 10 My well-beloved is white and Ruddie.

to Run after Christ. sig:
To desire and endeavor, more and more to be joined unto Christ, and yield him
greater and better obedience. Cant. 1, 3. Draw me; we will Run after thee.

S. A.
Saffron. sig:
A Sweet Plant, so called.

2 The faithful, and the delectable fruits which they bring forth to God,
represented by Saffron. Can. 4, 4. Even Spicknard, and Saffron. The like is to
be said of Spicknard, Calamus, Camphire, etc.

Sapphire. sig: pro
A Stone so called, beautiful, and precious.

2 The rich and precious things of Christ; as his wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. Cant. 5, 14. His belly like white Iuorie,
covered with Saphires.

Savor. sig:
The sweet sense and feeling of Christ his love and benefits, being more
excellent and delightful, then the most sauoury ointment. Cant. 1, 2. Because
of the Savor of thy good Ointments, etc.

Savor of the Nose. sig:
The Sweetness of breath; for men use to breath by the Nose.

2 The sweet and pleasant things, (as praises, prayers, and other good
works) which the Church does (as it were) breath and bring forth. Cant. 7, 8.
And the Savor of thy Nose like Apples.

S. C.
Lips like Scarlet thread. sig:
Small lips, and of a red color. Cant. 4, 3. Thy Lips are like a Thread of
Scarlet.

2 Pure and comely words. Cant. 4, 3.

S. E.
to be set as a Seal upon the heart. sig:
To beioyned nearly to one, highly esteemed off, and always had in mind as
dear and precious. Cant. 8, 6. Set me as a Seal on thy heart. A Seal in a
Ring of Gold, was ever made much account of, as a thing very precious, so does
the Church desire to be accounted of Christ.

secret place. sig:
The most high high God, who is as a Rock of Salvation, and hiding place for
his people. Cant. 2, 14. My Dove, thou art in the Secret places of the Stairs.

to Seek. sig:
To feel a want of Christ, and of his graces, with an earnest desire and
endeavor to find them. Cant. 3, 2. I will Seek him whom my Soul loves.
Cant. 4, 6. 5, 7.

S. H.
Shadow. sig:
Jesus Christ, from whom the faithful receive rest, peace, and refreshing
against hot persecutions of the World, the fiery temptations of Satan, and
burning heat of guiltiness for finne; even as they, which being parched by
the heat of the Sun, are refreshed by the Shadow of a Tree. Cant. 2, 3.
Under his Shadow had I delight, and sat down.

shepherds. sig:
The holy Prophets and Apostles, by whom Christ guided his Flock, and led them
into heavenly pastures. Cant. 1, 7. Feed thy Kids by the tents of the
Shepherds.

Shoes. sig:
The preparation of the Gospel of peace, which prepares and armeth a
Christian Soul to go thorough all temptations; even as Shoes arm the bodily
feet, to pass through all the difficulties of a rugged way. Cant. 1, 7. How
beautiful are thy goings with Shoes.

Shulamite. sig:
One, made most perfect by the counsel and calling of God. Cant. 6, 12.
Return o Shulamite.

S. I.
Sick of love. sig.
One, taken and held with a vehement and immoderate passion of love, being
ready to sound through strong desire after the thing loved; such is the
affection of the Church after Christ. Cant. 2, 5. For I am Sick of love.

Signet upon his arm sig:
A Jewel always in sight, so is the Church to Christ; most dear, and near
unto him, as a Jewel on his heart, and hand. Cant. 8, 6. And as a Signet upon
thine arm.

thousand pieces of Silver. sig:
The Hire and Wages paid unto the faithful keepers of the Vine; to wit, Sound
Teachers, for their painful labor in well husbanding the Vine of the Church.
Cant. 8, 11. Every one bringing for the fruit thereof a thousand pieces of
Silver.

Sister. sig:
The Church of Christ, being by grace of Newbirth, borne of God, and thereby
become Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone; In which regard, she is called
his Sister. Cant. 4, 10. My Sister, my Spouse.

S. L.
Sleep. sig: pro
A Slumber, or half asleep.

2 A Spiritual Slumber and drowsinesse in the mind and heart, touching
heavenly things. Cant. 5, 2. I Sleep, but my heart waketh.

S. M.
small grapes sig:
True Believers, being yet but young and weak in Faith, and in the fruits
thereof. Cant. 2, 15. For our Vines have Small Grapes.

Smell. sig:
The Sweet savor of Christ (like to the Smell of precious Spicknard) greatly
delighting the Church therewith. Cant. 1, 11. My Spicknard gave the Smell
thereof.

S. O.
Socket. sig:
A foot, which to a Leg, is, instead of a Socket. Cant. 5, 15. His Legs
set upon Sockets of fine Gold.

Sons of my mother. sig:
Original or birth, sin entering with us into the World, and still dwelling
with us. Cant. 1* 5.

2 The degenerate children of the Church, as the wicked Priests and false
Prophets under the Law; and all sorts of Haeretickes and Idolators under the
Gospel. Cant. 1, 5. The Sons of my Mother were angry against me.

Soul. sig: pro
That part of man, whereby he understands and wills.

2 The great affection of Christ toward his Church. Cant. 6, 11. My Soul set
me as the Chariots, etc.

S. P.
Spices. sig:
The graces and gifts of the holy Ghost, casting a sweet savor like to
Spices. Cant. 3, 6. 5, 13. As a Bed of Spices.

Spiced Wine sig:
A dainety banquet, by a Sinecdoche, a part for the whole.

2 The holy praises, whereby the Church sets forth and declares the glory
of Christ, to whom the praises of his people are as acceptable, as Spiced Wines
to our taste. Cant. 8, 2. I will cause thee to drink Spiced Wine.

Spicknard. sig:
A Plant, which yields most pleasant savor, representing the sweetness of
Christ, bringing exceeding great pleasure to the believing heart. Cant. 4, 13,
14. Even Spicknard.

Spot. sig:
The Stain and blemish of Sin, from which the faithful at length shall be
wholly freed by perfect sanctification in their own persons, as they be now
perfectly freed by imputation of Christ's holiness unto their faith. Cant. 4.
7. There is no Spot in thee.

Spouse. sig:
The holy Church, betrothed to Christ through Faith in his promises. Cant. 4,
9. My Spouse, thou have wounded my heart.

Spring shut up. sig:
The Church of Christ, by firm faithfulness keeping her self only to Christ
her Husband, of whose treasures she alone is partaker, as a spring sealed and
shut up from all others. Cant. 4, 12. My Sister is as a Spring shut up.

Springs of Lebanon. sig: pro
Clear streams of Water, flowing out from the Forest Lebanon.

2 The graces of the Spirit, which (as living Waters) flow upon the church,
from Christ (as from a bottomless euer-running Spring) Cant. 4, 25. And the
Springs of Lebanon.

S. T.
to Stand. sig:
To be present, and at hand ready; and soorth coming. Cant. 2, 9. He^
Stands behind our Wall.

Steps of the flock. sig:
The faithful Doctrine, Religion, and holiness of life, of Abraham and the
Patriarckes; of Moses and the Prophets, wherein (as it were in steps) the
people of God must tread. Cant. 1, 7. Get thee forth by the Steps of the Flock.

to Stir. sig:
To molest and trouble the happy rest and peace of the church. Cant. 2, 7. That
you Stir not up my Love.

Streets and Lanes. sig:
Difficulties and inconveniences which the church does meet with, in seeking
after Christ. Ca^. 3, 2. By the Streets, and by the open places.

Studdes of Silver. sig:
An excellent ornament, to set forth and deck a bodily Garment withal.

2 The heavenly graces of the holy Ghost, which bring such beauty and glory to
an elect Soul, as Studdes of Silver do to raiment. Cant. 1, 10. Borders of
Gold, and Studdes of Silver.

S. V.
to Suck the breasts of my mother. sig: pro
To live familiarly, as a Brother with a Brother which dwells in one House
together, and daily embrace one another.

2 To live in most near familiarity with christ. Cant. 8, 1. O that thou were
as my Brother, that Sucked the Breasts of my mother.

Sun. sig:
The spiritual beauty and purity of the church of Christ. Cant. 6, 9. Pure as
the Sun.

2 Hot persecutions, and sharp afflictions, wherewith (as with the hot Sun)
the church is parched and made black (as it were.) Cant. 1, 5. The Sun has
looked upon me.

S. W.
sweetefruits, things, and Flowers. sig:
The graces of the Spirit and works of Faith, which are as delightful as sweet
fruit, or any sweet thing. Cant. 4, 13. With Sweet fruits.

2 The doctrine of the word, which is as sweet to the godly Soul, as any thing
can be to the mouth. Cant. 5, 13. His Cheeks are as Sweet flowers.

T. A.
to take hold sig:
TO receive Christ by Faith, that we may draw him and his beuefits to us.
Cant. 3, 4. I Took hold on him and left him not.

comely talk sig:
Gracious words, tending to edification. Cant. 4, 3. Thy Talk is comely.

Targets of strong men. sig:
The whole complete Armor of God, as it is described and set forth in the
sixth chapter to the Ephesians. Cant. 4, 4. All the Targets of the Strong Men.

T. E.
Temples. sig:
That part of the head, called the Temples.

Tents of Kedar. sig:
The Aethiopians which dwelt in Tents or Boothes, to defend them from the
parching heat of the Sun. Cant. 1, 4. As the Tents of Kedar.

Terrible as an Army. sig:
One, dreadful and to be feared, because of great valor and courage in the
spiritual battle, against infernal and Hellish enemies. Cant. 6, 9.
Terrible, as an Army with Banners.

T. H.
Sweet things, new and old. sig:
Holy virtues, and fruits of Faith of all sorts. Cant. 7, 13. In our Gates
are all sweet Things, new and old; that is, abundance of all sorts of graces.

Thorns. sig:
All other societies, companies, and fellowships, which be in the World, and
are (as Thorns) if they be compared with the true Church, and company of the
faithful, which be (as a Lilly.) Cant. 2, 2. Like a Lilly among the Thorns.

Thousand Shieldes. sig: pro
Store of weapons laid up in an Armory, to be used in time of war.

2 The spiritual Weapons of a Christian; to wit, Faith, Hope, the word of God,
Prayer, a good conscience, righteousness, etc. Cant. 4, 4. A thousand shields
hang therein.

Threescore strong men. sig:
A sufficient number of valiant men, to watch by night in the bedchamber of
Solomon, that he might sleep without fear.

2 The most merciful and mighty protection and presence of God, causing his
Church to rest safely and peaceably here in earth (but much more in Heaven)
from all fear and danger. Cant. 2, 7. Threescore strong Men round about
Salomons Bed.

T. I.
Tirzah. sig:
A great and fair City in the skirts of Israel, hard by Euphrates, where
Ierobo^m being King of the ten Tribes, erected and set up his Palace. 1 Kin.
14, 17.

2 The Church of Christ, strong, beautiful, and large, like unto the City of
Tirzah. Cant. 3, 2. Thou art beautiful my Love, as Tirzah.

T. O.
Tops of Amanah. sig:
The highest pitch or part of an Hill, so called, whence one might see the Land
of promise. Cant. 4, 8. Look from the Top of Amanah.

Tower of David. sig:
A goodly, fair, and high Tower, built by David for an Armorie, therein to
hang up sharp Weapons for defense. Cant. 4, 4. Thy Neck is as the Tower of
David, built for defense.

Tower of Iuory. sig:
A most white, and near, or smooth* Tower; of precious matter, and of fair
color. Cant. 7, 4. Thy Neck is like a Tower of Iuory.

Tower of Lebanon. sig:
An high place or Tower built in the house, built in the Forest of Lebanon.
Cant. 7, 4. Thy Nose is as the Tower of Lebanon.

T. R.
Trees of Incense, etc. sig:
Plants of all sorts, wherewith a Garden uses to be planted. Cantic. 4, 14.
Calamus and Cynamon, with all the Trees of Incense.

T. V.
to Turn alide. sig:
To spread and pitch Tents, or to follow and go after. Cant. 1, 6. Why should I
be as she, that Turns aside to the Flocks of thy Companions.

to Turn away. sig:
To Turn toward, to set and fix her Faith (as an eye) upon Christ, who is
ravished with the great beauty thereof. Cant. 6, 4. Turn away thine Eyes from
me.

T. W.
Twins. sig:
Two Lambs, or two Children at one birth. Can. 4, 2. Every one bring out
Twins, and none is barren among them.

V. A.
Uaile. sig:
A Covering which Virgins did wear, in token of modesty, chastity, and honor,
the taking away of this from the Church, was the exposing her to reproach.
Cant. 5, 7. The Watchmen of the Walls took away my Veil from me.

Ualiant men of Israel. sig:
Mighty strong men, which were sound and true hearted, right Israelites. Cant.
3, 7. Of the Ualiant men of Israel.

Ualley. sig:
A low ground between two Hills, being moist and more fruitful. Cant. 6, 10. I
went to the Fruits of the Valley.

V. E.
full Uessels. sig:
Hollow places filled up fitly. Cantic. 5, 12. And remain by the full Vessels.

V. I.
Uillages. sig:
At the Cyprus Tree, so it may be translated. Can. 7, 11. Let us remain in the
Villages.

Uine. sig:
The Church, spreading herself, and fruitful as a Vine: Also, needing the
presence and care of an Husbandman, to prime and dress it. Cant. 7, 12. Let us
see if the Vine flourish.

Uine in Baalhamo^ sig:
A Vine planted in a fruitful soil, or in a place so plentious for Vines, as
it brings forth a multitude of Vines. Cant. 8, 11. Solomon had a Vine in
Baal-hamon.

Uine flourishing. sig:
The fruits of the graces of God in the Church, and the signs of the
approaching of the marriage day. Cant. 7, 12. Let us see if the Vine flourish.

Uines of Engedi. sig:
Vines excellent and fruitful, planted at Engedi, a Town near unto the
Red Sea; whereunto the Church is resembled for her sweet smell and pleasant
fruits. Cant. 1, 13. My well-beloved is as a Cluster of Camphire unto me, in the
Vines of Engedi.

Uine-yard. sig:
The true Church of Christ committed to faithful Ministers, as to the Keepers
of it. Cant. 8, 11. He gave the Vineyard unto Keepers.

V. N.
Undefiled. sig:
One, which is free from filthiness and spot of sin, being washed in the
blood, and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ. Cant. 5, 2. My Undefiled.

V. O.
Uoyce. sig:
The word of Christ, by which he calls the elect to him. Cant. 2, 8. It is
the Voice of my Well-beloved.

2 The prayers, supplications, thanks-giuings, whereby the Church does (as it
were) talk with Christ. Cant. 2, 14. Let me hear thy Voice.

Uoice of the Turtle. sig:
The singing or sweet Melody made by the Turtle. Cant. 2, 12. The Voice of the
Turtle is heard in our Land.

W. A.
to Waken. sig:
TO disturb the quietness of the Church which she has in Christ, or by any
offense and provocation to grieve her. Cant. 2, 7. Stir not up, nor Waken my
Love.

heart Waketh. sig:
That Faith and Spirit of Sanctifycation, working still in the regenerate
children of God, though they be sometime taken with a Spiritual slumber and
sleep in security. Cant. 5, 2. I sleep, but mine heart Waketh.

Wall. sig:
A City built up, such as is the Church, consisting of Jew and Gentile, the
partition wall of Ceremonies, being beaten down in the death of christ. Cant.
8, 9, 10. I am a Wall.

expert in War. sig:
Men skillful in feats of Arms, wise in matters of Warefare, how to order
battles. Cant. 3, 8. They all handle the Sword, and are expert in War.

Washing. sig:
The making clean and white, by purging in Water. Cant. 4, 2. Also 5, 3, I
have Washed my Feet, how shall I defile them?

washed with Milk. sig:
Made exceeding bright. Cant. 5, 12. Which are Washed with Milk.

watchmen. sig:
Such as by night keep watch in a City, or ouerlooke the Watch, to see that
the Watchmen do their office. Cant. 3, 3. The Watchmen that went about the
City, found me.

2 Pastors which Watch over the City of God, whereof some be negligent and
blind, as false Priests and Prophets, Popish Prelates, ignorant guides, and
idle Shepheardes under the Gospel. And some be diligent and faithful, as
true Prophets, Apostles, and other godly Ministers. Cant. 3, 3. Also Cant. 5,
7. The Watchmen that went about the City.

Much water. sig:
Great force and violence used by Tyrants, to auert and turn the Church from
the love of Christ. Cant. 8, 7. Much Water cannot quench love, etc.

W. E.
Well of living Waters. sig:
Christ Jesus, Author of all good gifts, whose bounty is infinite, as an over
flowing Well. Cant. 4, 5.

well-beloved sig:
One dearly loved, with a vehement affection of pure and sound love; such as
Christ is to his church, and the Church to Christ. Cant. 1, 12, 13, 15. Also
Cant. 5, 10. and 7, 10, 11. I am my welbeloueds, and his desire is toward me.

W. H.
Wheat. See Heap.

White. sig:
Such a color as joined with ruddy, shows a most excellent constitution of
body, and very perfect beauty. Cant. 5, 10. My Well-beloved is White and Ruddy.

White Iuory. sig:
The precious beautifulness, or beautiful pretiousnesse of Christ. Cant. 5,
14. His belley like Iuory.

Wholly delectable. sig:
One every way, and perfitly delightful. Can etc.

W. I.
wilderness. sig:
A vast, barren, desolate place.

2 The old man, with his lusts and affections, which are to be forsaken of
such as will come to Christ. Can. 8, 5. Who is this that comes out of the
Wilderness?

Window. sig:
The types and figures of the Law, under which the Prophets and Patriarckes saw
Christ. Can. 2, 9. Looking forth of the Windows.

Winter. sig:
A time of the year, cold and uncomfortable; as also, unfruitful, when all
Trees cease to bring forth.

2 The State of the elect, while they are the Servants of sin, under the
power of darkness. Can. 2, 11. Behold, Winter is past.

W. O.
Work. sig:
A thing wrought or done with exceeding skill. Canticles. 7, 1. The Work of the
hand of a Cunning Workman.

to Wound the heart. sig:
To strike ones heart with a vehement affection and passion of love. Cant. 4,
9. My Sister, thou have Wounded my heart.

Y. O.
Young figs sig:
A Kind of Fruit, called the Fig, not yet grown, but growing to his
ripeness.

2 A sign or token of the approaching of the Spring, whereby the change and
conversion of a sinner is signified. Cant. 2, 13. The Fig Tree has brought
forth her young Figs.

Young Heart sig:
A Beast, so called, swift and quick of foot.

2 Christ, who like a young Heart, makes have to come to his beloved. Cant. 2,
9. My well-beloved is like a Roe, or Young Heart.

two Young Roes. sig:
The two breasts of the Church; to wit, the two Testaments, whence sweet
nourishment is drawn out, for the feeding of the Church. Cant. 4, 5. Thy two
breasts, are as two Young Roes.

FINIS.
A Dictionary, of the Epistle unto the Hebrews.
This Epistle being fomwhat more dark then other the Writings of the
New Testament, I have therefore allotted a peculiar Dictionary unto it, for the
explanation of it. That word which you find not opened here, seek it in the
Common Dictionary. Farewell, and take all things well.

Abraham's seed. sig:
HVmaine substance or nature, of the posterity of Abraham. Heb. 2, 16. But he
took Abraham's seed.

Able. sig:
One, who is meet and fit. Heb. 5, 2. Who is Able.

After those days. sig:
The times of the Olde-Testament, being fully expired, when that fullness of
time promised to the Fathers was come. Heb. 10, 16. After those days, I will
make a New Testament.

of Age. sig:
One capeable of more perfect Doctrine; or a man whose senses are exercised in
the word. Heb. 5, 14. Strong meat belongs to them who are of Age.

All things. sig:
Throughout, in every point; for Nature, affections, infinnities, and sin,
always excepted. Hebr. 2, 17. In all things it behooued him to be like to us.
Also 4, 15.

Anchor of our souls. sig:
The hope of life eternal, which is like an Anchor. Heb. 6, 19.

Nature. sig:
A sperituall substance, such as Angels have. Heb. 2, 16. In no sort he took
on him Angels nature.

Anger. sig:
Punnishment, which is a Token and effect of Gods anger. Heb. 3, 16. Provoked
him to Anger.

Anoint. sig:
To furnish with authority and answerable gifts to do the work of a Mediator.
Heb. 1, 9. He has Anointed him with Oil of gladness.

to Appear. See the Common Dictionary, in the word [Appeare.]

2 To be existent or extant. Hebr. 11, 3. By those things which did Appear.

Altar. See the Common Dictionary, in the word [Altar.]

Aliants. sig:
Forrainers, strangers, of another (both Country and Religion.) He. 11, 34.
Turned amay the Army of the Aliants. This fulfilled Jude 7.

to Appoint. sig:
To decree by an unchangeable purpose. Hebr. 9, 27. It is Appointed once to dye.

2 To command according to his decree. Heb. 3, 2. To him who Appointed him.

3 To prefixe and separate determinately. Heb: 4, 7. He Appointed a certain
day.

Assurance of faith. sig:
A certain persuasion of such things as faith apprehends. Heb. 10, 22. Draw
near in Assurance of Faith.

B. A.
Babe. sig:
One, to whom principles belong, being weak in knowledge of God, and
therefore incapable of perfect Doctrine. Heb. 5, 13. For he is a Babe.

Bastard. sig:
One, who is no natural Child, but begotten beside and against the ordinary
course of Nature, in fornication or adultery.

2 One, who is not the child of God by grace of Adoption, but is either a
wicked person, or an Hypocrite. Heb. 12, 8. Then are ye Bastards, nor sons.

to Bear up all. sig:
To sustain and uphold, that it fall not and perrish. Heb: 1, 3. He Bearei up
all things with his mighty word.

to Beget. sig:
To manifest and make Christ known to be his natural son, and
consubstantiall. This was done when the word was made flesh; Also, when Christ
rose from the dead. Acts 13. 33. Heb: 1, 5. This day have I begotten thee.

Beginning sig:
A fundamental Doctrine, or Catechizing instructions, fit for children in
knowledge. Heb: 6, 1. Leaving the Doctrine of the Beginning of Christ.

Beginning of the book. sig:
The book of the Law written by Moses, wherein were promises, concerning
Christ his Priesthood and Sacrifice. Hebr: 10, 7, In the Beginning of the
book, it is written of me.

that Beginning of substance. sig:
Faith, which gives us being and subsistence in Christ, by joining us to him,
to be one with him, which is the chief and principal benefit, even the
foundation of the rest which follow. Heb. 3, 14. If ye keep sure unto the end,
that Beginning of substance.

to Believe. sig:
To know and be persuaded, that God is, and that he is our God, and will
reward freely such as seek him. Heb: 11, 6. Must Believe.

Birthright. sig:
The right of the first borne amongst the Hebrews. Heb. 12, 16. Sold his
Birthright. This stood in two prerogatives; first, Dignity and power over his
brethren; secondly, double portion. Gen: 49, 3 Deuteronomy. 21, 17. 2 Chro: 21, 3.

to Bless abundantly. sig:
To heap benefits upon one, or plentifully and effectually to give good
things. Hebr, 6, 14. I will abundantly Bless thee.

2 To wish and pray (as a Priest of the high God) for good things to be given
others. Heb: 7, 6. And Blessed him who had the promises.

Blessing. sig:
The inheritance or possession of such blessings and promises as were made to
Abraham and Isaac. Heb: 12, 17. Tho he sought that blessing with tears.

Blood of Abell. sig:
The death and slaughter of Abell. Heb: 12, 24. Then that Blood of Abell.

Blood of Bulls. sig:
Bulls and Goats, offered in Sacrifice at the feast of expiation. Heb: 10, 4.
That the Blood of Bulls and Goats shall put away sins.

Blood of Jesus. sig:
His blood shed and powered out to death, and his whole sufferinges, by a
Sinechdoche of the part for the whole. Heb. 10, 19. By the Blood of Jesus we
may be bold to enter.

Blood of sprinkling. sig:
That blood of Jesus, shed in his cruel death, wherewith the hearts of the
faithful being sprinkled and watered through Faith, their sins are washed away,
that they may be accepted of God. Hebr. 12, 24. And to the blood of sprinkling.

Blood of testament. sig:
The death and bloud-shedde of Christ (joined with his Fathers curse) whereby
the Testament or covenant of salvation was ratified. Hebru: 10, 29. And count
the Blood of the Testament. Heb. 9, 20.

without* Blood. sig:
Without shedding of Blood. Hebr. 9, 18, 22. Without Blood.

to resist unto Blood. sig:
Unto the suffering of death and martyrdom; to strive against sinners and
persecutors as Christ himself did. He: 12, 4. Ye have not yet resisted sin to
blood.

Body of Jesus. sig:
The whole manhood of Christ, which was the oblation and sacrifice given for
our sins to take them away. Heb: 10, 10. Even by the offering of the Body of
Jesus once made.

to Ordain a body. sig:
As Much as to pierce ones ears, by making one obedient and willing to hear. A
phrase borrowed from servants under the Law, who in token of perpetual
service, had their ears bored through. Heb: 10, 5. But a Body have thou
ordained me.

Boldly to go to God. sig:
With constant persuasion and good assurance to pray to God. Heb: 4, 16. Let us
go Boldly to the Throne of grace.

Bondage. sig:
That slavery and subjection to the Devil, by the guilt of sin, working in us
fear and terror of aeternall death, such as is in bondmen, toward their Lord,
least he scourge or kill them. Hebru* 2, 15. Which for fear of death, were
all their life subject to Bondage.

Brethren. sig:
Such, as not only have society with Christ of flesh and blood, but are borne
of God, and become partakers of his spirit. Heb: 2, 11, 12. He is not ashamed
to call them Brethren.

2 Such as have society of one true Christian profession. Heb. 3, 12. Brethren
take heed.

holy Brethren. sig:
Such as being sanctified by the Spirit, are received into his fellowship, to
be one with him. Hebr. 3, 1. Therefore holy-Brethren.

Brightness of glory. sig:
Christ Jesus, the second person in Trinity, in whom alone did shine forth
aeternally, the Image and beauty of his Fathers glory: having also many ways
showed forth unto men, his Fathers bright glory, in his teaching, and clear
manifestation of the gospel; also, in his working of miracles: in both which,
he set forth a glorious light of the power and goodness of God, for the
saving of the elect. Heb: 1, 3. The Brightness of his glory.

to Build all things. sig:
To make all things in heaven and earth, but chiefly to set up the Church of
God, which is an house or building. Heb: 3, 4. But he that has built all
things is God.

C. A.
Called. sig:
Effectually drawn to Christ, by the Ministry through the spirit. Heb: 9, 15.
That they which are Called.

Carnal commandment. sig:
A Precept, which enioyneth things weak and frail, not lasting and aeternall,
such was the whole ordination of the Leuiticall Priesthood. Heb: 7, 16 Which is
not made Priest after the Law, of the carnal Commandment.

Carnal rites. sig:
Certain outward Ceremonies, which did not come to the soul, but were placed
in Terrene and earthly matters. Heb: 9, 10. Which only stood in carnal rites.

Carcasses. sig:
Their limbs and bodies, by little and little languished. Heb: 3, 17, Their
Carcasses fell in the wilderness.

to Cast away confidence. sig:
To make loss of, or to loose the free and ingenuous profession of the truth,
whereof the confidence is in the heart. Heb: 11, 35. And cast not away the
confidence.

to Cease from our own works sig:
To do our own will no longer, but to resign our selves to God, to yield him
obedience by doing his will revealed in his word. Heb: 4, 10. Has Ceased from
his own works.

Church. sig:
The congregation of Gods people, called out of the world by the word. Hebe. 2,
12. Amiddest the Church will I sing to thee.

Children. sig:
Such as are regenerate and born a new by the spirit of Christ, having God for
their Father. Hebr. 2, 10. Seeing that he brought many Children to Glory. Heb:
12, 5.

2 Disciples which love and obey their Teachers, as Children their Father. Heb.
2, 13. Here am I, and the children which thou have given me.

City of the living God. sig:
The Church of God, which is like to a City, being ruled by one King, Christ;
and according to his Laws. Heb: 12, 22. The City of the living God.

Cloud of witnesses. sig:
Many witnesses, even an inumerable company of witnesses, as it were a cloud of
godly and religious persons, by their examples of constancy, provoking us to
the like. Heb. 12, 1. Having such a Cloud of Witnesses.

to Come to God. sig:
To join himself to the true God, as his servant and true worshipper. Hebr.
11, 6. He that comes to God.

Companion sig:
One that takes part with another in suffering. Heb. 10, 33. We were
Companions with them.

to be Compassed with infirmities. sig:
To bear about a nature subject to the same sins and discommodities. Hebru, 5,
2. Being Compassed with the same infirmities.

Compassion sig:
A disposition or affection, prone to pity others, so much as need is. Heb.
5, 2, Which is able sufficiently to have Compassion.

to condemn the world. sig:
By his deed and example, in building the Arc at Gods commandment, to
convict other wicked men which did swarm in the world of infidelity. Heb. 11,
7. By which he condemned the world.

to Confirm. sig:
To stablish and ratify a thing with signs, wonders, etc. Heb. 2, 3. And was
Confirmed.

to Consecrate. sig:
To sanctify or set apart to some excellent matter. Heb. 2, 10. That he should
Consecrate the Prince of salvation by afflection. Verse 11. For he that
sanctifies, etc. This word expounds the former. The word in the Original,
signifies to make perfect.

Conservation. sig:
Salvation, which is contrary to distinction. Heb. 10, 39. Unto the
Conservation of our souls.

consolation. sig:
Exhortation. Heb. 12, 5. Have ye forgot the Consolation.

to Consider sig:
To observe, mark, and watch, with loving mind. Heb. 10, 24. Let us Consider
one another.

2 To weigh, ponder, and think seriously upon. Heb: 3, 1. Consider the
Apostle, etc.

evil Conscience. sig:
A Conscience accusing of sin, and terrifying with Remembrance of punishment
due to sin. For against an evil Conscience, is set a true faithful heart,
which truly believes forgiveness of sin. Heb. 10, 22. Pure from an evil
Conscience.

to Count unholy. sig:
Not to discern and put difference between the blood of Christ, and common
blood. Hebr. 10, 23. Count the blood unholy wherewith, etc.

to Crown with glory. sig:
To give this dignity unto Christ, and by him to Gods children, to have all
things in this world subject to them, and to be fellow heirs of the
heavenly kingdom. Heb. 2, 7. Thou Crownest him with glory and honor, and
set him above the works of thy hands.

to Crucifye again the son of God. sig:
To expose and lay open Christ (as it were, the second time nailed to the
Cross) to the reproach and ignominy of all men. Heb. 6, 6. Crucify again the
son of God.

Custom. sig:
An habit gotten by Custom. Heb. 5, verse last. Which through long Custom
have their senses exercised.

D. A.
another Day sig:
A certain day. Heb: 4, 7.

to Day, this Day. sig:
The season and opportunity appointed of God, for doing something. Heb: 4, 7.

2 All that time, in which God made his son known, by his wonderful works.
Heb: 1, 5.

seventh day sig:
The day which was the seventh from the creation, which is our Sunday. Heb: 4,
4.

Day of temptation. sig:
The time, when the people of Israel tempted God by their contention and
striuinges, as if they would try his power and Justice. Heb: 3, 8.

David. sig:
The Book of Psalms penned by David A Metonimie. Heb. 4, 7.

Death. sig:
Separation of soul and body, being joined together with the wrath and curse
of God. Heb: 2, 15.

2 Eternal death or destruction. Heb: 2, 15.

to have power of death sig.
To provoke unto, and procure sin, whence comes death Temporal and
Eternal. Hebr. 2, 15.

to taste death sig:
To die, or feel death, coupled with Gods infinite anger. Heb, 2, 9.

Deceitfulness of sin. sig:
Sin, which is a deceitefull thing, or full of decerte and craft, for sin
never appears in her own countenance. Heb: 3, 13. Be hardened with the
Deceitfulness of sin.

Defiled. sig:
Stained and corrupted with the filthiness of sin. Heb: 12, 15.

to Depart from God. sig:
To fall away from God, by infidelity and distrust of his word. Heb: 3, 12.

to be Deprived. sig:
To be made frustrate or void of the thing promised thorough Spiritual
slownesse. Heb: 4, 1.

to Devour the adversaries. sig:
To destroy utterly with extreme destruction, the enemies of Christ, which
maliciously resist his spirit. Heb: 10, 27.

to Despite. sig.
To put Christ unto reproach, by accusing him of a lie, in denying the truth
of the Gospel. Heb: 10, 29.

to Despise. sig.
To abrogate and make void by a defection from the whole Religion of God. Heb:
10, 28.

to Deliver. sig.
To set free from the curse and bondage of sin. Heb: 2, 15.

to Discern. sig.
To direct the heart, either more to be hardened by deceit of sin, on wholly
to be renewed to the love of righteousness. Heb: 4, 12.

2 To be of Judgment to put difference between good and evil. Heb: 5, 14.

to do Gods will. sig:
To yield perfect obedience to the will of God, even to the suffering of death.
Heb: 10, 7.

2 With patience to endure, what God will have us suffer. Heb: 10, 36.

Doctrine of beginning. sig.
Catechizing Doctrine, instruction fit for beginners. Heb: 6, 1.

Doctrine diverse, and strange. sig:
False Doctrine, not grounded on Gods Word, but devised by men, therefore
strange. Hebru. 13, 4.

to Draw near. sig:
To call upon God, to approach to him by faithful prayer. Heb: 10, 22.

Dull o^ hearing. sig:
Slow. Heb: 5, 11.

E. A.
Earth. sig:
Men dwelling in earth. A Metonimie. Heb: 12, 26.

Elders. sig:
Ancestors, or Forefathers, of whom we have our being; and by whose
Authority and example we ought to be much moved. Heb; 11, 2. They are called
Fathers. Heb: 1, 1.

to Endure. sig:
To persevere and continue constant in the hope of the Gospel, notwithstanding
troubles or persecutions, by tongue or hand. Heb: 10, 32.

Ensample of disobedience. sig:
The immitation or following of their disobedience, and for the same to perish,
as those disobedient ones did. Heb: 4, 11.

to Enter into the holy place sig:
To have passage made into our house, and power to go in. Heb: 10, 19.

to Enter into rest. sig:
To go into the Land of Canaan, and aeternal life in heaven, figured by Canaan.
Heb, 3, 11.

2 By faith in Gods promises, and holy obedience, to begin to be partakers of
that true rest which shall be perfect in heaven. Heb, 4, 3, 4.

to establish the Earth. sig:
To create the earth in a firm and stable condition. Heb, 1, 10.

2 To settle a thing, that it may be perpetual. Heb, 10, 9.

for Ever and and Ever. sig:
No^ for a long space of time, but eternally. Heb, 1, 8. Also Heb, 10, 12, 14.

Eyes. sig:
Divine knowledge, or infinite understanding of God. Heb: 4, 13.

Evidence. sig:
Setting forth to the eye, or making after a sort visible. Heb, 11, 1.

to Exhort. sig:
To stir up, and provoke unto duties. Hebru, 10, 26.

F. A.
to Faint. sig:
To suffer ones heart and courage to sink and fall. Heb. 12, 3.

Faithful. sig:
One, who is constant, and leaves not the elect, till he have brought them to
aeternall life. Hebr. 2, 17.

2 One, which does in every point according to that trust and charge which God
puts in one, neglecting nothing which God commanded him. Heb. 3, 3. Moses
was Faithful in Gods House.

3 One, which stands to his word, keeping truth without Failing or Falsehood.
Heb. 10, 23. For he is Faithful that promises.

to Fall. sig:
To perish and be destroyed. Heb. 4, 11.

to fall away sig:
To oppose, or set himself against the grace of God, as a malicious adversary.
Hebr. 12, 15. Also. Heb. 6, 6.

Faith. sig:
That gift of God, by which we firmly believe the whole word of God to be
true; but especially the promise of salvation by Christ, with application of
it to our selves. Hebr. 11, 1. And 4, 3. Heb. 10, 22.

Fathers of our Flesh. sig:
The men by whom we receive our bodies, as by active Instruments which God
does use in our generation. Heb. 12, 9.

Fathers of Spirits. sig:
God, the Author and Creator of our Souls. Heb. 12, 9.

Faultlesse. sig:
That, wherein nothing can worthily be required, as wanting or lacking. Heb.
8, 7.

Fear. sig:
Extreme terror and horror of mind, through expectation of aeternall death
due for sin. Hebr. 2, 15.

2 The thing which is feared, not without great anxiety and anguish of heart.
Thus was Christ delivered from aeternall death, that he was swallowed up of it,
as in the infirmity of humain nature, he feared. See Math. 22. and John 11.
Heb. 5, 7. He was heard from his Fear.

3 Religious awe, such as is in good Children toward their Fathers. Heb. 12, 2.
That we may serve him with Fear.

Fearful looking or. sig:
Expectation, full of ^read and horror. Heb. 10, 27.

fellowship. sig:
The gathering together of the faithful in public place, for the hearing of
the word, public Prayer, administration of Sacraments, and distribution of
alms. Heb. 10, 25.

Fellows. sig:
Godly Christians, which by grace communicate with Christ in his Merits, being
thereby Heirs of God, even Fellow-heires with Christ. Heb. 1, 9.

to Find grace. sig:
To find help and comfort in our need, through the favor and free love of
God. Heb. 4, 16.

consuming Fire. sig:
The most severe God, who is like a fire, to consume and destroy the wicked
contemners of his word. Heb. 12, 29.

Flame of Fire. sig:
The holy Angels of God, endowed with a strong, agile, and active Nature, like
unto a flame of Fire. Heb. 1, 7.

violent fire. sig.
Most fervent and hot indignation. Hebr. 10, 27.

first begotten. sig:
Christ, as Mediator, who is called elsewhere, the first begotten among his
Brethren, for his pre-eminence over them. Heb. 1, 6.

to Follow. sig:
To come after others, in believing and living well, as they have given us
example. Heb. 6, 12. and Heb. 12, 8.

to Forsake the promise. sig:
Not to believe and give credit to the word of promise. Heb. 4, 1.

to forsake one. sig:
To deny help, or refuse to succor him in his need. Heb. 13, 6.

Footstool. sig:
That which is put under the feet of him that sits to tread upon it.
Meaning, is, that all Christ's Enemies; even to death, which is the last, shall
be subdued to him for ever, as Paul teaches. Corin. 15, 26. Heb. 1, 13. and
10, 13.

foundation of repentance sig:
The Doctrine of repentance, as it is a principle and foundation. Heb. 1, 1.

Foundation of the world. sig:
The beginning, when the World was first made of nothing. Heb. 4, 3.

Fruit of righteousness. sig.
Life aeternall, which is a fruit of a righteous life. Heb. 12, 11.

G. H.
Partakers of the Holy Ghost. sig:
To enjoy the knowledge of the word, by the benefit and enlightening of the holy
Ghost. Hebrews 6, 4.

living God sig:
That God, who in himself lives, and is the Author and Fountain of all that
do live. Hebr. 3, 12.

Gifts. sig:
Sacrifices and oblations freely given unto God, to honor him withal. Heb. 5,
1, 11, 4.

Generation sig:
A Nation or people, living together in some one age. Heb. 3, 10.

to see God. sig:
To enjoy the aeternall blessedness in Heaven, which consists in the vision of
God. Heb. 12, 14.

Glory. sig:
The high excellency and dignity of Christ, being exalted at the right hand of
his Father, above all Creatures, Angels and Men. Heb. 2, 9.

Grace. sig:
The sense and feeling of the favor of God, being reconciled unto us by
Christ. Heb. 13, 9.

2 Faith, which proceeds from the grace of God. Heb. 12, 28.

3 The free benefit of God. Heb. 2, 9.

Throne of Grace. sig:
God the Father, favorably embracing us, and being ready to hear us, for, and
through Christ his Son. Heb. 4, 16.

Ground. sig:
Substance or sustenance, causing a thing in some sort to exsist, and be, which
yet is not. Heb. 11, 1.

H. A.
Halting. sig:
Not the negligent only and slow, but them which hangs between two;
inclining to the Gospel, and to the Law also. Heb. 12, 13.

Hands. sig:
The revenging power of God. Heb. 10, 31.

2 Heavenly glory and Majesty. Heb. 12, 2.

3 The almightinesse of God. Heb. 1, 10.

4 Sluggish and sloathfull minds. Hebr. 12, 13. Hands hanging down.

Hard to be uttered. sig:
Not easy to be unfolded and declared, but very difficult things. Heb. 5, 11.

to Harden. sig:
To refuse obstinately, or with an obstinate heart, Heb. 3, 7.

to hear his voice. sig:
To believe and obey the voice of Christ, being uttered and heard. Heb. 3, 12.

evil Heart. sig:
An heart of unbelief, which distrusteth God in his word. Heb. 3, 12.

true Heart. sig:
An heart touched with a true sense of sin and miseries. Heb. 10, 22.

Heaven. sig:
Angels, the Inbabitants of Heaven, who shall wonder at the strange and great
alteration which the Gospel shall make. Heb. 12, 26.

to enter into Heaven. sig:
To pierce through these visible Heavens, and to pass into the supreme and
highest Heaven. Hebr. 4, 14.

Heavenly things. sig:
Doctrine, ministry of the Gospel, Sacraments, Prayers; yea, the Church and
company of the faithful. Heb. 9, 29.

Heirs of the promises. sig:
Godly Patriarchs and other holy men, to whom Gods promises were made and kept.
Heb. 6, 17.

Heir of righteousness. sig:
One, which is partaker of the righteousness of God, and of aeternall life,
flowing from thence. Heb. 11, 17.

Heirs of salvation. sig:
Such as shall possess aeternall life in heaven. Heb. 1, 14.

Heir of all things. sig:
Equal possessor and Lord of all things created, together with God the Father.
Heb. 1, 2.

highest places. sig:
The third heaven, which is the seat of Gods glory. Heb. 1, 3.

Holiness. sig:
A quality created in the heart by the holy spirit, cleansing and purifying
them, that they may purely worship God. Heb, 12, 14.

2 An uncreated quality, even the most perfect purity of divine nature. Heb.
12, 10.

Honor. sig:
The dignity and exaltation of Christ, above all creatures. Heb. 2, 8.

2 The Office of High Priest, which is an honorable calling. Heb, 5* 4.

Hope. sig:
Eternal life which we hope for, Heb. 6, 18. See Common Dictionary.

2 The gift of hope, whereby we look certainly for salvation. Heb. 10, 23.

to Hold fast the hope. sig:
With perseueraunce to embrace eternal life, which we hope for. Heb. 6, 18.

House. sig:
An earthly habitation of Timber and stone, put together for one to dwell in.
Heb. 3, 4.

2 The Church of God here in earth, which is like unto an house. Heb. 3, 2.

I. E.
Jesus. sig:
Iosuah, the Captain of Gods people after Meses, under whose conduct the
Israelites were brought into Canaan. Heb. 4. 8.

Ignorant. sig:
Such as have sinned, of what sort, or in what kind soever. Heb. 5, 2.

Inferior to Angels. sig:
One, which for a time humbled himself, and took on him the form of a
servant, and was crucified. Heb. 2, 7, 9.

Infirmities sig:
Sins, and all consequents or effects of sin, both body and soul miseries.
Heb. 4, 15.

Ingraued form. sig:
The person of the son, lively and fully representing the person of the
Father, as an Image set in wax, does resemble the form or figure of the seal.
Heb. 3, 1.

Joints and Marrow. sig:
The most inward, hidden, and secret parts and powers of a man's soul. Heb. 4,
12.

With Joy. sig:
Not only with patience, but with cheerfulness, being glad that they were
counted worthy to suffer for Christ. Heb. 10, 34.

to Judge his people. sig:
To govern the Church, by protecting it, and taking vengeance upon the enemies
of it. Heb. 10, 30.

Just. sig:
A person that is righteous, by believing in Christ. Heb. 10, 38.

K. I.
scepter of his Kingdom. sig:
The administration and government of Christ's Church in earth. Heb. 1, 8.

to receive a Kingdom. sig:
To lay hold upon the inheritance of heaven. Heb. 12, 28.

weak knees sig:
Feeble, remiss, and slothful minds. Hebr. 12, 12.

to know. sig:
To understand the will of God, in such sort, as to believe and live thereafter.
Heb. 3, 10.

L. A.
Last days. sig:
All the time between the first and second coming of Christ. Heb. 1, 1.

Laying on of hands. sig:
The whole ministry of the Church, and order of Church-policy. Heb. 6, 1.

Law. sig:
The whole Leuiticall Rites and Ceremonies. Heb. 10, 1.

2 The prescript and appointment of the Law. Heb. 10, 8.

3 The will of God revealed in the Moral Law, which is said to be put or
written in our minds, when our wills are effectually revealed and framed to
begin obedience to it. Heb. 8, 10.

to be Lightened. sig:
To be endowed with the true knowledge of God, but not effectual to the
conversion of the heart. Heb. 6, 4.

Fruit of Lips. sig:
The Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. Hebr. 13, 15.

little while. sig:
A very small space of time, and then the reward will come to all such as be
constant. Heb. 10, 37.

to Live. Lively. sig: sig.
To enjoy aeternall life in heaven. Hebr. 10, 38.

Operative, effectually to pierce their hearts which hear the word; either to
convert, or to convict and harden them. Heb. 4, 12.

Love. (...) See general Dictionary.

M. A.
Highest Majesty. sig:
Supreme and most Sovereign greatness, such as is propper unto the Godhead.
Heb. 1, 3.

Manifest. sig:
Open, bare, easy to be seen, as a face uncovered. Heb. 4, 13*

after diverse Manners. sig:
Not fully and all at once, in perfect cleerenesse, but by little and little,
till at last the Son of righteousness, Christ, did arise in the preaching of
the Gospel, which brought a full Revelation. Heb. 1, 1.

strong Meat. sig:
More perfect doctrine, set down exactlie and at large, to feed strong
Christians withal. Hebr. 5, 12.

Without mercy. sig:
Without sparing or pardon at man's hands. Heb. 10, 28.

Melchisedech. sig:
A man, so called, who was both Priest of the hie God, and the King of Salem,
which was afterward Jerusalem. Heb. 5, 10, 11. Heb. 7, 1, 2.

messengers sig:
Persons, sent by Commission to execute Gods decrees in comforting the godly,
and punnishing the wicked; such are the Angels. Heb. 1, 7.

Ministers. sig:
Servants, which by their Ministry do help the elect. Heb. 1, 7, 14.

Milk. sig:
Easy Doctrine, shortly and familiarly taught. Heb. 5, 12.

Mount Sion. sig:
The Church of Christ, whereof Mount Sion was a figure. Heb. 12, 22.

Men just and perfect. sig:
True believers, and godly persons. Hebr. 12, 23.

N. A.
Naked. sig:
Open, or plain to be perceived. Heb. 4, 13.

Name. sig:
Such dignity and excellency as is peculiar to God. Heb. 1, 9.

to confess his Name. sig:
To celebrate and set forth the praises of God. Heb. 13, 15.

declare his Name. sig:
To preach the Doctrine of grace. Heb. 2, 12.

O. B.
to Obey. sig:
To believe the word, yiedling unto the truth of the promises, and embracing
them by faith, which is the principal obedience of a Christian, and a root of
all other obedience. Heb. 5, 9.

to learn obedience. sig:
To prove and try indeed, what it was to obey such a Father as looked for and
commanded obedience to the death of the cross. Heb. 2, 8.

Order of Melchis^dek. sig:
The fashion, manner, or likeness and similitude. Heb. 5, 6. Also heb. 7, 14.

to Offer. sig:
To show himself, or to behave and carry himself as a father to his
children. Thus God offers him to his Saints. Heb. 12, 7.

2 To give and make himself willingly a slain oblation and Sacrifice for
satisfaction. Thus Christ offered himself. Heb. 9, 25, 26.

3 To slay and kill Beasts for Sacrifices, to be figures of Christ his
offering himself. Thus Priests under the Law offered. Heb. 10, 11.

4 To render praise to God, for mercy, and alms to the poor, which be needy
and miserable. Thus Christians offer to God. heb. 13, 15.

Offering for sin. sig:
Sacrifices expiatory, as peace offerings signifye Sacrifice gratulatory. heb.
10, 6.

Ofttimes. sig:
Something, which for insufficiency from the promise in Paradise, must be
deneagiue. hebru. 10, 11.

Old time. sig:
The time which was till Christ. heb. 1, 1.

Old. sig.
That which with time vanishes, and does not last ever, as the estate of this
world, such as it is now shall not. heb. 1, 11.

Once. sig:
At one time only, and no more, not oftener. heb. 9, 27, 28.

Once for all, and one sacrifice. sig:
That which being done, is so sufficient, as it needs no repetition or doing
again. hebr. 10, 10, 12, 14.

Once more sig:
One turn, or for one time, and then to cease; to note unto us the firm and
stable condition of the Gospel, and such as believe it. heb. 12, 26.

of One. sig:
Of one father; to wit, Israel or Jacob, of whom came Christ and the hebrews,
to whom this Epistle was sent: Or of one; that is, of one God, of whom is
Christ, and all true Christians. heb. 2, 11.

Over the house of God sig:
One, that is Ruler and Governor of Gods church. heb. 10, 21.

to have Oversight. sig:
To have room and function of a Pastor and guide to Gods Flock. heb. 13, 7,
17.

to be Out of the way. sig:
To take offense and stumble, putting his salvation in hazard by backsliding
and declining. heb. 12, 13.

P. A.
Past age. sig:
One, which is unmeet through her great years to be a mother. Heb. 11, 11.

Patience. sig:
Power to endure grievous things. Heb. 10, 36.

Perfect. sig:
Consecrate to God and sanctified with the Fathers who lived before Christ,
were not by the Leuiticall Rites severed from Christ, the substance of them.
heb. 11. verse last. Also heb, 7, 11, 19.

Perdition. sig:
Destruction. heb. 10, 39.

Person. sig:
A Divine subsistence. heb, 1, 3. See Common Dictionary.

holy Place. sig:
Heaven, even third heaven, called Paradise. heb. 9, 12.

Pleased God. sig:
His person to be accepted into favor by Faith. Hebr. 11, 5.

Pleasure. sig:
Allowance, approbation (as satisfactory for sin.) Heb. 10, 6.

2 Liking and will; yea, sometime unreasonable and unjust. Heb. 12, 10.

Power of the endless life. sig:
The strength and virtue of a life which knows no end, but is aeternall. Hebr.
7, 16.

Thing pressing down. sig:
Whatsoever heavy weight or burden, which makes slow and hinders us in the
course of piety, as sin does. Heb. 12, 1.

High Priest. See the Common Dictionary, in the word [High-Priest.]

High Priest of our profession. sig:
The chief and only Priest, from whom we are to take, both the Doctrine which
we profess, and the Religion too. Heb, 3, 1.

Principles of the word sig:
The Catechizing Doctrines, familiarly taught, and in few words, tempered and
fitted to the understanding of the weak in knowledge. Hebr. 5, 12.

Prince of salvation. sig:
One, which is Captain or Chiefetaine and guide to aeternall life. Heb. 2, 10.

profession. sig:
The Faith or Religion which we profess. Heb. 3, 1.

2 The publishing, or open and free acknowledgement of our Faith* Heb. 10, 23.

Promise. sig:
The word of God, touching the exhibiting and sending Christ into the World.
Hebr. 11* 39* This is a general promise to all the faithful before christ. Heb.
6, 17. Heb. 7, 6.

2 Things promised; as the Kingdom to David, etc. Heb. 11, 33. These be
special Promises.

3 The word of God, touching the calling of Abraham's seed, in Isaac, and
blessing all Nations in that seed. Heb. 11, 17, 18.

to Provoke* sig:
To whet and quicken unto love. Hebr. 10, 24. Thus we provoke one another.

2 To stir God unto wrath, by tempting him,

T A.
Tabernacle sig:
Christ's body: also Heaven. Hebre: 9, 11. See Common Dictionary.

to take away. sig:
Utterly to remove a thing, as if it had never been. Heb: 10, 4. 9, 11.

to Taste. sig:
To have a slight and slender belief in Christ, and light feeling of heavenly
bliss. Heb: 6, 5. See common Dictionary.

Testament. See Common Dictionary.

To Tempt. See Common Dictionary.

Things concerning God. sig:
Which concern the pleasing and worship of God. Heb: 5, 1.

Things not seen. sig:
Of nothing. Heb: 11, 1.

better thing. sig:
Some thing more worthy and excellent. Hebr. 11, 40.

things hoped for. sig:
The glory and bliss of Heaven. Heb. 11, 1.

things shaken. sig.
Things of an unstable condition, as Things not shaken, signifies, Things of a
firm and constant Nature. Heb: 12, 27, 28.

V. A.
Uaile. sig:
The flesh or body of Christ. Heb: 10, 20.

2 That hanging or Cloth, which divided the holy place of the Temple, from the
most holy. Heb. 9, 3.

Uengeance sig:
Punishment for sin. Heb. 10, 30.

Unbelief. sig:
An utter absence and want of lively faith. Heb. 3, 19.

Unpossible. sig:
Not that which absolutely can never be, but some thing which cannot be,
because it is against Gods decree and counsel. Heb. 6, 5. and 11, 6.

Heavenly Uocation. See Common Dictionary.

W. A.
Ways. sig:
Either Gods works of mercy and Justice, whereby God comes to us, or his
commandments, whereby we come to him. Heb: 3, 10.

new and living Way. sig:
Christ Jesus, crucified and dead by the merit of his bloodshed, quickening all
the elect. Hebr: 10, 20.

Out of the way. sig:
Transgressors or Sinners. Heb: 5, 2.

Word. See Common Dictionary.

World. See Common Dictionary.

our own works. sig:
Our corrupt Nature, and the evil fruits of it. Heb. 4, 10.

good works sig:
Merciful and charitable actions. Hebr. 10, 24.

2 ^ Holy duties of all sorts, toward God and Man. Heb. 13, 21.

to Withdraw. sig:
To distrust God in his word. Heb: 10, 29.

without the camp and gate. sig:
To be accounted for vnpure and wicked men. Heb. 13, 12.

within the veil. sig:
In Heaven. Hebr. 6.

without Father and mother. sig.
Without mention or rehearsal either of Father or Mother, in the sacred Story.
Heb. 7, 3.

written in Heaven. sig:
Chosen of God to aeternall life, by Christ Jesus. Heb. 12, 23.

Word of righteousness. sig:
The Gospel, which teaches the righteousness of God, and the way to attain
to it. Hebr. 5, 13.

Y. E.
Years. sig:
The aeternity or perpetuity of Gods being, without end or limit of time. Heb.
1, 11.

Yesterday and to day. sig:
At all times, both before and after the coming of Christ. Heb. 13, 8.

FINIS.
Author to the Reader.
I Gentle Reader, notwithstanding, the Printers very great care and diligence,
yet by the badnesse of the Copy, and by absence, as also partly by forgetfulness
of the Author, there are more faults committed then were thought of. Might it
please thee with patience to bear with lesser, and first with thy Pen to amend
these, ear thou begin to use this Book.

Farewell.
I Faults escaped.
PAge 2. line 11. read Luke 21, 11. after people. page 11. line 12. strike out,
or departing. page 12. in the Marg. read anguish for anointing, and after,
anointing for anguish* pa. 19. line last, strike the whole line out. pa. 22.
li. 10. read this. pa. 2. li. 32. read imitation. pa. 26. line 7. put in, which
before well. page 30. read- Eumenides in the Marg. pa. 35. read boldness, for
bonds, and after bonds for boldness, in the Marg. page 37. line 12. strike out
that is. pa. 57. line 4. read Deuteronomy. 11, 22. page 68. li. 34, 35. strike both
these lines out. p. 100. line 27. read Cant. 5, 2. p. 113. read Romans 8, 9. p.
114. line last, read Romans 8, 9. p. 117. read collections in the Marg. pa. 119.
line 12. read word for figure. and line 28. read Metonimie, and so through the
Book. page 128. over line 8. read sig. page 132. strike out Eye in the last
place of the Marg. and for these figures, 1, 2, 3, 4. read 4, 5, 6, 7. page
142. line 4. read not for now. page 172. line 28. strike out that is. page 177.
strike out Apostles, and read Moses. page 181. read fruit of lips, in Marg.
over line 2. page 186. line 13. read New before Man. page 195. line 15. 16.
strike both lines out. page 196. read-Note, over line 17. and strike out four.
page 199. line four, strike out it is. and read sig. by line 12. and strike
out, this is created goodness, in line 14. page 201. line 22. strike it out.
page 220. line 11. read, it is partial or total. page 222. line 19. read
Romans page 237. line 32. read Luke 1, 33. page 244. strike out is nothing, after
Idol, and set Idol is nothing, over line six, with sig: page 265. line 20.
read Commutatiue. page 270. line 35. read Romans page 275. line 19. read
Metonimie of the sign, for Metaphor. page. 293. line 20. read self, for
life. page 298. strike out See Lips. line the third. page 341. line 24. read,
this is an offense taken. page 350. line 1. read grossly, for glory. pa. 353.
li. 10. read even for men. p. 371. li. 30. strike out either. page 372. lines
25, 26, 27. strike quite out. page 383. li. three, read this is ill applied by
some to man's purpose. page 412. li. 35. read the rock in, after of. page 414.
lines 18, 19. strik out, and for them, read King David Son of Iesse, out of
whose stock Christ came, according to the flesh. page 419. line 33. read holy,
for unholy. page 432. line 2. read things, for tidings. pa. 437. lines 27, 28,
29, 30. strik out. page 452. line 19. Marg. read Smell, for smite. ibid. line
21. Mar. read Smite, for Smoke. page 476. line 16. read and Church, after
Kingdom. page 495. line 21. read subsistence, for substance. page 515. line
4. read a mighty. page 524. line 20. read hence, for hear. page 537. line 12.
read wise men, for wisdom. page 547. line one, add, also Papists which
reckon for good works, such as God never commanded. page 549. line 7. read
condition, for contention. In the first Dedicatory Epistle, read dim, for
Divine.


