GOOD NEWS FROM NEW ENGLAND: OR A true Relation of things very remarkable at
the Plantation of Plimoth in NEW ENGLAND. Showing the wondrous providence and
goodness of GOD, in their preservation and continuance, being delivered from
many apparent deaths and dangers. Together with a Relation of such religious
and civil Laws and Customs, as are in practice amongst the Indians,
adjoining to them at this day. As also what Commo^ities are there to be ray^ed
for the mainten^^ce of that and other Plantations in the said Country.

Written by E. W. who has borne a part in the forenamed troubles, and there
lived since their first Arrival. Whereunto is added by him a brief Relation
of a credible intelligence of the present estate of Virginia.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for William Bladen and John Bellamie, and are to be
sold at their Shops, at the Bible in Pauls-Churchyard, and at the three Gold^n
Lions in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1624.

TO ALL WEL-WILLERS AND FVRTHERES OF Plantations in New England: especially to
such as ever have or desire to assist, the people of Plimoth in their just
proc^edings, Grace, and Peace, be multiplied.
RIght Honorable and Worshipful Gentlemen, or whatsoever: Since it has
pleased God to stir you up to be instruments of his glory, in so honorable an
enterprise as the enlarging of his Majesty's Dominions, by planting his loyal
subjects in so healthful and hopeful a Country as New England is; where the
Church of God being seated in sincerity, there is no less hope of convincing
the Heathen of their evil ways, and converting them to the true knowledge and
worship of the living God, and so consequently the salvation of their souls by
the merits of Jesus Christ, then elsewhere though it be much talked on, and
lightly or lamely prosecuted. I therefore think it but my duty to offer the
view of our proceedings to your worthy considerations, having to that end
composed them together thus briefly as you see; wherein to your great
encouragement, you may behold the good providence of God working with you in
our preservation from so many dangerous plots and treacheries, as have been
intended against us; as also in giving his blessing so powerfully upon the
weak means we had, inabling us with health and ability beyond expectation,
in our greatest scarcities, and possessing the hearts of the Saluages with
astonishment and fear of us, whereas if God had let them loose, they might
easily have swallowed us up, scarce being an handful in comparison of those
forces they might have gathered together against us, which now by Gods blessing
will be more hard and difficult, in regard our number of men is increased, our
town better fortified, and our store better victualed. Blessed therefore be
his name, that has done so great things for us, and has wrought so great a
change amongst us.

Accept I pray you my weak endeavors pardon my unskillfulness, and bear with
my plainness in the things I have handled. Be not discouraged by our former
necessities, but rather encouraged with us, hoping that us God has wrought
with us in our beginning of this worthy Work, undertaken in his name and
fear; so he will by us accomplish the same to his glory and our comfort, if
we neglect not the means. I confess, it has not bin much less chargeable
to some of you, then hard and difficult to us, that have endured the brunt of
the battle, and yet small profits returned; only by Gods mercy we are safely
seated, housed, and fortified, by which means a great step is made unto gain,
and a more direct course taken for the same, then if at first we had rashly and
covetously fallen upon it.

Indeed, three things are the overthrow and bane (as I may term it) of
Plantations.

1. The vain expectation of present profit, which too too commonly takes a
principal seat in the heart and affection; though Gods glory, etc. is
preferred before it in the mouth with protestation.

2. Ambition in their Governors and Commanders, seeking only to make
themselves great, and slaves of all that are under them, to maintain a
transitory base honor in themselves, which God often punishes with contempt.

3. The carelesnes of those that send over supplies of men unto them, not
caring how they be qualified: so that often times they are rather the Image of
men endued with bestiall, yea, diabolical affections, then the Image of God,
endued with reason, understanding, and holiness. I praise God I speak not these
things experimentally, by way of complaint of our own condition, but having
great cause on the contrary part to be thankful to God for his mercies
toward us: but rather, if there be any too desirous of gain, to entreat
them to moderate their affections, and consider that no man expects fruit
before the tree be grown; advising all men, that as they tender their own
well fare, so to make choice of such to manage and govern their affairs, as
are approved not to be seekers of themselves, but the common good of all for
whom they are employed; and beseeching such as have the care of transporting
men for the supply and furnishing of Plantations, to be truly careful in
sending such as may further and not hinder so good an action. There is no godly
honest man, but will be helpful in his kind, and adorn his profession with
an upright life and conversation, which Doctrine of manners ought first to be
Preached by giving good example to the poor Savage Heathens amongst whom they
live. On the contrary part, what great offense has been given by many profane
men, who being but seeming Christians, have made Christ and Christianity
stink in the nostrils of the poor Infidels, and so laid a stumbling block
before them: but woe be to them by whom such offenses come.

These things I offer to your Christian considerations, beseeching you to make
a good construction of my simple meaning, and take in good part this ensuing
Relation, dedicating my self and it evermore unto your service; beseeching God
to crown our Christian and faithful endeavors with his blessings temporal
and eternal.

Yours in this service, ever to be commanded: E. W.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, when I first penned this discourse, I intended it chiefly for the
satisfaction of my private friends, but since that time have been persuaded to
publish the same: And the rather, because of a disorderly Colony that are
dispersed, and most of them returned, to the great prejudice and damage of him
that set them forth; who as they were a stain to old England that bred them,
in respect of their lives and manners amongst the Indians: So it is to be
feared, will be no less to New England in their vile and clamorous reports,
because she would not foster them in their desired idle courses. I would not
be understood to think there were no wel-deseruing persons amongst them: for
of mine own knowledge it was a grief to some that they were so yoaked; whose
deserts as they were then suitable to their honest protestations, so I desire
still may be, in respect of their just and true Relations.

Peradventure thou will rather marvel that I deal so plainly, then any way
doubt of the truth of this my Relation, yea it may be tax me therewith, as
seeming rather to discourage men, then any way to further so noble an action?
If any honest mind be discouraged, I am sorry, sure I am, I have given no just
cause; and am so far from being discouraged my self, as I purpose to return
forthwith. And for other light and vain persons, if they stumble hereat I have
my desire, accounting it better for them and us that they keep where they are,
as being unfit and unable to perform so great a task.

Some faults have escaped because I could not attend on the Press, which I
pray thee correct as thou find, and I shall account it as a favor unto me.

Thine E. W.

GOOD NEWS FROM New England.
THE Good Ship called the Fortune, which in the Month of Nouemb. 1621.
(blessed be God) brought us a new supply of 35. persons, was not long departed
our Coast, ere the Great people of Nanohigganset, which are reported to be many
thousands strong, began to breath forth many threats against us,
notwithstanding their desired and obtained peace with us in the foregoing
summer. Insomuch as the common talk of our neighbor Indians on all sides was
of the preparation they made to come against us. In reason a man would think
they should have now more cause to fear us than before our supply came: but
though none of them were present, yet understanding by others that they neither
brought Arms nor other provisions with them, but wholly relied on us, is
occasioned them to slight and brave us with so many threa^s as they did. At
length came one of them to us, who was sent by Conanacus their chief Sachim or
King, accompanied with one Tokamahamon a friendly Indian. This messenger
inquired for Tisquantum our Interpreter, who not being at home seemed rather to
be glad than sorry, and leaving for him a bundle of new arrows lapped in a
rattle Snakes skin, desired to depart with all expedition. But our Governors
not knowing what to make of this strange carriage, and comparing it with that we
had formerly heard, committed him to the custody of Captain Standish, hoping
now to know some certainty of that we so often heard, either by his own
relation to us, or to Tisquantum at his return, desiring my self, having
special familiarity with the other forenamed Indian, to see if I could
learn any thing from him, whose answer was sparingly to this effect; that he
could not certainly tell, but thought they were enemies to us. That night
Captain Standish gave me and another charge of him, and gave us order to use
him kindly, and that he should not want any thing he desired, and to take all
occasions to talk and inquire of the reasons of those reports we heard, and
withal to signify that upon his true relation he should be sure of his own
freedom. At first fear so possessed him, that he could scarce say any thing:
but in the end became more familiar, and told us that the messenger which his
Master sent in Summer to treat of peace, at his return persuaded him rather to
war; and to the end he might provoke him thereunto, (as appeared to him by
our reports) de^ained many of the things were sent him by our Governor,
scorning the meannesse of them both in respect of what himself had formerly
sent, and also of the greatness of his own person; so that he much blamed the
former Messenger, saying, that upon the knowledge of this his false carriage, it
would cost him his life; but assured us that upon his relation of our speech
then with him to his Master, he would be friends with us. Of this we informed
the Governor and his Assistant, and Captain Standish, who after consultation
considered him howsoever but in the state of a messenger, and it being as well
against the Law of Arms amongst them as us in Europe, to lay violent hands on
any such, set him at liberty, the Governor giving him order to certify his
Master that he had heard of his large and many threatenings, at which he was
much offended, daring him in those respects to the utmost, if he would not be
reconciled to live peaceably as other his neighbors; manifesting withal (as
ever) his desire of peace; but his fearelesse resolution, if he could not so
live amongst them. After which he caused meat to be offered him, but he refused
to eat, making all speed to return, and giving many thanks for his liberty.
But requesting the other Indian again to return, the weather being violent,
he used many words to persuade him to stay longer, but could not. Whereupon he
left him, and said he was with his friends, and would not take a journey in
such extremity.

After this when Tisquantum returned, and the arrows were delivered, and the
manner of the messengers carriage related, he signified to the Governor, that
to send the rattle Snakes skin in that manner, imported enmity, and that it
was no better than a challenge. Hereupon after some deliberation, the Governor
stuffed the skin with powder and shot, and sent it back, returning no less
defiance to Conanacus, assuring him if he had shipping now present thereby to
send his men to Nanohigganset (the place of his abode) they should not need to
come so far by land to us: yet withal showing that they should never come
unwelcome or unlooked for. This message was sent by an Indian, and delivered in
such sort, as it was no small terror to this savage King, insomuch as he
would not once touch the powder and shot, or suffer it to stay in his house or
Country. Whereupon the Messenger refusing it, another took it up, and having
been posted from place to place a long time, at length came whole back again.

In the mean time, knowing our own weakness, notwithstanding our high words
and lofty looks toward them, and still lying open to all casualty, having as
yet (under God) no other defense than our Arms, we thought it most needful
to impale our Town, which with all expedition we accomplished in the month
of February and some few days, taking in the top of the Hill under which our
Town is seated, making four bulwarks or ietties without the ordinary
circuit of the pale, from whence we could defend the whole Town: In three
whereof are gates, and the fourth in time to be. This being done, Captain
Standish divided our strength into four squadrons or companies, appointing
whom he thought most fit to have command of each; And at a general Muster or
Trayning, appointed each his place, gave each his Company, giving them charge
upon every alarm to resort to their Leaders to their appointed place, and in
his absence, to be commanded and directed by them. That done according to his
order, each drew his Company to his appointed place for defense, and there
together discharged their muskets. After which they brought their new
Commanders to their houses, where again they graced them with their shot, and
so departed.

Fearing also lest the enemy at any time should take any advantage by firing
our houses, Captain Standish appointed a certain Company, that whenever
they saw or heard fire to be cried in the Town, should only betake themselves
to their Arms, and should enclose the house or place so endangered, and stand
aloof on their guard, with their backs toward the fire, to prevent treachery,
if any were in that kind intended. If the fire were in any of the houses of
this guard, they were then freed from it, but not otherwise, without special
command.

Long before this time we promised the people of Massachuset in the beginning
of March to come unto them, and trade for their Furs, which being then come,
we began to make preparation for that voyage. In the mean time, an Indian
called Hobbamock, who still lived in the Town, told us, that he feared the
Massachusetts or Massachuseucks (for they so called the people of that place)
were joined in confederacy with the Nanohigganneucks, or people of
Nanohigganset, and that they therefore would take this opportunity to cut off
Captain Standish and his company abroad: but howsoever in the mean time, it
was to be feared that the Nanohigganeuks would assault the Town at home,
giving many reasons for his jealousy, as also that Tisquantum was in the
confederacy, who we should find would use many persuasions to draw us from
our shallops to the Indians houses for their better advantage. To confirm this
his jealousy he told us of many secret passages that passed between him and
others, having their meetings ordinarily abroad in the woods: bu^ if at home
howsoever he was excluded from their secrecy, saying it was the manner of the
Indians when they meant plainly to deal openly: but in this his practice there
was no show of honesty.

Hereupon the Governor, together with his Assistant and Captain Standish;
called together such, as by them were thought most meet for advice in so
weighty a business, who after consideration hereof came to this resolution;
That as hitherto upon all occasions between them and us, we had ever
manifested undaunted courage and resolution, so it would not now stand with our
safety to mew up our selves in our new-enclosed town, partly because our
Store was almost empty, and therefore must seek out for our daily food,
without which we could not long subsist; but especially for that thereby they
would see us dismayed, and be encouraged to prosecute their malicious purposes,
with more eagerness than ever they intended: whereas on the contrary, by the
blessing of God, our fearelesse carriage might be a means to discourage and
weaken their proceedings. And therefore thought best to proceed in our trading
voyage, making this use of that we heard, to go the better provided, and use
the more carfulness both at home and abroad, leaving the event to the
disposing of the Almighty, whose providence as it had hitherto been over us
for good, so we had now no cause (save our sins) to despair of his mercy in
our preservation and continuance, where we desired rather to be instruments
of good to the Heathens about us, than to give them the least measure of just
offense.

All things being now in readiness, the forenamed Captain with ten men,
accompanied with Tisquantum and Hobbamock, set forwards for the Massachusetts:
but we had no sooner turned the point of the harbor called the Gurnets nose
(where being becalmed we let fall our grapnell, to set things to rights, and
prepare to row) but there came an Indian of Tisquantums family, running to
certain of our people that were from home with all eagerness, having his face
wounded, and the blood still fresh on the same, calling to them to repair
home, often looking behind him, as if some others had him in chase, saying that
at Namaschet (a town some fifteen miles from us) there were many of the
Nanohiggansets, Massassowat our supposed friend, and Conbatant our feared
enemy, with many others, with a resolution to take advantage on the present
opportunity, to assault the town in the Captains absence, affirming that he
received the wound in his face for speaking in our behalf, and by sleight
escaped, looking often backward, as if he suspected them to be at hand. This he
affirmed again to the Governor, whereupon he gave command that three piece of
Ordnance should be made ready and discharged, to the end that if we were not
out of hearing, we might return thereat. Which we no sooner heard, but we
repaired homeward with all convenient speed, arming our selves, and making all
in readiness to fight. When we entered the harbor, we saw the Town likewise
on their guard, whither we hasted with all convenient speed. The news being
made known unto us, Hobbamock said flatly that it was false, alluring us of
Massassowats faithfulness; howsoever he presumed he would never have
undertaken any such act without his priuitie, himself being a Pinse, that is,
one of his chiefest champions or men of valor, it being the manner amongst
them not to undertake such enterprises without the advice and furtherance of
men of that rank. To this the Governor answered, he should be sorry that any
just and necessary occasions of war should arise between him and any the
Savages, but especially Massassowat, not that he feared him more than the
rest, but because his love more exceeded toward him than any. Whereunto
Hobbamock replied; There was no cause wherefore he should distrust him, and
therefore should do well to continue his affections.

But to the end things might be made more manifest, the Governor caused
Hobbamock to send his wife with all priuacie to Puckanokick the chief place of
Massassowats residence, (pretending other occasions) there to inform herself,
and so us, of the right state of things. When she came thither, and saw all
things quiet, and that no such matter was or had been intended, told
Massassowat what had happened at Plimoth, (by them called Patuxet) which when he
understood, he was much offended at the carriage of Tisquantum, returning many
thanks to the Governor for his good thoughts of him; and assuring him that
according to their first Articles of peace, he would send word and give warning
when any such business was toward.

Thus by degrees we began to discover Tisquantum, whose ends were only to
make himself great in the eyes of this Countrymen, by means of his
neerenesse and favor with us, not caring who fell so he stood. In the
general, his course was to persuade them he could lead us to peace or war
at his pleasure, and would often threaten the Indians, sending them word in a
private manner, we were intended shortly to kill them, that thereby he might
get gifts to himself to work their peace, insomuch as they had him in greater
esteem than many of their Sachims; yea they themselves sought to him, who
promised them peace in respect of us; yea and protection also, so as they would
resort to him. So that whereas diverse were wont to rely on M^ssassowat for
protection, and resort to his abode, now they began to leave him, and seek
after Tisquantum. Now though he could not make good these his large promises,
especially because of the continued peace between Massassowat and us, he
therefore raised this false alarm, hoping whilst things were hot in the heat
of blood, to provoke us to march into his Country against him, whereby he hoped
to kindle such a flame as would not easily be quenched, and hoping if that
block were once removed, there were no other between him and honor; which he
loved as his life, and preferred before his peace. For these and the like
abuses, the Governor sharply reproved him, yet was he so necessary and
profitable an instrument, as at that time we could not miss him. But when we
understood his dealings, we certified all the Indians of our ignorance and
innocence therein, assuring them till they begun with us, they should have no
cause to fear. And if any hereafter should raise any such reports, they should
punish them as liers and seekers of their and our disturbance, which gave the
Indians good satisfaction on all sides.

After this we proceeded in our voyage to the Massachusetts, where we had good
store of Trade, and (blessed be God) returned in safety, though driven from
before our Town in great danger and extremity of weather.

At our return, we found Massassowat at the Plantation, who made his seeming
just Apology for all former matters of accusation, being much offended and
enraged against Tisquantum, whom the Governor pacified as much as he could
for the present. But not long after his departure, he sent a messenger to the
Governor, entreating him to give way to the death of Tisquantum, who had so
much abused him. But the Governor answered; Although he had deserved to die
both in respect of him and us; yet for our sakes he desired he would spare
him, and the rather because without him he knew not well how to understand
himself, or any other the Indians. With this answer the messenger returned,
but came again not long after, accompanied with diverse others, demanding him
from Massassowat their Master, as being one of his subjects, whom by our first
Articles of peace we could not retain: yet because he would not willingly
do it without the Governors approbation, offered him many Beuers skins for
his consent thereto, saying, that according to their manner, their Sachim had
sent his own knife, and them therewith, to cut off his head and hands, and
bring them to him. To which the Governor answered; It was not the manner of
the English to sell men's lives at a price, but when they had deserved justly to
die, to give them their reward, and therefore refused their Beauers as a gift:
but sent for Tisquantum, who though he knew their intent, yet offered not to
fly, but came and accused Hobbamock as the author and worker of his overthrow;
yielding himself to the Governor to be sent or not according as he thought
meet. But at the instant, when our Governor was ready to deliver him into the
hands of his Executioners, a Boat was seen at Sea to cross before our Town,
and fall behind a head-land not far off: whereupon, having heard many rumors
of the French, and not knowing whether there were any combination between the
Savages and them, the Governor told the Indians, he would first know what Boat
that was ere he would deliver him into their custody. But being mad with rage,
and impatient at delay, they departed in great heat.

Here let me not omit one notable (though wicked) practice of this Tisquantum,
who to the end he might possess his Countrymen with the greater fear of us,
and so consequently of himself, told them we had the plague buried in our
storehouse, which at our pleasure we could send forth to what place or people
we would, and destroy them therewith, though we stirred not from home. Being
upon the forenamed brabbles sent for by the Governor to this place, where
Hobbamock was and some other of us, the ground being broke in the midst of
the house, (whereunder certain barrels of powder were buried, though unknown
to him) Hobbamock asked him what it meant? To whom he readily answered; That
was the place wherein the plague was buried, whereof he formerly told him and
others. After this Hobbamock asked one of our people, whether such a thing
were, and whether we had such command of it? Who answered no; But the God of
the English had it in store, and could send it at his pleasure to the
destruction of his and our enemies.

This was, as I take it, about the end of May 1622. At which time our store of
victuals was wholly spent, having lived long before with a bare and short
allowance: The reason was, that supply of men before mentioned, which came so
unprovided, not landing so much as a barrel of bread or meal for their whole
company, but contrariwise received from us for their ships store homeward.
Neither were the setters forth thereof altogether to be blamed therein, but
rather certain amongst our selves, who were too prodigal in their writing and
reporting of that plenty we enjoyed. But that I may return.

This Boat proved to be a Shallop that belonged to a fishing ship, called the
Sparrow, set forth by Master Thomas Weston, late Merchant and Citizen of
London, which brought six or seven passengers at his charge, that should before
have been landed at our Plantation, who also brought no more provision for the
present than served the Boats gang for their return to the ship, which made
her voyage at a place called Damarins Coue near Munhiggen some forty leagues
from us North-east-ward; about which place there fished above thirty sail of
ships, and whither my self was employed by our Governor, with orders to take
up such victuals as the ships could spare, where I found kind entertainment
and good respect, with a willingness to supply our wants: But being not able
to spare that quantity I required, by reason of the necessity of some amongst
themselves, whom they supplied before my coming, would not take any Bills for
the same, but did what they could freely, wishing their store had been such as
they might in greater measure have expressed their own love, and supplied our
necessities, for which they sorrowed, provoking one another to the utmost of
their abilities: which although it were not much amongst so many people as were
at the Plantation, yet through the provident and discreet care of the
Governors, recovered and preserved strength till our own crop on the ground
was ready.

Having dispatched there, I returned home with all speed convenient, where I
found the state of the Colonie much weaker than when I left it: for till now
we were never without some bread, the want whereof much abated the strength
and flesh of some, and swelled others. But here it may be said, if the Country
abound with Fish and Foul in such measure as is reported, how could men
undergo such measure of hardness, except through their own negligence? I
answer; Every thing must be expected in its proper season. No man, as one
says, will go into an Orchard in the Winter to gather Cherries: so he that
looks for Foul there in the Summer, will be deceived in his expectation. The
time they continue in plenty with us, is from the beginning of October to the
end of March* but these extremities befell us in May and June. I confess that
as the Foul decrease, so Fish increase. And indeed their exceeding abundance
was a great cause of increasing our wants. For though our Bay and Creekes were
full of Basse, and other fish, yet for want of fit and strong Saynes, and other
netting, they for the most part brake through and carried all away before them.
And though the Sea were full of Cod, yet we had neither tackling nor h^rseis
for our Shallops. And indeed had we not been in a place where diverse sorts of
shellfish are that may be taken with the hand, we must have perished, unless
God had raised some unknown or extraordinary means for our preservation.

In the time of these streits (indeed before my going to Munhiggen) the Indians
began again to cast forth many insulting speeches, glorying in our weakness,
and giving out how easy it would be ere long to cut us off. Now also
Massassowat seemed to frown on us, and neither came or sent to us as formerly.
These things occasioned further thoughts of Fortification: And whereas we have
a Hill called the Mount, enclosed within our pale, under which our Town is
seated, we resolved to erect a Fort thereon, from whence a few might easily
secure the Town from any assault the Indians can make, whilst the rest might
be employed as occasion served. This work was begun with great eagerness, and
with the approbation of all men, hoping that this being once finished, and a
continual guard there kept, it would utterly discourage the Savages from
having any hopes or thoughts of rising against us. And though it took the
greatest part of our strength from dressing our corn, yet (life being
continued) we hoped God would raise some means in stead thereof for our
further preservation.

In the end of June, or beginning of July, came into our harbor two ships of
Master Westons aforesaid, the one called the Charity, the other the Swan,
having in them some fifty or sixty men sent over at his own charge to plant
for him. These we received into our Town, affording them whatsoever courtesy
our mean condition could afford. There the Charity, being the bigger ship,
left them, having many passengers which she was to land in Virginia. In the
mean time, the body of them refreshed themselves at Plimoth, whilst some most
fit sought out a place for them. That little store of corn we had, was
exceedingly wasted by the unjust and dishonest walking of these strangers, who
though they would sometimes seem to help us in our labor about our corn,
yet spared not day and night to steal the same, it being then eatable, and
pleasant to taste, though green and unprofitable. And though they received
much kindness, set light both by it and us; not sparing to require the love
we showed them, with secret backbitings, reuilings, etc. the chief of them
being forestaled and made against us, before they came, as after appeared:
Nevertheless for their Masters sake, who formerly had deserved well from us,
we continued to do them whatsoever good or furtherance we could, attributing
these things to the want of conscience and discretion, expecting each day, when
God in his providence would disburden us of them, sorrowing that their
Ouer-seers were not of more ability and fitness for their places, and much
fearing what would be the issue of such raw and unconscionable beginnings.

At length their Coasters returned, having found in their judgment a place fit
for plantation, within the Bay of the Massachusetts, at a place called by the
Indians Wichaguscusset. To which place the body of them went with all
convenient speed, leaving still with us such as were sick and lame, by the
Governors permission, though on their parts undeserved, whom our Surgeon by
the help of God recovered gratis for them, and they fetched home, as occasion
served.

They had not been long from us, ere the Indians filled our ears with
clamours against them, for stealing their corn, and other abuses conceived by
them. At which we grieved the more, because the same men, in mine own
hearing, had been earnest in persuading Captain Standish, before their
coming to solicit our Goruernour to send some of his men to plant by them,
alleging many reasons how it might be commodious for us. But we knew no means
to redress those abuses, save reproof, and aduising them to better walking,
as occasion served.

In the end of August came other two ships into our harbor, the one (as I take
it) was called the Discovery, Captain Jones having the command thereof, the
other was that ship of Mr. Westons called the Sparrow, which had now made her
voyage of fish, and was consorted with the other, being both bound for
Virginia. Of Captain Jones we furnished our selves of such provisions as we
most needed, and he could best spare, who as he used us kindly, so made us pay
largely for the things we had. And had not the Almighty, in his All-ordering
Providence, directed him to us, it would have gone worse with us, than ever it
had been, or after was: for, as we had now but small store of corn for the
year following: so for want of supply, we were worn out of all manner of
trucking-stuffe, nor having any means left to help our selves by trade; but,
through Gods good mercy toward us, he had wherewith, and did supply our wants
on that kind competently.

In the end of September, or beginning of October, Mr. Westons biggest ship
called the Charity, returned for England, and left their Colony sufficiently
victualled, as some of most credit amongst them reported. The lesser, called
the Swan, remained with his Colony for their further help. At which time they
desired to join in partnership with us to trade for corn; to which our
Gouenour and his Assistant agreed upon such equal conditions, as were drawn
and confirmed between them and us. The chief places aimed at were to the
Southward of Cape Cod, and the more because Tisquantum, whose peace before this
time was wrought with Massassowat, undertook to discover unto us that
supposed, and still hoped passage within the Sholes.

Both Colonies being thus agreed, and their companies fitted and joined
together, we resolved to set forward, but were often crossed in our purposes; as
first Master Richard Green, brother in Law to Master Weston, who from him had
a charge in the oversight and government of his Colony, died suddenly at our
Plantation, to whom we gave burial befitting his place, in the best manner
we could. Afterward, having further order to proceed by letter from their
other Governor at the Massachusetts, twice Captain Standish set forth with
them, but were driven in again by cross and violent winds: himself the
second time being sick of a violent fever. By reason whereof (our own wants
being like to be now greater than formerly; partly, because we were enforced
to neglect our corn, and spend much time in fortification, but especially
because such havoc was made of that little we had, through the unjust and
dishonest carriage of those people before mentioned, at our first entertainment
of them) our Governor in his own person supplied the Captains place, and in
the month of November again set forth, having Tisquantum for his Interpreter
and Pilot, who affirmed he had twice passed within the Sholes of Cape Cod,
both with English and French. Nevertheless, they went so far with him, as
the Master of the ship saw no hope of passage: but being (as he thought) in
danger, bare up, and according to Tisquantums directions, made for an harbor
not far from them, at a place called Manamoycke, which they found, and
sounding it with their shallop found the channel, though but narrow and
crooked, where at length they harbored the ship. Here they perceived that the
tide set in and out with more violence at some other place more Southerly,
which they had not seen nor could discover, by reason of the violence of the
season all the time of their abode there. Some judged the entrance thereof
might be beyond the Sholes, but there is no certainty thereof as yet known.
That night the Governor accompanied with others, having Tisquantum for his
Interpreter went ashore; At first the Inhabitants played least in sight,
because none of our people had ever been there before; but understanding the
ends of their coming, at length came to them, welcomming our Governor
according to their Savage manner, refreshing them very well with store of
venison and other victuals, which they brought them in great abundance,
promising to trade with them, with a seeming gladness of the occasion: yet
their joy was mixed with much jealousy, as appeared by their after practices:
for at first they were loath their dwellings should be known, but when they
saw our Governors resolution to stay on the shore all night, they brought him
to their houses, having first conuayed all their stuff to a remote place, not
far from the same, which one of our men walking forth occasionally espied;
whereupon, on the sudden, neither it nor them could be found, and so many
times after upon conceived occasions, they would be all gone, bag and baggage:
But being afterward (by Tisquantums means) better persuaded, they left their
jealousy and traded with them; where they got eight hogsheads of corn and
beans, though the people were but few. This gave our Governor and the company
good encouragement. Tisquantum being still confident in the passage, and the
Inhabitants affirming, they had seen ships of good burden pass within the
Sholes aforesaid. But here, though they had determined to make a second assay,
yet God had otherwise disposed, who struck Tisquantum with sickness, in so
much as he there died, which crossed their Southward trading, and the more
because the Masters sufficiency was much doubted, and the season very
tempestuous, and not fit to go upon discovery, having no guide to direct them.

From thence they departed, and the wind being fair for the Massachusetts went
thither, and the rather because the Savages upon our motion had planted much
corn for us, which they promised not long before that time. When they came
thither, they found a great sickness to be amongst the Indians, not unlike the
plague, if not the same. They renewed their complaints to our Governor, against
that other plantation seated by them, for their injurious walking. But indeed
the trade both for Furs and corn was overthrown in that place, they giving
as much for a quart of corn, as we used to do for a Beauers skin; so that
little good could be there done. From thence they returned into the bottom of
the Bay of Cape Cod, to a place called Nauset, where the Sachim used the
Governor very kindly, and where they bought eight or ten hogsheads of corn
and beans. Also at a place called Mattachiest, where they had like kind
entertainment and corn also. During the time of their trade in these places,
there were so great and violent storms, as the ship was much endangered, and
our shallop cast away, so that they had now no means to carry the corn aboard
that they had bought, the ship riding by their report well near two leagues
from the same, her own Boat being small, and so leake, (having no Carpenter
with them) as they durst scarce fetch wood or water in her. Hereupon the
Governor caused the corn to be made in a round stack, and bought mats, and
cut sedge to cover it, and gave charge to the Indians not to meddle with it,
promising him that dwelt next to it a reward, if he would keep vermin also
from it, which he undertook, and the Sachim promised to make good. In the
mean time, according to the Governors request, the Sachim sent men to seek
the shallop, which they found buried almost in sand at a high water mark,
having many things remaining in her, but unserviceable for the present; whereof
the Governor gave the Sachim special charge that it should not be further
broken, promising ere long to fetch both it and the corn; assuring them, if
neither were diminished, he would take it as a sign of their honest and true
friendship, which they so much made show of, but if they were, they should
certainly smart for their unjust and dishonest dealing, and further make good
whatsoever they had so taken. So he did likewise at Mattachiest, and took
leave of them, being resolved to leave the ship, and take his journey home by
land with our own company, sending word to the ship, that they should take
their first opportunity to go for Plimoth, where he determined, by the
permission of God, to meet them. And having procured a Guide, it being no less
than fifty miles to our Plantation, set forward, receiving all respect that
could be from the Indians in his journey, and came safely home, though weary
and surbated, whither some three days after the ship also came. The corn
being divided which they had got, Master Westons company went to their own
Plantation, it being further agreed, that they should return with all
convenient speed, and bring their Carpenter, that they might fetch the rest of
the corn, and save the shallop.

At their return, Captain Standish being recovered and in health, took
another shallop, and went with them to the corn, which they found in safety as
they left it: also they mended the other shallop, and got all their corn
aboard the ship. This was in January, as I take it, it being very cold and
stormy, insomuch as (the harbor being none of the best) they were constrained
to cut both the shallops from the ships stern, and so lost them both a second
time. But the storm being over, and seeking out, they found them both, not
having received any great hurt. Whilst they were at Nauset, having occasion to
lie on the shore, laying their shallop in a Creek not far from them, an Indian
came into the same, and stole certain Beads, Cissers, and other trifles out of
the same, which when the Captain missed, he took certain of his company with
him, and went to the Sachim, telling him what had happened, and requiring the
same again, or the party that stole them, (who was known to certain of the
Indians) or else he would revenge it on them before his departure, and so took
leave for that night being late, refusing whatsoever kindness they offered. On
the morrow, the Sachim came to their randeuow, accompanied with many men, in a
stately manner, who saluting the Captain in this wise; He thrust out his
tongue, that one might see the root thereof, and therewith licked his hand from
the wrist to the fingers end, withal bowing the knee, striving to imitate the
English gesture, being instructed therein formerly by Tisquantum: his men did
the like, but in so rude and savage a manner, as our men could scarce for bear
to break out in open laughter. After salutation, he delivered the Beads, and
other things, to the Captain, saying, he had much beaten the party for doing
it, causing the women to make bread, and bring them, according to their desire,
seeming to be very sorry for the fact, but glad to be reconciled. So they
departed, and came home in safety; where the corn was equally divided, as
before.

After this the Governor went to two other inland Towns, with another
company, and bought corn likewise of them, the one is called Namasket, the
other Manomet. That from Namasket was brought home partly by Indian women; but
a great sickness arising amongst them, our own men were enforced to fetch
home the rest. That at Manomet the Governor left in the Sachime custody: this
Town lies from us South well near twenty miles, and stands upon a fresh
river, which runs into the Bay of Nanohigganset, and cannot be less than
sixty miles from thence. It will bear a boat of eight or ten tun to this
place. Hither the Dutch or French, or both use to come. It is from hence to the
Bay of Cape Cod about eight miles; out of which Bay it flows into a Creek
some six miles almost direct toward the Town. The heads of the River, and
this Creek are not far distant. This River yields thus high, Oysters,
Muscles, Clams, and other shellfish, one in shape like a bean, another like a
Clam, both good meat, and great abundance at all times; besides it abounds
with diverse sorts of fresh fish in their seasons. The Governor or Sachim of
this place, was called Canacum, who had formerly, as well as many others, (yea
all with whom as yet we had to do) acknowledged themselves the subjects of our
Sovereign Lord the King. This Sachim used the Governor very kindly, and it
seemed was of good respect and authority amongst the Indians. For whilst the
Governor was there within night in bitter weather, came two men from Manamoick
before spoken of, and having set aside their bows and quiuers, according to
their manner, sat down by the fire, and took a pipe of Tobacco, not using
any words in that time, nor any other to them, but all remained silent,
expecting when they would speak: At length they looked toward Canacum, and one
of them made a short speech, and delivered a present to him from his Sachim,
which was a basket of Tobacco, and many Beads, which the other received
thankfully. After which he made a long speech to him, the contents hereof was
related to us by Hobbamock (who then accompanied the Governor for his Guide)
to be as follows; It happened that two of their men sell out as they were in
game (for they use gaming as much as any where, and will play away all, even
their skin from their backs, yea and for their wives skins also, though it may
be they are many miles distant from them, as my self have seen) and growing
to great heat, the one killed the other. The actor of this fact was a Powah,
one of special more amongst them, and such an one as they could not well miss,
yet another people greater than themselves threatened them with war, if they
would not put him to death. The party offending was in hold, neither would
their Sachim do one way or other till their return, resting upon him for
advice and furtherance in so weighty a matter. After this there was silence a
short time; at length men gave their judgment what they thought best. Amongst
others, he asked Hobbamock what he thought? Who answered, he was but a stranger
to them, but thought it was better that one should die than many, since he had
deserved it, and the rest were innocent; whereupon he passed the sentence of
death upon him.

Not long after (having no great quantity of corn left) Captain Standish
went again with a shallop to Mattachiest, meeting also with the like
extremity of weather, both of wind, snow, and frost, insomuch as they were
frozen in the harbor the first night they entered the same. Here they pretended
their wonted love, and spared them a good quantity of corn to confirm the
same: Strangers also came to this place, pretending only to see him and his
company, whom they never saw before that time, but intending to join with the
rest to kill them, as after appeared. But being forced through extremity to
lodge in their houses, which they much pressed, God possessed the heart of the
Captain with just jealousy, giving strait command, that as one part of his
company slept, the rest should wake, declaring some things to them which he
understood, whereof he could make no good construction. Some of the Indians
spying a fit opportunity, stole some beads also from him, which he no sooner
perceived, having not above six men with him, drew them all from the Boat, and
set them on their guard about the Sachims house, where the most of the people
were, threatening to fall upon them without further delay, if they would not
forthwith restore them, signifying to the Sachim especially, and so to them
all, that as he would not offer the least injury; so he would not receive any
at their hands, which should escape without punishment or due satisfaction.
Hereupon the Sachim bestirred him to find out the party, which when he had
done, caused him to return them again to the shallop, and came to the
Captain, desiring him to search whether they were not about the Boat, who
suspecting their knavery, sent one, who found them lying openly upon the Boats
cuddy; yet to appease his anger, they brought corn afresh to trade, insomuch
as he laded his shallop, and so departed. This accident so daunted their
courage, as they durst not attempt any thing against him. So that through the
good mercy and providence of God they returned in safety. At this place the
Indians get abundance of Basse both summer and winter: for it being now
February they abounded with them.

In the beginning of March, having refreshed himself, he took a shallop, and
went to Manomet, to fetch home that which the Governor had formerly bought,
hoping also to get more from them, but was deceived in his expectation, not
finding that entertainment he found elsewhere, and the Governor had there
received. The reason whereof, and of the treachery intended in the place before
spoken of, was not then known unto us, but afterward: wherein may be observed
the abundant mercies of God working with his providence for our good. Captain
Standish being now far from the Boat, and not above two or three of our men
with him, and as many with the shallop, was not long at Canacum the Sachims
house, but in came two of the Massachuset men, the chief of them was called
Wituwamat, a notable insulting villain, one who had formerly imbrued his hands
in the blood of English and French, and had often boasted of his own valor, and
derided their weakness, especially because (as he said) they died crying,
making sour faces, more like children than men. This villain took a dagger
from about his neck, (which he had gotten of Master Westons people) and
presented it to the Sachim, and after made a long speech in an audacious
manner, framing it in such sort, as the Captain (though he be the best
Linguist amongst us) could not gather any thing from it. The end of it was
afterward discovered to be as follows: The Massacheuseucks had formerly
concluded to ruinate Master Westons Colonie, and thought themselves, being
about thirty or forty men strong, enough to execute the same: yet they durst
not attempt it, till such time as they had gathered more strength to themselves
to make their party good against us at Plimoth, concluding, that if we
remained, (though they had no other Arguments to use against us) yet we would
never leave the death of our Countrymen unrevenged, and therefore their safety
could not be without the overthrow of both Plantations. To this end they had
formerly solicited this Sachim, as also the other called Ianough at
Mattachiest, and many others to assist them, and now again came to prosecute
the same; and since there was so fair an opportunity offered by the Captains
presence, they thought best to make sure him and his company. After this his
message was delivered, his entertainment much exceeded the Captains, insomuch
as he scorned at their behavior, and told them of it: after which they would
have persuaded him, because the weather was cold, to have sent to the Boat for
the rest of his company, but he would not, desiring according to promise, that
the corn might be carried down, and he would content the women for their
labor, which they did. At the same time there was a lusty Indian of Paomet or
Cape Cod then present, who had ever demeaned himself well toward us, being in
his general carriage, very affable, courteous, and loving, especially toward
the Captain. This Savage was now entered into confederacy with the rest, yet
to avoid suspicion, made many signs of his continued affections, and would
needs bestow a kettle of some six or seven gallons on him, and would not accept
of any thing in lieu thereof, saying, he was rich, and could afford to bestow
such favors on his friends whom he loved: also he would freely help to carry
some of the corn, affirming he had never done the like in his life before, and
the wind being bad would needs lodge with him at their Randeuow, having indeed
undertaken to kill him before they parted, which done they intended to fall
upon the rest. The night proved exceeding cold, insomuch as the Captain could
not take any rest, but either walked or turned himself to and fro at the fire:
This the other observed, and asked wherefore he did not sleep as at other
times, who answered he knew not well, but had no desire at all to rest. So that
he then mist his opportunity. The wind serving on the next day, they returned
home, accompanied with the other Indian, who used many arguments to persuade
them to go to Paomet, where himself had much corn, and many other, the most
whereof he would procure for us, seeming to sorrow for our wants. Once the
Captain put forth with him, and was forced back by contrary wind; which wind
serving for the Massachuset, was fitted to go thither. But on a sudden it
altered again.

During the time that the Captain was at Manomet, news came to Plimoth, that
Massassowat was like to die, and that at the same time there was a Dutch ship
driven so high on the shore by stresse of weather, right before his dwelling,
that till the tides increased, she could not be got off. Now it being a
commendable manner of the Indians, when any (especially of note) are
dangerously sick, for all that profess friendship to them, to visit them in
their extremity, either in their persons, or else to send some acceptable
persons to them, therefore it was thought meet (being a good and warrantable
action) that as we had ever professed friendship, so we should now maintain
the same, by observing this their laudable custom: and the rather, because we
desired to have some conference with the Dutch, not knowing when we should
have so fit an opportunity. To that end my self having formerly been there,
and understanding in some measure the Dutch tongue, the Governor again laid
this service upon my self, and fitted me with some cordials to administer to
him, having one Master John Hamden a Gentleman of London (who then wintered
with us, and desired much to see the Country) for my Consort, and Hobbamock
for our guide. So we set forward, and lodged the first night at Namasket,
where we had friendly entertainment. The next day about one of the clock, we
came to a ferrie in Conbatants Country, where upon discharge of my piece,
diverse Indians came to us from a house not far off. There they told us, that
Massassowat was dead, and that day buried, and that the Dutch would be gone
before we could get thither, having houe off their ship already. This news
struck us blancke: but especially Hobbamock, who desired we might return with
all speed. I told him I would first think of it, considering now that he
being dead, Conbatant was the most like to succeed him, and that we were not
above three miles from Mattapuyst his dwelling place, although he were but a
hollow-hearted friend toward us, I thought no time so fit as this, to enter
into more friendly terms with him, and the rest of the Sachims thereabout,
hoping (through the blessing of God) it would be a means in that unsettled
state, to settle their affections toward us, and though it were somewhat
dangerous, in respect of our personal safety, because my self and Hobbamock
had been employed upon a service against him, which he might now fitly
revenge, yet esteeming it the best means, leaving the event to God in his
mercy, I resolved to put it in practice, if Master Hamden and Hobbamock durst
attempt it with me, whom I found willing to that or any other course might
tend to the general good. So we went toward Mattapuyst. In the way, Hobbamock
manifesting a troubled spirit, brake forth into these speeches, Neen womasu
Sagimus, neen womasu Sagimus, etc. My loving Sachim, my loving Sachim. Many
have I known, but never any like thee: And turning him to me said; Whilst I
lived, I should never see his like amongst the Indians, saying, he was no liar,
he was not bloody and cruel like other Indians; In anger and passion he was
soon reclaimed, easy to be reconciled toward such as had offended him, ruled
by reason in such measure, as he would not scorn the advice of mean men, and
that he governed his men better with few strokes than others did with many;
truly loving where he loved; yea he feared we had not a faithful friend left
among the Indians, showing how he oft-times restrained their malice, etc.
continuing a long speech with such signs of lamentation and unfeigned sorrow,
as it would have made the hardest heart relent. At length we came to
Mattapuyst, and went to the Sachimo Comaco (for so they call the Sachims place,
though they call an ordinary house Witeo) but Conbatant the Sachim was not at
home, but at Puckanokick* which was some five or six miles off; the Squa-sachim
(for so they call the Sachims wife) gave us friendly entertainment. Here we
inquired again concerning Massassowat, they thought him dead, but knew no
certainty; whereupon I hired one to go with all expedition to Puckanokick,
that we might know the certainty thereof, and withal to acquaint Conbaetant
with our there being. About half an hour before Sunne-setting, the messenger
returned, and told us that he was not yet dead, though there was no hope we
should find him living. Upon this we were much revived, and set forward with
all speed, though it was late within night ere we got thither. About two of the
clock that afternoon the Dutchmen departed, so that in that respect our
journey was frustrate. When we came thither, we found the house so full of men,
as we could scarce get in, though they used their best diligence to make way
for us. There were they in the midst of their charms for him, making such a
hellish noise, as it distempered us that were well, and therefore unlike to
ease him that was sick. About him were six or eight women, who chafed his
arms, legs, and thighs, to keep heat in him; when they had made an end of
their charming, one told him that his friends the English were come to see him;
(having understanding left, but his sight was wholly gone) he asked who was
come, they told him Winsnow (for they cannot pronounce the letter l, but
ordinarily n in the place thereof) he desired to speak with me; when I came
to him, and they told him of it, he put forth his hand to me, which I took;
then he said twice, though very inwardly, keen Winsnow, which is to say, Art
thou Winslow? I answered, a^he, that is, yes; then he doubled these words,
Matta neon wonckanet namen Winsnow; that is to say, O Winslow I shall never see
thee again. Then I called Hobbamock and desired him to tell Massassowat, that
the Governor hearing of his sickness was sorry for the same, and though by
reason of many businesses he could not come himself, yet he sent me with such
things for him as he thought most likely to do him good in this his
extremity, and whereof if he pleased to take, I would presently give him;
which he desired, and having a confection of many comfortable conserues, etc.
on the point of my knife, I gave him some, which I could scarce get through his
teeth; when it was dissolved in his mouth, he swallowed the juice of it,
whereat those that were about him much rejoiced, saying, he had not swallowed
any thing in two days before. Then I desired to see his mouth, which was
exceedingly furred, and his tongue swelled in such manner, as it was not
possible for him to eat such meat as they had, his passage being stopped up: then
I washed his mouth, and scraped his tongue, and got abundance of corruption out
of the same. After which, I gave him more of the confection, which he swallowed
with more readiness; then he desiring to drink, I dissolved some of it in
water, and gave him thereof: within half an hour this wrought a great
alteration in him in the eyes of all that beheld him; presently after his sight
began to come to him, which gave him and us good encouragement. In the mean
time I inquired how he slept, and when he went to the stool? They said he
slept not in two days before, and had not had a stool in five; then I gave
him more, and told him of a mishap we had by the way in breaking a bottle of
drink, which the Governor also sent him, saying, if he would send any of his
men to Patuxet, I would send for more of the same, also for chickens to make
him broth, and for other things which I knew were good for him, and would stay
the return of the messenger if he desired. This he took marvelous kindly,
and appointed some who were ready to go by two of the clock in the morning,
against which time I made ready a letter, declaring therein our good success,
the state of his body, etc. desiring to send me such things as I sent for, and
such physic as the Surgion durst administer to him. He requested me that the
day following, I would take my Piece, and kill him some Foul, and make him
some English pottage, ^uch as he had eaten at Plimoth, which I promised: after
his stomach coming to him, I must needs make him some without Foul, before I
went abroad, which somewhat troubled me, being unaccustomed and unacquainted in
such businesses, especially having nothing to make it comfortable, my Consort
being as ignorant as my self; but being we must do somewhat, I caused a
woman to bruise some corn, and take the flower from it, and set over the grut
or broken corn in a pipkin (for they have earthen pots of all sizes.) When the
day broke, we went out (it being now March) to seek herbs, but could not
find any but strawberry leaves, of which I gathered a handful and put into
the same, and because I had nothing to relish it, I went forth again, and
pulled up a Saxafras root, and sliced a piece thereof, and boiled it till it
had a good relish, and then took it out again. The broth being boiled, I
strained it through my handkerchiffe, and gave him at least a pint, which he
drank, and liked it very well. After this his sight mended more and more, also
he had three moderate stools, and took some rest. Insomuch as we with
admiration blessed God for giving his blessing to such raw and ignorant means,
making no doubt of his recovery, himself and all of them acknowledging us the
instruments of his preservation. That morning he caused me to spend in going
from one to another amongst those that were sick in the Town, requesting me
to wash their mouths also, and give to each of them some of the same I gave
him, saying, they were good folk. This pains I took with willingness,
though it were much offensive to me, not being accustomed with such poisonous
savors. After dinner he desired me to get him a Goose or Duck, and make him
some pottage therewith, with as much speed as I could: so I took a man with
me, and made a shot at a couple of Ducks, some six score paces off, and killed
one, at which he wondered: so we returned forthwith, and dressed it, making
more broth therewith, which he much desired; never did I see a man so low
brought, recover in that measure in so short a time. The Foul being
extraordinary fat, I told Hobbamock I must take off the top thereof, saying it
would make him very sick again if he did eat it; this he acquainted
Massassowat therewith, who would not be persuaded to it, though I pressed it
very much, showing the strength thereof, and the weakness of his stomach,
which could not possibly bear it. Notwithstanding he made a gross meal of
it, and ate as much as would well have satisfied a man in health. About an
hour after he began to be very sick, and straining very much, cast up the
broth again, and in ouer-straining himself, began to bleed at the nose, and
so continued the space of four hours; then they all wished he had been
ruled, concluding now he would die, which we much feared also. They asked me
what I thought of him; I answered, his case was desperate, yet it might be it
would save his life: for if it ceased in time, he would forthwith sleep and
take rest, which was the principal thing he wanted. Not long after his blood
stayed, and he slept at least six or eight hours; when he awaked I washed his
face, and bathed and suppled his beard and nose with a linen cloth: but on a
sudden he chopped his nose in the water, and drew up some therein, and sent it
forth again with such violence, as he began to bleed afresh, then they thought
there was no hope, but we perceived it was but the tenderness of his nostrill,
and therefore told them I thought it would stay presently, as indeed it d^d.

The messengers were now returned, but finding his stomach come to him, he
would not have the chickens killed, but kept them for breed. Neither durst we
give him any physic which was then sent, because his body was so much altered
since our instructions, neither saw we any need, not doubting now of his
recovery, if he were careful. Many whilst we were there came to see him, some
by their report from a place not less than an hundred miles. To all that came
one of his chief men related the manner of his sickness, how near he was
spent, how amongst others his friends the English came to see him, and how
suddenly they recovered him to this strength they saw, he being now able to sit
upright of himself.

The day before our coming, another Sachim being there, told him, that now he
might see how hollow-hearted the English were, saying if we had been such
friends in deed, as we were in show, we would have visited him in this his
sickness, using many arguments to withdraw his affections, and to persuade him
to give way to some things against us, which were motioned to him not long
before: but upon this his recovery, he brake forth into these speeches; Now I
see the English are my friends and love me, and whilst I live I will never
forget this kindness they have showed me. Whilst we were there, our
entertainment exceeded all other strangers. Diverse other things were worthy the
noting, but I fear I have been too tedious.

At our coming away, he called Hobbamock to him, and privately (none hearing
save two or three other of his Pneeses, who are of his Council) revealed the
plot of the Massacheuseucks before spoken of, against Master Westons Colony,
and so against us, saying that the people of Nauset, Paomet, Succonet
Mattachiest, Manomet Agowaywam, and the I Will of Capawack, were joined with them;
himself also in his sickness was earnestly solicited, but he would neither
join therein, nor give way to any of his. Therefore as we respected the lives
of our Countrymen, and our own after-safety, he advised us to kill the men of
Massachuset, who were the authors of this intended mischief. And whereas we
were wont to say, we would not strike a stroke till th^^ first begun; if said
he upon this intelligence, they make that answer, tell them, when their
Countrymen at Wichaguscusset are killed, they being not able to defend
themselves, that then it will be too late to recover their lives, nay through
the multitude of adversaries they shall with great difficulty preserve their
own, and therefore he counseled without delay to take away the principals,
and then the plot would cease. With this he charged him thoroughly to acquaint me
by the way, that I might inform the Governor thereof at my first coming
home. Being fitted for our return, we took our leave of him, who returned
many thanks to our Governor, and also to our selves for our labor and love:
the like did all that were about him. So we departed.

That night through the earnest request of Co^batant, who til now remained at
Sawaams or Puckanukick, we lodged with him at Mattapuyst. By the way I had much
conference with him; so likewise at his house, he being a notable politician,
yet full of merry jests and squibs, and never better pleased than when the like
are returned again upon him. Amongst other things he asked me, If in case he
were thus dangerously sick, as Massassowat had been, and should send word
thereof to Patuxit for Maskiet, that is, Physic, whether then Mr Governor
would send it? and if he would, whether I would come therewith to him? To both
which I answered yea, whereat he gave me many joyful thanks. After that,
being at his house he demanded further, how we durst being but two come so
far into the Country? I answered, where was true love there was no fear, and
my heart was so upright toward them that for mine own part I was feareles to
come amongst them. But, said he, if your love be such, and it bring forth such
fruits, how comes it to pass, that when we come to Patuxet, you stand upon
your guard, with the mouths of your Pieces presented toward us? Whereunto I
answered, it was the most honorable and respective entertainment we could
give them; it being an order amongst us so to receive our best respected
friends: and as it was used on the Land, so the ships observed it also at Sea,
which Hobbamock knew, and had seen observed. But shaking the head he answered,
that he liked not such salutations.

Further, observing us to crave a blessing on our meat before we did eat, and
after to give thanks for the same, he asked us what was the meaning of that
ordinary custom? Hereupon I took occasion to tell them of Gods works of
Creation, and Preservation, of his Laws and Ordinances, especially of the ten
Commandments, all which they hearkened unto with great attention, and liked
well of: only the seventh Commandment they excepted against, thinking there
were many inconveniences in it, that a man should be tied to one woman: about
which we reasoned a good time. Also I told them that whatsoever good things we
had, we received from God, as the Author and giver thereof, and therefore
craved his blessing upon that we had, and were about to eat, that it might
nourish and strengthen our bodies, and having eaten sufficient, being satisfied
therewith, we again returned thanks to the same our God for that our
refreshing, etc. This all of them concluded to be very well, and said, they
believed almost all the same things, and that the same power that we called
God, they called Kietitan. Much profitable conference was occasioned hereby,
which would be too tedious to relate, yet was no less delightful to them,
then comfortable to us. Here we remained only that night, but never had
better entertainment amongst any of them.

The day following, in our journey, Hobbamock told me of the private conference
he had with Massassowat, and how he charged him perfectly to acquaint me
therewith (as I showed before) which having done, he used many arguments
himself to move us thereunto; That night we lodged at Namasket, and the day
following about the midway between it and home, we met two Indians, who told
us that Captain Standish was that day gone to the Massachusetts: but contrary
winds again drive him back, so that we found him at home; where the Indian
of Pa^met still was, being very importunate that the Captain should take the
first opportunity of a fair wind to go with him, but their secret and
villainous purposes being through Gods mercy now made known, the Governor
caused Captain Standish to send him away without any distaste or manifestation
of anger, that we might the better effect and bring to pass that which should
be thought most necessary.

Before this journey we heard many complaints both by the Indians and some
others of best desert amongst Master Westons Colony, how exceedingly their
Company abased themselves by indirect means, to get victuals from the
Indians, who dwelt not far from them, fetching them wood and water, etc. and
all for a meals meat, whereas in the mean time, they might with diligence
have gotten enough to have served them three or four times. Other by night
brake the earth, and robbed the Indians store, for which they had been
publicly stocked and whipped, and yet was there small amendment. This was about
the end of February, at which time they had spent all their bread and corn,
not leaving any for seed, neither would the Indians lend or sell them any more
upon any terms. Hereupon they had thoughts to take it by violence, and to that
spiked up every entrance into their Town (being well impaled) save one, with a
full resolution to proceed. But some more honestly minded, advised John Sanders
their Over-seer first to write to Plimoth, and if the Governor advised him
thereunto, he might the better do it. This course was well liked, and an
Indian was sent with all speed with a letter to our Governor, the contents
whereof were to this effect; That being in great want, and their people daily
falling down, he intended to go to Munhiggen, where was a Plantation of Sir
Ferdi: Gorges, to buy bread from the Ships that came thither a fishing, with
the first opportunity of wind; but knew not how the Colony would be preserved
till his return: he had used all means both to buy and borrow of Indians whom
he knew to be stored, and he thought maliciously with held it, and therefore
was resolved to take it by violence, and only waited the return of the
Messenger, which he desired should be hastened, craving his advice therein,
promising also to make restitution afterward. The Governor upon the receipt
hereof, asked the Messenger what store of corn they had, as if he had intended
to buy of them; who answered very little more then that they reserved for seed,
having already spared all they could. Forthwith the Governor and his
Assistant sent for many of us to advise with them herein, who after serious
consideration, no way approving of this intended course, the Governor answered
his Letter, and caused many of us to set our hands thereto, the contents
whereof were to this purpose; We altogether disliked their intendment, as
being against the law of God and Nature, showing how it would cross the worthy
ends and proceedings of the Kings Majesty, and his honorable Council for
this place, both in respect of the peaceable enlarging of his Majesty's
Dominions, and also of the propagation of the knowledge and Law of God, and the
glad tidings of salvation, which we and they were bound to seek, and were not
to use such means as would breed a distaste in the Salvages against our persons
and professions, assuring them their Master would incur much blame hereby,
neither could they answer the same; For our own parts our case was almost the
same with theirs, having but a small quantity of Corn left, and were enforced
to live on ground nuts, clams, mussels, and such other things as naturally the
Country afforded, and which did and would maintain strength, and were easy
to be gotten, all which things they had in great abundance, yea, Oysters also
which we wanted, and therefore necessity could not be said to constrain them
thereunto. Moreover, that they should consider, if they proceeded therein, all
they could so get would maintain them but a small time, and then they must
perforce seek their food abroad, which having made the Indians their enemies,
would be very difficult for them, and therefore much better to begin a little
the sooner, and so continue their peace, upon which course they might with good
conscience desire and expect the blessing of God, whereas on the contrary they
could not.

Also that they should consider their own weakness, being most swelled, and
diseased in their bodies, and therefore the more unlikely to make their party
good against them, and that they should not expect help from us in that or any
the like unlawful actions. Lastly, that howsoever some of them might escape,
yet the principal Agents should expect no better then the Galhouse, whenever
any special Officer should be sent over by his Majesty, or his Council for
New England, which we expected, and who would undoubtedly call them to account
for the same. These were the contents of our Answer, which was directed to
their whole Colony. Another particular Letter our Governor sent to John
Sanders, showing how dangerous it would be for him above all others, being he
was their leader and commander; and therefore in friendly manner advised him to
desist.

With these Letters we dispatched the Messenger; Upon the receipt whereof they
altered their determination, resolving to shift as they could, till the return
of John Sanders from Munhiggen, who first coming to Plimoth, notwithstanding
our own necessities, the Governor spared him some Corn to carry them to
Munhiggen. But not having sufficient for the Ships store, he took a Shallop
and leaving others with instructions to over see things till his return, set
forward about the end of February, so that he knew not of this conspiracy of
the Indians before his going; neither was it known to any of us till our
return from Sawaams or Puckanakick: At which time also another Sachim called
Wassapinewat, brother to Obtakiest the Sachim of the Massachusetts, who had
formerly smarted for partaking with Coubatant, and fearing the like again, to
purge himself revealed the same thing.

The three and twentieth of March being now come, which is a yearly Court-day,
the Governor having a double testimony, and many circumstances agreeing with
the truth thereof, not being to undertake war without the consent of the
body of the Company; made known the same in public Court, offering it to the
consideration of the Company, it being high time to come to resolution, how
sudden soever it seemed to them, fearing it would be put in execution before
we could give any intelligence thereof. This business was no less troublesome
then grievous, and the more, because it is so ordinary in these times for men
to measure things by the events thereof: but especially for that we knew no
means to deliver our Countrymen and preserve our selves, then by returning
their malicious and cruel purposes upon their own heads, and causing them to
fall into the same pit they had dug for others, though it much grieved us
to shed the blood of those whose good we ever intended and aimed at, as a
principal in all our proceedings. But in the end we came to this public
conclusion, that because it was a matter of such weight as every man was not of
sufficiency to judge, nor fitness to know because of many other Indians which
daily as occasion serves converse with us; therefore the Governor, his
Assistant, and the Captain, should take such to themselves as they thought
most meet, and conclude thereof; which done we came to this conclusion, That
Captain Standish should take so many men as he thought sufficient to make his
party good against all the Indians in the Massachuset-bay; and because (as all
men know that have had to do in that kind) it is impossible to deal with
them upon open defiance, but to take them in such trappes as they lay for
others; therefore he should pretend trade as at other times: but first go to
the English and acquaint them with the plot, and the end of his own coming,
that comparing it with their carriages toward them he might the better judge
of the certainty of it, and more fitly take opportunity to revenge the same:
but should forbear if it were possible till such time as he could make sure
Wituwamat, that bloody and bold villain before spoken of, whose head he had
order to bring with him, that he might be a warning and terror to all of that
disposition. Upon this Captain Standish made choice of eight men, and would
not take more because he would prevent jealousy, knowing their guilty
consciences would soon be provoked thereunto: but on the next day before he
could go, came one of Mr. Westons Company by land unto us, with his pack at
his back, who made a pitiful narration of their lamentable and weak estate,
and of the Indians carriages, whose boldness increased abundantly, insomuch as
the victuals they got they would take it out of their pottes and eat before
their faces, yea if in any thing they gaine-sayd them, they were ready to hold
a knife at their breasts; that to give them content, since John Sanders went to
Munhiggen, they had hanged one of them that stole their corn, and yet they
regarded it not; that another of their Company was turned Saluage, that their
people had most forsaken the town, and made their randeuous where they got
their victuals, because they would not take pains to bring it home; that they
had sold their clothes for corn, and were ready to starve both with cold and
hunger also, because they could not endure to get victuals by reason of their
nakedness; and that they were dispersed into three Companies scarce having any
powder and shot left. What would be the event of these things (he said) he much
feared; and therefore not daring to stay any longer among them, though he knew
not the way yet adventured to come to us, partly to make known their weak and
dangerous estate, as he conceived, and partly to desire he might there
remain till things were better settled at the other plantation. As this
relation was grievout to us, so it gave us good encouragement to proceed in
our intendments, for which Captain Standish was now fitted, and the wind
coming fair, the next day set forth for the Massachusetts.

The Indians at the Massachusetts missed this man, and suspecting his coming,
to us as we conceive, sent one after him and gave out there that he would
never come to Patuxet, but that some Wolves or Bears would eat him: but we
know both by our own experience, and the report of others, that though they
find a man sleeping, yet so soon as there is life discerned they fear and
shun him. This Indian missed him but very little, and missing him passed by the
town and went to Manomet, whom we hoped to take at his return, as afterward
we did. Now was our Fort made fit for service and some Ordnance mounted; and
though it may seem long work it being ten months since it begun, yet we
must note, that where so great a work is begun with such small means, a little
time cannot bring to perfection: beside those works which tend to the
preservation of man, the enemy of mankind will hinder what in him lies,
sometimes blinding the judgment and causing reasonable men to reason against
their own safety, as amongst us diverse seeing the work prove tedious, would
have dissuaded from proceeding, flattering themselves with peace and security,
and accounting it rather a work of superfluity and vainglory, then simple
necessity. But God (whose providence has waked and as I may say, watched for
us whilst we slept) having determined to preserve us from these intended
treacheries, undoubtedly ordained this as a special means to advantage us and
discourage our adversaries, and therefore so stirred up the hearts of the
Governors and other forward instruments, as the work was just made serviceable
against this needful and dangerous time, though we ignorant of the same. But
that I may proceed, the Indian last mentioned in his return from Monomet, came
through the town pretending still friendship and in love to see us, but as
formerly others, so his end was to see whether we continued still in health
and strength, or fell into weakness like their neighbors, which they hoped
and looked for (though God in mercy provided better for us) and he knew would
be glad tidings to his Country men. But here the Governor stayed him, and
sending for him to the Fort, there gave the Guard charge of him as their
prisoner, where he told him he must be contented to remain till the return
of Captain Standish from the Massachusetts, so he was locked in a chain to a
staple in the Court of guard, and there kept. Thus was our Fort hanselled, this
being the first day as I take it, that ever any watch was there kept.

The Captain being now come to the Massachusetts, went first to the ship, but
found neither man, or so much as a dog therein: upon the discharge of a
Musket the Master and some others of the plantation showed themselves, who were
on the shore gathering ground-nuts, and getting other food. After salutation
Captain Standish asked them how they durst so leave the ship and live in such
security, who answered like men senseless of their own misery, they feared not
the Indians, but lived and suffered them to lodge with them, not having sword,
or gunne, or needing the same. To which the Captain answered, if there were no
cause he was the gladder, but upon further inquiry, understanding that those
in whom John Sanders had received most special confidence and left in his stead
to govern the rest were at the Plantation, thither he went, and to be brief,
made known the Indians purpose and the end of his own coming, as also (which
formerly I omitted) that if afterward they durst not there stay, it was the
intendment of the Governors and people of Plymouth there to receive them till
they could be better provided: but if they conceived of any other course that
might be more likely for their good, that himself should further them therein
to the uttermost of his power. These men comparing other circumstances with
that they now heard, answered, they could expect no better, and it was Gods
mercy that they were not killed before his coming, desiring therefore that he
would neglect no opportunity to proceed: Hereupon he advised them to
secrecy, yet withal to send special command to one third of their Company
that were farthest off to come home, and there enjoin them on pain of death
to keep the town, himself allowing them a pint of Indian corn to a man for
a day (though that store he had was spared out of our seed.) The weather
proving very wet and stormy, it was the longer before he could do any thing.

In the mean time an Indian came to him and brought some furs, but rather to
gather what he could from the Captains, then coming then for trade; and
though the Captain carried things as smoothly as possibly he could, yet at his
return he reported he saw by his eyes that he was angry in his heart, and
therefore began to suspect themselves discovered. This caused one Pecksuot
who was a Pinese, being a man of a notable spirit to come to Hobbamock who was
then with them, and told him he understood that the Captain was come to kill
himself and the rest of the Saluages there, tell him said hoe we know it, but
fear him not, neither will we shun him; but let him begin when he dare,
he shall not take us at unawares: many times after diverse of them severally,
or few together, came to the Plantation to him, where they would whet and
sharpen the points of their knives before his face, and use many other
insulting gestures and speeches. Amongst the rest, Witawamat bragged of the
excellency of his knife, on the end of the handle there was pictured a women's
face, but said he, I have another at home wherewith I have killed both French
and English, and that has a man's face on it, and by and by these two must
marry: Further he said of that knife he there had; Hinnaim n^men, hinnaim
michon, matta cuts: that is to say, By and by it should see, and by and by it
should eat, but not speak. Also Pecksuot being a man of greater stature then
the Captain, told him though he were a great Captain, yet he was but a
little man: and said he, though I be no Sachim, yet I am a man of great
strength and courage. These things the Captain observed, yet bare with
patience for the present. On the next day, seeing he could not get many of
them together at once, and this Pecksuot and Wituwamat both together, with
another man, and a youth of some eighteen years of age, which was brother to
Wituwamat, and villaine-like trod in his steps, daily putting many tricks
upon the weaker sort of men, and having about as many of his own Company in a
room with them, gave the word to his men, and the door being fast shut began
himself with Pecksuot, and snatching his own knife from his neck though with
much struggling killed him therewith, the point whereof he had made as sharp
as a needle, and ground the back also to an edge: Wituwamat and the other man,
the rest killed, and took the youth, whom the Cap. caused to be hanged; but it
is incredible how many wounds these two Puceses received before they dyed, not
making any fearful noise, but catching at their weapons and striving to the
last. Hobbamocke stood by all this time as a spectator and meddled not,
observing how our men demeaned themselves in this action; all being here ended,
smiling he brake forth into these speeches to the Captain, Yester-day Pecksuot
bragging of his own strength and stature, said, though you were a great
Captain yet you were but a little man; but to day I see you are big enough to
lay him on the ground. But to proceed, there being some women at the same time,
Captain Standish left them in the custody of Mr. Westons people at the town,
and sent word to another Company that had intelligence of things to kill those
Indian men that were amongst them, these killed two more: himself also with
some of his own men went to another place, where they killed another, and
through the negligence of one man an Indian escaped, who discovered and crossed
their proceedings.

Not long before this execution, three of Mr. Westons men which more regarded
their bellies then any command or Commander, having formerly fared well with
the Indians for making them Clanoes, went again to the Sachim to offer their
service, and had entertainment. The first night they came thither within night
late came a Messenger with all speed, and delivered a sad and short message:
Whereupon all the men gathered together, put on their boots and breeches,
trussed up themselves, and took their bows and arrows and went forth,
telling them they went a hunting, and that at their return they should have
venison enough. Being now gone, one being more ancient and wise then the rest,
calling former things to mind, especially the Captains presence, and the
strait charge that on pain of death none should go a Musket Shot from the
plantation, and comparing this sudden departure of theirs there with, began to
dislike and wish himself at home again, which was further of then diverse
other dwelt: Hereupon he moved his fellows to return but could not persuade
them: so there being none but women left and the other that was turned saluage,
about midnight came away, forsaking the paths lest he should be pursued, and
by this means saved his life.

Captain Standish took the one half of his men, and one or two of Mr.
Westons, and Hobbamocke, still seeking to make spoil of them and theirs. At
length they espied a file of Indians which made toward them amain, and there
being a small advantage in the ground by reason of a hill near them, both
Companies strove for it, Captain Standish got it, whereupon they retreated and
took each man his tree, letting fly their arrows amayne, especially at
himself and Hobbamocke, whereupon Hobbamocke cast off his coat, and being a
known Pinese, (theirs being now killed) chased them so fast as our people were
not able to hold way with him, insomuch as our men could have but one certain
mark and then but the arm and half face of a notable villain as he drew at
Captain Standish, who together with another both discharged at once at him,
and brake his arm; whereupon they fled into a swampe, when they were in the
thicket they parlyed, but to small purpose, getting nothing but foul language.
So our Captain dared the Sachim to come out and fight like a man, showing how
base and woman like he was in tonguing it as he did: but he refused and
fled. So the captain returned to the Plantation, where he released the women
and would not take their beaver coats from them, nor suffer the least
discourtesie to be offered them. Now were Mr. Westons people resolved to leave
their Plantation and go for Munhiggen, hoping to get passage and return with
the fishing ships. The Captain told them, that for his own part he durst
there live with fewer men then they were, yet since they were otherwise
minded, according to his order from the Governors and people of Plymouth he
would help them with corn competent for their provision by the way, which he
did, scarce leaving himself more then brought them home. Some of them disliked
the choice of the body to go to Munhiggen, and therefore desiring to go with
him to Plymouth, he took them into the shallop: and seeing them set sail and
clear of the Massachuset bay, he took leave and returned to Plymouth, whither
he came in safety (blessed be God) and brought the head of Wituwamat with him.

Amongst the rest there was an Indian youth that was ever of a courteous and
loving disposition toward us, he notwithstanding the death of his Countrymen
came to the Captain without fear, saying his good conscience and love
toward us imboldened him so to do. This youth confessed that the Indians
intended to kill Mr. Westons people, and not to delay any longer then till they
had two more Canoes or Boats, which Mr. Westons men would have finished by this
time (having made them three already) had not the Captain prevented them, and
the end of stay for those Boats, was to take their Ship therewith.

Now was the Captain returned and received with joy, the head being brought to
the fort and there set up, the Governors and Captains with diverse others went
up the same further, to examine the prisoner, who looked pittiously on the
head, being asked whether he knew it, he answered, yea: Then he confessed the
plot, and that all the people provoked Obtakiest their Sachim thereunto, being
drawn to it by their importunity: Five there were (he said) that prosecuted
it with more eagernes then the rest, the two principal were killed, being
Pecksuot and Wituwamat, whose head was there, the other three were Powahs,
being yet living, and known unto us, though one of them was wounded, as
aforesaid. For himself he would not acknowledge that he had any hand therein,
begging earnestly for his life, saying he was not a Massachuset man, but as a
stranger lived with them. Hobbamock also gave a good report of him, and
besought for him, but was bribed so to do: Nevertheless, that we might show
mercy as well as extremity, the Governor released him, and the rather because
we desired he might carry a message to Obtak^est his Master. No sooner were the
yrons from his legs, but he would have been gone, but the Governor bid him
stay and fear not, for he should receive no hurt, and by Hobbamock commanded
him to deliver this message to his Master; That for our parts, it never entered
into our hearts to take such a course with them, till their own treachery
enforced us thereunto, and therefore might thank themselves for their own
ouer-throw, yet since he had begun, if again by any the like courses he did
provoke him, his Country should not hold him, for he would never suffer him or
his to rest in peace, till he had utterly consumed them, and therefore should
take this as a warning. Further, that he should send to Patuxet the three
Englishmen he had and not kill them; also that he should not spoil the pale
and houses at Wichaguscusset, and that this Messenger should either bring the
English, or an answer, or both, promising his safe return.

This message was delivered, and the party would have returned with answer,
but was at first dissuaded by them, whom afterward they would but could not
persuade to come to us. At length (though long) a Woman came and told us that
Obtakiest was sorry that the English were killed before he heard from the
Governor, otherwise he would have sent them. Also she said, he would feign
make his peace again with us, but none of his men durst come to treat about
it, having forsaken his dwelling, and daily removed from place to place,
expecting when we would take further vengeance on him.

Concerning those other people that intended to join with the Massachuseucks
against us, though we never went against any of them, yet this sudden and
unexpected execution, together with the just judgment of God upon their
guilty consciences, has so terrified and amazed them, as in like manner they
forsook their houses, running so and fro like men distracted, living in swamps
and other desert places, and so brought manifold diseases amongst themselves,
whereof uery many are dead, as Canacum the Sachim of Manomet, Aspinet, the
Sachim of Nausat, and Ianowh, Sachim of Mattachurst. This Sachim in his life,
in the midst of these distractions, said the God of the English was offended
with them, and would destroy them in his anger, and certainly it is strange to
hear how many of late have, and still daily die amongst them, neither is there
any likelihood it will easily cease, because through fear they set little or
no Corn, which is the staff of life, and without which they cannot long
preserve health and strength. From one of these places a boat was sent with
presents to the Governor, hoping thereby to work their peace, but the boat
was cast away, and three of the persons drowned, not far from our plantation,
only one escaped, who durst not come to us, but returned, so as none of them
dare come amongst us.

I fear I have been too tedious both in this and other things, yet when I
considered how necessary a thing it is that the truth and grounds of this
action, especially should be made known, and the several dispositions of that
dissolved Colony, whose reports undoubtedly will be as various, I could not but
enlarge my self where I thought to be most brief; neither durst I be too
brief, least I should eclipse and rob God of that honor, glory, and praise,
which belongs to him for preserving us from falling when we were at the pits
brim, and yet feared nor knew not that we were in danger.

The month of April being now come, Anno 1623.
on all hands we began to prepare for Corn. And because there was no Corn
left before this time, save that was preserved for seed, being also hopeless
of relief by supply, we thought best to leave off all other works, and
prosecute that as most necessary. And because there was no small hope of doing
good in that common course of labor that formerly we were in, for that the
Governors that followed men to their labors, had nothing to give men for
their necessities, and therefore could not (...) well exercise that command
over them therein as formerly they had done* especially considering that self
love wherewith every man (in a measure more or less) loves and prefers his
own good before his neighbors, and also the base disposition of some drones,
that as at other times so now especially would be most burdenous to the rest;
It was therefore thought best that every man should use the best diligence he
could for his own preservation, both in respect of the time present, and to
prepare his own Corn for the year following: and bring in a competent
portion for the maintenance of public Officers, Fishermen, etc. which could
not be freed from their calling without greater inconveniences. This course was
to continue till harvest, and then the Governors to gather in the appointed
portion, for the maintenance of themselves and such others as necessity
constrained to exempt from this condition. Only if occasion served upon any
special service they might employ such as they thought most fit to execute the
same, during this appointed time, and at the end thereof all men to be employed
by them in such service as they thought most necessary for the general good.
And because there is great difference in the ground, that therefore a set
quantity should be set down for a person, and each man to have his fall by
lot, as being most just and equal, and against which no man could except.

At a general meeting of the Company, many courses were propounded, but this
approved and followed, as being the most likely for the present and future good
of the Company; and therefore before this month began to prepare our ground
against seed time. In the midst of April we began to set, the weather being
then seasonable, which much encouraged us, giving us good hopes of after
plenty: the setting season is good till the latter end of May. But it pleased
God for our further chastisement, to send a great drowth, insomuch, as in six
weeks after the latter setting there scarce fell any rain, so that the stalk
of that was first set began to send forth the ear before it came to half
growth, and that which was later, not like to yield any at all, both blade and
stalk hanging the head, and changing the color in such manner, as we judged
it utterly dead: our Beans also ran not up according to their wonted manner,
but stood at a stay, many being parched away, as though they had been scorched
before the fire. Now were our hopes overthrown, and we discouraged, our joy
being turned into mourning.

To add also to this sorrowful estate in which we were, we heard of a supply
that was sent unto us many months since, which having two repulses before, was
a third time in company of another ship three hundred Leagues at Sea, and now
in three months time heard no further of her, only the signs of a wrack were
seen on the coast, which could not be judged to be any other then the same. So
that at once God seemed to deprive us of all future hopes. The most courageous
were now discouraged, because God which hitherto had been our only Shield and
Supporter, now seemed in his anger to arm himself against us; and who can
withstand the fierceness of his wrath.

These, and the like considerations moved not only every good man privately to
enter into examination with his own estate between God and his conscience,
and so to humiliation before him: but also more solemnly to humble our selves
together before the Lord by fasting and prayer. To that end a day was appointed
by public authority, and set apart from all other employments, hoping that
the same God which had stirred us up hereunto, would be moved hereby in mercy
to look down upon us, and grant the request of our dejected souls, if our
continuance there might any way stand with his glory and our good. But oh the
mercy of our God! Who was as ready to hear as we to ask: For though in the
morning when we assembled together, the heavens were as clear and the drought
as like to continue as ever it was: yet (our exercise continuing some eight or
nine hours) before our departure the weather was over-cast, the clouds
gathered together on all sides, and on the next morning distilled such soft,
sweet, and moderate showers of rain, continuing some fourteen days, and
mixed with such reasonable weather, as it was hard to say whether our withered
Corn, or drouping affections were most quickened or revived. Such was the
bounty and goodness of our God. Of this the Indians by means of Hobbam^ck
took notice: who being then in the Town, and this exercise in the midst of
the week, laid, it was but three days since Sunday, and therefore demanded of
a boy what was the reason thereof? Which when he knew and saw what effects
followed thereupon, he and all of them admired the goodness of our God
toward us, that wrought so great a change in so short a time, showing the
difference between their coniuration, and our invocation on the name of God
for rain; theirs being mixed with such storms and tempests, as sometimes in
stead of doing them good, it lays the Corn flat on the ground, to their
prejudice: but ours in so gentle and seasonable a manner, as they never
observed the like.

At the same time Captain Standish being formerly employed by the Governor to
buy provisions for the refreshing of the Colony, returned with the same,
accompanied with one Mr David Tomson, a Scotchman, who also that Spring began a
Plantation twenty five leagues north-east from us, nere Smiths Isles, at a
place called Pascatoquack, where he likes well. Now also heard we of the third
repul^e that our supply had* of their safe though dangerous return into
England, and of their preparation to come to us. So that having these many
signs of Gods favor and acceptance, we thought it would be great
ingratitude, if secretly we should smoother up the same, or content our selves
with private thanksgiving for that which by private prayer could not be
obtained. And therefore another solemn day was set a part and appointed for
that end, wherein we returned glory, honor, and praise, with all thankefulnes
to our good God, which dealt so graciously with us, whose name for these and
all other his mercies toward his Church and chosen ones, by them be blessed
and praised now and evermore* Amen.

In the latter end of July and the beginning of August, came two Ships with
supply unto us, who brought all their passengers, except one, in health, who
recovered in short time, who also notwithstanding, all our wants and hardship
(blessed be God) found not any one sick person amongst us at the Plantation.
The bigger Ship called the Anne was hired, and there again fraighted back,
from whence we set sail the tenth of September. The lesser called the little
James, was built for the company at their charge. She was now also fitted for
Trade and discovery to the Southward of Cape Cod, and almost ready to set
sail, whom I pray God to bless in her good and lawful proceedings*

Thus have I made a true and full Narration of the state of our Plantation, and
such things as were most remarkable therein since December. 1621. If I have
omitted any thing, it is either through weakness of memory, or because I
judged it not material: I confess my style rude, and unskillfulness in the
task I undertook, being urged thereunto by opportunity, which I knew to be
wanting in others, and but for which I would not have undertaken the same; yet
as it is rude so it is plain, and therefore the easier to be understood;
wherein others may see that which we are bound to acknowledge, viz. That if
ever any people in these later ages were vpheld by the providence of God after
a more special manner then others, then we: and therefore are the more bound
to celebrate the memory of his goodness, with everlasting thankefulnes. For in
these forenamed strayts, such was our state, as in the morning we had often our
food to seek for the day, and yet performed the duties of our Callings, I
mean other daily labors, to provide for after time: and though at some times
in some seasons at noone I have seen men stagger by reason of faintness for
want of food, yet ere night by the good providence and blessing of God, we
have enjoyed such plenty as though the windows of heaven had been opened
unto us. How few, weak, and raw were we at our first beginning, and there
settling, and in the midst of barbarous enemies? yet God wrought our peace for
us. How often have we been at the pits brim, and in danger to be swallowed
up, yea, not knowing, till afterward that we were in peril? and yet God
preserved us: yea, and from how many that we yet know not of, he that knows
all things can best tell: So that when I seriously consider of things, I cannot
but think that God has a purpose to give that Land as an inheritance to our
Nation, and great pity it were that it should long lie in so desolate a
state, considering it agrees so well with the constitution of our bodies,
being both fertile, and so temperate for heat and cold, as in that respect one
can scarce distinguish New England from Old.

A few things I thought meet to add hereunto, which I have observed amongst
the Indians, both touching their Religion, and sundry other Customs amongst
them. And first, whereas my self and others, in former Letters (which came to
the Press against my will and knowledge) wrote, that the Indians about us are
a people without any Religion, or knowledge of any God, therein I erred, though
we could then gather no better: For as they conceive of many divine powers, The
meaning of the word, Kichtan, I think has reference to Antiquity, for Chise
is an old man, and Ku^chise, a man that exceeds ^n age.
so of one whom they call Kichtan, to be the principal and maker of all the
rest, and to be made by none: He (they say) created the heavens, earth, sea,
and all creatures contained therein. Also that he made one man and one woman,
of whom they and we and all mankind came: but how they became so far
dispersed that know they not. At first they say, there was no Sachim, or King,
but Kichtan, who dwells above in the Heavens, whither all good men go when
they die, to see their friends, and have their fill of all things: This his
habitation lies far Westward in the heavens, they say; thither the bad men
go also, and knock at his door, but he bids them Quatchet, that is to say,
Walk abroad, for there is no place for such; so that they wander in restles
want and penury: Never man saw this Kichtan; only old men tell them of him,
and bid them tell their children, yea, to charge them to teach their
posterities the same, and lay the like charge upon them. This power they
acknowledge to be good, and when they would obtain any great matter, meet
together, and cry unto him, and so likewise for plenty, victory, etc. sing,
dance, feast, give thanks, and hang up Garlandes and other things in memory
of the same.

Another power they worship, whom they call Hobbamock, and to the Norward of us
Hobbamoqui; this as far as we can conceive is the Devil, him they call upon
to cure their wounds and diseases. When they are curable, he persuades them he
sends the same for some conceived anger against them, but upon their calling
upon him can and does help them: But when they are mortal, and not curable in
nature, then he persuades them Kichtan is angry and sends them, whom none can
cure: in so much, as in that respect only they somewhat doubt whether he be
simply good, and therefore in sickness never call upon him.

This Hobbamock appears in sundry forms unto them, as in the shape of a Man,
a Dear, a Fawn, an Eagle, etc. but most ordinarily a Snake: He appears not
to all but the chiefest and most judicious amongst them, though all of them
strive to attain to that hellish height of honor.

He appears most ordinary and is most conversant with three sorts of people,
one I confess I neither know by name nor office directly: Of these they have
few but esteem highly of them, and think that no weapon can kill them:
another they call by the name of Powah, and the third Pniese.

The office and duty of the Powah is to be exercised principally in calling
upon the Devil, and curing diseases of the sick or wounded. The common people
join with him in the exercise of invocation, but do but only assent, or as
we term it, say Amen to that he says, yet sometime break out into a short
musical note with him. The Powah is eager and free in speech, fierce in
countenance, and joins many anticke and labourious gestures with the same
over the party diseased. If the party be wounded he will also seem to suck
the wound, but if they be curable (as they say) he touches it not, but a
Skooke, that is the Snake, or Wobsacuck, that is the Eagle, sits on his
shoulder and licks the same. This none see but the Powah, who tells them he
does it himself. If the party be otherwise diseased, it is accounted
sufficient if in any shape he but come into the house, taking it for an
undoubted sign of recovery.

And as in former ages Apollo had his temple at Delphos, and Diana at Ephesus;
so have I heard them call upon some as if they had their residence in some
certain places, or because they appeared in those forms in the same. In the
Powahs speech he promises to sacrifice many skins of beasts, kettles,
hatchets, beads, knives, and other the best things they have to the fiend, if
he will come to help the party diseased: But whether they perform it I know
not. The other practices I have seen, being necessarily called at some times
to be with their sick, and have used the best arguments I could make them
understand against the same: They have told me I should see the Devil at those
times come to the party, but I assured my self and them of the contrary, which
so prooved: yea, themselves have confessed they never saw him when any of us
were present. In desperate and extraordinary hard travel in childe-birth, when
the party cannot be delivered by the ordinary means, they send for this Powah,
though ordinarily their travel is not so extreme ^s in our parts of the
world, they being of a more hardy nature; for on the third day after
childe-birth I have seen the mother with the infant upon a small occasion in
cold weather in a boat upon the Sea.

Many sacrifices the Indians use, and in some cases kill children. It seems
they are various in their religious worship in a little distance, and grow more
and more cold in their worship to Kichtan: saying in their memory he was much
more called upon. The Nanohiggansets exceed in their blind devotion, and have
a great spacious house wherein only some few (that are as we may term them
Priests) come: thither at certain known times resort all their people, and
offer almost all the riches they have to their gods, as kettles, skins,
hatchets, beads, knives, etc. all which are cast by the Priests into a great
fire that they make in the midst of the house, and there consumed to ashes. To
this offering every man brings freely, and the more he is known to bring,
has the better esteem of all men. This the other Indians about us approve of
as good, and wish then Sachims would appoint the like: and because the plague
has not reigned at Nanohigganset as at other places about them, they attribute
to this custom there used.

The Prieses are men of great courage and wisdom, and to these also the
Devil appears more familiarly then to others and as we conceive makes
covenant with them to preserve them from death, by wounds, with arrows,
knives, hatchers, etc. or at least both themselves and especially the people
think themselves to be freed from the lame. And though against their battles
all of them by painting disfigure themselves, yet they are known by their
courage and boldness, by reason whereof one of them will chase almost an hundred
men, for they account it death for whomsoever stand in their way. These are
highly esteemed of all sorts of people, and are of the Sachims Council,
without whom they will not war or undertake any weighty business. In war
their Sachims for their more safety go in the midst of them. They are commonly
men of the greatest stature and strength, and such as will endure most
hardness, and yet are more discreet, courteous, and humane in their carryages
then any amongst them, scorning theft, lying, and the like base dealings, and
stand as much upon their reputation as any men.

And to the end they may have store of these, they train up the most forward
and likeliest boys from their childehood in great hardness, and make them
abstain from dainty meat, observing diverse orders prescribed, to the end that
when they are of age the Devil may appear to them, causing to drink the
juice of Sentry and other bitter herbs till they cast, which they must
disgorge into the platter, and drink again, and again, till at length
through extraordinary oppressing of nature it will seem to be all blood, and
this the boys will do with eagernes at the first, and so continue till by
reason of faintness they can scarce stand on their legs, and then must go
forth into the cold: also they beat their shinnes with sticks, and cause them
to run through bushes, stumps, and brambles, to make them hardy and acceptable
to the Devil, that in time he may appear unto them.

Their Sachims cannot be all called Kings, but only some few of them, to whom
the rest resort for protection, and pay homage unto them, neither may they
war without their knowledge and approbation, yet to be commanded by the
greater as occasion serves. Of this sort is Massassowat our friend, and
Conanacus of Nanohiggenset our supposed enemy.

Every Sachim takes care for the widow and fatherless, also for such as are
aged, and any way maimed, if their friends be dead or not able to provide for
them.

A Sachim will not take any to wife but such an one as is equal to him in
birth, otherwise they say their seed would in time become ignoble, and though
they have many other wives, yet are they no other then concubines or servants,
and yield a kind of obedience to the principal, who orders the family, and
them in it. The like their men observe also, and will adhere to the first
during their lives; but put away the other at their pleasure.

This government is successiue and not by choice. If the father die before the
son or daughter be of age, then the child is committed to the protection and
tuition of some one amongst them, who rules in his stead till he be of age,
but when that is I know not.

Every Sachim knows how far the bounds and limits of his own Country
extends, and that is his own proper inheritance, out of that if any of his
men desire land to set their corn, he gives them as much as they can use,
and sets them their bounds. In this circuit whosoever hunteth, if they kill any
venison, bring him his fee, which is the fore parts of the same, if it be
killed on the land, but if in the water, then the skin thereof: The great
Sachims or Kings, know their own bounds or limits of land, as well as the rest.

All travelers or strangers for the most part lodge at the Sachims, when they
come they tell them how long they will stay, and to what place they go, during
which time they receive entertainment according to their persons, but want not.

Once a year the Prieses use to provoke the people to bestow much corn on the
Sachim. To that end they appoint a certain time and place near the Sachims
dwelling, where the people bring many baskets of corn, and make a great stack
thereof. There the Pnieses stand ready to give thanks to the people on the
Sachims behalf, and after acquainteth the Sachim therewith, who fetches the
same, and is no less thankful, bestowing many gifts on them.

When any are visited with sickness, their friends resort unto them for their
comfort, and continue with them ofttimes till their death or recovery. If they
die they stay a certain time to mourn for them. Night and morning they
perform this duty many days after the burial in a most doleful manner,
insomuch as though it be ordinary and the note musical, which they take one
from another, and all together, yet it will draw tears from their eyes, and
almost from ours also. But if they recover then because their sickness was
chargeable, they send corn and other gifts unto them at a certain appointed
time, whereat they feast and dance, which they call Commeco.

When they bury the dead they sow up the corpse in a mat and so put it in the
earth. If the party be a Sachim they cover him with many curious mats, and
bury all his riches with him, and enclose the grave with a pale. If it be a
child the father will also put his own most special jewels and ornaments in
the earth with it, also will cut his hair and disfigure himself very much in
token of sorrow. If it be the man or woman of the house, they will pull down
the mattes and leave the frame standing, and bury them in or near the same,
and either remove their dwelling or give over housekeeping.

The men employ themselves wholly in hunting, and other exercises of the bow,
except at some times they take some pains in fishing.

The women live a most slavish life, they carry all their burdens, set and
dress their corn, gather it in, seek out for much of their food, bear and
make ready the corn to eat, and have all household care lying upon them.

The younger sort reverence the elder, and do all mean offices whilst they are
together, although they be strangers. Boys and girls may not wear their
hair like men and women, but are distinguished thereby.

A man is not accounted a man till he do some notable act, or show forth such
courage and resolution as becomes his place. The men take much tobacco, but
for boys so to do they account it odious.

All their names are significant and variable* for when they come to the state
of men and women, they alter them according to their deeds or dispositions.

When a maid is taken in marriage she first cutteth her hair, and after
wears a covering on her head till her hair be grown out. Their women are
diversely disposed, some as modest as they will scarce talk one with another in
the company of men, being very chaste also: yet other some light, lascivious
and wanton.

If a woman have a bad husband, or cannot affect him, and there be war or
opposition between that and any other people, she will run away from him to
the contrary party and there live, where they never come unwelcome: for where
are most women, there is greatest plenty.

When a woman has her monthly terms she separateth her self from all other
company, and lives certain days in a house alone: after which she washes
her self and all that she has touched or used, and is again received to her
husbands bed or family.

For adultery the husband will beat his wife and put her away, if he please.
Some common strumpets there are as well as in other places, but they are such
as either never married, or widows, or put away for adultery: for no man will
keep such an one to wife.

In matters of unjust and dis-honest dealing the Sachim examineth and punishes
the same. In case of thefts, for the first offense he is disgracefully rebuked,
for the second beaten by the Sachim with a cudgel on the naked back, for the
third he is beaten with many strokes, and has his nose slit upward, that
thereby all men may both know and shun him. If any man kill another, he must
likewise die for the same. The Sachim not only passes the sentence upon
malefactors, but executes the same with his own hands, if the party be then
present; if not, sends his own knife in case of death, in the hands of
others to perform the same. But if the offender be to receive other
punishment, he will not receive the same but from the Sachim himself, before
whom being naked he kneeleth, and will not offer to run away though he beat
him never so much, it being a greater disparagement for a man to cry during the
time of his correction, then is his offense and punishment.

As for their apparel they wear breeches and stockings in one like some
Irish, which is made of Dear skins, and have shoes of the same leather.
They wear also a Dears skin loose about them like a cloak, which they will
turn to the weather side. In this habit they travel, but when they are at
home or come to their iourneys end, presently they pull off their breeches,
stockins, and shoes, wring out the water if they be wet, and dry them, and
rub or chafe the same. Though these be off, yet have they another small garment
that covers their secrets. The men wear also when they go abroad in cold
weather an Otter or Fox skin on their right arm, but only their bracer on
the left. Women and all of that sex wear strings about their legs, which the
men never do.

The people are very ingenious and observatiue, they keep account of time by
the moon, and winters or summers; they know diverse of the stars by name, in
particular, they know the North-starre and call it mask, which is to say the
bear. Also they have many names for the winds. They will guess very well at
the wind and weather before hand, by observations in the heavens. They report
also, that some of them can cause the wind to blow in what part they list, can
raise storms and tempests which they usually do when they intend the death or
destruction of other people, that by reason of the unseasonable weather they
may take advantage of their enemies in their houses. At such times they
perform their greatest exployts, and in such seasons when they are at enmity
with any, they keep more careful watch then at other times.

As for the language it is very copious, large, and difficult, as yet we cannot
attain to any great measure thereof* but can understand them, and explain our
selves to their understanding, by the help of those that daily converse with
us. And though there be difference in an hundred miles distance of place, both
in language and manners, yet not so much but that they very well understand
each other. And thus much of their lives and manners.

In stead of Records and Chronicles, they take this course, where any
remarkable act is done, in memory of it, either in the place, or by some
pathway near adjoining, they make a round hole in the ground about a foot
deep, and as much over, which when others passing by behold, they enquire the
cause and occasion of the same, which being once known, they are careful to
acquaint all men, as occasion serves therewith. And least such holes should be
filled, or grown up by any accident, as men pass by they will often renew the
same: By which means many things of great Antiquity are fresh in memory. So
that as a man travelleth, if he can understand his guide, his journey will be
the less tedious, by reason of the many historical Discourses will be related
unto him.

In all this it may be said, I have neither praised nor dispraysed the Country:
and since I lived so long therein, my judgment thereof will give no less
satisfaction to them that know me, then the Relation of our proceedings. To
which I answer, that as in one so of the other, I will speak as sparingly as
I can, yet will make known what I conceive thereof.

And first for that Continent, on which we are called New England, although it
has ever been conceived by the English to be a part of that maine Land
adjoining to Virginia, yet by relation of the Indians i^ should appear to be
otherwise: for they affirm confidently, that it is an Island, and that either
the Dutch or French pass through from Sea to Sea, between us and Virginia, and
drive a great Trade in the same. The name of that inlet of the Sea they call
Mohegon, which I take to be the same which we call Hudsons-River, up which
Master Hudson went many Leagues, and for want of means (as I hear) left it
vndiscovered. For confirmation of this, their opinion is thus much; Though
Virginia be not above an hundred and fifty Leagues from us, yet they never
heard of Powhatan, or knew that any English were planted in his Country, save
only by us and Tisquantum, who went in an English Ship thither: And therefore
it is the more probable, because the water is not passable for them, who are
very adventurous in their Boats.

Then for the temperature of the air, in almost three years experience, I can
scarce distinguish New England from Old England, in respect of heat, and cold,
frost, snow, rain, winds, etc. Some object, because our Plantation lies in
the latitude of 42. it must needs be much hotter. I confess, I cannot give the
reason of the contrary; only experience teaches us, that if it do exceed
England, it is so (...) as must require better judgments to discern it. And
for the Winter, I rather think (if there be difference) it is both sharper and
longer in New England then Old; and yet the want of those comforts in the one
which I have enjoyed in the other, may deceive my judgment also. But in my best
observation, comparing our own condition with the Relations of other parts of
America, I cannot conceive of any to agree better with the constitution of the
English, not being oppressed with extremity of heat, nor nipped with biting
cold, by which means blessed be God, we enjoy our health, notwithstanding,
those difficulties we have vnder-gone, in such a measure as would have been
admired, if we had lived in England with the like means.

The day is two hours longer then here when it is at the shortest, and as much
shorter there, when it is at the longest.

The soil is variable, in some places mould, in some clay, others, a mixed
sand, etc. The chiefest grain is the Indian Mays, or Ginny-Wheate; the
seed-time begins in midst of April, and continues good till the midst of
May. Our harvest begins with September. This come increases in great
measure, but is inferior in quantity to the same in Virginia, the reason I
conceive, is because Virginia is far hotter then it is with us, it requiring
great heat to ripen; but whereas it is objected against New England, that
Corn will not there grow, except the ground be manured with fish? I answer,
That where men set with fish (as with us) it is more easy so to do then to
clear ground and set without some five or six years, and so begin anew, as
in Virginia and else where. Not but that in some places, where they cannot be
taken with ease in such abundance, the Indians set four years together
without, and have as good Corn or better then we have that set with them,
though indeed I think if we had Cattle to till the ground, it would be more
profitable and better agreeable to the soil, to sow Wheat, Rye, Barley,
Pease, and Oats, then to set Mays, which our Indians call Ewachim: for we have
had experience that they like and thrive well; and the other will not be
procured without good labor and diligence, especially at seed-time, when it
must also be watched by night to keep the Wolves from the fish, till it be
rotten, which will be in fourteen days; yet men agreeing together, and
taking their turns it is not much.

Much might be spoken of the benefit that may come to such as shall here plant
by Trade with the Indians for Furs, if men take a right course for obtaining
the same, for I dare presume upon that small experience I have had, to affirm,
that the English, Dutch, and French, return yearly many thousand pounds
profits by Trade only from that Island, on which we are seated.

Tobacco may be there planted, but not with that profit as in some other
places, neither were it profitable there to follow it, though the increase were
equal, because fish is a better and richer Commodity, and more necessary,
which may be and are there had in as great abundance as in any other part of
the world; Witness the West country Merchants of England, which return
incredible gains yearly from thence. And if they can so do which here buy
their salt at a great charge, and transport more Company to make their voyage,
then will sail their Ships, what may the planters expect when once they are
seated, and make the most of their salt there, and employ themselves at lest
eight months in fishing, whereas the other fish but four, and have their ship
lie dead in the harbor all the time, whereas such shipping as belong to
plantations, may take freight of passengers or cattle thither, and have their
lading provided against they come. I confess, we have come so far short of
the means to raise such returns, as with great difficulty we have preserved
our lives; insomuch, as when I look back upon our condition, and weak means
to preserve the same, I rather admire at Gods mercy and providence in our
preservation, then that no greater things have been effected by us. But though
our beginning have been thus raw, small, and difficult, as thou have seen,
yet the same God that has hitherto led us through the former, I hope will raise
means to accomplish the latter. Not that we altogether, or principally propound
profit to be the maine end of that we have undertaken, but the glory of God,
and the honor of our Country, in the enlarging of his Majesty's Dominions, yet
wanting outward means, to set things in that forwardness we desire, and to
further the latter by the former, I thought meet to offer both to
consideration, hoping that where Religion and profit iump together (which is
rare) in so honorable an action, it will encourage every honest man, either in
person or purse, to set forward the same, or at leastwise to commend the
welfare thereof in his daily prayers to the blessing of the blessed God.

I will not again speak of the abundance of foul, store of Venison, and
variety of Fish, in their seasons, which might encourage many to go in their
persons, only I advise all such before hand to consider, that as they hear of
Countries that abound with the good creatures of God, so means must be used
for the taking of every one in his kind, and therefore not only to content
themselves that there is sufficient, but to foresee how they shall be able to
obtain the same, otherwise, as he that walks London streets, though he be
in the midst of plenty, yet if he want means, is not the better but has
rather his sorrow increased by the sight of that he wants, and cannot enjoy
it: so also there, if thou want art and other necessaries thereunto belonging,
thou may see that thou want, and thy heart desires, and yet be never the
better for the same. Therefore if thou see thine own insufficiency of thy
self, then join to some others, where thou may in some measure enjoy the
same, otherwise assure thy self, thou art better where thou art. Some there be
that thinking altogether of their present wants they enjoy here, and not
dreaming of any there, through indiscretion plunge themselves into a deeper sea
of misery. As for example, it may be here, rent and firing are so chargeable,
as without great difficulty a man cannot accomplish the same; never
considering, that as he shall have no rent to pay, so he must build his house
before he have it, and peradventure may with more ease pay for his fuel here,
then cut and fetch it home, if he have not cattle to draw it there; though
there is no scarcity but rather too great plenty.

I write not these things to dissuade any that shall seriously upon due
examination set themselves to further the glory of God, and the honor of our
Country, in so worthy an Enterprise, but rather to discourage such as with too
great lightness undertake such courses, who p^radventure strain themselves
and their friends for their passage thither, and are no sooner there, then
seeing their foolish imagination made void, are at their wits end, and would
give ten times so much for their return, if they could procure it, and out of
such discontented passions and humors, spare not to lay that imputation upon
the Country, and others, which themselves deserve.

As for example, I have heard some complain of others for their large reports
of New England, and yet because they must drink water and want many delicates
they here enjoyed, could presently return with their mouths full of clamours.
And can any be so simple as to conceive that the fountains should stream
forth Wine, or Bear, or the woods and rivers be like Butchers-shops, or
Fish-mongers stalles, where they might have things taken to their hands. If
thou can not live without such things, and have no means to procure the one,
and wilt not take pains for the other, nor have ability to employ others for
thee, rest where thou art: for as a proud heart, a dainty tooth, a beggars
purse, and an idle hand, be here intolerable, so that person that has these
qualities there, is much more abominable. If therefore God has given thee a
heart to undertake such courses, upon such grounds as bear thee out in all
difficulties, viz. his glory as a principal, and all other outward good things
but as accessaries, which peradventure thou shall enjoy, and it may be not:
then thou will with true comfort and thankfulness receive the least of his
mercies; whereas on the contrary, men deprive themselves of much happiness,
being senseless of greater blessings, and through prejudice smoother up the
love and bounty of God, whose name be ever glorified in us, and by us, now and
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

