Theological Rules, TO GVIDE US IN THE UNDERSTANDING and practice of holy
Scriptures:

Two Centuries: Drawn partly out of Scriptures themselves: Partly out of
Ecclesiastical writers old and new.

ALSO AEnigmata Sacra, Holy Riddles; Or Mystical Cases and Secrets of
Divinity, with their Resolutions.

Four Centuries: The unfolding whereof lays open that Truth that concerns
Salvation.

By T. W. Preacher of the word.

LONDON Printed by Edw. Griffin for Fran. Burton, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the green Dragon. 1615.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IT is not the words of holy Scriptures only, but the sense and meaning,
(Beloved in Christ) which is carefully to be searched after of all those who
desire the knowledge of that Truth which brings to salvation such as endeavor
to live thereafter. This appears well by that worthy sentence of a Greek
Father, affirming, Basil.
That Piety consists not in the sound of the Air, but in the force of
things signified, whereunto accords that of Hierom the Latin Father. Hierom.
The Gospel consists in the inward marrow of the sense, and not in the
outward sound of words; not in the leaves of letters, but in the root of
reason. To this purpose as I have heretofore traveled to lay forth the
signification of words in Scripture by a short and easy Dictionarie already by
me published to the world, in the kind acceptance whereof and other my
labors, I have tasted of thy courtesy, to my great encouragement: So have I
now thereunto added Two Centuries and more, of Theological Rules, and above
Four Centuries of Mystical Cases and Secrets of Divinity with their
Resolutions, as good helps and means to bring to light the hidden understanding
of the Scripture. For, certain it is, as humane Arts and Sciences, be they
Grammar, Logic, or the rest, so neither Divinity, which is the Art of Arts,
and Queen of Sciences, can either be taught or learned without Precepts and
Rules; And as it cannot be practiced, so can it not be understood without
special fit Rules to guide us in the Interpretation. For the most of these
Rules, especially such as be derived from ancient writers, I am beholden to
Flaccius Illiricus; the rest I either collected out of later modern writers,
or by my own observation. I have also added an Explication of all the Rules
which be drawn immediately out of the Scriptures: To the other, which be
collected out of Ecelesiasticall Authors, I have (for the most part) joined
both Reasons and Examples, to explane them the better. Some of these Rules do
further our understanding in the Old: some in the New Testament: and some in
both. Some of them will steed us in the Doctrines, some in the words and forms
of speeches used in the Scriptures: and some serve to govern us in the study
and practice of the word. Whatsoever use or worth they be of, (which I verily
hope will be much and manifold,) I dedicate them, to all the Faithful
whersoeuer throughout this land, dispersed.

If any either Joshua or other young man, shall out of envy or jealousy
object, that by this means not only Eldad and Medad, but (as Chrysostom
speaks) the Shepherd and the Husbandman, and the Spinster, will be able to
prophecy and know as much as some Preachers do. An answer is framed to my hand
by Moses the man of God: I would to God that all the Lords people could
prophecy, and that the Spirit of the Lord were put upon them. And by Paul, Let
the word of God dwell plenteously in you in all wisdom. Col. 3. 16. If this
satisfy not, The next answer is, that if they who find fault will labor to
do as much, or much more service to the Church by their painful endeavors,
they shall do it I assure them without envy on my part. As for you beloved in
the Lord, take in good worth, I beseech you, both these my Two Centuries of
Theological Rules, and also my Power Centuries of AEnigmata Sacra, or
Mystical Cases and Secrets of Divinity, annexed, (of whose use see their
proper Preface) and improoue them to your greatest spiritual gain in Christ.
To whose Grace I commend and commit you to be guided and comforted by it for
ever. Farewell, from my house in Canterbury. 1615.

Yours to his uttermost T. W.

Theological Rules, drawn partly out of holy writ, partly out of
ecclesiastical writers both ancient and modern, serving to guide us in the
understanding and practice of holy Scripture.
52. Rules drawn immediately out of themselves.
ASK and ye shall have, Rule.
Seek and ye shall find, Knock and it shall be opened unto you: Math. 7. 7.

The true and saving knowledge of the Scripture by most earnest and daily
prayers is to be begged of God through Christ: Explication.
Iam. 1. 5.

Christ begun at Moses and interpreted to them the Scriptures, Rule.
and opened their wits, that they might understand them: Luke 24. ver. 27.45.

It is Christ his office to open to man, Expl.
both the Scriptures by the ministry of the Church, and his mind by
illumination of his spirit.

Rule.
The spirit shall lead you into all truth, he shall write the law of God in
your heart: John. 14.26. Ier. 31.33.

Expl.
The holy spirit is both author and interpreter of Scripture, which as it is
inspired by the holy ghost: so by his enlightening, it must be believed and
practiced: Therefore the high and sovereign authority of interpreting of
Scripture does belong neither to Councels, Fathers, nor Pope: but to the holy
spirit the inditer of the Scriptures, he is the principal interpreter. 2. Pet.
1. 20. he that makes the law is best and highest interpreter of the law.

Rule.
In Christ are all treasures of knowledge and wisdom, Col 2.3.

Expl.
We must desire to know nothing beyond, or above, or besides Christ: then whom
in the scriptures god has reveled no greater, nor no other thing: even Paul
made this the bounds of his knowledge, desiring to know nothing save Christ and
him crucified.

Rule.
One tittle or Iod of Scripture shall not perish, but be fullfilled.

Expl.
Nothing is to be lightly regarded, which is found in holy scripture. Mat. 5. 18.

How can they preach except they be sent? Rule.
how can they hear without a preacher. how can they believe except they hear?
Romans 10.14.15.

We must depend for sound instruction not upon men's traditions, Expl.
or fantastical revelations: but upon the sacred ministry set up of god in
his church, which is the pillar and ground of truth, because it propounds
the truth of doctrine, and maintains it, not because it ouerrules the sense.

Turn not from my precept neither to the right hand nor to the left: Rule.
neither put to them, nor take from them. Deuteronomy. 5. 38. and 12. 32.

The scripture gives us a perfect direction both for faith and manners. Expl.


Christ is the end of the law to every believer. Romans 10,4. Rule.


Christ with his passion and obedience is the sum, Expl.
mark and perfection of the whole law, to such as have faith to apprehend him.
For the law requires absolute justice or righteousness, which believers find
in Christ alone.

Fear shall make you understand the hearing. Rule.
Esaias. 28,19, Psalm. 119.71.

Expl.
The cross and affliction (being sanctified) is a good help to the
experimental knowledge of the word.

Rule.
Whatsoever things are written before, are written for our learning. Romans 15.4.

Expl.
Every part and sentence, word, or work mentioned in scripture contains some
profitable lesson for our use. 2. Tim. 3. 16.

Rule.
The godly man does meditate day and night in the law of God. Psalm. 1.2.

Expl.
Great, earnest, and continual study is to be used of all such as will profit
by the scriptures. John. 5.39.

Rule.
They searched the scriptures daily whether those things were so, and many of
them believed, Acts. 17,11.12.

Expl.
The hearers must diligently examine by the Scriptures the doctrine of the
teachers. 1. These. 5.21. 1. Ioh. 4.1.2.

Rule.
Understand according to sobriety. Romans 12,3.

Expl.
A christian must seek no more then is revealed, contenting him with that which
is taught in Scripture.

Rule.
How is it that ye understand not these things.

A christian must strive to be ignorant of none of Christ's words. Expl.


It is written. Romans 1.17.10.15. Rule.


Scripture is the rule of all truth, Expl.
whatsoever truth may be proved by Scripture, it alone is a sufficient witness
in stead of all other authorities and testimonies, for it alone can convince
the conscience: therefore Christ and his Apostles contented themselves
therewith.

The only begotten son, Rule.
he has declared him. John. 1. 18.

We know so much of God, Expl.
as Christ in scripture has made known unto us.

Therefore ye err because ye know not the scripture and the power of God.
Rule.
Mat. 22. 29. Romans 9. 25. as also Hosea etc.

God must be joined with his word, Expl.
and the word teaches us never to hear scripture otherwise, then if we heard
God speak, nor to believe otherwise of him, then he has manifested of
himself in the word.

Paul confounded the Jews, Rule.
conferring places of Scripture to prove Jesus to be the Christ.

Because Jesus is such an one as the Expl.
scriptures of the Prophets have described the Christ to be, therefore we must
receive him for the Christ, and rest in him alone for salvation: also for the
atteining of the true meaning of the scriptures which speak of Christ, there
comes great light by comparing places.

Rule.
My word and my preaching was not in the entycing speech of man's wisdom; but
in plain evidence of the spirit and of power. 1. Cor. 2, 4.

Expl.
We may not be offended with the simplicity and plainness of style and matter,
which we find in scripture, which although they have a grave eloquence, yet
want such pompous and painted words, as worldly carnal Rhetoricians hunt
after, and desire to be applauded for. Blessed is he, who is offended neither
at the ignominy and meandness of Christ's person, life, and death, nor at that
which the Apostle calls foolishness of preaching, and plain evidence of
truth 1. Cor. 1. 21.

Rule.
The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14,

Our own natural capacity (how quick and sharp soever) Expl.
does not make us fit readers and auditors of the caelestiall philosophy
which is in Scripture. Humane Philosophy requires an auditor or scholar
prompt witted, capable of knowledge: but divinity in stead of finding a fit
scholar must first make him so, by renewing his wit and mind.

They shall all be taught of God. Rule.
No man comes to me, except the Father draw him. He comes to me which has
learned of the father. Ioh. 6. 45.

The saving knowledge of heavenly truth is not in the power of any man, Expl.
minister or other, no nor of Angels to give, but is the peculia^ work and
gift of God, who is the only effectual scholemaster or teacher which teaches
the heart within, drawing it to faith and to Christ.

Thou have hid these things from the wise, and revealed them to little ones.
Rule.
I thank thee Father for so it was thy pleasure. Math. 11. 25. 26.

Such as are worldly wise are least capable of heavenly truth, Expl.
which is most commonly showed to such as have least wit and worldly prudence
to rest in, and farthest of from opinion of great wisemen. and thus it is,
because God will have it to be so, to confound wise things by foolish. 1. Cor.
1. 26. 27. therefore let men be fools in themselves (that is lay aside all
ouerweaning conceit of their own wisdom) that they may be wise to God. 1.
Cor. 3. 18.

Rule.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Ioh. 13. 17. Blessed
are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Luke 11. 28.

Expli.
The end of studying the scripture is not knowledge, but practice. we hear and
read that we may learn, we learn to know, we know to practice, and do. and if
this be the end of moral, much more of Theological philosophy, whose theorie
without practice is hurtful.

Rule.
If any will do the will of my Father, he shall know. John. 7. 17.

Expli.
When any endeavor to do the known will of god, he shall know it more clearly
and more abundantly.

We believe and know that thou art Christ, Ioh. 6. 59. Rule.


In matters of divinity we must first believe and then know, Expl.
not know and then believe. In humane sciences it is otherwise, for there men
are brought to assent and believe, by experience, knowledge and sense, as to
credit the fire to be hot, water moist, are by knowing and feeling: but it is
plain contrary in Theology, there belief and assent go before experimental
knowledge, sense, and use.

God gives grace to the humble. Rule.
The meek and humble he will teach his ways. Iam. 4. 6. Psalm. 25. 8.

Such are sure to grow up in sound knowledge of God to salvation, Expl.
which most see and feel their own spiritual poverty, how ignorant they be
by nature, and how unable to know ought without new enlightening, being ready
to submit with meekness, both judgment and affections, to be guided by the
word.

The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 13. Rule.


The true worship of God (which is, Expl.
he that fears him) shall much profit by the study of Scripture. For as in
other arts which are humane, such as often exercise themselves in the precepts
thereof do thrive best in that art^ so they which often and reverently exercise
themselves in the duties of Gods fear and religion, laboring for sorrow, and
contrition of heart for sins committed, for sense of forgiveness, and to get
peace of heart and conscience, and comfort of the word preached, often praying
and confessing their sins, privately wreftling with their lusts, Satan, and
the world, and finally being much and religious in the works of piety, such
do exceedingly increase in good knowledge; Let this be marked and done.

Rule.
And they remembered his words, Luke 24. 8.

Expl.
Many things which are not understood at the present when one reads, or hears
them, afterward are made more easy, therefore let none be discouraged if they
learn little at first, but wait upon God, for illumination of his spirit, as
Mary did, Luke 2.

To him that has shall be given; Rule.
from him that has not shall be taken, even that which he seems to have,
Luke 8.18.

Where there is care and conscience to keep and make good use of that
knowledge which a man has already toward himself and others, Expl.
according to his gifts and calling: then will God of his mercy make former
knowledge to abound, as he will curse the gifts of such as are careless in
using them well. Let such earnestly think on this as do not apply their
knowledge to their own direction and information of others.

That when they see they should not see, Rule.
and when they hear they should not understand, Luke 8. 10.

It is a righteous judgment in God upon the wicked, Expl.
which have no will nor care to obey the truth which they hear, that they
shall be no better for all their hearing and knowledge, but rather the worse,
their light being turned to darkness.

The world cannot receive the spirit of truth, Ioh. 14. 17. Rule.


No wicked man is capable of divine Expl.
truth because he is incapable of Gods spirit, not possible therefore is it
that he should profit by the word.

Rule.
I could not speak unto you as to spiritual, but as to carnal, and to babes,
1. Cor. 3. 1. 2.

Expl.
The same truth of salvation is laid forth in scripture after two manners or
fashions. The first is easily and familiarly, so as children and weak ones may
know it, the second more deeply, exactly, and largely, as may befit such as are
strong in faith, and of a ripe age in knowledge of Christ. See Heb. 5. 12. 13.
13. also Heb. 6. 1. Let every one consider what kind of teacher he is meet
for, whether for Catechizing points, or for sounder instruction, some have yet
need of the former, and some can brook the latter.

Rule.
I am the God of Abraham etc. God is the God of the living, Math. 22. 23.

Expl.
From hence we learn two rules, one, that there is a twofold knowledge to be
got from scriptures, one direct and far more certain, namely from that which
God in his word expressly affirms or denies, as thus, That God is the God of
Abraham. The other knowledge is by due deduction and firm consequence, when
from express words some truth is strongly collected, as this, that Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacob shall live and rise according to their bodies, because God is
not the God of the dead but of the living; this kind of knowledge is also very
certain; but deceitful is the knowledge which by sophistry and false
consequence is drawn from plain texts. The next rule from hence is this, that
such truths, as by firm consequence are collected from the word, must be
believed, as that which is expressly written in the word, for it is Gods will;
therefore this consequence that Abraham and the Saints departed, shall rise,
must be credited no less than that express scripture from whence Christ drew
it.

How can I understand without a guide: Act. 3. 18. Rule.


Instructions be as needful (as guides) in an unknown way: Expl.
and what is too hard for us, when we read, let us enquire of the godly-learned
pastors, and submit to their instructions out of the word.

Rule.
Avoid profane and vain babbling: give not heed to fables and genealogies,
stay foolish questions, etc. 1. Tim. 1.4. 1. Tim. 6.20. Titus 3.9.

Expl.
Subtle, intricate and vain scruples, doubts, and questions, must be shunned,
and the plain profitable truth quietly embraced without contention about
things which have no fruit of edification in godliness.

Rule.
Evil words corrupt good manners. They lie in wait to deceive: 1. Cor. 15.
Ephesians. 4. 14.

Expl.
Such as will go forward in godly knowledge, must abhor impure company,
writings, or books.

Rule.
Some having put away a good conscience, as concerning faith, have made
shipwreck.

Expl.
A good conscience is as it were a chest, wherein the doctrine of faith is to be
kept safe, which will quickly be lost if the chest be once broken, for God will
give over to heresy and errors, such as cast away conscience of walking after
Gods will revealed in his word.

This is my beloved son hear him: Math. 17.5. Rule.


All Christians are commanded to attend (for their direction in things of
salvation) unto Christ, Expl.
the only doctor of his Church, and to be led by his voice, as good sheep; we
may not hearken and believe, what any father or counsel says, unless they
say what Christ taught, who is before and above them all.

My sheep hear my voice and know it: Rule
but the voice of a stranger they will not follow: Ioh. 10. 4. 5. 27.

True Christians must be so expert in the doctrine of Christ, Expl.
as that they can discern it from all false doctrine; and secondly, they must
account all that, strange doctrine, which is not according to the voice and
words of their shepherd, Christ.

Be near to hear, looking well to your feet when ye enter into the house of
God. Rule.
Take heed how you hear. I will muse upon thy testimonies, my study shall be
in thy statutes: Psalm. 119. Eccles. 4. 7. Luke 8.

Expl.
Preparation is needful before the word preached, attention in the hearing,
meditation and study how to profit by it afterward.

Rule.
Understand ye all these things? they answered yea: Mat. 13.51.

Expl.
A rule hence arises for children, servants and parishioners, to suffer their
governors to examine them after their hearing and reading the word; this
course will make them heedfull, and causes them to see what they have lost,
and gained; and to digest and imprint the word the better in their minds.

Rule.
They read in the book of the Law distinctly, and gave the meaning thereof by
the Scripture it self. Christ interpreted to them, etc. Nehem. 8 8.9 Luke
24.27.

Expl.
The surest mean of interpretation of scripture, is by scripture, which is the
best commentary to it self, when the phrase is marked, and matter, and scope,
and place compared with place, hard with easy; the exposition of all learned
writers to be so far admitted, if that exposition which they give, be grounded
on the scriptures.

Christ said, avoid Satan, for it is written: Math. 4.10. Romans 10.14.15. Rule.


The scripture is the only competent judge to decide all controversies, Expl.
and the most strong weapon to repel all Satan's temptations.

And they confirmed the word with signs and wonders, etc. Mark. 16. 20. Rule.


The authority and truth of the Gospel needs no new miracles to ratify it,
Expl.
being so sufficiently confirmed with the miracles of Christ and the Apostles
Let no man therefore doubt of the truth, because Ministers work no miracles,
nor like popery the better for their lying wonders.

They talked together of those things which were done: Luke 24. 25. Rule.


Conference with others of heavenly things is profitable, Expl.
with such Christ will be present to inform them.

I have hid thy words in my heart, that I might not sin against thee, Psalm.
119. 11. Rule.
I will not forget thy word, Psalm. 119. 16.

Great care must be taken that good doctrines once learned, Expl.
be not forgotten, for a Christian shall neither believe, nor do more, then he
remembers.

Rule
I will consider thy words, Psa. 119. 15.

Expl.
The word of God once known, must ever be in ones eye, (as a mark which
Archers look on to aim at) so the word ( consider) signifies in the
original, as the learned say.

Rule.
I know that Abraham will teach his servants my laws, therefore I will not
hide from him what I mean to do, Genesis 18. 17. 18. 19.

Expl.
The storehouse of the family is the breast of the master, who the more he
powers out to the information of his servants and children, the more shall his
own store of heavenly wisdom be multiplied, to him that has, it shall be
given.

Rule.
Whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Expl.
The utmost and farthest end of our studies in the scriptures, must not be our
own glory in heaven: but Gods glory and praise.

Rules to direct and guide in the reading and studying the holy Scripture,
gathered out of ancient and modern Authors.
THE holy scripture uses no kind of speech which may not be found in common
custom of speech amongst men, Rule.
as August. lib. 1. de Trin. cap. 12.

Because in the scripture God speaks not to himself, but to us men: Reason.
therefore he has fitted, and tempered his style, to our forms of words,
which we are most acquainted with, Hilarious in Psalm. 26. There is good reason
then why the Scripture should be more regarded of us for the meannesse and
homeliness of the phrase, since it is framed to our good.

The two tongues wherein the Scriptures were originally written (to wit Hebrew
and Greek) Rule.
have their Idiomes or proprieties, which being observed, bring much light, and
being neglected the sense will be troubled, Augustine intract. in Iohannis 10.

Examp.
The Hebrew and Greek words both which be translated ( for ever, or
everlasting) do not signify properly eternity in every place where it is used,
but great continuance according to the propriety of both tongues Psalm. 132. 14.

Rule.
The scriptures have some peculiar words by which they use to signify some
proper and peculiar matter Ambros. in Luke 1. Examp.
An Angel appeared to Zachary as also in Genes. it is writ-God appeared to
Abraham, in which places the word (appear) signifies peculiarly that which is
seen of a sudden, and could not be perceived before.

Rule.
Sense of scripture is to be gathered out of the words. For as a child in the
womb, Reason.
or a kernel in the shell: so is the truth of things contained in words,
without the understanding whereof we cannot know the sense and meaning, Hilar.
de Trinit. 5. Hieron: in Eccles. cap. 1. It is therefore absurd to profer to
teach the scriptures, or to learn them without care to interpret words and
phrases.

In scripture some time good things are spoken well, Rule.
when righteous things are taught rightly, as Repent and believe the Gospel.
Examp.
Or secondly evil things are taught euilly, when wicked things are persuaded,
as in Job, Curse God and die. Or thirdly, good things are uttered euilly, when
some right thing is said with a perverse mind, as that Ioh. 9 Be thou his
disciple. Or fourthly, evil things well spoken, and dishonest things uttered
in honest terms, as David went into Bathsheba. And Romans 1. The women changed
their natural use into that which is against nature, and innumerable such
like. See Gregor. moral. 23. cap. 3. Reason hereof is, Reason.
because the scripture speaks many things in the person of ungodly men, whose
crooked words it does report unto us, as well as their deeds.

It is the manner of scripture not seldom to put one word twice in one
sentence, Rule.
with a different signification. John. 4. 35. where the word ( harvest) twice
put, Examp.
does vary his signification, first noting the earthly and bodily harvest, and
the spiritual harvest in the latter place. Origin. in Romans 3. also Ioh. cap.
4. 13. 14. Water is twice repeated in diverse sense first for elemenmentary
water, secondly for spiritual, to wit, graces of the holy Ghost.

Rule.
This copulative particle ( And) is used by the Prophets sometime when nothing
is coupled and joined together. Examp.
August in Psalm. 4. Ezekiel. cap. 2. 1. And he said to me. Also Ezekiel. 5. 1. And
thou son of man, and very often else where. Also this particle, Therefore, or
Then is not always illatiue or argumentatiue, Romans 8. 1. Reason is, Reason.
either after the manner of the Hebrews this particle ( And) begins the
sentence absolutely without respect to any thing went before, or it does abound
being more then needs, or because it coupleth the words uttered outwardly, to
that which the Prophets heard inwardly.

Rule.
By bodily things the scriptures lead and lift us up to see such excellent
divine things as be in god, by a figure called Anthropopathia, Hilar. de Trin.

Thus an hand is applied to God to signify his working power, Examp.
an eye to signify his knowledge, an heart, his will; a foot, his presence or
government, wings, his care and protection, a mouth, his word and
commandment, a finger, his might, a soul put for the essence of God,
nostrils, for his indignation. Reason.
Because our dulnes to conceive the things of God is so great as we cannot
perceive them, but by comparisons drawn from the things of men, for this
infirmity of our understanding, the scripture very often speaks of invisible
things by visible, and shadoweth spiritual, by corporal. This rule strikes
against the error of the Anthropomorphites which fashion unto God the shape
and nature of a man, upon mistaking such scriptures, as attribute to him the
members and actions of a man.

Sacred scripture upon dumb and dead things does often put the person of such
as speak by a figure called Prosop^paeia, Rule.
that is, fiction of a person Gregor. Naz. theolog. 4. Examp.
The firmament speaks his handiworke, Psalm. 19. Romans S. 19. 20. 21. etc. The
creature waits, groaneth, trauelleth in pain etc. Psalm. 98.7. 8. Let the sea
roar, and the floods clappe their hands, let the bills rejoice etc. Also
Lazarus looked up and saw etc. and said. Reason.
By this manner of speech we are moved more to affect the things spoken, and
are more easily brought to understand them.

Rule.
Scripture ascribes the names of things that be in truth, unto their
similitudes and representations.

Examp.
1. Samuel. 28. 14. 15. Saul knew that it was Samuel. And, Samuel said, etc.
where the name of true Samuel is put upon his phantasme or representation; it
being Satan that had transformed himself into the shape and likeness of
Samuel, who was at rest with God, out of whose hands the witch could not fetch
him back. August. 2. de doct. christiana.

Rule.
The figurative speeches in scripture do far more affect and move us with more
delight then if the same things were spoken plainly without figure, Psalm. 23.
1. Examp.
The great care and protection of God set forth most pleasantly by the
metaphor of a shepherd, and Isay 5. 1. 2. 3. also Ioh. 15. 1. 2. by the
similitude of a husbandman, and infinite the like. Because things common and
usual breed loathing or disdain: Reason.
whereas new and strange things do engender delight. August. 2. de doctr.
Christ. cap. 6.

Nothing that concerns faith and manners, Rule.
is said obscurely and darkely in any one place of scripture, but the same may
be found plainly uttered in some other place. August. 2. de doctr. Christ.
cap. 9. Examp.
Thus the words of James cap. 2. 21. are made clear by comparing them with
those plain words verse. 18. Thus the promise Genesis 3. 15. is expounded, Gal.
4. 4. 5. Also the promise generally made to Abraham Genesis 12. 3. is more
particularly and plainly set forth Gal. 3. 8. And the words of Christ of
abomination of desolation in Math. 24. 15. clearly interpreted of the Roman
soldiers (those abominable infidels) by Luke cap. 21.20. Reason.
It pleased God so wholsomly and wisely to temper the holy scriptures as by
plain places he might satisfy hunger, and by hard places wipe away disdain.
It is a great wrong to Gods people to be barred from reading scriptures upon
pretense of hardness, and fear of learning heresies out of them, seeing the
scriptures so familiarly declare themselves.

Rule.
Where there is a sentence of scripture which has one tropicall or borrowed
word, we may not think the whole place figurative, Examp.
as Math. 26.28. and Luke 24. 31.

Rule.
They are deceived that think all things to be figuratively (nothing properly)
spoken in the scriptures August. in Genes. 8. Examp.
Histories in scripture, as that of creation, of paradise, of man's fall, of
Adams progeny, Abraham his leaving his country, and many such are uttered in
plain words and proper without allegories, or other figures. Reason.
Because that would make the scriptures to be laughed at, and breed infinite
absurdities, if one should attempt to make all tropicall, and turn every thing
into Allegorical senses, as some wanton unsanctified wits too much do
endeavor it, to please their own and the carnal conceit of there is.

Beware how a figurative speech be taken properly, Rule.
or a proper speech figuratively August. 3. de doctr. Christ. Math. 26. 26. 27.
This is my body, being figuratively said, Examp.
may not properly be taken: and so of the rest of that kind. Reason.
This mistaking of scriptures figurative for proper, must needs fill the
scriptures with heresies, and corrupt the meaning of holy write, and it is a
miserable servitude (as August. says) to take signs for things, of whieh,
words, be but signs.

Whatsoever in Gods word seems to forbid goodness, Rule.
or to command wickedness, there is a figurative speech most certainly,
August. 3. de doctr. Christ. 10. Ioh. 6. Examp.
Unless a man eat my flesh and drink my blood etc. herein wickedness is
commanded, to eat man's flesh, therefore it is a figure commanding us to
communicate in the passion of our Lord. Reason.
Because scripture being pure as God is, it can allow nothing against honesty
of manners, or verity of faith.

Rule.
The tropes and figures in scripture are not to be reputed lies. Aug. c. 10.
contra.

Examp.
As when Christ calls Herod a for who was a man, and Nero a lion, and Christ his
two disciples sons of thunder: or when Christ is called a rock, a vine, a
door, etc.

Reason.
Because in such tropicall and figurative speeches, there is no purpose to
deceive, but by meet resemblances to express the truth. For this end the
scripture uses figures of all kinds abounding in them throughout, as a garden
is decked with flowers, or a garment beset and beautified with pearls.

Rule.
An Hyperbole is to be found sometime in holy scripture, Aug. 16. de ciuit. dei.
That is an hyperbole, when far more is uttered by a speech, then can be
signified by the proper acception of that speech, an out-stretching speech (as
one would say) which increases the signification, and exceeds the truth
being strictly construed. Examp.
As Genesis 13. 16. when God said to Abraham, I will make thy seed as the dust of
the earth, and as the stars of heaven which cannot be counted, Genesis 15. 5.
by this excess of speech meaning no more, but that his posterity should be
very great, even a father of many nations, as it is expounded Genesis 17. 4. By
like form of speech John says, cap. 21. 25. I suppose the world could not
contain the books which should be written. and many like.

Because when the mind of the speaker is manifest, Reason.
therefore such speeches do please more, than if they were uttered in plain
and proper terms.

In a Parable, the mind, and scope, Rule.
and intention of the holy ghost must be marked above all, and thereafter it
must be expounded, and no farther strained than things agree with the
principal drift. Hier. in Mark. Chrysostom. in Math. 3. Hilar. de Trinit.

In the parable of hyring laborers into the vineyard, Examp.
the end thereof is, that God is a debtor to no man; but calls freely; refer
hitherto all in the exposition, Math. 20. 1. 2. likewise in the parable of the
evil steward, Luke 16. 1. 2. etc. the drift is to teach, that the children of
this world be more heedy in affairs of this life, then the children of God
can be in the things of everlasting life. Rack nothing here beyond this
meaning of Christ.

Reason.
Because many false and vain things would be broached, if all circumstances in
a parable should be canvased, the principal scope and end being neglected: as
that it is lawful to steal, out of that, Luke 16. 2. 3. and that damned
persons being dead, have care of their living friends. and that they in hell
have means to express their desires to be understood and heard of souls in
heaven: and consequently that the Saints in heaven, have care of us on earth,
and hear our prayers, as Papists foolishly gather out of the parable in Luke
16. 19. 20. etc. foreshewing the scope and end, which is, that they which
refuse in this life to credit the holy Scriptures, may not look to be called
by extraordinary revelations. This rule being followed, will deliver us from
the folly of such, as rent some words in a Parable from the maine drift, to
serve some particular fancy and error.

Divine writings, though they do not by ostentation show it, Rule.
yet they want not eloquence, August. 4. de doct. Christ.

Examples hereof especially to be seen in the prophecy of Esaiah, Examp.
and the Epistle to the Romans: Augustine doubts not to affirm that he is
able to show all elegancies, and ornaments of Rhetoric to be in the Bible.
Because Rhetoric being a good gift, Reason.
and God the author thereof, he might to great profit use this Art (as an
handmaid) to minister to the Art of Arts (Divinity) as to a Queen and
mistress. Eloquence condemned 1. Cor. 1. 2. is vain and carnal eloquence, to
express vaineglory in the speaker, and please carnal humors in the hearer, to
the prejudice of the power of Christ in the Gospel.

Scripture has Allegories, Rule and exam.
as Gal. 4. 22.23. 24. and elsewhere often: these are not to be found in
precepts of manners, or in plain and perspicuous places, August. 15. de ciuit.
dei cap. 17. An allegory is ever to be expounded according to the meaning and
drift of the place present where it is found. Allegorical senses are not of
private motion, but to be followed where we have the spirit for our president
to go before us, and show us the way, August. in Psalm. 8.

Rule.
All places of Scripture have this rule common to them, that they be interpreted
by the matter handled, and the phrase, and the scope or end which is aimed at,
or by circumstances of time, persons, places; also by precedents and
subsequents, by conferring scriptures, and by analogy of faith, that no sense
be received contrary to the ten commandments, Lords prayer, and the Articles
of our belief.

Examp.
Thus if we would have the meaning of this place, 1. Pet. 4. 8. Love covers a
multitude of sins, look but to the precedent words set next before, and
compare this text with that, Prou. 10. 12. then it will appear to be meant of
mutual love, whereby we forgive offenses one to another, and not that which
should justify us before God, by deserving forgiveness of sins committed
against him, as Papists dream.

Numerall words, Rule.
as 5, 7, 10, etc. though sometime they note a certain time, as 70. years for
the captivity etc. yet a certain finite number, is put for an uncertain
oftentimes, Examp.
as in that phrase to fall 7. times, to forgive 70. times 7. times, and many
such like. Also diverse numbers be either prophetical, as the number of Daniels
weeks; or mystical, as the number of the name of the beast, Revel. 13.18. But
observations of numbers, which be idle, curious, or superstitious, must be
avoided. August. 3. de doct. chr. 31.

Scripture often in one word and saying, Rule.
utters one thing plurally, and many things singularly; Examp.
as, Blessed is the man etc. Hear o Israel. and thou shall not have any
strange God, etc.

Because God would have every one take to himself, Reason.
that which is meant of that society and kind, whereof he is one.

In setting down numbers, Rule.
scripture is not exact to reckon precisely, but that little which may be over
or under, it reckons not: Examp.
as Luke 3. 23. Acts 1. 15. The number of names which were in one place were
about an hundred and twenty. Augustine quest. 47. super Exodum.

Rule.
It is usual in scripture by a part to signify the whole: Examp.
as, Let every soul be subject (for every person man and woman) Romans 13. And
by the whole to note a part, as in the speech of Mary, who seeking but for the
body, said, they have taken away my Lord: and Math. 3. 5. All Judea went forth,
that is, a great part. Gregor. 3. moral. cap. 9.

Rule.
Names given by God immediately, or by his appointment: also the alteration of,
and additions to names by him; have spiritual and mystical meanings. Examp.
As does appear by the imposition of the name Jesus, Math. 1. and in the
addition of a letter to Abrams name, to signinfie multitude; and detraction of
a letter from Sarah, Genesis 17. and in the mutation of Jacobs name into Israel,
Genesis 32. 28. to note his power and strength to prevail with God and man. This
rule has many authors.

The imperative mood of commanding, Rule.
is often put for the optatiue of wishing, Orig. hom. 1. in Cant. Examp.
As in the Lords prayer, Let thy name be hallowed, thy kingdom come etc. that
is, oh that thy name were hallowed, thy kingdom come. And Cant. 1. 1. Let him
kiss me. for, oh that he would kiss me with the kisses of his lips.

Sundry wishing speeches be not so much prayers as prophesies, Rule.
foretelling what shall be, rather then desiring they should be, Examp.
as imprecations against Judas, Saul, and others in the Psalms. August. in
Psalm. 78.

It is the manner of Scripture, Rule.
having said a thing in one member of a sentence, to repeat the same again in
the latter member, Examp.
whereof many examples in Proverbs, and Psalms 33.10, Greg. moral. 28.16.

It is done partly by way of explication, Reason.
and sometime for confirmation, sometime for expressing or exciting zeal. See
more examples Esaias 3.9. also John 1.3. Psalm. 6.9.10. 2. Kings 20.3. Romans 11.8.

The accomplishment and fulfilling of former prophesies concerning Christ, Rule.
is an assurance of the rest, which be fortold, and not fulfilled, Aug. de
catech. rudib. c. vlt.

Examp.
The prophecy of the end of the world, of restoring the creature, of
resurrection, of the last judgment, of the state of all men after judgment, are
as certain, as they of his birth, suffering, death, etc. Reason.
Because one God of truth is author of all these prophesies, and he is
unchangeable and infinite in power, therefore can and will fulfill the one as
well as he has done the other. By this rule might be stopped Atheists mouths,
which mock at the promise of his coming.

Rule.
There is nothing taught in the new Testament, which may not be proved by the
old, and what we find in the old, is also for substance read in the new.
August. lib. 1. retract. Examp.
There be every where examples hereof, Christ and his Apostles confirming
their doctrines by Moses and the Prophets Luke 24. and often elsewhere. Reason.
where one spirit indicted all, there must needs be a consonancie and agreement
in the whole, and every part.

The old Testament is the occultation or hiding of the new, Rule.
and the new is the manifestation of the old. Reason.
For what is delivered and taught in figures, types, and prophesies of the old,
the same without such types be taught in the new, but much more fully, and not
more manifestly alone.

Where Moses is mentioned, Rule
there oftentimes not his person, but his writings be meant, as Luke 16.29.31.
and 24. 27.

In sundry places out of the old testament cited by Christ and his Apostles,
Rule.
the sense is kept, but not the same words always; as Romans 10.15. 18. 19. 20.
21. and often elsewhere. Reason.
Christ and his Apostles follow the translation of the Septuagint in Greek,
which renders the sense, and not the words. Also this is done to show that
Scripture is considered by the meaning, and not by letters and syllables.
Lastly, God deals as an interpreter, therefore adds or changes words, for
the better keeping of the sense. This rule puts to silence cauilling
adversaries of Gods blessed word, especially the wicked unbelieving Jews,
which take occasions from such mutations to harden themselves in infidelity.

Rule.
Some places in the old testament, which seem mere historical, containing bare
narrations of some thing done, yet are mystical withal, having an hidden
spiritual sense, Aug. in Genesis 8. Thus in the history of Jonas, Reason.
our Savior found the mystery of his death, burial, and resurrection. For it
pleased God to make some histories already done, to be types and prophesies of
things afterward to be done, as that of Hagar and Sarah. See Galat. 4.

Rule.
The holy scripture has sundry words, which according to the place where they
be used, do signify diverse, yea even contrary things, Aug. de doct. christ. c.
25. Examp.
As Leaven, to signify the nature of the Gospel, Math. 13. And also heresy
and superstition, take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, yea and in
sinful corruption, as 1. Corinthians. 5. Likewise a Lion, to signify both
Christ the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and the devil that roaring Lion, 1.
Peter 5. Likewise, serpent, is put in good part, Math: 10. 16. wise as
serpents; and in ill part, Genesis 3. 1. Reason.
Because the things have several properties and uses, hence the words, by which
these things are noted, are applied to sundry significations, whereof some be
contrary.

The literal sense of scriptures, Rule
arising from the words duly understood, is the only true and genuine sense;
analogies and tropologies, are not diverse senses, but collections, or sundry
applications of that one only true litterall sense, or a certain manner of
uttering the same sense, as Allegories.

Too much liberty of playing with allegories in expounding scriptures, Reason.
is very dangerous and hurtful; as also to make figures where none are. Origin
is taxed of Epiphanius, and of Hierome too, for his licentiousness in turning
scripture into allegories, wherein also popish Friars are much faulty. This
rule is against devised allegories, not against sober allusions.

Rule.
It is the best and surest way of interpreting scriptures, to expound one place
of scripture by another, Examp.
as Esra did, Nehem: 8. 8. He gave the understanding by (or according to) the
scriptures: so Tremelius reads the place. Reason.
For what better interpreter of the holy ghost, then the holy ghost; also the
scripture, being as a light, shows both other things and it self too: like
the sun that great light. Also there be clear places enough to open the
hard, Aug. lib. de doct. chr. cap. 26. How much to blame are they, which send
us to the Fathers, to fetch thence all interpretation of scriptures, (whereas
Fathers are to believed, because they write that which is found in scripture)
but it is madness to make the Pope chief Interpreter.

Rule.
Howsoever some one scripture, sometime through difficulty or ambiguity of
words, and diversity of translations seems to beget diverse senses, yet every
scripture has one certain and fit meaning, which by all means is to be
searched after, and rested in.

Howsoever many profitable truths may be gathered out of a text, Reason.
yet we may not make every scripture speak every thing, but what is a greeable
to the matter handled, scope, and phrase, as well as to other scriptures, and
the anologie of faith (to wit) the Articles of our Christian Creed, the 10.
commandments, the Lords prayer, and doctrine of the Catechism.

Examples hereof innumerable, Examp.
the word (Image) Romans 8. 29. is expounded diversely, of likeness to Christ in
holiness by some, in glory by others, in afflictions by others. Now the matter
there handled and scope which is to comfort Christians under the cross, shows
the third sense to be only fit to this place, though the other be true and
godly. Likewise Romans 10. 17. The word of God is interpreted by writers both of
the Gospel (the matter of our hearing, and mother of faith) and of Gods
commandment, sending preachers and commanding them to teach, this latter to be
more meet sense appears by the phrase, in that Paul says not, of the word of
God, but by the etc. also by comparing this verse, with the first words of the
15. verse.

Rule.
Where a text of scripture is so ambiguous as it cannot be found out by us,
after diligent search to which sense of two or three, to lean unto, that text
may be interpreted in both senses, August. cap. 2. de doct. Christ. if the
Analogy of faith will suffer, nor be against the circumstances of the text,
hereof such as be preachers of the word shall in course of reading and
preaching find many examples. Reason.
Because it is our duty in interpreting scriptures not to swerve from the
general mark of the whole word (faith in Christ and love toward God and our
neighbor) though we miss of the particular scope and sense of that place
which we handle, but ever esteem that sense to be corrupt that buildes us not
up in faith and love.

Rule.
We must not bring a sense of our own unto the scripture, but meekely receive
that which the scripture gives of it self. Examp.
Papists in steed of fetching from Scripture the true sense of the word (
justified) in the epistle to the Romans, and of works (where imputed justice,
and works after grace, and done by grace, are plainly meant) do bring a
construction of their own, understanding them of infused justice, and of
works done before grace in favor of their own error touching justification
and merit by works done after grace by faith. It is the ready and high way to
all error to interpret scripture by prejudice, Reason.
in favor of some opinion of our own.

Many things be first generally spoken and then presently declared by
particulars, Rule.
as 2 Timothy 3. Examp.
having in the first verse said the latter times should be dangerous, in the 2
verse opens it by the particular vices which should reign in the latter
days. There be innumerable such examples which any intelligent reader shall
observe easily in the course of his reading.

The scriptures diverse times express the antecedent, Rule.
or that which goes before, by the consequent, or that which comes after,
Examp.
and contra. Two examples hereof amongst many other are found in one verse Romans
9.3.3. where a stone of trial as Isay has it chap. 28. verse. 16. is expressed
by the consequent, A stone of offense, for so it proves to the disobedient
which stumble at it by unbelief, and for not making have in Esaias: Paul has,
shall not be ashamed, and confusion being an effect which follows have and
precipitancy.

Reason.
Though some things in scripture be not only above our reason, but seem
contrary to reason, either improbable or impossible: yet beware that we never
do believe any false thing to be taught and delivered there, August. Because
God being of infinite wisdom may and does in his word set down things,
Reason.
of us incomprehensible by our reason, yet being also a God of infinite truth
and purity, will not, nay cannot write any false thing.

Rule.
We may not rashly either our selves affirm, or receive from others any thing
concerning Gods worship, and man's salvation which we do not read in scriptures
August. in Genes. 4. Reason.
Because all things necessary to faith, and good manners, or christian life are
contained in scriptures, which are a perfect canon and touchstone of all things
to be taught 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17.

Whatsoever is truly and soundly collected from scripture, Rule.
is to be believed of us, as though it were expressly written, Greg. Naz. 5.
lib. Theolog.

The doctrine of the Trinity, Examp.
of 2. Sacraments, of baptising infants and many such. Reason is, Reason.
for that which follows by good consequence from an express scripture, is no
less the mind of God then that which is in so many words set down, else
godly and sound sermons, and disputations, and treatises, were not to be
credited, and yet every thing consonant to scripture is not to be reputed
scripture. It is one thing to be scripture (peculiarly so called) another thing
to agree with Scripture, or to be grounded on scripture.

Whatsoever article and doctrine is necessary to salvation, Rule.
is delivered plainly in the holy Scripture, August. 2. de doct. Christ. 9.

For otherwise the rule of faith and of life should come unto a few learned
ones, except evidently it were taught in scripture so much as every one may
understand for his own salvation, as also by this means there is left no plea
for ignorance, nor pretense of accusing the obscurity of scripture, thereby to
make people afraid of them, as Papists do.

Rule.
In every scripture there is some thing visible, and something invisible, there
is a body, and a spirit or soul, Examp.
the letters, sillables, and words be visible, as the body; but the soul, and
invisible, part is the sense and truth wrapped and infoulded in the words,
which are as the bark, ryne, or bone, the meaning within is as the root, and
juice, or as the marrow.

Rule.
The scripture delivers some things of God which may be uttered, and inquired
into, Examp.
as that he is the creator of the world, and governor thereof, the redeemer
of mankind etc. but other things there be which are unutterable, and rather to
be adored and believed, then examined, as the unity of his essence, trinity of
his person, incarnation of the son, and such inconceivable and
vnexpresseable secrets, Damascen. de fide l. 1. c. 1. Reason is, if nothing
were found in scripture save that which men may conceive the reason and manner
of, then should not God be thought to be infinitely wise.

The scriptures have an admirable and singular harmony and consent among
themselves, Rule.
old with new, Moses with the Prophets, and Apostles with them both, Examp.
precepts, promises, and examples sweetly agreeing without contrariety, though
not without variety, August. de ciuit. Dei 8. c. 14.

Because the whole scripture comes from the inspiration of one spirit of
verity, Reason.
who must needs be in all places like himself, the whole scripture being but
as one chain or circle.

Such places as have show of repugnancy, Examp.
are easily reconciled by an intelligent reader, August. As, where it is
written 1. Tim. 2. 3. God will have all to be saved, yet Romans 9. it is said,
Examp.
he will not have mercy on all, a man of understanding can see that one place
speaks of one kind of will, the other of another. Also that in Timoth. ( all)
may be meant not of every one but of all sorts and kinds of men, rich, poor,
high, low etc. for there he speaks of the degrees of men for which prayer must
be made. Thus by the thing before going, or coming after, and by the matter
in hand, all seeming ming contrarieties may be reconciled, as when Christ says
in John 5 may father works hitherto, it seems contrary to that in Genes. 2.
2. that God rested from his works, howbeit the very next words following do
accord these scriptures, when he says from the works which he made, that is,
from making more works, a new out of nothing; but ceased not from preserving
and governing what he had made, as Christ meant in that place, also Matthew. 10.
10. it is written, nor a staff, but in Mark. 6. 8. 9. Take a staff, whereas
Matthew speaks of a staff which might comber and burden, but Mark of one,
which might ease and relieve a traveler.

Things proper to the body are ascribed unto and affirmed of the soul, Rule.
as hunger and thirst, Examp.
which are peculiar to the body, to signify the earnest desire of the soul,
and many other of like nature. Because the soul is unknown to us, Reason.
therefore the scripture speaks such things as appertain unto it in such
words as our senses are best acquainted with, the like is to be said both of
God, angels, heaven, hell, and most of divine mysteries, which are taught by
earthly and corporal things, to help our rude and imperfect knowledge.

If we do well distinguish times, Rule.
sundry things which seem to jar in scripture will be soon accorded.
August.

As one of the thieves crucified with Christ, Examp.
did after the time of his conversion reprove his railing fellow, yet he
himfelfe before his conversion joined with his fellow in railing. And those
shut up in prison, 1. Pet. 3. 19. were in prison of hell at that time when Peter
wrote his Epistle, but not when Christ preached by Noah unto them.

Rule.
The Evangelists in their narrations are diverse one from another, but never
contrary. Reason.
For it pleased the spirit to write that more fully by one which was more
sparingly set down by another, and that which one touches not, to express by
another, yet all speak what was true, August. in Johan. The parable of the
vineyard by Matthew alone, Examp.
of Lazarus and the rich man by Luke alone, the story of the man borne blind
by John alone cap. 9.

Rule.
Whatsoever is said in scripture by God for the comfort, or erection of any one,
must be held to be said to all in the like case and condition. Gregor. moral.
28.

Examp.
As the consolatory words spoken to Iosuah being in necessity Iosuah 1.5. are
applied by the Apostle Heb. 13. 5. to all persons which have any want or
distress. Reason.
Because to like, or the same evils, belong the same remedies, and of like
things there is like reason and judgment to be given, this rule is of large
and profitable use for application of scriptures unto our own edification upon
like cases and circumstances, both for reproof, exhortation, and comfort.

Scriptures unto Sacraments give the names of the things or gifts which we
have by them, Rule.
(calling circumcision the covenant, Examp.
baptism our new birth, and washing away of sins) the bread and cup, his
body and blood, which is done to show the similitude betwixt the signs and
things given, Reason.
also to remember us and assure us the better of the gifts promised in the
word, and offered to us in the Sacraments, that they are given us together
with the signs, this is a Sacramental metonimie, the observing whereof
preserues from Transubstantiation.

The authority and strong credit which scripture has with us is from God,
Rule.
whose word and voice it is, so certified to our consciences by that spirit
which indicted it, and is not derived from the Church, whose office is
faithfully to interpret and preserve this word in purity by the use of an holy
ministry, and so is the pillar and ground of truth, not a Mistress and Queen
to command and overrule, but an handmaide and servant to expound it to the
Saints, therefore truly says a learned author that the authority of Church in
expounding Scriptures is ministerial, not absolute and sovereign.

Rule.
Men know by the scriptures such things as were otherwise impossible to be
known of us, yet are of necessity to be known. August. de ciuitat. dei l. 11.
cap. 3.

Examp.
The whole mystery of Christ, of which we had never dreamed, except it had
been revealed in scripture, neither can we ordinarily be saved without
knowledge of it, Ioh. 17.3. the resurrection, judgment and things following,
were showed in no other writers save the sacred scriptures, as God has
revealed no superfluous things, and unprofitable matter, so they had been
still secret, except he had opened them.

Rule.
All heresies have risen from the corrupt and naughty understanding of
scriptures, Hilarious aduersus Arrianos.

Examp.
As from the ill understanding of that 1 Timothy 2.4. Photius drew his heresy
Christ to be man only not God. Philip. 2.7. Marcian gathered the body of Christ
to be not true, but fantastical and imaginary, of those words in John My
father is greater then I; Arrius grounded the inequallity between the god head
of the father and of Christ. This happens by no fault of Scriptures, Reason.
but of men euilly understanding them, which cannot but breed error, as of
well understanding comes truth.

A particular example will afford a general instruction when the equity of the
thing done is universal, Rule.
and the cause common, otherwise not. Iunius.

As we may not follow the examples of Ehud, Sampson, and Elias calling for
fire, Examp.
because of these actions there were particular respects, and special warrant,
no law to command to all, what was done by them few.

The true cause why men err in expounding scripture is for that they want the
spirit of God inwardly to inlighten the judgment, Rule.
and do not use by plainer places of scripture to seek light for those which
be more difficult, and obscure; else because they come with prejudice imposing
a sense from themselves in favor of their own false opinion, or bring not
humble hearts and holy affections, desirous to know the truth that they may
obey it. Reason.
For men cannot know the truth unless they continue in his words John. 8.
32. Master White in his Treatise of the way to the true Church.

Rule.
The scripture in the manner of teaching divine things has great respect both
to our capacity, and vtility, Orig. contra Celsum lib. 4. God so speaking to
man as if he were a man, as Scholemasters fit themselves to their young
pupils, and Nurses to their young infants, whose meat they chew for them. See
John 3. 12. Romans 6. 19. I speak after the manner of man because of the
infirmity of your flesh.

Rule.
Where scripture dispraiseth and condemns any man, all actions which that man
did, are not dispraised absolutely; Examp.
As is to be seen in Judas, in Saul, in Iehu and others. Also, where it
commends the person of a man, it follows not all his acts to be commended,
as in Peter's denial, and David's adultery is very apparent, Examp.
but (like a true glass) the scripture shows what is fair, and what deformed
in every one. August. contra Faustum. If this had been thought on, that the
Saints are not to be followed but in good things (nor in those neither, if
they be personal) many would never have made infirmities of the Saints, a
buckler for their iniquity.

The scripture prophesies both of good and evil things to come, Rule.
as well of the abounding of iniquity and perils in the last days, and of the
pains of hell: as of the happiness of the Saints in heaven, August. Epist.
137. Reason.
Because men being forewarned are half armed, and that no man should be taken
unawares, or be able to pretend ignorance.

In Scripture take knowledge of two generations, Rule.
one of good men the seed of Christ, the other of wicked men the seed of the
Serpent: it must be marked what belonges to the one, and the other, and what is
spoken of each particularly, Hieron. in Math. 23. See Psalm. 1.2. and Psalm. 3.7.
throughout. Because if these two generations and the things spoken of them, be
not wisely distinguished, one shall not be able to apply scripture rightly,
either to the use of others or themselves.

Rule.
Some sentences taken from heathenish authors are to be found in holy
scriptures, Hieron.

Acts 17.28. 1. Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12. As the Egyptians spoils furnished the
Israelites, and David help himself with the spear of Goliath: Reason.
so the holy Ghost strikes the heathens with their own weapons and causes
heathnish books (as handmaides) to wait upon divine truth, and as spoils to
enrich sacred divinity. But let others be wary and sober in the practice of
this point. It would be used wisely and religiously without prejudice to holy
scriptures authority, or hurt to the hearers, or ostentation in the teachers.
It is a sure rule to be followed, as in other actions, so especially in
sermons, Let all things be done to edification.

Rule.
Profundity and depth of Gods counsels and judgments are not too narrowly and
curiously to be searched, but wondered at with astonishment, Aug. de vocat.
gent. lib. 1. cap. 4. After the example of Paul, Examp.
Romans 11.33. O the depth, etc.

The reason is, Reason.
because Gods ways are vntraceable and past finding out, and secret things
belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29. vlt. As it is contempt to despise things revealed
which belong to us, and were written for our learning and comfort; so it is a
wicked curiosity, to search into unrevealed things, which God has kept in his
own power: as, why he would elect Peter and not Judas, etc. Such things as we
cannot know them, so it were not for our profit know them, as what day the
Angels were made, and what God did before the world, and in what place hell is,
and the judgment shall be, and such like. All this checks such as search the
time of Christ's second coming, and determine the ranks and orders of Angels.

Whatsoever things are written in Scripture, Rule.
are to be referred unto Christ, who is author, object, matter, and mark of
old and new Testament: Reason.
for he is the end of the law, Romans 10.4. whereunto the law as a schoolmaster
leads us, Gal. 3.24. and in Christ all the promises of the Gospel are
fulfilled, 2. Cor. 1.20. the ceremonies also shadowed him and figured him, who
was the body, Col. 2.17. but the body is in Christ. Therefore all hearers and
teachers, if they will profit in all their hearing, teaching, and reading, must
have the eye of their mind turned toward Christ, as the faces of the Cherubins
were turned toward the Mercy-seat. Do thus, if ever you will do well, digest
this rule, practice it, pray for grace to do it, it is a rule of rules, August.
in Psalm. 71.

Rule
In some sacred stories, and other places of holy scripture, some thing is left
out, which in some other place of scripture may be found, August. in Psalm. 77.
Example in Heb. 12.21. Examp.
Reports of Moses, which is omitted in his story, Exodus 9. Also David in Psalm.
105. mentions diverse things, which in the story Exodus 4.5.6.7. chapters was
left out. The reason whereof is not forgetfulness, Reason.
or oversight, but the spirit sets down the sense in some places, and the
words in another, affecting brevity, and to stir us up to more search.

All testimonies of scripture are healthful to men of sound understanding:
Rule.
dangerous only to the perverse and froward, who will not bow their blind
reason and stubborn affections to the scriptures, but wrest them to their own
perverseness. August. in Psalm. 48. 2. Pet. 3.16.

The knowledge of tongues H:G:L. also of Arts Gr. Rh. L.R. etc. and good store
of good Interpreters, Rule.
be needful for such, as would so exactly know the scriptures, as to be able
learnedly and exactly to expound them to others.

The scriptures speak some things of Christ the head, Rule.
which also belong to his Church the body, Aug. in Ps. 21. as Acts 4.9. why
do thou persecute me, i. my members. also 1. Cor. 12. 12. euen' so is Christ,
i.e. the Church, which is the mystical body of Christ. The reason is, Reason.
because of the most strait conjunction between the head and the body.

Rule.
Some speeches of scriptures are affirmed of, or directed to one, which belong
also to others. August. Math. 16. 17. 18. the words of Christ to Peter, Examp.
were meant to all the Apostles as well as to him, as appears by John
20.22.23. The reason, Christ took his beginning of one, to teach unity to his
Church in the confession of faith. Of this nature be the Epistles of Christ
entitled to the Angel of the Church, but directed and meant to the whole
Church. See Revel. 3. 16. The reason is, Reason.
because the health or decay of the flock, depends upon the worth, and
unworthiness of the pastors.

Rule.
Some things are said in scripture, not according to the truth of the thing
said, but after the opinion of the time, as others thought. Thus Scribes and
Pharisees are termed righteous, Luke 15. Hieron. in Math. cap. 24. Examp.
Thus also they be called builders, Acts 4. and Joseph, Christ's parent or
father, Luke 2. and thus hypocrites are said to have faith. James 2.18.19.

Those good words of Scripture, which we do not presently understand, Rule.
let us religiously believe, and diligently ponder, till the spirit open our
wits. Aug. in Psalm. 54.

Because it pleases God to keep our wits shut for a time, Reason.
that we shall not distinctly see, what yet we are bound to credit for truth,
because it comes from a God of truth. Examp.
Thus did Peter, John 6. 68. and Mary, Luke 2. 51.

The scripture uses to call men by the names of beasts, Chrysostom. in Genesis
homil. 12. Rule.
Thus the Pharisees and malicious Jews, Examp.
are called serpents, Math. 3.8. heretics, dogs, Phil. 3.2. desperate sinners,
swine, Matthew. 7. wicked slanderers, aspes, Romans 3. meek ones, doves; wise
ones, serpents; for the likeness of qualities and passions, there be given the
same, Reason.
or like names to diverse creatures.

Scripture does not always allow the things and actions from whence
similitudes be fetched, Rule.
Aug. in Ps. 157. as the fashions and manners of thiefes, Examp.
unjust stewards and Judges.

Rule.
Sacred scripture affords us examples of all virtues, theological,
political, moral, oeconomicall; yea, and of all vices, prescribing remedies
against all sins, Chrysostom. in Act. homil. 9.

Examp.
Examples of this rule abound every where, and offer themselves to the Reader
that observes the scripture.

Reason.
The reason is, because Gods word is perfect, so is no other writing of any
author whatsoever.

Rule.
The knowledge of humane histories, written of the Persians, Babylonians,
Graecians, and of the Romans especially, brings no small light to understand
sundry parts of scripture, namely the books of Daniel and Revelation, which
contain historical prophesies of things to be perceived by the events, which
are recorded in profane and ecclesiastical historiographers. Events of things
set down in humane stories, Reason.
is best interpreter of the prophesies in the Revelation, which book to the
Fathers, which saw not the events, Examp.
as we do, was therefore darker and harder to them, then to us.

In way of disputation, Rule.
the Scripture sometimes infers some absurd consequents, which follow upon some
error, held by others, whom the holy ghost would reform, by laying forth the
absurdities which attend upon their false opinion, Augustinus de doct. christ.
l. 2.^.31. Examples hereof Romans 4. 14. Examp.
also 1. Cor. 15.16.17.18. Reason.
For there is no better way to convict an erroneous, or heretical fellow, then
by laying forth the wicked or foolish things which ensue and arise from his
false conceits, and thus also the truth is much helped.

We may not neglect or lightly esteem or slightly pass by any thing, Rule.
which we read in Gods word, be it mention of names, or observation and
distinction of time, rehearsal of rites and pedegrees, or any such matter
which may be thought mean. Reason.
Because the holy Scripture (being a word of a God infinite in wisdom) conteins
an infinite treasure, if it have exquisite searchers. Examp.
Did not Paul from observation of the time when Abraham was circumcised, Romans
4. 8. and when the Law was given, Gal. 3. also from Christ his suffering
without Jerusalem, and from killing the beasts without the camp, Heb. 3. gather
very wholesome and weighty truths? ergo, contemn nothing which is found
therein. Chrysostom. Hom. 22. and 24. upon Genesis.

Rule.
To the understanding of Scripture, there needs great search, John 5. with
earnest prayer, Psalm. 119. The reason, Reason.
because otherwise that which lies deep in the bottom, for want of care, may
remain hid from us. Chrysostom.

Rule.
One and the selfsame truth, is taught by many sundry similitudes in sacred
scripture, and in sundry forms; sometime by precept, sometime by exhortation,
sometime in prayers, in thanksgiuings, in examples, and sometime in
threatenings, August. in Psalm. 8.

Reason.
The reason is, that by varying the manner and form of speech and teaching, not
only disdain and weariness may be removed, but the truth receives better
impression through such kind of proceeding.

Examp.
Examples whereof, amongst many easy to be marked, take one or two. The Church
is compared to a vineyard, an house, a floor, a net. Again, that truth. That
all must believe in Christ that will be saved, is taught by way of
commandment, 1. John 3.23. of exhortation, Heb. 10.21. of example, Heb. 11. of
promise, and of threatening also, John 3 18. also 36.

Similitudes are rather for illustration, to make dark things plain, Rule.
then for confirmation to prove any doubtful thing. Examp.
Such is the similitude of the evil steward, of a vine Ioh. 15. of a King
marying his son, etc. for similitudes are not argumentatiue.

The authority of divine Scripture, Rule.
must not be subjected to humane capacity, August. The reason whereof is,
Reason.
because corrupt reason cannot diue so deep as Gods truth, and the wisdom of
God in his word is infinite, our understanding finite; therefore they err
which will believe no more than their reason can reach. And this error has
been the mother of very many errors.

Whatsoever we read in any heathen or ecclesiastical author (be it Father,
Rule.
Doctor, or Counsel, or whosoever) contrary to that we read in scripture, we
ought reject it as false. August.

Examp.
In Ireneus, we read that Christ died at the age of 50. years. Augustine, that
the communion ought to be given to infants. In Origin, (that at length, all
(devils and men) shall be saved; and innumerable such like in other authors.

Reason.
The reason is, because the Scripture contains an infallible and perfect
truth, therefore it must needs be refused as false, whatsoever in matter of
religion and salvation is beside it, or against it; and whatsoever any of the
learned Fathers do write truly: i^ must not be believed because it comes from
them, but because it is grounded on Scripture, or sound reason.

Rule.
Certain precepts are in common propounded to all, as the X. commandments; and
whatsoever precept serves to expound them, or illustrate them; and some private
to certain special persons, as that to Abraham of killing his son, Examp.
to the Israelites of spoiling the Egyptians. Also diverse peculiar precepts to
magistrates, fathers, and children, pastors, etc. Reason.
These common and proper precepts are to be marked, because by that means, a
man shall the better walk in the ways of his calling. August. de doct. christ.

All things reported, Rule.
and commended in Scripture, must not be imitated by us. Because many things
well done were personal, and not done for example, Reason.
to warrant us to do the like. August. de doct. christ. This being not known,
has cast many upon unlawful enterprises, as one M.r Birchet in England, who
by example of Ehud, thought he might have killed a great personage in this
land, whom he took to be Gods enemy; as some of Christ's disciples offended by
preposterous zeal in following Elias example, calling fire from heaven.

When the Scripture speaks something darkly, Rule.
it uses for most part to join thereto some plain thing in the same place to
give light to it: Whitaker. Also it is Ieromes rule. Esaias 51. 1. Examp.
the latter end of the first verse, being somewhat hard, is presently opened in
the beginning of the second verse: and in Deuteronomy. 7. 3. God having said, thou
shall not make marriages with Canaanites; by and by declares this more fully in
the next words. Also the 3. verse of the first of Esaias expounds the second; and
the former part of the first verse of Esaias 53. does expound the latter. and in
Romans 10. the 5. and 6. verses mentioning the righteousness of the law and of
faith, expounds the 3. verse, touching our own righteousness, and the
righteousness of God. also the confession spoken of in verse 9. is interpreted
verse 13. by calling on the name of the Lord. and in verse. 8. having said, the
word is near, in the end of that verse shows what word he means, to wit,
not of the law, but the Gospel, This is the word of faith which we preach. See
the like, Romans 8. 20. 31. 2. Tim. 4. 6. Romans 11.7.8. 1. Cor. 5.9. Ephesians. 5.32.
and often elsewhere, though not always. For sometime we are to range farther of
to fetch the sense of some places which we read. The not observing of this Rule
holds many in ignorance, and carries others to many errors.

We may not imitate the works of Christ, Rule.
which be miraculous and proper to him as mediator: but his moral duties only.
For they only were given us for example and pattern, Reason.
Math. 11.29 30. 1. Pet. 2.21. 1. Ioh. 2. 6. that we should walk as he has
walked. The ignorance of this, Examp.
caused some to counterfeit themselves Christ; as one Moore in K. Edward the
VI. his time: and one Hacklet in Q. Ellzabeths time, David George, and sundry
others, according to that foretold, Math. 24.

Those things which are subordinate (one put in order under another) Rule.
do not fight and jar, so as upon affirming one of them should follow the
denying or excluding of the other; as grace of the Father, Examp.
merit of the Son, operation of the holy ghost, ministry of the word, faith,
sacraments, are subordinate in the matter of man's regeneration and salvation.
Kickerman. Therefore it will not follow, we are saved by grace, ergo not by
Christ. or this, we are saved by Christ, or justified by Christ; ergo, not by
faith, or this, we are justified and saved by faith: ergo, what needs
ministry, or sacraments, or prayer, or good works; as popish Priests reason
most absurdly. Again, Gods providence and endeavor in the use of second
causes and means be subordinate under, and serving one the other. Therefore it
will not follow, we need not pray, nor work; nor use physic for body or
soul, nor preaching, because it is ready appointed by Gods providence, what
shall be, and what not be, which all our care cannot alter, as many
fantastically argue to their own peril and ruin. Thus in the delivery of
Christ to death, God and Christ, and Judas, Satan and Jews are all
subordinate. These three latter, as instruments to the two former, all doing
one thing, though not to one end.

Rule.
Scriptures do diverse times by the poor and needy, understand all Gods people,
poor or rich. The reason is, Reason.
because howsoever the equity of the things commanded or forbid, may stretch
to all sorts wealthy and needy, yet there may be particular reasons, why we
ought more especially regard the poor, and why to that end God would commend
his own peculiar care of them; amongst many examples hereof take these few.
Examp.
Psalm. 10.14. Psalm. 14. 6. and Psalm. 72.2. he shall judge the poor with
equity: but in the next verse, this office of Gods magistrate, is enlarged to
all the people, Hills shall bring peace to the people by justice. The like Ps.
82. 3. 4. Judges are charged to do right to poor and needy, and to defend
them: yet it is their duty, to discharge and perform these things to all the
people of what condition soever, Deuteronomy. 1.16.17. Again, where usury is forbid,
or taking increase for loan toward the poor, Exodus 9.22.25. Deuteronomy. 23.19. this
prohibition is extended to all the Jews, to whom money or ought else must not
be lent with covenant for gain, for the duty of lendings sake; which appears,
first because he says generally, to a brother (and all Jews were brethren in
this sense, being all worshippers of one God. 2.ly Because he opposes a
Brother to a stranger, not a poor man to a rich. 3.ly Because the Prophets,
who are the Interpreters of Moses (as Moses of the Law) and the Apostles of the
Prophets) have ever set down this prohibition without limitation. See Psalm.
25. 5. Ezekiel. 18. and chap 23. Prou. 28.4. This rule is an halter to strangle
all usurious practices, or taking increase for the duty of lending.

Rule.
Promises of temporal good things, must be understood with exception of the
cross and chastisement. Reason.
Because sometimes to many Christians, it is better for them to be exercised
with afflictions, then to be in health and ease. Godliness has promises of
these, Examp.
obey me, and it shall go well with thee, and thou shall prosper.

Rule.
This particle ( if) is not always a note of doubting, but of reasoning, and of
one which argues to confirm and strengthen himself and others, Romans 8 31. if
God be with us who can be against us; Examp.
and when in the Prophets, we read this word and such like, as Joel 1.14 who
knows if he will return. Act. 8.22. if it be possible, then no uncertainty
on Gods part is noted, or inhability to do that which is spoken; but a
difficulty of the duty, and sometimes an uncertainty of the thing on man's part:
yet ( if) is sometimes put doubtingly, if thou be the son of God, Math. 3. 34.

It is usual in scripture to attribute to the instrument that efficacy and
force which is belonging to the author and worker. Rule.
As the Ministers are said to save 1. Tim. 4. verse last, Examp.
faith to justify Romans 3. 28. Baptism to regenerate, afflictions to bring
patience, Romans 5. 4. parents to prolong the lives of children Deuteronomy. 5. 22. and
beget the bodies of their children Heb. 13 and many such like. Reason.
The reason why God commits his own work to the means, it is, to give more
countenance to the means if they be good, that they may be the more respected
The ignorance of this rule caused some Heretics to ascribe divine operation
and virtue to the Sacraments, which are but voluntary instruments, by which
being rightly administered and used God gives grace as himself pleases.

Rule.
When any sinful actions are attributed to God, as that he hardened Pharaohs
heart, Examp.
that he gave men over to vile affections and a reprobate mind, and sendes a
spirit of slumber into men, and provoke others to anger and envy, and
turns their heart that they should hate, and the like speeches, we may not
understand that God puts into any the poison of sin, for he tempts none
to sin James 1. but he does it by delivering them over to Satan, and their
lusts to be hardened etc. as a just judgment of a just judge, who punishes one
sin by another. Reason.
For this having a respect of God in it, being the execution of his justice,
may be done of God most holily. Therefore Papists slander us in affirming that
we make God author of sin, whereas we make him only author of the judgment.

Rule.
Comparison of places of Scripture together to get the sense the better, is
either of the same place with it self uttered else where in scripture, Examp.
as Hab. 2. 4. with Romans 1. 17. and Gal. 3. 11. also Leuit. 8. 5. with Romans 10.
5. and Gal. 3. 12. or else with places like in matter and phrase, as 1. Cor.
10. 4. with Romans 4. 11. and Genesis 17. 10. and Exodus 12. 11. or with places
altogether unlike which seem to differ in matter and phrase, as Genesis 46. with
Act. 7. And Genesis 48. with Act. 7. and 3. 28. with Iam. 2. 24. In the first
kind between like places there fall out many mutations and changes, some
words added, or taken away, or altered, which is either done without all
fault, by Angels, and holy men of God citing them rightly, or corruptly by
Satan, as Math. 4. 6. or by Pharisees Math. 5.27. 33.

Philosophy, Rule.
as Mathematickes etc. is behoouefull for students of divinity so it be
soberly dealt in, Reason.
for many things are to be found in Philosophers false, superstitious and
vain, August. As of eternity of the world, Examp.
and that virtue is in our power, and touching, our chief good etc.

One of the greatest helps and best means to understand the scripture is to
keep a good conscience, Rule.
living according to that we know out of the word, being joined with
continual and fervent prayer, Reason.
M. Perkins. For Christ says in John 7. 17. He that does the will of my Father
shall understand the doctrine that it is of God. And how often (even in every
verse almost) does holy David pray for the opening of his eyes, Examp.
and the teaching of him Gods statutes. It was the saying of a godly Minister,
that he profited in the knowledge of the word more by prayer in a short space,
then by his studdie in a longer time.

Rule.
Any person shall so much more deeply understand the scripture, by how much his
mind is more intent and fixed upon them. Reason
The reason is, because such rich treasures are in every place of scripture; as
need careful sifting and great intention of mind to find them out.
Therefore Christians are charged as well to mark and heed what they read, and
hear in the scriptures; as to read and hear them Gregor. in Ezekiel homil. 7.

Rule.
The truth of many things to be fulfilled in Christ, were written before in
types, as Psalm. 2. many things uttered of David in type which in truth to the
full were accomplished in Christ only, Examp.
as verse 1. 2. and verse 7. 8. 9. Also of Solomon typically are spoken sundry
things in Psalm. 72. verse 5. 8. 11. etc. which cannot agree but to Christ,
likewise in Christ was verified what before was written in shadows and
figures, of the brazen serpent of Jonas, Hieron. in Dan cap. 10. Reason is
because God purposed in his dispensation of the doctrine of grace to proceed
by degrees, and to honor the times of the Gospel with the fullest Revelation.

Every book of scripture may not be permitted to be read of every age, Rule.
Nazian. Reason, Reason.
because such as be young and rude cannot be capable of mystical books
which be of abstruse or hidden sense as Canticles, Daniel, Ecclesiastes,
Revelation etc. Examp.
and therefore best were to begin with historical books, then with
doctrinall as Proverbs, Psalms etc. then to proceed to Prophetical as
Isayah, Jeremy etc. and lastly to such as have a profound meaning. This order
of reading I hold fittest for such as be simple, but for the more learned,
and namely for students in divinity I would commend another course out of M.
Perkins, to begin with the Gospel of John and the Epistle to the Romans,
after with the Prophet Esaias, because these three books be as the keys to open
the understanding of the rest.

Rule.
We may reverently think of the books of Apochrypha and of their authors, but
seeing they are not received into the number of Canonical scriptures we may
not build our faith on them, nor allege them for confirmation of doctrine, but
read them for information and institution of our manners, receiving them so
far as they agree with divine oracles, August. de ciuit. dei 18. cap. 38.
Hierom. This rule checkes such as make Apocripha the ground of their Sermons,
and a rule of faith equal to the Canonical, as Romanists do.

Rule.
There be certain writers, or authors, (as Iehn, 2. Cron. 20. 34. named in
scripture) whose books are lost, being never Canonical (but as the Chronicles
of England) August. 18. de ciuit. dei cap. 38.

In the new Testament written in Greek, Rule.
there be Hebrew or Syriacke names and words, whereof some have their
interpretation set by them, Examp.
as Bar Jonah the son of Jonah, Bartimaeus the son of Tymaeus, Barnabas the
son of consolation, Boanarges the sons of thunder, Abba Father, Emanuel God
with us. Golgotha, a place of sculs etc. and some have not interpretation as
being more common and familiar, as Amen etc. Hieron. in Galat. 4. What reason
then have Papists from these words to collect that the service of the Church
should all be in a strange tongue?

It is the manner of the Prophetical writing, Rule.
first to use reprehensions and threatenings of judgment, and after to join
the promises of mercy by Christ to come. Reason.
Because men are not to receive comforts before their natural pride (being
humbled and tamed with fear,) they can see a need, and have a desire after
the promises of grace, Examp.
see in Esaias 1.2. also 9. 10.11.12. also chap. 51. 52. 53. 54. Joel. 2.
Hieronimus. in Hose. 5. and Isay. 16. This rule may be a directory for
preachers to govern their teaching, for the manner of it in respect of their
hearers vnhumbled.

Rule.
Sacred writers sometime write so of themselves, as if they were others, as
Moses saying he was the meekest on earth Numb. 12. 3. and John, Examp.
This is the disciple whom Jesus loved. And Paul 2. Cor. 12. 1. 2. 3. see also
John, 20. 30. and that other disciple which walked with Cleopas to Emaus is
thought to be Luke who wrote the story. This witnesses their modesty, and
whereas holy men of God in scripture reveal their own faults, this shows
their sincerity, as Matthew reports his own forsaking of his Lord with his
fellow Apostles Math. 26. 35. Also Paul reports his own persecution and
blasphemy 1. Tim. 1.13 also John reports his own slip in falling down and
worshipping the Angel which appeared to him Revel. 19. 10. Moses his own
hastiness and unbelief at the striking of the rock Numb. 20. 12. which
shows that in penning of scripture they were guided by the spirit of God, not
led by private motion. For then it is likely they would not have published
their own follies and faults to all the world 2. Pet. 1. 20. Gregor. in his
preface on Job. This rule may be a stay to such as shall be at any time
tempted to doubt of the scripture whether they be of divine authority.

Sundry interrogatiues in scripture have the force of negatiues, Rule.
denying that which seems to be but asked after, as those interrogations
which be found together Romans 10. 14. 15. the meaning of every interrogation
there, Examp.
is negative, as if it were said, they cannot. Some again do so ask a
question, as they require and have an express answer Psalm. 15. 1. Romans 11. 1.
Rome. 3. 12. the use of them in scripture is commonly to quicken attention: or
to urge more vehemently the affection, or to prepare way for some weighty and
wholesome discourse.

The books of holy scripture whether they have the writes name or not, Rule.
it much skilleth not so long as we are resolved in our minds by the holy
Ghost that they come from God. Because the authority of scripture depends not
on the pen man but upon God the Author. Reason.
Therefore knowing the Epistle to the hebrews to be inspired of the holy
Ghost, Examp.
we receive it with as much faith and reverence, as those other Epistles which
have the Secretaries name set before them.

Rule.
The whole scripture is called a Bible as if it were one book. Because it is
written all by one spirit. Reason.
Also it is called the Bible by an excellency, because it is the most worthy
and necessary book, as if in comparison of it none other deserved the name of
a book, as indeed they do not, considering the Author, subject, and the end
of it being inspired immediately of God, teaching Christ and faith in him, for
eternal life in heaven to the glory of Gods free grace toward elect sinners.

Rule.
The scripture sometime writes future things in the time past Romans 8. 30. whom
he has predestined them he has called, Examp.
whom he has called them he has justified, whom he has justified, he has
glorified, such like speeches there be many in the Prophets. The reason is,
Reason.
because Hebrews use so to write: also by this form of words, the certainety
of the things to come is noted, as if they were now done.

The title (God) is in scripture sometime put absolutely and in the singular
number, Rule.
then it is proper to the creator, and notes his essence, or some person:
sometime it is used with an addition, Examp.
as in Exodus, I have made thee God of Pharaoh, or in the plural number Psalm.
84. I have said ye are Gods and verse 1. in the assembly of Gods; then it
belongs to the creature. Also (God) in the singular number is used sometime
personally, as Romans 1. 7. from God our Father etc. sometime essentially, as
Ioh. 4. 24. God is a spirit, so the word Father is sometime put essentially for
the whole diety Math 6. O our father: sometime personally as in John, The
father is greater then I, and my father works hitherto and I work, Gregor.
in Ezekiel. Ignorance of these rules breeds errors about the Trinity.

Rule.
Who so will understand the scriptures must first love them before he learn
them. Reason.
Because God will punish such as contemn his mysteries: as also love and good
will make our labor and studdie more easy. Nothing is hard to a willing
mind, August. de vtil. credendi cap. 6.

Rule.
When something is written in an historical narration which seems to have no
signification, or use for edification, yet then remember that it is written to
be an introduction to some thing which is significatiue, and of good use,
August. Reason.
Because no title, or iott in Gods word is unprofitable or vain seeing all is
inspired, and profitable 2. Tim. 3. 16. therefore mention of persons, Examp.
times, places, etc. be not unprofitable and to be neglected, if it were but
for this, that they do evidence the truth of the thing related, and paue a way
to some substantial matter.

Rule.
It is usual in scripture to put, all, for many. 1. Timoth. 2.3. God will have
all to be saved, Math. 3. all Jerusalem went etc. Math. 4. 23. all diseases;
so on the other side ( many) is put for all Romans 5. 9. by the disobedience of
one man many became sinners. Now where the one of these is put or used for the
other it will be manifest to him that marketh the matter handled. August.
contra Pelag.

In scripture this word (until) does not always exclude the time following,
Rule.
but signifies an infinite time, or unto eternity 1. Cor. 15. until his
enemies be made his footstool shall he reign. Examp.
Hieron. cont. Heluid. Also Math. 28. I will be with you until the end of the
world. And 2. Samuel. Michol had no child until her death, Math. 5. 26.
Therefore idly do Papists seek to gather their Purgatory from hence.
until thou have paid the utmost farthing, that is never as Mark expounds
it. Of this kind is that Math. 1. 25. thought to be, until she had brought
forth etc. in all which places by (until) a perpetuity is noted, but else
where a certain limited time is signified, as until Penticost, until I
come, and till the pit be dug for the ungodly, in the Psalm, this word
(until) does rather resemble the property of the tongue whence it is drawn
(as Aug. writes) then conteyne any deep or more hidden meaning.

Rule.
In genealogies it is the manner of the Hebrews not to mention the females but
males only Math. 1. Luke 3. Examp.
1. Chro. 5. 6. 7. Reason.
Because man is the more worthy person, and the chief agent in all generation
and the head of the family. And because it is the surest side in which the name
continues, Hieron.

Rule.
In scripture one is called first begotten or first borne, not in respect of
other brethren or sisters which are begotten afterward, but because he came
first into the world though none other follow afterward Math. 1. 25. had
brought forth her first borne. Examp.
Hieron. against Helue.

Rule.
In scripture a betrothed woman is called a wife, and a betrothed man a husband,
though they never yet came together, or knew each other, Examp.
Math. 1. 20. fear not to take Mary thy wife etc. though she were only
betrothed, see verse. 8. Deuteronomy 22. 23. if a maid be betrothed to an husband
etc. So likewise the man is called an husband so soon as he is betrothed to
her. Reason.
Because betrothing is an essential part of marriage being duly performed; and
the solemnization is necessary unto comeliness, honesty, and avoiding of
offense. Hieron. in Math. 1.

Crying in scripture does not always betoken the sending forth of a strong
voice outwardly: Rule
but inward compunction and feruency of spirit and affection Genesis 14. 15.
wherefore criest thou, Examp.
Romans 8. 15. we cry Abba Father, Heb. 5. 7. Hieron. in Gal. 5.

The word (spirit) being put without addition is ever taken in good part, Rule.
with addition (as unclean, evil) in ill part. Hieron. Also spirit with a
word of a genetiue case adjoined, does signify the mighty, working of God by
his good spirit directing to good things, a spirit of grace etc. or by Satan
leading to evil, a spirit of error.

Sundry Prophets foretold things to come which were temporal as well as
eternal things which belong to the Messiah, Rule.
(though he were the chief object of all prophesies) also they prophesied not
in words only, but even by their actions, Examp.
as Jeremiah by carrying a chain prophesied the captivity. Ezekiell by flying
in the night, having broken down a wall in his house, Agabus foretold Paul's
bonds by binding his own hands etc. Reason.
This was done to make prophesies better observed, and regarded when words and
things met together, and to leave the heedlesse and incredulous without excuse,
Gregor.

Rule.
When Prophets report visions they do not always mention or infer ought which
they saw, but do declare what was said, Esaias. 1. 2. A vision which Esaias saw;
Examp.
and then follows hear o heaven and earth etc. telling words spoken to him,
not sights showed him, yet are they called visions, because God extraordinarily
opened the eyes of their minds to behold his judgments upon the wicked, and
to know most certainly the good promises made to the Church. Hieron. in Isay 1.

Rule.
Te^porall prophesies of earthly things which were nearer, being fulfilled, gave
proof of the truth of the spiritual prophesies touching the kingdom of
Christ, Reason.
which was farther of. Because a God of unchangeable truth was author of
both. Thus the Prophesies of the Jews going in, and coming out of
captiuities, Examp.
and of destruction to other Nations being accomplished, assured Gods people of
the coming of the kingdom of the Messiah. This rule being well known and
marked by the Jews, had preserved them from hardness of heart. Rupert. in
Hos. c. 1.

Evangelists and Apostles in citing places out of the old Testament, Rule.
keep the words of the Greek Septuagint, when that differs not in sense from
the original Hebrew. and sometimes in citing testimonies from Moses and
Prophets, they follow not the words, either of the Hebrew, or the Septuag: as
Romans 11.9.10.
but religiously keep themselves to the sense agreeing in unity of spirit,
though with variety of words, doing rather the office of divine interpreters,
then of bare alledgers of Scripture. thereby to teach all pastors, in cyting
Scriptures, rather to respect the matter and sense, Examp.
then the letter and words. See Matthew. 2. 15. and verse. 23. Math. 26.31. also
1. Cor. 2. 9. and in sundry other places, wherein they cleaued not to the word,
but forsook them, yet without damage to the matter and sense. Reason.
because that is the principal thing most to be observed. Hier ad Pamach.

Rule.
The new Testament never cites any testimony out of Apocrypha books, but out of
canonical scripture only. Hieronimus. Because God himself being the author
and inspirer of it, Reason.
has sanctified it and inspired it for the perpetual and perfect instruction
of his Church in the truth of salvation. 2. Tim. 3.16.17. Therefore through all
the books of Evangelists and Apostles, not one Apocryphal saying is alleged:
and but three out of the books of the Gentiles, to convince them the better
with their own testimonies, which being once passed through the golden pipe of
the holy ghost, they are now no more to be accounted common or profane
sayings, but part of Gods word. Ignorance of this rule has caused the Papists
to advance the Apocryphal books into Gods chair, to equal them with
canonical.

Words of knowledge and sense, Rule.
do signify (besides) actions and affections; for example, Examp.
when it is written, that God knows the ways of the righteous, Psalm. 16. and
that he knows who are his, 2. Tim. 2.19. Revel. 2. 3. I know thy works, it is
further meant, that he knows them with love, favor, and approbation, meaning
to reward and crown them. Also where it is said, whom he foreknew, Romans 11.2.
also 1. Pet. 1. 2. his eternal love embracing these as his o^ne is understood
there. for the knew barely before, all reprobates and devils, them and their
works too: but not with favor and allowance. Also ( remember) which is a word
of sense, yet it often imports care, love, delight, 1. Cor. 11 Do this in
remembrance of me. also God remembered Abraham, Genesis 18.

The scripture is to be taken in the largest sense, Rule.
if nothing hinder, neither matter, phrase, nor scope. Estay. as 1. Pet. 1. 13.
Trust per^itly on that grace which is brought by the revelation of Jesus
Christ. where grace may be at large interpreted of glory: as imposition of
hands Heb. 6. 1. of the whole ministry, and all the whole order of Church
government as prescribed by the word.

All interpretations must be fit as well as true, Rule.
and one place of Scripture can have but one fit and proper interpretation,
which is very hard sometime to hit upon.

These two words (of God) be sometime used in scripture, Rule.
to note, not auauthoritie, but excellency of the thing or person, whereof
they be affirmed; as, Nimrod an hunter of God, Genes. Examp.
Sacrifices of God, Ps. 150. the weapons of God, 2. Cor. 10.4. the hill of God.
Trees of God, and the like, which import an excellency. Estay in Ps. 51.

The scripture as it understands sometimes less then is spoken, Rule.
to wit, in all hyperbolicall speeches: as in Gen: thy seed shall be as the
stars: so sometime there is less spoken and more understood, Prou. 3. despise
not the Lords correction. Examp.
also despise not his kindness, Romans 2.4. Psalm. 51. 17. the Lord despises
not, by this is meant regarding, or highly esteeming, which is more than not to
despise. likewise in that speech, Math. 7. depart from me, I know you not, that
is, I abhor you, and will surely punish you. Adam knew his wife Euah, Genes.
4. that is, had most inward familiarity with her, even such as accompanies
bed-company; also, shall never be forgiven, Mark. 3. that is, shall be
eternally punished. likewise, shall never see death, Ioh. 3. that is, shall
live blessedly in heaven for ever. and many such may in reading be observed,
where less is written and more meant. Estay in Ps. 61.

Scripture sundry times does teach spiritual duties, Rule.
of faith, prayer, thanksgiving, repentance, love, etc. by such terms as
served to express the legal, Jewish, ceremonial service, and sacraments:
thus christian prayers and praises, are signified by incense, and evening
sacrifice, Examp.
Psalm. 43.2. and by a pure oblation in Malach. also our repentance, taught by
purging out the old leaven 1. Cor. 5.8. also our whole religious service, and
worship, under the new Testament, is declared by offering gifts at the altar,
Math. 5.23.24. and by offering our bodies, as an holy and living sacrifice,
Romans 12.1.2. The reason is, Reason.
because ceremonial worship ought ever to have gone together with spiritual,
whereof it was also a shadow and type; and moreover to inform the Hebrews,
that howsoever the external altar, and priest, and sacrifices, were abolished,
by the death of our Lord: yet there remained a true worship, and true
sacrifices for Gods people to offer, Esaias 63.21. from mistaking this, the
Papists build there altars. Beza.

Rule
In the writings of the Prophets, the spiritual benefits of the Messiah, and
eternal good things to be enjoyed in heaven, were wrapped up in temporal and
earthly promises, Reason.
which was done by Gods wise dispensation, who respecting the rudeness of
those times, and their tender weakness, did by things present, and desirable
to their nature, to lift the mind up to the true and celestial good things.
Examples hereof are very plentiful: Examp.
as, Esaias 55.1.2. also Esaias 49.7.10.12. and Esaias 60.10. 11. and verses 13.16.
17. 19. The ignorance of this Rule, as it led the Jews into a conceit of an
earthly Messiah, who should have an outward Monarchy, flourishing, and
ouerflowing in earthly dignity, and wealth: so ^it occasioned others to imagine
foolishly, and falsely, that the promises of grace, and life everlasting, did
nothing appertain to the Fathers before Christ, but that they were no better
than swine fed full with the acornes, husks, and wash of this world.

In setting down the X. commandments, Rule.
Moses uses a sinecdoche in every one, that is, by some particular virtue or
vice, which he names, he means all of that kind, with all means, causes,
occasions of it: Examp.
as in the second commandment, an Image is put for all false worship; in the
5. parents, put for all superiors, and betters. in the 7. adultery, for all
sorts of uncleanness about generation. murder for all cruelty, etc. also (
thou) for all and every one. M.r Estay on 10. command.

The negative or forbidding commandments, Rule.
imply the contrary. as 1. command: Examp.
Thou shall have no other God, that is, thou shall have me for thy God, commit
not adultery, commands the contrary, to live chastely. Estay.

Every affirmative or commanding law, Rule.
implies a denying and forbidding: as 4. com: Examp.
Keep holy the Sabb: implies, do not break it. Honor thy parents, has in it
the contrary, do not dishonor.

Every commandment does require obedience, Rule.
from the most inward secret thoughts and motions. Reason, Reason.
because the whole law is spiritual: as the command: Examp.
which forbids Adultery, forbids, to lust after a woman: an angry thought,
under murder. Math. 5.

The future tense is put for the imperative mood: Rule.
as, Thou shall not take the name etc. Examp.
Thou shall not steal, and so in the rest: for, thou may not, thou ought
not. Estay on the ten command:

Rule.
In setting down the commandments, God observes an exact order, placing the
waighest things, and duties first, afterward the less weighty, Examp.
as his essence and person, before his outward worship; his worship, before his
name, his name before his Sabbath. also duties of the second Table be lesser,
then the duties of the first, and sins against the first, greater the^ sins
against the 2. in equal comparison, I mean, in comparing thoughts with
thoughts, words, with words, actions, with actions. also maine duties, with
maine, and mean, with mean. but not comparing the greatest sins of the
second, with the least of the first, and smallest duties of the first, with the
weightiest of the second Table. The last six rules do serve to guide us in the
right and full interpretation of the law, or X. commandments. By the ignorance
whereof, many remain exceeding ignorant in Gods law to their great hurt.

Legal, and Evangelical sentences, or promises, Rule.
must be distinguished, not by books, but by the nature and condition of
promises: Reason.
for legal promises may be found in books of the new testament, as To.
2.7.8.9.10.11.12.13. also Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 10. 12. and contrarily, promises
Evangelical of grace, may be found in the books of the old Testament, Examp.
as Psalm. 132. 1.2. also Ierem. 32. 31. 32. etc. therefore they are to be
discerned the one from the other in this sort, namely, according to the rules
following.

Rule.
Wheresoever promises of temporal, or eternal good things are made, on
condition of works, as they be the perfect keeping of the law, all such
promises are legal, which no man can lay claim to, except he bring an
absolute obedience in no point failing, which none since Adam, save the man
Christ, can do. therefore he only has right to eternal life, and to all good
things in the strict justice of the law; they which believe claim by his title
conveyed to us by faith in Christ.

Rule.
All promises of the life to come, or of this life, which be made on condition
of believing, or of repenting and working (as repentance and works (though
imperfect) be signs, marks, and fruits of faith, and faithful persons) all
such promises, be Evangelical, whereunto every believer, (how weak soever, be
his faith but as a grain or mustard seed) may lay claim and challenge, through
the grace of God, freely promising and giving them Christ his son, and all
good things with him. Examp.
as, godly sorrow brings repentance to salvation, 2. Cor. 7.10. and Luke
Blessed are they which hear, and keep the word. and 1. Timoth. 6. Godliness
has promises etc. and Psalm 1.1.2.3. and John 3. he that belieueth shall not
be condemned, he shall be saved, he shall pass from death to life. and the
just by faith shall live, Hab. 2. 4. all those, and all of this sort and suit,
are promises of the Gospel. The well observing this difference between
promises of the Law, and Gospel, will bring great light both to teachers and
hearers, and the neglecting of it, will trouble, and confound both: nothing
being so dangerous, as not to distinguish well betwixt Law and Gospel. as M.r
Fox, and Luther do teach at large.

Touching such places of scripture, Note.
where moral duties be commanded, and commended, they must be understood
according to these Rules following, set down by M. Estay in Psalm. 119.1.

Rule.
Though no word be spoken of Christ, yet it must be understood, that he alone
is the full cause of every part of our salvation. Act. 4. 12.

Rule.
All moral duties are then commended in any party, when the party that does
them, is first in Christ, having his righteousness imputed to him, and his
sins pardoned through the death of Christ. Reason is, Reason.
because all our duties are acceptable to God through Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 5. and
that without faith in Christ, none can please God, Heb. 11.6. lastly, because
our best duties being imperfect and full of blemishes, must be purged by
forgiveness of sins; therefore the good things done by Saul, or Judas, or
proud Pharisees, or other evil men please not God.

Rule.
All good works, must have a pure heart for the beginning, and Gods glory for
their end, that is, they must be done of conscience to godward, out of
obedience to his word; and with desire and purpose by such obedience to
glorify him: for the bare deed never please God. Reason.
Thus Abell, thus Abraham, Moses, David, Ezekiah, did their works, and all the
regenerate do them thus. Examp.
and thus Papists neither do, nor can do good works.

Moral duties, Rule.
when they have blessedness promised to the doing of them, are not to be
considered as causes thereof, (that is Christ, as is said before) but as
signs, which show to a man that he is faithful, and therefore happy and
blessed, or as the way which leads to blessedness.

These duties must not be understood in the strictness and rigor of the
moral Law, Rule.
but expounded of a continual and unfeigned desire, purpose, and endeavor to
do them, sorrowing, when we cannot do them as we ought, asking pardon
wherein we fail, and setting a fresh upon them, striving always to prove
better and better. This rule would prevent scruples and fears, which weak ones
have through a sense of their own wants and failings.

Rule
When the scripture commends any as being perfect, or exhorts any to be
perfect, it must be understood of uprightness, not of absoluteness; of a
perfection in parts, striving to all duties, not in measure and degree. Reason.
for it is impossible for any Saint in this world, to attain to a certain and
perfect love, and obedience, that is reserved till next life. Estay in Psalm.
199. this Rule would have preserved Familists, and Papists from conceit of
imagined perfection in this life.

Rule.
Likewise the Scriptures that affirm of the Saints, that they are worthy, must
either be understood of the worthiness of the person accepted, as worthy for
Christ his worthiness (not of the worthiness of works) or else, worthy,
signifies in such texts, no more, but meet and fit, as Math. 3.8. Luke 21. 36.
Col. 1.12. Reu. 3. 4. for they are worthy. Thus there will be no footing for
Papists merit in these texts of scripture. Perkins in Reu. 3.

Rule.
In the doctrine of justification of elect sinners before God, where the
Scripture mentions Christ only without faith, there understand it always
with reference to faith. Examp.
see Gal. 3. 8. and contrariwise, where faith is mentioned withouten Christ, it
has respect to him as the object, Romans 3. 28. 30. Reason is, Reason.
because there is a necessary mutual relation, betwixt faith the instrument,
and Christ the object and matter of our righteousness, Christ justifying such
only, as have faith to believe in him and faith looking directly and only to
the promise concerning Christ. The ignorance of this Rule bred that absurd and
vn-gospellike error, of actual justification by Christ, without the help of
faith.

The books of the new Testament, Rule.
speak of the passion of the Lord Jesus by a Synecdoche, that is, putting a
part for the whole, the visible sufferings for the invisible. Examp.
Thus under his suffering of death, be comprehended all the sufferings of his
life. also his whole suffering spiritual, and bodily is comprehended sometime
under the offering of his flesh or body, as. 1. Pet. 1. 24. Heb. 10.10. 1. Pet.
4.1. sometime under sprinkling, or shedding his blood, Math. 26.28. 1.Pet. 1.2.
sometime under his stripes, Esaias 53.5. and that all, both the inward pains of
soul, properly felt for sin, and outward smart of the body, went together for
the full and whole sacrifice for sin, is very clear by Heb. 9 28. where it is
written, that by the offering of [ himselfe] he put away sin. that is, his
whole manhood was the sacrifice propitiatory for sin. also the story of his
sufferings, which mentions his souls sorrow, ere ever his body was meddled
withal, makes it most manifest, Math. 6.38.39. etc. The reason is, Reason.
because as man had sinned in the whole, and a full satisfaction was to be made
to the justice of God: so Christ took our whole nature, to this very end, that
he might suffer in it, and so save us wholly. Heb. 2.14.15.

Rule.
Books of the new Testament, citing authorities out of the old, as they look
chiefly to sense, not precise keeping the word, and take them from canonical
scripture only: so they regard not number of the chap: or verse, or name of
authors always, but generally allege them (thus it is written) contenting
themselves with a few testimonies, and they choice and fit ones; See Romans 9.
and 10. throughout and the 11. also. Examp.


The doctrine of the Trinity is more obscurely taught in the old Testament
before Christ his incarnation, Rule.
but more plentifully, and manifestly in the new. The reason is, Reason.
because Christ brings with him a greater light then Moses and the Prophets,
Math. 3. 16. 17. and chap. 28. 19. John 5. 8.

Where the old Testament brings in, Rule.
God appearing in humane shape, or speaking to the Patriarchs and Prophets;
there understand it always of the second person, for he it was by whom the
father in all ages declared himself to his Church, Reason.
John 12. 37. 38. 39 40.41. and compare that place with Esaias 53. 1. and the
chapter 6.9. also compare Romans 14. 10. 11. with Esaias 45. 23. and see 1. Cor.
10. 9. This would have kept Serueltus and others from denying the aeternall
godhead of Christ.

Rule.
The word which signifies (to predestinate) is but six times found in the new
Testament (never in the old) being referred but twice to things as Act. 4. 28.
and 1. Cor. 2.7. and then it is translated (determined before) 4. times applied
to persons, Examp.
as Romans 8. 29. 30. Ephesians. 1. 5. 11. and never applied in scripture to
reprobates, but to elect persons only, Yet divines in scholasticall and
theological discourses do enlarge this strict acception of the word, and
under predestination do consider the decree both of election and reprobation.

Rule.
The doctrine of Gods most free predestination ought to be taught to August.
The reasons be, Reason.
because it is a part of his revealed will, and therefore belongs to us and our
Deuteronomy. 29. last. Also Christ Jesus taught it, Ioh. 6. and his Apostles Act.
5.13. Romans 9. throughout. Romans 8.23. 30. Romans 11. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Ephesians.
1.4.5.6. and elsewhere often. Examp.
These former scriptures our Church well and rightly appoints to be read,
wherein is more danger then in expounding them soundly. Thirdly, it is the
ground of patience and constancy, Romans 8. 28. also of piety and of the Romans
12. 1.2.1. Ioh. 4.19. And lastly exciteth to thankfulness when we have
learned that there is no good in us concerning salvation, or otherwise, Paul to
bless God for himself 1. Timoth. 1. 14. 15. 16. 17. and for others Ephesians.
1.3.4.

The doctrine of Gods predestination in electing some and not others, Rule.
without any respect of man's worthiness for his own very good pleasure, and
will sake, to the glory of his mercy and justice, would be taught very warily
and with good cautions: first

This word ( heart) is commonly in scripture put for the soul, Rule.
and mind of man. Reason is, Reason.
because the soul, though it be in the whole body and in every part: yet
keeps her chief residence in the heart, as it were in her chair of estate.
Secondly, as natural life proceeds from the heart of the body: so the
beginning of the godly life is from the soul. And lastly to teach that God
regardes not outward shows and deeds, unless they come from within. Math.
15. out of the heart proceed evil reasoning, adulteries etc. Examp.
Also Proverb. My son keep thy heart above all keepings, Romans 10. with the
heart man beleiueth, And Psalm. 51. 10. create in me a right heart, and very
often else where, Estay in Psalm. 51.

This word ( all) is not ever used absolutely and universally for every one,
Rule.
but restrictiuely with limitation to the subject and matter handled, as for
example, Ioh. 1. 3. All things were made by him. Romans 10.12. God is rich unto
all. Examp.
where the limitation is presently added ( which call upon him) Romans 5. by the
justification of one, grace has abounded toward all. This is to be
restrained to justified ones of whom he speaks there. Coloss. 3. The peace of
God which excels all understanding, that is, all humane understanding, the
like in Ioh. 3.13. Thus much must be said of the particle none or no man, Ioh.
3. No man receives his testimony, this must be understood with restraint to
the wicked. The ignorance of this rule has caused diverse to deny the
doctrine of particular election, and to plead for universal grace with
denial of divine reprobation, Kekerman: Paraeus.

Rule.
Petitions, or prayers conceived, or uttered in the imparatiue mood, must be
reduced into the indicative, where a reason of the petition is rendered, Examp.
Psalm. 5. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry for I call upon thee, This must
be understood thus, O God it is agreeable to thy nature to hear me, seeing I
call, and Psalm. 16.1. Preseru^ me o God for I trust in thee, and the like in
other Psalms Kekermannus.

Rule.
What is proper to one nature in Christ, is often affirmed of the other, or of
his whole person. Reason.
The reason hereof is the unity of his person, it belonges to the humane nature
to be crucified, to shed his blood etc. Yet the scripture affirms of his
divine nature that the Lord of glory was crucified, 1. Cor. 2. 8. Examp.
And that God purchased his Church with his blood Act. 20.28 And on the
otherside that is attributed to his manhood, which belongs to his godhead
peculiarly, Ephesians. 4. 10. He that descended is the same that ascended. See more
examples, Luke. 2.52. also Ioh. 8. 58. Graecians call this coinonia Idiomatoon.
Beza. Perkins. Zanchius.

Some works of Christ are proper to his godhead, Rule.
as his miracles; some to his manhood, as his natural and moral works; some
to his whole person, as his works of mediation, in which each nature does that
which was proper unto it. Zanch.

Rule.
When the same places which be in the old Testament, be repeated in the new
with some alterations, additions, and omissions, this falls out for these five
causes. 1. For expositions sake, as Psalm. 78.2. compared with Math. 13. 35.
Psalm. 110.1. with 1. Cor. 15.25. Psalm. 116.10. with 2. Cor. 4.3. Secondly for
discerning sake, Examp.
to the end that places, persons, and times might be distinguished as Mich 5.2.
compared with Math. 2.6. Thirdly for limitation sake that the sense of the
place might be truly restrained according to the mind of the holy Ghost, as
Deuteronomy. 6.13. compared with Math. 4.10. and Genes. 2.24. with Math. 19. 5.
Fourthly for application sake, that the type might be fitted to the truth, as
Jonas 1.17. with Math. 12.39.40. also Esaias 61.1. with Luk 4.18. Fifthly for
breuity sake, some things are omitted because they agree not with the matter in
hand, as 1. King. 19.10.18. with Romans 11.3.4. Perkins.

Rule.
Touching plain places this rule is to be followed, if the natural
signification of the words of the place expounded do agree with the
circumstances of the same place, that is the proper meaning of that place, as
for example Romans 3.20.28. Examp.
It is written, a man is justified by faith without works, the natural
signification of these words is plain that every elect person when he believes
in Christ is absolved from his sins, and accepted of for just without merit
of his own works; this sense we presently receive, because it agrees with
circumstances of the place, and with holy Scripture, Perk.

Rule.
For expounding dark places let this be the rule. If the native or natural
signification of the words do manifestly disagree with the anologie of faith
and other very plain places of Scripture then it must be refused, and a
figurative improper sense, is there the true sense. Examp.
As for example the native and proper signification of those words ( Math.
26.26. This is my body) is this, that the bread is his body, or is turned into
his body; but this cannot be the meaning of the place, because it disagrees,
with Articles of our Creed which teach that Christ's body is made of the
Virgin by conception of the holy Ghost, not of bread by the Prists
consecration, also that it is ascended into heaven, and shall return where he
comes to Judge the quick and the dead: also it disagrees with that manifest
scripture which says, that the heavens must contain him, till the time that
all be restored, Act. 3. Perkins.

Rule.
The supply of every word which wants is fitting enough to the place
propounded, if the word supplied agree with the anologie of squire of faith,
and with the circumstances, and words of the same place. as Exodus 19. 4. I
have carried you on Egles wings, here wants ( as it were) likewise Es. 1. 13.
I cannot iniquity, here must be supplied ( bear) which wants, Exodus 4. 25.
Zipporah took a sharp, supply ( knife) where there is Ellipsis or want of any
word, then it signifies either breuity, or swiftness of affections, Perkins.

Rule.
When Repentance is attributed to God in Scriptures, as Genesis 6. it notes only
the alteration of things and actions done by him, and no change of his purpose
and secret decree, which is immutable, Perkins.

Rule.
Things spoken as if they were already finished and yet be not so, they must be
understood as being in the way to be finished, or as being begun to be
fulfilled. Examp
As Noah being 500 year old begot Shem, Ham, and Iaphet Genesis 5.23. that is he
began to beget them. See the like Genesis 11.26. also Luke 1.6. and they were just
in all the commandments, that is they begun entire obedience, and endeauored
to do all, Perkins.

Promises must be understood with condition of faith, Rule.
where the condition is not expressed.

A superlatiue or exclusive speech used of one person in Diety, Rule.
does shut out creatures and fained gods, but, not the other persons As John
17.3. Examp.
This is aeternall life to know the only true God; this s^uts not out Christ
and the spirit, but false Gods, so does that 1. Tim. 1. 17. Romans 16.27. Ioh.
10.39. Perkins.

Rule.
All works of the Trinity, and all attributes must be understood inclusiuely
without exception of any other of the persons, Perk.

Rule.
This word (nothing) is put for little or small, as Ioh. 18.20. I have spoken
nothing in secret, that is little. Also Act. 27.33. also, Examp.
none is used for few (as all is put for some or many) Ier. 8.6. 1. Cor. 2.8.
none of the rulers, that is, few. And (always) is put for often and long, as
Proverb. 13.10. always there is contention amongst the proud, that is, often
it falls out so, Luke 18.1. pray always, that is, long, with continuance Luke
24.53. Ioh. 18.20. Every where is put for here and there without respect of
place, Math. 16.20. Act. 13.30. also.

Rule.
This negative particle (not) is often put comparatively or respectively and not
absolutely or simply as Hos. 6. I will have mercy and not sacrifice, that is,
rather then sacrifice, Examp.
or not sacrifice in respect of mercy, 1. Cor. 1. sent not to baptize but to
preach, also Psalm. 51. Sacrifices thou would not have, that is, in comparison
of a contrite heart, Ierom. 32.33. every man shall not teach his neighbor.
Also (not) is sometime put for seldom, as 1. Kings. 15.5. Luks. 2.37. she went
not out of the Temple, that is seldom or scarcely.

Rule.
The present time being put for the time to come does signify the certainty of
the thing spoken of, as Esaias. 21.9 Reu. 18.2 Babylon is fallen, Examp.
Babylon is fallen, for, shall certainly fall.

Unto the dubbling, Note.
or repetition of words belong these rules following.

When a substantive is repeated or twice mentioned in one case, Rule.
it signififieth first aemphasis, or force, as Lord, Examp.
Lord. Secondly a multitude, as droues, droues Genesis 32. 16. that is, many
droues. Thirdly, distribution, as 1. Chron. 16. a gate and a gate, that is,
every gate, and 2. Chron. 19.5. Leu. 17.3. a city and a city, that is, every
city. Fourthly, diversity or variety, as Pro. 20.20. a weight and a weight,
that is, diverse waights, an heart and an heart, that is, diverse or double
heart.

A substantive repeated in diverse cases, Rule.
if it be in the singular number, it argues certainety, as Sabbath of sabbath,
Lamentation of lamentation. Micha. 3.4. If it be in the plural number it
signifies excellency, Examp.
as Eccles. 1.1. vanity of vanities, song of songs Cant. 1. God of Gods, Psalm.
136.2. King of Kings, Lord of Lords, for, most high and excellent.

Repeating of an adjective, Rule.
and of a substantive sometime signifies increasing, as holy, Examp.
holy, holy, Jehovah, Jehovah, Temple etc.

Rule.
A verb repeated, and twice gone over in a sentence, makes the speech more
significant: or else it shows vehemence, certainty, speediness; Examp.
as to die, by dying Genesis 2. and is my hand shortened, in shortning Esaias. 30.2.

Rule.
A conjunction dubbled, does dubble the denial, and increase it the more as
Math. 13. 14. Examp.
shall not, not perceive.

Rule.
Some figurative speeches beside that they do enlarge the sense, and bring with
them delight and ornament; they do also afford matter for nourishment of our
faith, as Math. 25.35. ye gave me (Christ) to drink, here the putting of
Christ for a Christian man, does nourish faith and comfort a Christian man.
Also the like is to be said of putting Christ for a Christian Church, Examp.
as 1. Cor. 12.12. and Act. 9. 4.

Rule.
An Ironie (which is when the contrary to that which is spoken, is meant)
carries with it a just reprehension of some sin, Examp.
whereof examples be in Genes. 3. verse last. Also Judge. 10.14. Mark. 7.9.1.
King. 22.15. go up and prosper, 1. King. 18.27. cry a loud, for he is a God.

Questions do sometime import an earnest affirmation, Rule.
as Genesis 4.7. also Ios. 10.13. Ioh. 4.35. Genesis 37.13. 1. King. 20.2. and
sometime they signify a forbidding, as why shall the gentiles say where is
there God? Psalm. 79. 10. also 2. Sam. 2 22. Examp.
and sometime time they argue affections of admiring, compassion, faultfinding
and complaining, as Psalm. 8.10. Esaias. 1.21. Psalm. 22. 1.

Concession and yielding has sometime in it a denial and reprehension, Rule.
2. Cor: 12.16.17. But be it that I charged you not etc.

Holy writers speaking of things and persons which are past and gone, Rule.
do use sometime to anticipate, that is, they speak of them according to the
custom of the place and time in which they wrote, as Genesis 12. 8. Examp.
the place named Bethel by Moses, was named Luz in Abraham's time, 1 Pet. 3. 19.
Christ in spirit preached to them in spirit. So they were indeed in regard of
the time when Peter wrote this Epistle, and not of the time wherein Noah lived.
In Genes. 9. 2. Moses does mention Canaan who at that time when such things as
he writes of, were done, was not borne. And sundry other things in order of
the story go before, which in order of time were done after.

Rule.
In Sacred accounts and Genealogies, either the name or number of years how
long some Prince reigned be left out. Reason.
The reason is, because of the wickedness of the Prince. Examp.
As Saul who reigned far longer, yet is said to have reigned but two years
and an half, that is, lawfully and rightly. Also in Match. 18. three Kings (
Ahaziah, Ioas, and Amaziah) are for their wickedness left out.

Rule.
The parts of time are understood inclusiuely sometime, and sometime
exclusiuely. In Math. 17. 1. it is written, Examp.
and after six days Jesus took etc. whereas Luke 9. 28. it is written of the
same thing, that it came to pass about eight days after, the Reason is,
because Matthew put exclusiuely those days only which went between and were
finished, but Luke puts the two utmost days also into the reckoning. Moreover
it is usual in scriptures historical, to take the time spoken of either
completely as fully finished, or vncompleatly as being begun to be in
finishing, as 1. Kings 25. 19. 1. King. 15. 18. 25. the last years of the
Kings of Israel and Judah are not fully expired, but some of them scarsely
contain months in them, the rest of the years of their reign being put
completely.

The lesser number is to be counted under the greater and more complete, Rule.
as Judge: 3. 11. the land had rest 40. years when Othniell died. Examp.
under this number be comprehended all the years from the death of Joshua,
unto the death of Othniell, and the 8. years of servitude under the Assirians,
Iud. 3. 20. the like is used diverse times in the Judges, as chapter 5. 31. and
8.28. and 9.22. also chap. 10. 2. 3.

The scripture uses to call sons, Rule.
which by nature are no sons, to them whose sons they be called, but are
there sons legally and by succession. Thus Salathiel being son of Neri
naturally, Luke 3.27. is legally and by succession made the son of Iechoniah,
whom he succeeded in the kingdom, as Math. 1. 12. after this manner Zedekiah
is the brother of Iechoniah, or Iehoiakim, 1. Chro. 36. 10. and his son, 1.
Chro. 3. 16. his brother by generation: his son by right of succession. By
this rule the two Evangelists Matthew and Luke are reconciled in their
Genealogy. for Luke follows the natural order, and Matthew the legal order.

Rule.
This word ( rather) is put not always comparatively, when two persons or
things are compared, as like or unlike: Examp.
but sometime negatiuely, as a denying particle in stead of ( not.) as Luke 18.
14. this man went away rather justified then the other. that is, not the other,
but he, departed justified. also Ioh. 3. 19. men loved darkness rather then
light. that is, they loved not light, but darkness.

Rule.
This word ( behold) is used not always or only to stir up attention, at the
report of some weighty and admirable thing: but most commonly it signifies a
thing manifest and plain, whereof all do, or may take knowledge, as Psalm. 51.
6. Math. 1.23. and often elsewhere. Rule.


Doing, does sometime import believing, as Math. 7.2. but he that does the will
of my Father. Now this is the will of my Father John 6. 40. that he which
believes in the Son should have life everlasting.

These 13. Rules following are all taken out of M. Luthers works.
SCripture must be understood not against Christ, but for Christ.

2 Precepts presuppose faith: as where it is written, keep the commandments,
that is, in Christ, or by faith in Christ. also, thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thine heart, etc. that is, in Christ, or by faith in him. also,
do this and thou shall live, that is, do it in Christ. and so in the rest of
this kind.

3 Interpretations must be drawn out of Scriptures. these are the supreme and
absolute mean of interpretation, as the Spirit is the principal Interpreter.

4 Many things are said in Scripture by anticipation, and recapitulation.

5 Negative speeches in Scripture, be more vehement and forcible then
affirmative.

6 We may not interpret scripture by allegories, unless we be able to avouch
the allegorical sense by some other place of scripture.

7 Grammar must give place to Divinity. Reason is, Because things are not
subject to words, but contrariwise.

8 He is best interpretour of Scripture which takes the sense from it, not
which brings a sense unto it.

9 Comparison of places one with another (the darker with plainer) is a good
mean to attain the sense of scripture.

10 Literal sense alone of scripture is the whole substance of faith, and of
Christian Theology.

11 Without the holy spirit of God no man can understand one iott or title of
Scripture, because of our inbred darkness. Therefore prayer for inward
illumination must be joined with outward reading and hearing.

12. There can be but one only proper, true, and certain sense of one place
of Scripture, the rest are to be avoided as doubtful opinions.

13. Hysteron proteron (a placing of things before which should come after, and
some things after which should be before) is very frequent in holy Scriptures.

AEnigmata Sacra. MYSTICAL CASES AND SECRETS of Divinity, with their
Resolutions.

Four Centuries and upwards.

The unfolding whereof, lays open that Truth that concerns Salvation.

We speak the word of God in a mystery. 1. Cor. 2.7.

The Secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him. Psalm. 25.15.

Open mine eyes (Lord) that I may see the wonders of thy Law. Psalm. 119.

Then Mary said unto the Angel, how shall this be (that I should be with
child) seeing I know not man. Luke 1. 34.

This is the model or pattern of all the Mystical cases in this little Book.

BY T. W.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Francis Burton. 1615.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, be pleased to understand; First, that and given, to such as
could loose such knots, and frame fitting answers. Lastly, not alone humane and
profane, but sacred and divine Stories afford us examples and presidents, of
such mystical Questions; the truth of all this will appear in these few
things here annexed and set down.

Plutarch reports, that it was a custom amongst Kings of old times, to put
Questions one to another, to make proof of best wits: and that a certain
praise was appointed to him that got the victory.

Dius an Historiographer of the Phoenicians, rehearses the Riddles and
Questions that Solomon sent to King Hiram, saying, that it cost him very much
in that he could not open them, until at length he found a young man of Tirus
(named Abdenan) who deciphered to him the most part of them: Poets write that
Sphinix was wont to set forth a reward of freedom and liberty, to him that
could absolve his Riddle.

We find in the book of Judges, that Sampson put forth a hard question, how
meat could come out of the eater, and sweet out of the fierce? an elegant
riddle, consisting in contraries; for he that eats, and he that gives meat:
also, he that is fierce and bitter, and he that is sweet, are opposites, of
contrary natures; He also promised a reward to him that could read his riddle.

Ambrose (as he is cited by Peter Martyr) demanded the cause why Sampson made
his problem, and he says, that because men in feasts, when they have well
drunk, are wont to be somewhat full of talk, and to rebuke others too
intemperately, which for the most part turned to contention; therefore to avoid
that, grave men were wont to put forth riddles or problems, omitting dangerous
talk, and turning their minds to the exposition of things put forth: whose
example Sampson followed, and set a reward for him that could open his
question; to show that knowledge and sharpness of mind ought to be rewarded;
and contrarily, ignorance and foolishnes ought to be shamed and punished: thus
far are the words of Ambrose.

In the first of Luke, Mary the Virgin puts a difficult question unto the
Angel, which brought her the message of conceiving and bearing the Son of
God. How (says She) may this be, seeing I know not a man: that is, how may I
be a mother, while I am and remain a Virgin.

Lastly, through out the Gospel we find AEnigmata, and many hard parables
Christ put unto the Jews, which his own Disciples could not open: therefore
did ask him, apart, what they meant.

These things I doubt not make it evident, that this course which I take is
warrantable, and profitable: Especially if the nature and importance of my
doubtful cases be considered, tending to instruct in divine things, which
concern salvation and religion; and the iniquity of these times be thought on,
wherein it is hard to say, whether ignorance or malice do more abound; some
that would talk of good things in their meetings, cannot, for lack of skill
to put forth or loose a question wisely: others, are so wicked and malicious,
as they deride all wholesome communication: now seeing the sharpning of wits,
is a maine and principal end of Questions, for the trying of our knowledge,
some may muse why I would set down answers, to ease men of their own labor
in searching, and so take both the praise of the answer from others, and hinder
the benefit which would come by seeking; to this I say, that I had little cause
in this draught to aim at my own praise, for many respects; but as I moved
questions to provoke some, which better can, to frame better and more: so I
thought good, to frame an answer unto these, that such as could not by their
own knowledge upon their trial find a resolution, might have here a piece
of an answer and satisfaction, to give them some contentment: I have put each
case and answer together, desiring such as can fit and yield more pregnant, and
substantial answers, to set them down, and to accept in the mean while these
my poor endeavors. Farewell.

Mine answer is a slender thing,
Yet rest in it, or better bring.
T. W.
Aduertisements.
FIrst ye shall find a word in

The cases and answers for the

To the Christian Reader, certain Directions.
The use of these dark and mystical Cases, is Fiuefold.
FIrst to minister occasion of searching

To try and draw out your knowledge;

To bewray the imperfections and

To give light unto sundry places

To help the practice and exercise

For these purposes, your charge and duty is this.






AEnigmata Sacra. MYSTICAL CASES AND SECRETS of Divinity, with their
Resolutions. The unfolding whereof, lays open that Truth that concerns
Salvation.
ENIGMA. 1.
Who is he that has understanding and will, and yet has no soul, and how
that may be?

The Resolution.
IT is God, GOD.
of whom it is written that he is understanding, Pro. 8. 14.
and a God of knowledge; 1. Sam. 2.2.
working all things after the Counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11.
yet he has no soul. For he understands and wills things not by a
created faculty of understanding and will, such as is in men's souls, whereby
they do understand, and will one thing after another by discourse and in
measure: but God infinitely understands both himself and all things at once,
by one act of understanding; and wills infinite things together by an
uncreated and infinite power which is in himself or rather which is himself,
all things which are in God, being God. Exodus 3. 14.

Psalm. 103. 20. 21.

2
Who is he that has hands and feet, and has no body, and how this may be?

Resolution.
A Spirit.
It is the invisible God who being a spirit, or spiritual substance Ioh. 4.24.
he is therefore vncorporeall and properly has no hands nor feet, yet these
members are in scripture attributed to him for the help of our weakness, to
signify unto us the mighty workeing of his power, whereby (he does execute
all his own power) counsels, as men by their hands do effect and do all
their works: as it is written, The hand of the Lord has done this. Again.
The right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass. Psalm. 118. 16.

3.
Who is he that causes all motion, yet himself moves not, and how this may
be?

Resolution.
It is the immutable God, Unchangeable.
who is author and ruler of all motion good and evil; as it is a motion it is
from God in whom we, and all things else, which move, do move: yet himself
is immovable, Act. 17.28
because he is unchangeable, for all motion is with some change, which cannot
fall into the nature of God, I am Jehovah, I change not.

4.
Who is that, that is all light, yet cannot be seen of us, and how this may
be?

Resolution.
It is the most glorious God who is called light, Most Glorious.
both for the brightness of his glorious majesty, 1. Ioh. 1.5.
and for the perfect purity of his most holy nature having in it not the least
spot of ignorance or sin, yet because our weak mind cannot comprehend him
as he is, much less our bodily eyes be able to behold him, therefore it is
written that he cannot be seen, and dwells in a light inaccessible, whom
never man saw, Tim. 6.16
nor can, to whom be honor and power everlasting.

5. 6.
How can one love and hate, grieve and joy, and all this without affection?

How can one repent and not alter his mind.

Resolution.
Impassible.
God being unchangeable, he cannot repent by altering his purpose as men do,
and being Impassible he is not subject to joy or grief, love, hate, as the
sons of men be, yet these things are given to him in Scripture, not by
reason of any affection which is in him, but of the works which he does like
unto men who have such affections, so that his punishing men, is his wrath,
Genesis 6.6.
and blessing men is his love, and the overthrow of any of his creatures or
works is his repenting, which is but the undoing of some thing done.

7
How may one hear and see all things, and yet have neither eyes nor ears?

Resolution.
God who made the eyes shall he not see? Of infinite knowledge.
and shall he not hear which made the ear? is there any thing so secret that
can be hid from him who is all an eye and all an ear? yet because he is no
bodily substance he has no bodily eye or ear, which members being the
instruments of understanding, are applied unto God, thereby the better to
express his infinite knowledge, to us, who by the things of men must be led to
conceive the things of God more readily.

8.
What is he that has all good qualities, yet is all substance without any
quality, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It is God in whom every good quality of mercy, A most single Essence.
truth, justice, wisdom etc. is to be found, because he is an infinite
perfection: yet nothing is in God as a quality or accident, because he is a
most single essence, without any composition of subject or accident of
substance and quality. Therefore his mercy is himself, so is his truth,
wisdom, goodness, patience, every one-of these and all these together, as
they are in God, are that most perfect divine Substance, even that great
Jehovah according to that is written Exodus 24. 6.7. Now in that the Scripture
gives these attributes unto God as distinct from his essence or himself, and
amongst themselves, it is to help our understanding, who otherwise cannot
conceive and consider of him.

9
Who is he that is no where, and yet every where, within the world and without
the world, and yet neither within it nor without it, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It is the incomprehensible God, Incomprehensible.
who is no where because he is not circumscribed in any one place, as our
bodies be, which have their dimentions of length, breadth, etc. Yet in as much
as he filles heaven and earth with his essence and presence, therefore he is
every where within the world and without it, because of his infinite presence,
Act. 7. 1. King. 8^
power and essence, yet neither within it nor without it (as in a place)
because of this vnmeasureablenesse and immensitie.

AEnig. 10.
How none is good save God only, yet men and Angels be good?

Resolution.
God is good essentially (his goodness is himself) not by participation. A
most perfect Self-being.
Also he is good most perfectly and everlastingly being cause of all good in
others. Now Angels and men are called good by partaking in his goodness, in a
measure, and changeably, for they may and do loose it, when God vpholds not by
his grace.

AEnig. 11.
How can God be Almighty, yet there be many things which he cannot do; as he
cannot die, nor sin, nor deny himself?

Resolution.
He is called Almighty, Omnipotent or Almighty.
not because he can do every thing, for there be things which if he could do,
he neither should be God nor almighty. These





none can resist his will, Romans 11. 19. He can resist and overthrow the will
and purpose of all his Creatures, for there is no council against the Lord,
Pro. 21. 30.

Secondly, Because he is able to do Abraham, A twofold power in God, or one
power diversely considered.
which yet he did not, and have sent to Christ legions of Angels to have
defended him against the Jews, which yet was not done: and could have made
many worlds by his absolute power, but by his power limited to his will, he can
do nothing against that which he has signified in his word to be his
pleasure, for one iott or title thereof must not fall nor fail.

AEnig. 12.
How can any thing be so good as in no respect to be evil, seeing there is
nothing so evil but is in some sort good.

Resolution.
God himself is so absolutely and infinitely good and holy, Most holy.
as he is good not only when he promises good things and accordingly
blesses, changing and comforting our heart: but also when he hardens sinners,
and delivers them up to Satan, and to vile affections, when he accurseth and
condemns; yet in these respects he is not evil, because he does these
things as Judge of the world, who cannot do unjustly, Genes. 18. Psalm. 5.
James, 1. whereas all other things even they which be most evil (as sin and
Satan) have ever some consideration of good, serving for the execution of Gods
justice upon the wicked, or for the humiliation and trial of the godly, which
be good things, Job. 6.

AEnig. 13.
What is that that sees and knows all which we do think, or speak, even our
secrets, yet is not God?

Resolution.
Searcher of all Hearts.
It is thy Conscience, which by a power given unto it, takes knowledge of all
thy actions, (as an espiall or watch) yea even of the most secret cogitations
thereof, to accuse or excuse thee, Romans 2. Yet it is but a Creature, and not
that al-seeing God who knows not thine alone, but all other men's thoughts,
even before they be conceived, which the conscience cannot do, Psalm. 139.
2.3. Therefore look to your thoughts. The Devils by our

AEnig. 14.
How is it that one should not be bound to do any thing, yet does all things
upon necessity.

Resolution.
Whatsoever things God does he does them upon and by necessity; Most free.
not simple and absolute necessity, as if he could not have done otherwise;
but by a necessity of supposition, that is, it being put and supposed (which
is true) that God does nothing but what he decreed before, and as he decreed
it, therefore he must needs do what, and as he does, because his decree
cannot alter. Yet he was not bound, Psalm. 33.
but most free to have decreed other things, and otherwise if he would,
Psalm. 1. Whatsoever pleased him, that he does in heaven and earth.

AEnig. 15.
How can he be faithful and true whose word of promise and threatninge is
often broken?

Resolution.
Most True and Faithful.
The promises and threatninges of God run always with condition either
expressed or understood, and this clears God of all untruth, for if he do
not fulfill to the wicked some evil which he threatened, it is because the
offenders did repent, upon which condition he was purposed to remove the evil,
Jonah. 3. Ierem. 18. 7.8. Likewise if he give not his children some good
things promised, it is either because he sees the cross fitter for them; or
to correct some sin, to teach them better obedience, upon which conditions,
temporal good things are always promised. Deuteronomy. 28. 1. 2. etc. Esaias 1. 19.

AEnig. 16.
How can one be most just who condemns the innocent that he may justify
sinners, seeing both these are abomination. Also how can God deal justly
seeing it goes well with evil men, and ill with good men?

Resolution.
The righteous God does this, Most Just.
remaining still just: for the man Christ in his nature and actions was most
innocent (for he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and knew not sin) yet God
condemned him to justify us sinners. All which was done justly. 2. Cor. 5.
Romans 4.3. 4.
For Christ as he sustained our person, was guilty through the imputation of
our sin, and we through faith in his blood, cease to be sinners, being
covered with his righteousness, but out of partiality to justify a
malefactor and to condemn an innocent, both these be abominable things.

Though here in this life it oftentimes fares ill with them that do well, and
well with those that do ill, yet God remains just, both because he does it
to exercise the patience of the one, and to express his own bounty and
patience toward the other; also because after this life is ended he means
to render unto every man according to his works, when it shall go full ill
with them that do ill, and full well with them that do well, Esaias. 10. 11. 2.
Thessal. 6.7.

AEnig. 17.
How can he be most merciful, who afflicts sinners for whom he has taken
full atonement?

Resolution.
Most merciful.
God indeed has taken a full price for all the sins of the Elect, yet he
afflicts them not in justice to punish their sin, but in great mercy to
humble and amend them, 1. Cor. 11. 32.

AEnig. 18.
How was Pharaohs heart hardened of God, yet God just in punishing him?

Resolution.
Judge of the world.
Because Pharaoh first did harden his own heart wilfully persistinge in known
disobedience, therefore God (as a just Judge) did harden his heart, the more
worthily punishing his former sins with later sins, Exodus 7. 14.

AEnig. 19.
Who is he which was, and yet is; which is to come, yet both is and was?

Resolution.
Eternal.
It is the aeternall Jehovah, who is God from everlasting, to everlasting,
abiding one and the same for ever, therefore was from all eternity, and yet
is. And because he is an eternal being, he so was, and is, as it is he that
will be to come. Reu. 1.8.

AEnig. 20.
Seeing God is a Spirit, how can Angels be Spirits, and yet not Gods?

Resolution.
Angels and souls be finite and created Spirits, An uncreated Spirit.
but God is an infinite and uncreated Spirit.

AEnig. 21.
How is it that evil motions be sins, yet God is holy from whom all motions
come, for in him we move? Acts 17.

Resolution.
Motions (as they be motions) are from God, No Author of sin.
but the evil of sin (which sticks to them) is from our corrupt nature; as an
halting horse being beaten with the waggoners whip, he mooues and stirs
because of the striker, but lamenesse or halting is from some defect in his
bones.

AEnig. 22
How can God receive ought of others, himself being an infinite perfection?

Resolution.
God receives prayers and praises, An infinite perfection.
and other duties from his children, as his due homage and service: not to add
any thing to his own perfection; for if one be good, God is not made more
righteous. as the sea is not fuller by the drops that fall into it, or by the
recourse of rivers unto it.

AEnigma 23.
How should he be a consuming fire, who is full of pity and bounty?

Resolution.
Most terrible to the wicked.
To wilful and impenitent sinners, he is a consuming fire: but to such sinners
as believe and repent, he is a most merciful God. Command: 2.

AEnig. 24.
How may one be three, and these three but one?

Resolution.
Unity of Godhead and Trinity of persons.
God being but one in substance, yet is distinguished into Trinity of persons,
the subsistences or persons being three, Father, Son, and Spirit; yet the
divine Essence is but one, being equally communicated to each Math. 28. 19.
Ioh. 1. these Three are one. a secret to be admired.

AEnig. 25.
How may three be Eternals or Almighties, yet there be not three Eternals, nor
three Almighties?

Resolution.
The three persons of the Trinity be each of them Eternal and Almighty,
Coessentiall.
each person being God of himself, yet the Godhead being but one, there is but
one Eternal and one Almighty. this secret is to be adored and not searched
into.

AEnig. 26. 27.
How can one beget a son, yet himself not be before that son? etc.

How can the begetter be before his son, yet that son not to be after his
father?

Resolution of both.
God the Father begot his Son Christ by an inconceivable generation,
Coeternall.
and so was before him in order of nature, but not before him in order of time,
because the Son was begotten by an everlasting generation.

AEnig. 28.
How can Christ be God of God, yet be God of himself?

Resolution.
Christ is God of God in respect of his person or Sonneship, which he has by
relation to the Father (for he is a Son as being begotten of his Father) but
in regard of the Godhead or divine Essence which is one and the selfsame to
all the three persons, he is God of himself, even God blessed for ever. Romans

AEnig. 29.
How is Christ the selfsame God with his Father, yet the Father is greater
then he?

Resolution.
Coequall.
Christ as he is the Son, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
Philip. 2. he and his Father being one mighty God. John 10.30. I and my Father
are one, But as was Incarnate and became the Mediator of our Redemption, so the
Father is greater then Christ: for Christ as Mediator being his Fathers
servant, Esaias 5.11. was sent to do his Fathers will, John 20.21. as my Father
sent me, etc.

AEnig. 30.
If Christ be the only begotten Son, then how are all belieuers his sons.

Resolution.
Christ the only begotten Son.
Christ is the only begotten son, because he only is the natural son:
Believers being by nature not the sons of God but of wrath, become his sons
only by adoption and grace. John 1.14. Gal. 4.5. Ephesians. 2.3.

AEnig. 31.
What is that which is sent, yet is not inferiorto the sender?

It is either Christ sent of his Father, Coequall with his Father.
or the Spirit sent both of Father and Son; yet all these being one God and
coequall, none being above another. Sending is not always a note of
pre-eminence or superiority, Acts 11. 36. where Superiors be sent of Inferiors.

AEnig. 32.
What is that which is one with another, yet is another from that one?

Resolution.
The Father is one with the Son in substance, Distinction of persons.
yet an other person: the Spirit also is another person, distinct from the
Son, yet one in essence. In the Trinity there is one person and another, yet
not one thing and another, this is a great secret.



The names of the persons put essentially.
Mat. 28. and sometimes they be put essentially for the whole godhead, and thus
God is called the Spirit, John 4. 24. and Christ is called the Father, Esaias 6.9.

AEnig. 33.
How can something come out of nothing?

Resolution.
Creation of the world out of nothing.
By a created finite power (such as in art and nature) something cannot be made
but out of matter and stuff, praeexistent, or being before: but divine power
being infinite and unbounded was able when there was nothing to create the
matter and forms of all things which were formed, Genesis 1.1. Heb. 11.2.3 those
things which we see were made of things which did not appear.

AEnigma 34.
How can there be a Palace made without matter or instrument, or without
knowledge or consent of him that was the Lord that should dwell in it.

Resolution.
That Palace is the world, which God made by his word only, By the word and
commandment of God.
Ps. 148. he spoke the word and they were created, Genesis 1.2. and he made it,
when as MAN (the Lord of it) was not created. so well did God provide for men,
to build and furnish them an house to dwell in, before themselves were.

AEnig. 35. 36. 37. 38.
How can there be light, where there is neither Sun, Moon, Star, or
Candle?

How can there be darkness, where there is no night? and how

Waters, where there is neither Sea, River, nor Rain? and how

Trees and herbs without setting or planting?

Resolution of all four.
All these things happened in the work of Creation only. Contrary to the
ordinary course of Nature.
see Genesis 1. to teach all men so to use means, as to acknowledge a God in
them, and notwithstanding we have no means, yet to depend upon God, who
works by them, or without them as he will.

39.
How is it that the Angels are not mentioned amongst the works of creation,
being Gods chiefest creatures?

Resolution.
Creation of Angels.
Moses applying himself to the capacity of the ruder multitude, does mention
expressly sensible works only, as the fittest glass for the vulgar therein to
behold their Creators glory: yet so as he does not wholly pass by Invisible and
Spiritual creatures. for in the first of Genesis, verse 1. he says, that God
made heaven and earth, Within the six days.
that is, them, and all in them; also in chap. 2. verse 1. he says, God made
the heavens and the whole host or army of them, (the Angels being a chief
part of this Army.)

AEnig. 40.
How may a wicked man of a corrupt nature be called God, Psalm. 82.6. yet he
not be God who is partaker of the divine nature?

Resolution.
Adam being created in perfect righteousness and holiness, Man created after
the likene^ of God.
was partaker of the divine nature, as Peter calls these godly properties, 2.
Pet. 1. 4. yet was not God substantially, (which is but one) whereas a wicked
man of corrupt nature and manners, may be, and is a God representatiuely, in
respect of his office and power, being a Magistrate and executing the judgments
of God, Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods.

AEnig. 41.
Who was he that had neither Father nor Mother, being but a mere man, and was
a man ere he was a child, and how that may be?

Resolution.
This man was Adam, Made perfect every way.
who came into the world not by natural generation as other men, but by
supernatural creation, wherein he was made every way perfect in graces,
members, proportion, stature, etc.

AEnig. 42.
How are Kings and beggars equal while they live?

Resolution.
They are equal by profession, All men alike by Creation.
being both worshippers of one God, Ephesians. 4. and by creation, being both the
workman-ship of God. in these two things they quarter Arms. being for degree
and gifts very unequal.

AEnig. 43.
How can he be but one man, in whom all men at once were.

Resolution.
All men created in Adam.
Adam was but one man personally; his person was but one and singular, but (God
so decreeing it) he was all men potentially, and orginally. as Leui was, when
Abraham was, Heb. 7. 9.10. so all men were when Adam was, because they all were
in his loins.

Adam being the head and root of our kind (though himself were but one
person) yet he bare and sustained the persons of all men, who were to stand
with him, or to fall with him, as the event declared.

AEnig. 44.
Who was he that needed not sin if he would, yet must needs sin, and how
this may be?

Resolution.
With liberty of will.
It was Adam, created with perfect liberty of will, who might always have
chosen righteous things if he would, and therefore when he sinned, he sinned
freely, his will of it own accord inclining it self to eat of the forbidden
tree; Adam sinned voluntarily.
yet God having decreed his Fall, not as it is a sin, but as a mean to
effect his own counsel to the praise of his name, in the just punishing of the
reprobate for sin, and in the merciful saving of the Elect by Christ. Hence
it is, that there was a necessity that he should sin, a necessity (I say)
in regard of the event by Gods decree, the first cause: yet no necessity in
regard of Adams will, (the second cause) which had power not to have done it.

AEnig. 45.
Who is he that sinned ere he had any evil concupiscence?

Resolution.
It was Adam, who was created holy without any evil lust, He was seduced by
the Tempter.
yet (God not confirming his will) he freely yielded unto an evil temptation,
outwardly suggested, and so evil concupiscence came in as a punishment of his
voluntary disobedience. and now it is become to all his issue, the root of all
their sins, Romans 7.7. Iam: 1.14.15. Adam sinned actually first, and then
originally; we sin first originally, and then actually.

AEnig. 46.
How can the fault of one, make all other men sinners, without injustice?

Resolution.
The effects of Adams Fall.
The fault of one of us cannot do it, because our sins be personal, hurting
our selves, or some few other: The Soul that sins shall die, Ezech. 18. but
Adam being the original and beginning Sin.
all men sinned in him; his sin was the sin of the whole, and by the guilt
of his disobedience imputed, all were made sinners and miserable, To. 5. 12.19.
If in case of high treason earthly Princes punish children with their Fathers
without injustice: how much more may God do this, and yet not do unjustly.

AEnig. 47.
How can one offense being done in a moment, bring eternal death upon all men,
without iniquity?

Resolution.
The act of Adams disobedience Eternal Death.
also the object of his sin but mean; yet an everlasting God being offended,
in that one act: the guilt thereof binds him and his to punishment for ever,
if it be not pardoned, Romans 6.23. It stands with justice that an eternal
pain be rendered to the offense of an eternal essence: and sins are to be
measured by the dignity of the person, against whom they are committed.

AEnig. 48.
How was it that Adam did live after he had eaten the forbidden fruit, yet he
was threatened that he should die the death, if he did eat?

Resolution.
Adam having sinned by eating, the All the miseries of this life, and natural
death.
because upon his fault his soul was spiritually dead, and his body
thenceforth liable to natural death, and to all miseries, as forerunners
thereof; God reptiued him and spared the full execution of the sentence, to
commend his abundant mercy and patience in giving him both space and occasion
of repentance, 2. Pet. 3. To. 2.4.

AEnig. 49.
What is that which at once is both sin, the cause of sin, and the punishment
of sin; and how may this be?

Resolution.
Original sin.
It is original lust, which is properly sin, being a transgression of that
Law, which says, Thou shall not lust, To. 7.7. and fighting against the
government of the Spirit in a renewed soul, To. 7. 21.22. Also it is the
punishment of Adams willing and witting disobedience, and the cause of all
other sins, which do arise out of that bitter root. James 1.15.

AEnig. 50.
What is that one thing that at once is both most happy, and most miserable of
all other things?

Resolution.
Adams fall, ocasion of man's restoring to a far greater happiness.
It was Adams fall, which in its own nature, and in regard of the effects which
followed, enfolding all men within sin and everlasting death, was the most
miserable thing that ever happened, no evil like to it for extent and force. But
in regard of the event which fell out by the marvelous wisdom and goodness of
God, it did accidentally prove, (as one says of it) foelix crimen, an happy
fault, giving occasion to the redemption of the elect, by Christ incarnate,
purchasing a constant and heavenly felicity.

AEnig. 51.
How can one who is like to God, offend by desiring to be as God?

Resolution.
Adam in his creation was like God, that is, Adams pride.
perfectly just and wise (as a creature might be) wherewith not being
contented, but aspiring to be as God, (that is equal to him) this was his
horrible offense. Genesis 3.

AEnig. 52.
Now is it said we all sinned in Adam, yet the woman was in the transgression?

Resolution.
The woman indeed was first in the transgression, Sin originally from Adam
rather then from Eaue.
for she entised and deceived her husband, 1. Tim. 2. 14. yet it is written
that we sin in Adam, not in Eaue, because the man being the principal agent
in generation, sin is rather derived by him into his offspring.



AEnig. 52.
How is it that our first parents did not know good and evil till after their
sin, yet were created with perfect knowledge?

Resolution.
Their eyes opened.
They were created with perfect speculatiue knowledge, but experimental
knowledge of good or evil till after their fall they had not; for then they
saw to their cost, what a great good they had lost, and what a great evil they
had found. Genesis 3.7.

Aenig. 54.
How do our souls become sinful, if they be of God created without sin?

Resolution.
There be two opinions touching the creation of the soul; Of the propagation
of Sin into the Soul.
some think they are created immediately by God of nothing, and at their
creation be ininfused into the body: Now after this opinion, we must say that
souls being created good are at the Instant of their Creation destitute of
Gods grace; How the Soul becomes sinful.
and inclining to sin, come into sinful unclean bodies where they
qiuckely draw unto them contagion and filth, of sin; as sweet liquor, is
corrupted by being put into a mustie vessel.

The second opinion is that our souls come from the souls of our parents,
Genesis 5. 3. Adam be got a son in his own likeness. Hence it is that the
corruption of nature is in Scripture so often called by the name of flesh, Romans
7.5. and 8.1.2.3. etc. The best strife is about the driving out of sin, not
about the entering in, labor how to have it mortified and pardoned.

AEnig. 55.
How may one be a sinner that never thought, spoke nor did amiss?

Resolution.
Infants be Sinners and how.
It is an Infant newly borne; who being without all actual sin, yet is a
sinner by original transgression, Adams transgression being imputed to it, and
together with the want of perfect righteousness, being through inherent
corruption of nature proane to all evil, Romans 5. 13.14. and so under death.

AEnig. 56.
What is that that is a sin, yet is not the transgression of any
commandment?

Resolution.
Original sin forbidden in the whole law.
It is natural corruption, which because it hinders the perfect love of God
and of our neighbor, is equally forbidden in every commandment, which strikes
at the root, the whole law being spiritual; and because it is an universal
transgression, therefore it is not forbidden specially in any one commandment,
as many think.

AEnig. 57.
What thing is that which God never made?

Resolution.
It is sin and death which be the effects of Satan's malice, Sin and Death
whence they came.
and Adams fall Genesis 3. 1. and not the works of Gods hand, who suffers and
rules them, but created them not; For all was good which he made, very good,
Genesis 1. verse last.

AEnig. 58.
What is that that does turn blessings into cursinges and how may that be?

Resolution.
It is sin, which to them in whom it reigns, Sin a most hurtful thing.
causes such things to be snares, as in their own nature are blessings,
given of God for our welfare.

AEnig. 59.
What is that that has a name, yet may not be named?

Resolution.
Generally it is all sin, which is so filthy a thing, A most filthy thing.
as it ought not to be named but with detestation: particularly it is
Idolatry, Fornication and Covetousness, these may not be named without
dislike, Psalm. 16. 4. Ephesians. 5. 3.

AEnig. 59.
What is that which has lost his stinge, yet has a sting?

Resolution.
To whom sin and Death prove hurtful.
It is sin and death which have lost their sting toward the faithful, for
whom Christ died, but still keep a sting to bite and kill the ungodly withal,
1. Cor. 15. Romans 6. 23.

AEnig. 60.
How can God love and hate men before they be, without injustice?

Resolution.
In Scripture, Gods decree to love is called love, Gods decree of
predestination.
because it is a part of love, to purpose to give us unto his Son in whom we
are beloved and accepted: Also his decree not to love and to save by Christ is
called his hatred, because it is an effect of hatred not to mean one good. God
being said to love and to hate, when he does such things as men use to do, who
have these affections.

It were injustice and absurdity both, Most Just.
actually to love, or to hate actually Romans 11.

AEnig. 61.
How can God choose one man to life and refuse another, without respect of
persons, seeing all were a like good by Creation, and alike evil by corruption?

Resolution.
Persons, Most Free.
in phrase of Scripture signifies outward qualities, as riches, poverty,

AEnig. 62.
How can God foresee and fore-ordaine all things which be and happen, yet not
be the author of sin?

Resolution.
Most Holy
God-fore sees and fore-appointeth Joseph by his brethren, and the betraying of
Christ by Judas be examples hereof, Genesis 45.5. Act. 2.23. Disposing all things
to good Ends.
as that he moves, eggeth, persuades none to sin, Iam. 1. 13. God
tempts no man.

AEnig. 63.
How may one be chosen, yet not be saved?

Resolution.
One may be chosen to an outward function, Decree of Election.
either Civil, as Saul, or Ecclesiastical as Judas, yet not be saved; being
not chosen to sanctification of the spirit, 1. Pet. 1.2.

AEnig. 64.
How can God decree Death for sin, yet not will the death of a sinner? Romans
6.23


Resolution.
Death as it is the stipend of sin, How death is Decreed of God.
has the consideration of God, and therefore is decreed of God; but as it is
simply the destruction of the Creature, thus God has no pleasure in it. As a
mild and just King ordaines torture and prisons for prevention to keep from
offending, or for penalty of offenders, yet has no delight in the pain of
his subjects: so does God.

AEnig. 65.
How can it be written that God will have all men to be saved, yet very many
men be vessels of wrath prepared to destruction?

Resolution.
When the Word says that God will have all men to be saved, Decree of Election
is not of every one.
the meaning is not of every one in particular, for then none should be damned,
because none can let his will but some of all sorts, some poor, some rich,
some Kings, some private men, some Jews, some Gentiles, etc. while other some
of all sorts are appointed to wrath, 1. Tim. 2.3. Romans 9.22.

AEnig. 66.
How does God prepare many to destruction, yet their destruction is of
themselves?

Resolution.
Reprobation.
In destruction we are to consider two things, the purpose, and the execution
of it. The first is from God decreeing destruction as the punishment of Sin:
but men's own faults and their impenitencie goes before the latter, as the
proper cause of it. Osea 13. 9. O Israel thy destruction is of thy self?

AEnig. 67.
How can things be done contrary to the will of God, yet not be done besides
the will of God: If Gods will be does revealed and secret, how is it but one
will?

Resolution.
All sins are done contrary to the revealed will of God, Gods will but one.
which forbids them Exodus Yet they do not fall out besides the secret will
of God, for they should not be at all if God were unwilling they should be.
Howbeit Gods will is but as himself is, that is but one, and it is always
like it self as he is unchangeable; yet of this one will much is manifested in
his word, It has diverse considerations.
and much is reserved unto himself. That which concerns the way to salvation,
and the rule of good life is manifestly revealed: that which concerns the
events and ends of persons and things, of their councels and actions, is kept
secret to God himself, till time bewray it: hence comes the distinction of
his will into secret and revealed, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Secret things to God, revealed
things to us.

AEnig. 68.
How can that will be sinnelesse, which does will sin?

Resolution.
That may be sinnelesse will which wills sin, It is most just.
not as it is sin and a breach of the law, but as punishment of some
foregoing sin, or as occasion and means of future blessing and safety.
Thence did God will Adams fall, Pharaohs hardening, Judas treason.

AEnig. 69 70.
What is that that makes all evil things yet is the cause of no evil, and how
may this be?

What is that that draws evil out of good, yet it self is most good, and how
may this be?

Resolution.
Providence
It is Gods most just and wise providence, which makes all evil of affliction,
Just and wise.
Esaias 45. yet is he not cause of any evil of crime, which God indeed orders
and conuerteth to the great benefit of his children, by his marvelous
goodness and wisdom Himself still remaining most holy. As the Sun is not
defiled by shining upon a dunghill, so neither is God polluted by turning bad
actions to good ends.

AEnig. 71.
How is it that God appointes means, yet himself works, against means?

Resolution.
Not tied to Means but free.
Means are appointed for us to be helps of our weakness, and not for him who
is almighty and most free, neither needing them nor tied to them, but working
with them, without them, or against them as he will. Examples hereof in saving
Daniell, and opening the blind man's eyes with clay.

AEnig. 72.
How is it that God commandes us to use means, yet some sin as much in
vsinge them, as others in refusinge them?

Resolution.
To use means with trust in them, Two faults about the Means.
as King Asa used the Physician, and covetous men use riches, is as great a
sin as it is to refuse means when we may have them: in this later we do
tempt God, Math. 4. in the former we make the means our God, in placing our
confidence in them, Col. 3.

AEnig. 73.
How can dead things preserve life?

Resolution.
Through Gods effectual and mighty blessinge, Providence in all Things.
our dead meats maintain life, and make us lively, and our cold clothes to
minister warmth to us.

AEnig. 74.
How is it that some men have a good cause with good means, which they use
well yet speed ill, when others who lack means, or use them ill, yet speed
well though their cause be naught?

Resolution.
Ouerruleth the success of men's actions.
It pleases God to withdraw success, where both, the cause and the means be
good, for that he says that the means were either trusted in, or used without
prayer and repentance: or a good cause dealt in with no good affection: or
because God will try the Faith and patience of his children: whereas to evil
men which have an evil cause, though they lack means, or abuse them, yet
they often speed well that God may the more declare his lenity and goodness
in being kind to the unkind: or may the better manifest his Justice in their
punishment, if they amend not by his bounty.

AEnig. 75.
How are the righteous delivered even then when they are killed?

Resolution.
Providence even in Death.
Death is one means of deliverance unto the Distressed children of God, and the
best means, for after that, they rest from all their labors, Revel. 14. 13.

AEnig. 76.
How are many of the Saints put to vile deaths, yet their death is ever
precious.

Resolution.
Their death is vile sometime, for the manner of it in the world, In Martyrdom.
and in the account of worldlings; but in respect of the cause for which they
die, and their constant cleaving to the truth unto death; their cruel and vile
death is always precious unto God, Ps. 116.

AEnig. 77.
How can hell be an help to bring any man to heaven?

Resolution.
The fear of hell pains deserved by sin, and the feeling of hellish
sorrows after some sin, In Hell.
be sanctified and blessed to the elect of God, to be means to keep them
from sinning and either to drive or hold them closer to Christ, who is the
only way that leads to heaven. Thus hell helps to heaven, the Devil against
his will proves a Physician to the just.

AEnig. 78.
What is that that is both a medicine and a poison at once, and how this may
be?

Resolution.
In sins.
Satan's temptations and sins motions in their own nature be poysonfull, but
by Gods merciful providence, they prove medicines too, being preservatives to
the Godly against many sins, and the occasiou of more humbleness, wariness,
feruencie and prayer.

In Sacrament.
through their own fault, 1. Cor. 9. 27.29.

AEnig. 79.
What bitter thing is that that has a sweet fruit, and how it may be?

Resolution.
In Afflictions.
They be outward afflictions, and inward conflict of conscience for sin; also
the severe threatenings of the law, they all be grievous and bitter to the
flesh; but to the inward man, they bring forth in the end the sweet fruits of
righteousness and peace, even of a good life, and a quiet conscience, Heb.
12.11.

AEnig. 80.
How is it that God tempts no man, yet leads many men into temptation?

Resolution.
God being most holy cannot tempt any to sin, In Temptations.
by inspiring the motion of sin, for this were against his most pure nature,
which can abide no iniquity, Psalm. 5. 4. Yet as a just judge he leads some
into temptation by delivering them up unto the lusts of sin and Satan, as a
Judge delivers the malefactor to the executioner, Romans 1. 24. 26. Let all
flesh fear this God.

AEnig. 81.
How can God harden men's hearts, yet not be the author of sin, seeing
hardness of heart is a sin.

Resolution.
God hardens not by infusing sin, In Hearts.
but by offering occasions. Secondly, by giving up to Satan. Thirdly, by
withdrawing his grace. Fourthly, by enclining effectually the will that way to
which yet it freely runs; and all this he does not as an evil author, but
as a righteous judge, punishing sin by sin.

AEnig. 82.
Who are they which bow to Christ, yet have no knees, and serve him though they
love him not?

Resolution.
In Devils.
They be the Devils, who hating Christ extremely, yet against their wills are
subject to him, as to their Lord. Which is meant by bowing the knee. Phil. 2.
10.

AEnig 83.
If the promises of this life be made unto godliness, how is it that the
wicked do so prosper in the world?

Resolution.
In the Blessings of this life.
Gods promises even for temporal blessings be made to the Godly, 1. Tim. 6.
who alone through Christ have right to them, and how little soever they enioie
they have sufficiency, which they hold with the favor of God, as a testimony
of his present love, and pledge of future happiness: yet because God sees
want and afflictions fitter for them, and because at last he means Heaven to
them, therefore are they often scanted and troubled here, when many wicked men
abound in wealth and pleasure, because they should be left without excuse, and
to commend Gods bounty and kindness in doing good to the evil. Luke 6.

AEnig. 84.
What work of God is that, that does excel the work of creation; and wherein
infinite mercy and extreme justice meet together, without impeching one the
other?

Resolution.
It is the work of redemption, wherein the word became man, a servant, In
Redemption, which exceeds creation.
and a curse: whereas at the creation God made the world by his speking a word.
Also in our redemption God punishing sin fully in his only son, and for
his sake sparing and saving sinners, he so showed infinite mercy, In it mercy
and Justice met together.
as it was without hurt to justice: a marvelous wisdom, worthy to be
reverenced and loved.

AEnig. 85.
How can one be two, and these two but one?

Resolution.
Christ in respect of his person is but The redeemer is but one Christ.
one, yet this one Christ is both God and man, because of his diverse natures;
there is in Christ one nature and an other, and so he is two: yet there is not
in him one person and another, and therefore he is but one.

AEnig. 86.
How may a woman be with child of the holy Ghost, and yet that child not to be
the Son of the holy ghost?

Resolution.
Conceived by the holy ghost.
Thus. In the conception of our Lord, the holy ghost had not the place and
office of an instrument as a father: but of a principal efficient cause by a
secret mighty working, sanctifying and enabling the Virgin to conceive a Son.
Mat. 1. Luke 1.

AEnig. 87.
How may one be the Son of a sinner, yet that son be without sin?

Resolution.
He is without sin.
Mary the mother of Christ coming from Adam by ordinary generation, must needs
be a sinner: yet her Son being borne of her by the extraordinary power of
the Spirit, (clensing that lump of flesh whereof his manhood was formed) he
became pure and sin-lesse in conception, birth, life and death, that he might
offer up himself a spotless sacrifice. Heb: 4.

AEnig. 88.
How may one be truly a man, and yet that man be no person?

Resolution.
The humane nature of Christ being so assumed into the unity of the person of
the son of God, does subsist in the Godhead.
as out of it, it had no subsistence, he is in such sort a very true man, as
yet that man is no distinct person from the son of God. Romans 1.4.5. Gal. 4.4.

AEnig. 89.
How can that which is neither visible nor palpable, be seen and felt?

Resolution.
The Godhead of Christ being an invisible and vncorporeall substance; both God
and man.
yet in the assumed nature of man became sensible, was felt, and seen, and
heard; Communication of properties.
as it is written, 1. Ioh. 1. 1. Our hands have handled that eternal life.

AEnig. 90
How can that which is greater then heaven and earth be enclosed within the
compass of two spannes?

Resolution.
Humiliation in his Birth.
The son of God being greater then the world in respect of his unmeasurable
Dietie, yet as touching his humanity was shut up in the narrow compass of a
woman's womb. Mat. 1.

AEnig. 91.
Who is he that has two wills, and but one soul, and how?

Resolution.
Two wills in Christ, answering his two natures.
Christ as man had a created humane will, but as God equal to his Father he
had an uncreated divine will, yet had but one soul. Matthew. 26. Father not as I
will but as thou will: here is the will of the man Christ, desiring through the
infirmity of humane nature, to be freed from the bitter cup of his passion,
yet with submission through faith to the divine will appointing it otherwise.

AEnigma 92.
How can one be before he was, and not be when he was?

Resolution.
Christ his manhood promised.
Christ was God before he was man, Ioh. 8. Before Abraham was I am. and thus he
was God when he was not man. Also he was man by the

AEnig. 93.
How can one have a father and mother, and yet have neither father nor mother?

Resolution.
Christ as the Son of God had a Father, Christ like Melchisedech.
and a mother as the son of man, Mat. 1.17. yet as he was God he had no
mother, nor father as he was man, Heb. 7. again, Melchisedeck lived so long,
as the knowledge of his parents were worn out.

AEnig. 94.
How can one that is no sinner, yet be more then a sinner?

Resolution.
It is written of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.21. that he was made sin for us. Christ
made sin by impu^^tion.
which in some sense is more then to be a sinner. as to say, that the wisdom
of the flesh is enmity against God, Romans 8.8.
is more then barely to say, it is an enemy against God: yet in truth Christ
was not so much as a sinner, being that Holy one of God, who knew no sin; but
because he had the sins of all the Elect imputed to him, that by the
sacrifice of himself he might take them away; thence it is written of him,
that he was made sin for us. for saying he had no sin inherent in his own
nature, he had died unjustly, had he not died for sin imputed.

AEnig. 95.
How may it be that one that is extreme poor, should by his poverty make many
rich?

Resolution.
Christ abased in the world.
Christ Jesus being heir of all, Heb. 1.2. yet willingly humbled himself to
such poverty, that foxes and birds were in better case then he by which
extreme poverty he merited for all his, heavenly and spiritual riches. 2. Corinthians. 8.

AEnig. 96.
How can finite obedience deserve infinite glory?

Resolution.
His obedience of infinite value.
The obedience of the man Christ to his Father in respect of the things done and
the time wherein, and the nature whereby, was finite; yet deserved infinite
glory, because it received infinite worthiness from the Godhead, to which his
manhood was personally united.

AEnig. 97.
What son is he that is heir while his Father lives, and how?

Resolution.
Though properly he be an heir, Christ heir of the world.
which by succession enters on the inheritance of his dead Father: yet both
Christ and all belieuers are heirs while their Father does live, because he
cannot die being the everlasting God, and freely communicates his inheritance
to them, without any wrong to himself.

AEnig. 98.
How can Christ receive ought of his Fathers gift, himself being author of
every good gift?

Resolution.
Himself as God is giver of all, Our Mediator.
but as mediator he does receive much from his Father, Mat: 28. 18. Ephesians. 1.
22. God has given him over all things to be the head of the Church.

AEnig. 99.
How can one be both Priest, Sanctuary, Sacrifice and Altar?

Resolution.
our Priest.
Christ Jesus as a man was both sacrifice and Sanctuary, Hebr: 2.8. as God he
was the Altar, Mat: 23.19. as God and man he was the high priest. Heb. 9.14.

AEnigma 100.
How may eternal life be borne and dye?

Resolution.
That which is proper to one nature, is attributed to the other.
Christ being true God was that eternal life, John 1. 2. which was borne and
did die in the nature of man assumed; as it is written, the Lord of glory was
crucified, 1. Cor: 2.8. also God with his blood purchased his Church, Act. 20.
28. in which speeches that which is proper to the manhood is attributed to the
Godhead, for the unity of the person: though he was borne and died in his
manly nature, yet the person that died was God the life eternal; understand
this soberly and wisely: it is a true and wholesome doctrine.

AEnig. 101.
How did Christ die willingly, yet die necessarily, for he must die?

Resolution.
In respect of his own election Christ died voluntarily, Christ's sacrifice,
voluntary: else it had not been satisfactory.
for he laid down his life of himsele, no man could take it away from him,
John 10. 18. Yet he died necessarily, to fulfill the just purpose of his
Father, and the true prophesies of the word, which had decreed and foretold his
death, Luke 24.25. Christ then died because he would die, yet he must die
because God so ordained.

AEnig. 102.
How can a body be severed by death from the soul, and yet both remain still
united together?

Resolution.
Christ his body and soul were pulled asunder one from the other in his death,
Hypostaticall and personal union is inseparable.
yet even then both of them were still united to the person of the son of
God, for the hypostaticall or personal union of the two natures in Christ is
inseperable and everlasting, or else he could not be an eternal high Priest,
if there were interruption of this union but for a moment.

AEnig. 103.
How may one at once both overcome and be conquered?

Resolution.
The victory of Christ over death.
Christ when he yielded to death, and went into the grave, was for a time, as
one conquered according to the infirmity of his flesh: yet even then his divine
power triumphed over sin, death, and grave, which was manifested at his
resurrection from the dead. Col. 2.



AEnig. 104.
How may a Lamb overcome a Lion!

Resolution.
Over Satan.
That Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, by the merit of his voluntary death, took all
the Elect (as a prey) out of the jaws of Satan, that roaring Lion, Heb. 2. 14.
He destroyed through death, him that had power of death, even the Devil.

AEnig. 105.
What stone is that, that is both the rising and falling of many, and how this
may be?

Resolution.
That stone is Christ, Christ the corner stone.
who to them that by faith stay on him, is a precious Stone, everlasting lie to
support and save them: yet to the disobedient he is a stone of offense, and an
occasion of their ruin, and fall, because through unbelief they refuse him
being offered. 1. Pet. 2.6.7.

AEnig. 106.
Who is that that gives that life it has to others, yet is self has not that
life it gives?

Resolution.
That flesh or humane nature of Christ, How the manhood of Christ has eternal
life in it.
has that life by participation from the Godhead, (the fountain of life.) And
gives the same to all believers his members, yet the life which it gives it
has not in it self originally, for the flesh profits nothing, it is the
spirit (that is) the Godhead which quickneth, John 6.63.

AEnig. 107.
How is death the cause of life? How can death be the death of death?

Resolution.
Doubble the fruits of Christ's death.
The death of Christ by worthiness derived from his divinity it is the
meritorious cause of life eternal, which we had forfeited by sin, John 1. 6.
I will give my flesh, for the life of the world. This same death of Jesus is
the death, that is the destruction of death having spoiled it of all power to
hurt us, Hos. 13.14. O death I will be thy death and thy destruction O grave.

AEnig. 109.
How may one person at once be most blessed, and yet be made a curse?

Resolution.
Christ made a curse.
Christ in himself as he was perfectly righteous so he was most blessed, the
fountain of blessedness, Luke 1. Yet as he sustained the person of
offenders, he became a curse which was signified by his manner of death being
on the tree. Gal. 3.13.

AEnig. 110.
How can temporal pains deliver from eternal pains?

Resolution.
Temporary pains through the dignity of the Sufferer, Has freed us from
^uerlasting torment.
be equivalent or answereable to eternal pains; that the eternal son of
God should suffer for a while, what more then if all Angels and men had
suffered for ever, Ephesians. 1. Phil. 2.
by how much he is higher then they having obtained a more excellent name,
Heb. 9. 1.

AEnig. 111.
How is Christ daily crucified, yet could die but once?

Resolution.
It is most certain that Christ could be but once really and actually
crucified, Christ his sacrifice but once.
could but once die, yet after four sorts he is continually crucified, first
present to every believing soul. Lastly in the mouth of wicked Apostates who
blaspheme him, Heb. 6.

AEnig. 112.
How was Christ slain in the last times, and yet was the lamb slain from the
beginning of the world?

Resolution.
The virtue of Christ's death look backward.
He was actually slain in Jerusalem, at the time appointed which was in the
last days. But if we respect the promise of his sacrifice, or the virtue
thereof cowardes believers he was slain from man's restoring which was near
the beginning of the world, And before all worlds in his Fathers council and
ordinance.

AEnig. 113.
What person is that which being not mere God, was yet both in heaven, in hell
and in earth at once and how?

Resolution.
It was Christ God and man, His agony or soul suffering.
whose soul in his agony went into the pains of hell. When he: wrestled with
divine wrath in the garden, and upon the cross at which time his manhood was
on earth, and his godhead in heaven, Math. 26.

AEnig. 114.
Who is he that loved his enemy more then himself, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It was Christ by dying and by being made a curse for such as were his enemies,
His love.
Romans 5. 8.

AEnig. 115.
Who is he that being dead and buried did not corrupt and putrify.

Resolution.
Christ his body being buried in the grave was there preserved extraordinarily
from all corruption, His burial.
Psalm. 16. 10.

AEnig. 116.
How is it written of Christ that God did beget him in the day of his
resurrection, yet was he begotten of his father before all worlds?

Resolution.
Christ was begotten of his Father by an everlasting generation. Resurrection.
but being declared mightily to be the son of God when he raised himself
from the dead Romans 1. 5. thence he is said to have begotten him, on the day of
his resurrection, at what time his godhead was so fully manifested to the
Church Act. 13. 33. as if he had then been begotten.

AEnig. 117.
How can absolution come out of condemnation, glory out of shame, liberty out
of bonds?

Resolution.
Jesus being unjustly bound, reproched, and condemned, suffered obediently the
same, hence arose the merit of our liberty, glory, and absolution.

AEnig. 118.
How can the death of Christ profit us more then his life, yet had he not
risen and lived his death had done us no good?

Resolution.
His life after his resurrection.
It is more to reconcile an enemy, then to keep in favor a person reconciled.
The former we gain by Christ's death believed in, the latter he does for us
being raised and alive, Romans 5.9.10.

AEnig. 119.
Who is he that did not forsake earth when he went up to heaven, nor forsake
heaven when he came into the earth, and how this may be?

Resolution.
When the man Christ ascended into heaven, His ascension.
the godhead forsook not earth fulfilling all places: and when he first became
man and dwelt in the earth his godhead then did not forsake heaven.

AEnig. 120.
How can the heavens contain him whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain?

Resolution.
The heavens contain him locally. as man, His local abode in heaven.
because of his natural dimensions; whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain
as God, because of his immensity.

AEnig. 121. 122
Who is he that is himself God, and yet does sit on the right hand of God. And
how this may be?

What one name is that, that is above all names and how this may be?

Resolution.
Christ according to divine nature is true God, His sitting on Gods right hand
who being made true man and in his time dying, rising and ascending, sitting
now as mediator at the right hand of God full of power and majesty, Heb. 1. 3.
In which his exaltation to glory, bliss, and dominion, he has received a
name above all names, being become more excellent then all creatures, which are
all put under him, Ephesians. 1. as subject to him.

AEnig. 123.
What is that that being absent from us is more present with us, then when it
was present with us?

Resolution.
Ieuites of his assention.
It is our mediator Christ who being absent from his Church, as touching his
manhood which he has taken up into heaven: yet by the presence, comforts, and
operation of his spirit, he is more effectually present with his Church, Ioh.
16.7.
then when he lived here in earth with it.

AEnig. 124.
What is that that comes to the Church, at that time, when the Church already
had it?

Resolution.
Sending of the holy Ghost.
The Church had the holy Ghost as touching ordinary gifts, and working while
Christ lived, but after that he ascended, the same spirit came to the Church by
extraordinary and visible graces and operations. Ioh. 7.39. Acts 2.2.3.

AEnig. 125.
How may we pray to one, who himself did pray to another?

Resolution.
We may pray to Christ as he is God equal with his Father. Mediator.
also as he is Mediator, who yet himself (as man and as a creature) did pray
to his Father in the days of his infirmity. Heb. 5.

AEnig. 126.
How can the Faithful be saved seeing they still do sin, even after the
forgiveness of sin?

Resolution.
By the intercession of Christ, Intercession.
whose death having once reconciled us, the merit of it (as an Intercessor
(...) comes between Gods justice and our sins of frailty, to keep us in
favor by obtaining pardon of our daily infirmities upon repentance. 2. John
chap. 2. 3.

AEnig. 127.
How is it that Christ does dispose of the kingdoms of this world, and rules
over the men which be in the world, and yet his kingdom is not of this world?

Resolution.
His kingdom spiritual.
His kingdom as he is God, is universal over all the kingdoms of the earth, to
give and take away, Dan. 2.21 but (as Mediator) his kingdom is spiritual
peculiarly over men's consciences, in things which belong to heaven, being
managed, and governed in all simplicity, without all outward force and pomp.
Ioh 18. 36. 2. Corin. 10. 3. 4 5.

AEnig. 128.
How is it written of Christ, that of his kingdom there is no end, yet he must
deliver up the kingdom unto his Father at the resurrection?

Resolution.
Eternal.
I. the glorious majesty of his own person: II. the everlasting salvation of
the elect. and thirdly, the destruction of all his enemies: but as touching the
manner of his reigning (such as now is used) by execution of his prophetship,
in the administration of his word and Sacraments. 2. of his priesthood, by his
Sacrifice and Intercession. 3. of his royal power by the keys committed to
his Church it shall cease, that God himself immediately may be all in all. 1.
Cor. 15. 14.

AEnig. 129.
How can Christ be that Word which is God, and yet that word be not the word of
God?

Resolution.
Christ is the uncreated, Word of God inspired.
substantial word, whereby Gods mind for the salvation of his chosen is
declared to us, as our mind is declared by our words. this Word is God. Ioh.
1.1. there is another inspired created word, which serves for ever, as a rule
of faith and manners to the Church, and this is called the word of God, not God
the Word.

AEnig. 130. 131.
What weakness is that, that is stronger then all strength?

What foolishness is that, that is wiser then all wisdom?

Resolution.
Mighty in op^ration.
The weakness of Gods ordinance in preaching his word, and the foolishness
thereof (as the wicked worldlings judge and speak of it) being the wisdom and
power of God, to make the elect believe unto salvation, Full of wisdom.
is far stronger and much wiser, then all the wisdom and strength of this
world, which cannot effect so much as the conversion of one sinner. 1. Cor.
1.25.

AEnig. 132.
What is that which being known is still a secret to them that know it, and
how this may be?

Resolution.
A mystery.
The word of the Gospel is still a secret, not only to the ignorant, but even
to him that knows it because it is but in part revealed unto him. 1. Cor. 13.
12.

AEnig. 133.
How is it a duty to search the secrets of God; yet his secrets may not be
searched without sin?

Resolution.
The word of God is called a mystery or secret, Our duty to search the word.
because it is hid from the children of this world; and Gods children know it
no other ways then by revelation of the spirit; to search this secret is our
duty, Ioh. 5.39. but it is a sin to search such secrets as God keeps to
himself, which he would not have men to know. Deuteronomy. 29. more briefly thus,
Indicia Dei.
we may search the secrets of Gods mouth with duty, but not the secrets of God
without sin. Indicia oris Dei.


AEnig. 134.
What is that, that kills before it make alive. And how this may be?

Resolution.
It is the word of God which kills by the ministry of the law, Effects of the
word.
Romans 7.8.9. ere it make alive by the ministry of the gospel for first it
deeply wounds our souls, with fear and sorrow in the feeling of sin and
death, through the knowledge of the law: and afterward it comforts and heales
us by the feeling of mercies, to the forgiveness of our sins, and life
eternal thorough the knowledge of Christ. Esaias 61.2.3.4.

AEnig. 135. 136.
How may lively Oracles be a dead letter?

How may that which is dead be sharper then a two edged sword?

Resolution.
It is effectual by the Spirit.
The word of God, 1. in it own nature. 2.ly in respect of the Author. and 3.ly
of the end for which it was given, is a lively oracle, being from the God of
life ordained to give life: and having promises of life, yet without the
quickening force of Christ, and regenerating Spirit, it is of no more force to
convert us, then a dead Letter, but by the mighty working of God it is sharper,
etc.

AEnig. 137.
How are the Scriptures before the Church, yet there was a Church long before
there was any Scripture?

Resolution.
The antiquity of the word before the Church.
The Scriptures in regard of the matter, which is the word or doctrine of
godliness, it is before the Church as the immortal seed, whereof it is
begotten: but in respect of the form, as it is written in ink and paper, and
set down in letters, sillables and words; so the Church was before there was
any Scripture; for Moses was the first penman of Scriptures.

AEnig. 138.
If prophecy must cease, how does the word of God endure for ever?

Resolution.
The truth of the word in things promised to the faithful and threatened to
unbelievers, The word is Eternal.
for their estate in the life to come shall abide ever, but the manner of
delivery of the word, and teaching knowledge thereof, by prophesying, tongues,
writing, ink, and the paper, wherein it is written, with the letters and words,
shall cease and perish.

AEnig. 139.
How came Christ to make war, yet he is the prince of peace, and his gospel
the gospel of peace?

Resolution.
It is true that the word offers peace, It is a word of peace.
with God, and calls unto it; also persuades peace with man, and so
resembles the Author, which is a God of peace; also works peace as an
instrument; whereas therefore contention, schism and heresy, arise upon the
publishing of it, this comes accidentally beside the nature of the word,
thorough the fault of our corrupt hearts, which use to strive, for our fancies
and lusts, against truth and such as bring it, rather then to yield peceably
unto it. Mat: 10. Ephesians: 6.

AEnig. 140.
How are sinful affections by the law, if the law be good and holy?

Resolution.
The word of the Lord is holy.
The law is neither cause nor occasion of sin, to speak properly, but
detecteth and condemns all sin, and therefore most holy: but sin takes
or snatcheth occasion by the commandment, and works all manner of evil lusts
in men unregenerate: whose corrupt sinful hearts by the prohibitions of the
law, be irritated and provoked to sin thorough their own fault, Nitimur in
vetitu^.
in running more eagerly upon an evil that is forbidden them. Romans 7.7.8.14.

AEnig. 141.
How is it that the law promises eternal life to works, yet no man can be
justified and saved by the works of the Law?

Resolution.
Because no man fulfills the work of the Law as they be commanded of God, It
justifies not.
Romans 8 3. Gal. 3. for no mere man can do all, in perfection, and all his
life long. Therefore no man can be just by the works of the Law.

AEnig. 142.
How is it that the Law being the word of God and of life, as well as the
Gospel, yet we are saved by the Gospel not by the Law?

Resolution.
The Gospel promises salvation (upon condition of believing it) and gives
through the holy ghost power to believe it: How the Law differs from the
Gospel.
whereas the Law promises life to works, but gives no power to do these
works, Rom: 1. 16. Law shows the disease and cures it not; the Gospel heales
the wound by applying remedy.

AEnig. 143.
What is that, that abides still, yet is passed away.

Resolution.
The Ceremonial Law fulfilled in Christ.
The Ceremonial Law is passed away as touching the ordinances thereof, which
now have no force; yet their substance and truth being fulfilled in Christ, the
body of them abides still.

AEnig. 144.
How is it that we can no more believe perfectly then we can perfitly do the
Law, yet we are justified by the faith of the Gospel, and not by the deeds of
the Law?

Resolution.
The condition of the Law and the Gospel.
The reason is because the Law does not promise life but to deeds perfectly
done, whereas life is promised to them in the Gospel as believe, truly, though
imperfectly: for it is not written, that we are justified by perfect faith,
but by faith for Christ who is the object of faith.

AEnig. 145.
How may one do a work commanded in the law, yet sin in doing it?

Resolution.
What things are required of him that shall do the Law.
If he shall fail in the manner of doing it, or in the end: not doing it in
perfect love, and to Gods glory, then there is sin in doing it, though the
thing done for the substance of it be commanded.

If one do a work commanded, and yet do it not out of knowledge, but
ignorantly, then it is sin.

AEnig. 146.
How many one do a work forbid in the Law: yet not sin in doing it?

Resolution.
To kill ones son, to take away ones goods be works forbidden in the general
Law: General Law yields to a Special.
yet Abraham and the Israelites doing these things with warrant of Gods special
commandment, sinned not in doing them. Genes. 25. Exodus: we are to walk not
by particular, but by the general precept.

Concerning works; Law of Ceremony yielded to the Law of Mercy.
as eating Shewbread, plucking ears of corn on the Sabbath, or healing on the
Sabbath: these be against the law of Ceremonies; yet in case of necessity
they were done by David, Christ, and his Apostles without sin, because the
law of Ceremony, must give place to the law of Charity, as it is written, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice. Hosea 6.6.

AEnig. 147.
How is the Law a yoke that none can bear, yet the commandments are not
heavy?

Resolution.
To whom the Law is easy, and how? Ioh. 5.3.
The commandments are easy to such as being regenerate, are strengthened by the
Spirit to walk in them, and have their failings forgiven them by grace; to
others, they be heavy and buthensome. Also the perfect fulfilling of the Law,
To whom impossible.
is to all a yoke intolle^able. Acts 15.10.

AEnig. 148.
How is faith commanded in the Law, it being a part of the Gospel?

Resolution.
How Faith is commanded in the Law.
Faith as it is a work or action, it is commanded in the first Commandment,
wherein we are charged to believe what God speaks, and to trust in him; (but
as faith has a property to apprehend Christ with all his merits, it is a part
of the Gospel, a condition of the covenant of grace, and is not of the law:
Gal. 3.12. To. 1.16.17. the Law does generally command us to believe, but
special faith to believe in Christ that is required in the Gospel.

AEnig. 149.
How is the Gospel and not the law called the ministry of the spirit, which
works in and by the law, as well as by the Gospel?

Resolution.
The law has the spirit of fear and bondage joined to the ministry thereof,
What spirit goes with the law.
but the ministry of the Gospel, being accompanied with the spirit of
regeneration and adoption, (which be the most noble and worthy eeffects of
the spirit) hence is it called the ministry of the spirit by an excellency.

AEnig. 150.
How was the law ordained to life, yet the law is the ministry of death?

Resolution.
In Gods purpose it was given unto life, How law is the ministry of death.
having also promises of life. It is turned unto death accidently, because by
breaking it we incur the sentence of death, whereof we being convicted in our
consciences we do see and feel our selfs to be dead and under condemnation.
Romans 7. 9. 10.

AEnig. 151.
What mould or stamp is that, which leaves no print nor figure?

Resolution.
The gospel unprofitable to the reprobate.
It is the Gospel: the doctrine whereof being applied to the Consciences of
unbelievers, does leave behind it no print or stamp of saving grace.

AEnig. 152.
What glass is that which changes into it self such as look into it and how
this may be?

Resolution.
Profitable to the elect only.
It is Christ Jesus revealed in the preaching of the Gospel, to the conscience
of elect believers, transforming them effectually into his own Image of true
holiness, setting upon them the stamp of his grace, 2. Cor. 3. 18.

AEnig. 153. 154.
What savor is that, that is both sweet and deadly at once, and how this may
be?

How can one word at once both harden and soften?

Resolution.
Diverse effects of the Gospel according to the subject.
The word of the Gospel is a sweet savor to quicken unto life the elect sinner
in his effectual calling, but it gives a deadly sent to the killing
spiritually of them that receive it not. Hardening these in their corruption,
mollifying and softeining the other as the sun softeneth wax and hardens
the clay. 2. Cor. 2. 15. one cause may have diverse yea contrary effects in
respect of sundry objects.

AEnig. 155.
What is that which at one time is both seed and bread, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It is the doctrine of the Gospel, According to the degrees.
which is as it were seed to beget a new the elect who receive it into their
hearts, (through faith) And afterward it is as bread, and will be to nourish
and strengthen them up in Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 23. and the second Chapter and
second verse.

AEnig. 516.
How may there be a great famine of bread, where there is a plenty of bread?

Resolution.
This may happen in a Country where earthly blessings abound, Famine of the
word.
the word of God to be precious and rare to be found: there may be plenty of
corporal bread, where is scarcity of spiritual bread?

AEnig. 157.
How many two men at one time attentively hear one sermon, being both alike
corrupt, yet the one receive the doctrine, the other refuse it?

Resolution.
Gods counsel gouerns the effect of preaching.
Thus: the one being ordained to life eternal is also ordained to faith, the
means of life: And therefore is effectually called, the time of this happy
vocation being come, the other not belonging unto Christ but appointed unto
wrath is left to his natural corruption, and so refuses the word Act. 13. 48.
Ioh. 10. 26. or thus, that is revealed to one which is hid from another, Math.
11.
because it pleases God.

AEnig. 158.
How may a woman pray and prophecy in the assembly, without sin, seeing she
is forbid to speak in a congregation?

Resolution.
Women may be no public Teachers.
She may be said to pray and prophecy because she is present at both,
partaketh in both and gives her consent, so in a sort the action is hers; but
she is forbid to speak as a public teacher, not as a private partaker, 1.
Cor. 11.5.

AEnig. 159.
How may a rain fall plentifully, yet no grass or stone to be wet with it?

Resolution.
It is the doctrine of the word which comes down upon the hearts of Gods
children, Gospel fructuall like rain.
as dew or rain to make them fruitful in good works, Deuteronomy. 32. 2.

AEnig. 160.
How may the same s^ede fructify the same day it is sown, yet not fructisie
in seven year after?

Resolution.
The seed of the word in some bringes forth fruit presently as in Lidia,
When the word fructifieth.
and Act. 2. 37. in other it lies long in their hearts (as seed in the ground)
ere it fructify as in the Apostles of Christ, who remembered and understood the
words of their Lord long after they were spoken.

AEnig. 161.
How is it there being both an old testament and a new, yes the testament is
but one?

Resolution.
Testament or Covenant of p^ace is but one.
The Testament for the substance (which is salvation by Christ) And for the
condition of it (which is faith) it is but one, yet for the diverse manner of
dispensation of it, it is called old and new, as if it were two: As it was
given to the Jews, by Moses, in many, dark rites and ceremonies, which in
time were to vanish, so it was old: but as it is given to all Christians by
Christ, in few and plain Sacraments, to continue without change, so it is new.

AEnig. 162.
How was Abraham dead long ere Christ was borne, yet Abraham did see the day of
Christ?

Resolution.
Fathers believing in Christ to come.
It is true that Christ came into the world long after Abraham's death. yet
Christ and his day were seen of Abraham, and other believing Fathers (by the
eye of faith, to which, things to come are present; And Christ is the same for
ever.

AEnig. 163.
If the Gospel be only the power of God to salvation, how were they saved that
lived before the Gospel?

Resolution.
If by the gospel we understand the narration of Christ's doings and sufferings
set down by Evangelists, The gospel preached to them.
the fathers before Christ might be and were without this, yet were saved by
the gospel, for that they had the promises concerning Christ, which be the
effect of the gospel: and did save such as believed them Gal. 3.8. God
preached the Gospel to Abraham, Act. 15. 11.

AEnig. 164.
Who is he that is both a father and a nurse at once, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It is the minister of Christ who is (as a father) spiritually to beget
children to God, Office of the Ministers.
through the sound and painful preaching of Christ, 1. Cor. 14. 15. Also he
is (as a nurse) tenderly to feed them, whom he has begotten with great
wisdom, love, and patience, 1. These. 2.2.

AEnig. 165.
Who is he that has sin of his own, and yet is a Savior of others, and how
this may be?

Resolution.
How ministers be saviors: and what is their work.
Faithful ministers of Christ are compassed with sinful infirmities, as
other men be, yet they are said to save others as instruments by whom God (the
alone Savior) uses to call the elect, unto salvation, this being a common
thing in Scripture to attribute that work to the instrument which is peculiar
to God the Author Tim. 4. 16. Obedi. 21.

AEnig. 166.
Who is he that sows better things then he reapeth, and how this may be?

Resolution.
Maintenance of Ministers.
The minister reapeth carnal things which perish, but sows spiritual things
which endure for ever, 1. Cor. 9.11.

AEnig. 167.
How may one be the foundation and the builder of the same house at once?

Resolution.
Prophets preached Christ.
Prophets and Apostles in respect of their office and work, were masterbuilders
of the Church which is Gods house: yet they are called foundations in regard of
their doctrine, by which the elect (as lively stones) were laid upon Christ, as
the only true foundation and corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 10.

AEnig. 168.
Who are they that be but friends to the bridegroom, yet fathers to the bride,
and how?

Resolution.
The Prophets were but friends to Christ the Husband, They be Christ's friends.
yet fathers to the Church the bride.

AEnig. 169. 170.
Who is he that is greater then Moses, and the Prophets, yet lesser then any
true minister of the Gospel and how this may be?

Who is he that was a minister of the word, yet a minister neither of the old
Testament nor of the new and how may this be?

Resolution.
It was John Baptist Christ's herault and immediate forerunner, John Baptist.
who in respect of his doctrine was greater then the Prophets, yet lesser then
any true minister of Christ. For he could point, to Christ with his finger and
say, this is the lamb of God, which none of the Prophets could do, but he
could make no report of Christ's suffering, death and resurrection, as the
ministers of Christ are able to do. Also this John coming in the middle
between the Prophets and Apostles he was so the minister of God, Middle
between two testaments.
as he neither lived in their state who preached before Christ came, nor in
theirs who preached after all things were restored by his death and
resurrection.

AEnig 171.
Who were they which were Servants of Christ, yet Christ called them not his
Servants?

Resolution.
Apostles.
The Apostles in respect of their office and charge to dispense Christ's word to
the instruction of his Church they were but Servants Romans 1. 1. Servants.
but as Christ acquainted them with his fathers counsel so fully and so
familiarly as one friend would do another, Friends to Christ.
in this respect they not servants but more then servants, even Christ's
friends, as himself says, John 18. 15.

AEnig. 172.
Who were they which without force, or weapon, armor, bands of men, or stroke
striking, subdued the whole world to their king, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It was the Apostles who by powerful preaching, They conquered the world to
Christ.
faithful prayer, and constant patience, without other means brought and
subdued Kings, and nations under the yoke of Christ 2. Cor. 10. 3. 4.

AEnig. 173.
Who are they that succeed the Apostles, yet are not their successeors?

Resolution
Pastors and teachers succeed the Apostles in the office of teaching, How
Pastors succeed Apostles.
administering sacraments, and discipline. but in respect of their large
commission to teach all nations. 2. Of their extraordinary graces. And 3. of
their privilege not to err in their doctrine, they be not their successors,
neither in the manner of their calling: Also Popes and Cardinals boast of being
Peter's and Apostles successors and be nothing less.

AEnig. 174.
How may a stone, be a builder?

Resolution.
A good Pastor a good builder.
Every godly minister (as a Christian) is a lively stone, of the spiritual
building, 1. Pet. 2. 5. but as a minister he is a builder both of himself and
of others, Ephesians. 4. 12.

AEnig. 175. 176. 177. 178. 179.
How may one at once both build and pull down?

How may one teach others and not teach himself?

How may one be darkness yet give light to others?

How may the seed fructify well, yet the sower reap no fruit?

How may one loose his saltness yet be able ^o season others?

The Resolutions.
Bad Ministers which teach well and live ill.
themselves do not believe and practice, Then they pull down more full of
wickedness which is spiritual darkness, while the light of their teaching
shines before others, Who reap much fruit by their

AEnig. 180.
How may one have the covering of a sheep, and the condition of a Wolf?

Resolution.
Every false Prophet, Wolves.
is a Sheep in aparance, but a Wolf in purpose, and effect, having a wicked
meaing to kill souls with poisoned doctrine, wrapped in sugered and sweet
words.

AEnig. 181.
How may two feed the flock with like diligence, yet the one be an hirelinge,
the other a sheepehard?

Resolution.
If the one do it for filthy luker or gain sake chiefly, Hirelings.
and the other of a ready mind for the love of Christ and of the flock.

AEnig. 182.
How are we commanded to be courteous and friendly even to our enemies, yet
there are some to whom we must not say God speed 2. John.

Resolution.
False Prophets.
Our private enemies being our brethren, we are bound to entreat kindly and
friendly, Math. 5. 46. 47. but as for false Prophets which bring and broach
false doctrine, we are not to bid them God speed, that is, to have any
familiarity with them, because they be enemies to Christ and his flock, 2.
John. 10.

AEnig. 183. 184
Who are they that under pretense of Christ and the Church do most destroy the
Church, and fight against Christ, and how this may be?

Who is he that of all men is humblest and proudest at once, and how this may
be?

Resolution.
Antichrist.
It is the Pope or Bishop of Rome, with his mitred Prelates, Cardinals,
Monks, Friars, Priests, and Jesuits, who have the Church much in their
mouths, and Christ in their profession as if they would gather and build for
him: whereas under this pretense they do by their heretical doctrine, and
damnable superstitions both make havoc of the Church, and destroy the pure
religion and faith of Christ: therein proving themselves the ministers of
Antichrist, the head of which hellish rabble is the Pope, of all men the
humblest in title, calling himself the servant of the servants of God, but the
proudest in truth and deed, exalting himself above Kings and Emperors and
all that is called God, 2. These. 2.4.

AEnig. 184.
How may one be many yet these many be but one?

Resolution.
A natural body is one, yet consistes True Church.
also the mystical body which is the universal Church Cor. 12. 12. Lastly a
particular Act. 5. 12.

AEnig. 185.
How may one Church be both visible and invisible militant and triumphant at
once?

Resolution.
It is but one.
The holy Catholic Church which consists of all the faithful, it is but one:
yet at the same time it is both invisible in respect of election and faith
which make men members of this Church yet cannot be seen. Sundryl ways
considered.
And also visible, as it consists of men and women who may be seen warring in
some of her members against Satan here in earth, whereof it is called
militant: whiles others having ended their warfare, their souls reign in
heavenly glory: and thereof is called triumphant.

AEnig. 186.
How may the Church be called the fullness of Christ, in whom dwelles the
fulness of the godhead?

Resolution.
It is Christ's body.
The Church being Christ's mystical body, he as the head of it reckens himself
defective, and imperfect without it, as if he wanted some things of his
fullness: though himself in his person wants nothing, but filles all in all
things, because the godhead dwelles in him bodily, Ephesians. 1. 13. col. 2. 9.

AEnig. 187.
How a mother of many children may at the same time be a Virgin?

Resolution.
The true Church which is the mother She is a Virgin.
yet in respect of keeping her faith to Christ, undefiled without mixture of
errors, she is a

AEnig. 188.
How many one marry two sisters without sin, it being very sinful to marry
two sisters?

Resolution.
Christ first married spiritually to the believing Jews: Spouse to Christ.
Hos. 2
afterward accepted for his spouse a Church out of the Gentiles which became
sister to the Jewish Church: Cant. 8.23. but the marriage of two sisters either
natural or legal is wicked.

AEnig. 189.
What Creature is that, that is both in heaven and in earth at once, and how
this may be?

Resolution.
Fruitful in begotting children.
yet at the same time is in earth in his members: Act. 9.3. Also one Phil. 3.
20.

AEnig 190.
What woman is that which always gives suck, yet is always in travail?

Resolution.
Likeness between Christ and his Church.
It is the true Church of Christ traveling continually, to bring forth more
children to God, whiles out of her two breasts she ministers suck, to such as
be already newborn.

AEnig. 191.
How can that society be invisible that consistes of visible persons?

It is answered in the 185. Resolution.

AEnig. 192.
What is that, that is at once a kingdom, a house, a vine, a body and a City
and how?

Resolution.
The true Church is like unto all these, The church a kingdom, a body, etc
Christ ruling therein as in his City, kingdom and house: husbanding it as a
Vine that it may be fruitful, saving it as his body. Ephesians. 5.15.

AEnig. 193.
What woman is she that has children to be her fathers?

Resolution.
It is the Church, Faithful Ministers the Fathers and children of the Church.
whose faithful Ministers are both the children, and the Fathers of the Church.

AEnig. 194.
Who is that which at one time is both fighting and tryumphing. And how this
may be?

Resolution.
Christ at one time did both fight and triumph on the Cross, The likeness
between Christ and his Church.
Col. 2. 15. Also this is the case and condition of his Church. See 185.

AEnig. 195. 196. 197.
How can a man be of the Church, and not in the Church * and in the Church, yet
not of the Church?

How may such as be without the Church, be more of the Church, then such as be
in it?

How may wolves be within, and sheep without the Church?

the Resolutions.
The censure of the Church.
David and Joseph when they were exiled and lived among the Pagans, were more
of the Church then such hypocrites In excommunication both unlawful.
as the man in Ioh. 9. be more of the Church than the false guides be, which
cast them out, who being within the visible

AEnig. 198.
How may one be a brother, who is no member of the visible Church?

Resolution.
And lawful.
One lawfully cut of for some crime, is no member of the visible Church for the
time, Math. 18. yet he is to be dealt withal as a brother, 2. Thessal. 3.
because he still holds the profession of Christ, though he fail in practice,
and be scandalous in life and manners.

AEnig. 199. 200.
What kingdom is that, where all subjects be Kings. And how this may be?

What kingdom is that, where a King and a subject be equal. And how this may
be?

the Resolutions.
It is the kingdom of Christ upon earth, The dignity of a Christian.
where every subject is a spiritual king, partaker of Christ's royal dignity,
and by his spirit subduing carnal lusts. Also in this kingdom an earthly king
is no more accepted then a private man, Christians equal.
with that God, who is no accepter of persons, Romans 6.11. yet for his office
and power among men, far above his subjects. Romans 13.1.

AEnig. 201.
What kingdom is that which is in this world, and yet not of this world. And
how this may be?

Resolution.
It is the spiritual kingdom of Christ over his Church, The church has a
spiritual regiment.
which is in this world, as touching the persons and subjects who inhabit
here in this world. but as touching the manner of government, that is not
worldly as other kingdoms, but spiritual as Christ the king is spiritual,
reigning by his spirit and word over his people for spiritual ends.

AEnig. 202.
What body is that whereof the members are distant from themselves, as far as
East and West, and from their head as far and further then North and South,
and how this may be?

Resolution.
True Church is universal.
It is the mystical body of the Church, whose members are dispersed thorough
the whole earth; And whose head is above in heaven, while she way fares as a
pilgrim in earth.

AEnig. 203.
Who is that woman which in the time of John the Evangelist, did reign over
the Kings of the earth, and sat upon seven hills?

Resolution.
False Church.
It is the City of Rome to which many nations and provinces were subdued, the
Romans then being Lords almost of the whole earth) and which was situated upon
seven mountains or hills, Vrbs septicollis.
which (as it is said) with their names are extant and known till this day.
Apoc. 17. 18.

AEnig. 204.
What beast is that, that has seven heads and ten horns?

Resolution.
The Romish ecclesiastical estate, whose seven heads are seven hills, and
the ten horns are the several Kings that gain their riches and power to
uphold it. Apoc. 17. 9. 12.

AEnig. 205.
Who is that, that fitteth in the Temple of God, yet neither that Temple
wherein he sits, nor himself, be any sound member of the Church of God?

Resolution.
It is that Antichrist reigning where God once had his Temple and Church, Reu.
18.2.
which now through Idolatry and errors is become a cage of unclean birds, the
habitation of devils, the hold of all foul Spirits, adversary to Christ and
his Church. Apoc. 18.2.

AEnig. 206.
Where is the market, wherein wine, honey, and milk, are to be bought without
money?

Resolution.
The benefit of public assemblies.
It is the public assemblies of the Saints, wherein the graces of the Spirit
for their great sweetness and profit likened unto wine, milk, and honey, are
to be had and obtained freely from God, who takes nothing for them at our
hands, howsoever his Son has with a great price purchased them for us.

AEnigma 207.
How may one be a Sheep, who never came in the fold?

Resolution.
The elect children of Gods house.
The Elect not yet called are the sheep of Gods purpose, who has decreed to
gather them by his word and spirit into the fould of his Church, and to make
them sheep of his vocation. John 10.

AEnig. 208.
What name is that, which none knows save he that receives it?

Resolution.
The called children of God.
It is the name of the child of God, Apoc. 2. 17. 1. John 3.1. or to be called
the child of God.

AEnig. 209.
How can a sister marry the brother, and brother marry to brother: yea and
natural mother to a natural son, and all this without sin?

Resolution.
Every one that does the will of God, is unto Christ as his brother and sister,
Their conjunction with Christ
yet linked to Christ by a spiritual marriage: whereby the Virgin Mary is
espoused unto Christ her own natural Son, to whom she is married (by faith)
as all believers be.

AEnig. 210.
How may one be a mother that never had child?

Resolution.
All the Godly, among whom many be childlesse, Christ's affection unto them.
are unto Christ as his mother dearly loved. Math. 12.49.

AEnigma 211.
How may there be a marriage between the quick and the dead?

Resolution.
Thus * the Elect which are dead to sin through mortification, Spiritual
marriage between them and Christ.
are married unto Christ in heaven, Romans 7.4.

AEnig. 212.
What creature ^s that, which is both in heaven and earth at once, and how this
may be?

Resolution.
How they are in heaven.
It is the true believer, who as touching his person is here on earth, yet at
the same time as touching his own hope, and in Christ his head, he is in
heaven. Ephesians. 2.17.

AEnig. 213.
What living creature is that, that is neither plant, beast, woman, man, nor
Angel?

Resolution.
They be new Creatures.
It is the new man or new creature which lives unto God. 2. Cor. 5. 16. Romans 6.9.

AEnig. 214.215.216.
How can one be a King and have no subjects to rule?

How may one be a Priest that is of no order?

How can one be a good Prophet, and no Minister?

Resolution.
Kings.
Every true Christian is a King to reign over his lusts by grace, till he
reign with Christ in glory. And a Prophet to teach himself and those under
his charge. Prophets.
And a Priest to offer spiritual Sacrifices, Priests.
all the works of his calling, acceptable to God thorough Jesus Christ. 1.
Peter 2.9. Apoc. 1.6. Col. 3.16.

AEnig. 217.
What men are they who while they live, never come to the age of men, and how?

Resolution.
Christians which be men in years, They be still imperfect.
yet so long as they live here, never attain to the age of perfect men in
Christ, Ephesians.4. 13. they daily grow toward it, but are not of full age, till
they come into heaven.

AEnig. 218.
Who is he that being but a mere man is more excellent then the Angels?

Resolution.
It is every good Christian, More excellent then the Angels.
who by incorporation into Christ is become his true member, flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone: which is a dignity and excellency deigned to the
very Angels, who are as servants to minister unto the elect, in this respect
that they are one with Christ, and Christ one with them. Hebr. 1.14. and 4.6.7.
8.16.

AEnig. 219.
Who is he that serves every man, yet is not the servant of any man, And how
this may be?

Resolution.
Most free.
The godly Christian through love is ready to do service unto every one that
needs him, Galat. 5.13. yet will he not suffer his conscience to become servant
and bond to men's traditions. 1. Cor. 7.

AEnig. 220.
Who is he that lives in the world, and yet is none of the world. And how this
may be?

Resolution.
It is the child of God, who still remains in this elementary world, Separate
from the world by effectual calling.
amongst men, till he be translated into the celestial world amongst the
Angels; In the mean while, he is none of the unbelieving world, out of which
God has singled him by an effectual calling to Christ. Ioh. 15.19.

AEnig. 221.
What Children be they which never had any Mother?

Resolution.
They be the holy elect Angels, who are the children of God, though not by
adoption; for they were never out of favor, yet by creation. Job 1.

AEnig. 222.
What is that which makes things which are not, to be?

Resolution.
It is an effectual calling by the spirit which makes the elect, Effectual
calling is a new creation.
who were not actual members of Christ and sons of God, to become such, as
in the creation, things which were not mere made to exist and be in an
instant.

AEnig. 223.
How came Christ to call sinners to repentance, yet many which heard his call
did not repent?

Resolution
The end of Christ's coming it was effectually to call elect sinners, A twofold
calling.
being changed by grace, and made obedient to the voice of the Caller: whereas
other sinners were generally and outwardly called by his word, without the
quickening spirit of Christ to bow their heart.

AEnig. 224.
How can things which are not, confound things which be?

Resolution.
What persons for the most part called.
When poor simple contemptible persons, which in common account are not, be
called unto Christ, and the wise, the rich, the noble of the world, (which
only are seeming to be something) be passed by: thus does God by things which
are not, confound things which are, making it appear that the glorious things
on which the world doteth, are nothing with him. 1. Cor. 1. 26.27.28.

AEnig. 225.
How may one have eternal life before he comes at heaven?

Resolution.
Faith in Christ is the entrance to eternal life.
Whosoever truly believes God to be his God and Father in Christ, being also
led by the spirit of Christ: he has now the beginning of eternal life, though
he but a pilgrim here on earth. Gal. 2.5. last.

AEnig. 226. 227.
How may one be blessed who believes and sees not, yet believing to be all one
with seeing?

How can one walk by faith and not by sight, whereas faith is nothing but
sight?

the Resolutions.
One who does believe (though he never saw Christ with bodily sight) he is a
blessed man, Faith the eye of the soul or spiritual sight.
yet believing is nothing but a spiritual sight (faith being the eye of the
soul, whereby we see God reconciled to us by Christ), by which sight we walk
now, not by immediate sight, such as Angels and Saints have in heaven, which
glorious sight shall dim, or extinguish rather, the obscure sight of faith,
which sees thorough the Word and Sacraments (as spectacles) whereas there in
heaven we shall see perfitly.

AEnig. 228.
Who is that, that makes things visible to be invisible, and things past and to
come to be present. And how this may be?

Resolution.
Office of Faith, with the force thereof.
It is a true and lively faith, to which God, and heavenly glory (things
invisible) do after a sort become visible, being believed that they shall as
certainly be performed, as they are certainly promised. Also in a wonderful
manner, both things past, as the worlds creation, Christ's incarnation and
passion. And things to come, as resurrection, Judgment, etc. are present to
faith. Heb. 11.1.

AEnig. 229.
How may one at once both have faith and loose it?

Resolution.
Faith once had, never lost.
A Christian at once may have the gift or habit of faith, and yet loose the
feeling and some fruits for a time; as in David and Peter, who lost confession
of Christ with boldness, cleanness and joy of heart, yet lost not the grace
of faith.

AEnig. 230.
How can one see him that is invisible, whom never man saw?

Resolution.
Nature of faith.
God being an invisible Spirit, makes himself seen unto faithful ones, and
visible (as it were) in his word, sacraments, works, and creatures. Heb. 11. 27.

AEnig. 231.
How is it that a believer still hungers and thirsts, yet true believers hunger
and thirst no more? John 6.

Resolution.
True believers, because their apprehension and feeling is weak, It rests on
Christ only.
hindered by sins and temptations, therefore they still thirst and covet
increase of their faith to a more full enjoying of Christ and his graces:
wherein because they do find all soul contentment, and satisfaction, even
whatsoever belongs to full happiness, therefore they are said to thirst no
more: for they rest in him only, and seek not for an other.

AEnig. 232.
How may one believe before he have faith?

Resolution.
He that out of an heart truly touched for his offenses, Least measure of faith.
does desire through the holy ghost to believe the forgiveness of them: such a
one though he have not that faith, which is in strong apprehension and act, yet
he does believe in Gods acceptance, who in his children accepts the desire
for the deed. Mat. 12.20. Ioh. 7. 37. 38.

AEnig. 233.
Seeing doubting is contrary to faith, how can believing and doubting meet both
together in one person?

Resolution.
No Faith without doubting.
Doubting being a fruit of unbelief, is contrary to the nature of faith, (which
is a certain assent unto the promises) yet it may stand with the infirmity of
faith, as in Peter, Mat. 14. 31. why do thou doubt o thou of little faith.
doubting springs not from faith, but from weak faith.

AEnig. 234.
If we be certain of our salvation by faith, how are we bid to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling?

Resolution.
What fear is joined with faith.
As a child may reverence and fear his Father, of whose love he is certainly
persuaded: so Gods child thinking upon his own weakness, and the falls of
others, may fear to offend God by falling to sin, yet may be certainly
persuaded of his own salvation, when he considers the infinite mercy, truth,
and power of God. Phil. 2. 12.

AEnig. 235.
If faith be but one, how is it written that righteousness is revealed from
faith to faith?

Resolution.
Faith is but one, Degrees of Faith.
as touching the kind, author, object and end; yet this one faith has sundry
degrees and measures; righteousness is then revealed from one measure of faith
to another, from a lesser faith to a greater, but not from one kind of faith
to another. Romans 1.17. Ephesians. 4.5.

AEnig. 236.
How one person, at the same time may be an enemy to God, yet loved of him?

Resolution.
One that is an enemy actually by the guilt and corruption of sin, How loved
before faith.
wherein he sticks, being unregenerate; may at the same time be and is loved of
God in his purpose and election. Romans 7.10. and 9.13.

AEnig. 237.
How may it be that one should marry a Wife, and yet still remain a Virgin?

Resolution.
Faithful man a Virgin.
He that is married to a Woman, yet is still a Virgin, if his faith be kept pure
and unspotted. see 189.

AEnig. 238.
How may one be a maa and a chtld at once?

Resolution.
Imperfect in knowledge.
One person at the same time may be a man in years, and a child in
understanding, as Nicodemus, John 3.

AEnig. 239.
Who was he that was a man the first day he was borne. And how this may be?

Resolution.
In some more perfect.
Paul the Apostle in respect of his great knowledge and strength of grace, which
he received in his new birth, was a man, (not a babe) the first day he was
borne into the Christian world. Acts 9.

AEnig. 240.
Who is he that is twice borne and thrice dead, and how this may be?

Resolution.
A regenerate man is borne of his mother naturally, Regeneration.
and the second time he is borne of the Church spiritually: Also he is once
dead in sin by corruption from Adam: The second time he is dead to sin by
mortification from the death of Christ: The third time dead to the world in the
disolution of soul and body by the decree of God.

AEnig. 241.
Who is he that five a child and how?

Resolution.
One that is regenerate, Regenerate are children many ways
and lives till he be in great years, is a child first by age, secondly by
new birth, thirdly in understanding, if he continue weak in knowledge long
time after he is newborn; fourthly in maliciousness, being harmless as a
child, fifthly in years (as it is said) once an old man twice a child.

AEnig. 242.
Who is it that has four heads and but one heart, also two hearts and but
one head, and how this may be?

Resolution.


Ezekiel. 11. 19.

AEnig. 243.
If Gods promise be true why are seals added?

Resolution.
The use of Sacraments
Seals are added to the promise not simply to confirm the truth thereof which
is more stable then heaven and earth: but to help the infirmity of our faith,
which needs strengthening against doubts and fears of the flesh.

AEnig. 244.
What is that which is called that it is not, yet is that which it is called?

Resolution.
Sacraments be called by the name of things whereof they are sacraments, They be
mystical signs.
for likeness sake; yet are not the self same things really, and
substantially, but mistically and representitiuely, and by sacramental union;
Against transubstantiation
as circumcision is called the covenant, which yet is not, otherwise then a
mystery, because it is a sign of it; likewise water in Baptism, Bread and
wine in the Lords supper, are not properly that which they be called, but they
are it mistically by representation, and relation.

AEnig. 245.
How may one be saved who is not Baptized?

Resolution.
Baptism saves only as an instrument, Baptism how it saves.
to assure salvation to them, that be already saved by the covenant of grace;
therefore it is not the want of Baptism when it either not at all or not
lawfully may be had which hinders salvation, but wilful neglect or contempt
of it.

AEnig. 146.
How may elementary water wash the soul, which is a spiritual substance?

Resolution.
How it washes the soul.
Elementarie water washes not the soul, by any power in it self, or by any
act done about it, but by virtue of Gods ordinance and promise, the outward
washing by water, it is an effectual pledge, to the elect only, of that inward
washing by the spirit, applying Christ unto their justification, Math 3. 11.
Tit. 3. 5.

AEnig. 247.
If God does only forgive sins how does Baptism take away sins?

Resolution.
Baptism forgiueth sins instrumentallie, How it forgiueth sin.
as a Sacrament of seal, to certify and confirm our mind, in the persuasion
of forgiveness by Christ, but God forgiueth sins properly as an Author by
his own power, putting away from us the guilt and punishment yea and the
dominion of sin, through faith in the blood of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 71. 12. Romans
3. Luke 5. 11.

AEnig. 248.
What meat is that which is not diminished by eating?

Resolution.
It is Christ Jesus whose flesh given, Lords supper.
and blood shed for the world is the true meat of our souls, which being
offered in the word and in the supper of the Lord is spiritually eaten, by
infinite believers, and yet remains still whole and entire without diminution.

AEnig. 249.
How can one eat which has neither mouth nor stomach?

Resolution.
The faithful soul does eat so often as it feeds upon Christ and yet is
without fleshly teeth or stomach. How eaten


AEnig. 250. 251.
How can Christ abiding in heaven he their food which are in earth?

How may a man eat man's flesh and drink man's blood without sin?

The Resolutions.
Though Christ in his manhood be in heaven, How Christ becomes our food.
and the faithful be abiding here on earth, yet by our faith receiving him as
he is offered in the supper, the spirit conueying and applying him unto us,
Spiritually.
our bodies are not more truly fed with the meat which they take in, 1. Cor.
13. 12.
then our souls be nourished with this spiritual manducation of Christ, Math.
26. 26. 27.
whose flesh to eat and drink corporally and naturally 1. Cor. 11. 24.
(as we do other food and as Capernaites dreamed and as our Papists fancy)
Against corporal eating.
is a horrible sin.

AEnig. 252.
If faith it self be a work, how is it written that we are not justified by
works, seeing we are justified by faith?

Resolution.
Faith is a work of the spirit and an holy quality, Justification by faith.
as hope, love, and repentance be; but does not justify any as it is a work
or quality (for so it is weak and spotted needing pardon) but as an
instrument appointed of God to receive and apply Christ his perfect obedience
and sufferings, unto us, for our justification before God, Romans 5. 1. 11. Gal.
3. 14.

AEnig. 253.
Who was he that was thrice justified, and yet was justified but once, and how
this may be?

Resolution.
It was Abraham, It is but once.
who at his conversion was justified by faith in the promised seed. Secondly
at the time when a son was promised unto him in his old age, he is said to be
justified in believing that promise Genes. 15. which was but a proceeding of
his former justification: Thridly it is written of him, that he was justified
by that work of offering up his son. James 2. 2. which was but a declaration
before men, that he was a just person, and his faith lively, and not dead.

AEnig. 254.
How can the justice of an other make us just, and yet the riches of an other
cannot make us rich?

Resolution.
The perfect justice of Christ is without us sticking or inherent in his
manhood, Christ's justice ours by imputation.
as the proper subject thereof, and so it is the justice of an other, yet being
accounted unto the elect, at what time they do believe, it does become their
own justice by imputation, Romans 4. throughout To. 10. 4.
as verily as if themselves had kept the law, and fulfilled all righteousness in
their own persons: whereas another man's riches being so another man's, as it is
none of ours, it cannot make us rich.

AEnig. 255.
How may one which is a transgressour of the law, be perfitly just while he
lives?

Resolution.
The godliest man that is, No man righteous in Gods sight.
transgresses the law in many things, and therefore can never be perfitly
righteous in this life, by any righteousness of his works; but Christ keeping
the whole law perfitly, (the grace of God imputing that perfect obedience to
the believing sinner) he is made the end of the law for righteousness unto
him, Romans 10.4.

AEnig. 256.
How was Abraham justified by faith, if he was justified by his works?

Resolution.
How works do justify.
He was justified by faith instrumentally: by his works declaratiuely; or thus,
his person was justified by his faith, and his faith justified by his works:
James 2. 18. that is made known to be a lively faith.

AEnig. 257.
How may one adopt sons which has a natural son, seeing adoption is found
out for the comfort of childlesse men?

Resolution.
Though God have a natural son Adoption by Grace.
yet men being all by nature the children of wrath, he had no sons of our
kind, therefore of singular Pro. 8.) he sent his only begotten son to
assume our nature, and by his willing subjection of the law, to purchase unto
us the adoption of sons, Gal. 4. 5.

AEnig. 258.
How can a faithful man be more sure that God is his father, then a natural
child can be of him to be his father, whom he so calls?

Resolution.
That double witness of Gods spirit. Certainty of our adoption.
and of their own sanctified consciences assures the faithful that God is
their father, without fail, Romans 8. 16. whereas a natural child cannot be
certain of his own father in very infallible certainty.

AEnig. 259.
What sons are they which come not to their inheritance before themselves be
dead, and how this may be?

Resolution.
Sons of God be heirs.
The adopted sons of God they be heirs by hope, yet do not in their own
person enter upon their real and full possession of their inheritance till
they be dead, Romans 8, 24. 25.

AEnig. 260.
How may an inheritance be parted amongst many, yet not be diminished by such
distribution?

Resolution.
Inheritance of heaven has perfection with differences in degrees.
The heavenly inheritance is distributed to innumerable children, yet no way
lessened and impaired by such partition, neither have any of the heirs the
less, by that which others do enjoy. Also such as have the least portion want
not, and such as have the greatest have none over plus; for all have
perfection. Even as many vessels cast into the sea, being unequal measures,
yet every one is filled full.

AEnig. 261.
How is there one spirit of bondage, another spirit of adoption, yet the holy
spirit is but one?

Resolution.
Bondage and Adoption be but diners affectes of one spirit, Adoption an effect
of the spirit.
workeing diversely, in the law, too terrifying, in the Gospel too comforting.
Romans 8. 15. 2. Cor. 3.

AEnig. 262.
What is that, that is both kept and given at once?

Resolution.
Christ gives the title of sons to The duty of adopted sons.
Also the right of heaven he so keeps, as yet he has be gift bestowed it
upon his members: who in way of

AEnig. 263.
How may the child of Adam be certain that he is the child of God?

Resolution.
Certainty of adoptist.
By their faith and the fruits thereof inward and outward, See 258.

AEnig. 264.
If the faithful be sons and heirs, how is it that they are persecuted and
contemned as Vassals and Outcasts?

Resolution.
Adopted ones why afflicted.
Through the malice of Satan and wicked men, who neither know them nor God
their father, but hate God in them and them for his sake, who permits his
children to be abused by the world, because it makes for their present trial,
and for the increase of future glory, 1. Ioh. 3. 1. and 1. Pet. 1. 6. 7. Romans
8. 18.

AEnig. 265.
Seeing the spirit of fear is contrary to the spirit of adoption, how then
can they fear which are once adopted?

Resolution.
Free from slavish fear.
Adopted children of God fear not now with a servile fear of punishment only,
as slaves their Lords, or malefactors their Judge; this fear is expelled by
faith: but they do still fear the displeasing of God, with a childe-like
reverence out of a loving affection to God as unto a father, Psalm. 13. 4. they
fear transgression rather then condemnation.

AEnig. 266.
How can they be said to be reconciled unto God, whom God did always love?

Resolution.
The elect were ever loved of God, in his eternal decree, Reconciliation.
and purpose, yet, being by Adams disobedience imputed, and their own natural
corruption, together with the fruits thereof, become enemies to God, and he
to them, (sin having made a separation) they are actually reconciled being
loved indeed, when by their faith they do lay hold on the death of Christ for
remission of sin and have the image of God restored by the spirit of
sanctification, Romans 5.7.8.9.

AEnig. 267.
What is that which at once is both old and new, and how?

Resolution.
The soul of an elect man by grace of sanctification is renewed to the
likeness of God, Sanctification.
in righteousness and true holiness, yet still reteineth much oldnesse of
corruption, new it is then by reigning grace, and old it is by remaining sin,
Romans 7. 23.24.25.

AEnig. 268.
How may one at once be both persit, and vnpersit?

Resolution.
It is imperfect.
The Saints be perfect by imputation of Christ's perfection; Also in respect of
their sincere delire to please God, and of their endeavor toward actual
perfection, yet in respect of their manifold wants and sins, the best men are
still imperfect, Phil. 3. 12. 13.

AEnig. 269.
How may one and the self same person be all flesh and all spirit at once?

Resolution.
It is a total change.
The child of God because he is sanctified, throughout in all parts, therefore
is all spirit: but because his sanctification is not perfect in degree,
therefore he is also all flesh; spirit and flesh, grace and corruption, being
so mixed together in the whole man as wine and water in a cup, or as light
and darkness in the air at the break of the day, Romans 7. 14. 15, 16.

AEnig. 270.
Who is he that has two bodies and two spirits at once, yet is but one man,
and how this may be?

Resolution.
A truly sanctified person, has one body of flesh, But not absolute.
another of death Romans 7. 24. Also he has one spirit which is his soul, and
the holy spirit whereby he is led, Romans 8. 1.

AEnig. 271.
Who is he that at once is both free and bound, and how this may be?

Resolution.
Every Saint is free both from the curse and power of sin the bonds whereof
are broken in his new birth, The end of sanctification.
yet he is bound still to serve God his Creator, and redeemer in newness of
life, Romans 7. 6.

AEnig 272.
How may one man at once be both under grace and under the law, and yet he
that is under grace is not under the law?

Resolution.
One man at once may both be under grace, Free from the law.
and under the instruction and regiment of the law. Yet whosoever is under
grace, at the same time he is not under the malediction and irritation of the
law, but is freed from it, as it is the strength of sin, and accurseth every
sin. Romans 6.14. and 7.4.5.

AEnig. 273.
How may one lawfully kill himself?

Resolution.
Mortification.
(Himself) in Scripture signifies the corrupt lasts of our reason and will,
which may lawfully be killed by mortification, Col. 3.5. but (himself) that
is, his person, he must preserve and cherish. Ephesians. 5.

AEnigma 274.
How may one both love himself and deny himself at once?

Resolution.
Denial of a man's self.
Thus. One may love his person which is himself, and deny his evil affections,
which are (as himself) at one time.

AEnig. 275.
How may it be that one should sin no more while he lives, And yet there is
no man living which senneth not?

Resolution.
Burial of sin.
He may be said to sin no more, who earnestly strives against his sin, to
weaken and keep it under, and in whom the desire and pronenesse to sin is
corrected by grace; such a one by reason of his affection would not sin; and
by reason of his strife against sin, he sins less then he was wont to
do, daily casting new mould upon his sins to bury them.

AEnigma 276.
How is it that sin does still live in us, if sin be dead in us and we dead
in it?

Resolution.
It fares with sin in a truly sanctified person, Mortified in part.
as it fares with a soldier, that has taken a deadly blow, yet still mooues
and stirs; or with a sick man, who still lives, yet has a deadly unrecoverable
disease: likewise sin in the godly has by mortification taken a deadly
wound, and can never recover his former strength, yet is still alive, moving
and tempting us to break Gods law. Romans 7. 22.

AEnig. 277.
How may one be raised from death, whiles he is alive?

From the death of sin the Elect are raised by Christ, Resurrection to
newness of life.
(even while they are alive in the flesh) to walk in newness of life, Romans
6.4. this is the first resurrection.

AEnig. 278.
How may there be in one man both peace and war at once?

Resolution.
Spiritual Combat
Peace with God, war with his lusts, Romans 5.1 and 7.22. as the wicked have
peace and league with their sins, but war with God at one time.

AEnig. 279.
How may one at once both work and fight?

Resolution.
is Continual.
The true Christian does at once both perform the work of his calling, and
fight against the hindrances, whereby the world, sin, and Satan, would
withdraw him from his work, or discourage him in it, as Israelites in building
Jerusalem.

AEnig. 280.
How may he say, who shall free me from sin, who is already freed from the
law (...).

Resolution.
One who is in part freed from the tyranny of sin, It is irksome.
may desire and long to be perfectly freed. Rom: 7.24.

AEnig. 281.
How may one repent before he have repentance?

Resolution.
The child of God has a sound purpose and desire to repent, Least degree of
repentance.
which with God is accepted for repentance, before he has the power and grace
of repentance, so he repents in will, ere he has actual repentance wrought in
him.

AEnig. 282.
How may one have repentance without repentance?

Resolution.
When one has true repentance wrought in him, Repentance a great blessing of
God.
whereof he never need to repent him, because it springs out of a godly sorrow
for sins, and tends to salvation: then has he repentance without
repentance, 2. Cor. 7.10. for he never repents him that he has repented.

AEnig. 283.
How may one confess and leave his sin, yet not repent?

Resolution.
How true repentance distinguished from false.
If his confession be hypocritical, from stinge of conscience, or perforce, and
not out of displeasure of heart for sin, and hope of forgiveness thorough
Christ, and that he leave his sin touching the act, because he lacks occasion
or strength to do it, not in affection, because he hates it: such confession
and leaving sin, argues no sound repentance.

AEnig. 284.
How may the children of the kingdom be cast out, and harlots enter in and be
saved?

Resolution.
Repentance given to great sins.
Such as be children of the kingdom by outward covenant and profession only, as
proud Jews were, being without faith and repentance, shall be cast out and
refused, when believing penitent harlots, shall be received unto salvation.

AEnig. 285.
How can there be in this life a righteous person, who needs no repentance?

Resolution.
If we speak absolutely, All men need repentance, but not all alike.
there cannot be any such righteous person; but there is, if we speak
comparatively, for one who has already repented, departing from his sins,
and having made good proceedings in a righteous course of life, having done
many good works, has not such need of repentance, as one that goes still
astray, being dead in sins and trespasses, or that is newly turned.

Also one that thinks himself to be

AEnig. 286.
Seeing repentance is a grace hidden in the heart, how can the Angels who know
not our hearts, joy at the conversion of sinners?

Resolution.
Angels, Repentance is the joy of Angels.
by outward signs, and effects, do observe and know the inward conversion of
our hearts, and do joy therein, because it turns to the honor of God, to the
increase of Gods kingdom (which they greatly love.) Also they delight in the
good of all elect persons, who together with them, make up one glorious Church
in heaven. Luke 15.

AEnig. 287.
How may one live in a gross sin till death, and yet be saved; and another
doing so shall not be saved?

Resolution.
General Repentance sufficient for secret sins.
If it be his secret sin, which he does not know and mark to be a sin, (such
as the polygamie of the Fathers, and fornication amongst the Corinthians, and
usury in England were thought to be) he that repented not of such sins
particularly, may be saved, so he do repent generally; whereas another living
in such a sin, against the light of his conscience, cannot be saved without a
special repentance for it. Luke 13.3.

AEnig. 288.
What is that, without which we cannot be saved, yet is no cause of our
salvation?

Resolution.
Good works necessary to salvation.
It is good works, which be no cause of our salvation, and yet the elect which
are of years, if they have space and time to do them, cannot be saved without
them, for they are the way to the kingdom, though they be not the cause of
reigning.

AEnig. 289.
To what purpose is it to do good works, yet we are neither justified nor
saved by them?

Resolution.
God works, They serve to many good purposes.
though they cannot merit our salvation, being both imperfect and spotfull, yet
are we bound to do them, to obey the commandment of God, to glorify the
doctrine and name of God, to edify our brethren, to witness and assure our
own faith and election, and finally, to stop the mouths of the wicked. Also
to aedifie the weak.

AEnig. 290.
How can our good works please God, seeing they have in them such wants and
spots as God hates?

Resolution.
As good works come from our faith and be fruits of Gods spirit, How they
please God.
so they please God, by the intercession of Christ, covering the defects and
stains of our works, by the mantle of his death and righteousness.

AEnig. 291.
If heaven be freely given for the merit of Christ, how is it then the reward
of good works?

Resolution.
Heaven a free reward of good works.
Though heavenly happiness be freely given as the purchase of Christ's passion,
yet because it is given in the end of our life after the works done, (as a
recompense uses to be given to laborers in the end of the day,) hence it is
in Scripture called a Reward, not of debt, as due to our work, but of free
favor, the better to encourage us to our work. Matthew. 5.

AEnig. 292.
How is it that no man did ever see the Father, and yet he that sees Christ
does see the Father?

Resolution.
God is to be known by Christ.
No man did ever see the Father immediately, because the brightness of his
Majesty cannot be endured by any mortal creature: but God being in himself
invisible, became after a sort visible in Christ, whose doctrine, life and
miracles, be as it were an image or looking glass, wherein to behold the
divine truth, power, bounty, mercy, and goodness.

AEnig. 293.
If in heaven we shall see God as he is, and know him as we are known, how is
it written, that then our knowledge shall cease?

Resolution.
In heaven our knowledge shall be perfect, Our knowledge not perfect here.
and immediate by the vision of God himself, and therefore such means as we
have here of getting knowledge shall cease; no books, no ministry, no
doctrine, etc.

AEnig. 294.
How is it eternal life to know God and Christ, and yet many shall perish
which know God and Christ?

Resolution.
It is the beginning of eternal life, to know God and Christ, Saving knowledge
is effectual and special
by the special knowledge of faith, begetting in us affiance and love in God:
therefore such as know God and Christ, and yet do perish, it is because their
knowledge is general, and empty of confidence and love.

AEnig. 295.
How may it be that one shall not see, that which he does see?

Resolution.
Practike knowledge is best knowledge.
That which one does see spiritually, it may be he shall make no use of it to
himself; and then he were as good not to see it at all?

AEnig. 296.
How may it be that darkness shall increase by light?

Resolution.
Knowledge without practice is fearful.
When such as are enlightened to knowledge, do not walk in that light, but sin
against the will of God, which they know; that light in the end increases
darkness, and leads to eternal darkness: as in the Pharisees, who persecuted
Christ against their knowledge. see Heb. 6.4.5.6.

AEnig. 297.
How may he that knows little, have more knowledge then he that knows much?

Resolution.
He that has little knowledge with good affection and care, Knowledge joined
with godliness.
to do what he knows, has more true knowledge, then he which knows much,
and does not practice; a little active knowledge, is worth much contemplative
knowledge, which is idle and unfruitful. 2. Pet. 1.5.6.7.

AEnig. 298.
How may there be a learned Ignorance, and an ignorant knowledge?

Resolution.
When we are willingly ignorant, Knowledge with sobriety.
of that which God would not have us know; this is a learned ignorance, as it
is a blockish knowledge, when we are curious to understand things hid from us,
or when we do not apply our knowledge to practice.

AEnig. 299.
What is that which a man may deal and give out to others, yet himself not
only still keep it, but have the more of it. And how?

Resolution.
It is knowledge of heavenly things, Knowledge grows by right use.
which the more we communicate and give out to others, the more we have of it,
seeing it increases by use, as it is written, to him that has it shall be
given?

AEnig. 300.
How may that which is grace, be an occasion of great sin?

Resolution.
Knowledge abused, an occasion of sin.
If the grace of God be turned into wantonnesses, as in those who abuse the
knowledge of Gods mercies unto liberty in sinning: grace general by abuse of
it is the occasion of sin.

AEnig. 301.
How may men prove wise, while they become fools; and prove fools when they
become wise?

Resolution.
Who be truly wise.
Such as become fools in themselves, laying aside all opinion of their own wit
in matter of salvation, giving over themselves wholly to be governed by Gods
word; these prove wise unto God, as they which are wise in their conceit,
thinking their own discretion sufficient to guide them, prove fools before
God.

AEnig. 302.
How can a mere man that is here on earth, be at the same time in heaven?

Resolution.
By christian hope, Hope.
whereby ^e so certainly looks for possession of heavenly bliss, as if already
he had it: for we are saved by hope. Romans 8.

AEnig. 303.
Seeing by faith we see our inheritance, how then can we hope for it, for hope
is of a thing not seen?

Resolution.
By faith we have a spiritual sight of our heavenly inheritance, How it
differs from faith.
in that we believe the promise of it, yet we do hope for it, because we have
not a present bodily sight and enjoying of it; hope looks for the effect of
the promise, faith to the truth of it.

AEnig. 304.
How may one at once believe both under hope and above hope?

Resolution.
One may at once believe under the hope of God, Hope above hope.
and above the hope of man: despayring in respect of man's reason or humane
helps, yet hoping well because of Gods promise and power, as Abraham did, Romans
4. who from barren Sarah could not hope for a Son, whom yet he hoped to have,
because God had promised.

AEnig. 305.
How are we saved by faith only, And yet it is written, that we are saved by
hope? Romans 8.

Resolution.
How saved by hope.
We are saved by faith, as the only isntrumental cause: And by hope we are
saved, because yet we enjoy not the salvation which we believe, but by hope
look only to possess it one day. Romans 8.

AEnig. 306.
How is it written that hope makes not ashamed, and it is an anchor: And yet
many there be, which say they hope to be saved, who are still wavering, and do
never attain the end of their hope?

Resolution.
Hope ashameth not.
It is Christian hope springing from God, and grounded on Gods mercy and truth
which confounds not; other hope is no more hope than a dead man is a man.

AEnig. 307.
How may one do well, who does not love till he be loved, and another if he
do so, shall do ill?

Resolution.
The elect being first loved of God in Christ, Our love of God springs from his
love to us.
and having that love shed abroad in their hearts through the holy Ghost, are
thereby moved to love God again, wherein they do well, according to that that
is written. 1. John. 4. We love God because he first loved us. But a wicked
man who does therefore love his neighbor, only because he was provoked by
some former love, and does not love God but in respect of some precedent,
temporal blessings, herein does ill, not loving purely.

AEnig. 308.
What gift is that that is both greater and lesser then faith, and how this may
be?

Resolution.
It is love which is greater then faith, Love lesser then faith being an effect
of faith.
First because it extends further, embracing God, angels, and men, both good
and bad men, whereas faith looks on God only upon whose promise it leans.
Secondly love is not only of larger extent, but of larger lasting and
continuance then faith, which cease when the thing believed is enjoyed,
whereas love remains in heaven after this life; howbeit love is lesser then
faith, because it is the daughter and fruit of faith, having no commendation or
force but from faith which alone does carry us to Christ: and gets us justified
and sanctified by him. A thing which love cannot do.

AEnig. 309.
How does love drive out fear, yet the fear of the Lord abides for ever?

Resolution.
Love mixed with childlike reverence.
Love drives out of the heart servile fear whereby God is feared as a Judge for
punishment sake; but the filial and chaste fear of the Lord whereby he is
feared as a father and savior, this fear abides for ever as a companion of
godly love.

AEnig. 310.
How may one at one time both forsake that which he has, and have that which
he forsakes?

Resolution.
For love of Christ's all so be forsaken
He may forsake it in affection, being ready to leave life, substance and all
for Christ if need be. And yet have all these still in possession.

AEnig. 311.
How may a Christian so esteem the least of Gods earthly blessings, as to
think himself lesser then it, yet ought so to contemn the greatest of them,
as to judge them loss and dunge.

Resolution.
In regard as they are love tokens, How earthly things to be loved under Christ.
and fruits of our redemption by Christ, lent unto Christians for comfort of
this pilgrimage, they ought highly to esteem the least, yet when they come in
comparison with the excellent knowledge of Christ, and with heavenly glory,
they may contemn them, and account them vile as dunge.

AEnig. 312.
Seeing we are commanded to honor our parents, how may we hate them without
sin?

Resolution.
When our Parents come in comparison with Christ and his Gospel, Parents less
to be loved then Christ.
in this case it is no offense to hate them, that is to love them less then
Christ, for natural affection must give place to godliness but simply to
hate them is a grievous sin?

AEnig. 313.
How may one worship the true God, yet have many Gods at the same time?

Resolution.
Idolatry to love ought more then Christ.
If he worship the true God in profession, yet give away his heart to riches,
pleasures and other earthly things; for this is spiritual idolatry, so many
things we make our Gods as we love and fear above God.

AEnig. 314.
How may two fear both one God, and the one do well the other ill?

Resolution.
True fear of God.
If the one fear him for his goodness, and mercy sake, because he would not
offend him by sin, and the other fear sinning, in respect of the evil and
torment following sin. This latter fears amiss, while the former fears a
right.

AEnig. 315.
How may one at once both fear and rejoice, or how rejoice in trembling?

Resolution.
First in respect of diverse obiectes, Gods children rejoice with fear.
as the women at the Sepulcre, feared at the sudden and glorious apparition of
an Angel, but were joyful to see and hear that Christ was risen; secondly
the godly do all their duties to God with joy and cheerfulness in respect of
Christ's mediation, and Gods acceptance: yet not without fear and reverence in
respect of Gods awful Majesty, and least by their own infirmity, duty be
not done as it should, Psalm. 2. 11.

AEng. 316.
What is that, that is so strong as can ouercom the mighty God, and how this
may be?

Resolution.
It is prayer, faithful, fervent, and humble, Humble prayer.
which after a sort causes the mighty God to yield unto it, hindering many his
judgments, and pulling down many benefits upon them, as is to be seen in
the example of Moses Exodus 32. and James 5. in the example of Elias praying
for rain.

AEnig. 317.
What is that, that speedes not when it speedes, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It is always heard
It is godly prayer which though it always obtain not that it does ask for,
yet it does ever obtain some thing better for us, as the lame man in Act. 4
though he missed the alms he begged, yet he got his strength which he asked
not; so many afflicted with poverty, sickness, pain, temptations, or
oth^rwise, are denied that releife they crave, yet have inward graces and
comforts given them, which have more benefit for them, 2. Cor. 12.

AEnig. 318.
What Messenger is that that is swifter then the Angels, And how this may be?

Resolution.
A speedy Messenger.
It is true prayer which sometime in a moment both carries our mind to heaven
and brings us back an answer, Dan. 9. Act. 10.4.

AEnig. 319.
How will God have no beggars in Israel yet in Israel there is naught but
beggars?

Resolution.
It is Gods will to have the poor so relieved and keept to work as no man
through extreme bodily want should be driven to beg of another, It must come
from a feeling of our spiritual beggary.
making beggary his profession or trade of life: yet in Israel (that is in the
Church of God) all be full of beggerie in respect of spiritual wants, whereof
the supply must how^ely be begged of God in Christ's name.

AEnig. 320.
How may one make a strong cry, and not yet open his month?

Resolution.
As Moses at the red sea cried unto God by the inward sighs of his heart,
There is inward mental prayer.
and yet he spoke never a word, the like did Annah 1. Sam. 1. the like do all
the Saints sometimes Romans 8. 26. the secret and silent groans of a renewed
heart are loud cries in Gods ear.

AEnig. 321.
How is it true that they that call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved,
and yet many shall say Lord, Lord, that shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven?

Resolution.
Vocal prayer.
All that call upon the name of the Lord, by the prayer of lively faith shall
be saved eternally: others that profess him outwardly and pray with their
lips only, have no promise of salvation made unto them.

AEnig. 322.
How may one as bare Lazarus make all Gods children both rich and poor,
beholden to him?

Resolution.
By prayer the poor profit the Rich.
By his earnest and devout supplications made to God for them, Luke 16. 9. rich
be more beholding to godly poor, then the poor to the rich.

AEnig. 323.
What is that, that ouercomes by yielding, and how this may be?

Resolution.
Patience.
Patience by bearing and forbearing, overcomes and gets the victory of the
fiercest mind.

AEnig. 324.
What is that that makes heavy things become light, and how this may be?

Resolution.
Relieues our miseries.
It is Christian patience which eases the burden of affliction, by willing and
constant suffering, 2. Cor. 4. 17.

AEnig. 325.
What virtue is that that makes one likest to Christ and vnlikest to Satan?

Resolution.
It is Christian humility, Humility.
Phil. 2. 5. none so humble as Christ, none so proud as the Devil and
Antichrist his eldest child.

AEnig. 326.
Who was he that was one of the chiefest sinners at that time, when he was one
of the chiefest Saints, and how?

Resolution.
The Apostle Paul insence of his own unworthiness felt himself the
ringeleader of offenders and so humbly confessed himself, Springes from
feeling of our vileness.
yet through Gods grace at the same time was a principal Saint and a chief
builder in Gods Church, 1. Tim. 1. 15.

AEnig. 327.
What is that that flies from men that follows after it, and follows him that
flies from it, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It is glory and praise amongst men, The humble are exalted.
which follows the humble that neglect it and flies from the proud that catch
at it.

AEnig. 328.
How may two go both together into the temple to pray, the one be heard the
other refused?

Resolution.
Prayers of the humble accepted.
A humble sinner, and a proud Iusticiarie, both praying together, the one is
filled with good things, and the other is sent away empty, Luke 18. in the
example of Pharisie and Publican.

AEnig. 329.
How is the Saboth day sanctified of God, yet we may not account one day holier
then another?

Resolution.
Sabbath holy.
Not in respect of the day, but of the use and end, which is his own holy
service, all days a like for the nature of the day, not for the work done in
the day.

AEnig. 330.
How is it a sin to be zealous, yet we are commanded to be zealous?

Resolution.
True zeal.
To be zealous without knowledge is a sin, wise and godly zeal is a special
Christian virtue, Romans 10. 2. Romans 3. 19.

AEnig. 331.
How is it that God abhors the sacrifice which him self has commanded?

Resolution.
First if it be not offered in faith and repentance, A broken heart better then
Sacrifice.
Esaias 1. Secondly when it is duly offered yet never so respected of God, as is
a broken and contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 16. it is a comparatiue speech like to
Hos. 6.

AEnig. 332.
How may one love God with all his heart, yet is bound heartily, to love his
neighbor?

Resolution.
If our neighbor be loved for God, Our neighbor to be loved for Gods sake.
in him, and after him, then is God never the less loved with our whole heart,
which still cleaues wholly to God, and is not divided between God and man: but
if man be not loved at Gods commandment, and to his glory, then the heart is
parted.

AEnig. 333.
How is love the bond of perfection, amongst those as be imperfect?

Resolution.
Brotherly love the bond of perfection.
Because it fastneth men one to another, and linketh all duties together, (as
things are knit together with a band) whereby men become the stronger against
evils and enemies, yet themselves still imperfect, because they lack fullness
of Grace and Charity.

AEnig. 334.
How is self-love a fault, yet we are commanded to love our neighbors as our
selves?

Resolution.
The love of a man's self is the pattern of a man's love to others.
Self love is a fault if we love our own corrupt reason and will, or if we
love our person with an ill grounded love; but it is a virtue for a man to love
himself (that is) his body and his soul with a right ruled love, and thus we
are commanded to love our neighbor.

AEnig. 335.
What thing is that which is both ours, and not ours, and how this may be?

Resolution.
Love makes all things common for use.
Our worldly substance and our spiritual graces, are ours in respect of
propriety, and not ours in respect of use. For we are bound to communicate
unto others as we are able, or as they have need, Act. 11.29. 30.

AEnig. 336.
What is that which makes things proper to be common, and cannot make things
common to be proper, and how this may be?

Resolution.
It is true Christian charity which makes such gifts whereof we our selves are
the proprietaries, It cannot make things common to be proper.
to be common in use for the weal of other, whereas on the contrary, Christ
with his merits, the word and Sacraments which be common to all, it cannot
make proper to any.

AEnig. 337.
How may one with charity curse others, seeing we are commanded to bless and
pray for our enemies?

Resolution.
The Prophet David out of the spirit of prophecy denounced curses and
execrations to the public desperate enemies of the Church, It loves private
enemies.
without the breach of charity, which it were not lawful to do unto our
private enemies(...)

Resolution.
Makes rich
1 The faithful in their greatest wants are heirs of the world. 2 Also in
Christ they possess all things. 3 Also in coveting nothing.

AEnig. 358.
What is that, that increases by spending, and wastes by keeping?

Resolution.
Good things increase by use.
A man's blessings spiritual and worldly do increase by giving them forth
according to our ability and calling: but they waste and wither away being hid
in the ground, as a talent in a napkin, for as to him who has, it shall be
given, so from him that has not, shall be taken that he has.

AEnig. 359.
How are we forbid to lust, yet we can neither live, nor live well without
lust?

Resolution.
Some lusts be good.
It is carnal lust either original or actual, with consent or without, which
we are forbid, when we lust some evil condemned of God: but it is natural
lust after things necessary for life, and spiritual lust after good things of
the life to come, without which we cannot live, or live well.

AEnig. 360.
What sorrow is that, that is the high way to joy?

Resolution.
Godly sorrow always ends in joy; Godly sorrow a path way to joy.
who so truly mourns for his sins as offenses of a good God, or for the
iniquities and afflictions of others: they so sow in tears, as they shall
reap in joy.

AEnig. 361.
How is grace the mother of good works, and yet good works be contrary to
grace? Romans 11.5.6.

Resolution.
It is the merit of good works, Grace the mother of good works
or the doctrine of deserving by them, and placing trust on them, which cannot
stand with the doctrine of grace, for if salvation or election be of grace, it
is not of works, yet one cannot do a good work, but thorough the aid of grace.

AEnig. 362.
How is death the wages of evil works, yet eternal life is not the wages of
good works?

Resolution.
Evil works merit hell.
Evil works are our own and be perfect, and so merit death as a stipend by
the justice of the law, which accurseth every sin: but our good works are
from God, not our own, and be due to him as a debt. also being imperfect
needing pardon, therefore cannot merit. Romans 6.25. Romans 8.18.

AEnig. 36.3.
What is that, that at once is both dead and immortal, and how this may be?

Resolution.
Unregenerate men
It is the soul of an unregenerate man, immortal by nature and Gods decree,
but dead in sins and trespasses. Ephesians. 2. 1.

AEnig. 364.
How can another be flesh of ones flesh, And yet this one not flesh of his
flesh?

Resolution.
Have no fellowship with Christ.
Christ the Son of God took the flesh and nature which is common to all men,
yet many men have no communion with Christ: he is flesh of their flesh, but
they be not flesh of his flesh; he one with them by communion of nature, and
they not one with him by communion of grace.

AEnig. 365.
How may one have body and soul, yet be all flesh and body?

Resolution.
A man unregenerate in respect of his qualities, Wholly poluted.
is all flesh and corrupt, in having a mass and body of sin, before his new
birth, yet as touching his substance he consists of body and soul.

AEnig. 366.
What creatures be they which being dead, are yet savage and wild?

Resolution.
Unregenerate persons are likened unto wild savage beasts, Of a brutish
disposition.
for fiercenes of nature, and their souls being dead through sin, they walk
after the wildness of their natural disposition, and so being dead are still
wild; yea therefore wild because dead spiritually.

AEnig. 367.
How may a branch be in the Vine, yet be fruitless and perish?

Resolution.
Christ is the Vine, Seem to be in Christ.
all Christians be as branches; whereas some be truly grafted into Christ by
a lively faith, and these bring forth good fruit; others be in him only by
profession, or in the account of the Church; or sacramentally, as having
received the pledges of union with Christ, tasting also some of his sweetness:
these remain barren and fruitless, Ioh. 15.2.

AEnig. 368.
How may a thing revive and live again, which was never dead?

Resolution.
In their ignorance of the Law sin is dead.
It is sin in a natural man, which being stirred and irritated by the Law
duly considered and understood, is thence said to reviue, Romans 7.9. whereas
before it was not dead in truth, but counterfetly: because it does not disquiet
the conscience: as a sleeping dog that stirs not.

AEnig. 369.
How may one that is already dead, be said to dye while he lives?

Resolution.
In the right knowledge of the Law themselves do dye.
When he comes to feel himself to be dead, and earnestly thinks of his own
damnation revealed unto him by the law, though he live in his body, yet he has
a sense and taste of eternal death in his soul, it fa^ing with him as with a
condemned malefactor, who dies while he lives. Romans 7.10.

AEnig. 370.
How may one be washed, sanctified, eat Christ; And yet not be saved?

Resolution.
One may be washed sacramentally, How far they may go, and yet perish.
sanctified generally, eat Christ in a mystery, (the sign of Christ, for
likeness called Christ himself) receive the common gifts of the Spirit, as to
pray, to preach, etc. yet be an hypocrite, as Saul, Judas, Simon Magus, etc.

AEnig. 371.
How may one be a great liar in speaking the truth?

Resolution.
An hypocrite speaking truth in his profession, The hypocrite is a great liar.
yet denying it in his works, proves a great liar, 1. Ioh. 1. 6.

AEnig. 372.
How may one be both a man and a beast at once?

Resolution.
As Herod was; by nature a man, Sin turns men into beasts.
in quality a fox for his subtlety and wiliness. Also obstinate and
desperate sinners, have the substance and shape of men, yet the condition of
dogs and swine, Mat. 7.7.

AEnig. 373.
Who is he that sleeps while he is awake?

Resolution.
Security.
The carnal and careless gospeller, his soul sleeps in sin, being secure of
Gods judgments, while his bodily eyes be awake; Contrary.
also on the contrary, the soul of the godly is watchful, when the eyes of
the body are closed with sleep: even in bodily sleep, his heart sleeps not.

AEnig. 374.
How does the Scripture call some righteous, who have no true righteousness in
them, or imputed to them?

Resolution.
Appearance of some righteousness in some wicked men.
One whose life is outwardly reformed, may lack both inherent righteousness, a
fruit of Sanctification, and imputed righteousness by faith, yet doing many
righteous deeds, may seem to himself and to others, to be righteous: and
sometime the Scripture calls such righteous, speaking of men, as they appear,
not as they are. Ezekiel. 18. and Ezekiel. 3.

AEnig. 375.
Who are they that joy in that that hurts them, and love that which they
abhor, and how this may be?

Resolution.
Sinful scorners rejoice in iniquity, Scorning, the height of sin.
and make a pastime of sin, which turns to their destruction in the end: also
they love such evils in themselves, as they abhor in others. Romans 2. Mat. 7.
2.3.4. Mat. 23.23.24. etc.

AEnig. 376.
How may it be that sin should be dead in any person, and that person not
mortified and dead to sin?

Resolution.
In the phrase of Scripture, Sin in many is still and quiet.
sin is said to be dead, when it lies still without moving, not vexing and
fearing the conscience; this is but a seeming death of sin, which may be and
is in many, who never knew what true death and mortification of sin meant. Romans
7.8.

AEnig. 377.
What bread is it that always hurts the owner and the eater?

Resolution.
Sin of oppression, dangerous.
It is the bread of oppression gotten by deceit and violence, which being sweet
in the mouth, proves gravel and bitterness in the belly. Prou.

AEnig. 378.
What sin is that, that most dishonoreth God, yet is least regarded of men?

Resolution.
Unbelief the greatest sin.
It is the secret unbelief of the heart, which at once robs God and spoils him
of his mercy, truth and power: whereas most men make least account of this
sin, because it is most high from common understanding and from common sense.

AEnig. 379.
How may one worship the true God, yet be an outward Idolater?

Resolution.
Outward Idolatry how many ways.
First, if the true God be worshipped in a strange manner, by a worship not
commanded in his word, as Papists. Secondly, if the true God be with Christ,
as the Jews and Turks do worship him. Thirdly, when men are

AEnig. 380.
How may one be both a Vassal and an Emperor at once?

Resolution.
If a worldly Prince be a slave to his own passions and lusts, Sinners be
slaves.
he is at once both a Vassal of sin, and Emperor of men. Also every godly
person

AEnig. 381.
What vice is that, that makes men likest the devil, and vnlikest to Christ,
and how this may be?

Resolution.
It is the vice of envy and pride, Envy a Diabolical vice.
whereby men most resemble Satan, who out of most deep pride against God, and
envy against man, overthrew himself and all mankind.

AEnig. 382.
What fountain is that, that sends forth both sweet waters and sour, and
how this may be?

Resolution.
A wicked tongue.
It is a malicious and blasphemous tongue, which at once blesses God, and
curses man. Iam: 3.9.10.

AEnig. 383.
How is ignorance a sin, yet one may be ignorant without sin?

Resolution.
How far ignor^nce is a sin.
Ignorance of some truth which we may know, and are bound to know, is a sin
against the first Commandment: yet one may be (without sin) ignorant of many
things which be impossible to be known, and vnbehoofefull; such is the
ignorance of Christ and of the Angel touching the last day; and of man touching
the same and all other secrets of God, which his word does not teach.

AEnig. 384.
What is that, that makes some men's best works their greatest sins, and how
this may be?

Resolution.
It is a false heart, or an evil unbelieving heart mockinge God with shows,
An evil heart mars chief works.
and men with apparances of piety and virtue, when all is rotten, and unsound
within at the bottom, Esaias 1. and Esaias 66.

AEnig. 385. 386.
How may one sin necessarily, yet not certainly and compulsarily?

How is there a necessity of sinning where there is a liberty of willing?

Resolution.
All wicked men sin necessarily, Wicked men sin freely yet cannot choose
but sin.
being servants and bondmen to sin so as they can do nothing but sin: yet
their will sinning freely by election they sin without compulsion, as Christ
says of the Jews John. 8. they would do the lust of Satan their father, yet
adds that they were bound, necessity and liberty may well meet together; a
thing may be freely done which is yet necessarily done, howbeit liberty and
compulsion cannot stand and agree in one man: the will of men is never
compelled, yet is it in servitude to lust.

AEnig. 387.
How may one at one time in respect of one thing both see and not see?

Resolution.
Idle knowledge.
An evil man may see a truth speculatiuely, to koow it, yet not so see the same
truth as to practice it.

AEnig. 388.
How may one deny him, whom he professes?

Resolution.
Denial of God.
If he deny him in deeds whom he professes in words.

AEnig. 389.
How may God justly not hinder sin when he may, yet it were a fault in us so
to do?

Resolution.
Men must hinder sin in others else they sin.
Also it is a part of justice in God not to hinder sin, when thereby former
sins are to be finished, lastly sometime this not hindering of Adams fall,
in David's and Salomons sin, in Peter's denial.

AEnig. 390.
How are we commanded to contend for the faith, and yet contention is forbid as
a fruit of the flesh?

Resolution.
There is a holy and necessary contention when according to our vocation we
strive for the fear and worship of God, What is strife is wicked.
for upholding the doctrine of faith with desire not to overcome men but the
errors unto Gods glory, and profit of the Church: but private contention with
bitterness in our own quarrels, or public needless and godless contentions
be fruits of the flesh.

AEnig 391.
How may one do many good things yet himself an evil man?

Resolution.
Herod and Judas not having faith and a good conscience were ill men, An evil
man can do no good work.
yet they did many things which for substance of the work done were good, and
good to others; yet in respect of the persons who did them, they were no good
but evil works, for an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit.

AEnig. 392. 393.
How may two move the same question yet the one offend the other not?

How may three laugh at one thing, and only one of them be without sin?

Resolution.
Actions to be judged of by the end and mind.
If the one move it curiously for strife sake, the other soberly for learning
sake, to be better instructed: or if the one do it out of doubt, and distrust
as Sarah about her son promised, the other out of faith as Abraham did who
laughed for joy because he believed the message touching a child in his old
age; but Sarah of unbelief was moved to laugh, Ismaell in flouting manner, as
a Scoffer, Genesis 21.

AEnig. 394.
How may one offend more by doing a good thing, then an other shall do, by
doing an evil thing?

Resolution.
Sinning against conscience.
He that does a good thing against his conscience, whiles he judges it evil,
is more a trespasser then he who does some evil ignorantly not knowing it to
be evil. Romans 14.


AEnig. 395.
How may one without offense of God ask something of him which he will not
give, yet another asking what he is willing to give, shall offend?

Resolution.
A child may ask the life of his father, Wicked prayers be sins.
a wife of her husband, yet not offend, (though God be unwilling to grant it)
being asked with condition of his will, the Isralites murmuring in distrustful
sort, asking meat which God was willing to give, did sin in their prayer,
Paul sinned not in craving to have that prick of the flesh removed though God
meant to deny it, because he prayed with submission to his will.

AEnig 396.
How may one be a looser at that time when he is a Winner?

Resolution.
Loss of soul the greatest loss.
A covetous man may win much worldly wealth and yet be thereby a looser of
his soul, also an evil preacher may be a looser of himself when he winnes
others unto God; Lastely many a wicked man loses his credit at what time he
gains some commodity.

AEnig. 397.
How is Usury a sin yet one may be an Usurer without sin?

Resolution.
Usury committed without sin. Lending being a work of mercy must be free as
Christ commands Luke 6.
Usury whereby we increase our stock by compact, in respect of lending money
or other things to the hindrance of our neighbor, is a sin, but to increase
our spiritual graces by the due use of them, is a Christian usury and
commendable.

AEnig. 398.
Seeing God alone is to be worshipped, how may we worship men without sin?

Resolution.
Evil worship is no impeachment to religious worship.
There is a religious divine worship (which by our bodies and souls is to be
performed to God, as to the searcher of the heart and Lord of all) whereof no
part can be given from him to any other without sin Act. 10. 26. Math. 10.
4. Revel. 19. 10. But a civil worship is due to magistrates and all our
betters, in respect of their authority and gifts even by the commandment of
God which not to give willingly is a sin.

AEnig. 399.
How may the first be last and the last be first?

Resolution
This is fulfilled in the Jews, Vocation of the Gentiles
and Gentiles, who being called after the Jews were received into favor and
stand in grace, while the Jews who were before them for outward vocation are
now cast out for their unbelief and become the last, they were last in
acceptance with God, who were foremost in his outward vocation, whereas the
Gentiles being last by vocation, became first in acceptance.

AEnig. 400.
What is that, that was once mortal and twice immortal?

Resolution.
It was Adams body once mortal by sin, twice immortal, Bodies immortal.
once by creation, second time by glorification.

AEnig. 401.
How may death which is as the wages of sin and porch of hell, be yet the
way and passage to heaven, or how may heaven and hell have both one gate?

Resolution.
Death natural is the gate and door to let into the palace of heaven, Death
the gate of heaven and hell.
such as fall a sleep in Christ, and others that die in unbelief and sin
into the dungeon of hell: this difference happens by the merit of Christ his
death, sanctifying death to his members, to be a porch of paradise, and not to
others, to whom it proves a part of their curse, a passage to the infernal
lake.

AEnig. 402.
If Christ has destroyed death by his death how is it that the godly must die?

Resolution.
Christ has destroyed and so taken away the sting of death, All men must die.
as it shall not hurt the godly, but help them rather; yet they die, first to
fulfill Gods decree, secondly to obey his will and ordinance, thirdly to be
joined immediately and fully unto Christ, their head having in their death put
of sins with their bodies.

AEng. 402.
How has Christ overcome death by his passion, yet death is the last enemy,
that shall be destroyed?

Resolution.
Death the last enemy must be destroyed.
Christ in his passion got a victory over death in part, at the last
resurrection he shall have a full conquest; before the curse was removed, but
at the judgment the thing it self shall be quite done away, to have no power
over faithful persons.

AEnig. 404.
How is it appointed for men once to die, yet there are many that shall not
die?

Resolution.
Ordinarily men die once by virtue of Gods appointment; Some only changed.
whereas some dead were raised, and other at the great judgment shall only be
changed, this is extraordinary, howbeit that change is a kind of death.

AEnig. 405.
How can a body which is dead and rotten yet live at the same time that it is
dead?

Resolution.
The bodies of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Certainety of resurrection.
(and so of other Saints) At what time they are dead and rotten in the graves,
they are (...) to God (to whom all live) who has made a Covenant of life with
the bodies of the elect, as well as with their souls, and is fully purposed to
raise them at the last day, therefore to him they are as if they were already
quickened to life, Math. 22. 23.

AEnig. 406.
How may it be that dust shall be made to live?

Resolution.
By the power of Christ.
At the resurrection bodies mouldred to dust, by the mighty power of Christ,
shall be restored to life, being joined to their own souls, 1. Cor. 15. 22.

AEnig. 407.
How is it that all shall rise from death, and yet the resurrection is called
the resurrection of the just?

Resolution.
Of men and women.
All men and women shall rise (for resurrection shall be of just and unjust)
but because the benifit of the resurrection appertains to the just, who shall
then be glorified in their bodies, thence is it called the resurrection of the
just.

AEnig. 408.
How may bodies be spiritual and yet remain bodies?

Resolution.
At the resurrection the bodies of the Saints being the same in substance as
before, Spiritual bodies after their resurrection.
yet because they shall be sustained and preserved by the immediate workeing
of the spirit, without natural means of Physic meat etc. hence are they
called spiritual, though they still be bodies, 1. Cor. 15.44.

AEnig. 409.
How is Christ judge of quick and dead, yet it is written that he came not to
judge the world?

Resolution.
Christ his coming in infirmity, Last judgment.
it was to be judged and condemned for sin, that he might purchase
redemption by the price of himself, but his second coming in glory will be
to judge the world, by rendering every man according to his works

AEnig. 410. 411.
If Christ be the only judge of the world how is it written that the Saints
shall judge the world?

How may it be that the Saints shall judge the Angels?

Resolutions.
Christ the Judge.
Christ shall judge the world (that is, the inhabitants, angels, and men) as his
fathers lieutenant, by his commission and authority gathering all before him,
inquiring into them, pronouncing a righteous vnreuocable sentence, which
presently and mightily shall be executed, thus Christ alone shall judge: the
Saints shall judge as his assistants, giving consent and approbation to his
sentence, How Saints shall judge.
1. Cor. 6. 2. 3. thus also shall they be judged even of Devils who are Angels
of the bottomless pit.

AEnig. 412.
How is it that the ungodly shall not stand in judgment, and God will not
enter into judgment with the righteous, yet both quick and dead shall stand
before him (that sits on the white throne) to be judged?

Resolution.
All judged yet with differences.
The righteous shall not come into judgment of condemnation, nor the wicked
into judgment of absolu^ion, but all shall come to the judgment of
inquisition and examination, Romans 14. 2. Cor. 5. 10.

AEnig. 413
What is that, that burns and consumes not, is changed and perishes, and
yet abides still, and how?

Resolution.
The Bush which Moises saw, The world but altered in quality not aboleshed.
Exodus 3. also the heavens, elements, and earth, shall be burned at last day,
yet their substance not consumed to nothing, but purified in that fire, like
metal refined in a furnace, that they may abide in an immortal and glorious
estate, being for our sin in bondage to corruption. Romans 8. 21.

AEnig. 414.
What country is that wherein is all day and no night, and how?

Resolution.
It is the country which we look for in heaven, Heaven.
where shall be an everlasting most glorious light without any the least
darke^esse.

AEnig. 415.
What country is that wherein is all night and no day, and how?

Resolution.
It is the region of hell where shall be a perpetual darkness without any light
Hell.


AEnig. 416. 417.
How may one live, being under and in an eternal death?

How may one be in hell that never came in hell?

Resolution.
Hell of conscience.
The life of the wicked in hell, shall be a dying life, and a living death; one
may be in the hell of conse^ence who never shall come in the hell of the damned.

AEnig. 418.
What reasonable creature is that which had a body, and never had soul?

Resolution.
Angels assumed bodies for a time.
The Angels are reasonable creatures who assume bodies by Gods dispensation;
when they were sent on messages to men, they a^^^^red as men; but whence those
bodies came, or whereinto they were dissolved, it is vnreuealeable, therefore
uncertain.

AEnig. 419.
What people be they whose life it is at once both happy and miserable, bitter
and sweet?

Resolution.
True Christians most blessed.
They be true Christians, Gods faithful children, who be happy and live
sweetly under the hope, rejoicing of eternal glory, but because they are most
troubled with sin, assalted by Satan, hated and persecuted by the world,
therefore their life is miserable and full of bitterness.

AEnig. 420.
What soul us that which never was mixed with body?

Resolution.
God is the soul of the world, which God is the Soul of the world.
as a body is quickened and ruled by the soul.

2 Also Faith is the Soul of our

3 Finally Christ is the Soul of the legal Ceremonies, whereof the truth

AEnig. 421.
What grace is that which once had, is never last, yet is utterly taken away?

Resolution.
A lively faith is gone and utterly taken away when we die and enjoy the
things believed: Li^ely faith ^^aseth at our death.
yet in this life it is never lost, being once had, by virtue of Christ's
prayer, Ioh. 17. and by Gods covenant, which is everlasting. Ier. 32.

AEnig. 420.
What gift is that whereby we live to God, yet it self shall dye when we live?

Resolution.
No use of it in heaven.
We live now by faith in the Son of God, Romans 1. 17. Gal. 2. last: but when we
shall live by sigh^ in heaven, then shall be no use of faith.

AEnig. 421.
What rich man is he who made a great supper without meat?

Resolution.
Christ entertained by a faithful soul.
It is Christ Jesus when he comes to suppe with a faithful soul without
earthly delicates.

AEnig. 422.
What fire is that which being once kindled, is never quenched and how this
should be?

Resolution.
Hell fire unquenchable.
The fire of contention between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the
woman, will never be extinct.



AEnig. 423.
Seeing all living creatures here in earth be corruptible, how is there a
worm that shall never dye?

Resolution.
It is that worm mentioned in the Gospel, Torment of the damned.
even horror of conscience for sin, which shall gnaw the soul everlastingly,
even as wood is eaten by the worm.

AEnig. 424.
How are we forbid to fashion our selves to this world, yet without sin we
may fashion our selves to the world?

Resolution.
We are forbid to fashion our selves to the world of the wicked, We must not
follow the wicked.
by imitating their ungodly customs and ways, but to follow the world of
believers, by living after their good example. this is a duty.

AEnig. 425.
How we may have two minds, and but one soul?

Resolution.
A regenerate man, Our mind renewed in part.
having but one soul, yet in the state of corruption had his mind wholly
depraved, which by grace is wholly renewed, but not perfectly; whence it is that
still, he has both a good mind and an evil.

AEnig. 426.
How may they wait for adoption, which be already adopted; and how this may
be?

Resolution.
The full fruit of Adoption enjoyed in Heaven.
The adopted children of God, which be already sons, and have the spirit of
adoption, yet they do want the full fruition of the heavenly inheritance,
(being hear cloyed and clogged with sins and miseries) which they do both
earnestly and certainly wait for.

AEnig. 427.
Whether dumb and deaf may be saved, seeing faith is by hearing, and only
believers are saved?

Resolution.
Dumb and deaf, how saved.
Infants, idiots, dumb and deaf, which be the children of faithful parents,
they be within the covenant, and have the seal thereof, therefore charity
will hope well of their salvation. Secondly, though they lack the ordinary
means of engendring faith (to wit) hearing of the word preached: yet seeing
this comes to pass without their own default, by defect of years or
senses, therefore God who is not tied to the means necessarily may without
them, and does inspire faith into so many of them as be elect; the Spirit
blows where he list; if the Ravens call upon God, what lets but Christian
Infants may in their kind and degree? yea the Scripture does attribute a kind
of invocation to them as Psalm. 8. And how shall they call on him, whom they do
not believe, therefore they may have faith, as they have reason, the faculty,
without the use.

AEnig. 428.
How is God found of such as seek him not, seeing it is written, God is found
of such as seek him?

Resolution.
Elect sinners before they be found of God and converted, Elect, found of God
before they seek him.
they are found without their seeking: God rather seeks them as in the Parable
of the lost sheep, Luke 15. and of the Vineyard, Math. ^^. but being once found
and co^^^ted, God moves them to seek, by which seeking, they shall find God
more and more, and thus they find when they do seek.

AEnig. 429.
How can men's flesh or garments be unclean, seeing they be the creatures of
God, and all be good which he has created?

Resolution.
They may be unclean ceremonially, by touching of a Leper or dead corpse,
Uncleanness
etc. Secondly, as creatures they be not unclean but clean, yet may be and
are defiled by contagion of sin.

AEnig. 430.
How can God punish children with their parents, who sin not as they sinned?

Resolution.
Original sin in Infants.
Children do not sin by actual transgressions, as their Parents do, yet
have in them the selfsame original corruption, which they drew from their
parents, and which will bring forth in time (in such as be left to their
natural sin) the selfsame fruits; therefore as men destroy young Wolves
and Foxes, because they take the same pestilent nature and qualities with their
dammes; so God is just by smiting the parents upon the children, for they be
guilty (by birth-sinne) of his wrath, and will tread in their parents steps.

AEnig. 431.
How Christ can be said to be only wise, seeing others (as Solomon) be wise
also?

Resolution.
Christ his wisdom is essential to him; also most perfect, Man; wise but by
participation of Christ's wisdom.
whereby he (as God) knows himself and all things exactly, yea and he is
the Author of all wisdom, both in Angels, and men, and thus he is only wise,
which word only excludes not the persons of the Trinity, but creatures, who
are wise but in part, and by participation of Christ his wisdom; and so as
they cannot give their wisdom to others.

AEnig. 432.
How can we give any glory unto God, seeing he can receive no more than he
has?

Resolution.
The glory which we give unto God, is an acknowledgment and confession of Gods
glorious properties, How men-giue glory to God.
his wisdom, goodness and power before men, that they magnify him with us,
and not any addition to his most absolute glory, which he had with himself
from everlasting. Ioh. 17.4.

AEnigma 433.
How does Christ say to his Apostles, you have entered into other men's labors
yet Paul denies that he built upon any other man's foundation?

Resolution.
How Paul built on no other man's foundation
Christ means the Prophets, and the labors which they take to instruct the
Jewish Church, by their divine writings: and Paul says truly, that he built
on no man's foundation, because he preached to the Gentiles, which before had
not heard of Christ, as he says, Romans 15.

AEnigma 334.
How is every man bound to please his neighbor, yet he that pleases man
cannot be the servant of Christ?

Resolution.
How one man must please another.
We must please our weak neighbor in that which is good and profitable to
aedi^ie him, Romans 15. 1.2. but wicked and stubborn sinners in that which is
against honesty and religion, we may not please, if we will approve our
selves the servants of God: and thus Paul is to be understood of pleasing
Infidels, against Christian faith to their destruction, Gal. 1.10.

AEnig. 435.
How was the sound of the Apostles gone into the whole world then, when the
Gospel was not every where preached?

Resolution.
That in Paul his time the sound of the Gospel, Gospel, how preached to all
the world.
came into all places of the habitable, and inhabited world, is very clear by
To. 15.19. and Col. 1.6. and 23. and Romans 11. according to the commission of
Christ, Matthew. 28. which no doubt the Apostles faithfully executed; howbeit now
in our times many of those countries which first enjoyed that light, have
through their unthankfulness lost it, as Christ threatens, Revel. 2. Also
some Countries might then lie drowned under water, (which are bared and dry
since,) and some since found out which were then unknown.

AEnig. 436.
If God be rich toward all, how be any rejected and left poor and naked of
grace?

Resolution.
All saved how to be understood
By (all) is not meant every singular person, but it is put distributiuely here
in Romans 10. 11. to all (that is) whether Jews or Gentiles, without distinction
of Country as in time past, under the law: also restrictiuely with limitation,
to all which believe and call upon him.

AEnig. 437.
How is it that the Prophet prays to be taught to number his days, yet every
child can do so much?

Resolution.
Numbering our days.
It is one thing to number our days Arithmetically, to sum up our years
which is soon done; it is another thing to number them Theologically, or
Christianly to be led to wisdom and godliness, by consideration of their
shortness and uncertainty, which is not done but by grace from God.

AEnig. 438.
How may one at once be married and not married, possess riches and not
possess, use the world and not use it?

Resolution.
This is done by mortification and denial of a man's self, Mortification.
and contempt of the world, which causes that they which are indeed married and
have possessions, yet have no hinderance thereby to godliness, and the
kingdom of heaven, because they set not their hearts upon them.

AEnig. 439.
How the same persons may be at once both children and servants to another?

Resolution.
As God is both a Lord and Father, A Child and a Servant both at once.
so the bel^^^^ may be at one time, though (...) respects, Servants to the
(...), and Children to that Father.

AEnig. 440.
What ladder is that, which touches both heaven and earth; and how this may
be?

Resolution.
That ladder is Jesus the son of man, The ladder to heaven is Christ.
Ioh. 1. ^v.last. who touches heaven by his divinity, and earth by his
humanity; also his mediation has made peace between heaven and earth, joining
God and men together, who were enemies through sin. Ephesians. 2. and finally, by
whom it is alone, that we have access to the kingdom of heaven, for he is
scala Coeli, and the way and life.

AEnig. 442.
How may creatures descend and ascend upon a ladder which has no stayers or
steps?

Resolution.
Upon who the Angels ascend and descend.
The Angels, those most noble creatures, by ministering to Christ their head, and
for his sake and honor unto his members, do ascend and descend upon the Son
of man, that mystical and immateriall ladder.

AEnig. 443.
If God dwell in heaven, and heaven be a creature, how was God without a
dwelling before the heaven was made?

Resolution.
The Heavens wherefore made.
This I answer with Augustine, God neither needed house to dwell in, when there
was no heaven made (for he was a heaven and a house to himself) neither the
heavens being made, he did find a seat as a stranger wearied with wandering:
the heavens have no glory whereby God is more blessed, but whereby Angels and
men may be more happy, in beholding and enjoying there the glory and majesty
of their good. Creator.

AEnig. 444.
How is it written, that we know not what to ask, yet the Lord has taught us
in a prayer what we should pray for?

Resolution.
We have a prayer given to teach the matter of our petition: The Spirit it is
that teaches us how to pray.
but the right manner of asking we must be taught by the Spirit, who also in
extremities and perplexed cases, suggests motions and requests, such as we our
selves know not of. Romans 8.

AEnig. 445.
How may it be said, that the wicked know God, and yet the Scripture denies
that they know him?

Resolution.
They know him by a general knowledge from the sight of the creation, The
wicked how said to know God.
but not by a special knowledge of faith: they know him as a God, but not as a
Savior. Finally, they know him historically, not effectually to salvation.

AEnig. 446.
If the Spirit make intercession for us, how is Christ our only intercessor?

Resolution.
The spirit, how it prays for us.
The Spirit makes intercession one way, by suggesting and prompting us, helping
us to pray, Romans 8. and Christ another way by merit of his death.

AEnig. 447.
If Christ be Lord of all, how is he called a servant?

Resolution.
Christ; how called a Servant.
A servant, in respect of his Father who sent him with commandment, to teach
and redeem his Church, Esaias 53. in respect whereof he is Lord, having
purchased it by his death, and now governing and preserving it by his Spirit
and power.

AEnig. 448.
Romans 9.1.
How may Paul swear, yet break not the precept, which says, swear not at
all?

Resolution.
Swearing; how forbidden.
The precept forbids rash swearing, and swearing by creatures, as appears in
the place of Mat. 5. Paul swear advisedly in a weighty cause by the name of God
only.

AEnig. 449.
How can he be said to return to us, who is ever with us?

Ever with us by presence general, by essence and power; yet returns by his
grace and benefit, when God restores them to such as were in part, and for a
time without them.

AEnig. 450.
How can he be said to differ or long to put off, who does all things in due
time?

Resolution.
In respect of us who judge of God as we would do of men, How a thing may be
said to be prolonged yet done in due time.
or because he comes not when we would; yet when it may be best for our
good, and that is due time.

AEnig. 451.
How can Christ be of the seed of David, seeing he came not of Joseph?

Resolution.
His mother Mary was of David's stock, and lineage, How Christ is said to be the
son of David.
and that is enough to make Christ the son of David after the flesh, Romans 1.
5.

AEnig. 452.
Seeing the Godhead did not arise, how was Christ declared God at his
resurrection?

Resolution.
The raising of his dead body by his own power was an argument of his godhead,
The raising of Christ's body an argument of his godhead
which though it rose not, yet witnessed it self in quickening and raising of
his dead body.

AEnig. 453.
If every man be a lier, how is not he a lier who spoke and wrote this?

Resolution.
How all men are liers.
Not in speaking and writing, a lier, because he was inspired of God, and
preserved from error in his doctrine, and writing, yet naturally a lier as
other men be all without exception.

AEnig. 454.
How can Paul say no man is justified by the works of the law, and again the
doers of the law are justified, and say truly?

Resolution.
The works of the law justify not and why.
He says truly in both if we understand him to speak of the works of the
law, in one place as they be performed of us vnperfitly so they justify not;
and in the other place as they be commanded of God, in all perfection, so they
are able to justify: in that they do not, the cause is in us who fulfill them
not, Romans 8. 3.

AEnig. 455.
Abraham believed and it was accounted to him for righteousness, and Phineas did
a work which was reckoned to him for righteousness, how does this agree?

Resolution.
Very well, if by righteousness in the one place ye mean forgiveness of
sins, Of Faith and works
imputation of righteousness by the obedience of Christ; and a righteous act
or duty in the other place: for works justify declaratiuely though not
effectiuely.

AEnig. 456.
How is patience both the cause and effect of experience?

Resolution.
The cause by working experience and trying Gods goodness, Of patience
and power, upon which follows increase of patience, as an effect of that
experience, Romans 5. 6.

AEnig. 457.
How is that justification does not abound toward all, seeing condemnation
came upon all?

Resolution.
Because all be not in Christ by faith as all were in Adam by creation. Of
justification and condemnation.
Christ is justification to all his, as Adam is condemnation to all th^^ come
of him Romans 5.

AEnig. 458.
Seeing all men were Gods own, how was it that he bought them?

We were bought with a price.
He bought us with a price in as much, as we were by Gods righteous judgment for
sin inthralled to Satan who was Lord over us, till Christ by the ransom of
his life redeemed us?

AEnig. 459.
Seeing Baptism is a Sacrament of repentance and mortification, and infants
cannot repent and mortify sin, how is it that they are Baptized?

Baptism of infants.
Baptism is given Infants by the right of the covenant to which they belong,
and therefore ought to have the seal which is a lesser thing; also the grace
of repentance is both sealed and furthered in Infants by this Sacrament, also
the effect of Baptism follows long time atfer the act of baptism.

AEnig. 460.
How is it that any were damned, seeing the Apostle says, he that is dead is
freed from sin, and where no sin is, there is no damnation?

Resolution.
Dying to sin.
They which be ciuilly dead, sin not by outw^^d actual sin, as theiues
strangled steal no more, all such as be spiritually dead are freed from the
dominion and power of sin.

FINIS.

