A Discourse upon vsurye, by way of Dialogue and oracions, for the better
varietye, and more delight of all those, that shall read this treatise.

By Thomas Wilson, doctor of the Civil laws, one of the Masters of her
majesty's honorable court of requests.

Seen and allowed, according to the Queens Majesty's injunctions. 1572.

To the right honorable, high and mighty Earl, his most especial and
singular dear lord, the lord Robert Duddeley, Earl of Leycester, Baron of
Denbigh, master of the horse to the Queen's Majesty, knight of the noble order
of the garter, Chauncelloure of the university of Oxforde, and one of her
hyghenes most honorable preuy counsel: Thomas Wilson Doctor of the Civil
laws, wishes perfect health, with increase of honor to godds most holy will
and pleasure.
THe Stoike Philosophers (right honorable and my singular good Lord) have
said both truly and wisely, that the world is made for man, and man is made
for god, to the end that man may have all pleasure, and god may have all
honor. Saying then, that such a creacio^ of man, and the world, is thus framed
by the myghtie finger of god, and man especially made for god: I doubt not,
but your honor being gods lively image upon earth, and fashioned to his
lykenes, concerning the reasonable soul, as all others such his creatures
are: will remember for your part, to forsee and to do your duty from time,
to time, and endeavor youreselfe in all your actions to have god always before
your eyes, and to exercise your mind all your life long, with all godly
practices, as well in aduauncing religion, to gods glory, as in dooyng
Justice for ma^s benefit, that god alone as he is always praised in Heaven
amongst his angels, may even so have his holy name only honored here upon
earth amongst his people. But because man's nature, through Adames fall, is
altered from that perfection, wherein it was at the first, and is much subject
therefore to great corrupcion of life and manners: It is to be feared, that all
men will not always be myndefull of their duty, except they be often warned
and put in mind of that they ought to do, whereby they may consider still
what they are. For by wanting the remembrance and exercise of well dooyng: they
may declyne from god, (a thing sone done where god is not feared) and so
wallowe in sin, the plain effect of graceless people. For ye devil being
great adversary to all goodness, (whom that ancient father of famous memory
Hughe Latymer, called the most vigilant bishop in his vocation) is never idle,
but still occupied and busy, in sowing cockle and darnel amongst the good
corn and pure wheat of the lords harvest. So that if their be not as quick
wedyng hooks, and as sharp iron forkes; ready at hand to cleanse the soil
from time to time, as the weeds are, and wilbee ready to spring up and grow:
in the end all will be wedes, and antichrist himself will be lord of the
harueste. This must I say, that warenes in all things is evermore very
wisdom, and of advised dealings comes perfection, and things foreseen do
always the less harm. For which cause laws are enacted, not only to punish
evil, when any is committed, but also to prevent evil not to be committed
at all, that men being warned before hand, may take heed the rather, how to
offend laws for fear of the sword, and live in good order, to escape the
severity, and sharp rod of justice. I do wish therefore that man were as
apt to do right, as he is ready to speak of right, and to be all
together, as he would seem to be: least otherwise laws stand not in vain,
when great occasion geeues just cause of speedy redress. And in this behalf
magistrates are to be put in remembrance, that they having government and
execucion of justice in their hands, may be good ryghters of all wrong
doings, and just dispensers of gods law, and man's law, both to low and
high, to rich and poor, without any respect or regard of parson. For most
true it is, that where justice is duly ministered, there is god most hyghly
honored, and sweet is that sacrifice to god, when the lives of lewd men are
offered up to suffer pains of death for wicked doings. I will not speak to
aggrauate execucion for all mysdeedes, either severally or generally, because I
think it both nedelesse, and a great folly also, and a thing almost
impossible for man to hope by only demau^ding, to have the amendment of all
things preciselye, that presentlye are amysse: but this I reach at, that
where amongst a number of gawles and great greefes in this common weal, there
spredeth one especial mischief as ill, nay worse than any plague: my meaning
is to set all other faults aparte, and to disclose this one above the rest
unto your Lordship, that by your honorable means and great aucthoritye, it
may at the least be some what reformed, if not all together amended or
taken away. I do mean that ouglie, detestable and hurtefull sin of usury,
which being but one i^ grossenes of name, caries many a mischief linked unto
it in nature, the same sin being now so rank througout all England, not
in London only, that men have all together forgotten free lending, and have
given themselves wholye to live by foul gayning, making the lone of monye a
kind of merchandise, a thing directlye against all law, against nature, and
against god. And what should this mean, that in stead of charitable dealing,
and the use of almose (for lending is a spice thereof) hardenes of heart has
now gotten place, and greedy gain is cheefelye followed, and horrible
extorcion commonly used. I do verily believe, the end of this world is nyghe
at hand. And the more is this evil to be pitied, because men do lulle
themselves with the exercise thereof in such sort, as though there were none
offense in it at all, whereas amongst all other offenses next to Idolatry, and
the renouncing of god, and his magistrates upon earth, there is none more
heinous, none more offensive, and none more hurtful, to any well governed
common weal. For besides that the very sin of usury, is expreslie forbidden
by godds word, as well as either theft, aduowtrie, or whoredom: the country
and realm where this offense is commonly used, cannot long continue in
prosperous welfare. And sorry I am to say it, but I see it and know it
ouerwel, and therefore I must needs say it: I do not know any place in
christendom, so much subject to this foul sin of usury, as the whole
realm of England is at this present, and has been of late years. For men
of wealth are now wholly geeuen every wheare all together to idleness, to get
their gain with case, and to live by lending upon the only sweat and labor
of others. Whereas god wills every man to live in his vocation, and he that
will not labor either with body or mind, according to his calling rightly,
should not eat at al, forbiddi^g men to make le^ding a ki^de of liui^g. But
these men do not live in any vocation, but being the devils known apprentices
in earth, and bound to do, as he would have them: seek when they are dead
to serve him in hell, as I take it. For god says by his prophet David,
Psall. 15.
that he shall never dwell in his tabernacle, that has put out his money for
usury. And therefore, whether should such men look to go, when they are
dead, but straighte to the devil, seeing in earth they serve such a master.

There be two sorts of men, that are always to be looked upon very
narrowly, the one is the dissemblinge gospeller, and the other is the wilful
and indurate papists. The first under color of religion, overthrows all
religion, and bearing good men in hand, that he loves playnesse, uses
couertelie all deceypte that may be, and for pryuate gain, undoes the
common welfare of man. And touching this sin of usury, none do more openly
offend in this behalf, then do these counterfeite professors of this pure
religion. The wilful Romaniste, as he professes an hatred to this religion,
so having mischief boiling within him, deuiseth by indirecte means to
advance his welfare, that he may have monye in store against a good hour,
such as he looks for. So that betwixt the secret dissembler, and the open
blasphemer, the world is made a pray, and divided betwixt them, and god
thereby most hyghely dishonored. Neither do either of these people follow
you for your person or virtue, but for your fortune and aucthority. Cicero
sayethe wiselye, wholesome severity, does greatly excede the vain show of
folish pity. Cleme^cie is good, I deny not, but that is to be used to good
men, or else toward such as of whom there is good hope of their better
behauioure hereafter. But where clemency is altogether abused, and makes as
it were an open way to all lowsenes in manners and carnal liberty of life,
there severity must needs stryke a stroke. For to what end are good laws
made, if there be no execucio^ of them? As good pyke strawes, as make laws
that want a magistrate, to see them well kept obeyed and fulfilled. For the
law it self, is a du^me magistrate to al men, whereas magistrates are a
speaking law to all people. And therefore, as governors do submit themselves
to law, and live thereafter: so will the people submit themselves to
governors and their doings: such force (lo) has example of life,
especially in magistrates. Neither are governors private persons, to live
honestly to them selves only, but they are public officers to do good unto
many, and by wise advise, to have care over them, that neither will, nor can
have care of themselves. And this I say, that like as one may be a good
magistrate to the people, and yet no god man to himself: even so may one be a
good man to himself, and prove no good magistrate to the people. And of these
two, less harm does that man, who priuatelye offends in his life: than he
that publikelye offends in his charge. Nedeful therefore were it, that all
magistrates were good men in their offices, because the common welfare
depends upon their well doing. And good it were also never to remitte
apparante great faults unto any person in aucthority. For the magistrate
abusing his office, deserves more punishmente than does the private person.
For as he abuses his charge, so does he deceive his trust, and by example
geeuethe great cause of much evil But let no men in any estate presume
therefore to do evil, because they hope to hyde their evil. doyngs from the
princes knowledge. For time does discover all, and god has granted this
priuylege unto princes, that wicked attemptes, shall never have deep root.
For although wrong dealings may be shrouded for a space, and be kept under
couerte: yet they will out at last, and be opened with shame, the rather to
set forth gods mighty justice, and to advance his endelesse glory

Amongst the Romans, there were censores, appointed as commissioners, to
search out the doyngs of such as either had borne office, or were notorious
offenders: and finding any such to be faulty, they did streighte ways remove
them, and punish them with infamy. The same order is yet used in Italy,
Spain, and Portugale, and good justice done against all unjust magistrates,
and evil lawyers. And thus it is. Such as over hastelye have risen to great
wealth, have been sifted for their life and doings by commission, and stripped
out of all, when they were taken in a trippe. Now then, needs must I say thus
at this time, that amongst all sorts of men, sin abounds here for wants of
chastisemente, evil men being over ryfe, and good men over scante, such as
should do good. Or else how is it, that usury amongst other sins (for I will
at this time say nothing of magistrates) is so universally used, which ought
in any wise to be weeded out above all other fa^tes. For as I think, and must
say still, usury only, is the cheifest cause of the greatest misery in this
land, as well to geeue occasion of great waste, as also to make much want,
and will be in the end, the undoing of all, if it be not looked to in time.
The Romans never began to decay, till usury lorded amongst them, for then
private gain thrust out common profit, lust was holden for law, ydlenes
more used then labor, ryott in steed of diett, vice better regarded then
virtue, no charity at all, no love betwixt man and man, but every man for
himself, and the whorlepole of pride and ryote ouerflowed in all things, and
in all places.

Plato says, there must be three things in every good state. A magistrate
to govern, laws whereby to govern, and execucion of laws for maintenance
of government. And Diogenes said well, where neither laws have force, nor
water has course: there should no wise man willingly seek to dwell. For where
evil men bear rule, (as it is always, there where laws are stopped of
their ordinary course) there cannot any good man have place, because they
are always contrary. And this I say, that in all commonweals, it is as
great a blame not to cherishe and maintain the good and godly, as it is a
great shame to suffer the offender and wicked man to go unpunished. For both
must have their deserts, or else yt state is not justly governed. And as
weeds are to be rooted out of every gardeine, so are good herbs to be often
watered and cherished still, with good earth or else they will perish, and wyther
soon away. And amongst all others, I would the religiouse learned men of
this land, were so cherished and esteemed, as they have well deserved, and
together with their good cherisinge, I would their good warninges were
thoroughly followed. Yea I would they were better holden up, in that which they
have maintained and professed in good learning: although their livings and
entertainements were not made much greater: The preachers I do mean, and the
godly ministers of this time, for they still exclaim maynely against sin to
discharge their duties, they cry out continually against all usurers with open
mouth, and in all their sermons, and yet, what auailes it? nothing at al. The
reason is, for yt the civil magistrate does not join with them, and see that
executed by censures of the law, which they so earnestly rebuke in the
pulpite, and show forth godds threats most vehemently, for such sins so
much suffered, and so little punished. For what says the lewd man, when the
good preacher has done? See how properlye he gyrdes at the matter, yonder
sellie man (says he) has said, but he can do no more, thanks be to god.
And fond is y^ man, says y^ usurer to others, whatsoever he be, that will
not suffer a poor simple preacher to have his words, when others have the
deeds, and live in all wealth and iolytye in this world. Lord god send to
England some Solon, for this redress, who took away the usurers books and
their gaynes from them, and forbadde such filthy lucre, and brought in nouas
tabulas, which are said in greek to be Seiuachtheia, (...)
as who should say, an easement of a burdeine. For that all debtours were
discharged from all such creditours that had lent their money for usury and
gain, or at the least wise, were eased from the usury of it. Thus did Solon
in the detestacion of usury, a sharp kind of dealing no doubt, and a
strange: but in great diseases, sharp corrysiues must needs be used, when
lenitiues will not serve. And shall I name one, that has been in our age, and
wish him now a live, to cure so great a cancre? Would god England had a
Cromwell, I will say no more. I do read, that long before the conquest, king
Edgare, that just gouernoure and severe magistrate against all lewd officers
and extorcioners in this land, did amongst his other good deeds make
proclamacion to have all the wolfes killed in England and Wales, because they
were rauenouse beasts, and deuourers of sheep and other cattle, to the great
harm and hynderaunce of his subjects. And to have this the better done, he
appointed many to pay for their fines and revenues, wolfes heads yerelye:
some more, and some less, and such as could not bring wolfes heads in, paid
their fines and revenues in money. Now such force took this good order in this
land, that within a while, there was not a wolf to be had, neither in
England* nor yet in wales. And Laudvvallus prince of Wales brought in 300.
wolfes heads in one year for his tribute, which he was bound to pays
yearly. And afterward when no more wolfes heads were to be had, he paid to
the king a certain yearly revenue. This was a good deed surely, and a
gracious proclamacion: for since that time, which is six hundredth and odd
years past, no wolfes have troubled this land.

Now if your lordeship, with others could procure by your good means, that
in your time, there might be never an usurers head in England: I do think
you should do a greater good deed to this land, then ever was done by
kyllinge of wolfes. For these be the greedy cormoraunte wolfes in deed, that
rauyn up both beast and man, who whiles they walk in sheep skynnes, do
couertlye deuowre the flock of England, under color of their wealth and
counterfeit honesty. And what if there were therefore a law to search out
these hypocrites, and to vnuisar these maskinge minyons, and such as they be,
that make war of set purpose against god and his laws, that strive so
maynelye against his holy will and commandments. And the same law to be
so executed, that as wolfes have been ridd out of this land, they should all
likewise either suffer the pains of death, or be banished this realm for
ever, that there might herafter no more usurers be found in England, than are
wolfes to be had here at this day? I do think surely, this would be as
sweet a smelling sacrifice in the sight of god, as ever was offered since
England was first converted to the faith. King David praiyng god to send
unto his son Solomon judgment and righteousness, says that his son being
assisted by the mighty power of god, shall be honored of all princes upon
earth, because he should deliver the people from usury. A great good deed no
doubt, and worthy of such great honor as Solomon afterward enioied, and a
very meet example for all princes to follow, that they might have like
honor. And touching a law to be made, I do not see, but it is as necessary
to have one against usurers as against thieves, and a great deal more. For
thieves steal many times for necessity, whereas usurers rob and undo all
men, for greedy gluttonye. The one steals a crown in the high way, the
other robs men in the high streate, of all that they have: the one steals
a little, to sustain nature: the other scratcheth up the whole treasure of
England, to serve his own covetous and wretched desire, to the utter undoing
of thousands. Therefore it were good, these usurers were all gone one way or
other, out of this realm, for here in England they do no good at al, nay,
they do all the myschiefe that is done, and will be the cause of utter ruin to
this land, if they be not taken up in time, and cut shorter by the heads.
Good men therefore must have this care to sifte out lewd men, and till
governors give good example of good life, evil men will continue to be evil
still. But if this law seem blodie, although the hanging of poor wretches for
small matters, is counted nothing blodie at all: then would I, that the old
laws of England were put in execucion, such as are called king Edwards laws,
or the common laws of England, whereof one was, that the goods of an usurer
after his decease, should turn to the benefit of the prince, when twelve men
had found by proof, that the party deceased was an usurer in his life time.
For in those days, no enquiry was made by verdict so long as a man lived,
whether he was an usurer or no: but y^ matter was referred wholly to yt
ecclesiastical laws during men's lives. This I think would make the fewer
usurers, when twelve men should be triers after their deceases what trade
they used in their life, and finding them by proof to have committed usury
(which as Glanuil says, Glann. l^. 7. (...). 16. and li. 10. (...). 3
is then done when any thing is received over and above the principal) to
geeue up straight ways the dead man's goods from his heirs, executours and
assigns, to the prince and governor of the land. But some will say, if the
laws were put in execucion, it would turn to the hurt of all me^, for that
none would lend hereafter to any body, either more or less, and need there
wilbee always, as there has been heretofore. I do answer, and say, that
the hungry desire of man, does enforce need many times further, then there
is cause of need in deed, seekynge for a great deal more in all things,
than nature craves. To whose sufficience, if man's gredy appetite, could
answer, and yield themselves content, with the blessed fruit of this little
paradise of England, one man should have little cause to borrowe of an other.
Or if they had can se (as I cannot deny but need may be, and that great need
sometimes,) yet if men were envred* with the fear of god, and acquaynted to
lend freely, and to do to others, as they would that others should do to
them: I would not doubt, but that charity would abound universally, and the
most would be as loath to lend for gain, as theye would be loath to kill, or
to murder a man by the high way side. And I trust also that men would then
as fast run from a known usurer, as they would fly now from a mad dog,
or rather from the devil himself, if they saw him in his likeness. But what
do these worldlings now a days? They do not lend to help the need of
others, but to benefit themselves, and where they find the greatest unthrift,
that has lands, or other lyuinges left unto him: there they will be most
ready, to feed him in his ryott and vimecessarie expenses, making their
gain to be his chiefest hurt, yea a greater hurt in deed, then all his
wilful and folish charges otherwise, as may well appear in the discourse of
this my devised book. Whereas they that fear god, and will be such men in
deed, as they would seem to be, should not deal in this sort, but following
their trade, in what vocation soever it be, ought to help the needy and
worthy parson, with some part of those goods, that they have lawfully
gotten by their trade and manner of living, whereby they may receive usury at
godds hands, who does give an hundred for one, to all them that give or lend
freely for his sake. Thus I have boldlye, and I trust with godds spirit moved
your honor to look well to your charge and calling, desiring you to take in
good part my good meaning, for my desire is, that my natural country, might
be parfite and blessed, without danger of evil, or infection of mischefe, to
corrupt this state, or destroy this noble land. And the boulder I am to deal
thus with your honor before others, because I have known you, and that noble
race of your brethren, even from their young years. And with your honor, and
that famous earl of Warwike deceased, and your noble brother, now earl of
Warwike lyuinge, I have had more familier conference, then with the rest: and
especially with your honor (I do thank you most humbly therefore) I have had
sufficient proof of your careful mind, even in reading not only of the
latin, but also of the Italian good and and sound writers, to know and to
understand the best used government, and the chief laws that have been made
in all ages. And as your mind has been thus godly enclyned to know, so it
appears very well, you have ever had a good mind, to put your knowledge in
practice. And this must I say, that godds providence is greatly showed in this
behalf, and the queens majesty's blessed estate most evidently appears to
be the stronger, in that it has pleased her hyghnes, to have chosen so
stayed and so discrete a noble man, as you are, to deal in the affairs of the
state. For I know, and therefore will not fear to say, that you have been next
to the Queens majesty's most mylde and gracious disposition, a great help and
mean of this most calm and merciful government, a thing so joyful to all
good people as nothing can be more: although it has plainly fallen out in
proof, that both the Queens mercy and your nature has been greatly abused,
and the princes goodness especially most unthankfully recompensed. Whereupon
her majesty has been enforced much against her nature, to use the sword, a
thing so needful when gentle means will not serve, that without so doing no
state could stand, nor man could live. And such has this world ben, is, and
wilbee ever, that princes upon cause must do, and in reason are bound to do
that which they would not of themselves do, if it were not for very
necessity, to avoid a greater inconvenience. And therefore are counselors
about a prince, that they might always geeue the best counsel, and procure
thereby the safety both of prince and state, that when clemency will not
serve, they may use the contrary. But amongst all other needful
aduertisements, I do wish that your honor and others of your calling should
never at any time let slip any good occasion offered for the welfare of
England, much less to be careless in that great trust, which is committed
unto you. And therefore as the master of a ship, has ever an eye to keep a
right course, a physician always a good mind to heal his paciente, a
captain evermore a careful head, to get the victory: even so my good
lord, I pray god you may be a faithful counselor to the prince, and a
watchefull magistrate to the people, to the advancement of godds most holy
word, and for the welfare of this land. And so to care for the whole body of
the state, that whilst you take the defense of some one part, you do not
leave other parts of the state undefended or smallye esteemed. Thus if you do,
as I pray god you may do, and I hope in god, you will do no less: I do well
assure my self, that usury amongst other faults will no more show her face
hereafter in England, than the staring Owl, will look upon the bright sun,
or the fearful mouse, abide the wily catte. And I hope, that by such good
means, this noble real me will greatly florishe, and the people will become
every day better and better: and in might wax strong: in riches, plentiful:
in renown, famous: in virtue, honest, and in religion zealous. All which
blessed and happy welfare, god grant for his sons sake Jesus Christ, in
whom your honor, and al others do live, move, and have a being, whose name be
therefore praised for ever. Amen. From the Queens majesty's hospital at
saint Katherynes, this twenty of Julye. 1569.

A Christian Prologue to the Christian reader.
SOme will count me fond, that of mine own fansy vnconstrayned, have chosen
rather to hazard danger of blame, by entringe to touch this matter of
vsurye, standinge thereby to other men's courtesies, for pardon of my fault:
then by sittinge still, as noe medler in matters of the world, to be without
blame or fault at all. One says to me, what have you to do, to wrestle thus
with vsurye? what will you geat by it, not a penny the more will be lent you for
making any such book, be you well assured: nay, you shall the rather want,
when you would have, trust unto it upon my word. In this first onset, I am
thus iumped withal by some men, for dealinge in this sort with matters of
vsurye. Well I am sorry to offend any, and surely my mind is to do good unto
al. For I protest before god I do not mean evil to any man, but wish the best
I ca^, to one and other. And sorry I am, that good meaning and well, should be
hurtful to me, or offensive to any body else. And yet such is the world, the
galde horse will not be rubde: men that are most faulty, can least abide
rebukes, and plain men for telling truth, many times beshrewe them selves,
being well assured, that it is as certain a thing, as it is a common saying,
Veritas odium parit, Truth purchases hatred. I know in deed that
playnenesse of speech, and freedom of tongue, in decypheryng sin, and
advancing virtue, are not the best ways to thrive by, for it is not rare, that
many a man has com to great wealth, which never knew what virtue nor honesty
me^t in all his life. Yea, there be some that have solemply vowed, never to be of
that religion, that smells of pouertye, they had rather be rich with
Alexander, then poor with Christ. A horrible kind of speech, first money say
they, and then honesty will follow of course: for what is wisdom, learning
or honesty? It is money (man) say they, that makes a man to be taken for wise,
honest, valiant, mighty, yea, and for a kings fellow too. This opynion have
many men, and I fear it be the creed of the world at this time. And thus I
have lost all my credit, and shall not be worth a grote here after, if wicked
mammon or man's malice be ever of power to keep me under. And then had it not
ben a great deal better for me, to have played and done nothing, then thus
to take pains, and lose al things? Well, of this one thing I am well assured,
that god will not forsake them, that put their trust in him, but will reward
them more largelye then man's will is to give or his power to get. And I hope
better of their courtesies, then to have such discurtesy at their hands. And
this will I say, he that will do as I have said, he shall be richer tha^ the
proudest of the^ al. And let the^ not say that I am such an enemy to usury
that I will have none at all to be used. For I am an usurer my self so far
forth as I am able, I would they knew it, and I will teach others to be
greater usurers then I am my self, and show them how to gain more in a day,
then others are able to geat in seven years. Do therefore O ye men of this
world, as I shall teach you, and you shallbee such men, as hereafter you will
bless me. Le^d to your poor neighbors in time of their great need, for gain
on gods name, and put out your money to them for usury, in such sort of
vsurye I mean, as god has commanded you to use, and you shall yearly,
daily, and howerly reap infinite gain. For as god is better able to reward
you then man: so will he for his promise sake, make you recompense with
increase infinytely. And as he says, if you give but a draught of water in
his name, and for his sake, you shall not lose your reward. The just man is full
of compassion, as the Prophet Dauyd sayethe, and does lend. Be you therefore
just men, O ye worldlinges, and let others have that to occupye, which lies
idle by you, and lend freely, not hopinge somuche as for the principal again,
that you may heap gayn to your selves, from god plentifully. For I tell you,
this is a spiritual usury, which is the right usury in deed, and such as
Christ would have used in the 19. chapter of the gospel after Saint Matthew
where he sayethe. Why would thou not put out my money to the banker? that is,
why did thou not bestow my grace and my gifts to the profit of others, by
communicating the same among them? Thus spiritual usury is called the
multiplicacion of the gifts, and graces of god. Thus by a little travail, a
man may win an hundred fold meede in heaven. Who would not labor in time of
harvest to get in corn? And what other thing is this world the^ an harvest
for good me^, to gleane the poor into their barnes. And be it, that the party
unto whom you have le^t is poor and not able to repay you, yet you are sure of
this, the party that borrowed, will thank you, if there be any honesty in him
at all, and will desire god to reward and prosper your doings, and god will
hear his prayer that is not hable to pay. And is not this a good recompense?
But be it that some one being able to pay, is yet not only unthankful in
words, but defraudeth you in deed of your own: as you may have your remedy
against the man, so assure your self that god even in such cases will reward
you, with his grace and mercy without any asking or prayer made to him at al.
For it is thus written in the book of Jesus of Sirach. Qui facit misericordiam
foe nerat proximo. He that uses pity and compassion, does lend upon usury to
his neighbor, and god will pay that usury him self. And therefore it is said
farther in that chapter. There be many which are not glad for to lend, not
because of evil, but they fear to lose the thing that they did lend. Have
thou patience herein O man with the simple (says the text) and withholde not
mercy from him, help the poor for the commandments sake, and let him not
go empty from thee because of his necessity. Leese thy money for thy brother
and neighbors sake, and burye it not under a stone where it rusteth and
corrupts. Gather thy treasure after the commandments of the highest, and so
shall it bring thee more profit then gold. Lay up thy alms in the hand of
the poor, and it shall keep thee from al evil. Thus far Jesus the son of
Sirache with a great deal more, full of much comfort, for all those that lend
their money out, to receive usury at gods hands. Which usury god grant all
men may use daily and howerlye to their Christian brethren: for their reward
shall be great in heaven, that for Christ's sake lend freely unto men upon
earth. Neither is hear any loss to him that lends in such sort, but rather
unspeakable gain, such as neither heart can think, nor tongue can utter, nor
eye has seen. If a man in this world gain a pound for a penny, it is thought
a wonder, and yet god gives to them, that give for his sake, thousands more
then is gained in this proporcion. For he geeueth for transitory trashe,
eternal treasure: for bryttle metal, assured welfare: for money, mercy: for
gold, al goodness: and for this frail world here, the world that never has
end hereafter.

Thus you see, this vsurye is good and praise worthy, such as will heap more
treasure to man in one moment, then all the gold mounteth unto, that all the
Banquers have in the wide world besides. Happy is he therefore, that is such
an usurer, and I pray god al men may be such usurers hereafter in deed. For
whatsoever men lose by this means upon earth, they are sure to find the
same again in heaven. And what loss I pray you has he, that when his
debtour faylethe him, god receives him? and when the debtour payethe not, god
payethe the debte for him? An happy eschaunge no doubt, say I, yea and a
blessed alteracion. The poor man is bound to pay, and god is his suertie,
and will pay the debte himself, if the poor man be decayed, and not able to
answer the sum: yea let men be never so unthankful, god will for his
promise sake pay all men's debtes. And because a man may be the surer, god
layethe in a pawn, which is his heavenly gospel, than the which no greater
nor surer gain can be laid out for man's behoof upon earth. We see if a
man need money in this world, and has a known rich man to be his
suertie, every man is ready to lend for gain. And is the lord of heaven
and earth, he that made the world and all that therein is, a poor man in your
sight my rich masters? will you not trust him, that made you al of naught?
that gave you freely all that you have, and without whom you can have
nothing? that suffers the Sun to shine upon you through his mercy, that
sendethe rain in due season, that rulethe the heavens, and the course thereof,
for your only benefyte? And doubt you now good sirs, that this lord of
ours, being lord of all lords, is not a sufficyent suertye to pay unto you
your own again, and to recompense you to the vttermoste farthynge? If the
servant should mistrust his just masster, the tenant his good landlorde, the
son his loving father, it would be thought, that any of these were lewd
folk in their so doing. And shall we not think them most worthy of blame,
that mistruste the goodness of god, who is master, lord, and father over all
creatures living, and the only creator of mankind, by whom all creatures
breathe, live and have their being, and without whom all flesh is nothing but
confusion, shame, and the very outcastes of this wretched world? But now,
touching the company that is to talk in this treatise, you shall understand
gentle reader, that no man, nor yet any profession or calling is especially
touched in this report that I have to make, but only a rehearsal made of
speech that has passed. Which I thought good for the variety thereof, and
for the better setting forth of gods glory, to commit to writing, and so to
the printe, that all men may see and read the matter, and thereupon do, as god
shall give them grace. Their names I have given unto them in greek and
English, calling the preacher, (...) which I do english, Ockerfoe, as
enemy to usury. The merchant I do name, (...) whom I do term, Gromel
gayner, and for shortness, write him sometime Gromel, calling him most by the
name of merchaunte. The Ciuilian, (...), and so advocate or Ciuilian. The
Lawyer, because I know temporal law is whollye against usury, as much as the
Cannon law, or scripture it self: I do christen him, (...), counting him
hear in deed not much better then a petye fogger in law, as one that
sometimes has studied a little law, beeinge yet never allowed in any Inn of
Court or Chauncery for his learning, and assuring my self that no utter
barrister, much less any Counselor in law, will allow his opinion:
calling him Lawyer notwithstanding, for modesty sake, because the other name
is odious, and none would wyllingly in deed be termed as they are, especially
when the name concerns either wit or learning. And yet to see the world,
none are so ready to defend usury as those are, that have the least
understanding in any profession. And so I am bold to use this name pety
fogger, whom for courtesy sake, and for good manner, I do call Lawyer,
although noe lawyer in deed, does or will allow of usury, but the unlearned
only that presume oftentimes to deal in higher matters, then the elder and
wiser sort of men wyllingly do, or dare affirm certainly upon their
knowledge. God be mercyful unto us, and make one and other of al professions,
good usurers in the lord, that we may lend plentyfully and freely, and trusting
in gods goodness may receive reward at his hand in that day. And thus til
then fare you well in Christ Jesus, to whom be al honor praise and glory for ever
and ever Amen.

The names of the speakers in this dialogue.
(...). Ockerfoe, the Preacher or enemy to usury. (...) Gromel gayner, the
wrong merchant or evil occupier. (...) Advocate or Ciuilian. (...) Lawyer, or
rather petischoler in law.
A letter found in the study of the right reverend father in god, and most
godly pastor of Christ's flock, Ihon late bishop of Salisburye, within
certain months after his forsaking this earthly dwelling, which letter was
sent to the author of this treatise by Ihon Garbrande, master of art in
Oxforde, and Prebendary of Salisbury, who had by legacy given unto him, by the
foresaid godly father, al his papers, writings, and notes of all his traueyle
in gods vineyarde, and other devises of lerninge whatsoever.
I Have perused your learned and godly travail touching the matter of usury,
M. D. Wilson, and have no doubt, but if it may please you to make it common:
very much good may grow of it. Such variety of matter, such weyghte of
reasons, such examples of antiquity, such authority of doctors both
Greeks and latins, such allegation of laws not only Civil, and Canon, but
also prouincial and temporal, such variety of cases so learnedly and so
clearly answered, such learning, such eloquence, and so evident witness of
gods holy will, can never possibly pass in vain. I will not flatter you, I
cannot, it becomes me not. I assure you, I like all notably well: Si quid mei
est iudicij, and if my liking be worth the liking. But of al other things this
likes me best. Of the three parties, you make each one to speak naturally
like him self, as if you had been in each of them, or they in you. What it
shall work in other I can not tell, for mine own part, if I wear an usurer
never so gredyly bent to spoil and rauine, vt sunt faeneratores, yet would I
think my self most unhappy, if such persuasions, could not move me. For
what man would not be afraid, to live desperately in that state of life, that
he sees manifestly condemned by heathens, by Christians, by the old fathers,
by the ancient counselles, by Emperors, by Bishops, by decrees, by Canons,
by all sects of all regyons, and of al relygions, by the Gospel of Christ, by
the mouth of god? Ago breuiter, vt vides, non enim id mihi sumo, vt damnem
large hoc tam horrendum peccatum, id tibi relinquo.

vt viuat liber, vsura pereat From Salisbury this 20. of August, 1569.
Guilielmus Wickham, Capella nus serenissimae Reginae nostrae Elizabethae.
Doctus es, and pius es, Wilsone, quis abnuat istud?
Qui vel opus praesens, script due prima legate.
Nam, nisi doctrina praestante, quis obsecro posset
Rhetoricae, ac Logicae verba Britanna dare?
Et, nisi perrara pietate, quis obsecro vellet,
Vsurae scripto prodere damna libro?
Ergo nisi indoctus nemo tunc illa notauit,
Nec nisi perdemens hoc reprehendit opus.
Johannes Garbrandus Oxoniensis.
Foenore qui lucrum facit, est homicida Catoni,
Furti dupla, huius quadrupla mulcta fuit.
Non facit haeredem, priuatur honor sepulchri
Qui tenues lucro foenoris auget opes.
Sermo sacer, patres, pius omnis damnat, at vna
(quae docet errores) Consuetudo probat.
Tu, qui a supplicibus stas, vir reverend, libellis
Consilio, penna, dexteritate premes.
Prodeat egregius tuus ensis, praestet acumen
Et deus, and metuens, regia virgo, deum.
In Thomae Wilsoni, hominis Doctissimi, legumque ciuilium Romanarum. D. ac
serenissimae nostrae Reginae a supplicum libellis, librum de foenore, Ioannis
Coci carmen.
Est patriae Wilsonus amans, populique salutis,
Et grauiter patitur publica damna seri.
Hinc multae populo labes, and crebra ruinis
Fulmina, communi visa nocere rei.
Sed mala dum trutina vigili per singula lustrat,
Nil auido reperit foenore deterius.
Nam (...) epascit populo cum sanguine fibras,
Et (...) misero, laethifer, vsque necem.
Esse Cato (...) homines occidere censet,
Cum (...), exposito in foenus, ab aere venit.
Nam nihil, aut fumos locat is, qui tempora ve^dit,
Aut si quid vendit, vendit amicitiam.
Merx praeclara quidem, vlli si venalis honest:
Quae, nisi gratuita est, non sit amicitia.
Nulla potest virtus nam mercaenaria nomen,
Naturaeue not as empta tenere suae.
Nam proiecta for as, alienos spectat ad vsus
Vitae hominum cultrix, officijque parens.
Non sua corradit, non mutua conficit atrox,
Lucra nec ex damno quaeritat alterius.
Non fugitat lucem, nec vult, obscura latebris,
Turpia per quaestus era vocare domum.
Prodit enim crimen latitans vsura pudendum,
Horret and infames author ab art notas.
At tam tetra lues, hominum sublata saluti,
Conuersa rerum, concidat ipsa, vice.
Dumque parit, pereat, miserandae bellua plebis,
Exitio sceleri conueniente suo.
Sed Wilsonus ouans caedendis floreat hydris,
Quas alit infandas publica laerna mali.
Acris and Herculeos exantlet mill labores,
Vt pariat patriae commoda mill suae.
Fautes escaped.
In the Epistel, fol 4 evil lawyers, read evil lyuers, In the prologue fo 5.
page 2. and well, read and well doiynge. fol. 53. conueant, read covenant,
fol. 54. page 2. get, read give, fol. 63. images, read examples, fo. 77.
page 2. borne, which all, read borne with all, fo. 97. page 2. equal
property, read equal proporcion, fol 12, delyuerie, read deliverer, fol.
122. page 2. bering, read bring, fol. 123. page 2. should set, read do set.
fo. 126. pa. 2. this permission exchange, read this merchandising exchange.
In the conclusion page 4. give my head, read give you my head.

A Communicacion or Speech between the rich worldly merchant, the godly and
zealous preacher, the temporal and civil lawyers, towchynge usury, or the
lone of money for gain.
ABout two years past (as I remember) a ioly merchant of London, after he
had heard a most earnest sermon against vlurye in his paryshe Church, did
in vite the preacher to dynner, having purposed before to have certain of his
frindes and acquayntaunce the same day at dynner also with him, amongst
whom, a gentleman one toward the law, meanly studied, and yet of a goodly
wit, and great boldness, was a bidden gheast, who having been likewise at
the same sermon, came immediatlye after that the sermon was done, to the
merchaunts house, wheare the preacher and he meetynge together, each desired
other of more acquaintance, and the merchant in his solemn manner, as soon
as he saw them both, said thus unto them. Now in good soothe my masters,
you are heartily welcome, and you good master preacher are welcome with all my
heart, and I thank you for your manyfolde preachynges bestowed amongst us,
specyallye for this days sermon: for by Saint Marye you have shot your
arrowe to the mark, and it cannot be, but much good will come of this your
preaching, and therefore you are welcome hartelye, and I pray you be covered.

Preacher. God grant that any my words may edify any one for his soul
health, and then might I the better rejoice in my poor trauail, but I fear
me, there is much corn sown upon the hard rocks and high ways that want
moisture.


Merchant. Well well, all shallbe well I trust, and god forgeeue us al.


Lawyer. As I have heard you this day master preacher, so have I geeuen you
an ear heretofore, and have many times wyshed that I might have had some
pryuate talk with you, for my better understanding, and more famylyarity with
you.


Merchant, Nay, if you be dysposed to talk, I pray you pause the matter till
after dynner, and then we will spend time, according to poyntment, for an
hour or two in my gardeyne, where ye shall have a pleasant sweet arbor to
sit in, I thank my sweet wife hear for it. In the mean season, let us be
friendly merye, and use our cheer as god has sent it, for in good soothe you
are welcome at a word. I did look for mo gheastes, and amongst others, for
master doctor of the Arches, but he had rather be at his ordinarye in the
Arches amongst his fellows my masters the doctors there, then at this kind
of diet, howebeit I think he will not fail me in the after noone, for wot
ye what master preacher, I have desired him of purpose to come and use
conference with us, if you be so contented.


Preacher. I am well contented sir with your appointment. Hereupon the merchant
took his place and called his gheastes unto him, and as merye as a Pie, made
them very good cheer. And all the dynner time was passed over, with none
other talk, but of the good order of the City, and what an honorable state it
was, and how chrystendome through, the like cheer was not at an officers
boorde, as ye lord majors table carried, for that was specially the honor of
England, al which speech was soothed almost by every body, and gloriouslye
extolled for that present. The Lawyer amongst all others at that table, had
most talk, as he that thought himself most woorthye, for as he had a good
ready wit, so wanted he neither boldness, nor utterance to set it forth,
as commonly lawyers have plenty of both. The Preacher having his head
hammeryng upon another steethy, used seldom any speech but lifting his eyes
often to heaven, seemed to sit in some mislykinge with the world, as I take
it. Notwythstanding, he was remembered by the merchaunt, master Lawier, and
others to be merye as they were. When dynner was done, the Lawyer forgate not
to put the merchant in mind of his gardeyne and fair arbor, who commanded
his kinsman and apprentise to provide cushyns, and to make all things ready.
And so the rest of the gheastes being courteously dispacched, they three with
one or two others of the house being there, and the apprentise standing by,
after the merchaunt had said somewhat of his comelye arbor and gardeine, and
they also allowed very well the beautye of it, the Preacher, domping in a
deep concept, as one carried with the zeal of god, and being asked what he
thought of the world, began in this manner.


Preacher. It is very certain as I take it, the world is almost at an end.


Merchant. What is the matter sir? belyke you are wearye of the world.


Lawier. No, not weary of the world, but I think him angry with the world,
for he heateth diverse times at it, showing always a merueylous zeal against
sin, as I remember you did this day.


Preacher. The zeal that moves me, ought to move you, and all others that
have any fear of god, or care of life to come.


Merchant. Tush, what amounts your care for the world? you have discharged
your duetye, let the world care for it self, and let every one answer for
his own doings. Lord god, what should you be so much grieved inwardlye?


Preacher. I will tell you sir, doctrine does greatly abound, sin in all
kind is sharply rebuked, and yet none or few do amend their lives.


Lawyer. That is not so, there is great amendment, and men are better now,
then they have been, say you, what you list.


Merchant. You say truth sir, except this man will now seek out motes, where
great beams wear heretofore.


Preacher. I pray god the beams be not greater now then ever they were,
such untruth, such extorcion, such malice, such dissimulacion, such
vncharytablenes, such horrible usury was never seen in any time.


Merchant. Preachers may descant generally at their pleasures, and randone in
the pulpyt at liberty, to fear men from sin, but with your leave, if you
search every man particulerly, you shall find great change and amendment of
life.


Preacher. Would god it were as you say.


Lawier. Wherewith do you charge this world most?


Preacher. With all kind of sin, and especially with want of Charity.


Merchant. Nay then you roue ad Ephesios. I pray you sir, when saw you a
more charitable or more quiet time, then this is now, sauinge only that
beastlye unquiet storm which lately rose in the North?


Preacher. Peace in appearance appears, and thanks be to god, and to the
Queens majesty, we are now void of cyuile debate, and of outward
dissension, and yet I say we want charytye.


Lawyer. That is, because you churchemen have not so much wealth, as you wear
wont to have.


Preacher. Not so sir, for I think the church is very well provided for, but
I say generally, charity waxes cold, the poor neighbor is not beloved, as
he ought to be, his need neglected, his miserable and wretched estate
forgotten.


Lawier. You would have men give to all that ask for gods sake, would ye? so
loyterers and vagabonds should be mayntayned.


Preacher. None speak more against idle folk and sturdy beggars, then the
preachers do, but I say, the poor householder, and the honest meaning man
(who seekethe by good and lawful means to live) is forgotten.


Merchaunt. You may say your pleasure, but I know that they are now more
relieved by the rich, then theye have been heretofore, as well with money as
with friendly counsel.


Preacher. What your counsel is, I know not, and I pray god it be such, as
you ought to give, and as you would have given to your selves, if you stood
in need, but touching lendinge of money, I think men rather seek their own
gain, then any thing the benifit of their Christian neighbor.


Lawyer. Nay both, and who I pray you would lend, but to have some
benefit of his money, and is that any harm, when both do gayen?


Merchaunt. Gods blessyng of your heart for so saying, for I did never lend
money in my life, but for gain, and whether my neighbor gained or not, I
know not, I wyshed well unto him, but by saint Marye, I would be sure first
to do well my self, whatsoever came of him.


Preacher. Herein you wanted charity, and showed your self not to be a
perfect Christian.


Lawier. I can not tell what you call a Christyan, they that will live in this
world must do so, and I warrant you master merchaunt does nothing, but he has
law for him.


Merchaunt. Yea marie have I, and I thank you for it. I deal surely for fear
of clappes, the world is naught, and full of decept, every man has an eye to
the rich man, to take him at advantage.


Preacher. God grant your law dealyng be grounded upon a good conscience, for
I fear me, you care not who smart, so you farewell.


Lawyer. Soft and fair good sir, better speech were better, but I pray you,
tell me in good faith, what mean you to be so grieved with this world?
Belike you cannot have that you would, or have not that others have, and
therefore you are grieved.


Preacher. No surely I am contented with mine estate, and a very little thing
satisfies nature, a king cannot have more then food and clothing to
withstand hunger and cold, which you see I have, and I thank god for it.


Merchant. In deed you have enough, and what should you do with more, that
profess contempt of this world? Plenty belongs to us, that are worldlings,
and travail for it to help others, if we list, and to enrich our selves to y^
vttermoste, for as I take it, a merchant should not be stinted.


Lawyer. In deed your treasure is the welfare of the realm and countreye
where you dwell, and where merchants are not cheryshed, that countreye or realm
will soon perish.


Preacher. Lawful tradyng and aduenturing to bring in our want and to carry
out our plenty has ever been allowed, and without such traffic no
countreye, nor kingdom can floryshe.


Lawyer. In deed, they are the only merchants, to be esteemed above all
others, as for such as ingrosse wares to them selves, which are brought in by
others, because they them selves would have the sale of them alone, they are
no better then forstallers and regratours of the market, a manner of men truly
unworthy to live in a common weal. And touching retaylers at home, I can not
skyll of them, I place them in a lower degree, as not worthy the name of
merchaunts, but of huckesters, or chapmen of choice, who retayling small wares,
are not able to better their own estate, but with falshode, lying and
periurye, byndinge ofttymes the utterance of their petye sales with an huge
oath, swearynge to every body almost every hour in the day, that this and
that standethe them in so much, when so much it cost not, by very much,
Merchant aduenterer a lords fellow in dignytye
whereas the merchaunt aduenturer, is and may be taken for a lords fellow in
dignity, as well for his hardye aduenturynge upon the seas, to carrye out our
plentye, as for his royal and noble whole sales, that he makes to diverse men
upon his return, when he brings in our want, and therefore to be highly
chearyshed, and worthy to hear office in any well governed common weal.


Merchaunt. You say well for us sir, but I pray you for all that, how are we
cherished, that are so racked with great custom, even for vyctualles, and not
only that, but for all other merchandises.


Preacher. Trybute and custom are due unto the prince by gods law, and
therefore you must not grudge to yield custom, but geeue willingly and
franklye unto Caesar that which is proper unto Caesar, Math. ca. 22
and unto god, that which is proper unto god. If you think the burden and
payment intolerable, be humble suitors unto the magistrates, and if your
demand can be proved and found reasonable, I doubt not, hut you shall find
release or ease: In the mean season, grudge not to pay that is appointed you
by order to pay, and pay it truly, or else god will punish your theft and
fraud, for by none other terms can I call them. The taskes and tallages which
are leuyed upon other people in strange countries, if I should tell them you,
what would you say to them? where in some place the prince has the yerelye
fifte part of every man's goods, in other places the fowerth, yea and in some
places the third, would you not say this were a miserable and pitiful
hearing? and therefore I say, English subjects live in merueylous exemption
and liberty, in comparison of other nations.


Lawyer. As they live in great freedom, so they live most godly, in
comparyson of others, for I pray you, how little whoredom is there in
England, in comparison of other countries? the relygyon pure, and all men
ashamed to sin.


Merchaunt. Do you not see how vacabonds are whypped, and whoremongers carted,
which is not used in other countries, yea, and hospitality better maintained
in England, then in any place else in Chrystendome.


Preacher. I do not deny but religion is truly taught openly every where,
vnclenlynesse punyshed somewhere, and ydlenes whipped somewhere, and
hospytalytie kept after a sort somewhere, but yet I say, we are not clear
from other faults that are great and horrible enough, and I think the like
not used in other countries. This must I say of other natyo^s, they are more
unwilling to offend in those things that hurt a common weal then we are.
As, look what generallye is noisome to the state, noe man will seek to geat
by license, nor otherwise by dealing against the common welfare, because they
prefer the wealth of their country, before their own commodity: yea
positive laws and statutes are better obeyed abroad in all states, then they
are here in England, and the superiors in other realms geeue better example in
following yt laws, of their countreye, and less offend the state, then our
great men and governors in England do. Theaft is counted so horrible amongst
some nations, that men commonly will rather sterue then steal, and here in
England, he that can rob a man by the high way, is called a tall fellow.
Again, they do less oppress their neighbors elsewhere, theye are more
temperate in their speech, and more spare of dyett then we commonly are.
And, yt which greeueth me most in this land, less extortioners, and fewer
usurers elsewhere then are here in England.


Lawier. All countries have their faults, and I cannot excuse England, but yet
I will not so accuse my countreye, that I will make it altogeter worse then
others. The Flemynges and high Almaines are subject most to dronkennes, the
Italyan to revenge wrongs by murder, and otherwise to sin horribly in such
sort, as is not to be named, although that same heinous filthynesse is not
only used there. The French man is charged with furious rashenes, and
overmuch intermedling in all causes and states, the Spanyarde with intolerable
pride and disdain against all others, the Portyngall with ouermuche
supersticion in relygion, and simplicity of life, the Scottyshman with
bragging and lyinge, the English man, with glottony, instead of
hospitality, with much theft to set forth his bravery, and sometimes
treason for desire of innouacion. And as every one of these countries has his
especial faults, so have they their proper virtues and several qualyties,
more excellent then any other nation.


Preacher. My desire is, yt England might be most perfect and without any
fault, if it were possible, and would Christ there were none other fault in
England then gluttony in the most, theft in many mean men, and treason in
some great folk. But I say there wants charytie, without which, there
cannot be perfection in any man: for let there be never so great
appearaunce of virtue otherwise, in whom soever charity is wanting, there
cannot be any virtue at all, and therefore saint Paul says. Valct fides in
Christo, Galath. 5.
quae per charitate^ operatur, That faith in Christ is of force that works by
charity, as who should say, where charity wants, faith is of no value,
let men brag and talk never so much of their belief. For as saint Paul
says, likewise in an other place. Though I speak with the tongues of men and
angels and yet have no love, 1. Corinthians. 13.
I am even as a sounding brass, or as a tyncling cymball, and though I could
prophesy, and understand all secrets, and all knowledge, yea if I had all
faith, so that I could move mountains out of their places, and yet had no
love, I were nothing. And though I bestowed all my goods to feed the poor,
and though I gave my body even that I burned, and yet had no love, it would
profit me nothing. Love suffers long, and is courteous, love enuyeth not, love
does not frowardly, swells not, deals not dishonestlye, seeks not her
own, is not provoked to anger, thinks not evil, reioyseth not in iniquity,
but reioyseth in the truth, suffers all things, beleuethe althings, hopethe
all things, endures all things, Yea though that prophesyeng fail, either
tongues shall sease, or knowledge vanish away, yet love fails never.


Merchant. I am never out of charity, but when I cannot geate my money in, and
then in deed I do chafe and freate, and thynk my self not well used, when
they do break day with me, but at length, I anger them worse then they anger
me, when I have driven them to an owtlawrye, for a bargayne is a bargayne: and
I will not forgive a penye to none of them all.


Preacher. Then I see well, if you will not forgive, you will hardlye give
freelye.


Merchant. Let them give on gods name that cannot tell what to do with their
money, I had rather have of mine own, then borrowe of another man, and I do
not know what need I may have another day, store sir, is no sore.


Lawyer. By, my small honestye sir, you do wisely to be your own friend, and
to live so, that you need not the help of an other, and better it is to have
too much, then too little, and sooner may a man take away, then put to: yea and
a more blessed thing it is, ever to be able to geate more, then to stand in
need to crave much. And I for my part, do love you for your wealth.


Preacher. You go about sir, Math. 6.
to persuade the rich man that his treasure is his chief assurance and best
friend, Luc. 12.
whereas he ought to lay up his treasure, where neither mothes, nor rust
should corrupt and consume it, and so he should have the reward at gods
hand, therefore I say still, charitable dealing is the most assured and best
wealth that a man can purchase upon earth, for where all other worldly
substance fails, and consumes away, this continues for ever, and is a
token of perfect christianitye, when men show their faith and belief by their
good living and well doing.


Merchant. When I am dead, I may perhaps do good, but so long as I live, I
will save one, and be sure not to want. Lay it up in heaven quod he? a merry
jest in deed, so long as I live, I will keep it in a chest, and have the key
about me.


Lawyer. In deed I must needs say, that wilful poverty is the greatest
follye in the world, and for a man to want him self by geuinge to others, is
the eygthe deadlye sin, the which I call extreme folly, or madness.


Preacher. If you will not, when you have it in your own possession, bestow it
upon others for Christ's sake, because you fear to want, then be you assured,
if you give your goods after your decease when they can do you no good at all,
because, then you are not, as being dead and without sense, god will little
esteem such almose, which is not worth grammercie: for you must perforce
leave all you have, and no thanks if you give them, when you cannot keep
them, and do then, and not before leave your goods, when your goods leave
you. Therefore I say still, use charity, while you may, and help the needye
and poor, and not only lend friendly, but also give freely to your power.


Lawyer. Durus est hic sermo: This is a hard thunder bolte, and such a one,
as I think all men are afraid of, for very few follow that lesson, say you
what you will. But I see you are much grieved with usury, amongst all other
sins, and in all your sermons and preachinges you rattle so greatly against
this offense, that you shake the blood of some, till they blushe as red as
their cloakes, and many do scratche through your bitter speech, where it
ytcheth not. I pray god, that you, who talk so much against usury, may know
what usury is, for I fear me you cannot judge so well by divinity what this
offense is, as the common lawyers can do, and especially the Ciuilians, who
have written largely hereupon, and have also authority to determine what is
usury, and who they are, that deserve to be called vserers: for, not all that
receive money for money are vserers (this I speak least you should be
deceived) but they that are byters and oppressors of their neighbors with
extreme and unmerciful gain, they and none other say I are vserers. And
therefore if you will say your mind in learning, I would gladly hear you, and
confer with you (if it please you) And when you have said, I will replye, if
I think meet, for, I tell you troth, I can for my part as well hear, as I
would be heard, and as gladlye learn of others, as I would teach others, and
especially I would gladly by arguing know your oppinion, because you
profess divinity only, in which all truth is couched undoubtedly if it be
well and truly understood, but I think, all men do not truly at all times
conceive the just meaning and weight of every sentence and controversy.


Preacher. None more desirous to hear and to learn then I am: and because you
will have me say as much and as long as I will, I will be bold with your
patience to utter my mind: And if you will take the like pains after me, I
will thank you most hartelye, either in allowinge or disallowing of mine
oppinion in any part.


Merchant. In good faith you shall do very well to utter both your minds,
and I for my part, will lean on my elbowe, and be an hearer of you both: but
I promise you I will do as I think meet, say either of you both what you
list. I have heard enough if that may serve, either to believe, or to follow,
but by saint Grombolde I will be advised twice before I do once so much as they
tell me I should do.


Preacher. When gods will is, your heart will be opened, and before he give you
his grace, it is not possible for you to receive and to follow his word, as
he has commanded. I have known them that have been as untoward as you now
are, that have through godds mighty grace and goodness been wonderfully
altered, to the advancement of his glory, and to their own soul health.


Lawyer. He that wilbee good, must first hear and learn the known truth
of god. And therefore because we are agreede to talk of this matter, I for my
part will take this resting place in this fair gardeine under this arbor,
and hear what you can say, and will not speak any one word, but give as
diligent ear, as I can, unto you, and make an answer when you have done.


Merchant. I see well, here is some sport toward. There will be snappyng and
snarring, I am well assured before all be done. And wot you what, master
Preacher, the world calls you by a nyckename, master Ockerfoe, because you
are ever so sharp against usury.


Preacher. I do not much pass to be so called, for so I am in deed, an
Ockerfoe no doubt, that is, an enemy to usury. But wot you what others call
you master merchaunt? they term you by the name of master Gromell gayner,
because you mind nothing so much, as gettinge of money.


Merchant. Contented with that name, for so I am and still mind to be. And
therefore go to it my masters, and this I promise you, I will not say much,
either now, or yet when you have done, because I have no learning, although I
know how to geate a pennye, as well as either of you both, and to keep it
also. But I pray god, if your tale be long, that I fall not a sleep, for
you see the weather is very hoate, and it is in the afternoon, in which time
my pastyme is to nodde a little, if friends or other busynes let me not, for
the phisician tells me, it does me good, so I do not sleep too much, but
take a nappe. And to tell you truth, I do love a dyshe of good meat well.
And we merchauntes must fare well by order, because yt is the honor of the
City, especially if we bear office, and truly good meat is well bestowed
on me, for I furnysh with it, I have Corpus cum causa, as you may see, stuff
and lyning it is that I carry. With that they all laughed merelye, and the
preacher beginnyuge to speak, was interrupted by a kinsman of the merchauntes
that stood by and heard this talk, who as he was young, and gave longer ear
then his young head could well endure, so was he very gredie and hungrye of
the world, and so he might geate by bargayning, he cared not which way it
came, wherefore making no conscience of gain in traffic and bargaynyng, he
said thus. I pray you sir, let me ask you a question or twoe before you
enter further, for they say lawyers often times tell longer tales, then wise
tales, and can better make a collection in their manner, of another man's talk,
then fashion a good Oration of their own. And some preachers are not without
this fault neither, and yet I do not speak this against you or others that
be of the wysest, but for that, seeing you are beginning to tell a tale, I
cannot tell how long you would in your speech either of you remember my
questions, and satisfy my mind therein.


Gromell gayner. Lo, will you see this fellow how he choppeth lodgick? he is
my kinsman as you know, and a knauyshe wit he has, ye and wilbee quarter
master with me I tell you, do what I can, and I maruayle he has held his
peace so long.


Lawyer. Well, say on my friend, we will give you a little hearing.


Apprentice. May not a man make the most of his own that he can.


Lawyer. Yeas, if he do it lawfullye.


Apprentice. I cannot tell what you call lawful. I have five hu^deth pound
lying by me.


Gromell gayner. Yea, and if he had said, a good thousand mark, he had not
lied, I may tell you in your ear.


Apprentice. What shall I do with all my money? adventure it all in
merchaundizes beyond the seas? so may I have a clapp either by shipwreck, or
by Pirates, or by evil factours, that all will come to naught. Perhaps you
would have me adventure at home, I will do so a little, but because wares
rise and fall and no man is certeynlye assured of gain: I will use one trade
that shall without all doubt bring me certain gain, although I sleep upon
the one side, and that is with puttinge my money forth for interest, and taking
good assurance. There is no such gain in tradynge, nor yet so certain, and
were it not better to have a great gain and a certain, without travail, and
without toil, rather then to stand to an uncertain gain? which as it will
never be so great, as the very lettynge out of my money will make it, so is it
got with much hazard of life, and great disquietnes of mind and body. I am
young and gladlye would I learn of mine elders to get goods with ease, and
gain money with money, which I take to be a good gain.


Ockerfoe. Such gain will turn one day to your loss, if you deal not more
charitablye with your neighbor.


Gromell gayner. Well master Ockerfoe, thus you see that even young knaves
such as this is, will seek to advance their lyuinge by ease, as well as
old folks. But sir knappe, talk you no more I charge you, let your elders
have the handlynge of this matter, and be you only a hearer. Do not you know,
that therefore you have twoe ears, and one tongue, because you should hear
more then you speak.


Apprentice. So have you too sir, and the gentlemen that be hear with you.


Gromell gayner. Yea, but you are a boy, and we are men, and therefore we
have, or should have, more wytt and judgment by reason of our experience, then
such as you have, and therefore hold your prate yet once again, and let us
not have you malaperte any more I charge you. What I say?


Lawyer. Your kinsman will obey, be you assured, but I will tell you, this
learning is now so well known, that even weomen, yea and goodman hoyden of
the country, in whom a man would think were no craft or subtlety to live,
can ask the shillynge penny for a week, which in a year amounts to four
shillynges and four pence besides the principal, and in a tweluemoneth after
the lone of a hundred pounds by the year, amounts to four hundredth pound,
which is merueilous strange and uncharitable.

And the shillinge penny for a month, yeldeth for the loan of an hundredth
pound by the year after that rate, an hundredth pound for an hundred. But
because this matter is of great weight, and requires a long discourse, good yt
were at large to talk of it, against which, because you preachers do in
open pulpite so much enueyghe, if it will please you according to our
agreement first to say your mind, I will answer you so well as I can. And
yet I think lawyers and divines do not in all things agree in this matter.


Gromell gayner. Speak first who list, and make as few usurers as you can,
the fewer the better, and my gain there by shall be the greater, for I think
neither of you both will persuade me from lending my money for gain.


Ockerfoe. Yeas by gods grace, I doubt not but you wilbee moved with the
threats against sin, and change your life upon better aduysement. And if
yt please you master lawyer, I will say my oppinion plainlye as the scripture
does teach us.


Lawyer. Say on a gods name, we will give you the hearing. And further,
perhaps I will say for my part according to my profession and knowledge: but
look who is yonder.


Gromell gayner. Now welcome heartily master doctor, I beshrewe you because you
came not to dynner, you should have been welcome, but you doctors of the
commons are wedded to small fare, because you will have your wits fresh to
pull money into your pursses, and to emptye ours, by sharp and quick
pleadinge.


Ciuilian. I thank you sir, our small fare is such, because our bags in
deed are thynn, and we must measure our bellyes by the weight of our purses,
for our gain is little, god knows, but with your leave my masters all, I am
gladd to see this wholesome assemblye here.


Lawyer. You are welcome sir heartily, and you come not unlooked for.


Gromell gayner. Now sir, you come (as they say) in puddingtyme, for we are
about a matter, wherein you have good skill, especially in this case of usury,
whereof we now talk, for that as well your books do plentifullye treat
thereof, as your experience is very great by the variety of cases, that come
before you.


Ciuilian. What learning I have herein, you may soon hear, but for my
experience in hearing cases of this kind, these temporal lawyers do wholye
drown our profession, and make us to have the less will to study, because
our causes are so few, that come before us, the rest whereof, your law has
taken from us, and so made us almost beggars for lack of the use, and exercise
of learning.


Lawyer. If time and leisure might serve, I could bring you infinyte reasons
to prove, that our law is the best, the worthyest, and the most ancient
law in the world. And first I will show you.


Gromelgainer. Stay there I pray you sir, for when with your first reason, you
say you have infinite reasons, you cloy me by and by, for what time will serve
for the end of your talk, when your reasons be infinite.


Ockerfoe. This matter requires an other day, and for this time I would wish
you both, not to speak further herein, but to bend both your wits for the
beating down of usury.


Ciuilian. Content for my part, and with your leave master preacher, I am
glad to see you, but to say the truth, for the trial of the laws, your part
is now the stronger, for that it is no time now for us, because such as bear
authority, are most of all with you: and therefore to speak without
prevailing, wear wast of wind and time.


Lawyer. I fear not to encounter with you at any time, but because we are now
in an other matter, I am contented to geeue ear, and to say somewhat to
master preacher, either in allowing or disalowing of his speech, say you to
me, what you will afterward.


Gromelgayner. I am glad I have two ears (as my boy said) to hear any of you
that I think will speak reason. As for master Ockerfoe, I must hear him with
both ears, and believe him also, because he is godds messenger: and if god give
me grace to follow him, the^ shall I be happy, therefore say on sir.


Ockerfoe. Without god, you can do nothing, who is ye geeuer of all good
things, and to him will I pray for you and say, as by his mighty and heavenly
spirit, I shall have grace.


Ciuilian. I am glad, that this good matter is thus offered to be talked and
disputed upon, and although I was not here at dinner, yet was I at your
sermon master Ockerfoe, and therefore while I am best at leisure to give you
the hearing, I pray you say on in gods name, and this I promise you, I am
somewhat armed to say my mind again, for I have often turned my books for
this case, and longed for some-such like conference.


Gromelgayner. I a^ glad to here thus much and therefore I hope to learn some
wit by you my masters: for we merchantes, have little more the^ will serve our
turns. Our wits are only to get and save against a dear year, and to have
always in store, whatsoever may happen unto us.


Lawyer. Surely I do long to hear master Ockerfoe, because I would be
answering of him, or at the least wise, utter my simple opinion in this
audience. With that, they were all contented to be quiet, saving that the
merchant told master Ciuilian merely, that he had given unto the preacher a
nickename, calling him Ockerfoe, and the preacher to hit him home again, called
him Gromelgayner, as you have heard, which names were agreed upon for them
both. And where the lawyer was no utter Barrister, as one little studied in the
laws, scante so good, as a mean attorney: yet he was to be named for
modesties sake, temporal lawyer, beeinge in deed no better than a common
pettifogger in law, such as was never allowed in any Inn of court or
chauncery, notwithstanding his wit, with his experience served him very well.
And this being said, thus yt preacher began.


Ockerfoe, or the preachers oracion.
Love god above all things, Deuteronomy. 6.
and thy neighbor as thy self. Math. 22
This is the law, Mar. 12.
and the prophets, says our savior Christ. Luc. 20.
What is he that in louinge god as he ought to do, Romans 13.
would do any one thing contrary to his will? or who esteming his neighbor as
himself, would not do unto him, as he would be done unto? so that in love, is
the perfection of the law, and without love, neither god nor man is either
honored, or used, as either of them ought to be. I do see god of his meare
goodness made heaven and earth, and all that therein is, framing man above all
other creatures unto his own likeness, making him lord over al earthly
creatures, as subject unto man, and man for himself. So that we al are nothing
else, but the children of one god the father, and brethren unto Christ our
savior. And therefore we should love and live together, as brethren, one
helpinge an others necessitye, and in no wise to contempne our own flesh, nor
to turn our own face from the poor and nedy, My neighbor being known to be
honest and of good life, although the world goes not well with him, comes
to a rich man, to borrowe for his relife, either for compassinge his
necessary affairs, or else for maintenance of his famelye, the rich man seeing
his poor estate, has no compassion of his want, but says, if he can put in
good suerties, and will be content to pay for the lone as he may have of others,
and as it goethe commonly in the royal exchange, he will lend him
thereafter, otherwise he cannot deal, for his money is his lyuinge, and it
shall not come home as it went out, for so he might have kept it still,
without all danger or loss whatsoever. The poor man that must either famishe,
or take as he is offered, boroweth either in money, which is very seldom, or
in wares, which is the common use of the most, to a certain value, and
enters into good bands, and often times lays a gage better then the goods
borrowed, and pays without mercy such as I am ashamed to name. This I say is
against charity, that any man should be so far from love, as he will not le^d
but for an assured gain, and most sufficient pawn, wherewith god must needs
be offended, for yt all lendinge for certain gain, upon most sufficient
assurance, is directly against his co^mau^dme^t. For first there is no love,
where free le^ding is not, and where love is not, John 13.
there is not god, because god is love, Iohannis 15.
and he that dwells in love, 1. Johan. 2.
dwells in god, and god i^ him. Now god commands us to love one another,
5. Matthew.
as he loved us first, 1. Timoth. 1.
and therefore if we will be his disciples and follow him, we must love one an
other, because he has commanded us, and given us an example so to do. And who
can say, yt he loves god or his neighbor, when he does not that which is
commanded by god, and is found needful for his christian brother? First it is
directely against the law of god and nature in his ten commandments. For
it is said. Thou shall not steal, thou shall not desire thy neighbors
goods, Exodus 20.
and yet whosoever le^deth his money for gain, does steal, and desire the his
neighbors goods unlawfully. For what is usury, otherwise the^ a fraudule^t
and crafty stealing of an other man's goods, under ye color of law, against
the owners will? For I pray you, who does willingly borow to pay more then he
received? or who is not craftily dealt with all, yt is thus entrapped with usury?
For besides yt god has utterly forbidden such usury, ye same is also an
extreme undoing unto ye poor borower, and the assured enriching of ye couetus
usurer. But because some man may answer and say, why would they borow the^?
they might have chosen, and volenti non fit iniuria, yt is, to ye willing man,
no wrong is done. A pretty answer, as though no harm can be don to him, that is
willinge upon necessity. to receue yt. Well, you shall hear what god says
expressly, as well in the old, as in the new testament. Exodus 22.
In Exodus the xxij. If thou lend money to any of my people, that is poor by
the, thou shall not be an usurer unto him, neither shall thou oppress him
with vsurye. In an other place, Leuit. 25.
if thy brother be waxen poor, and fall into decay with the, receive him as a
stranger, or a soiorner, and let him live by the, and thou shall take no usury
of him, nor yet vantage, but shall fear thy god, that thy brother may live
with the, thou shall not lend him thy money upon vsurye, or lend him of thy
food to have an advantage by yt. For I am the lord your god, which
brought you out of the land of Egypt, to geeue you the land of Canaan, and
to be your god. The prophet king David says. Lord who shall enter into
thy tabernacle? Psalm. 15.
and amongst other things he answers thus: he that gives not his money
upon usury, and takes no reward against the innocent. And in the 18. of
Ezechiel, Ezech. 18.
it is thus. The soul that sins shall dye, if a man be godly, and do that
is equal and right, that takethe not other men's goods by violence, that
parts his meat with she hungry, that clotheth ye naked, that lends
nothing upon usury, that takes nothing over, this is a righteous man, he
shall surely live says the lord, but he that greuethe the poor and nedye, that
robs and spoylethe, that giuethe not the debtor his pledge again, that
lends upon usury, and takes moreover, shall this man live? no, he shall not
live, seeing he has done all those abominations, he shall dye, and his blood
shall be upon him. Matthew. 5.
Christ says, give unto him that askethe, and from him that would borrowe,
turn not away thy face. Yea, lend says Christ in an other place, Luc. 6.
lookinge for nothing thereby, or of the gain.

Thus you see how manifest y^ scriptures are against all vsurye, and how
plainly the words are uttered, and with what great threats, because we
should be clean and undefiled persons in the sight of ye lord. Hieronimus
epist. lib.
Saint Hierome says there is no difference, betwixt usury, fraud and violent
robbinge, as who should say, he that is an usurer is a deceitful false man, an
errant thief, and an extreme extorcioner, and at a word, the worst man that
is to be found in a country, and therefore says he, lend unto thy brother
freely, and receive that again which thou have lent, and seek for nothing over
and above, for all overplus, or excess above the principal, is counted usury.
For as saint Augustyne says, August.
an usurer is the^ said to be, when he does demand more in money or any other
thing else, then he has delivered. S. Hierome also sayethe, that some do think
usury to be only in money, but let them well understand, that usury is an
overplus in any thing, above that which was lent. As for example. If a man do
le^d unto his neighbor ten bushels of corn in winter, to receive at the
next harvest fiftene bushels for the same, Ambrosius libro de bono mortis.
this is flat vsurye. Saint Ambrose likewise, says in the book of the
goodness of death. If any man take usury, he does commit extorcion, rauin, and
pillage, and shall not live the life: as who should say, Chrisosto. super illud.
he shall dye therefore. Saint Ihon Chrysostom says, that an usurers money,
Math. 5. and volenti mutuare.
is like to the bytinge of the serpent A^pis, which with a sweet pleasant itch
casts a man into a sound sleep, and so he dies there upon, without farther
sense or feling. Saint Augustine says, Augustinus psalm. 36.
if thou le^d thy money to any body, and lokest for more, then thou have lent,
not only of money, but also of any other thing, be yt corn, wine, oil, or
any thing else whatsoever, thou art an usurer, and herein to be blamed and
not to be allowed for it. Thus you see, that by S. Augustines saiynge, the very
hope of gain upon money lent, makes a man to be an usurer. Hieronimus in
Ezech. c. 6.
S. Hierome is of the same mind in an other place, and will not that any thing
shall be taken, over and above the principal, saiynge in this wise. There be
some (says he) that think usury to be only in money, which thing, the
scripture foreseeinge, does forbid all excess or overplus, that a man must
not receive more, then he has laid out. Some will take for the lone of their
money, small rewards of diverse sorts, thinking yt thereby they do not commit
usury, not understanding yt the scripture calls usury, al yt is over and
above, if a man receive more again the^ he did le^d at the first. but wholly and
utterly forbid it as a most wicked and detestable syn, according to the saying
of S. Paul. Roma. 2.
Man must not do any evil, that good may come thereof. And whereof comes
this foul usury? for sooth of covetousness, which as S. Paul says, Timoth.
6.
is the root of al mischefe. For they that seek wealth gredely, as it is in ye
same place, do fall into te^tacion, and into snare of the devil, and into diverse
folishe and wicked lusts, which drive men to destruction: and therefore some
seeking money greedely, have erred from the faith, and have filled themselves
with great sorrows, and much pensiuenes. Alas what goodness can be in them,
that are covetous, who have made money their god, Paul Ephesians. 5.
and committed therewith idolatry, as S. Paul saiethe in an other place. What
mind can he have of heavenly things, yt is wholly drouned in wordly desires,
and will sell his soul for money? Surely ye covetous man, has none other
mind in the world, but of his money, and his care to come by it is so great,
that he recketh not how he have it, either by hook or by crook. Farewell
honesty, farewell truth, farewell the fear of god, and all goodness, where a
covetous man lives. Mark I pray you, to how many things the covetous man is
compared. First he is like Hell, that is never satisfied. Next he is likened to
death, that deuourethe all things, the^ to the Sea, yt never swellith the more,
although all the other ryuers and fluddes do run into it, after yt, he is
ressembled to a dog, that lying in an heymowe, will neither eat heye himself,
nor yet suffer other cattle to eat by him: to a Moul, that casts earth upon
himself, to a spyder, that is entangled in his own copwebb, and last of all, he
is compared to a sack, yt has no botto^, that put in it whatsoever you will, ye
same still goes out straight ways, and is never filled. So yt to gether al
these together, and to lap the^ up round in one bu^dle, you shall here, yt a
covetous man is hell insatiable, ye sea ragi^g, a cur dog, a blind moul, a
venemus spider, and a botto^les sack, where by you may be well assured, yt the
dyuell dwells tabernacled in such a mo^stre. The scripture does merueilously
speak against couetusnes in diverse places. Exodus 28.
In Exodus it is written. Let them be altogether void from covetousness, that
bear rule over others: for surely where covetousness reigns, there cannot be
any Justice ministered. And therefore god defend this realm from covetous
magistrates, and gredy governors. In the Proverbs it is written. Proverb. 28.
He that hasteneth to be rich, cannot be honest. And I pray you who makes
greater have to advance his wealth, then the covetous usurer? or who commethe to
infinyte riches more easily, the^ the usurer? And yet the more he has, the
more he desires, whose gredye heart is very hell mouth as I said before, that
will never be filled. But see what follows of this. He that heapeth to him
self unjustly, Eccles. 14.
does gather his goods for an other manne, often times a mere stranger to
him, yea and sometimes his deadly enemy: so that with his evil gotten goods, an
other man, either stranger to him, or else his foe, shall be mightily enriched by
him much against his will, yea he shall be used like unto a spounge, which when
it is full of water, is pressed and wrounge in such sort, that the water goes
clean out: Even so shall the rich man be stripped out of all that he has,
to pleasure many times his enemy therewithal, to his great heart grief, and
be made as bare and naked, as ever he was borne. Therefore god by his prophet
denownceth, woe unto such rich carles, Esai. 5. ^3.
saying, woe be unto you that join house to house, and land to land, even
unto the very bounds of the place. Do you think to dwell alone upon the
earth? Woe be to thee that proulest and take prays, for thou shall be
bereft of all that thou have. Woe be to you rich folk, that have your only
joy and comfort here upon earth. Look well to your selves therefore, and
eschew covetousness, for no man's life (says Christ) is in the abundance of
that he has. Luc. 6.
And harken what saint Paul says, Ephesians. 5.
no whoremonger, no unclean person, no covetous man, who is a worshipper of
Images shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Christ also says, my children,
Math. 19
how hard a matter is it for those, that put their trust in money, to come to
heaven. It is more easy for a camel to go through a needles eye, then for a
covetous man to enter into heaven. Jacob. 5.
Therefore go on you rich men, as saint James says, weep and bewail your
miseries, which shall fall upon you and your riches. Genes. 19.
The Sodomites were wholye destroyed for their covetous and filthy lives. 1.
Reg. 15.
Covetousness was the destruction of Saul, for the scripture says, he more
esteemed spoil and rauyn, then the word of god. The richeman that fared
deintily every day, Luc. 16.
was buried in hell. Act. 1.
Judas had the reward of his covetousness, for he hanging him self did brast
in the midst. Diogenes seeing Anaximines servants carrying great store of
silver vessel, asked whose plate that was, which they carried, and hearing
that it was Anaximines their masters plate, who was a very rich couetouse
snudge, he said thus meryly unto the^: Is it not a shame fellows for your
master to have so many things alone to himself, Maximus sermo. 12.
and has not yet himself? meaning that a couetouse man is rather had of his
money, then has any money of his own, being as though it were servant and
bond slave to his gotten goods, and hid treasure. Examples be infinite,
as well profane as holy. And mark well in what common wealth that covetousness
once entered, the same did not long continue after: as by the Romayne state it
does most evidently appear. And therefore says Pondidius a Roman (as
Tully makes report, Cicer. offic. ^.
who says, that in all men bearing office, and public charge, the least
suspicion of covetousness ought to be eschewed) would god ( quoth he) it had been
my fortune then to have been, and in that time borne, when the Romans began
first to take brybes, surely I would not have suffered them long to have borne
rule. His meaning was, that he would have outbidden them all, and got
government with money: a covetous man no doubt, and ambiciouse, out of
measure. But Scipio Affricanus, and Paulus Aemilius being mighty magistrates,
and the worthiest captains, and rulers, that ever were, either before or
since, had clean, and uncorrupted hands, and as well were they continent as
abstinent, bearing them selves moderatly in all their affairs, and forbearing
to wrong or iniurye any body. God grant therefore, that all men, but especially
rulers, be void from covetousness. For as Apollo Pythius said by oracle that
Sparta, otherwise called Lacedemon, should not perish and be utterly destroyed
by any thing more, than by covetousness, so I pray god most heartily, that the
same be not a prognostication for England, where such horrible covetousness
raygneth, as never was known, either in Greece land, or in Italy. And of this
covetousness, usury springs, as daughter and heir to so fylthy a mother. And
what shall a man look for any other thing else, but confusion, and utter
destruction, when laws are holden for lusts, private commodity better
esteemed then the common wealth, poor men every where neglected, and god either
not remembered, which is evil, or else wholly contempned and despised, which is
worse, for how can it be otherwise, when men have no regard of sin, and
feeding them selves with their own humors, do think that what soever they do
is well done, be it never so far from god, and all godliness, alack the
pitye therefore, when our blyndnes and wilfulnes are such. Some forsooth, to
color their doings, will not lend money, but wares, and so of purpose will
set their wares at an high price, in consideracio^ of time, demaundyng great
gain for the time only, whereas if either they sold their wares then, or
kept them never so long, they could never have so much money of any man, to be
commonly sold betwixt merchant and merchant. Exodus 22.
But god says, if thou lend money, wine, oil, corn, or any thing else, thou
shall not take any tot more, then thou have lent, in respect of time, but so
much only, as thou have lent, and no more in any wise. And what do these men
mean, that saying the word of god so expressly against them, forbiddynge,
and condempnynge it in such sort, as daily they may read, see, and hear,
will so wilfullye offend against his holy law? will any man thynk him a man
of god, that having stolen often, delyteth still to steal, and thinks no
goods well gotten, that are not stolen, or robbed from other? Or is that man
worthy to live amongst men, that wittynglye murdreth his dear brother, for
whom Christ has shead his most precious blood, and delyteth still so to
do, heaping murder upon murder? Assuredly, the usurer is none other, but a
thief and a murderer of his even christian, and as well worthy to dye the
death, as any other offender whatsoever. There is no penalty of death
against the aduouterer, no more then against the usurer, and therefore they
both do more abound, then either theefes or murderers. Whereby this is a
manifest reason that the wicked men of this world, fear more penal statutes,
and positive laws of princes, then the law of god, wherein they show them
selves to be of this world, and to have no regard of the world to come. And
further I may say, and justify it also, that such are they whom god has
forsaken, the reprobate I mean, and cursed people, ordained for the Devil and
his angels to be tormented in hell fire for ever, for what can be worse, then
the vserer, who is without all love and charity, and has no pity of his
neighbor, in what miserye or want so ever he be? The poor may sterue, and
dye in the streates, for any mercy or charity that they will show, whereas,
if they were of god, they should remember the poor and needy, and not only to
lend freely, but also geeue almose frankly. 1. Joan. epist. 3
For as S. John says: who soever has this worlds good, and sees his brother
have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of
god in him? Again it is written in Tobias: Tobias. 4.
give almose of thy goods and turn never thy face away from ye poor, and so
shall it come to pass, that the face of the lord shall not turn away from the.
Be merciful after thy power: if thou have much, give plentiously, if thou have
little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little, for so gatherest you thy
self a good reward in the day of necessity, for almose delyuereth from death,
and suffers not the soul to come in darkness. A great comfort is almose
before god, unto all them that do it. Of thine own goods says he, not of
goods evil gotten, neither by extortion, theft or vsurye, but of such goods,
as thou half justly gotten, by sweat of thy brows, or by any other lawful
industry. And in the law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 15
god says, when one of thy brethren among you is waxen poor, in any of the
cities within thy land, which the lord thy god gives thee, see thou harden
not thine heart, nor shutt thy hand from thy poor brother, but open thy hand
unto him, and lend him sufficient for his need, which he has, and let it not
grieve thine heart to give, because that for that thing, the lord thy god shall
bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thy hand to, for
the land shall never be without poor, wherefore I command thee saying, open
thine hand unto thy brother that is needye and poor in thy land. Yet all
this notwithstanding the vserer is as deaf as a door nail, as blind as a
bittle, and as hard hearted as a flynt stone, whose mind, god for his great
mercy soften. The inhabitants of Asia, Macedonia, and Corinthia, as the
apostle shows of them, 1. Corinthians. 16.
in his epistle to the Romans and Corinthians, 2. Corinthians. 8.
were not hard hearted, 9. Romans 15.
toward their brethren. The apostles them selves, being the true disciples of
god, expressly willed in all their churches and congregacions, that the poor
should always be remembered, Act. 6.
yea, and did send of that poor substance they had, some portion to the poor
brethren that were in Iudaea. Act. 11.
We do read in the old testament a notable example of that famous and worthy
capytayne Nehemias, who seeinge the people of Israel, Nehemias li.
for want and need to run upon usury, to pawn their lands and goodds, ^.
Esdras. ca. 5
and so to pay excessyuely, after they had returned from their captivity in
Babilonia, called the magistrates and governors before him, and rebuked them
very sharply, that they exacted tribute upon their poor brethren. And
therefore he commanded, that there should be lands, vyneyardes, orchardes
of olyues, and also houses allotted unto them, without paying any usury at al,
for that they were wont to pay the hundredth part of their lands and goodds
every month, in the name of tribute, to maynteine the wages and salaries of
their chief governors and magistrates, which paymentes Nehemias did utterly
abrogate, because he saw the people were very poor, and therefore says he
these words unto them. It is not good that ye do, ought ye not to walk in
the fear of god, because of ye rebuke of the heathen our enemies? I, and my
brethren, and my servants have lent them money and corn: but as for usury,
let us leave it. Such should princes and magistrates be, such should
landelordes and great possessioners show them selves to the poor and nedye
tenaunts, when they are ouercharged with excessyue enhaunced rentes. The wise
man says: Water quenches fire, Eccles. 3. and 4
and mercy reconcileth sins, god has respect unto him that is thankful, he
thinks upon him against the time to come, so that when he falls, he shall
find a strong hold. And therefore it follows: My son, defraude not the
poor of his almose, and turn not away thine eyes from him that has need:
despise not an hungry soul, and defye not the poor in his necessity, grieve
not the heart of him that is helpelesse, and withdraw not thy gift from the
needful. Refuse not the prayer of one that is in trouble, and turn not away
thy face from ye needy, cast not thine eyes aside from the poor, that thou
give him not occasion to speak evil of the, for if he co^plain of the in the
bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard, even he that made him shall
here him. Proverb. 28.
In the proverbs of Solomon, thus it is written: He that gives to the poor
shall not want, but he that turns away his eyes from such as be in
necessity, shall suffer great pouertye him self, Psalm. 41.
and therefore the prophet David says: Blessed is he that considers the
poor, the lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. Esai. 58.
Esaias the prophet exhorts all men to do charity, and to give almose, saying
in this wise. It pleases not me, til thou break thy bred to the hungry, and
bring the poor fatherless home to thy house, when thou see the naked, that
thou cover him, and hyde not thy face from thine own flesh. It is written also,
in the gospel of saint Mathewe: Math. 6.
See ye gather not treasure upon earth, where rust and mothes corrupt, and
where thieves break through and steal, but gather thy treasure together in
heaven, where neither rust nor mothes corrupt, and where thieves neither break
in, nor yet steal, for where soever your treasure is, there will be your
heart also. Luc. 12.
And in Luke also he says: Sell that ye have, and give almose, and make you
bags which wax not old, and treasure that fails not in heaven, where no
thief comes, neither mothe corrupts. But what will you have of thorns,
other then thorns? Math. 7.
do you think to gather figs of thistles, or grapes upon brambles? such as
the tree is, such will the fruit be. Besides this, the vserer is the ydlest
man that lives, for he does nothing, and yet gayneth all things, contrary to
saint Paul's saying: Paul. 2. Ephesians. 3
who wills that none should eat, that does not labor. And these fellows do
not only eat, but they out eat all men, and geate the devil and all to them,
without cause, or any manner of reason in the world. Moreover, they are so
unmerciful couetouse, that they mind nothing in the world, but only money,
and therefore cannot talk willynglye of any other matter, but of setting forth
their money for gain, and desyringe still that others may want, that their
gain may be the greater, for conscience they have none, no more then dogs.
And better for a good meaning man, to be cast headlonge into prison, and
there to be fast cheyned with irons, then to come into their bonds: for a man
being imprisoned, may by some one means or other, get out, but being once in
the usurers danger, it is not possible to get out, but still he is assured to
be in, more and more, like as a bird, being taken with lyme twigges, the
more she struggleth to get out, the more she is lymed and entangled fast, so
the poor man, the more he deals with usury, the more he is wrapped in
Darbyes bands, as they say, and at length utterly undone. And this is the
occasion of diverse bankeruptes, of many decayed gentlemen, that are compelled
for lyfle to sell their lands away, and of a number of honest occupyers,
that by those means are utterly undone, both they, their wives, and their
children. I do know, there be other means that bringes many a man to
pouertye, as namelye, excessyue fare, gorgeous apparel, keepynge of over many
servants, playinge at dyce and cards, hauntynge of harlottes, and
vnnecessarye liberality, more used in England, then elsewhere. And yet will I
say, all these set togeether, have not more harmed some men, and the most of
men, then this filthye vsurye has done. And my reason is this: A man takes
up a thousand pounds at one time, and pays for the same, twentye, thyrtye,
nay shall I say forty, in the hundred sometimes, and still runs upon
usury, by the space of five or six years, yea, perhaps ten years, payinge
usury upon usury, which after twenty pound in the hundredth pound, comes
to two thousand pound, after ten years, with the pryncipall, and so forty in
the hundred, amounts to four thousand pound in ten years, with the
principal, now this borrower triumphs for a time, but when he shall come to
pay the principal, and the usury upon usury, then he feels thereupon
such a smarte, that he is wroung to the bones. And then forsooth away goes
his land, and all that ever he has, to master usurer. I know a gentleman
borne to five hundred pound land, and entering into usury upon pawn of his
land, did never receive above a thousand pound of nete money, and within
certain years, ronnynge still upon usury, and double usury, and usury upon
usury: the merchantes termyng it vsance and double vsance, by a more clenly
name, he did owe to master usurer five thousand pound eat the last, borowyng
but one thousand pound at first, so that his land was clean gone, being five
hundredth pounds inherytance, for one thousand pound in money, and the usury
of the same money, for so few years, and the man now beggeth. I will not
say, but this gentleman was an unthrift diverse ways, in good cheer, nay in
evil cheer, I may call it, in wearing gaye and costly apparel, in roystynge
with many servants mo then needed, and with mustrynge in monstrous great
hose, in hauntynge evil company, and lasshynge out fondlye and wastfullye at
cards and dyce, as time served. And pet I do say, he lost more by the
usurer, then he did by all those vnthriftye means: for his vain expenses was
not much more, then a thousand pound, because he had no more: whereas the
usurer had not only his thousand pound again, but four times more, which is
five thousand pound in the whole, and for want of this payement the five
hundred pound land was wholly his. And this gain only he had for time. They
say time is precious. He may well say, time was precious to him, that paid
so dearly for it, or rather the usurer may say, that time was very precious
to him that took so much unto him. Now lord god, what a strange thing is
this, that god suffering the sun to shine upon us freely, and the air to be
common to all, as well poor as rych, without any gain taking, that we not
considering so liberal a goodness of god, should so far be from charity, that
we will fell time and air so dearly, having it of god so freely. Assuredly
such caterpillars upon earth, are accursed of god above, because they have no
property of god in them below. For god gives power for yt sun to shine,
sends rain in due season, appoints the stars to keep their courses, and
al for the behoof and benefit of man: and man only, I mean the usurer, is
enemy both to god and man, and will in nothing follow, neither the example of
god, nor yet his blessed commandment, nor fear his bitter threats, nor
yield to any law. Therefore I say still, usurers be devils and no men, traitors
to their creator, disloyal members to his commandments, caytifes to their
kind, rebels to their country, and enemies to their own souls. But you
will say, all usurers be not of one sort, some take less, and some take more.
In deed (I speak by wordly respect) I may say with the philosopher, there are
degrees of comparison in some sin, and yet I must say, he that takes over
and above that he lends, is an usurer, and so a sinner before god: as he that
steals but a penny by the high way, is a thief as well as he that steals
an hundredth pound, and worthy to be hanged therefore, although the loss is not
so great to the owner, but that is no matter, the intent and evil mind is
all one. And so the usurer that takes less, because he would seem honest,
shall go to the devil, because he has wittinglye sinned against god, as well
as the other that takes more, for that the law says plainly, thou shall not
take any thing, over and above that thou have lent. And he shall dye the death
as well, he that has killed one man, as he that has killed twenty, because the
law says: Exodus 20.
thou shall not kill. Likewise he that offends with one married woman, and
that but ones, is as well an aduouterer, as that man is, that has offended
diverse times with many, because the law says, thou shall not co^mytt
aduouterie, which is then committed, when any one man offends with another
man's wife. Less taking^ excuses no man, when god forbids all manner of
taking. And often times, he that takes less, would have more, if he could
get it. I must not be wyser then the holy ghost, and therefore, what soever I
do find there, I will follow it plainly, without any addyng or diminishing.
And so, where Christ wills us not to look for any gain at all, what gain
should we have? Let lendyng be a lending, as it should be, that is to say,
free, simple, and for charityes sake, and as the nature of lendynge is, without
any thing at all, more then the principal: for if I do take more, I do not
lend, as I am commanded, but I do contract, and bargayne for mine own
couetouse gain only, contrary to gods good will, and commandment, and
against all law. Ezechiell says, if I do take any thing over and above my
lone, Ezechiell. 18.
I shall not live the life, but dye. Therefore I would wish all men, to take
good heed, what they do, and not to flatter them selves with vain gloses, and
imaginations, as though they might in some case, and in some respects take an
overplus, with a clear conscience. I for my part, would not take a penye more
then I did lend, for all the goods in the world. For I know there is no
mean in this vice, more then there is in murder, theft, or whoredom. And
therefore I say, and maintain it constantlye, that all lendyng in respect of
time, for any gain, be it never so little, is usury, and so, wickedness before
god and man, and a damnable deed in it self: because we are commanded to
lend freely, and to look for nothing over, and above that we lend. But as I
said before, this usury is the daughter of covetousness, a monstrous daughter
I say, of an horrible foul foster dame. Seneca says wisely, Auarus nil recte
facit, nisi cum moritur. The covetous man does nothing well, but when he dies,
which sentence may most aptlye be said of the wretched usurer, who in his
life time, is the cause of all hurt, for by leauyng his goods behind, there
may some good come by his death, when his wealth is dispearsed abroad
amongst others, and his unmerciful dealyng brought to an end. We do all
fear the plague merueylously, and desire, that both city and country may be
clean rid of it, and yet what a bless were it to this whole realm, if in one
year, there were an universal murren of all the usurers in England. Murren
quod one, why that is a death proper to beasts. Alack good man, I have failed
in my Rhethoricke, and yet I pray you, what are these usurers other then
beasts? for they live like beasts, and dye like beasts, and why should I
not wyshe unto such brute carons a caroniouse death, meet to their
condition, since they will not repent and amend their sinful living, by no
warning nor threatening of man nor god, that can be devised.

To lend freely is a kind of liberality and bountifulnes, when a man
departs from his own, to help his neighbors want, without any hope of
lucre or gain at all, for he is benefited, that borrows, and feels great
comfort in his great need, whereas lending for gain, is a chief branch of
covetousness and makes him, that before might have been counted bountiful, to be
now reconed a greedy gayner for him self, seeking his own welfare upon good
assurance, without any care at all what becomes of his neighbor, gnawing him
vnmercyfully, to satisfy his own wretched and most greedy hunger, directly
turnynge a most bewtifull virtue, into a most filthy abominable vice. Yea
usury is a manifest and voluntarye known theft, which men do use knowinglye
and wyttingly, for either they think they do evil, and forbear it never a
whit, or (that which is worst of all) they think they do well, and so by often
using of this filthiness, do lull them selves in sin with out any sense or
feeling of their most wretched wickedness, and horrible dealing.

Christ for his bitter passion be merciful unto us, and give us his fear, that
we may live after his law, and follow his holy will, for surely, as we live
now, either the bible is not gods word, or else we are not of god, such
contrarietiis between our lives, and our lessons. The scripture commands,
Exodus 20
thou shall not steal, thou shall not kill, thou shall not commytt aduoutery,
thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not lend out thy money for
gain, to take anythinge for the lone of it, and yet we do all these things,
as though there were neither scripture, that forbad us, nor heaven for us to
desire, nor hell to eschew, nor god to honor, nor devil to dread. And this
last horrible offense, which I count greater, or as great, as any of the rest,
is so common amongst us, that we have no sense to take yt for sin, but
count it lawful bargainynge, and judge them goodlye wise men, that having
great masses of money by them, will never adventure any iott thereof in
lawful occupying, either to carrye out our plentye, or to bring in our want,
as good merchants use, and ought to do, but lyuinge idle at home, will set
out their money for profit, and so enrych them selves with the labor and
travail of others, being the^ selves none other, then droanes that suck the
honney, which other paynefull Bees gather with their contynuall travail of
diverse slowers in every field. And whether these men be profitable, or
tolerable to a common weal, or no, I report me to you? Besides that, god
does utterly forbidd them, whose commandment ought to be obeyed, if we be
Christians, and of god, as we profess to be. And therefore for my part, I
will wyshe some penal law of death to be made, against those usurers, as well
as against theefes or murderers, for that they deserve death much more then
such men do, for these usurers destroy and devour up, not only whole
families, but also whole countries, and bring all folk to beggerie, that have
to do with them. And therefore are much worse then theefes or murderers,
because their offense hurts more universally, and touches a greater
number, the one offendynge for need, and the other upon wilfulness, and that
which is woorst, under the color of frendshippe, men's throtes are cut, and
the dooers counted for honest and wise men amongst others that have so
ungodly geathered goods together. What is the matter that Jews are so
universally hated wheresoever they come? For soothe, usury is one of the
chief causes, for they rob all men that deal with them, and undo them in
the end. And for this cause, they were hated in England, and so banyshed
worthelye, with whom I would wyshe all these Englishemen were sent, that
lend their money or other goods whatsoever for gain, for I take them to be no
better then Jews. Nay, shall I say? they are worse then Jews, for go whither
you will through out Christendom, and deal with them, and you shall have under
ten in the hundred, yea sometimes for six at their hands, whereas english
usurers exceed all gods mercy, and will take they care not how much,
without respect had to the party that borrows, what loss, danger, or
hinderaunce soever the borower susteyneth. And how can these men be of god,
that are so far from charity, that care not how they get goods so they may
have them.

O lord have mercy upon us, and deal not with us according to our manyfold
wickedness, neither reward us according to our iniquities. Great are our sins
that we have committed and more in number then are the sands upon the sea
shores. Lord, if thou narrowlye mark our naughtines and wicked doings, who
shall be able to stand before thee in judgment? but thou lord art merciful,
and wilt forgive them that call upon the in faith with a repentant mind,
which god grant unto us all for his dear sons sake Jesus Christ, to whom
with the father and the holy ghost be al honor and glory for ever and ever
Amen.


Lawyer. Every man in his faculty, I see well, ought first to be heard. You
have said much, and very godly, but whether politiquelye, and altogether
aptly, I cannot constantlye affirm, for that I see all commonweals in the
Christian world, are governed otherwise then you preach. And therefore I must
think you take the scriptures amysse, and do not expound them according to the
very meaning of the holy ghost. And I tell you plain, it is not in you
preachers to judge precyselie what usury is. For as diuynes cannot tell what
herb is best for every disease, but the phisicions that are best practiced,
and acquaynted therewyth: so it is not in simple divines to say, what contract
is lawful, and what is not, but in skillful lawyers to show, and in wise
magistrates to determyne the truth, and right hereof. And such contractes, as
the laws do allow for lawful, a good man may use the same with a safe
conscience. And public laws, made according to good reason, and justice,
are the ordinances of god, and the magistrate is the minister of god, to a
good man, for good. I grant you may preach generallye against it, as you
do, but to say perticularlye, and precyselye, what it is, is not within the
compass of your profession. Those have best skill in these matters, that are
judges, to hear the fact done, and by circumstaunce to consider thereof,
according to their learning, and as cases have been ruled heretofore in the
like contractes, and bargaynes, so to end matters, as you master doctor can
best tell. You preachers do hear things a far of, but you never sit in
judgment of such matters, neither it is incident to your calling: for a
preacher and a judge, are two distinct officers, and of the two, the judges
office is the harder to discharge, and more intricate, because of the
diversity of allegations, and reasons, which he must hear, weygh, and
consider depelye, and so resolve upon them, according to the truth of the
matter, alleged and proved, and as ye law does direct him.


Gromel gayner I was almost persuaded, never to lend money or wares again for
interest, but I will hear farther before I geeue up, because it may be,
there is some shifte to save a man's conscience with all. And the rather I do
believe it, because I do here you somewhat begin to contrary him.


Ockerfoe. Deceive not your self, neither yet be you deceived of others. Call
your conscience to account, and hearken to gods word simply, and he will give
you grace to take the best way.


Ciuilian. It were good, till every man have said his mind at large, that none
should by short speech affirm any truth, but stay his determynate
sentence, till he have uttered his mind at full, and therefore I would wish
that you went through with your tale, master temporal lawyer, and according to
your profession, say your mind without direct condempning others. And I will in
my learning, say after you what I can.


Lawyer. Content with all my heart.


Preacher. Say on I pray you in gods name.


The Lawyers oration.
AS your profession is divinity, so your whole sermon sounds of god, and
does require so much of man, as man is not able to perform. Happy is the
that comes nyghest, but assuredlye he never lived, that either has done, or
can do, or shall be able hereafter to do that which you have uttered. You begin
with love, and make love the perfection of the law, and here you bring the
commaundment, that man must love god above all things, and his neighbor as
him self. What man ever lived, that did, or was able to perform this lawnone
surely, saving Christ only, and therefore, because of our impossibility,
Christ came in fleashe in the fullness of time, to appease the wrath of his
father for sin, and to satisfy the law, which else could never have been
performed, so that in Christ only is our justification, as I have heard
you full often preach.

Therefore, whereas you say, no man should lend for any gain, and that all
men should lend freelye to them that have need without any respects of
profit, I do think you do deal over precyselye, and go about to bring men
to that strayghtnes, as they never were in, at any time. For as I hear some
say, usury is never hurtful, but when it vyteth, otherwise, it may be allowed
and suffered. For if I do lend^ money to him, that has need, and can prove
that for want of the same money I have sustained great loss, or if my
debtour do break day with me, when I look to have it at the time appointed,
and so am endaungered to my neighbor, for my necessary payementes, which of
right he claims at yt time: it were good reason, that my debtour bear my
loss, rather then I should sustain harm or danger for my good will. And
reason it is, yt every man have his own, or else it were better holding fast and
to be sure, then to lend and lose all. For whatsoever you say of love toward
our neighbor, me thinks no man should love his neighbor better then him
self, which they seem to do that lend to other freely, and want them selves.
And I have hard say, that Charitas incipit a se. Charity begins first at it
self. And use we not in common phrase to say? Near is my coat to my skin,
but my shirt is nerer. As who should say, I will be a friend unto my neyghbor,
and help him so much as I am able, but I will not so help him by S. Marie, as
I will harm my self: which is not gods will that I should do. You have
heaped a number of scriptures together, alleged doctoures, and brought forth
reasons, for ye detestation of usury, wherein you have done well, but better
you should have done, in my mind, if you had weied usury more straightely by
the rule of charity, and not directly to call al those usurers, that take any
thing more then they have lent, for so the case may fall out, that he sins
who has borrowed, if he will not make recompense: therefore in such cases,
circumstances ought to be considered, and so judgment geeuen upon ye matter.
Neither ought I to deal with all men in one sort, for as there be three
sorts of dealings amongst men, that is, gift, bargaininge, and lending: so
are there three sorts of men, the stark beggar, the poor houshoulder, and the
rich merchant or ge^tleman. To the first I ought to give freely, not only to
lend freely, to the second I ought to lend, either freely or mercifully, with
the third I may deal straightly, and ask mine own with gain, as I take it,
without offense to god, or man: for when I deal with him that makes gain of
my money with his trade and occupyinge, and is well able to pay me again,
being enriched by my means cheefelye, why should not I in reason, have part
of his advantage, when by my goods he is grown rich? for be it that two,
three, or fowr, be in consort, whereof two puts forth their money, and the
other twoe use their labor and industrye, for encreasinge the same money, by
lawefull trade, is it not reasonne that these although they be idle at home,
who have disbursed large sommes of money to adventure freely with others should
have reasonable gain with them: God forbid else. But you will say perhaps,
this is no usury. I cannot tell what you call vsurye, these men do lend and
the other do borrowe, and enter into good hands, first to restore the
principalle, and next to promise and couenante for such competent gain, as
they shall be able to make and show upon their account. It is no reason that
every manne should be an occupier, or merchant aduenturer, a chopper, or a
changer: but good it is that few deal for money, and then shall many thrive
and not that every body should be a doer for him self that scant one manne
can live for another. Therefore I think it good, that when a man has iij. or
iiij. thousand pounds liyng by him, to give some to the poor and needy
beggars, and in lending freely to help the orphans, widows and strangers, and
with y^ rest to make his own certain gain for his adua^ceme^t amongst the
rich occupiers and welthy cobbes of the world. For surely I am of this
mind, that where no bittinge is, there is no usury, and where both parties do
gain, there ought to be contentacion of mind, and good agreement on both
parties. Some therbe that say, all usury is against nature, whereas I think
clean contrary, for if usury wear against nature, it should be universally
evil, but god has said, yt to a stranger a man may put out his money for
usury, but it it had been against nature, god would not have granted that
liberty. So that I take it to agree both with law and nature, that I should
do good unto him, that does good unto me, or else I should be unthankful,
than which, there cannot be a greater or more horrible fault upon earth, and
rewards given for good turns done, or pleasures received for benefits
bestowed, are so common, that who so offendith herein, is pointed at and
counted a churl, and shall after want when he would have. Moreover, who may
not give his own freely, or what is he that will not, or may not take any thing
that is given? what is more fre then gift? or what is he that will show such
discurtesy not to receive a gift, when it is freely offered? and what other
thing do they that seek to borrow money, but entreat merueilouslye and offer
frankelye for the time and use of money. Moreover, it is not against the Romain
laws of the Emperoures, but rather allowed, not only suffered as you master
doctor can best tell, by laws of your Code and made by the Emperor
Justiniane, the best prince that ever lived. Yea the cannon law it self seems
to suffer it in the title of vsurye, as you know better than I can tell. Even
in gods law if I be not deceived, usury is not forbidden. Luke 19.
For is it not in S. Lukes gospel that god said, he would come and ask the
money lent with the usury, blaming him that did not put it fourth for gain.
Deuteronomy: 24.
And in Deutronomie it is plain. Thou shall not lend to thy brother for gain,
but to a stranger. The common law of England is not against all vsurye neither
in such sort, and so precise lie, as you take vsurye. And Statutes there have
been, that have permitted usury, which I would they had continued to avoid
further evil, for (as we say) better it is to suffer a mischief, then an
inconvenience. But to reason this matter further, if I lend unto a man my
plate for five or six months I may lawefullye take gain only for the lone,
and no man will say black is mine eye, and yet if I do take for money, by and
by they will make an outcry and call men usurers therefore, where at I marvel
greatly. For a man (as I take it) may more benefit him self with an hundrede
marks in money, then he can do with an other man's basin or ewer of an
hundrede marks value. And yet lending of money is called usury, and lendinge
of plate for gain to have the same plate again is no usury at all. Yet
further, if I lend one a thousand pound in gold, for pomp sake only to
show at the bank (as they use in Italye and other countries) or otherwise, to
make some believe they have so much of their own, it is not denied, but I may
receive gain for the same, having my principal returned unto me in the same
form and manner as I did lend it: and yet if I should have lent so much
money of good will, and suffered the party to occupye the same for his own
benefyt, restoringe unto me the value thereof with some overplus or gain,
then by and by I should be called an usurer. And what if one I pray you be an
occupyer, and wanting money come to me, that am an occupier also, and desire to
borow largelye: if I bargain with him to have part of his gain, if he make
any, or otherwise do covenant, that if the lendynge of this shall be any
hynderaunce to my occupyinge, to get some bargayne, which I shall perhaps
mysse, and prove yt plainly, because my money is out of my hand: may not I in
both these cases take vsurye without danger of the law, or offense to god?
yes without doubt I ma^e.

And yet to lend money simply is counted usury, whereas there is no man that
lendith but susteineth loss, for the want of it, because he might better
benefit him self by empolying it in diverse wais, the^ to suffer it to be in an
other man's hands, besides the danger that may happen, when a man's money is out
of his own hands, for surer it cannot be, then in a man's own possession. Then
away with this precisnes on gods name, to make every lending for gain to be
plain usury and that on penie over is sin before god, which neither I, nor
yet master merchaunt here, can well believe fully, for I would have althings
weighed by reason in matters of contractes and bargains, and not so to minse
things, as though there wear no mean, for I do not take usury to be, as
whoredom or theft is. In these sins there is no mean to make any virtue,
for he that offendith but once in whoredom, is an offendour, and he that
steals never so little, is a theif, and neither of their doings in any
respect, or by any circumstance is or can be good, whereas the lendinge of money
or other goods, for gain may be very beneficial unto him that boroweth, as
for example. A man is bound to pay 300. li. at a certain day, or else he
loses perhaps 40. li. good land, wear it not charity and a good deed to
help this man, that his land should not be lost for ever? and none offense
neither, as I take it, to do a good turn, and to receive an other. I will go
nerer. Be it there were a great dearth of corn and I have plenty lying by me,
wear it not better for me charitably to lend corn, to the poor and nedy for
their sustenance and relief, and so to receive somewhat in gain at the years
end, then to suffer them to want and utterly to perish? Of two euells, the
less is to be preferred, y^ is, better it wear to lend for gain, then to
suffer my even christian to die for hunger. And if I be not deceived, this is S.
Agustines opinion, who allowethe of gain in such time of necessity, rather
then the people should sterue. Yea the Emperor Justinians law is (as I am
informed) if I lend one ten bushells of wheat, and the borrower of him self
without any stipulation or bargayns made, do barelye promise me twelve
bushelles for the same at the next harueste, I may lawfullye demand the
same, and by action recover it, if it be denied me. And, as I understand,
there be of your doctors who write upon the canon law, that affirm the
less evil to be chosen before the greater, ye, even in that case of dearth
and extreme famine. Therefore I am still of this mind, when none has harm but
both receive benefits: there is none offense committed, but rather great
goodness used. You talk much of charity, you begin with love: I would you
weighed al causes as well by the rule of charity, and referred al things to
charity, by judgment and discrecion, as you have well spoken of charity, and
then this great talk neded not. For surely where charity is not hindered, there
is no usury committed, such usury only being forbidden that breaks charity
and decaiethe the love of my neighbor by extreme cutting and excessive
taking. And who will not be grieved when he is ouerlaid with intolerable usury,
that, do what he can, ye trauasil he and trade he never so much, the biting
usury will be lord in the end of all his gains what soever. And this it is,
that offendith god, when the idle Epicure and licencious usurer does wholly
gain, and the true dealing trader or occupier does beg his bread in the end,
notwithstanding his great industry and just dealing. Ye I say further, that
neither theaft nor aduowtry, nor yet murder wear to be counted sins, if yt
rule of charity were not broken. For in all these heinous offenses, charytie is
decayed, and therefore they are deadly sins, and so is usury when it biteth
and by that means breakithe charity: otherwise yt is no vsurye, if my
neighbor feel no smart nor loss, nor yet is hyndered therewith, for the end
and fulfillynge of the law is charytye. And where charytie is kept, I say
still, there is no offense made, nor yet sin committed.

Now therefore you must either prove every usury, be it never so little, to
break charity: or else I will say still, yt where charity is not broken (as
I say it is not when my neighbor feels no harm) there is no offense
committed, before either god or man. You have said very well against
covetousness, the root of all evil, and surely there cannot be a worse man,
then ye covetous man, for he makes his money his god, and so commits
idolatry, as S. Paul says. But I will not say, that every usurer is a covetous
man, but only the unmerciful and cuttinge usurer, yt has no love nor
charity in him in the world, and cares not, who be undone, so he may gain.
This is he that godd and man abhorrethe, that scripture and all laws do and
ever have condemned, for most wicked and abominable. And mark well the place
of Ezechiell the 18. chapter. and especially the 22. and there you shall see
that the prophet does expressly cry out of covetousness, after he has
condemned usury, as who should say, that covetousness is the chefest cause, of
this horrible vsurye, because it consumes and undoes, as many as deal
therewith, and yet what is he, that will say, that he is undone by his
neyghbor, because he has borrowed many hundred pounds of him, and has paid
over and above the principal, to his creditor for every hundred one penye by
the year? or who will say that such a creditour is a covetous man, or a biter,
or an offendour of gods law and man's law that takes for every 100 l. but one
selye penye. This is rather a Stoiks paradore, and an extrauagant immagination
then any true assertion in doctrine, as I take it. Let us go to the very word
of usury in the hebrew tongue. It is calledde a bitinge, of this word Neshech,
which is nothing else but a kind of bityng, as a dog uses to bite or gnawe
upon a bone, so that he that byteth not, does not commit vsurye: for usury is
none other thing, than a bitinge, as I said of the very Etimologie and
proper nature of the word, otherwise it cannot be called Neshech, as the
Hebricians say, and so call usury of biting only: And the Tigurine translation
has in Exodus. Non inferes morsum fratri tuo, Thou shall not bite thy brother,
where as other translatio^s have, Non foe neraberis fratri tuo, Thou shall not
take vsurye of thy brother: So that where ye first translation says, thou
shall not bite thy brother, and the other says thou shall not take usury of
the brother: I take biting and usury to be al one. The Grecians also call it
(...), which is a birth or born creature (as I am enfourmed) for I have
searched to know this matter, although I know neither hebrew, nor greek, nor
latin neither very well, but only do smatter of broken latin, as the most of
us lawiers do, seeking not for any deep skill or sound knowledge therein:
and in latin it is caled faenus a faetu, that is to say, of a birthe or borne
creature, likewise as the greek word is. And I pray you what a pretty babe is
that, when an hundred pounds bring fourth one single penye? I here say some
call usury a monstrous beast because she bringethe forth monsters from time
to time, by excessive increase of gain: Alack what a pretye monster is this
or what biting, or what gain can it be to any man's hurt, when one receives a
single penny, or an half penye or a farthinge, or the fourth part of a
farthing, or what you will, be it never so little (for all is one to the
deuines and precise preachers) for the borowinge of an hundred pounds for a
year? for this kind of bytinge is noe greater harm then is a flea bytinge,
nor so much neither, and therefore not fit to be spoken of now. God make al
things straight and upright that are crooked or awrye, and then the truth may
be known and so lowed, as god has expressly commanded with out this
burdening and ouercharginge of men's consciences, and woundinge them in such
sort, yt a man cannot almost tell what to do. In deed I will not deny but that we
ought rather to give then to lend, and rather to lend frelye then to
demand gain for love: but this I say, as I am not bound to give frankely to
every man that askethe, no more am I bound to lend freely to every man, that
would borrowe, but according to the circumstances of time, parson, cause,
place, and occasion, I may bestow my goods and distribute such wealth as
god of his goodness has allowed me to occupy, and given me leave to use, as the
steward of his household, and if some one man pay moderately over and above,
for that which he has borrowed, I say it is no offense before god, as I take
it. And recompense is allowed for beneefites done, say what you will, or at
the least wise, no man ought to fare the worse for his well doing, or to be a
looser for his lendinge, which many men should do, if they were not considered.
You say you will not be wyser then the holy ghost, I would not wish you so to
be, but rather I pray god you might be half so wise, as the holy ghost is,
for I believe verelye, the holy ghost never so meant, as you speak, or else
surely I must say that the world is in a strange case. Yea I will say further
if that wear true, the world could not be as it is, neither could man live,
for what reason is it, that I should lend freely to every man a like? for
whereas there be three men come unto me at one time, as I said before, the
stark beggar, the poor householder, and the great rich merchant, or great
landed gentleman, lord or knight, and al they three would have money, or
borrowe money of me at one time, shall I use them all a like, and in one sort
of charity? I do think no reason, nor law of god, or man will enforce me to
it, and therefore I think you divines, do not well observe circumstances,
when you will that the very bare letter shall be plainelye taken as it lies,
and in one sort or manner to be applied to all men, without regard of
circumstance, degree, estate, or condition, of any one. what? not a penny of no
man whatsoever he be? it is strange and without the compass of my
understanding, and surely in my conscience, without the meaning of the holy
ghost, for if you will take all texts of the scripture so precisely, how
answer you to this, Omni paetenti abs te dato. Give to every man that asks
of thee. I pray you who ever did, or was able or thought it meet to geeue to
all that ask: For then whosoever goes abroad, if he carried never so much out
with him, he might perhaps come home with an empty purse, if his disposicion
were known, and if he did so from day by day by a certain space, he might
perhaps beg as fast of those in thend as they did beg of him at ye
beginning. Besides that, in giving without discrecion, you shall oftentimes more
offend god in bestowing alms upon some, then you should do in holding your
hands, for that in geuinge to loyterers and vagabonds, whom you know not
whether they have need or not you do rather maintain them in their idleness,
then benefit their poverty, and offend god highly because you give without
choice or judgment, for which you shall answer another day. It is written in
Saint Paul: Paul. ad. Philip. 4.
Be always glad and again I say be glad. And likewise it is in Saint Luke.
Luke. 18.
Orate semper, pray always. And what is he I pray you Sir, that ever prayed
always, or what fool is he, that would think he is bound so to do, and
would endeavor him self to be always pattering, and so through supersticion
to be void of religion? for surely such fools are in ye excess. And amongst
all people, none go nigher to this vanytie than does the supersticious
Portingal, who is as far from true religion, as he is full of this overmuch
supersticio^ and fond worshipping of god, otherwise then his word and will is to
be worshipped. Christ says to his disciples, go your ways, behold I send
you forth as Lambs among Wolves, bear no wallet, neither scripp, nor shoes,
and salute no man by the way. Math. 10,
And in Saint Matthew, Christ forbiddethe his disciples to carry gold or silver
about them, or any manner of coin in their purses, in all which speches, I
trust you will grant an in terpretacion, over and besides the bare letter, or
else preachers are like to be in evil steed in this evil world.

Likewise it is said by Christ, ye have heard how it was said to them in
the old time. Thou shall not forswere thy self, but shall perform thine
oath to god, Exodus. 20.
but I say unto you, swear not at al, neither by heaven for it is godds seat,
nor yet by the earth, for it is his footestoole etc. wherein all swearing is
forbidden, and yet to take an oath before a magistrate, is not against god. The
co^mau^dment says, Thou shall not kill, and yet it is not forbidden to the
magistrate, to use the sword and to kill upon good cause, neither is any man
forbidden to kill, in his own defense, rather then to be killed, but that he may
with force withstand force. There be diverse such texts which I could allege and
prove, which if they were not otherwise understood then the bare words do
bear, would bring great confusion with them, and such inconveniences also,
as no reason nor law would, could, or might allow in any wise.

Therefore I say, Christ never so meant as you do understand, say you what you
will. Besides this, such straight and precise prohibitio^s do great harm, for
they open a way to the euel, who will hardly be brideled by any law, to do
and to deal with all men excessiuely, and hinder the good, that would deal
charitablye, and yet for want of a warraunt in law, dare not meddle at all, and
so the poor do perish, that else might be helped and relieved upon payment of
moderate vsance. And see what commethe of this precise restrainte, men now can
get no money, but after xxx. or xx. at the lest in the hundred, whereas if there
were a reasonable stint, all such as have need should fare the better, money
would be more common, and the covetous man, would the sooner be brideled, from
taking excessive gain, but many men are of such nicenes, and so far of from
yelding to a good act, to be made to the common profit of all, that they had
rather one gained a thousand pound with out law, than get one hundred pound
with law, such as might be made with a good conscience. You talk that gain
taking for lendinge only is flat usury as though any manne took gain for
lending only, and not for other respects, as that his money is out of his
hand, which else might be employed, and being in another man's keeping, is in
danger of loosing, that otherwise was safe and sure enoughe when it was in his
own hands. And lastly, such loss or hinderaunce perhaps might come unto him
for want of his own ready money, as some man at a time would geeue for so
much money, so much land upon a great extremity and present need. As who
is not subject to such accidents by war, sickness, imprisonment, trouble,
and displeasure that may happen to a man's utter undoing, if he do not avoid
the sodeine harm and present danger that ha^geth over his head. And whether
shall a man go or fly, or how shall one seek to help him self yt has no
money. Therefore that saying is impertynent and void of reason, that men do
commonly receive gain for only lending, and not rather in respect of the
harm yt might happen, or the profit that does cease when a man is without his
money: or else to take a neighbourly part of the gain, that the debtor might
geat. Noe surely, wise men of al ages and times yt have rated the proporcion of
taking, have not stinted y^ same, because men only have lent, but because of
the interest and gain that does or might happen to the lender, if he had the
use him self and employing of his own money. And therefore, say as it pleases
you, I will hold with them, that bargain for moderate gain, mary in all co^tracs
and bargains I would have plain dealing without cheuisance or colorable
deuyses, not as many use to do. There was a statute made Anno Henrici septimi
3. to meet with certain cheuisaunces, but the same was repealed, and an other
made in the tenth year, where brokers are met with all, and such as will have
the benefyt of men's lands, mortgaged till they be paid such money as they
lent, where the lent money is forfeyted. But because it is hard to make any
such good laws, but the malice and cunning of man will practice to break the
same, by some skillful slight especialy when it tendith to the benefitte of
man: therefore in my simple judgment I do much comend that law, which was
made in 37. Henry. 8 where none were suffered to take above 10. li. in the
hundred upon lone, either for wares, or for money, and sorry I am that the same
law was repealed by ye statute of Anno 5. Ed. 6. which statute although it
bear a color of godliness, and seems to be grounded upon religion, yet I
doubt much thereof, and I think verily it is made against all pollecye, and
therefore yt wear good that a parlyament, had wise regard to have it
abrogated, for the statute seemethe to say, that all gain had for the use of
money, in what sort soever it be, is plain usury, and utterly forbidden. And
yet what shall I say? where charity is kept, there is no usury committed: for
what if I say, I will freely lend unto my friend if he will bear with me in a
certain adventure, if any loss happen, shall I call that usury? or if one do
brek day with me, and I sue him for damages, because I have forborne my money a
long time: will any man call such dealinges usury? god forbid. Or be it that
the most of my goods are abrod and I doubt of the good success and spedie
return of them, if he that borrows will bear proporcionablye after 10. or
12. li. in the hundred, for my damages sustained, if any such misshap do fail,
then I shall be contented to do him good, otherwise I would be very loath to help
him and hurt my self, which I should do, if I lent my goods and afterward
being undone through aduenturinge, could have none to bear my losses, is
this any usury to make such a counea^t? I do not think so. I will put you an
other case. A merchant dies and leuethe to his wife 500. li in nete money, and
no more of any other substance, and to six young children that he had with her
200 l for every one of them, when they be of years: how shall this wife live
that knows no trade? how shall these children be maintained till they be of
years, and have there stock wholly delivered to them neither she nor they have
any art or neither she nor they having any art or knowledge to get their
living by? And is it reasou that the stock should run still without profyt,
and every one decay and be undone thereby? now god forbid. And surely except
they may be suffered to put forth their money for reasonable gain, I cannot
see how it can be otherwise with them. And therefore I would have all things
weighed by reason, and the state of danger better considered then it is,
without this precise usage to forbid gain upon money altogether upon pain of
deadly sin. For I do not think that the wydowe and her children should
offend god, if others will give reasonably for the use of her money, to
maynteyne her self and her children. And well do I allow the use of London, for
Orphans money to be yearly paid. I will go farther.

A young man has been waytinge on a gentleman in his Chamber, and seruinge
long got a little money together: the gentleman his master dies, the fellow
has no friends, and master can he get none, the world is hard and men are
mistrustfull, dig or delue he can not, and occupacion has he none, because
he was brought up only as a serving man, and to beg is ashamed, yea and if he
did so, he should have nothing given him, but be whipped for his labor as a
vagabonde, and if he should steal, there is noe mercy but hanging: Now what
shall he do? spend upon the stock, and suffer all go to waste? so may he
soon come to naught. Better it were for him, as I take it, to put out his
money for some gain that his stock may be whole, and he might live till
he espied a time to bestow his money upon some one thing or other, for his
better profit and avail. I will come to good bargains that may happen.

There is is a Ship wrack, and goods are to be sold, where I may get 20.
in the hundredth, if I might borow after 10. who would not geeue less to have
more? Besides this, I have a suit which I may get for a hundredth pound and
will be worth two hundredth pound to me, money I have none except I borrowe, what
a fool wear I not to get 20 l. in y^ hundred, to gain almost 200 l.? many
such things may profitably happen with in the compass of a year, but let all
these matters go. Be it that I have lent money my self freely, and lookinge
to have it at my day, could not get it, but tarried three or four months
for it after the day, and so was disappointed to satisfye my creditours, is it
reason yt I who lent freely and of good will, should sustain any loss for my
free heart and kind dealinge? our law grants good remedy, and I think in
your law master Ciuilian there is good redress, for such offenses. Again, if
I let one keep my money, and yt said man does employ the same money without my
knowledge for increase: is it not reason yt I should have part of his gain?
who will deny this unto me? I am well assured, that you master Ciuilian will not
say the contrary, and thus you se, that money gets money, and that lawfully,
for look what he gains in this behalf, I may in right demand for mine own
beehoofe the increase that commethe of it. I pray you answer me in this, what
if the debtour do fail, and play bankrupte? in what case am I then, for my
kind heart and charitable dealing? were it not good then that usury might be
yt price of such peril as may happen, and so I to have somewhat, rather then
to lose all, as in lending 88. l. to take a bill for 100 l. that y^ casualtie
of loss may be recompensed with the certentie of gain, for a man may lose
all, and therefore it is good to be sure to gain somewhat be fore hand. There is
a saying in your law as I have hard, much agreeng to this matter, L. periculi.
ff. de nautico foenore.
which is thus, Omnis mutuatio plerumque damnosa, eoque meretur
recompensationem. All lending is oftentimes harmfull, and therefore deserves a
recompense. But as I said before, I would there were a rate appointed or
tolerated either viij. x. or xii l. in y^ hundred, above which no man should
pass upon pain of life or loss of all his goods at the least, and so the
covetousness of usurers (against which you have said very well, and noe man
does gain say it) would be stopped and limited within reasonable bounds,
whereas now they take the devil and all, more the^ half a great deal, which
is horrible. And our law did never allow, but did utterly forbid al excessive
usury, as al other laws else do, as your law master Ciuilian, as I think,
does permyt ye hundred part for a month, which is twelve in the hundred for a
year, and so has been allowed in diverse princes times. But of your law, I
cannot say further then I learned by here say, and therefore I would know
your opinion, seeinge I have uttered my learning and said my conscience,
which I pray you take in good part every one of you.


Ciuilian, I would not any manne to be blamed for vtteryng his conscience,
so that he be not wylfull, to stand ouermuche in his own conceipte, when
he seethe manifest truethe against him.


Gromel gayners or the Merchants oration.
TO say and do are twoe things. I will not directlye speak in the favor of
usury, but rather if you will have me, I am contented to speak against it:
Mary not to use my money for my benefyte, call it what you will, I can hardly
allow thereof. You have said meetelye well master lawyer, that you will suffer
exchange within certain bounds, Others talk so much (I wot not how) that
in the end they will mar all. Poor merchants can not be suffered to thrive
amongst them. And I for my part, am against you all that will have no usury,
or will make the gain over little: for I pray you, what trade or bargayning can
there be amongst merchants, or what lending, or borowinge among al men, if you
take away the assurance and the hope of gain? What man is so mad to deliver
his money out of his own possession for naught? or who is he that will not
make of his own the best he can? or who is he that will lend to others and
want him self? you see all men now are so wise, yt none will lend for moon
shine in the water, and therefore if you forbid gain, you destroy intercourse
of merchandise, you overthrow bargaininge, and you bring all tradinge betwixt
man and man to such confusion, as either man will not deal, or else, they will
say, they cannot tell how to deal one with an other. I have been a doer in
this world these 30. winters, and as fresh an occupier as an other, and yet
never found I better or more assurede gain, than by puttinge out my money for
gain, the same being always the best and easiest trade, that could be in
the world. And in a dead time when there is no occupying, either by restraint
or thorough wars, what would you have merchants to do, other wise then to
turn the penny, and to live by their money? for if they should spend still on
the stock without lendinge for gain, or barrattinge any whit at all, I do
fear the best of us all (I mean such as live by our money) would soon shut
up our doors, and play the bankruptes, which were a most abominable shame,
and a great dishonor to this realm. Do not you know, that we are ever called
upon in time of need, to lend to ye prince, for maintenance of the state?
Have not noble men money of us, and all other gentlemen of service, whenever
they have need? And when is it, that they have not need of us, great need
god wotes full often, and many a time? yea, need must always be, and men shall
ever have need. And where is money to be had, in time of need, if the city
should fail? Many men talk of Robbyn Hoode, that did never shoot in his
bow. Is not London the queens chamber? Are not we then chamberlens to her
majesty, people always ready to spend not only our goods, but also our
lives in her service? So that, if we wear not, ye state, as I take it, should
hardly stand, or perhaps not be in so good case, as it is at this present.

We lend not for usury, but for interest, and by exchange, and I think no man
can disalowe either interest or excha^ge. I pray you, if an ambassador shall
have cause to travail in the affairs of the state, or the Queens agent
occasion to pay great sommes of money abroad in other countries beyond the
seas, what will you have done, if the excha^ge were not? How can great masses
of money be carried to far contries, if bills of exchange be not currante?
Or who will be so mad to pay thousands in an other contrie for moon shine in
the water, to have nothing for his pains, but only his labor for his
travail? Hope of gain makethe men industrious, and where no gain is to be
had, men will not take pains. And as good it is to sit idle and do nothing,
as to take pains, and have nothing. Merchants doings must not thus be
ouerthwarted by preachers and others, that can not skill of their dealings. And
this ever great curiosity of some to meddle in other men's matter. I must tell
you plain it is even the very right way to undo al in y^ end. Therefore
say what you will, I will live and amend, so as I may live every day better
and better, by any means, I care not how, yea I will make hard shifte with the
world, and strain my conscience narrowly, before I will either starve or
beg both I and my children after me.

Provided always that I will not come within the compass of positive laws. and
this I wot well, that by all laws a man may take as much for his own wares as
he can get, and it is no sin for one man, to deceive an other, in
bargayning, so that it be not to much beyond gods forbode, and a bargain is
a bargayne, let men say what they list. Such your strayte prohibicions and
strange precisenes, my masters, do make men weary of their lives. You may
as well forbid biyng and selling, as forbid taking interest for money: for I
pray you, what difference is there betwixt the one and the other. I do bye a
piece of land for 500. li. this day, and sell it to morrow, or within six
months after, for 600. li. And I do lend likewise 500 li. at the same time
that I do bye land, and do receive within six months after 600 li. again
for my 500. li. so lent, what difference is there betwixt these two dealings.
God amend you my masters of the Clergy, and you Ciuilia^s also.


Ciuilian. Soft sir, you cannot tell, what I would have said, although you
have heard the other, and therefore you do me wrong to cut me of before you
hear me speak.


Gromelgainer I pray you bear with me, for I was tickled, here is altogether,
titel, tattel, and all to littell purpose. This understand you all, and trust
unto it, men are loath to be comptrolled in their ordinary and accustomable
trades of geattinge, and as you may well know, gain is sweet, howsoever men
come by it, and men are loath to leave their old wont, to begin a new trade
of dealinge, that will sooner bring men to beggary, then any whit increase
their living. An old custom, although it be badde, must not sodeinly be
altered, for all innouacions are dangerouse, although they be for good. If a
man should speak against your profession, and say, your law is full of
delays, Lawyers are costly, and better a man lost his right, then follow it by
law, I think you would be angry, though in so saying, he might peradventure
say truly. And so I that know both your callings, and have heard you both
heretofore deal in places judicials, and have felt also some trouble in either
your courts, am not well pleased to have my occupacion and living pincht at,
defaced and made worse, the^ any other vocation is, no more the^ you would
have either your professions or tytles ransaked, or called in question.


Ockerfoe. I am sorry to hear so much as I have heard, wishing amendment, if
it please god, in all estates: But to your arguments master lawyer, I will
aunsweare, and to you also master Gromel with master doctors leave, for I am
inwardely grieved with you both, as a Christian man ought to be grieved.


Ciuilian. Although you take my course from me, yet will I not think amiss
of you, but ever give place to your profession, and honor divinity: for as
saint Paul sateth, the word of God is salvation to all beleuers, and
therefore necessary for all me^ to hear and so to know: yea the more we study
therein and harken unto it, the more happy and blessed every one of us shall be,
whereupon the Preacher replyeth as follows.


The Preachers Replication.
YOur foundation sir, that you first laid to prove your matter with all, is
not good, nor sownde, so that your buyl dinge can not stand, but must needs
fall to the ground, for thus you say: usury is not hurtful, except it be
biting. I do aunsweare, whosoever steals but one penny from a rich man, is a
thief before god, and if he steal twelve pence or above, he shall be hanged
by the laws of the land, as you best know, and yet you will say: and all men
know, that here is no biting, but the matter is this. The law has said, thou
shall not steal, for he that steleth be it more or less, is a thief,
because he takes an other man's goods feloniously against his will, being
forbidden both by God and man so to do. Eue^ so say I, whosoever takes but
one penny of gain by couenante over and above his principal, for y^ use only
of lending, and in respect of time, he is an usurer, although here seems no
bytinge at all. For God has said. Thou shall not agree to take by couenaunte,
any thing over and above thy principal, and therefore it is sin, being
expressly forbidden as theafte is, and so not to be used amongst christians,
for therefore is usury called a biting, because creditours are commonly
unmerciful, and care not what they geate, and who^ they undo, and so they do
byte and grieve poor men very sore, yea they make rich me^ ofte^tymes stark
beggars. Whereupon god to cut of all biting, and the color thereof (for if
you geeue then an inche, they will take an elle) has altogether forbidden his
people, to take any gain at all for lone, ye rather to induce men to christian
charity, that is, to lend freely, to help the needy, and to do as they
would be done unto, if the case wear theirs. Now when you allege that you
cannot have your money at your days appointed, and therefore in reason you
should have a recompense: I do not deny, but that they who keep your money
longer from you, than by couenaunte was agreed, are to aunsweare for it, and in all law and reason, must pay your damages and interest of your money, for so
long time holden from you against your will, for herein he does you apparent
wrong: and couenaunte was there none for gain to be reaped upon the
principal, so that this is no usury, but he only to be blamed, and to be
punished by the purse quantum tua interest, for witheholding your proper goods
from you, for so much time, against your good will and mind altogether: and
damages may justly be awarded unto you after ten or twelve in y^ hundred,
and no usury herein committed at all. Your distinction of three sorts of men,
and three sorts of dealing, is rather politic than christian, rather wordely,
than divine, although some diuynes be of your mind, but they speak of their own
heads, without warrant, and so their deuyse can not hold, for you ought to
lend freely unto all men, rich and poor, lord and gentleman, king and Caysar,
for that god being the lord of the rich, as well as of the poor, has utterly,
and precisely forbidden all usury amongst all men, that are of the household of
faith, except perhaps, you will say, yt rich men are no christians, or not
godds people, the which I trust, you will not so much as think, much less
affirm ye same by speech. And your example of comfort and fellowship, with
others, to lend money to them that have none themselves, and so to reap in
common yt gain, that they might make by their industry and travail, the same
is not law full if you deal for assured gain, by contracte aforehand, except
you will be as well contented to bear with all losses that might happen, as to
reap certain gain, for in so doing, where the gain is uncertain, and none
assured contract made before hand, I do not take that to be usury. To do
good, I grant is natural, and blessed be the good doers: but to make gain by
lending money is unnatural, wicked and monstrous, what gain, or profit
soever come to your fre^d by such borrowing: for your mind and intent of
lending, must be to help, and not to reap benefyte by him that gains by
borrowing of your money: for be it your fre^d were like to lose a 100. li.
la^d, for not payment of 300. li. and one understanding his need, and the
danger that he is in, do lend him 360. li. in money, to save his 100 li.
la^d, that else would be lost, taking nevertheless this 60. li. gain, or more,
in the whole, and having his la^d in mortgage for a year for his own especial
profit, and to ye utter undoing in time, of yt poor gentleman: Herein sir, as
he did seek his own commodity, so did he deserve no thanks at all. And
where the gentleman did owe before 360 li. having received of the usurer no
more then 300 li. now you to show your self a more merciful man, will help
this gentleman better cheap, after 15 li. in the hundred, criyng out of that
other cut throat (as in deed, one usurer cannot abide an other, and every
one will cry out against his fellow usurer) and so you will take his land on
gods name, for assurance into your hands, having a full intent with your self
to be Lord of all that he has in the end, for except he pay you when you
see your time, you will have it all in deed. Now this gentleman, having paid
20. li. in the hundred, and to you again 15. li. he is to repaye 105. li.
over and above the 300. li. that he borrowed for two years only, his debte
rising after two years 105. li. above the pryncipall. And now for fear the
Chauncerie, or thexchequer, or any other court should remedy this mischief,
for taking so much land for so little money, you will be contented, that he
shall still pay 15. li. by the year for every hundredth, till it come to the
quarter, or half value of the gentleman's land, and then you will lend no more,
except you may have all your money, which he is ever the less hable to pay,
the longer yt he boroweth upon usury, and so in effect, the poor gentleman
loses his hundredth pound land for ever, for the only borowinge of 300. li.
in money, and the forbearing of the same money, for five or six years, or there
about. Is this charity? is this love? is this godlynes? had it not be^ better
for the gentleman to have sold his la^d out right at the first, and so perhaps
to have received 2000 li. and upward at the least for it, than thus to leese
if for 300. li. with the usury of five or six years? This is the goodness and
natural dealinge of usurers with plain meaning men, god turn their hearts,
and send them better minds. But to color your doings the more, you say
further, that this overplus taken, is neither against nature, nor against law,
for if it were against nature say you, it should be forbidden universally,
whereas god has geeuen leave to lend money to the stranger for gain. I do
answer, that usury in his own nature, is universally hurtful and against
nature, as all the moral precepts are, and yet god may permit or allow the
use of it, as he liked well, that the Israelites should rob the Egyptians, and
yet theafte is dampnable, and against nature, and universally forbidden, where
god has not allowed of it. To worship images, is also forbidden, as a thing
against god and nature, and yet god suffered the Cheru bins to be erected, and
allowed of the brazen serpent, but particular Images permitted by God, must not
exclude universal laws. And you know, we live by laws, and not by examples.

You say further, that this ouergayne is a reward given, and reward may be
taken for good turns done. In deed if you would stand to the curtesy of the
lender, and not hope for gain, if any thing came unlooked for, or unhoped of,
I do think you might take some small present with a safe conscience, but those
rewards and gifts that you receive, are enforced payments, and by former
contracts and couenauntes assured, for else you would not lend money: and
therefore you geeue a wrong name to your usury gaynes, to call them gifts or
rewards, for they are rather compulsorie debtes, and violent bargaynes made,
against the will altogether (as God knows) of the needy and poor borrower:
for in deed necessity makes men often times, both to pray heartily, and to
pay dearly, that would else full gladly borowe freely. Yea blame them not,
that being driven to an extremity make greater offers, then they are well
hable to perform, or to bear the burden of them, because need makes the
old wife to trotte. And what though worldly laws in some respect, do
allow this cheuisaunces to avoid further inconveniences, as single whoredom
in some places is tolerated, yt men might keep their wives to them selves in
better safety: yet god forbids expressie, as well the one as the other. And
therefore where Laws are made against godds laws, they are evermore ungodly
and wicked, what color or gloss soever you do set upon them. And what
though charity be cold, what though men will not lend freely, shall therefore
men be allowed or suffered to lend wickedly? Better the world were overwhelmed,
and mankind wholly destroyed, rather than sin should openly be mainteyned,
and god thereby altogether defaced. And where you seem to say, that godds
law does allow it, in the nyneteene chapter of saint Luke, I would you and
all others committed such heavenly usury, and mocked not at those talents,
which god lends man to bestow, for so you should be godds good servant,
if you bestowed your talentes committed to your charge accordingly. And where
it is (...) in Deuteronomye: Thou shall lend to a stranger. In deed do so
still, that is to an infidel, to a Turk, and to him that is not of the
household of Christian faith, for that is the next way to undo him* so that as
to kill a Turk, or an infidel in the quarrel of Christ's religion is lawful:
so may we oppress him, byte him, yea and eat him out with usury, the
readiest way surely to undo any man living. And I do not think, that the
common law of England, did ever bear with usury, although some statutes have
tolerated usury. I do know that kings in all ages have banished usury out
of this land, as well before the conquest as since, and amongst the rest, king
Edgare did utterly forbid all usury. And since the conquest, king Edward the
first, who did send out of this realm, as well such bankers, as came from the
pope Gregory the tenth, called Caursini and were brought in by one Stephan,
the popes chapleyne, in the time of his father king Henry the third, as all
manner of Jews at that time, with whom the Realm was merueslously pestered
and oppressed also with usury, their proper art and profession, whersoeuer
they dwell, who surely do very well observe their law, for they taking al
Christians to be strangers to them do lend to them for gain wheresoever
they be dwelling, never lendyng one to an other, otherwise then freely, without
hope to receive any gain at al of them. Your argument of plate, is of no
force, for plate wears and consumes away, and comes oftentimes broken, and
is at his peril that lets it to hire, and must be returned in the same
form as it was delivered: whereas money returns without loss in the same
kind only, and of the same quantity and value, and having changed the
property, is at his peril yt has borrowed it. And likewise, le^ding of diverse
coins of gold and much money to a ba^ker, to receive the self same form
again, may bring gain without usury: but this is not properly called Mutuum, a
le^ding, but rather Commodatum, a letting to hyer, because the property is not
altered, but abides still in him that did let it to hier, who must abide the
peril of it, if any mishappe do chance otherwise then well, without his
fault that took those goods to hyer.

Your couenanting and bargayning to have part of the gain, by your money
lent: with allegation, that you might lose in a bargayne for not having the
said money, does show that you go about nothing more, then to cloak vsurye,
and to maynteine the practice of it, by all the shiftinge and colorable means
you can. And if you say, therefore you will not lend, because you may not
make your own gain, I say unto you, that then you are an unmerciful man,
and no servant of god: in that you turn your countenance from him, and will
not lend him money, that being an honest man does offer to put you in good
assurance for restitucion. And still you would have usury to be a lawful
trade, and for nothing will you agree that usury should be simpliciter a
sin, as whoredom, aduowtry, and theaft are, and yet god does so name it.
Again, your lending to an other, to save his la^d, and to benefit your self
thereby, is no thank to you at all, but a deuelish and a covetous act, directly
against god, notwithstanding the good whatsoever it be, that your neighbor
receives thereby. And what though your neighbor be saved from famyne, in
time of extreme dearthe by lending him corn, then to receive an overplus at
tweluemoneth after, yet are you wicked that did lend for gain, when men had
most need of help and free relief. And belike it is you and such others, that
are the cause of such dearth: for nothing causes dearth of al things so much
as vsurye, for by usury the prices of wares are raised, victualles are the
dearer, and they that would labor and turn up the ground, cannot for want:
whereas the welthy folk that have most money, live most idely, without doing any
thing else, but making money of money, an evil dishe of meat for him to feed
upon that is an hungered, and yet surely a thing most mete for usurers to eat
upon. Yea I would yt al usurers had none other food to nourish their earthly
bodies wtal, when they were most hungry, and to say unto them as was said unto
Crassus being dead, aurum sitisti, aurum bibe, Thou dyddest thirst to drink
gold: which gold the Persians in deed moulted and powered into his mouth,
when he was dead and slain in battle. Now Sir I pray you, who speaks more
with charity? he that counsels all men to lend freely, or he that wylleth
all men to make gain of their money? Surely I will say, when you seek your
own gain cheeflye, there is no charity nor love in you at al, although you
take but moderate gain: for not only bytynge usury, but all usury is against
charity, because it is iniurius, sinful and directly against god, even as
theafte is, be it never so little. But still you run to dyminyshe this
offense, with shewinge that a penny upon 100. l. biteth not. Well, I say unto
you it is an iniurye, it is a wrong, it is a thing forbidden by god, and
therefore a synful deed, say you what you will. There is difference in deed
betwyxte the biting of a dog, and the bytynge of a flea, and yet although
the flea does the less harm, yet yt flea does byte after her kind, yea and
drawethe blood too. But what a world is this, that men will make sin to be
but a flea bytynge, when they see gods word dyrectlye against them? And thus
you run to the property of the word, and so try it in diverse languages,
which in deed signifies a bytynge.

And now you tryumphe and say your pleasure, that a man may be a little
naught, so that he be not altogether stark naught: well, god gave this name
in diverse languages after this sort, that such vice might be the more
abhorred. For as spoylynge is forbidden, so is pyckyng also, and although in
man's judgment, the one be less then the other, yet before god he is a
transgressour of the whole law, and as gyltye of death and dampnation that
has pyeked, as he that has spoiled. And so in vsurye it is to be said,
as well he shall dye the death and not live that has taken little, as he that
has taken a great deal, because the law of god has forbidden al manner of
usury what soever, and will not in any wise that any thing shall be taken
over and above the pryncipall lone. For gods will is, that lendynge should be
used, as it ought to be, that is to say, freely with out hoape of any gain
at al, that charity thereby might be the oftener excercised betwixt man and
man. But you ca^ not abide this charitable dealyng, and therefore coming to the
greek and latin word, which both do signify a birthe, you make a jest of
the little pretye babe that 100. l. brings forth but a bare penny. Well, I
will tell you, how little soever you thynk it to be, it is the babe of
darkness, and it is inoughe to bring you to hell fire. You measure things by
the value, and not by the breach of gods law. Adam and Eve thought it a small
fault to eat of the forbidden fruit in paradise, and yet you see what followed
of it.

They lost euerlyuing joy by it, they felt the smarte of this miserable world,
and were banished out of gods presence, and all their posterity after them
forever, had not Christ of his mercy in the fulness of time, been our Redemer
and appeased the wrath of our heavenly father. So that the thing it self,
is not so much to be respected, as the doing of it against gods will and
commandment, who forbids al sin. And although it may be thought, that I
am somewhat nice and minse the matter over finely: yet let men remember what
they ought to do, and what god requires of them, and I doubt not, but they
will think that I have said little enough. And now you return to your three
sorts of me^: unto the which I say unto you, yt in gods presence and before
his majesty there is no respect of persons, that are of one faith, and as well
do you commit vsurye in lendynge to a king for gain, as you do in lending to a
poor wretched man, although you do not bite so much y^ one as the other,
because usury is forbidden in all degrees, say what you will. Neither are
circumstance, time, place, nor person to be considered in lending for usury, no
more the^ in the very nature of robbing: Mary, if you would le^d freely it were
an other matter, for then I would wyshe, and it is reason also, that every man
had the chiefest regard to the poor and nedye person. Your allegacion of
those textes: Give to every body that asks, and pray ever, and pray without
ceassinge, and be always glad, do nothing hinder, but that all vsurye is
dampnable: for although those textes are to be compassed within certain
bounds, and have their lymytacion by circumstaunces as reason would, and gods
word in other places does very well allow thereof, yet all manner of vsurye
is always evil, be it never so little, because the lord god has playnelye
and expreslye said it, and that the contrary cannot otherwise be gathered in
scripture. And so I say of all your other textes that you do afterward
infer, theye have their proper interpretacion and restrainte: and yet taking
overplus for lending, it is always synful, because there is noe interpretacyon
nor conference, of any text in scripture to make it otherwise. But still to
maynteyne your argument, you say that men do not take money for lending, but
because they lose their gain in the mean season, yt theye do lend, and
sustein loss and harm perhaps, for that their money is out of their hands.
Thus I see you seek to mock with god, for I say plainelye unto you, you ought
not for any respect put your money to gain by lendinge it. But according to
your profession, you bring out your statutes of 37. Henrici. 8. where usury is
tolerated, if it be not above. 10. l. in the hundred, and this statute you do
like well, but the statute of. 5. Edw. 6. you like not at al, where usury is
altogether forbidden. Well I am clean contrary to you: for I like king Ed.
statut best of al, because it is agreeyng to gods word, and I can not in any
wise allow or like king Henry's statute, because it is against gods word to
have any such toleratio^ in any Christian common weal, no more then theafte,
aduowtery, or murder are to be winked at. On you go still, and put this case.
You have a great adventure beyond the Seas, and stand in hazard of your
return, as you think: as who does not? You sai thus to your fre^d. If your
goods come home safe, you shall be in good case to help a gentleman, or your
neighbor at a pynche, Marye otherwise, if by mishap your goods do perish, then
are you cast so behind hand, that you shall sca^t be hable to hold up your
head, much less be hable to help others. Therefore if your friend (say you)
will bear with such losses upon your adventure, as may casually happen after
the rate of 12. or 14. in the hundred, for so much as he shall borowe, then
will you be contented to deal with him, otherwise you will keep somewhat in
stoare against foul weather, and not depart with that, which you have in
assured possessyon to have nothing for your labor. This (as I do remember) is
your speech, whereunto I do answer. If you will as well take nothing at al, if no
loss do happen to you in your adventure, as be assured to have something, if
any mishap do chance, and deal plainly in your doings without fraud or couin:
then I do think it is no usury for you to make such a bargain, because the gain
as well as y^ loss are both uncertain. After this you put forth a matter as
though it wear a pitiful case. A wydow has left her by her husband. 500. l.
in money, and for six small children that cannot help themselves 200. l. for
every one, to be paid unto them when they be of years, and you say what shall y^
wydow do? How shall these children be kept: neither she nor her children having
any trade, to increase or maintain their substance. And therefore what other
thing should be don, but to let out their money for reasonable gain, rather
then the wydow and children should perish, and their goods waste away? I do
answer still, that noe unlawful trade is to be used, to advance welfare.
Neither do I allow of your order in London for orphans money, because it
has no ground upon gods word, but rather utterly forbidden: for god has
no regard to these circu^staunces and pitiful cases, but wylleth all men to
live as he has commanded by lawful trade, and in his fear. And if the
usurers money is dampnable which is bestowed for redeeming of captyues from the
infidelles, and marying of fatherless maidens: what shall we say of this
money, which is geeuen for the maynteyna^ce of orphans and widows? Is not
the case all one? And is there noe way I pray you for orphans and wydowes to
thrive by, but only with going always into the devils dungeon, and seeking
out these crooked corners of wicked ockre and dampnable vsurye? Is there noe way
to be used by friends, with buyinge or sellyng to do good to this widow or her
young babes? Is there no ferme to be bought for money? Is there no occupying
that will do good, but only flat vsurye, a thing so unknown heretofore,
as nothing less known, and being known, so abhorred, as noe man could
abide them that were known manifest usurers.

Now lord god have mercy upon us, what a world is this?

You put an other case of a serving man that has no trade to live by, because
he has been brought up only to wait upon a gentleman, and to do nothing
else, and because his master is dead, and he can get no service to live by,
you will in any wise, that whereas he has a little money lying by him, he may
live by the gain thereof, by puttinge it out for time. I do answer, that he
ought not so to do, because god would not have him so to do. And for this
matter I will allege unto you Saint Augustines saying upon the psalm in this
wise. Audet etiam faenerator dicere etc. August.
The usurer also presumes to say, Psalm. 128.
I have none other trade to live by: so may the strong thief say when he is
taken by y^ throat with the manner; so may the burgeler say, when he is laid
hand on, in commytting burglarye, so may the bawd say, that sellethe young
maids to be common harlottes, so may the sorcerer say, when he or she
enchaunteth evil things, and selle their enchauntments. And whatsoever like
thing we should go about to forbid, they might all answer, they had none
other way to live by, and to find them selves, as though that this were not
chieflye to be punyshed in them, because they have learned the art or
occupacion of lewdnes to get their living by it, and will thereby feed them
selves, whereby they offend him, by whom we al are fed. Thus far Saint
Augustine.

For your Shipwreck, thus I answer. That where you pay ten in the hundredth,
poor folk shall fare the worse, for when you make your sale, they shall pay
for your vsurye to the uttermost, and your suite obtained, you shallbee
answered your money and your usury, to the last farthing by them that shall
deal with you: and so poor folk shall always be racked, and the common
weal hereby shall feel great smart thorough this wicked usury. You say
farther, if one deposite his money to an other man, and the same man does
increase it, without your knowledge, that then it is reason you should have
the gain. I do grant this to be true, and very reasonable also: For as master
Ciuilian knows better then I do, the money that was put in an other man's
hand to keep, is his that did deposite it, and not his that had the keeping of
it. So that if the money had been lost by some great mishappe without any
plain negligence, or known follye of the keeper, the owner should have borne
the loss, and not the keeper of the said money. A good lesson to teach him and
others, that put such men in trust, to make choice of a better hereafter. Then
if the loss should be his that was the owner, it is good reason, and a thing
also agreeable to nature, that the gain likewise should be his, that was
lord of that money, whereof the increase did grow, and without the which
any gain could not else have been made at all.

But still to help your self, you bring in a crooked questyon, and cast
beyond the Moon, asking: what if the debtor should fail, as many times
theye do, and then all is gonne: wear yt not reason to be assured of some
gain before hand, for fear of such harm? I do answer, that you will be sure
to do harm, upon the casualtie of harm, that might happen, which is ungodly
in you to do, for that you witting and willing do offend against your own
conscience. At last you come to breaking of days and forfeyture of
obligacions, and think you have wrong if you may not take usury, for wantinge
your money a month, two or three after the day: I do say unto you, as I have
said before, that in this case you may lawfullye ask interest, and god forbid
but you should be considered for ye time, because you have sustained loss
through breach of covenant and are dysappoynted thereby to your great
hinderaunce, as it may fall out. And no reason it is that you should lose for
an others benefit, and feel smart of your own goods, when an other shall repe
profit by it against your own good will, for your great good will erst showed
unto him before. Neither can this be any usury at al, because there was no
bargain for any overplus to be had for the receipt of that money, if it were
paid at the day, but only a forfeyture of a bond, for not keeping touch, the
benefits whereof, the law does cast upon every body, where couenauntes be
not performed: and good reason it is, that it should so be, so the bonds be
reasonable, and the forfeyture not excessive. At the last you come to a rate,
and would in any wise have ten or twelve upon the hundred, either appointed or
tolerated, as well for common benefit, in dealing betwixt man and man, as also
for stopping the covetousness of greedy cormorantes, whose insatiable minds no
convenient gain will satisfy, and this you think very good for all parts.
But I am not of your mind, because god is against you, and therefore I do
abhor all toleracion of usury: much less will I ever yield to any allowing
of it at all, but rather I would wish, that there were as strait laws to
forbid usury, as there be to forbid felony or murder, that charity the
rather by this means might abound universally, and men might lend to all men
freely, as god has commanded, and nature requires, for surely I do think,
that charity waxes could in this age, for want of knowledge, not but that
preachers deal with this matter, as much as with any other offense, but that
the hearers do not perfetlye know, or at the leastwise are not fully
persuaded, that all usury is sin, as theaft, murder, and other offenses are,
without blaunchyng or te^pering of it at all, for no doubt, if me^ did know
yt in deed to be so heinous a sin as it is: I do think verily, if there
were any fear of God in them at all, they would not be so evil as they are
now, nor so hard hearted, to withdraw their christian charity, from their
brethren as they do, and to run hedlonge into so bottomless a gulf of all
wickedness and abhominacion, the true knowledge and consideracion of whith
offense, I pray god, may enter into all men's hearts, that they may the rather
amend their lives, thorough charitable dealing, with their dear brethren in
Christ, to the high honor of god, and to the great advancement of his most
holy will.

And now to you, master merchant, I pray you heartily, remember god in the
midst of your occupiyng, and deal not willyngly against his will. If one
should call you thief or murderer, I know you would be very angry, and yet
he that proves you an usurer, makes you ten times worse the^ a thief, and
as evil as a murderer, yea this will I say, yt wear better to wink at a
hundredth pickpurses in London, and less harm should they do, then to suffer
the wringing of twenty known usurers, for a man may keep his purse from
pickynge and cutting, and if one should lose it, there were but so much gonne,
and a man would be wyser afterward, and others would take heed by his
example: but from an usurer, none can be rid that has need, being once
entered: for he will not leave a man, till he have gnawin him, even to the
very bones, that he is not worth the ground he goes on. But to your
reasons, you say if the assurance of gain be taken away, there can be no
trade nor bargaining amongst men at all. Sir, I do not see that any man
forbids you to make gain of your own lawfully: Mary to be a time seller,
to gain for days, months and years, and to make the sun shyninge, which
god sends so freely unto us to be the fruit of your occupiyng, and to make
money of money, for the very act of lending: these dealinges I do say, are most
abominable in the sight of god and man. Yea with what face or countenance I
pray you, can we look upon the sun, that do so abuse such a light sent unto
us from god? Or how can we number our days and years with a clear conscience,
that do thus most horriblye defile good time with our lewd dealyngs. For
whereas we should the rather love one an other, seeing god does love us all,
and sends this bryghtnes to shine over us for all our comfortes and welfare,
and many fair years, to enjoy gods blessings upon earth: we turn the
benefit of this light, and this time, to the utter undoing of thousands our
dear brethren, making the sun shinynge, and continuance of years, daily to
increase our cofers most unlawfully, to the decrease of all others, that have
to deal with us: For surely, this kind of lendinge for gain, is the undoing
of all occupiers, and the distructiou of trade: because me^ that buy dear,
must sell dear, or else bear the loss themselves, as they often do, and so
are undone in the end. Besides this, there is a great inequality, betwirt the
lender and the borrower, wherein the just proporcion of man's conscience is
broken: for why should one have more for his gooddes than they are worth, or
rather why should one have for nothing, more than his pryncipall? For when I
have borrowed money, the property is in me, and I am lord of it, and so much as
comes to my hands in money or goods, I ought in right to repaye the value
of yt at a time appointed, and no more than it was worth at the time of
delivering. For if one take more than his pryncipall, in respect of time, he
takes that, which is none of his, which is plain theafte, and a deed
contrary to nature, yea it is both against gods law, and man's law to. Now
the harm that ensues hereof, is very great, for the most part of men are
hereby in such sort oppressed, as the wealth of the world comes to the
hands of a few idle wretched caterpillars, that do nothing in the world but
eat up whole towns, countries and kingdoms. It is written. Sap. 11.
Sap. 11. Thou O god have ordained all things in measure, number and weight,
now then, he that will not deal justly, according to measure, number, and
weight, ye same man is not worthy to live upon earth, for that he does wound
his own conscience wittinglie, offends god greuouslie, and breaks the law
wickedlie. And what measure I pray you, does the usurer keep, that takes more
than he laid out? for one pecke lent, two, for his own again, more than his
own again, by a quarter, yea some times, more then half. For a pecke of wheat
le^t, a bushel at the years end: And what reason is this, that for one pecke
lent, a man should have more than one peck again, which was his own before,
for more than a man's one, no man should have by all law of right, conscience,
and justice. And where you say, that men will not lend freely, and therefore
it were necessary, men should be suffered to lend for gain, lest otherwise
the more part of men should sterue for want: First I say, if every man
would live in his trade and calling, as he ought to do, in the fear of god
lawfullye, there would be money enough, and men should not want of other
men's plentye that live so godly. Again I do say, this is a pitiful hearing
amonst christians, and a great token of vnbelife and gentilytie, when we are so
unwilling to lend freely, seeing god has commanded us so expressly. And surely
if we lived, as we ought to do, there would be free lendinge, and great
plenty of money every where. And touching the necessity you speak of, that
men should therefore be suffered to lend for gain, lest otherwise the most
part of them should starve for want: I tell you plainly, you speak in this
behalf, rather like a man, that can better deal with dross and money, than
judge of god reason, or any godlynes at all: For by such your speech,
covetousness should be holden for good, because the rich will not be
liberal, and aduowtrie should be esteemed equal to chastitye, because many
men will not forbear their neighbors wife. But sir, both you and we all,
ought to consider not what is done, but what of right ought to be done,
and so far to deal, as we may, and are allowed to do by god, and good
laws. And I say further, if usury were felonye, and the prince entitled to
the offenders goods, and no favor showed, there would be store of money,
the rather, through the great occupiyng that men would use, having gods
blessing and enough, when all unlawful tradinge were utterly forbidden, upon
such pains. Neither ought men to make the most of their own, that they
can, as you say, otherwise then by law they may: for so, the evil woman
may say, that because her body is her own, she may do with it what she
list, and company with whom she pleases for her best profit and avail,
whereas god has commanded, that every body should keep his own vessel pure,
unto holiness, because we are all the images of god, created to his likeness. And
thus being forbidden to deal unlawfully, if does not follow that buiynge
and selling are by this means taken from you, nor yet exchaunging one thing
for an other, barred any thing at all. But to lend contrary to the nature of
lending, which should be free, and to make an other contracte, than ever god
or nature divised, to advance your gain thereby most ungodly: surely such
kind of dealing, I must needs say, is utterly, and cheefely forbidden, upon
pain of dampnacion. But to have your unlawful doings borne, which all you
allege, that you do lend to the prince, in time of need, and that the
nobility and gentlemen are much aided by your lendinge, and that need wilbee
always, and men shall ever have need: I will answer you, cursed be that
lending, that makes y^ borrower go a begging, that undoes the state, that
destroyethe nobility and gentlemen, that dryuethe the prince, to seek aid of
her subjects by parliament, to pay her debtes. For it is you usurers, and none
other, that bring the prince behynd hand, with taking twelve and fowrteene in
the hundred. A strange people, that take usury of their prince, being their
assured defense, their louinge nurse, and their chief safegarde. But you
will say, your merchandise, and your occupiyng shall decay, if your money he
out of your hands, and therefore you must, for very necessity make money of
your money, or else have it in your own use, other wise you cannot live. Then I
see well, you will not loss, for ye prince to gain, whatsoever charges her
majesty sufteyneth, as of late her majesty did, in suppressing those godless
traitors, and Romaniste rebels of the North, to her immortal fame: you still
wilbee gainers upon the queens cost and expe^ces, unnatural subjects I must
call you, and unmerciful citezens, that will have such certain gain, upon money
so well bestowed, for the welfare and safety, not only of all your goods,
but of all your lives And here you make a great matter of your lending,
others have le^t sir, as well as you, and more the^ you to, and yet were they
lewd men notwithstanding, and banished the Realm for their usury. The Jews I
mean in king Edward the first days, dwelling in the old Jurie, did lend in a
greater quantity, and better cheap to the king, than the English men did.
But what thank is yt to the^, or to you either, that le^d ungodly for gain
and profit only. And where you talk of need and want, that want must be, and
men shall always have need: I do assure you, in mine opinion, this your
unmerciful usury, is the cheifest cause of all want and need. And shall I say
as I think? It was one of ye greatest causes of the last rebellion, next after
their horrible lothinge of wholesome religion: for had not men paid unmercifully,
for that which they borrowed, and grown thereby so deep in debt, through usury,
that they were not hable to pay their creditours: they would never so
desperately, as I think, have withdrawe^ themselves, some of the^ I mean, from
the obedience of their sovereign lady and prince. And therefore I say, their
need, which did grow through usury, was after a sort, ye cause of their
naughty doyngs. And of this, they may thank some of you gredy merchants, and
others, whom no reasonable gain, otherwise can suffice, but still are heaping
gain upon gain, this way and that way deuowringe noble men, and gentelmen,
even to the very hard bones, till their goods and lands be quyte and clean
made away, and they, as boyd of welfare, as you are of honesty. You call this
City, the queen's chamber: if you continue still as you do, you will perhaps
turn it to a chamber in deed, yea a chamber only, and no City, and a very
small row me for Engla^ds welfare. God be merciful unto us, and grant
charity and love amongst us, that we may say, as saint Ambrose says of
Theodosius the emperor, Ambros. in morte^ Theod.
in a funeral sermon. Who feinyng the said emperor to be asked of the
Angels in heaven, what he did upon earth, made the^ answer, no more but
this, Dilexi, I loved, which love in deed, is the fulfillyng of the Law. And
so I pray god, we all may make that reckennyng, when we shall come to that
general audite in the latter day, that every one may say truly and
unfeignedly Dilexi, I have loved. But you say, thexchange is lawful, and that
trade, you do use most commonly, in le^ding and putting out your money, as it
goes usually in the street, and this you say, no man can mislike: I do
answer: Would god you used thexchange, as yt should be used in deed, and made
it not a cloak for usury, giving a good name to a naughty deed for as you do
use it now, it is none other, then flatt usury, colorably cloked, under the
name of exchange. I cannot deny but thexcha^ge is good, when every man helps
his eauen christian, to have the same value in an other place, disbursed to him
here at home, and deal so truly with his neighbor, as he would that his
neighbor should deal with him self in the like case. But thexchange is now
used only for gain to themselves, and not for good to others, to benefit
themselves chefelie, and not to help their neighbors need. If merchants
wear as they should be: that is to say, fresh occupiers, and aduenturouse
dealers in other countries, like merchauntes, they might serve princes
necessities, and furnishe their Ambassadors, with value for value, at an
equal rate, without making merchandises of money, the most devilish divise,
that ever was invented by man, to undo all states and countries. The excha^ge
is then offensive, when more is received in respect of time, than was
delivered, and therefore to speak how the exchange ryseth or fauleth, is
nothing else to say, but that good men must be forced to pay, according to
the covetous man's desire, that regrateth all gold and silver into his hands,
to make a scarsetie, and holding the mass in his power, will not let go any
part of yt, without excessive return, and so cause men to pay in respect of
the month, more than they should do to receive upon ye sight, wtin three or
fowr days after ye excha^ge is made. And I pray you, how is measure, weight
and number kept in this kind of dealinge, except you will say, yt time must
be rekened as a part of your gain, which dealinge is unlawful, and
forbidden by god. Therefore let every man give value for value, pound for
pound, ounce for ounce, as things are worth, and then just proporcion is
kept, as it should be, and every man's necessity served a right without
unlawful gayning, in respect of time. As for example. If fowere ounces of
English money, which is one pound weight, or twenty shillings tale, be worth
23. S. 4. d. flemysh in pound weight, or pound tale, then let thexcha^ge have
so much and no less in Flaunders, and let him not pay any thing over and
above, for any respect, either of time, charges, or for any other
consideracion whatsoever. But you say, that if trading for money upon money
be a hurtefull thing, and an offense to god, the^ is buiyng and selling also
unlawful. God forbid. And this is my reason. In buiyng and selling, your
gain is not always certain, as it is in usury: for he that buieth land
this day for five hundredth pounds, shall not always be sure to gain a
hundredth pou^ds by the bargayne, but sometime he loses, and can not have his
own again, whereas the usurer is always suer to gain, whosoever loses,
having good and sufficient assurance always for his money. I grant yt every
man may make the best of that, which he has in his own possession, by
lawefull trade and just dealing, as the laws of god and manne have ordained:
but always I would wish, that charity should be used ever in bargayns.
And in any wise I would have this ungodly and deuilyshe devise to get money
with money, to be utterly banyshed, a thing so monstrous in nature, as if
thorns should bear figs, or stones should bring forth liuelye creatures.
But what does not the insatiable greedynesse of man deuyse, and imagyne with
himself, to increase wealth, and to heap up riches together? And especyally
what do covetous merchants leave unsought or undone, to get goods into their
hands? a kind of vermin so wedded to scrape up money, that many of them
oftentimes fall out with the dearest frindes they have, for the value of a
penny. And rather then they will yield willinglye to any loss, they will take
such pains, that all worldly wealth is not so much worth. I pray god y^ some
of the^ do not prefer money before god and their own soul health. I have read
in an old writer upon ye law, y^ thinks it a thing almost impossible for
these worldly merchants to be good christians. Belike he speaks it be cause
merchants are commonly given to usury, and sunken so deep in covetousness, yt
theye are drowned in it. Which vice in deed, is y^ root of al evil, y^ gredy
sercher of al hidden gain, y^ bottomless whurlpoole of al apparent spoil, y^
gainers themselves, never fortunate with the fruit or benefit of the goods they
possess, but rather being most miserable and hu^gry, by a certain strange
gredy desire to hepe them together, are swalowed up with the vnsaciablenesse
thereof, and cast hedlong to hell pit, to live there with the devil and his angels.
An other says, yt a mercha^t occupying usury, Alex. cons. 46. paucis vtar.
volu. 4
is a person abominable, and worthy to be lothed of all men, for his gain
(says he) is most filthy. I pray you therefore master Gromell, make this
iolye lawyer an untrue sayer for your part, saving the worship of this company,
and with his leave: and amend you one, and be a merchant in deed, which is a
worshipful calling, and do not so much harken to the devils sophistry, that you
will not allow ye true and almighty logike, and godly reasons of our heavenly
father, least confusion be your end, both in this world and in y^ world to
come. But master Doctor, it had been my part to have given place unto you, who^
we al desire to here in both laws as well canon as civil: because you are a
professor in them both. And to say the truth, your calling and profession is
to deal in these matters by order, and taking knowledge thereof to punish by
censures of yt church, and your skill herein is better then ours, as master
lawier has said before me, and somewhat charged me with overmuch intermedling in
ye particular trial of this offense.


Lawier. It is truethe sir, sauinge my quarrel for your great heat, and now I
would gladly answer you in my heat for many things, yt you have said, but
perhaps I should offend: although to say truth, all that has been said
hitherto, should be under correctyon of master doctor that has in these
things most skyll, and can put forth more cases in one hour, then we are
able to assoyle in a whole year: Who if he can by his learning, after your
divine preaching bring us to such certainty, as to make master Gromell here
to lend every one of us freelye 100.li. before we depart: I would call him an
other Chrysostom, that is, he that had a golden mouth where with to speak
and utter his mind.


Gromell gayner, my purse is mine own, and before I lend, I will know how
to come by it again, and in my lendynge I had need to take good heed, what
I did, least I be first cried out upon in ye pulpit, next brought into
thexchequer, and lastly to appear in the Arches before my lord of Caunterbury
and his officers. So that I and my boy here, are both beset, god help us,
and long it will be before we gain to bear office in London, by such kind of
oration and preaching, although I must needs say, you do much astonne me,
master Ockerfo, with your terrible threats and curses from god, whereby I am
sometime at that point, y^ almost I cannot tell well how to turn me.


Ockerfoe. Assure your self sir, the happiest usury upon earth, and the
greatest gain that may be, is to help the needye and poor: for he that
freelye lends that way, does lend to god for vsurye, who will infinitely
reward and send him great gain above all expectacion. And therefore, master
doctor, we all now desire you to say your mind, whom we long al to here,
that god may be praised, and we all edified according to your good learning and
doctrine.


The Ciuilians or Doctors oration.
YOu look for more at my hand, then I am able to perform: I would be
glad to say what I know, and rather utter my learning plainlye, then seek
much to confute any of your opinions expreslye, although I may incidently,
and by the way touch some thing perhaps, that has been said. And yet thus much
I say unto you, you shall rather hear what I have read and gathered of
others, then know mine opinion directly, touching the very precisenes of al
usury, so long as mine oration shall continue, although I may seem to show some
heat, as occasion shall serve in detestation of wicked doings and excessive
gain. Afterward it may happen upon farther speech, and private conference
emongst us, you shall know the very bottom of my mind, and the reasons yt
move me to affirm, as some of you have said. In the mean season, I pray you
have patience, and do not interrupt me, til you be more wearye with hearing,
then I shall be with speaking: for I tell you, we professors of learning,
do love oftentimes to here our selves speak, being more tedyous, then
fruitful, better stuffed with speech, then freighted with skyll, and more
ready oftentimes rather to talk much about the matter, then able to say
much to the matter. And yet because a method or order is good: I will divide
myspeache into five or six several parts.

1 And first I will show what vsurye is, and where, that we may know certainly
whereof to speak, and laying our fou^dacyon sure, may the better proceed in
the rest of our talk.

2 Again, I will show that the same is evil, and by what laws forbidden, and
for what causes.

3 Thyrdelye, I will utter diverse kinds of contracts, and trades in bargayning
commonly used, and therewyth show what the exchange is.

4 Fowerthlye, I will show what is not vsurye, and what dyfference there is
betwyxte interest and usury.

5 Fyftlye, I will show the punyshmentes for vsurye, and therewyth allege
such examples of all ages, as shall come to my remembrance, in the detestacyon
of vsurye and all usurers universally.

6 Lastly I do mind upon farther conference, and private debating to show
mine opynion, what is expedient to be done at this time. Usurie commethe of
the latin word Vsura, and according to the nature thereof, it is called so, of
the use that men have of things borrowed. It is called in greek a birth,
because that money brings money.

In the Hebrew tongue, it is called a biting, because they that borowe and pay
over and above the principal, more the^ they borrowed, in the end shall be
bitten, with such want and penurye, that the biting of a serpent, or venomous
beast, cannot be more hurtful to a man's body, then the borowing of money,
for gain is hurtful to a man's welfare and possessions: For as poison wastethe
the body, so does usury consume a man's goods. Thus much for the property
of the word, as in effect has been said before.

Now, 14 q. 3. vsura.
touching the definition of usury according to the scholemen, it is said to
be again that commethe thoroughe lendinge by covenant, or by chief intent
or purpose. As for example, I do lend to receive more then I laid out, I do
covenant to have more, and my chief purpose in laying out my money is, by my
principal to e^crease my stock, and hoape by my lending, to receive an over
plus: for where these three things concur together, lending, gain, and a
pryncipall or chief purpose to increase welfare, in such dealings, usury is
always most certainly known. Imola in Cle meant. 1. de vsuris. 19. coll.
verse. querit hic pet. de an char in repet. reg. and pecca ti venia in. 1. 9.
principali. Ludou. Roman. co^s. 500. Laure^t. de To dolph. in trac tatu de
vsuris.
Others do define usury thus.

Usurye is whatsoever is taken for lone above the principal.

Usurie is a certain gain due, or exacted for lendinge, or by covenant agreed
upon. S. Barnard says, that usury is a lawefull theft, or a theft in law,
the Civil law it self, or rather the Emperor Justinians statute, tellyng
before hand what is intended, that is to rob by order and sufferance of law.
Usurye is also said, to be the price of time, or of the delaying, or
forbearing of money. Melancthon does define vsurye in this sort.

Usurye or fenorye is a gain demanded above ye principal, Bernardus in libro
de cura rei familiaris Gl. in L. in fraude^ ss. fiscalibus F. de iure fisci,
Joan. de prat. in L. qui procurator de procur.
only for the benefit or pleasure showed in lendynge. Wherein me thinks
Melancthon has very well and playnelye said, what is vsurye: so that,
whosoever lendethe his money, or puts out the same to have gain only for
the very lone of the said money, is an usurer undoubtedly, and such a one as
ought by good laws to be punished. So that by this definition, every receiving
above the principal, is not usury. As if I do borowe 100. l. of a merchant
that tradeth and occupiethe and the merchant do freely lend me the same
money for a year, afterward if the merchant do prove unto me, that the want
of his said 100. l. was greatly hurtful unto him, I ought to make him a
recompense. And such allowaunce of his loss or hinderaunce, ought not to be
counted unlawful and vsurye: when one does not bargain to receive more then
he lent, only for yt le^dyng, although the borower was not any time anyt
evident or effectual hinderer of his gain or welfare. But of this kind of
le^dings and other like, we will talk more hereafter in a more apt place. I
trust you know by these few words, what usury is. It follows, that I
show, wherein vsurye is occupied.

And I say first, there cannot be any vsurye, where lending is not: and
le^ding consists upon three things, that is number, weight, and measure. As
for example, money, lead, corn, the first is nu^bred, the second is weighed,
the third is measured, and so likewise of all other things that are in such
sort uttered.

Lendynge moreover is said to be, whermy goods are made thine, called in latin
Mutuum, that is to say, mine, thine, and so thou art lord and owner, and
haste the possession of them, that thou may dispose of them as shall like
thee best, restoringe unto me again, not the very self same thing in his
own propre nature, without alteracion or change of the shape, form or
quality (for so it wear no lending, but a letting to hier) but so much in
value of the same kind: as if I should lend my friend 100. l. in money of
diverse coins, he may pay the value in money at the years end, although not
the very self same and proper coin. And so likewise I may say of corn,
oil, wine, spyce, lead, tin brass, or any thing else that is either
measured, or weighed. And usury is not only in money, but also in wares and
merchandises, such as may be consumed or spent by vsinge of them.

But some to avoid usury will say then, y^ they will not lend, but let to hyer,
which I would they did in deed, and not say it only, for then the peril
should be theirs, that do let it to hyer, and not the hirers, or else it is
nothing to hier. For if I do hyer a horse to journey for a seuennight, and
the horse without any fault at all on my part, do dye before I do return:
the loss shall be his, that did let the horse unto me for hyer, and not mine
that did take the horse to hier, except an express covenant be made to the
contrary: Whereas in lendinge it is clean contrary. For I being lord of an
other man's goods, by the virtue of borowing, must answer the general sum:
which never dies whatsoever become of mye particular receipt: no, not
although thieves robbed me immediately, or that mye house wear burned, and
so I utterly undone. And this must I perform by order of all laws,
although no covenant be made at all to save the creditoure harmless, for he
must have his own principal, without any contradiction. And therefore let
the usurer say what he will, if he do put forth his money to be sure of it
again, he does not let it to hyer, nor yet uses any other contract at all,
saving only lendinge, let him color it by never so many devises, as by
bargain and sale, and vtteryng of wares, or any other shift whatsoever. And
because you shall fully and perfectly perceive, what lendinge is, and what
letting is, know you that when a delivery is made of goods lent, (for without
delivering there can be no lending) then he that has thus borrowed the same, is
y^ proprietarie, the very true owner, and lord of all, to dispose of them
freelye as he list, for his own use and benefit: being bound
notwithstanding, to restore at a time appointed, so much and no more in value,
as he has received, so that these goods seem to be lent for his benefyte
and profit that borrowed them, not for his gain or advantage, that did lend
them. And hereby common society is the rather mainetayned betwixt man and man,
mutual friendship better increased, and christian charity much exercysed, when
the wealthy man has this care, to help his needye and poor neighbor, and
lends freely and chieflye for his profit and avail. Now letting to hier, is
for gain, and especial profit, and the thing put forth to hier, is still
his that did let it out, called in latin Locatio, so that if by sum great
myshap the same be destroyed, lost, or consumed away through casualty, either
of fire or water: he yt did let those goods or chatels out to hyer, abides al
ye peril, not he that took them to hyer.

There is, also Commodatum, a lendinge without alteracion of the property, the
owner remaining still lord of that he did lend, and this lending is free
without any gain at al. Thus you see by my simple learning and understanding,
what lettyng is for hyer, what le^ding is for use, to have the very self same
again, and what free lending is for charity, to have the same kind, and how
every one of these should be used, and how a man may dyscerne lendinge for
use, from lettinge to hyer, and lending to have yt same kind again, and what
difference there is betwixt Mutuum, Locatio, and Commodatum. And besides, what
is the very natural and proper definicio^ of usury, by me set forth before,
according to yt judgment of learned men, in all ages. But now yt I have showed
unto you what usury is, and where in manifestly enough, as I trust, and with as
great shortness as I could: I will declare unto you, yt the same is evil,
ungodly and wicked, and so forbidden because it is evil, and not therefore evil,
because it is forbidden, and by what laws it is forbidden, and for what causes.
Where no charity is, there is no virtue. but in the usurers heart there is no
charity: Joan. de ligna in C. nauigati. Bald. in ius de vsuris, et in L.
cunctos popu los verse. quae to primo C. de suma Trinitate.
therefore the usurer is void of virtue. If the usurer had charytye he would
have compassion of his poor and needye neighbor and aid his want to his
power, as by gods law he is bound. But the remorse of conscience is not in him,
but only a desire to enriche him self, which is a wicked intent and meaning,
and directly against god: for god not only by his commandments wills one to
help an other, and to relieve the poor, but also he shows his bountifulnes
universally of his mere grace, sufferynge the sun to shine over all, sending
weather in due season, blessing the ground with all kind of fruit and goodness
for man's behoof, wherein is showed an example for us to follow: that as god of
his free mercy, is good to all being our creator, so man should be
charitable one to an other, in frank aydinge his fellow creature. And as
amongste all virtues, there is none that goethe so nyghe to the goodness of god,
as liberality: so no vice is so far from god as is covetousness, whereof
spri^geth usury, and all other myschiefes upon earth. And as these that
cannot geeue with their ease, and yet do lend freely, are good members of god,
so they, that will neither geeue nor lend freely, are the very members of the
devil. Evil therefore is usury, when it hyndreth charity, and has no
spark of goods grace in yt, but only a desire to undo all, and to divise
that the wealth of the woorlde might be in few men's hands: as what other do
this caterpillars, and enemies to all contries, and kingdoms, but heap wealth
to themselves, from others, without charity or respect of man or god? yea both
against man and god: in all that ever they may. And therefore, who can say
otherwise, but that usury is evil, when it brings all myschiefe with it,
And therefore it has been forbidden in all ages, and almost by all laws
universally.

First, the word of god is directlye against all usury and usurers, and
does not only forbid the same sin, but threateneth death and dampnation
to them that use it, as master Ockerfoe has very well declared, in his godly
oracion, and therefore I need not to make dubble inculcation.

The canon law, 14. q. 3.
does straitely and plainly forbid usury, not only in the decrees, but also
in the decretales in Serto, and in the Clementynes, and does appointe very
great punishments, and diverse, for them that are notorious usurers, as you
shall hear more at large hereafter, when I come to my last division. And
touching the prohibition by the canon law, you shall here, what the words
are.

No man shall enter in to holy orders, 33. D. maritu^.
or be of the ministerye, that by law is convicted and found to have put his
money to usury. And in an other place: we do ordeyne, that no usurer shall be
made one of the clergy. D. 46. Seditionarios.
And the reason is in the gloss, that such me^, because they are covetous
persons, will go to law, and sue any body, for every trifle, and mind
nothing more, than greedye, getting, without all mercy, a sin against god
and nature. D. 47. per totum.
And in the next distinction throughout, the forbidding is plain, with this
reason alleged, that no covetous man, or such as follows his own greedy
desire, for worldly goods, should be of the clergy, because they do easily
fwarue from Justice, and from all right and well doing. And therefore there is
brought in a decree, Consiliu^ Nicenum. 18.
of the Nicene counsel, which ordeneth, that such of the Clergy, as put out
their money for usury, taking twelve in the hundred or less, shall be
degraded from all their degrees of ecclesiastical office, and made irregular,
because they have sought to live by filthy gain, contrary to the express
word of god. And immediately after, it is said, that such as follow
greedilye worldly gain, cannot serve god faithfully. And fo throughout, there
are diverse distinctions, directly against usury and avarice.

It follows in the decrees, by the aucthority of saint Augustyne, 14. q. 3.
saint Hierome, and saint Ambrose, that any ouertakyng more then has been
lent, is utterly forbidden as plain usury. But because you, master preacher,
have alleged those doctors, and other holy fathers of the church, I will not
make any new rehersall. In the latter end of the same decree is brought in
the sentence of a general counsel, Co^silium Agathense.
which says, y^ usury is committed, when in any thing is demanded; 14. q. 5.
more then was lent. As for example. Nullus.
If I lend one (...) shillinges, and take any thing for it, or if I lend a
bushel of wheat to have a pecke, 14. 9. 3.
or any other measure, be it never so little over and above my principale.
Vsura est.
In an other counsel, 14. q. 4.
it is said. Minysters that do commit vsurye, Co^silium Arelatense.
shall not ^eceyue the communion.

Also he that buiyeth things of one sorts very cheap, Consiliu^
Terraconense.
to selle the same goods in the same kind dearer, cannot be of the clergy.

Pope Martyn, Ex concilio Martini Papae.
in the council that he called, says If any man forgettinge the fear of
god, and the holy scriptures, which do say (he that has not geeuen his money
to usury, shall enter into the tabernacle of god) do, after knowledge had of
this general council, commyt usury, or take Centesimam vsuram, which is
twelve in the hundred, or by any filthy trade, does make his gain, taking for
diverse sorts of things, for either wine or corn, or any other thing, else
by buiyng or sellinge, more then he has laid out, shall be put out of the
clergy for ever.

Pope Leo does also forbid the same offense in the laytie, being very sorys
that any christian should be an usurer, saiynge, that the clergy ought to be
the more sharply punished for such offense, because all others should be the
more afraid to offend, when the clergy is not spared.

Yea the Decrees do further say, 14. q. 5.
that no alms ought to be geeuen, of evil gotten goods, which cannot be
worse gotten, than by usury: but because you master preacher have said your
mind herein somewhat largely, I will not say any more.

And now, that I have shortly uttered, what is said in the decrees of the canon
law, you shall see, that the decretales likewise, and Clementynes, are
directely against usury. And therefore, I would not have men altogether to be
enemies to the canon law, and to condemn every thing there written, because
the popes were aucthours of the^, as though no good law could be made by
them, which god forbid, should either be spoken, or thought. Nay I will say
plainly, that there are some such laws, made by the Popes, as be right
godly, say others what they list, whom few things can please, although they
be never so well setteled and divised, that are not invented and made first by
themselves. But left them go, and go we to the matter. In the decretales, in
the chapter of usury, thus it is written.

Alexander the pope, In Concilio Tur^n^.
does straightly forbid all usury, not only unto the clergy, but also unto the
laitye. And yt none taking pawn, whereof increase or gain may rise, shall
turn the same profit to himself, but return it in his principal, when he
receives his own again. In Conci. Lateren^.
And so thereupon shows the penalty that they shall sustain, who are
manifest usurers, as I will then declare at large, when I come to my last
division. And in this chapter are diverse co^tracts and bargaynes uttered,
which you shall hear a none, in their proper place. In ye book called,
Sextus Decretalium.
Sextus Decretaliu^, Gregori, ye tenth bishop of Rome of y^ name, begins
thus: We being desirous to stop the gulf, or whorlepoole of usury
committed, which does deuore souls, and utterly wastes wealth, do command,
upon the threatenings of goods curse, that the constitution of the latter
counsel set fourth against usurers, be without any violacion at all, fully and
wholly observed. And thereupo^ a prohibition is made, y^ no corporacio^,
college, or university, shall let any house or dwelling place to any stranger
usurer, being borne in an other country etc. As you shall hear more thereof,
in the proper place of my division. And now last in the Clementine canon,
which book has the name of pope Clemente, Clementine.
the fyfth, by the advice and allowance of the counsel at Vienna, does
straigtly forbid usury, and abrogateth all laws made for the maintenance of
usury, cursing the^ that hereafter will set forth, or be aydors,
abbettours, or counselors, for the making and allowing of such ungodly and
wicked laws, as you shall hear more at large, when I come to speak of
punishment appointed against usurers. Neither should we so much hearken,
what worldly princes or magistrates have done for worldly policy, as to
look, what god and Christ, the high magistrate of all has done and
forbidden, and follow that, as which we are bound to follow, upon pain of
dampnation. And according unto that, I do read of a Christian Emperor,
called Leo, Hermenopolus, lib. 3. tit. 7.
who made a statute (as (Hermenopolus declares) against usury, which for the
woorthynes and godlynes therein, I thought good to English word for word as
follows.

Although many of our ancestors have thought, ye lending for usury might be
admitted, and only for that the creditours were so hard, and as men loath else
to lend: yet we have thought it most unworthy amongst christians, and to be
utterly abhorred and eschewed, as a thing forbidden by the law of god.
Therefore our majesty does command, that it be not lawful for any man, to
take usury for any cause, least whiles we go about to keep the laws and
statutes of men, we do transgress thereby y^ law of god, but whatsoever any
man does take, the same shall be reconed into the principal.

Thus you see this christian emperor, after Justinia^ and others, having more
respect to god, tha^ to any polycie of man: does expressly forbidd usury: and
fearing to blaunche the writing of god, and for policye, to deprave a veritye,
folowethe the plain words of god, neither adding thereto, nor diminyshing
any jot thereof, as by the laws he was commanded. Besides this, the
general cou^selles are directely against usurers. The causes that have moved
wise and godly men to deteste usury, besides the plain prohibition, are diverse
and substancial, and therefore worthy to be considered most diligently.

The Jewe, that has used this horrible sin most above all others, and might
lawfullye use the same, before Christ's coming, upon any stranger, as appears
plain in Exodus, has so robbed the christians wheresoever he came, y^ his
evil lyuinge seen, he is banished out of the most places in christendom,
and worthily: for surely that common weal and country, cannot long stand in
prosperous estate and welfare, where mercha^ts, and all others, become usurers,
And no better do I call the^, the^ Jews, yea worse tha^ any infidel, that
wittingly live by the only gain of their money. The causes that move me, are
these First, the usurer is an idle man, he does not travail, nor labor by
sweat of his brows, to advance himself, and his country, but uses the
pains and troubles of others, to his great gain, without any pains taking
of his part at all. And therefore, if all should do, as the usurer does, y^
ground should lie untilled, no trade of merchandise should be used, nor yet
occupiyng maynteyned, for the use of mankind. For what follye wear it for a
man, either to delue, or dig, to pass the seas with peril, to work in
any mysterye or handie craft: when he may, with ease liyng on the one side,
without labor, toil or danger, get more unto him, with ease and certainty,
than the best laboring man, with all his travail, or the greatest mercha^t
living with all his pains, through uncertainty, having like wealth to
begin as they have, were ever hable to geate. For what is he living that in
any trade, or trafique, can assure himself yerelye, of every hundredth pounds,
to gain by his occupiynge twelve pounds, without any peril or danger,
Whereas the usurer, will be assured of so much, and more a great deal every
year, let y^ world go which way it will, to the great hurt and undoing, not
only of those with whom he deals, but also, to the destruction of the
whole country where he dwells. For besides that he heapeth much wealth
to himself, by such unlawful means, he brings a dearthe also of all
things, through his excessive dealing. For when he takes so dear for his
money, yt must needs follow, that as others do buy, so they must sell. And
therefore, when one takes a hundredth pounds, to pay twentye pounds, over or
more than he borrowed, that same man in uttering of his wares, must so selle,
that he must pay his creditours, and live also, which he cannot do, except
he selle his wares very dear, that he may pay all that he owes, and
get some what over, to maintain him self and his family. For if he do
not make of his wares, the some of six score and ten pounds at the years
end, which notwithstanding are no more worth, betwixt man and man, than one
hundred pounds at the first buiynge, he is like to leave his occupiynge
shortly, and to shutt up his doors for ever. Therefore you see, that the
usurer is the occasion of all dearth and want, that happens to a common
weak. And this is one of the cheifest occasions of all your bankruptes now a
days, and decayed gentlemen, that have borrowed money, and taken wares so
dearly, that the very usury in time has wholly eaten them up, and undone
them for ever. But woe worth that man, that has so oppressed his brother. God
is not mocked, and his word shall be found true, to their dampnation for
ever, except they do amend in time, and call to god for grace. God ordained
lending for maintenance of amitye, and declaration of love, betwixt man and
man: whereas now lending is used for pryuate benefit and oppression, and so no
charity is used at all, as though there were no god to judge, nor life to
come. I do marvel, to see so many thieves hanged, and so many usurers live:
For before god, the greatest thief and rauener, that can be in a common
weal, is the usurer, and the woorste man that lives. And I am of master
Ockerfoes opinion, and think it were better, that all England had one
thousand known thieves, than one hundred known usurers. For the thief, may
by diligence be eschued, and lightly he harmeth but one man at once: but the
usurer cannot be avoided: for the usurer bearethe the contenaunce of an honest
man, and is commonly taken, to be the best man in his paryshe. Yea he is
often in aucthoritye, and deals as though it were by law, being none other
than a lawful thief, creepinge into credit where gain is to be made, and
use the help of brokers, to serve his purpose. And this is very true, he
undoes as many as he deals with all, under the color of amity and law.
And surely, if a man be once in the usurers net, it is a great grace of god,
if he do ever escape his hands, without undoing. Therefore, unhappy are they
that fall into the usurers snares, or have to do with them, for as the
caterpiller consumes the fruit of the tree, so does the usurer destroy the
substance and credit of man. And the worst of all is this, that a man is undone,
before he knows he is euel dealt with all, being persuaded, that all is to
his benefyte, till he be not woorthe the ground he treads upon. And
therefore, the dealing of an usurer, is compared to the biting of the serpent
called Aspis. For as saint Chrysostom says, upon the fyfty of saint
Matthew, where mention is made of borrowing, (as you master Ockerfoe have
partlye touched): The money of the usurer, is like the bityng of the Aspis: for
he that is stricken by that serpent, feels thereof a certain pleasant ytche,
whereby he falls a sleep, and so through ye plesauntnes of his sleep, he
dies in pleasure, for the^ the poison goes by a little and a little through
all ye parts of ye body. So after y^ a man has taken money upon usury, and
lives plesauntly therewith for a time: at length, ye usury perceth so
throughout all his goods moveable and immovable, y^ al his lands, and livings,
are not hable to pay his debts. As I have known some, and partlye you, master
Ockerfoe, spoke of the like, that has borrowed upon 100. li. land, never
improued only 300. li. in money, paiyng deep usury, be you assured, and at
length paid so long (and yet in no long time neither) that his whole debte,
through usury, came to above 2000. marks: and so he lost (to say in effect) a
hundred pound land, for 300. li. in money. A pityful case, and worthy to be
punished with horrible death. Hereof comes decay of good houses, and
wracking of the people, through this devouring caterpillars, which being not
many, in respect of all others: do gather the goods of infinyte persons,
into their own hands. And so the commonweal is weakened, and whole towns
destroyed, through the covetous usurer. For when they have gotten whole manours
and towns into their hands, they are sorye, that any should dwell there,
but them selves. And so they rid away in time the poor tenauntes and suffer
them to beg, and to dye for hunger, and for tillage, use shepegates, where no
me^ are mainteyned, nor house holden, but all overthrown: and in steed of
houses, desert places to be seen, and wild solytarines for beasts to raunge
in, and to feed upon, cattaile and sheep occupyinge the places of many a good
honest meaning man. So that by these twoe idle occupacions, great vsurye and
many flocks of sheep and heardes of beasts, this noble Country is made in
a manner a forest, and brought to great ruyn and decay, thorough dyspeoplyng of
men, overthrowing of towns, and oppressyng of the poor, with intolerable
usury. And I pray you, what is more against nature, the^ yt money should beget
or bring forth money? which was ordained to be a pledge or right betwixt man
and man, in contracts and bargayning as a just measure and proporcion in
bargayning, and not to increase it self, as a woman does, that bringethe
forth a child, clean contrary to the first institution of money.
Aristotle politic. lib. 7.
And therefore Aristotle says, that such money as bri^geth forth money
through usury, is an ugly beast, that brings forth mo^sters from time to
time, such as are not in nature. Likewise Suydas upon Aristophanes in nubibus
says, that such money which brings forth money is a swelling mo^ster,
waxing every month bigger one then an other, and so horrible swells from
time to time, as no man by words is able to utter, contrary to nature, order,
and al good reason. And what equalytye is in bargaynynge I pray you, when the
one party is famished, and ye other is hoggesty fed? Justice is none other
thing then a certain euenhode or equality, and therefore they that do not in
their dealings, use an equal property, do not use Justice. Now in vsurye, you
may well say, there is noe euenhode at all, for the lender receiuethe more
then he lent. As after he has le^t, he receives his principal again, which
is the equality in law, then he takes an overplus for nothing, that is to
say, gain above his pryncipall, yea, and excessyue also, which is a great
disproporcion and plain inequality, for why should any man gain, for the
only lendinge? He has his own again, without any loss, or hinderaunce at
all. And what will he have more? his own he has with thanks, and more then
his own he should not ask. If he receive not as good money as he lent, and
of the same value, he may well complain, but when he has his own again,
without loss, and with thanks toe, what can he have more? In lending he
loses the property, and use for the time, and is noe lord of his own for
the season, and what will he have when he has departed with his own for
time? for nothing, something? for a shadow a perfect body? for moon shine
in the water, a man's whole treasure? I speak of those now that for lendynge
of money only (all other respects and considerations set aside) will have
money for their money, yea, and a great deal for a little respiting of time,
in forbeari^g their money, a wicked kind of men, and the vnprofitablest
wretches that live. Do not these worldlinges see, that god of his goodness,
has freely given this world for man to use and occupye only, to acknowledge
their creator, and to love their brethren. Does not ye sun shine upon us
freelye? the air is open to us all, and we breathe, thoroughe gods great
mercy, the time endures for our benefit? And will these idle men sell the
sun, the air, and the time for their proper gain? how can he be of god
that so does. God geeueth, and the usurer withholdeth, god opens his hands,
and the usurer is strait handed, god is free, the usurer is hard. God
lendethe life and living for love, the usurer gains all that he may for lone,
yea he takes men's hearts (as I might say) out of their bodies. So that I
may well auowe, that light and darkness, white and black, truth and
falsehood, heaven and hell: are not so contrary and so distant, as god and the
usurer, yea so far of is it, that any man shall take gain for money, Cap.
sup. ext. de vsuris. 13. q. 1. 2. and ibi Augustinus.
as it is forbidden to do any good work, for usury. As that a stock of money
should run for ye helping of young occupiers, to marry poor maidens, to relieve
the poor and afflicted in every town and parish that be not able to help
the^ selves, or to redeem captives from the Infidels: al these good deeds I
say, are forbidden to be done by the way of usury. And therefore, whereas
there are in Italy, Montes pietatis, that is to say, mountes or banks of
charity, places where great sums of money are by legacies given, for
relief of the poor, to borowe upon gages, and to pay only after three or
four in the hundred at the most, to maintain the officers, and to bear the
charges of such an erected mount for ever: the law does plainlye condemn all
such doings to be vsurye, and therefore much more should vsurye be abhored,
that is excessyue and lent only for greedye lucre and private gain. Then if
we love to live together in a common society, as brethren ought one with an
other, and will that covetousness the root of all evil, as you have well said
master Ockerfoe, be banished out of England. Let us agree, that noe usurer
may carry estimacion (as by law and right they ought not to have any) but he
with heart abhorred, and by order punished as he ought to be, and to pray that
god may inspyre the magystrates hearts, to provide good and wholesome remedy
against such wicked and ungodly doings. Thus much touching the second part
of my division: in all which talk, I have followed the course of my profession,
and used such speech, as the authors and writers thereof, have give occasion
of such like matter.

3 In the third part I will open diverse contractes and bargaynes that are used
to avoid vsurye.

I have need of money, and deal with a broaker, he answers me, that he
cannot help me with money, but if I list to have wares, I shall speed. Well
my necessity is great, he brings me blotting paper, pakthreede, fustia^s,
cha^lets, hawks bells, and hoodes, or I wot not what: I desire him to make
sale for mine advantage, askyng what he thinks willbe my loss, he
answers, not paste twelve pound in the hundred. When I come to receive, I
do find yt I lose more then twentye in the hundred (yea, would god that none
had lost more) I being grieved with my loss, do charge the broaker, and say,
that I will not receive the money with such loss, the merchaunt answers,
that he will not take his wares again, and having my bille, cares not what
become of me that have borrowed: this is called a double stoccado, that is to
say, the stycking blow, or the double stabbe. For at the first, the poor
gentleman is borne in hand, there is no money to be had, but is promised
wares, to avoid, or rather to mock the danger of the statute (but god is not
mocked) and so with this cruel blow of wares, he is made believe that they
will fall out not above twelve pound, or 20. marks at the most, but when he
commethe to receive the nete money, ye merchant and broker being agreed
together, he is stabbed at the very heart, paying sometimes twenty pound, nay
shall I say thirty pound, I would it had been noe more with some, a wicked and a
most horrible cruel dealinge: and once in for a hundred pound, he can never
come out clear again, til having mortgaged his lands, (which is ye next
part to be played and practiced) he be forced in the end, to sell the same
out right. And so between the merchaunt and the broaker, the poor gentleman
is caught in the Cony clapper, to live with the loss of thirty pound in the
hundred at the least. And yet if there were plain dealyng, in the matter, it
were the more sauourye: but the merchaunt is agreed with the broaker, to buy
his own wares again, and to pay 70. l. for that which the gentleman must pay
him a hundred pound for, at the years end. Is not this usury? is it not vsurye
think you, in ye devils name? Now surely unhappy is he that deals with
such devilish merchaunts or others whatsoever, for of all cutthrotes in the
world, these are the absolute horrible, and most detestable mo^sters that live.
And god keep all plain and true dealing men from the dangers of all such
false and crafty hipocriticall harlottes, and greedye cormorantes in a common
weal. And yet these fellows that thus do, carry the countenance, as though
they were as honest men as the honestist, and are not ashamed to look an
honest man in the face, neither yet to take office upon them, because theye
florishe with the goods of this world, and are wealthye: whereas if theye had
their due merit, they should be exalted for their worthiness, to hang on the
gallows, rather then to be thought meet of estimation, or to bear office as
some of them do, in any good governed common weal. Thus master mercha^t when
he has robbed the poor gentleman, and furnished him in this manner to get a
little apparel upon his back, girdeth him with this frompe in the tail. Lo
sayethe he, yonder goes a very strong stowt gentleman, for he cariethe upon
his back, a fair manor, land and all, and may therefore well be standerd
bearer to any prince christian or heathen. Alack what handling is this? Is here
mercy, charity, or love, is this merchantly dealing? would these merchaunts
be so used, as they use others? do they as they would, be done unto? These be
marmaides, not merchants, singing sweetly to confusion. Merchants I say, that
make armony for the devil, no better, nor more to be esteemed, then ribaldes
and common bawdes, that put forth young gyrles to sale, and make merchaundises
of them, to win treasure to their purses. As Archidiaconus says. An other
has a patente of fortye pound by the year, and comes in time of his great
need, to borowe a hundred pound for the year, making a bargain and sale with
this condition, if he do not repaye the same 100. l. within the year, that
then the said patente shall be forfeyted for ever: and if the patentee do dye
within the year, the^ the merchant to have his own money again, and so much
of the patent as was in time run out, and very strong bonds and suerties
offered therefore.

The merchaunt seeing the necessitye of the poor gentleman, will not deal
except he may have the whole years profit of the patente assured unto him,
whether the patentee die or live: and farther couenaunteth that the patentee
shall not within the year offer to pay the pryncipall, to save any part of
the annuitie for that year, and to have it five years together, for none
payment of the princypall, and so he is content, otherwise he will not deal.
The poor compelled gentleman beeinge driven to this necessity, either for the
better aduauncing him self to serve his prince and country, as well abroad as
at home, and called perhaps thereunto, or otherwise, for his necessary affairs
at home, to save hi^ self from present misery, yeldeth wholly to this cruel
contract, and unmerciful bargayne: And so having done in deed his service
abroad, for benefit of ye realm, and welfare of y^ mercha^ts chiefly, returns
after ye year paste, about one month or somewhat more, at what time offeringe
to pay the principal, and so to be rid of this bytinge usury, had much a
do to have that month forgeuen unto him, notwithstanding his absence out of
the land, in the necessary affairs of ye merchants them selves, as well for
the safety of their lives and liberties, as for their proper goods and
merchandises. A man would have thought that forty pound gain, had been
sufficient for one year and a month, for the lone of a hundred pound. These
dealings I do assure you, are not to be liked, tendyng to the utter
discreditinge of merchants wholye: for besides that they are bytynge, they are
uncharitable, unmerciful, and altogether wicked, stretching to the utter
destruction not only of whole families, but also of good commonweals.

I come to an other man, and borrowe forty pound of him for three months, and
do promise to give his wife a gown of satine, or an amblyng gelding for his or
her ridinge, without any express covenant in writing, this is plain usury,
although for his lendyng, he does not receive any thing that is paid by
number, weight or measure. Yet forasmuch as he receives a value above the
principal, he is an usurer.

I bind my land worth twenty pound by year to a man for a hundred pound in
money for a year, and do not pass it by bargayne and sale: If the creditour
do take the revenues of the land at the years end and his pryncipal, he is
an usurer.

Be it that a man lendethe an hundred pound freelye, and hops assuredlye to
have some thankful recompense at the years end, because he is a man able to
do him good diverse ways, without which hope he would not have lent his
money: undoubtedly ye same man is an usurer before god, and this is called
Mentalis vsura, an usury of the mind, when one hops for gain although no
contracte be made.

What if one lend money in hope to get an office, assuredlye the same man is an
usurer?

What if one lend a man money for a certain time, because the same manne
should speak a good word for him, or do him a certain pleasure, it is a ruled
case, that for as much as a covenant is past, it is usury.

I do lend you 100. l. that you shall do as much for me, when I shall demand it
of you: this is vsurye, because a contract is simply made, without any
addicion of time appointed, whereas if I had asked so much at the years end,
then it had been no vsurye, but permutacion, when one good turn of like value
is done for an other, and the time known certainly.

A lord does lend his tenauntes money, with this condition, that they shall
ploughe his land, whether does he commyt vsurye or not? I do answer, that
if he do not pay them for their labor, but will take the benefit of their
labor, for the use of his money, he is an usurer.

I would borowe, and one sellethe unto me wares, for more then they be worth,
(by the half) he is an usurer that so sells.

I do bargayne with a man for six months, and deal as straitlye with him
as I can for his wares: when the bargayne is done, I do offer him his money
presently, so that he will deducte after ten pound in the hundred pound for
six months. I am an usurer in so doing.

I do buy timber, brick, or stone, of a man to deliver the same at such a
time and place, and to pay him for the same, I do borrowe so much upon
usury. Whether shall the said man not deliuerynge my stuff at my time and
place appointed, pay me the said usury or not? I do answer, that he is
bound to pay it in good right.

The father in law, does lend his son in law a sum of money and takes i^
pawn the possessions of the dower, and co^uerteth the fruits thereof to him
self, for ye lone of money, the father in law is an usurer. And yet if the
son do pass with him by bargayne and sale, he may lawefullye turn the
fruit to his profit, if there be noe colorable dealing in this behalf, in
fraudem vsurarum.

He that buieth before hand, corn, wine or oil so good cheap as he is sure
not to be a loser, but a great gayner, at the time of the harvest or vintage,
the same man is an usurer.

I do lend a hundred pound to my fre^d for ten years freely, not to pay any
penny gain all that time, if either of us do dye, but if we both live together
till that time, then he to pay me after 12. l. in the hundred for these ten
years paste, whether am I an usurer or no? The law says I am an usurer, and
the reason is: that the peril which may happen, does not excuse me from
sin, when I take more then I ought to do, for cause of time not proper.

A merchant lends to a corporation or company a hundred pound, which
corporation has by statute a grant, that whosoever lends such a sum of
money, and has a child of one year, shall have for his child, if the same
child do live till he be full fifteen years of age, 500. l. in money, but
if the child dye before that time, the father to lose his principal for ever,
whether is this merchant an usurer or no? The law says, if I lend purposlie
for gain, notwithstanding the peril or hazard, I am an usurer.

I know an honest artificer, owes to a draper forty pou^des, to be paid after
six months, I come to the draper, and show him, if he will take thirty
pounds in hand, I will pay so much for ye artificer, if he will turn the
debte to me: Herein I am an usurer, because I do buy time, in seeking to
anticipate the payment of an other man's good debte, for mine own pryuate gain.

One buyeth a pay, of three or four hundredth pounds, delivering fifteen
shillings for every twenty shillinges, whereas the pay is like to be certain
at the day, as about three months hence: some think because a bargayne and
sale is past, there cannot be any usury, for where no lending is, there is no
usury, but here is a lending, in deed cloked, under the color of buiyng, and
so he is an usurer, because he only lent the soldiers their money for hope
of gain.

I do buy a man's bille of 100. pounds, true three months hence, and give
unto him in present money 95. li. here allthough a bargayne, and sale seem in
show, yet it is a le^ding, and so the party an usurer that pays the money.

I do make a bargayne, to have of certain poor men, or rich men, after iiij.
months, so many kyne and oxen, for so much money paid to them in hand.
Whereas I do know, that at my bargayne making, they have neither cow nor
ox. Herein I am an usurer, if I demand oxen or kyne, above the ordinary
price, that they are wo^te to be bought and sold for.

I do buy certain geldynges, to have them delivered at a certain fair, for
less the^ they were worth at y^ bargayne making, I am therein an usurer, if I
were sure those geldi^gs would be more worth, at the time of their delivering.

I do deliver old wheat, to receive new: if I do deliver ye same for gain,
^assuring my self of benefit, I am an usurer. I do fear ye fall of money,
and therefore, do deliver my money to an other man, to have as much at 6.
mo^thes after, according as ye money was the^ curra^t when I paid it: It is
usury, for yt, there is more to be paid, then was received.

A corporacion takes 100. li. of a man, to give him eight in the 100. li.
during his life, without restitucio^ of the principal. It is no usury, for yt
here is no le^ding, but a sale for ever of so much rent, for so much money.
Likewise it is, if a private man have a thousand pou^des, liynge by him, and
demands for his life, and his wyfes life a 100. li. by ye year, and never to
demand ye principal. It is a bargain of sale, and no usury, for ye the
pri^cipal is not to be restored again at any time. And therefore no lending can
be presupposed.

In Uenyce, Florence, and Genua, diverse heretofore have had pe^sions, some for
ever, some for lives, for somes of money disbursed to the benefit of their
City: In all which cases, there is no vsurye, and if any one buy their
rightes or titles, he is no usurer neither.

I seek an office, which I cannot have, except I do pay a certain some of
money: to avoid this paymente, I do lend, for two three or four years a
gross some, because I will not pay the said money: In this doing is usury.

I do pawn an house, with an orchard for certain money, the creditour has ye
benefyte of my ground and house: he is an usurer, except he will restore the
profits, upon repaymente of the principal.

A gentleman, or lord has a manor stocked, with thyrty mylche kyne, and 700.
sheep, valued at 300. marks, or there about, as they are the^ to be bought
and sold: This manor he would let out, with the stock, for ten years, to
receive the old rent of his manor, and 30. pounds yearly beside, for his
stock, and at the ten years end, either to have at his own choice his
cattle, of like goodness and value, as he did let them out, or else 200.
pounds in money for the cattle: the question is, whether there is any usury,
in this kind of dealinge or no? First, there is a lending, because the farmour
has property in the cattle, and may alter them, as he list, for his best
avail, paiyng his yearly rent for them, and restoring so good cattle, at
the ten years end, as he before received. Again, he must answer the
cattle at the ten years end, and pay rent yearelye for ten years,
although the cattle dye all, the very first year: so that I think, this
lord or gentleman, that thus seeks his certain gain, and principal, to be
safelye returned unto him, is an usurer colorably, to the hurt and undoing
many times of poor farmours. Yet some say, that here is locatio, which is a
letting to hyre, and therefore no usury. As if a man should let out his house
for ten years to have his house again, or his horse for a seven night, to
have his said horse again, with profit, but I am not of that mind, for when
a thing is let out, the tenant for the time can not alter the property, and
give an other thing of like value, but he must return the same again, in the
same goodness, as he did receive it, be it either house, horse, or any other
thing else. And therefore I say, this is usury, because the principal (the
loss whereof, was at the bourowers peril) must always be restored wholly,
with a certain overplus and gain, for the time that it is forborne. And then,
if this be true, what say these gyld halles, these colleges, these abbotes in
times paste, and these bishops also, that have let out Lordshippes, with the
stock, for a yerelye gain, in such sort as I have before declared? God be
merciful unto us: the devil teaches the woorld many ways, for men to come
the sooner to him.

And other trick I have to show, which is very strange: for by this new
devised practice, men will not, for any thing seem to be evil, and yet they
wilbee evil in deed, and live as wickedlye as any other, and thus it is. A
Northren gentleman of good wealth, comes to London, with 1000. li. in his
purse, and would feign increase his money, but he would not be known for any
thing, to be an usurer, because he is a gospeller in show, and would not for
his good will be taken otherwise, during this good time. And what does this man?
He comes to a broker, and says, that one John Clarke has ready money in
good store, and would put it out for gain, if he could find a good man:
Mary says the gentleman, the party will not lend to any body, except I be
bound my self for his safe receiving again of his money. And thus ye gentleman
is bound, to his nyckenamed man, for his own money, who hereupo^ requires (for
the more coloring of the matter) bonds of the borower, to save him self
harmeles, against this counterfeit John Clarke. The Broaker brings good men,
and good assurance, to save the gentleman harmeles, and the^ ye ge^tlema^
comes to the scriuener and wills one of his men, to take ye name of John
Clark upon him, and causes the wrytynges to be made in John Clerks name, and
the money to be repaide, at the said scriueners house, at six months, or
twelve months, as they can agree, after twenty pounds in the hundredth, and
that in the presence of the said gentleman, or his attorney in that behalf
appointed. Here is a tryme fetch, to mock god, and the Exchecker with all, if
it were possible: but god is not mocked, howsoever thexchequer is abused: but
such cunning dealinges, in the end will have shame enough, of such their
counterfeyt doings, and dye in hell fire at the last.

But will you see an other fetch, and not by the name of John Clarke, but by
one y^ in law can do nothing? A ge^telman, a lawier, a merchaunt, a yeoman, or
what should I call him, holdethe of my lady, and therefore will not be one
of these wise worldly men himself, but is contented, that my mystres his wife,
shall go to the devil, if she list. And therefore geeueth her leave, to put
out his money, in a strangers name, sometimes more, and sometimes less. And
be it never so little that is le^t, and ye party never so poor that boroweth,
yet shall it not go forth, with her good will, but with the return, many
times of ye shillinge penny for a month, which is one hundred for an other by
the year. Merciful god, who would have thought that ye devil could have had
such power in a woman: nay, who would not have thought it, considering their
miserable and gredie desires to get, their aptnes to supersticion, their
greatness of pride, their lousenes of life, and their ambicious desires,
without all reason to have all souerayntie. God amend all woomen, and forgeeue
all men, and grant that both man and woman, may agree always in one heart
and mind, to fear god, and to live vpryghtely, after the express decree of
his holy will, without such devilish, and unmerciful dealinges. Excepted
always, in all this my speech against women, all good woomen: and yet they
may be spared, for they all, are very few in deed, and may be easily
packed up, all the whole pack of them, in a very small rowme. What shyftes are
not used, for men to go straight to the devil? This one I will tell you, and
no more, and yet I fear me, I have told over many, for some will learn to
be naught, by the only hearing of these sleightes, and therefore ignorance in
evil things, is always good, but the devil will teach them every hour,
although I said never a word.

A merchant, or an other man, would feign go for an honest man, and yet
would needs be naught in deed, and therefore, when one comes, to borow
money of him, and offreth to pay for it: mary fie upon usury, says he, but
this will I say to you, says the merchaunte: I have lent two hundredth
pound to a friend of mine, for a twelve months, and there is not past three
months gone, if he will lend you ye same money freely, I will be contented,
and I promise you, I will speak to him, but I will not take a penny of you. The
party, who is said to have borrowed this money, has not borrowed one penye, but
sets countenance upon the matter, although he had received the said
sum, and therefore* will not forbear the money, for the rest of the time,
without co^sideracion, and so the poor gentelman, shall pay for yt, be he
well assured. Here is a trick, that none would teach but the devil himself,
who is a long practysed master, for such cunning mischiefs. But here an
end, and now to thexchange.

Thexchange, and what it is,
THexchange, according to the first institucion thereof, is very good, and
most necessary, without further talk, if they be honest and good themselves,
that use it. And as the trade is very needful, and the best way to maynteyne
intercourse between mercha^t and merchant, country and country: so is the
plain and open dealing therein, hyghly to be e^temed, such as none can
iustlye mislike, or in any point dysprayse.

The name of Exchange, called in Latin Cambium, is an ancient and propre
word for this purpose, and does in manner importe none other thing, then to
barter, or change one thing for an other. In Greek, ye occupier or minister
thereof, is called (...) that is to say, a banker or a keeper of table and
board, where money is ready for all persons, that will have bullion or coin
changed, or money transported. And in old time, it was not lawful for any
other man to exercise either change, or exchange, but only the said banker,
so admitted by public authority. Some will have this word Cambium, to
signyfie, Collibos, which is a certain subtraction, or deduction, that the
bankers and excha^gers make, in the name of reward for their pains, or else, as
it were a recompense, for the damage and loss they receue by the money, which
they deliver by exchange, being more profitable for them, to retain and keep
it still, considering the variety of money and coin between countries. And this
deduction, was properlye so called, in some men's opinion, when there is an
alteracion of place in thexchange, from one country to an other. Which kind
of dealinge, is just, lawful, and agreeable to reason and conscience, as well by
the judgment of all merchauntes, as in ye opinion of the best learned lawiers
that ever have been: Bald. in reg. de consti. pec. and l. 3. ff. de exercit.
ibid. Sali. et. Imol. cons. 60. in 2. volum.
especially, when the banckers and exchaungers, do not excede in taking, but
are contented with an ordinarye and competent kind of reward, confirmed by
custom, and allowed by public authority, for keepinge their banks,
lending their credit and money, to pleasure men withal at their need, and to
save themselves, from damage and loss. And if such merchauntes and
exchaungers, were not, to help men that travel countries, how should
trauailers do, namely scholars and studientes, if they had not their bills of
credit, and thexchange ready for their most safety, and ^ase of carriage, or
how could any man deal betwixt country and country, to have his turn served
for great masses of money, if such exchau^ge were not? As for example. Some
great merchaunt, or some other private man, is forced of necessitye, to make a
present payment of 3. or 4. thousand pou^ds, in a forrayne country, or rather
some prince: upon ocasio^, for ye atcheuing of his necessary exploits, in some
strange and forrayne realm, has need of 100000. pounds, how should either
the one or the other be furnished and served in this behalf by any means, so
well, as by the way of exchange?

First the carriage of money, either by sea or land, were troublesome and
dangerouse, the charges and costs great. Again, what coin or money might be
provided that is currante, and starlyng in all countries. And therefore al such
exchange is necessary, and worthy to be mainteyned, and cherished, if we
will have trafique and society to be continued betwixt al sorts of men and
countries. Neither can this manner of exchange come wtin the compass of usury,
because there is no lending for gain, without the which, no usury can be
committed, and it is proved thus. First, thexcha^ger or ba^cker geeueth out his
bills of credit or excha^ge freely, without taki^g any couena^ted gain, more
the^ is for his inde^nite, and peril of hazard, for such a some, as is agreed
upon. And peraue^ture without receiui^ge any pe^ny of ye principal, he geeueth
his bills, till they be paid in ye place appointed, bearing together with his
le^ding, ye adventure and peril of his money. Whereas in le^di^g for usury, it
is contrary, for there ye borower gives a good assurance before hand, and
abides al ye hazard and peril, yt may happen, ye creditour susteining no
adventure or damage at all. Again, in lending money by usury, ye creditour will
receive the self same kind of money again, which he delivered, whereas here in
this exchau^ge, ye ha^ker delivers one sort of money and coin, and is paid
again with an other kind of money. Moreover y^ manner of contract is contrary,
being like to buiyng or selling, or else to that contract which is called
contractus innominatus, y^ is to say. I do give you, upon co^dicio^, y^ you
do give me, as for example. I will give you at London, 100. li. of lawful money
of England, so yt ye will deliver and pay me at Venice, ye value of y^ same in
ducats of Uenice, according to their just valuacio^ and price. But now, for so
much as we be in hand with money, I will show y^ necessity of money, and how it
is to be used for y^ value, betwixt country and country, according to ye
sta^dearde, even in ye price and sale of ware. And certes money is the square
and rule, whereby all other things should receive estimacio^ and price. And as
Aristotle says. It is ye suerty for men's dealings: and without money no man
doubtless could tell how to trade or bargain, for it were impossible always,
to give ware for ware, or for one to supply an others want, with
entercha^geable delivering one stuff or chaffer for an other. As if one had
clothes, and wanted lether, to send his clothes, to him that had lether: or
wanting lynen, and had woollen, would send his woollen to have linen, or
having flesh, would ask bread for it in exchange. These things were strange,
and I say impossible to be brought to pass: because it may hap that the
thing I have in plentye, and would send for the exchange of my want, an
other may have the same as well as I, and he want that which I would have.
And therefore money was first devised to be coined, of the fynest and purest
metals, to be the measure whereby the price of all things might be set, and
to maintain a certain euenhode or equality in buying and selling, and ye same
to have his standinge valuation, only by public authority: to the end, that
all things might equallye pass by trade, from one man to an other. Again,
money is used for ye passing of exchange between party and party, countreye
and country, as I have said before, and will say more hereafter.

Thirdlye, money is used as a chatell, or a moveable possession, and to be
sold by the wayght, after so much the ounce, as commonly all kind of coin is
sold at smythes stalles, which seemethe to be contrary to the natural
institucion, and first inuencion thereof: because it is no ware or merchandise,
and therefore not to be prysed above his public estimacion, except it be
sold as bullion, and not as current money or coin.

And now, would god our merchants that profess trade and exchange, were so
skillful in their calling as they ought in all good right to be. For surely the
ignorance of them, bringethe kingdoms and states many times to great ruin.
For if they will be exchangers in deed, they must know perfitely the value of
our coin, and compare the same with other foreine money. And as they bargayne
with others abroad, so they must be assured to have somewhat more then the
value of our curraunt money, for things which they sell upon a price, or else
the realm and they both shall lose in the end. As for example. One buyeth
clothe in Blacwel hall, for. iiij. l. x.s. in Angels, which hold.xxxvi.
carrets fine, save three grains of alley, or eighteen ounces fine silver. The
same cloth to be sold in Spain, is to be rated at so many ducats as
hold.xxxvi. carets of fine gold, save three graynes of alley, or at so many
royals of plate, as hold.xviij. ounces of fine silver, after twoe carrets of
fine gold to every ounce of fine silver. And in making sale of this cloth, it
is wisdom to take so much over and above these carrettes or ounces, as both
may bear a man's charges, and bring a reasonable gayn. And so in all other
countries, and for every princes coin, the valuacion of our commodities
should be made after the like rate, with a reasonable overplus to live and
gain by. And in thexchaunge of coins, if our men would observe and compare
eight carrettes of fine gold, or four ounces of fine silver for ye pound
starlyng here, with the foreign coin beyond seas, either ducats or Philips
Caisars, or any other strange coin, and ever be well assured to take sowhat
over. After this proporcion and balance once made, Englishmen no doubt would be
Lords of yt coin in all places, where they had to deal. This is by the way of a
glaunce to my masters the merchants. But now to my purposed division of y^
ba^kers art and their profession. Thexchaunge is said to be divided into two
kinds.

1 The first whereof is called exchange real, or thexcha^ge made to yt last
minut.

2 The second is thexchange by bills, which is after twoe sorts. But first
for thexchaunge real, you shall understand yt then it is used, when the banker
or exchaunger receives money of any person in one coin, to deliver unto hi^
straight ways money of an other coin. As for silver, gold: for shillinges,
groates: for groates, pence: for pence, half pence: which is called exchange
to the last minut. Or else when bullion is delivered for current money, or when
one takes upon him to deliver coin, in one country, to receive coin of an
other strange country, according to just and public valuacion equally of
such bullion coin, or money whatsoever, which manner of exchange is now quite
out of use.

Exchange by bills after the first sort, is when money is delivered in one
country plainly and simply, without color or fraud, and bills delivered and
received for the payment again of the same, in an other country, according
as money is current, by merchants valuation between those countries. And this
kind of exchange may properlye be called merchandising exchange, because
merchantes do only themselves, set and appoint the prices and values of
money to exchaunged. And therefore, when any man will deliver in London to any
merchant a sum of lawful money of England, to receive in an other foreign
country, so much in value as the said sum of English money shallbe esteemed to
be worth, by merchauntes valuation after their exchange from London, in the
money of that country, where the party which delivered the money will have it
paid again: there must be first a co^posicion and compacte made, for the
value of the money, and a certain distance of time agreed upon, and limited
for the payment again of the said money, in a foreine country where ye
deliverer or the borower of the money, will have it restored and paid again.
For the better understanding and meaning hereof* thus I say. A certain man
does borow here in London of a merchaunt, a hundred pound English, to pay
the value thereof again at Antwarpe, according as thengshe money is current
and valued by merchaunts in their exchange, from London to Antwarpe. Here it
is requisite, that the borower do resort, and have access to such as be
brokers and solicitours between party and party, for making of thexchange,
of whom he shall learn what thenglish pound is worth and esteemed from London
to Antwarpe in Flemyshe current money, for what soever dystaunce of time, he
will take it up. Now grant that the English pound, thus exchanged from
London to be paid in Antwarpe at sight, that is, so soon as the bills of
exchange shall be presented at Antwarp: is esteemed and valued at four and
twenty shillings Flemyshe, so shall there be paid in Antwarpe, after this
reconing and price of four and twenty.s. Flemyshe for the English pound, the
sum of a hundred and twenty, pound Flemishe, for thenglishe hundred pound
delivered at London. And upon this co^pacte and agreement so concluded, the
money is paid at London, and bills of exchange received, for repayment and
satisfaction of y^ same again at Antwarp Now the party coming to Antwarp, or
else se^ding his letters of advise to some friend of his, willing him to pay
120. l. Flemish, so soon as his bill for paime^t thereof shall be presented unto
him, praying him also, for the furnishing thereof, to take it up there again
by exchange at sight, and to give his bills upon him to pay the valor
thereof at London in English money: here yt party inquiring how thexchange at
sight passes from Antwarp to London, fi^deth not above 23. s. ix. d or.x. d.
fle^i^ to pai for a pound of English money at London. After yt which rate
taking up so much Fle^i^ money at Antwarp, as will pay and satisfy the 120. l.
fle^i^ and so giving his bills of exchange upon his friend at London, his
frynde must pay at the sight thereof, within a little more or less, 101. l.
five shillings, or 100. l. sixteen shillings eight pence lawful money of
England, for the value thereof, paid for him in Flemishe money at Antwarp.
After the which reconyng there is lost for the use of a hundred pound, for yt
spare, not much above twelve or foreteene days commonly, for in that space of
time, change and rechange upon sight may be made between Antwarpe and London)
the sum of sixteen, or five and twenty shillings, lawful money of England,
or therabouts for the hundredth. Thus the world goes, and this is their kind
of exchange. And now let us examine whether this be usury or not. All learned
men do determine and consent, that usury is committed only, where lending
and borowing is, and that when any overplus or excess is taken, over and
above the pryncipal that was lent for the very respect only of lending, and in
consideration of forberi^g money for time, in y^ ^ase is usury. First it
appears in this first sort of exchange by bills, that there was paid at
London, one hundred pound only, and no more of good and lawful money of
England to receive by excha^ge at sight in Antwarpe, four and xx. s. Flemishe
for thenglishe pound, which was so performed and paid by the taking up
again of the same money, to be rechanged back again at sight, to London. So
that there was paid to the party that first l^^t the money, about the sum
of a hundred pound sixtene shillings eight pence or a 101. l. five shillinges
lawefull money of England. Which is an increase or gain growing to the
lender of his money, to ye value of sixteen shillings and odd money, or of
twentye shillings and odd money, only for the tarying and forbearinge of his
money twelve or foreteene days. Which over gayning, and excessive taking in
this sort, is in my opinion, most biting usury. And yet is this kind of
exchange, most commonly used at this day amongst all the merchants of
Europe, and had in great estimacion, and commended, as a thing most
necessary and a very ready mean to serve men's turns with all, at all times,
when theye need. And yet in deed it is an extreme usury, yea, and such a
Moth, as he that uses it, will sooner be consumed that way, then by any
means else in the world, especially by the rechaunge backwarde, which is ever
hurtful, costly, and very chargeable.

The second kind of bills or mercha^dising exchange, may be called se^ke
and dry exchange, and is practiced when one does borrowe money by exchange
for a strange Region, at longer or shorter distaunce of time, to serve his
turn the rather thereby, not minding to make any real payment abroad, but
compoundeth with thexchanger to have it returned back again, according as
thexchaunge shall pass from thence to London, for such distaunce of time as
they were agreed upon. And yet to color this matter, there shall bills of
excha^ge be devised, and sent to some of his friends that lent the money by
exchange, with letters of advise, to return the byls back again, and a
testimonial how the exchange comes from thence, at such dystaunce of
time, as he advertised him of, by his letters. Which retourninge of bills by
testimonial, does ever cost the party that deals with this sort of
exchange, after the rate of sixteen and twenty in the hundred for the year.
And oftentimes, such alteracion of exchange may chance by scarcity, or
abundance of money (whereof the banker will take advantage) that it stands
ye borower sometime above five and twenty or thirty in the hundred pound for ye
year. And bylles by this kind of exchange are made on gods name, for a color
only to get the parties hand to them, to show (if need be) that such money
so lent, was taken up for him by exchange, the said bills being never sent
out of London: to the end that the party who uses his money in this sort, may
have his reconing geeuen him to pay as the rate and course of thexchaunge:
has paste all the while he has the use of that money, which shall fall
out noe less then after the loss of twenty in the hundred pound for the year:
or perhaps (as the dry frostie charity of the lender, shall be moved) after
xxv. or.xxx. in the hundred pound, because the tasking, and limitting thereof
rests altogether in the bankers hand. This dry kind of exchange is utterly
to be abhorred, for that it is none other then a manifest cankered vsurye, and
therefore has been heretofore forbidden by acts of parlyament: as may appear
in the reign of two noble princes king Henry the seventh, and king Henry the
eight, of most famous memory. And yet all this notwithstanding, the merchants
will say, that they commit no usury, by such kind of dealinge, although the
lender by exchange be always for the most part a very great gayner. And
the reason is, the uncertainty of gain, and doubtfulnes of profit, for that
through the alteracion of thexchange, ye deliverer or lender of money, may
chance to susteyn loss sometimes: and therefore this adventure and hazard
considered in the exchange they say, there is no usury at all. But this is no
sownde reason of theires, but rather a mere cloak, to color their conyng
devises with all: because that in this second kind of exchange, thexchanger
or lender of money, is commonly his own bailey, and taxethe the borowers
loss, according to his private commodity and gain, who wylbe well assured
to be no loser, no more then he that puts forth his money upon plain
usury, and bargayneth always for present gain before hand. And although
the banker perhaps be not so fullye assured of his gain, as the usurer
commonly is: yet it is a hundredth to one, yt by the course and order of
thexchaunge the deliverer of money, shall be no loser in the end, but rather a
gayner, because the price of money by exchange from London to Antwarpe, is
ever dearer and higher by three pence or four pence in the pound, then it is
from thence to London, at whatsoever descrepance of time, the exchange be
made. And therefore ye gain thereby is in deed very certain to them, let
them say what theye list. I grant still, that real exchange is honest and
lawful, where money is delivered to be paid again at sight, or at twoe or
three months, according to ye just and publyque valuation of money, to what
Countreye soever thexchaunge is made. But this kind of exchange pleases not
merchants, the same having no such savor of lucre and gain, as the rechaunge,
and the dry exchange have: which twoe kinds of dealyng, are very hurtful
to al occupiers, and destroy all trade, when such often returns are made of
money, either the one way or the other. And therefore the exchange in these
days, is no other thing then a certain couetouse negotiacion, a greedye kind
of choppinge, and a colorable manner of chaunginge, or rather a certain devise
of buying and selling of coin and money, by way of commutacion and
exchange, which may aptely be called mercha^dising excha^ge, as I have
declared before, ye same being found out by chance and fortune, and at length
by experience reduced into such an art, as is altogether against nature. For
y^ occupiers thereof do geeue and sell money for money, which was not
invented and ordained to that end, that either it should price it self, by it
self, or be valued and esteemed by way of merchaundise, but that al other
things should receive their prices and value of it. And the valuation of
money to proceed, and have always estymacyon from public authority, and
the same to be perpetual and unchangeable, according to a known standarde.
Whereas the merchant exchaunger sellethe as it were, the valuation and rate of
money, making at all times, what price he lists: wherein he transgresses
public order, against al equity and common justice, practicing under the
color of exchange and rechange all the myschiefe that usurers can devise. And
for the closer and more secret handeling of the same, the excha^gers have
imagined certain distinctions of time, to bleare and stop men's eyes from
spying their pretensed vsuries, and counterfeyt dealings. For when a man will
borowe money by bill of exchange, he is asked and demanded, whether he will
have it at sight, vsaunce, or double vsaunce? which three varieties of time,
be the three disstances, chiefly used amongst mercha^ts, and exchaungers now a
days, although there be many other. And then if from London money go by
exchange at sight for Antwarp, for xxiiij. s. the^glish pound, it shall go at
vsance, which is a months time, at xxiiij. s iiij. d. and at double vsance,
which is ij. months time, at xxiiij s. viij. d. oftentimes at more, but seldom
times at less. So that for the forbearing of a hundred ^. pound for one
month, there is gotten five nobles, and for the forbearing of it two months,
there is gotten, three pound six shillings eight pence. And therefore it were
as good, at the least it were al one thing, to say to him that will borowe
money by this exchange: sir, ye shall geeue me for a months forbearing of
a hundredth pou^des, three and thyrtye shillinges and four pence, and for two
months, three pounds six shillinges and eighte pence starlinge. And if a
hundredth pounds be taken for sight, which is commonly not passing four or
five days respicte, betwixt London and Antwarpe, there is likewise gain
reaped, more or less, or else men will not deal. All which considered, who
can excuse this kind of trade from usury? because the ba^ker, or deliuerse of
money, makes his gain before hand: setting several prices upon his money
delivered for every distance of time. And so receives more again, then he
first disbursed, only for lending of it, and for the delay of time, in
forbearing his money: making other men's necessities, to serve his greedy
covetousness, colored with these strange, and unwonted terms of diversities
of times. Wherein ye ignorant and unskillful of this kind of trafique, have
supposed some reasonable cause, to lie hydden, for taking such gain and
profit, as redoundeth to the^ by the said exchange. But in very deed, there is
no reasonable cause at all, but a very flatt lending of money, for luker and
gain, as all usurers commonly do. And therefore, I can not judge, but both
these sorts of exchaunges, as well exchange by bylles, as seek and dry
exchange, are the very practices of usury, under yt color and title of
exchange: wyshing that no such cutting exchange, should be used or borne
withal, in any well governed and christian common weal. But yet, because
merchauntes, which have an intercourse and trade of occupiynge, between
country and country, many times, for the furthering of their business, or for
the benefitinge of some man's necessity, seem to have need of exchange: it is
not forbidden, but that they may use real exchange always, before specified,
so the same be done without fraud, for one to serve an others turn, leaving
that subtle inuencion of three distances of time, bargayning, as it were, for
gredy gain, and gaping after profit unlawfully, by letting forth their
money. And surely merchauntes should not live by gain of monye, but by gain
of wares, and yet not selling time therein neither: but following a known
lawful trade, for the maintenance of common society, doing as they would be
done unto, and helping one an other charitably as need shall justly require,
and time give opportunity. Thus if merchaunts would deal plainly, and simply
gain without seking further advantage, and sellyng for time as they could
presently, it were charitable, it were honorable, it were profitable for all
estates, yea it would be the universal benefit of Europe, to shaduauncement of
all welfare and plenty. Whereas now, through their unmerciful dealings, in
this their biting and cutti^g excha^ge in respect of time, they destroy many
honest men, and undo princes, that borowe money of the^ after that sort, and
so bering all things at last to utter confusion. God open the eyes of
christian princes, to redress this evil, the only inuencion of the devil,
to destroy all charity, that in right should be used betwixt man and man.

The young king of Portugale, being about 19. years old, this January last,
having had the absolut government of his kingdom, since the fowerteene year
of his age, according to the cyuill law, does deal severely at this time
against offenders, and especially against such as are hurtefull in their
trades to the public benefit of his people.

And whereas, amongst other gawles of his country, his majesty understands
by some godly men, that ye exchange in his realm is much abused, and
practiced amongst merchants there, for gredy gain only: his hyghenes has
forbidden by proclamacion, upon great pains (as I am informed) that no banker,
or other whatsoever he be, shall geeue any bills of exchange, for any
manner of gain at all: no not so much, as to have consideration, for the
charge of keeping their books and cassiers. But if any man be disposed to
geeue his bills of exchange for any place, or by any manner of ways, he
must geeue out the same freely, without taking any one penny for his pains,
taking only value for value, and no penye over at any hand. For if he do
otherwise, he incurreth straight ways a great penalty: the weight whereof, he
shall feel, be he well assured. For this must I say, that I have not seen
better Justice done, nor laws better executed in any place in Christendom,
then in Portugal. God grant Justice else where in every place, ye usury amongst
other offenses, may be at the last in no place at all. And would god, that men
would ones leave craft, and use playnnesse, and get wealth unto them lawfully
as they ought to do, and in good conscience. For suerly as men do now live,
especially in this matter of exchange, they do make the name of exchange, to
serve their wicked purposes, entermedling in the right of princes, for their
own gain, being lords of coin, to the great shame of all princes and
states. For whereas all kings and governors, should set a certain rate upon
their coin, and no man so hardye to ouerualue the same: these bankers, these
money men, and these merchants do set what price they list of money, and
make it either of high value, or mean value as they please, for their own
singular commodity and private gain. A time was, when princes only did deal
with the valuation of money, and exchange of the same. As first the coin was
rated in all countries, at a certain value, by public order and aucthoritye
from the prince and state. And then none gained, by any exchange of monye: for
the value being known, none would give more, yea none durst give more. And
especially in England, in the five and twentye of king Edward the third
capit. xij. Thexchange was not used by any subject, but by the king only,
upon pain of forfeiture of the money so exchanged. The same law was likewise
used in king Richard the seconds days, and in the third year of king
Henrye the seventh, and then did all states florishe. For the stranger bringing
in his wares into this realm, did first pay his custom, by his often
trafikynge, and emploiynge the money that he received here upon the
commodities of this land: and so paiynge custom, departed home to his country
again, without cariyng any money away at all by exchange, except upon great
cause. For if there were not sufficient commodities here in wares, he made his
exchange then with the kings officers, and none others. So that it was known
certainly to the prince and officers, what exchange he made, and upon what
cause. And then was no fraud used, yea in those days, merchauntes were
beneficial to the prince, profitable to their country, and wealthye to
themselves, with often trading, much barattinge, great changing, and speedy
selling of their wares, with the commodity and chaffer of other countries.
Since which time, the merchants seeing great gain before their eyes by
thexchange, began to flatter princes, and made offer, to lend them great
sums of money upon their need, if they would suffer them, to use
thexchange one with an other. And so they entered into a fraternitye, to have
the exchange, amongst themselves, and agreed upon four standinge banks, to
serve the pleasure of all princes. That is to say, at Antwarp, Lions, Uenice,
and Rome: who having in all these places certain privileges granted unto
them, for their security (for otherwise, it were high treason, to entermedle
with the valuacion of coins, against the leave of princes) they gave new
valuacions to coin, for their private gain, calling it permission money,
making a greater value of the coin, then it was in his own nature, and by
public authority agreed upon: taking occasion upon discrepances and
distances of time, and place, to make the money dearer or cheaper, as they
pleased amongst themselfes: and that after three manner of ways, at sight, at
vsance, and double vsance, as is said before. And from these four places,
other cities took example: as London, Civil, Lisbone, Paris, Roane, and
Bridges, and used the same permission exchange, as the other four standing
banks did. And this is strange, to see a diversity of payment from one place
to an other of equal distance. As for example. From Antwarpe to London,
thexchange has been two and twentye shillinges ten pence, at sight: and
from London to Antwarpe again, it was straight ways three and twenty
shillinges. Likewise the exchange from London to Roane, for a french crown,
was five shillinges eighte pences or ten pence at the most, and immediately,
from Roane to London, thexchange was again six shillinges, or five shillings
eleven pence at the least. By which examples it appears, that one some of
money, of one sort and kind of coin, has two pryces, and two valuacions
at one time exchanged, for one distance of time, differing only, by the
diversity of place and country. Thus we see, what merchandises men make of
money, and alter coins, valued by public authority, to be of what price
they list, for their own pryuate gain and commodity. And since this
permission exchange has been used, plain dealing, and charitable lendinge
has been forgotten, bullion has not been brought into this land, artificers
have decayed, the princes custom in all countries has been much lessened,
all lawful tradinge, nothing so much used, good occupiynge towns have come
to ruin, and the great transportinge of wares from one country to an other,
nothing so frequented amongst merchauntes, as has been heretofore. And last of
all, the price of all wares by this means, has been greatly enhaunced. And
will you see, when thexchaunge is most used. Thus it is. Where plenty of wares
is to be sold, and good is to be done with the buiynge of them: thither is
money sent in great abundance to buy the same, and the same money rysethe
straight to a greater value, when any one will borowe to pay present money
for merchaundizes. And thus the merchauntes paiynge for money after fifteen
in the hundredth at the least, although he make a good market for himself,
yet his own country men shall feel a smart, when he commethe to sell the
said wares at home. For he will so hyghten the price of his wares, that he
will lose nothing by thexchange at all. And so the poor chapman, and the
plain meaning man, shall pay for his exchange every penye, besides the gain
that the seller will make for his own living. And this is the reason, that
wares wax deerer in this age, then they have done heretofore, only through
the deuelishe and wicked merchaundize exchange. Now lord god, what mean
princes to be thus abused, to suffer private men, to set price of their
public coin, and to make it oftentimes, to be more worth, by permission
exchange, then by nature it is possible to be: suffering them, to change the
course of nature, as though a pound weighte, should be more weighty then a
pound, or a pound tale, more than a pound tale, or an ynche more than an
ynche, or a barley corn, more than a barley corn. And this I understand,
that certain rich bankers, agreing together, and taking up great masses into
their hands, can make what value they list, of money: for money must be
had, what shifte soever men do make, and pay they never so dear, they will
have it, rather then fail of their purpose, for want. And this is the reason,
that not only great merchauntes, but also great princes and kings, are many
times bankruptes, through the excessive paiynge for money borrowed, under the
name of exchange. But money was not first devised for this end, to be
marchaundize, but to be a measure and a beam, betwixt man and man, for the
buyinge and sellinge of wares. And so every man to receive money in value,
for the goodness and price of his wares, and not that men should make money of
money: a thing so contrary to nature, as nothing can be more, and the only
ruin of all trade, throughout the most part of this known world. Thus I
talk, and spend wind in vain, for you master merchaunte, stand still upon
this, that no order can be taken for thexchange, because of the vncertaynetye
of it, which ryseth and fallethe, as the searsetye or plentye of money is.
And what is the cause of all this? surely the greedynes of man, and the
couetouse desire, which he has to enryche himself, by hook or crook. Now
Lord for his mercyes sake, is there no way to temper this insatiable desire
and gredy covetousness. Well, howsoever men wilbee evil, it is not good for
others to lulle them in their evil, or to allow of sin: but always to
speak against vice, as god has commanded, and to refer the punishmente
thereof to his justice, in due time to be ministered. But I am afraid, I have
been ouerlonge, in this tediouse cause, and high mysterye of merchants
occupacion: and therefore I will speak no more thereof, but show you now where
no vsurye is at all, and that in diverse contractes, and so declare the
difference betwixt interest and usury.

I do buy land of my friend for a certain sum of money, and of like value
to the land, with this condition: if he bring me the money again, at any
time, he shall have his land again. I being lawful owner of this land by
bargayne and sale, may safely enjoy the fruits and rentes of the same lands,
without any suspicion of vsurye committed, and the rather for that I have
paid the just value. And (as I have often said heretofore) usury cannot
be, but where lendinge is, and the property altered, and the use also of the
thing lent, consumed. Now then, he that has gotten lands by bargayne and
sale in this sort, although he have promised, to sell back again the said
lands, for the said money: yet is he true owner thereof, and may take the
fruits, without danger or offense to god or man.

Always provided, that these dealings be not used for colorable cheuisaunces,
to make indentures of bargayne and sale, only for usury to be exercysed,
and to avoid thereby the danger of law. Now this fraud and this sleyght,
may be easelye espied, if the manner of dealing, be well and aduisedlye
looked unto. As thus. If the man that buyeth this land, be a known usurer,
it is lykely that he seeks the gain of his monye, by the rent of that
land, and his monye also, when it is offerde. Again, if the money paid, be
much less than the land bought: it is most like, there was no plain
meaning of any bargayne and sale, but a deuyse, to avoid the danger of
law, and so to make gain, by the profit of the mean yssues of the land, a
common shyfte used now of days, to mock god with all, C. de pactis
interempt. and vendit. l. 2. and l. commissoriae and l. cum te feodum.
and his law, but god is not mocked. And suerlye there is no right or lawful
buiynge, where very little is given for that, which is very much worth, but a
certain cunninge used (as I have said) to mock both god and man.

I do freely lend money to my friend, for six months, with this condition,
yt if he do not pay me the said money at the time, he shall pay unto me such
damages as I shall sustain, for default of his payment. C. peruenit, and C.
constit^tus. De fide iussor.
In this case, if he break day with me I may lawfully demand recompense,
and take reasonable usury without offense, because he has hindered my gain, in
breaking day with me, for that I purposed upon the same money at that time,
and made just reconinge to make then certain paimentes with the self same
money. And yet if upon lending my money, I demand a certain, as twelve pound
in the hundred pound, more or less, for the only forbearing, and for time
sake, without knowinge my loss that might be before hand, I am herein an
usurer.

I being an occupier having money lying by me, which perhaps I must shortly
employe, and notwithstanding, because my friend has great need, I do help
him, with an hundred pound for six months, with this condition, that if I
shall stand in great need of ye same money, within the same space, either to
pay some necessary debt not yet known unto me, or to buy some very good
bargain, that may perhaps fall in the mean season, which I cannot do,
without the said money: my said friend shall promise me to pay for me al such
usury as I shall be forced to pay, in consideration of the want of my money.
Herein I do not commit usury, if for good causes I do demand allowance,
without fraud, couine, or any coulorable deali^g at al, but only for mine
own certain indempnitie, and to save my self from an undoubted known harm.

An other commethe to me and would borowe a thousand pound in gold, and as
much in plate, for a show to declare and set forth his wealth the more to
ye world, when it is seen in his shop. In this case I may take vsurye for
my gooddes, ff. commodati L. 3.
without offense. For this is no lending, but a letting out for hyer, upon his
peril that lets for a certain time, and therefore where no lending is, nor
property altered, there cannot be any usury at all.

The Apothecarie lends to ye Physician 100. l. by ye year freely, because he
shall se^d his bills of receipts unto him and to none other. In this case is
doubtful aunswering. But if the Apothecary be a just dealing man, and have
good ware in his shop, and deal faithfullye without slander or hurt, so that
neither the Physician him self, nor yet any other for him can perceive or
judge, that he is damnyfied in any thing: I do think y^ in this case, there is
no usury, because the Apothecarie does not take any thing, to be valued or
measured, by money over and above his principal, but only the favor of the
Physician, for the vtteraunce of his good lawefull and honest wares. Although
there be that say, this same is a knacke of vsurye, by lendynge of money to
utter their wares better, and to get more credit among the people, but I
refer it to their consciences that so do.

A^ncightyer man then my self, wythholdethe through force, a portion of land,
from me: I am loathe to try the law with him, because he has the law in
his hand, and is a Judge. And I offer to lend him five hundred pound, for a
year or two freely, so that I may have my own, without farther trouble or
vexation: In this case, I am no usurer, because I do not gain any thing, but
only receive mine own quietly, without further trouble or charge. I do borowe
an hundred pound for a year, promisinge at the years end to le^d an other
hundred pound to my friend, of whom I borowe the year before: this is
permutacion, when one good turn of like value is done for an other, and noe
vsurye.

I take the peril upon me of the carriage of a great mass of money, I may
lawfully take portage money for my pains without offense: for it is no usury,
because it is but the reward of my trauail. I am suerty for one, and pay the
debte, paying usury for the same money. Ext. siede iussor. ca. 1. and. 2.
The principal debtor for whom I was bound, is bound to pay unto me the
vsurye, and the payment unto me is no vsurye, for that I have nothing but mine
own again.

A man by testament, grants a legacy, and wills his son to pay the
legacy, and so much (nomine poenae) for not paying of it: The law says, the
testator may charge his executours or heir, under a penalty, to pay his
legacy, and the same is noe usury. But if the testatoure should thus say. I
will that my son or executour, shall pay for every month that they are
behind hand, so much, and so from month to month til it be paid: this is
usury say the lawiers, because the time is me^cioned and payned. Baldus
rehearses this matter by a testatour, Bald. L. vnica. col. 6. q. 3.
that charged his executor to pay unto Sempronius a hundred pound, De hijs
quae poenae nomine
after his decease, or else to pay unto the legatorie for every year that it
were unpaid one tun of wine, or ten pound in money: the executour paid
the wine for three years together, and afterward refused to pay any penye
or legacye at all. The legatorie had the executoure in suite, and it was ruled
by law, that he could not have any thing, because it was against law yt a
testatour should make any such bequest with a penalty, being none other then
cloked usury.

And in this case, Baldus says, that he prevailed for his clyente
thexecutoure, against the legatarie. Now if the testatour had simply said
this, I will that Sempronius have ten pound yearelye for these.x. years, and
at the x. years end, 100. l: It had been noe usury at all, but a plain and
lawefull legacy.

A man has a sum of money allotted unto him for the dowry of his wife, C.
Salubriter extra. De vsuris. Et ibi Pauor. et Ant. de Butr.
the money is not paid at the day of the marriage, nor yet long after, but some
piece of land casually bearing fruit, or corn in pawn, allotted unto her: y^
husband shall have the benefyte of that casual ground, be it fruit or
corn, until the dower be fully paid, or having no such land nor pawn
otherwise, he shall have ye interest of his money dew unto him, because he
susteineth the burden and charges in mainteini^g his married wife freely, without
any dowry at al. And so much interest shall he have, as he can prove his
certain charges of the marriage has been. There be also, that think, he may
practice before hand, for a certain portion mo^thly, or yearly, til he be paid
ye whole dowry, which opynion Panormitane amongst others, does maintein.

A rich man dealethe with his baker, and says thus. Neighbor, I know you
need money to buy corn, you shall have 100. l. of me for a year, so that I
may have wekely, so much manchet, or cheat bred, as amounts to a roial,
noble or crown weekly for the whole year, and then to put me in good
assurance for my 100. l. at ye years end. This is usury in the devils name,
and he more fit to eat stones then bread, y^ would bind men to such a
bargain, and have so little charity in him. A lord says to a brewer, sirrah,
you shall have i^ such a parsonage of mine, an.100. quarters of barley yearly
before hand, so that I may have.20. tun of double bear yearlye, for my
corn. I do answer. If the lord have more bear, for lettinge his corn
before hand in respect of time, then he could have ready bear to be
delivered upon sight of ye corn, I do say that this lord is an usurer, for he
is a time seller, and has gain for the very forbearing of his corn.

One sells ye green corn of his ground, C. in Ciuitate. ext. de vsur.
or the fruit of his orcharde, before the trees begin to flower, and the
buyer has a good bargain, and gains greatly: the buyer in this case, is
not bound to pay any thing back again, because of the vncerteintye of his
gain. For so the year might have fallen out, that he should neither have had
corn nor fruit to any purpose. An other gives an hundredth pound in money,
never to have it again, to receive in steed thereof, five pound for ever, or
three lives: here is no usury, because there is no lendinge, the principal
being gone for ever, and the seller hasarding his money, for he or his
perhaps may be evil paid hereafter. Innocent. and Host. ext. de vsur.
And although the value may be twice or thrice paid, that is no matter, for
so a man may gain with buyinge and selling, with chopping and changing, with
lettinge and setting, with purchasinge of land, and by diverse other contracts,
and ware very rich with such bargains, and yet no reason that any thing should
be paid back again, for then all men's estates and wealth, should be
uncertain. There might diverse other contractes be named, I will not be long, for all say this. If a merchant that lives by his occupying and trade, shall
sustain either loss for wantinge his money (in due time) or feel hynderance
of gain, because his money is out of his hand: It is every man's part, to be
thankful, and to remember ye harm, that the merchaunt has felt, and
especyally if the debtour do break day in not payinge of that, which was
freely le^t unto him, he ought to satisfy the merchaunt to y^ uttermost, or
else he is no good man. And to show last of all, the difference betwixt
interest and usury, although it little needs, for that the examples
heretofore declare the matter plainlye enough, for you must understand, that
usury is only given for the only benefit of lendynge for time. Whereas
interest is demanded when I have sustained loss through an other man's cause,
and therefore inter est mea, that is to say, it behooves me, or it belongs
to me, or it is for mine auail, or it is reason, that I be answered all
losses and damages, that I have sustained thoroughe an other man's cause,
as well for the gain that else I might have had by my money, if touch had
been kept, as for the losses sustained thoroughe an other man's fault, that
has not paid me mine own in dew time. And therefore al laws do allow,
that men may have their damages awarded unto the^. And in so doing, an
equality and just proporcion is observed in this sort, that whereas one has
had benefit by me, I should likewise sustain no harm by him, much less
be undone for my well doing, and he to wax rich by my loss, that meant so
well toward him. This is agreeing to all laws and to natural equytye, to
justice and to reason. And the name of interest is laweful as the which seeks
only equalytye: whereas the name of vsurye is odyous, ungodly, and wicked as
ye which seeks al inequality, where by countries and kingdoms and all good
governed commonweals, are often times destroyed and utterly overthrown,
when the most do starve, and the fewest do gain. And thus although a man may
demand interest in some respect, and for cause after the lone of his money:
yet can he not certeinelye express ye value before hand, or by any former
contract, demand gayn for lone. The last part of my division, touchethe the
punishment of usurers, and the allegatyon of examples in all ages against
vsurye, wherein I will be as short as I may show my self: for I fear me,
I have wearied you all with my tedyous talk, but such a plentyfull field:
how may it be lightly ranged over? With that they all said, they wear rather
refreshed then wearyed, sauinge that the griselye merchant was put to his
noddes now and then, wherefore said he, it is good to cut short. And
hereupon I wished both him and all others, not to geeue occasion, and then men
would speak the less against usury. But now, as things go, ye hoattest
wild fire that is, is to little, and not hoate inoughe against usurers, because
they swarm so much, and are so horrible in their dealinges every where. For
if I should devise to do one a notable displeasure, whereby to bring him to
utter confusion: I could not set a better frame for him of mischief, then to
lend him great sums of money, upon very good assurance to pay deep vsurye
therefore, and to forfeit great bonds therwtall, if the money be not paid. And
I pray you, has not this devise ben practiced with some thriftelesse
enheryters, and wastful gentlemen, of our country to feed them with money
upon deep vsurye, and that in statute merchaunt, upon excessive, and almost
horrible penalties, that lands worth ten thousand l. have been forfeited for
not paying a thousand in money, the breach of the statute being four
thousand pound, whereas the simple gentleman never borrowed in his life ye nete
sum of v. hundred pound, in all ye world? Beware therefore how you borow upon
vsurye, you that would thrive, and beware of bonds: for surely whatsoever he
be, y^ uses customably to borowe for gain, and will easily enter into great
bonds, he cannot thrive or come forward by any possible means, although he
had the high favor of his prince, or ye wealth of a Duke: such a devouring
beast, and consumynge woorme is usury, where once it takes place, and has
made a deep entry. Therefore no maruail if ye laws do prohibit it upon great
pains, which I will touch in as few words as I can. First the word of god (as
master preacher has said very well) forbids the same expresslly in
Deuteronomie, Exodus and Leuiticus. And the psalm says. He shall e^ter into
gods tabernacle, that has not lent his money for usury. And in ye eighteen of
Ezechiel, all people are forbidden to take more then theye lend: And such are
excluded from god that take any overplus. The general counsel called Nicenum
Consiliu^ does utterly forbid usury upon great pains, but that stretches to
the clergy. The Civil law did never expressly allow of usury, neither was it
possible by law to alter nature. For use can not be assygned unto those things
which are wasted with the only occupying of them, as wine, oil, corn and
money are: and therefore cruel are they that seek to separate the^ from the
property. For he that has borrowed any thing, and so is lord of the same, by
virtue of his borowynge (as all borowers are) he has ye use of the thing
borrowed, which does consume away with the borowing, and cannot in any wise be
separated from ye property. And therefore ye Civil law, did rather use a shift
by caution of bond or oblygatyon after a certain time, for the lord to
recover by, that had le^t out his goods to an other man, which stood him in
steed of the property, although by duitie of nature and right, he could make
no claim at all to receive any use or benefit of that, which he did lend. In
deed the Emperor Justinian does bear, with moderate taking as I will say
more at large hereafter, and yet rather suffers it the^ allows it, to avoid
great harms, least the trade of merchandises should decay through the
covetousness of men, that else would not trade, ye same being hemmed
notwithstanding, within certain listes or bounds, over and above the which if
any man do pass, he is condemned for an usurer. Extra. de vsuris per tot^^.
But ye Canon law, which is the law of the church is most vehement against
vsurye, and appoints very sharp punishments against al usurers, grounding it
for a most dedly and dampnable sin, and making it by all circumstances, more
yrkesome in gods sight then murder. For y^ an usurer is a destroier of whole
families, towns, and kingdoms: whereas a murderer is but an offender against
one or twoe parso^s. Therefore who soever mai^teineth usury not to be a dedly
sin, the Canon law judges him for an heretic, against whom the laws may
of right proceed to his condempnacion.

The punishments appointed by the laws, are these.
FIrst they are defamed persons, L. improbum and ibi Bald. C. de infamibus.
for that the law defames the^. So that if my brother make an usurer his
heir, I may break the testament, and by excludynge him, be admitted my self,
by complaint of a testament, made against office or good right.

2 Again, they cannot be suffered to receive ye holy Communion, or to come
into the church where god is honored in the congregation, that by such
means they being ashamed, might repent and acknowledge their faults and call
to god for grace.

3 Moreover they shall not be suffered to use any oblatio^, in the church of
god, as other christians do. Clem. eos verse sepelije, De Sepul. Ioa^ de Imol.
in 7. Collat. and ib. Card.


4 And when they are dead, they shall not be buried in christian burial. And if
any minister do receive any known and convicted usurer to ye holy
Communion, the same priest or minyster shall be straight ways suspended from
celebrating in the church. And who so burieth an usurer so convicted, shall
immediately be excommunicated. According where unto, an old tale comes to my
memory: which because it is a matter of fact, and sets forth this purpose
well, I will breefely show it.

A rich usurer, A notable tale, fit for an usurer to know.
being notorious, and therefore often warned to amend, and yet amending never
the more (as many that come to sermons, are never the better) departed this
world: where, and when I cannot tell (for the book goethe not so far, either
for time or place) But after the man was dead, his kynsemen, that succeeded him,
(as rich men want none) desired to have him buried in the parish church,
before the high altar on gods name. The person being a zealous godly man,
would not burye him at all, no not in the churchyard, much less in the
church, or at the high altar. His kynsemen hereupon, being greatly dismayde,
offered largely to have this favor: but al would not serve. At length
understanding that the person had an ass, which brought his books from his
parsonage dailye to the church, being a pretty distance in sonder, they
pollitikelye desired, to obtain this favor for him, that as his ass did daily
carry his service books to the church, so it would please him, that for this
one time, the quick ass, might take pain, to carye this dead ass in a
coffyne, with this condition, that wheresoever ye ass stayed, there the body
should be buried, persuading themselves, that as the ass by an ordinarye
course, used every day to go from the parsonage to the church, with a burden
of books upon his back, so of course, he would take the same way, with this
dead man's corpse, being cheasted, even straighte to the church. The priest,
upon their importune suyte, was contented that the ass should deal in this
matter for the usurer, and be his dumme judge: who, when he had the cheasted
body upon his back, feelynge the weight heuier, then it was wo^te to be (as
usurers wa^te no weight, being ouerladen with sin) or else by some secret
motion of god, I think, as Balames ass was inspyred: So this foresaid beast
being laden, and ouerladen (as it should seem) did flinge, and take on
immediately, as though wild fire had been in his tail, and leaving the ordenarye
course to the church, took the straight way out of the town, and never leaft
flinginge, and runnynge, till he came to a pair of gallows at the towns
end, and there walloinge himself under the gallows, with the corpse upon his
back, did never leave tomblynge and tossynge himself upon the bare ground,
till he was clean dis^urdened of so miserable a carrion. So that there even
under the very gallows he leafte this usurers carcass. A fit alter
undoubtedly for usurers to be sacrificed upon a live, or buried under when they
are dead, and a most worthy tabernacle or shryne, miraculously assigned, for
all such lewd saints to be shrouded in, either dead or alive. But this
tale has almost made me forgeate my division.

5 It is further determined, that whereas priests do ordinarely go unto all
other christians, to geeue them ghostlye comfort: none shall be suffered to
come unto usurers, to geeue the^ any ghostly counsel, but to suffer them rather
to perish like dogs. Except it be evidently pr^i^ed, that they are sorry for
their former lives, and are contented to make restitucion of goods so
horribly taken, or gotten, as by wrongful usury* putting in pawn for the
same, according to their habilities. Wherein they are in worse case, then
common strumpettes or hatlottes be. For a drabbe, is not bound, to make
restitution of that she has gotten unlawfully, by abusing her body in
fylthynes, but only to do penaun^e. And yet an usurer, must restore his evil
gotten goods, because he has stolen them, or else, he cannot be received
into the church again.

6 Besides this, when they make their wills, none must be present at the
making thereof; to hear witness of any thing they do.

7 Neither shall their testaments he of any force, except they make
satisfaction.

8 Nay they cannot make any manner of last will at all, neither nuncupatiue*
nor yet codicill, that is to say. Neither will by word of mowth, nor yet a
short will, without i^stitucion of an heir.

9 No although he make his will, and register it, putting in sufficient
caution^ yet it will not help him, as some do hold opinion and say, as
Bartolus amongst others.

10 And if any usurer, Sextus de vsuris.
will dwell in any other shyre, then where he was borne, he shall not be
suffered, but utterly be banished for ever, and never to come there again. Or
if through sufferaunce; such do dwel^ those places, and are wi^ked at, the
chefest men there shall be indicted, the bishop suspended, and inferiors
prelates excommunicated.

11 And what become of an usurer, no man ought to care, although he beggi his
bread, and dye for hunger, because his life is as hateful, as it is
abominable.

12 And laws made, for the allowance of vsurye are utterly abrogated.

13 And because, theye are accounted worse then common thieves and rouers: they
are bound, not only to restore that they have, but also to aunsweare all the
fruit, that they have gotten by such unlawful means. Notaries are charged
upon great pains, not to make any instruments, for such wicked contractes
and ungodly bargaynes: for if they do otherwise, they are holden for perjured
persons, because they take an oath upon their first admission to the
contrary, and also are restrained for ever to be public notaries afterward.
Moreover, al laws and statutes made, or by oath received, and allowed to be
good, or that enforce debtours to pay usury unto their creditours, are upon
great penaltyes forbidden and made void. Again, those great vsuries, that
have been paid, are also abrogated, by the council of Uienna, and those that
hereafter will take upon them, to be aucthours, writers, officers, or
deuisers of such laws, shall be straygtway excommunicated and accursed of the
church. All this notwithstanding, if the usurer do repent, and call to god
for grace, he shall be absolved, and received again into the congregation: so
that he do make faithful restitucion of all his gain gotten by usury, and
do further stand, to tharbitrement of his ordinary diocesan, and judge in
causes ecclesiastical, who by the laws is appointed to punish him by the
purse, that whereby he has gained, he might make recompense by the same. And
assuredlye, there cannot be a greater punishment to a covetous usurer, the^ to
punish him with payment of money, who has set all his mind and whole thought,
upon scrapynge, and gatheringe of goods together, without any care in the
world how he came by them. And yet some will never be good, do you to the^
what you will. According whereunto, a (...) to revive your wits, and to
quicken you, yea and perhaps to touch you master Gromel with all, I will
tell you a ieste by the way, touching this matter, of a merchaunt whom you
all know.

A certain famous preacher, A tale, of a merchaunt in London.
a man most zealous in religion, and therewith so vehement against sin (as I
know few his like within this land) made a sermon, not many years past at
Paul's cross: which sermon was wholye against vsurye, wherein he showed
himself, both very well learned, and also right godly, and (as I think) he
did good to some. The same Preacher dyned the same day, either with the mayor
or sherif, or some other mercha^t: but whyther, I cannot well tell. And coming
to dinner, the party did welcome him, as it seemed, heartily: and glosed yet in
deed, as it fell out afterward, saiynge that he doubted not, but he had done
great good that day, in speaking so much against vsurye, and therefore
thanked him. Where upon an other famylier acquaintance of the said
merchaunte, said unto him serretly. What mean you sir, to geeue this man so
great thanks, for speaking so much against usury? I do not know him in
London, that gayneth more by his money then you do, and therefore me thinks,
you speak either holowly, or not advisedly. Tushe quod the merchaunt: you are
a fool. I do thank him, and thank him again, for wot you what? The fewer
usurers that he can make, the more shall be my gain: for then, men shall
chefely seek me out. For do you think, that he can persuade me, to leave so
sweet a trade, for a few words of his trolling tongue? No by the roodes body
can he not: and therefore I will clawe him, and say well might he fare, and
godds blessing have he too. For the more he speaks, the better it itchith,
and makes better for me. Thus you see, that notwithstanding the straightenes
of laws, and the myghtie threats and curses uttered by god, and his
prophets: some are so stony hearted, that nothing* will enter to temper them,
which are to be taken, as graceles people, abiecte persons, and reprobate
hethens, utterly renounced and forsaken of god. For wh^^ let us pray, if it
be godds will, to turn their hearts, that they may enter into their own
consciences, and use charity, as they are bound, and learn to do to others,
as they would that others should do unto them. The writers upon y^ law, are
most generally against usury, Baldus. cons. 449. in part 3.
and amongst the rest, Baldus in his book of councelles, speaks bitterly
against them, saiynge that usury is a gaynefull piracie, contrary to nature,
upon the lone of any thing, that consists upon weighte, measure and number.
And if any man (says he) do think it not to be sin, to le^de for gain,
he is strayghte ways an heretic: if he do think it to be sin and yet do
use it, then he is straighte ways a land pyrate. And therefore, whether he
believe it or no, he is like a leprouse person, that through te contagiousnes
of his own desease infecteth others, and to being infectious, he ought to
be banished out of christian men's company and congregation, till he be
found clean, as those leppers were in the old law. Yea he offends, says
this doctor, against the nature of things, because it is impossible, by the
order and course of nature, that once one, should be twice one: which the
usurers go about to make, heapinge and gathering together, more then the
bounds of nature will suffer, for nature can not foord yt, that once one of
dead things, should become twice one, which must needs be, if I receive more
than I lent: for in receiung more than I did lend, I have mine own, and one
thing more, which is two for one. And it cannot be, I say, either in nature,
or in reason, that one should make two: so that all usury is against nature,
law, reason, religion, and all gods forboade.

And farther he says, that an usurer is a devouring beast, Pli. lib. 7. not.
historiarum.
and like unto the worm called of Pliny, Teredo, that breadeth in timbre, for
that the same wor^^ being touched or handled, seems gentle and soft: and yet
has he so hard teeth, that he destroys all manner of wood. Even so the usurer
is a woorme at the first handeling, soft and gentle in words, always
pretending the charitable aid of his borower: but in ye end he deuoureth
every man's patrimonye and enheritance, yt deals with him. And although
naturally it be given to us to abhor most, the greatest sins: yet it is
contrary in an usurer, for ye greater usurer he is, and the greater gain he
gets, ye more sweet and plesaunt is his usury unto him. And as fire will
never cease to burn, if it have matter laid unto it to burn upon: so ye
usurer (like vntohel mowth) does deuower and gnaue, upon every ma^s goods, as
long as there is a penny, or half penny worth in the world to be had. And that
which is woorst of all, he then hurts most, when he is least felt. And
therefore, usury is called yt most wicked thing yt can be. D. 47. and ibi.
Archid.
And note further (quod he) that an usurer does lick with his tongue, like a
serpent, and stingeth like a scorpion, and seeks: ever like an angry or
roaring lyo^, whom he may devour, being a false deceiptfull beast throughout
al ye predica me^tes (that is to say) in every part of him, and in every
accio^ yt he takes in hand: for yt he takes that, which he gave not, or
takes more than he gave. Yea ye usurer is without al civility, curtesy, or
kyndnes: and the reason is, because there is no part of man in him at all.
Thus far, and a great deal more says Baldus, not only in this place, but
also in diverse other places. But I will leave him now, and go to others: Bart.
aute^^. de naut. vsur. and Aute^t. de Eccles^is.
Bartolus says, that all usury is utterly forbidden, and offensive to god and
man. Panormitanus, that writes upon the canon law, most excelle^tly
entreats upon this matter at large, Panormi. ext. de vsuris,
and does utterly condemn all usury and usurers whatsoever. And amongst many
other speeches, that he uses, he says thus. The whurlepoole and
bottomless gulf of usury, does destroy ye souls of men, and all together
deuoureth their goods, and brings them at all, to be worse than naught.

Card. Zabarella, a famous writer, Card. Zabar.
upon the decretales, C. qua^to. ext. de vsuris.
does say, that usury is forbidden, by all laws, and gives reasons,
alleging Innocentius, and saying that al men should sterue, c. in ciuitate. de
vsuris.
if usury were suffered: because tillage, would wholly be leafte, Innoc. super
rubr. de vsur.
when usury were allowed, and so all love and charity, would clearly be
forsaken, and all good trades abandoned for ever. Hosti. in sum ma de vsuris.
Hostiensis, writing the sum of y^ law, is of the same mind. Azo, likewise,
making the like gatheringe, being both of them, Azo. devsur.
the two eyes of the law, do so much speak against usury, as he that once
preached against ye pope, and not hable to thondre out his disprayse fully,
concluded, that he was fyfteene times worse then the dyuel. And so these men
do rattle against usury, in such sort, as they make it the worste, and
greatest fault almost that can be upon earth. Jason. in l. cu^ctos populos.
Iafon upon the code sayethe thus. It is not lawful to commit sin, C. de
summa trinit. and fide catholica.
for the safegarde of any man's life. Neither ought there any dispensacion be
granted for vsurye, though it were to redeem captives from the infidels. And
therefore no prince ought to suffer vsurye, although it were to the benefit
of the common weal.

Zabarella, whom I named before, Card. Zabar. de vsuris.
is of the same opinion, writing upon the cannon law, in the title de vsuris.

Speculator, frames libells against usury, Spec. de vsur.
and calls yt vsurariam prauitatem that is the wickedness of usury.

Johannes Andreas, upon the cano^ law, Joan. And. in regula peccatum. in
mercurialibus.
makes usury, to be most wicked.

Archidiaconus, and Cardinalis, calls it heresy. Imola, terms it a
vermyne.

Pet. de Ancharano says, Archid. 31. q. 1. and Card. cle.
that usurers be scorpions.

But what do I, 1. de vsur.
vnnecessarilie heap writers, Imola.
seeing there are more, that write against this offense, Pet. de Anch.
then against any other wickedness whatsoever? I will now therefore leave to
mind more doctors, and briefly show unto you, what several nations and
countries, have done herein, and therewith lay before you the minds and
sayings of diverse wise and sage gouernoures in all age^ and states.

The Romans being in their most perfect and flourishing state, Cornel. Tacit.
made a law by their twelve tables, Annal. lib. 5.
that no man should put forth money upon usury, but after one ounce in the
hundred, called faenus vnciarium: which is one pound in the hundred, whereas
before that time rich men might take at their pleasure. Afterward it was
ordained at the entreatynge of the tribunes, to take an ounce and a half, and
that was 30. shillinges in one hundred pounds. After that, it came to four in
the hundred, called triens, or faenus trientarium, which is four in the
hundred. And last of all, to six in the hundred, called semissis, after six
pounds in the hundred. And yet all these alterations, and diversities of
suffering in vsurye notwithstanding, one L. Genitius, Alexand. ab Alexand.
a tribune or burgese of the people published a law, that it should not be
lawful for any man, to be an usurer at any hand, or by any manner of
means. And so by all devises that might be, it was utterly forbidden, and
thereupon all frauds were met withal, by diverse edictes and proclamacions,
which being often repressed, did yet notwithstanding, break out by wonderful
strange means, as what thing is so stronglye establyshed, that the malice of
man seekethe not to overthrow? Wherefore Tiberius Caesar, to remedy this
evil, and because he would not that there should be any usury occupied at
al, did put a marvelous mass of money in bank to the sum of millies
sestertium, which as Budaeus says, amounts to two millions and five hundred
thousand crowns, and is after our English account, five hundred thousand
pound sterlinge, and took order, that every man should have credyte for three
years without paying any usury therefore at all, so that the debtour were able
to put in a sufficient pawn or suerty, to yt double value of that he borrowed.
And last of al, not only all manner of vsurye was forbidden by diverse edicts
and proclamacions, but also al manner of exchange for gain: Cornelius Tacitus.
for (as Cornelius Tacitus says) this canker of vsurye, is an old venomous
sore, and is the chiefest head and cause of rebellion and variance in countries,
and therefore it was altogether banished in the old time, when least
corruption of life appeared amongst men. Julius Caesar made a law, that
whatsoever was paid above the pryncipall for the very lone, the same should
be defalked out of the principal, and noe manne to be charged with more,
then with that only which was merely borrowed. There is a constitucion in the
name of the Emperor Alberte, Hermenopulus
whereby all me^ are forbidden to put out their money for usury. And if any man
did use this trade secretly, or by any colorable means, and thereof was
convicted: he lost by and by all his goods, as well immovable as moveable, the
same to be as an excheate confyscated to the Emperors Exchequer. And yet, if
the same offendour had a wife, she had the third part of his goods assygned
to her: so that she took a corporal oath, and did swear that her husband
used this kind of usury, altogether with out her consent or knowledge. But if
she refused to take this oath, then were all the goods of this man straight
ways forfeyted as I said, and he excommunicated from the company of Chrystian
men, till he had made amends, and was become a new man, according to the
prescript order of the law.

The Germans did not know in the old time, Alexan. ab Alexandria.
what usury was, nor yet the Indians nether, til covetousness sought to suck
gain of money, and so destroyed all. Yea, some people have so hated usury, yt
whereas a thief (for then they suffered noe death for stealinge) was punyshed
to pay the double of that he had taken, Cato de rerustica.
the usurer was always condemned to pay four times the value.

The Lacedaemonians did bannysh vsurye forever out of all their territories: and
whereas al Egypt was sore ouerlayd with usury, a law was made, that then a man
might take only his own that he had lent, but no more at any hand.

Amongst others, Agis Duke of the Lacedemonyans, is so thought to have hated
usury, that he burned all the usurers books with a flaminge fire, in the open
market place: which spectacle being viewed by Agesilaus, he said that he never
saw a blesseder light in all his life before. Would god such light might once
shine gloriouslye over London, nay through out al England.

Lucullus so hated the excessive delings of ye usurers, that whereas all Asia
was overwhelmed with usury, he cleared the same utterly from al usurers.
Likewise Cato being a sharp and severe man, did banish usurers out of all
Cicilia.

Anthoninus Pius, Alexander Seuerus, Claudius, Vespasian, Leo, and diverse
others, did restrain the covetousness of usurers from time to time.

Cato being asked what was the chiefest point for household keeping, Cicero de
officijs. lib. 2.
answered: to pasture well, that is, to have good pasturinge for cattle. Being
asked what was the second point, he answered, to pasture sufficiently well:
that is to say, not to ouerlay the pasture. Being asked what was the third,
he said: to clothe well, that is, not to exceed in apparel. And asked what
was the fowerthe, he said, to till the ground: that is, to mainteyne
husbandrye, for plentye of corn. Last of all, being demanded what he thought
of lending money for usury, he answered, marye what is it (quod he) to kill a
man? showing by this, that vsurye is a very murderer of mankind. Tullie in
his first book of offices, compares the usurers to vile artificers, that geat
their wealth by lying deadlye and vtterynge falsehed to save them selves from
famine. And with the usurer, he reconeth tolletakers, customers, and such
money officers, that pille and polle both prince and people, wheresoever they
bear authority. Aristotle says, that usurers and baudes may well go
together, for they gain by filthy means all yt theye geat.

Plato that divine Philosopher, and most Christian writer, in his fifth book of
laws, or of law making, as he geeueth the title, warns among other things
that no body whatsoever he be, that will bear the face of an honest man, do
let out his money for vsurye or gain. And says farther, if any do put forth
his money for usury, it shall be well allowed in him that so boroweth, if he
never pay the principal again, much less the usury rising thereupon. If this
Plato were now living, and had ye place of a councellor to her majesty, and
would maintain such an argument, many rich usurers would utterly cry out upon
such a magistrate.

There is a book in greek of Plutarches doing against usury, in which he
cou^celeth al men not to borow upon usury, and therewith does condemn the
whole manner of lendinge for gain. And his reasons be these.

1 It is against the rule and order of nature, that nothing should bring
forth something for yt le^ding. Besides this, the property of the goods is an
other man's and not mine, and so it is nothing to me, and therefore against
nature that any thing should come of nothing, which is ye gain over and above
the principal.

2 It takes away also from ye poor, their chiefest comfort, and that is, the
quyetnes of their mind, which theye cannot have when theye are forced to be
careful to aunsweare the biting usury, over and above the principal howsoever
they do speed.

3 It deuoureth gain before it can be gotten, taking vsurye in the hundred
and not upon the hundred, as these wicked wretches do.

4 It enforces those that pay deep usury, to take up upon double vsance, so
that the more they borrowe, and the longer they tarrye: the nygher theye are to
utter destruction. And sayethe he, these usurers are like unto these great
rauenynge fowls called Harpiae, that wear sent from the gods (as ye poets do
feign) to deuower blind Phineus meat from him, so often as any was laid
before him, because he had at the request of his second wife, being stepmother
to his two children, by his first wife Cleopatra, yielded to ye plucking out of
his childrens eyes: so the usurers do deuower all yt goods yt any man has, as
those ugly beasts did eat Phincus meat from him when he was blind. 5 Lastly,
he condempneth all vsurye for this reason, because that all men for the most
part, do borrowe to satisfye their sinful lust, and fond desire, in vain
expenses and needelesse cost and charges. And therefore he wills such as
will be unthrifts, that they do not borowe upon usury, and so pay money for
money, the woorst bargayne that any man can make: but rather that they do
sell their lands out right, to get for them what they can at the first,
because they shall have more that way by a great deal, then by the usurer, who
will make them lose al for a little, and to sell their lands altogether, for a
trifle, as I know diverse men have done in this realm. Thus far Plutarche,
that great learned Clarke. Yea, what godly wise man was there ever, that did not
enueigh against uncharitableness, and beat down usury flat to the ground, by
all ways possible? yea what time, what government, or what state is or has
been, that did not abhor this ugly monster and Caterpiller usury? And to
come home after the rehearsal of so many foreign and strange decrees, not only by
princes in all ages, but also by private learned me^ i^ al times. Did not the
Emperor Charles of famous memory, in Anno 1530. assemble a diet at Augusta in
high Almain, and there conclude by thaduyse and assent of the whole Empire,
that no manner of contract yt had any fellowship with usury, should be allowed?
but rather that all vsurye should be avoided for ever, and be never more
used. And if any were found to have made any such contracte, the same man
straight ways forfett to the magistrate and ordinary Judge, the fowerth part
of his principal sum, so put forth to usury. And if ye magistrate were
negligent in this behalf, and would foreflowe to punyshe such offenders, the
Emperors procurator had authority to call the officer before him, and to
punyshe him with forfeyture of two or three marks of pure gold.

In our time, that godly prince king Edward the sixth, yea godly may I well
call him, did make an act of Parlyament, that noe man might put out his money
for any gain at all, neither dyrectlye, nor indirectlye, and appointed pains
against thoffendours in that behalf, as you master temporal Lawyer know
better then I. Thus I have led you a long way in worldly punyshements, as well
by the Canon laws, as by the Emperors laws, which are called Ciuyll, and the
statutes also of diverse other countries and natyons. But lord, what are these
punyshementes in comparison of gods sharp rod and severe judgment in the
life to come? The scripture of god you have partly heard, but the threats and
punishements perhaps, you do not well remember, neither have I a^plified them,
as they are to be uttered. But lord god, what a difference is there betwixt
the punyshments of this life, and the sharp vengeance of god in the life
hereafter, as you master Preacher have often said? The pains in this life,
are in deed but transitorye and for time: but the pains in that life, are
perpetual, and shall never have end. Yea, such and so horrible shall the smart
be, as noe mouth can utter, nor tongue express: a bottomless hell, a
devouring furnace, and a fire unquenchable, prepared for the devil and his
angels, to burn forever with torments eternal. God be merciful unto us,
and hold his holy hand over us and defend us.

And now commethe to my mind, a matter most needful to be spoken of after
such heates of speech used against the usurer, Whether ye borower be an
offendoure as the usurer is.
and that is, whether he that pays vsurye be an offendour or not? For some
think that because there can be noe vsurye without borowynge, these
therefore that borow, are in fault, as they which do give cause of this
horrible offense, seekynge out these money men, and so after a sort, do compel
the^ to be usurers, yt else would not put out their money, if they were not
merueilously e^treated thereunto, and knew not unto who^ they might lend. I do
answer, that every borower does not sin, because it is an inuoluntarie
action, and much against the borowers will, to pay money upon usury, who
would rather with all his heart, borow freelye, and pay nothing for the lone
then otherwise. Yea, it is as much against his will, to pay vsurye for money,
if he might have it freely: as that man's deed is inuoluntarye, who being in a
ship, and in great peril, casts his goods that are in the said ship, into
the main sea, to save himself harmles, by lightening the ship for the time. And
as he that being set upon by thieves in the high way, gives his purse freely,
rather then he would have his throat cut violentlye, and yet god knowethe
it is much against his will to part with his money: Even so the poor nedy man
boroweth, that sees himself ready to starve, except he be presently
relieved, who yeldeth rather to be half vndo^, for a time, in hope to recover
himself again, by some odd means hereafter, the^ suffers himself to be
undone, both he and his for ever, for want of present relief. Again where
thentent is not evil, nor y^ mind consenting to sin, as allowing it, but
rather altogether unwilling to yield thereunto, as unto sin: who can say
that he offends, whose mind is sound, pure, and undefiled. And is there
any so mad to think, much less to say, that he had rather with all his
heart pay for ye lone of money, then to borowe it freely. So that in one, and
the self same fact, one may offend, and the other may be innocent. 32. q. 5.
propos.
As for example, an aduowterer abuses a woman's body against her will, the man
does sin, and yet the woman is undefiled, because her mind is chaste and
unspotted. Jason Baldus Felinus ext. de iure iura^do. C. debtor. et ibi Glos.
Imola. Pet. de ancho. et 32. q. 5. proposito.
Lucretia the Roman Matrone, lives chaste for ever, of whose body though
proud Tarquinius son had his pleasure, yet her mind continued still most
chaste and faith full to her husband, and therefore she not consenting in
heart to sin, is by same recorded to be the ornament of all womanhode and
perfyte chastity. And therefore sayethe Saint Iherome very well. Hieron. lib.
Corpus mulieris non vis maculat, sed volu^tas: Hebr. quest.
not violence, but will does defile a woman's body.

And Saint Augustine to Victorianus. August. Vic toriano.
Ad deum ingemiscentibus a^nino suis aderit qui suis adesse co^sueuit, Epist.
122*
et aut nihil in eam castissimis membris libidine hostili perpetrare permittet:
aut si permittet, cum earum animus nulla consensionis turpitudine maculatur,
etiam carnem suam defe^det a crimine. Et quic quid in ea nec commisit, nec
permisit libido patientis, solius erit culpa facientis, omnisque illa violentia
non pro corruptionis turpitudine, sed pro passionis vulnere deputabitur. Tantum
enim valet in mente integritas castitatis, vt illa inuiolata, nec in corpore
possit pudicitia violari, cuius membra potuerunt separari, which is thus in
english.

He will ever be present with his, that sigh and groan to god, as he has wont
to be present with his. And either he suffers nothing to be done in their
chaste bodies, by diuelishe lust: or if he does suffer, whereas their mind
is not defiled with any filthiness of consent, he does defend his own flesh
from offense. And whatsoever either the lust of the pacient, has either not
consented unto, nor suffered, it shall be the fault of ye only doer. And all that
violence shall not be imputed for the filthiness of corruption, but for the wou^d
of suffering. For the sou^dnes of chastity is of such force in ye mind that
when the mind is undefiled, chastity can not be defiled in ye body, whose
members might have been dysseuered in sunder, August. Honorat. episcopo.
one from an other.

And in an other place. Magis timeamus ne sensu interiori corrupto, pereat
castitas fidei, Epist. 180*
quam ne faemine violenter constuprentur in carne, quia violentia non violatur
pudicitia, si mente seruatur: quonia^ nec quis in carne violatur, quando
voluntas patientis sua turpiter carne non vtitur, sed sine consensione tolerat
quod alius operatur, that is.

Let us fear more, least the inward understanding being corrupt, the
chastity of faith do therewith perysh, rather then least weomen should be
violentlye defiled in their flesh: for chastitye is not defiled by vyolence,
if it be kept sound and clear in the mind, for as much as none is defiled
not so much as in the flesh, when the will of the sufferer, does not filthely
use ye flesh, but suffers that thing without consent, which an other does
work by violence. This case is likewise to be proved true in an other matter,
betwixt the landlord and the tenant: for the landlorde may so oppress his
tenant, with taking a great fine, and enhaunsing his rents, that he may undo
the poor* tenant forever, and so commit deadlye sin, and yet the poor
tenant nothing to be blamed. Ext. de locat.
For god knows he would have had his farm better cheap, and have paid
less rent with all his heart, Bart. L. vlt.
if it had so pleased his landlord. Cod. De indicta viduitate tollenda.
Thus where the reason in offending betwixt twoe is not like, the punishment
should not extend to the^ both. C. super 10.
And of this opinion are diverse Doctors, Ext. de vsuris
as Archidiaconus, Imola Laurentius de Rodolphis with others. Albeit there be,
that are of a contrary mind, and would have ye receiver, to be counted an
offender, as well as yt le^der, and yet not every receiuor neither, but such as
borowe to spend wantonly and vnthriftely, and induce them, to lend for gain,
that else have not used so to do, nor would not if they had not been greatly
constrained, and almost driven to lend, against their wills. Such borrowing in
deed, by such men, seems to induce others to sin, and they themselves do
sin, that do thus borowe, to serve their lust and couetouse desire, not he
that boroweth to gain honestly, and save himself from staruing. And therefore,
as I would not have unthrifts to borrowe, so would I have lenders to take heed, what manner of me^ they be, unto whom they do le^d, and not respect so
much their own commodity, by gettinge of unthrifts into their danger, as
the benefyte of them, and his great necessity, unto who^ they are desired to
le^d. For surely they do of fend much, that are over hasty in lending, when
they see present gain coming to themselves, and utter undoing ready for
others. And thus, as I have said some what of borrowers, excusing some from
sin, and accusing others of sin: so will I speak of their misery that are
driven to borrowe. And thus I say, he that wants, and is forced to crave,
must of necessity be driven to fawn, to flatter, to lie, to submyt himself
to an other man's will, and to speak oftentimes against his own conscience, and
so to falsify his faith all together. Such a one is not meet to be trusted in
matters of weight, concerning the state, especially if he be greatly in debte
through loose dealings. For men being needy, will commonly yield to much evil,
before they will starve: and yet not al poor men are unfit for authority,
but some more fit tha^ some rich me^. Such only are unfit as are in danger
to others for debt, into yt which they are fallen, through their own folly,
and know not how to pay ye same again, by any good or lawful means. And this
is very pityful to here, yt he who is once in miserable debt through usury,
ca^ never get out again, except some great goodness do happen unto him. For yt
more he borrows upon vsurye, the more he owes still, so that his myserie
is infynyte, his loss still encreasynge, and him self decaiynge and consuming
away, as wax or butter, melts at the sun. For as time goes away, and
tarieth no man, so the usurer takes ever the benefit of time, and gayneth by
course of the sun, by a clean contrary way to all others. For whereas ye
sun helps housbande men in their harvest, and at these times, when they
take pains and travail for their living: the usurer gets gain through
time by very ydlenes, a fytte man to be openly whipped for a commun rogue.

They therefore, that would be without danger of such devils, and not stand
in need of them, let them somewhat harken to me, and they shall be eased by
gods grace. I would have every body live in order, follow his vocation, be
not wastefull, spend nothing vainly, look twice upon their money before
they lay it out, and that their expenses, do not excede their revenues, but
rather to live under than above their degree, remembringe always, that in
sparing is great getting. Thus shall they have the less need to borowe, a
better heart to live, and a more quiet conscience to god ward, when they shall
spend of their own, and owe nothing to any body, but good will and charity:
And I tell you, it is a true saiynge, faelix qui nihil debet, happy is he that
owes nothing, he sleapeth sound sleapes, he takes little thought, and so
passes the course of his life, with much joy and quietness.

There is a pleasant tale, in one of Aristophanes Commodyes, which I will
show unto you, and somewhat enlarge it for mine own pleasure, the rather to
refreshe your wits, with some merry matter, who^ I have thoroughly weried, I am
afraid, with a long discourse.

This Aristophanes, being the most pleasant deviser of Commodies and
enterludes that ever wroate, has one commodie amongst the rest, which he
intituleth de nubibus, of the clouds, and he devised it, at the request of
Socrates enemies to mock him thereby, and to bring him in hatred with the
people, as one, that brought into the City, worshyppynge of new gods. And
amongst other things, he brings in one Strepsiades, an aged man, all
together shipwracked by frayghting with usury, who offered himself, to be one
of Socrates scholars, to learn thereby y^ rather of him, the way and manner
how to deceive his creditours, and not to pay them their months usury,
which was usual amongst yt Grecians, to pay their creditours, at the
beginning of every new moon. Unto who^e, when Socrates made answer, that
he could not geeue him any counsel to deceive his creditours, he called his
wits to him, as one that was brought to an afterdeale, and desired Socrates
to tell him, if that way were not good, which he had devised, for (quod he) I
have found out a way, that I shall be eased of my burden. As for example. What
if I buy a witch of Thessalia, and by her enchantements do fetch the moon
out of heaven, and bring it away, and afterward enclose it in a case of
glass, and so keep it, as I would keep a flee in a box. And what good
(sayethe Socrates) would that be to the? Mary, quod Strepsiades, if the moon
do never rise again, I shall never pay mine usury. And why so, sayethe
Socrates, forsoothe (quod he) because men pay their usury ever, at the
beginning of the news moon, and not before. Thus you see, to what a strange
shifte this poor man was driven, even to pluck by violence; the moon out of
heaven, for his help. And of truth ye witch did her best, and began to charm
the moon, which when the creditour understood, he was put in such a peltinge
chafe, as was wonderful to hear: and accusinge this poor debtour of
enchauntement, went himself to an other wytche, not only to keep the moon
from coming out of heaven, but also to hasten the course of it faster, that he
might the sooner have his money.

But lord what a trouble was the moon put unto, between these two witches?
what storms and tempests did rise? what horrible wind did blow? what great
rain did fall? what floodes ensued every where? what countries were almost
drowned and under the water in many places, as of late it was here with us? At
what time, I fear me, some faythlesse people were yeldinge themselves to the
dyuels devotion, to bring their wicked purposes about: and I think, it was
some usurers practyse, to hasten the year forward. But all this I have
hitherto rehearsed, to show the miserable state of poor debtours, and the
greedye desire of wicked creditours, that like as the one for mere necessitye
was driven to a merueilous rare shyfte, to avoid his debt and the penalty
thereof: so the other of an unmerciful cruelty, sought as extremely, to
hasten the return of his money, by the swyfte course of the moon. This
impossible dryfte, and unnatural fetch that the poor man was put unto,
proceeded upon the uncharitable dealinges of the usurers in those days. For
whosoever failed of paiyng his debte and usury, the first day of the new
moon (for so the Grecians and old Romans also did lend, from month to
month, and for no longer time) the party upon an execucion, was by and by
taken, and bound with a cord, and so committed to prison, Caelius Rhodiginus.
lib. 12 and 20. de nexis, and necte^di ratione.
there to live and rotte, either at his own charges, or else, if he had not
wherewith to find himself, the creditour gave him a little meal and cold
water and no more, so much only as would find nature, and so he lived in that
miserye, till he dyed.

Septimius Florens reports, if one man were a debtour to many, his body was
geeuen unto them, to be equally cut in pieces, and whereas he had not to pay
in his purse, his quartered body should pay for all, to give a terror to
others, how to break with their creditours, and as this was amongst the
Romans, so the Grecians used the same.

But Solon, that wise and merciful counselor of Athenes, would not that men
should so much as be bound with cords, for any debte rising upon usury, and
so heinous and hurtful he found usury to the whole state, that he procured a
general pardon, for all those that were indebted for usury, which in greek is
called (...) as who should say, an easemente of a burden.

Thus having long holden you with talk, I will now draw toward an end,
for I am half wearye my self with speaking. Would god, others were more
werye of their evil doing, and then all should be well. I pray you bear with
me my masters, and take that in good part, which I have hither to said.


Ockerfoe. I cannot otherwise, for my part, but judge well of your long
oration, for that generally vice has been rebuked, although in some particular
cases, some doubt may be made. But because I have no great skyl, to syfte
several causes, I do not mind to quarrel, but to use mine old trade in
rebukynge sin, and referring every particular actio^ to every man's pryuate
conscience. And glad I am, there have been some good popes, for surely they
have been all naught for the most part, as by all stories written of them, and
by sundry their canons and decretales it may appear.


Gromel gayner. I, as one of no greater skill, will neither say buffe nor baffe,
but thank you for your long communication, which I am sure, has rather don
me good then harm. For as you may perceive, I have often greeted your good
talk with a nodde, and therefore have thereby the better digested my dinner,
and not misliked your long rehersall at all.


Lawyer* Out of all your civil and canon law, you have showed plenty of
matter, but whether truly or no, I cannot tell. And under your correction, me
thinks still, that all vsurye, even for lendinge of money, should not be so
offensive to god, as your canon law makes it. And therefore, I do better
like the judgment of the emperor Justinian, who would by law enacte a
moderation of taking, wherefore, if you would farther open this matter, I would
be right glad to hear you.


Gromel gayner. So would I, if it be for my profit, as I think it is.


Ciuilian. In deed there are writers of this age, that do merueilously defend
Justinian, for his law of moderacion: yea, and stand in it earnestlye, that it
is neither against gods law, nor yet against the canon law neither, and
think it rather a matter of policy, to permit moderate gain, than thus
preciselye to deal in this case, and utterly to forbid all manner of taking
whatsoever. But before I do rehearse the writers, I will set fourth, and show
ye law unto you, which is in this manner.

We have thought necessary, l. eos. C. de vsuris.
says the emperor Justinian, to make a general law or statute, touching
the quantity of usury, bringing the old hard and most grievous weighte of
the same, to a certain moderate stay, or mean rate. Therefore, we command
those noble me^, that are Earls, or their betters, that they do not make any
stipulacion, or firm bargayne in any manner of contract whatsoever great or
less, for usury or gain to be had above four pou^des in the hundred. Those
that are guardens or governors over handye crafts men, or places where
artificers do work, or else do use any lawful trade of merchandises, we
will, that they shall moderate their stipulacion, or firm promise, taken in
any bargain, to eighte in the hundred. And as for those, that do adventure
their goods beyond the seas, and put out their substance upon their own
hazard, such may lawfully demand by firm promise, to receive twelve in the
hundred, and in no wise to take above that rate, although by the old Romayne
statutes, it has been lawful to excede. And we will, that all other men shall
take only six in the hundredth pound above ye principal, and the same
quantity of excess, in no wise to be enlarged in other contractes and
bargains, where usury is wont to be demanded, without stipulation or
couenaunte made. Neither shall it be lawful to the judge, to increase the
foresaid taxation or rate, made by reason of yt custom used in any country.
And if any man should do any thing, against ye order and measure of this
statute and law, he shall not have any benefit, by actio^ of any overplus:
but if he do take more, he shall be forced to account it into the
principal, forbidding all creditours, to defalke or to retain unto themselves
any thing of the money, that they put out to usury, either for John
Debates, or for John de Curtesia (as the Portugales term it) when man will
take a drinking penny, or a trifle for their pleasure. Or that they will be
allowed for brocage money, or to the scryuener, for writing of thindentures, or
for any cause whatsoever. For if any such thing be done, the principal debte
shall be diminished by so much in quantity, as has been taken, so that as well
that, which is to be deducted, shall not be asked, as that the usury also
shall not be demanded at all.

And we minding to cut of all sleights and engines of those creditoures, that
being forbidden by this law, to take greater usury, do deuyse other means,
and work by others, who are not so forbid by this law as they are.

We do command, that if any such thing be attempted, the vsuries may be so
recovered, and accounted, as shall be requisite, even as though he, who used an
other man's help, had made the stypulacion or bargayne himself. Wherein, we
do ordeyne, that the party shall be put to his book oath, to make his
purgacion. And the substance of al this law, is co^prehe^ded in these four
simple rymed verses.

Discant illustres stipulari posse trientes:
Et mercatores sibi possint quaerere besses:
Quaerere semisses possunt communiter omnes:
In traiectitijs vires centesima sumis.
In English thus.

Great men of an hundred by law may four make:
Merchaunts may have eight, al others, six alone:
Twelve parts adventurers, may always to them take:
More then this to gain, Justinian will have none.
Now, touching the writers of this matter, and in favor of this law, there is
amongst others one Carolus Molineus, a French man, a notable lawyer
undoubtedly, and one that lately lived, and such a one as should seem to be
of a most godly spirit, referringe all his doings to charity, which (he
says) if it be kept amongst men, there cannot be any usury committed.
For as you master lawyer have said to master Ockerfoe, so long as neither
part takes harm, but rather profyt, and is the better for such their
tradinge, how can it be countted an offense to god? Except you will say,
that therefore it is an offense, because god has expreslye forbidden it? which
if it be so in deed, then there is no remedy to the contrary. For look what
god forbids, no man should allow. But herein Molinaeus desires an
interpretacion, and says that vsurye is not forbidden, but where charity is
broken, and my neighbor da^pnefied by some exaction. And where it is said,
that therefore we should not le^de for gain, because Christ says, Mutuum
date nihil inde sperantes, Here he speaks not of usury, says he, but of
restitucion of the pryncipall again, or a like good turn. And that this is
true, it seems most evident to him, because Christ speaks there, against
those only, that geeue unto them as good again, which thing heathen men and
sinners do. But the servants of Christ should lend, and not look at all
for the principal again, as who should say, they should lend to the poor
and needy without all hope, to have their own again. And therefore Christ
requires of his disciples, a greater perfection and righteousness, then the
gentyles or heathen do show. That is to say, that they lend to the poor and
needye with this mind and intent, that although ye poor men are never like to
restore penye again, yet they may be glad and ready to help their needye
neighbor at al times, for gods sake. And so far unlike it is, that such a
good turn should be l^st and dye: that god him self will give a more
plentyfull reward, when man does look for the less reward of men. Therefore
as Christ will not, that any man shall lend unto those only, that are able to
repay them again, but rather to have an eye, how to do good to our needy and
poor brother, then to look that our lent money be in safety, and in a sure
hand: So if my neighbor and brother be not in such need, but that he may
with his ease pay, not only the principal, but also give me somewhat for my
good will and frendshyp, god does not forbid any such dealinge. As likewise
god did not forbid a man to ask his own again by order of law. But Christ's
meaning and intent is, that we should always have regard unto charity, and to
consider the state and case of our brother. And Christ does show there at
large, how we should use the poor, which either at all be not able to pay
us, or else with their ease cannot conuenyentlye answer the debte in time.
Therefore it is not against charity to take any manner of vsurye says he: but
to take with the hurt and loss of my brother, that is it, which is offensive
and dysallowed. For if thy brother do gain any thing by thy money, and he
thereof do give thee part, thou doste take part of the blessinge of god, and
not any part of an other man's good. Neither ought the offense of vsurye be
measured by the quantity of that which is taken, but by the harm and loss
which thy neighbor has sustained, so that the same quantity of taking do
not exceed, the bounds lymytted by the polytique laws: showing that noe man
shall for any cause whatsoever, take over and above twelve pound in the
hundred and yet not all neither, can take twelve in the hundred, but the
mercha^tes only that do adventure their goods over Seas, and into far
countries, hazardynge their wares by adventure. Others shall take but eight,
and some but six in the hundred by Justinians law, and great men, but four
only. Thus far Carolus Molineus.

Andreas Alciatus likewise, a new writer, and a most famous Clerk in ye
Civil laws says thus. Alciatus de verb. signif. C vsura.
Apud nos certe public interest legem ciuilem obseruari, quae certum modum
faenerantibus constituit, vt qui cum excederent, L. eos. C. de vsuris.
plecterentur. Na^ propter Canonu^ prohibitione^ non nisi pessimus quisque et
impudentissimus faenerat, qui cambij vel eius quod interest nomine, vel alio
fictitio titulo indigentem, atque necessitate, quod humaniores non reperiat,
compulsum, deglubit, nec episcopi et sacerdotes id hominum genus vllo modo
coercent, sed adiuua^t potius, suis quoque pecunijs Danistae in id lu^rum clam
creditis, quod et diuinus Ciprianus conqueritur.

That is to say, Amongst us surely, it were behoueable for the common weal,
yt the Civil law should be observed, which appoints a certain rate unto
usurers, yt who so exceeds the same rate, should be punished. For now adays
because of the straight prohibicion made by y^ Canon law, none do let out
their money but the woorst men of all, such as care not for laws, and are past
al shame, reckyng not what they take, who under ye color of exchange or
interest, or some other counterfeyte cloak or title of intercourse, do eat up
the poor and needye every where, being driven thorough necessity to go
unto such men, because there are none other that theye can find to show the^
any more favor, or gentleness at al. Neither do the bishops and priests,
punish any such kind of dealings, but do rather help them then otherwise,
putting their own money secretly in bank, for the same gayn: which S. Ciprian
did complain upon in his time. Innocentius likewise, one of the Popes of that
name, seems to hold the same opinion. Innocent in Rub. de vsur. in fine.
These things I do think my masters, will plese some of you metely well.


Lawyer. In deed I must say, yt you have pretely well confirmed mine
oppinion, howsoever yours is.


Ciuilian, Notwythstandinge I have showed the Canon law unto you, and spoken
largelye thereupon, heapinge examples, and bringynge in diverse reasons: Yet
some great learned men think, as you have hard, that this kind of dealinge
may be used in any Christian common weal. But I would know, what master
Gromel thinks, and also hear master Ockerfo yet once again.


Gromel gayner. I would have it free for every man, without any limitacion at
all, or else rather then the prohibicion should be so straight, as no man upon
great pains should lend for any money at all, that there might be a rate
appointed, beyond which, noe man should pass. Marye. I would that the
merchant should lend at all times, and for all causes, for twenty if they list
in the hundred, without contradiction, although he do not hazard, nor adventure
his money abroad or beyond the seas:


Ockerfoe. Will you see how covetousness is rooted in this man? no mercy at
all, no charity, no love, he would have the most yt is possible to be had,
and so would have it at liberty, which is worst of all. For then whereas some
men would willingly lend for.x. or xij. at the most: he with others would
engrosse to them selves all the money that they could geate after that rate,
and so when scarcitye came, they would put the same money out again for
fifteen, nay for twentye. Which wear a cruel dealing and a crafty
practice also: not unlike to those priests in the old time that would offer
an half penny to encourage the common people to offer a grote more franklye.
For so these subtle and deceyptfull merchauntes will come to the Street, and
take up all the money that theye can geate after.x. or twelve in the hundred
and so put it out straight ways again as I here say, for fifteen, nay xx.
and more in the hundred: a wicked and a most unchristian engrossing, and god
forbid that you or any man should do so. Touching your gentle moderatyon and
lessenyng of iniquity by Iustinianus law, I cannot say, as you say neither,
but still I must hold mine old opynion because the scripture does so direct
me, perswadynge my self, that overplus taken for lone whatsoever it be, yea,
be it but a farthinge in the hundred, for the very act of lendynge: is
plain usury, and dampnable before god. For so it is plain in the old and
new testament. And I will not seem wyser the^ god and his prophets, neither
will I add or dymynyshe any thing from his word. Lawyers, and worldly
learned men may blaunche and mynse things as the devil and carnal reason
does lead them. But god is wyser then man, and the wisdom of this world is
foolyshenes in deed before god.


Ciuilian. I will tell you master


Ockerfoe, If your expoundynge be so strayghte, that the taking of a
farthynge should be dampnacyon to him that takethe it, of whom soever it be
and that you have no respect of men, nor yet in any thing have any regard to
the cyrcumstaunces of time, person or place, I cannot tell what to say to
you, but god have mercy upon us al, for that none in any age did ever live (I
thynk) so perfectly as you expound scriptures.


Lawyer. I pray you let us examyne that place of Ezechiel and turn the book
to see what the words be: Ezechiell. 18
The soul that sins shall die, and his blood shall be upon him. If a man be
godly and do the thing that is equal and right, he eats not upon the
hills, he liftethe not his eyes up to the Idols of Israel, he defyleth not
his neighbors wife, he medlethe with noe menstrous woman, he greueth no
body, he gives his debtour his pledge again, he takes none other man's good
by violence, he parts his meat with the hungrye, he clotheth the naked, he
lends nothing upon usury, he takes nothing over. This is a righteous man, he
shall surely live says the lord god. If he now geat a son that is a
murderer, a shedder of blood. If he do one of these things (though he do
not all) he eats upon the hills, he defyleth his neighbors wife, he
greueth the poor and needy, he robs and spoyleth, he geeueth not ye debtor
his pledge again, he lends upon usury, and takes more over, shall this man
live? he shall not live, seeing he has done all these abhominacions, he
shall dye, and his blood shall be upon him. Now, if this man geat a son
also, that seethe all his fathers sins which he has done, and fears,
and does not ye like, namelye he eats not upon the mountains, he lifts
not his eyes up to the Idolles of Israel, he defiles not his neighbors
wife, he vexes noe man, he keeps no man's pledge, he neither spoyleth nor
robs any man, he deals his meat with the hungrye, he clotheth the naked,
he oppressethe not the poor, he receives no usury, nor any thing over,
he keeps my laws and walks in my commaundeme^ts: This man shall not dye
in his fathers sin, but shall live without fail. I do see here diverse
things, and by them I do judge, of this text twyse rehearsed which is, he
that lendethe freelye, and takes nothing over, he is a ryghteous man, he
shall surely live. But he that lends upon vsurye, and takethe any more
over: shall this man live? he shall not live. I would any of us wear so well
learned, as to understand the Hebrew. For I think this matter wear soon
ended. The greatest clerks as Leo Judas, Oecolampadius and others, do not
turn this place into latin out of the Hebrew in such sort as we do expound
it in English. For in steed of the old translation plus, which is more,
they do translate super abundantiam, that is over abundance, or over excessive,
which in deed is wicked and dampnable to do. For then men are bitten, and
oppressed, and not when any small tryfle is taken over. The like that is said
against vsurye, is said also in the same text twice of him that geenethe his
debtoure his pledge again. The same man is ryghteous, he shall surely live
sayethe the lord. But he that geeueth not the debtour his pledge again,
shall that man live? Noe. he shall not live. Now I pray you sir, how will
you expound this text? he that geeueth, or geeueth not the debtour his pawn
again, shall every man lendynge upon a pawn to any one whatsoever he be,
geeue his pawn again being not able to pay the debte? In good soothe, then
men be more then mad, that will redeem their pawnes, when Ezechiel wylleth
that every creditour shall deliver to every debtour his pawn again, or else
he shall not live. Assuredlye me thinks this wear a strange exposicion,
yet ye may as lawefully expound this so, as the other against usurers. In
both which texts to my simple understanding, I do think there is a specyal
regard had to the poor, that like as I ought to deliver to ye poor debtor his
pawn again, who is not able to redeem it: So should I not take any thing over
and above my principal upon my poor brother, least I do oppress him, who
perhaps is scant able to pay the principal, and therefore I should rather
forgeeue him all charitablye, when he is not able to pay me, then to take mine
own and more too, and so oppress him.


Ockerfoe. The words in Ezechiel are general. He that lends upon usury, and
takes more over without any mentyon of the poor.


Lawier. So are the words of the pledge pawned, general. And yet I thynk you
will not have all pledges restored.


Ockerfoe. Yes, all pledges must be restored.


Ciuilian. Then what assurance has the creditour of his own by any pawn,
when the debtour shallbee sure never to lose it, because it is commanded, that
it shall be restored: I do not understand this Divinity.


Ockerfoe. He must restore the pawn upon payment of his money, or else he may
keep it, except the poor man be sore decayed, and then for charity sake, he
is bound to give him his pawn again.


Lawyer. Every man is bound by all laws upon payment of the debte, to geeue
back the pawn again, yea, they that never hard of god, will do that by a
natural order. And therefore this precept as you understand it, is boyde and of
noe force, for as noe man by law, can be suffered to keep back an other
man's pawn, so I do think, none dares or will be so wicked, as upon receiving
of his own again, to withhold another man's pledge. Marye wheather men will
geeue again a pledge pawned, and lose their principal, I doubt much of
that, and I think noe man will so do, or if any be so minded, no doubt that
man is a very perfect man.


Gromel gayner. I never denied any man his pawn, that paid me my money
again. But by Saint Mary, he yt brake day with me, was sure to lose his pawn
forever. And that is reason as I take it,


Ciuilian. Me thinks you understand this text so straightly, as the Jews
understood the first precept, who because theye we are forbidden to make to
them selves any graven Image, or any lykenes of any thing, that was in heaven
above or in earth beneath, or in the water under the earth, therefore to this
day both theye and the Turks also (who groslie likewise understand this
precepte) forbear to make by painting, caruynge, grauynge, or woorkynge any
lykenes of any thing created by nature either in their buyldings, or in
their Turkey carpets, or i^ stone, wood, metal, or coin, or in any thing
else whatsoever. Whereas I trust you will not call it Idolatry amongst us
Christians, if a man have his Image painted or graven in the likeness of a man,
either in tiber, stone or brass: or if one have ye Queen's Majesty's portrature
coined in silver, or wrought in gold. And yet me thi^keth yt text makes
as much for Jews and Turks, as this does for you against all usurers, for
they both are general and forbidden universally. Therefore as in the matter of
Images, I should not make any Image to my self to attrybute any divine and
godly honor thereunto: So should I not in lending my money oppress my
neighbor with excessive taking and in such sort, yt he ca^ not live by the
bargayn. And therefore in both these sayings, ye offense is accidental, and not
in the substance, yt is, in the manner and usage, and not in yt matter it self,
as it is in other offenses, namely in theft, murder, and fornicacio^. And so
should I not le^d out my money, to ye hurt and oppression of my neighbor,
whereas otherwise I may lend forgayn with a safe conscience, when no hurt comes
thereof, but rather much good, as I may cause my picture to be made, without
offense, when only pleasure is had thereby, and no honor given thereunto.


Preacher. Nay surely, you are deceived, y^ offense is in ye substance, you
may not take over and above the principal, so much as a point, no not to gain
a point, no more the^ to steal a point. In Images, aboration is forbidden
only, and not ye making of Images, as I have said before, and in lendinge, all
overplus is prohybyted, that is to say, whatsoever is taken more then the
pryncipal. And thus your similitude holds not, as I have well proved.


Lawier. Let yt similitude hold as it may. What shall not a man take so much as
a point? And shall that point be oppressyon or deadlye sin? Now god for his
mercies sake, send you better judgment, For surely, I cannot as yet, be of
your mind. This is over great precisenes in my simple understanding. Yea,
this is to bad, I will say no more of other your strait and curious dealings.


Gromell gayner. well I say master


Ockerfoe, I have yet a knacke for you, and yt is this, because you are so
precise against lendinge, I will make hereafter a byll of bargain and sale,
and never lend again, and yet gain by this means, making a prouiso, that if
the money be paid at time appointed, the sale to be void, and where are you
then?


Ockerfoe. Lord god what a world is this, and what devises are used to mock
god and his laws, but god is not mocked. These dealings suerly, are the
works of darkness, god be merciful unto us. And where I am charged with over
much precisenes, I pray god others use not overmuch boldenes, and take too
much upon them. If I sought ye glory or praise of men, I should not be the
servant of god. I trust no good man is offended with me, say you my masters
as it pleases you. And this will I say unto you. The best learned men of all
ages, are directly against you.


Ciuilian. With your patience, master preacher, although my profession be the
law, yet do I sometime look upon the scripture, and see what they say,
that have written there upon. And this will I say unto you, the best of this
age, as Bucer, Brentius, Caluyne, and Beza, with others, are not against
moderate vsurye, but do rather think it needeful to be permitted, and say
also, that temperate taking, according as it is rated by the civil law, is
not against god, nor his laws: because it is not against charity.


Ockerfoe. I do honor both Caluyne and Bucer, as the chosen vessels of god,
and yet I am not bound to any opinion of theires, otherwise tha^ the scripture
does declare. Neither are these true, because they have so said, but because
the truth of god, which was before them has been so uttered. And I know, they
did never directlye allow of usury, but by circumstance forced to write their
minds, as they did, for very necessity. I know the old fathers have
expounded usury, as I do understand it, and therefore have forbidden it
utterly, and the catholic co^sente of christendom, has agreed thereunto.


Lawyer. If you will allow all things that the old fathers have agreed upon,
and stand to the determinacion of the church, your doctrine that you teach,
may soon be called in question, and perhaps utterly forbidden. Therefore
you shall not do well, to use such arguments, and to stand upon
universalities.


Ockerfoe. In deed the word of god is my foundation, which does expou^de it
self playnelye enough, to my understanding, and to the satisfaction of my
conscience. And yet so long as universalities do agree with gods truth, I
may well allege such consentes. And this I say for universalities, the very
substance of all our doctrine, that we teach this day, has the undoubted
witness, not only of the scriptures of god, which are infallible, but also
of the old catholic general counsels and learned fathers. And whosoever
thinks otherwise has not read the^. But now, whereas much talk has
passed, and every man has said his mind, I pray you let me answer yet
once again, and reioyne to every one of you, as you have given me just
occasion. I have a great desire to win you all to Christ, and none of you can
tell, how gods mighty spirit may work in me at length to speak, and in you
to hear. For I hope we are all gathered together in his holy name, and none
is here so wedded to his own will, but the same man is contented to captyuate
his senses, to godds most holy will, Neither comes every one at y^ first
call, but at such an hour as god has appointed, either at cock crow, at
none days, or in the evening. With that, they were all contented, and
therefore thus he began his reioynder, and last oracion.


The preachers, reioynder, and last oracion.
CHrist, before he should suffer, having his disciples (as you read) about
him, willed them, to love one an other, as he loved them. She winge that no
man could utter a greater love, than to spend his life for them, which Christ
did upon the cross, for the redemption of mankind.

Now then, if Christ did so dearly love us, that he bestowed his own
body, to be torn upon the cross for us, and requires nothing more of us,
but love, for love, first toward him, and then one of us to an other: What
do we mean to be so unthankful, that neither we think of godds goodness
toward us, nor yet have any remorse or pitye of our poor brethren in Christ
amongst us? Assuredlye we ^e so live now for a great part of us, as though
there were neither god, nor world to come. Such hardness of heart, so
unmerciful dealinge, such bribinge, such oppression, such bytinge, and such
wringinge of our poor brethren, was never in any world, as I think. And
what other thing is this, than wilfullye to war with god, and utterly to
defy his holy laws? to offend of set purpose against the holy ghost, and so
to condemn our sowles eternally? The word of god is true for ever. And these
scriptures that I have alleged, are gods own words, which if you will not
believe and follow, you shall all perish every one of you, and be dampened
for ever. And as surely as god lives, I say still unto you. No usurer shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven, except he do repent unfeignedly, and call
to god for grace. And like as he is a thief, that steals but one half penny,
with a felonyous entente, so is he an usurer, that by contracte takes but one
half penny, over and above the principal, in respect of time, and both are
deadly sinners before god. For le^ding must be free, without any thing
taking over, by couenaunte made before hand, or else it is no lending, but an
other kind of contracte without name, never yet used, no nor possibly, as I
take it, to be used by any law, being all together against reason, law, and
nature. For no man can reasonably and dutifully make any writing, to have
more then is his own in right to have. And what right has any body to that
which is an other man's? as al overplus is, being no part of the principal
lone? Or what man can put that in writing, which is an other man's goods, for
himself to recover, as his own proper lent goods? And yet these usurers, to
benefit themselves, will be notorious liars, for they will say, yea and have
it put down in writing also, that they lent a hundredth pounds, when in deed
they never delivered above 80. li. or perhaps some small portion over. And here
they show playnelye, whose scholars they be, namelye the very children of
Satan, for he is a liar, and the aucthor of lies. So that such, as will needs
have gain for time, and forbearing present payement, be the gain never so
little, do not only destroy altogether that loving, charitable and free trade
of borrowing and lending, which ought to be amongst men, but also show
themselves to be very liars, both in word and wrytinge, puttinge that in
their obligacion, which they did never lend. And now, if a man would reason
with them of the time, I pray you let us consider of it a little. He that
borrows, is Lord of the thing borrowed, immediatlye after that it is
delivered unto him. And then, if this usurer will be paid for the delivering
of his money in respect of time, he must be answered for so much time,
while he is in delivering of the money, for immediately after the money is
delivered, it is no more his, that did lend it, but straight ways it is his
that has borrowed it. And what reason is it, that a man shall pay usury, for
half an hours forbearing of his money? Yea many times not half a quarter of
an hour, although the payement be a hundredth pounds, if it were in
sovereigns of one coin. And why should any man pay for nothing, some thing,
as they do, that pay for the lone of money any thing over and above the
principal? For, as master Ciuilyan has well said, the use cannot be separated
from the thing, and then he that has the use of a thing, and so the
property by virtue of borrowing, how can it be, that any man can ask any
thing of him for nothing, seeing he is Lord of all, by virtue of his
borrowinge for the time? Again, by what law, or civil understanding, should
any one have an other man's goods for naught, as they have that reap the
fruit of an other man's labor and industry, for the only lone of money, which
being once lent, is none of his, for the time that he did lend it, but his
properly, that did borrowe it, who must in reason have all the profit alone,
if any can be got with that money, for the time he has the use of it?
Thirdlye, who did ever see coined silver, and curraunt money grow, which must
needs so do, if it should bring an overplus or increase again, for the very
act of lending? A thing so much against nature, as nothing can be more
repugnaunt or contrary. Then if we be reasonable men, let us live according
to reason, and have an especial regard above all things, to god above, who
sees al our follies, and forbids so expressly these merchauntes of time, and
these sellers of sun and moon, as he forbiddethe nothing more, willing all
men to deal freely in their lendynge, as he does freely suffer the sun
shynynge, the moon and stars to have their course, and the world to
continue, with seasonable weather and time. But usurers commonly stand upon
these points, that where charity is not broken, and that both parties do
feel no harm, but rather gain, and where men do to others as they would
have others do to them. Here cannot be (say they) any vsurye committed at
all, these respects being had. I do answer that there is no charity,
where private gain is chefely sought, without any especial regard to the
profit of my neighbor, which playnelye appears in all them, that let out
their money for usury. For wear they sure, that they should not reap any
gain at all by their money, they would never help the necessity of their
poor neighbor, although he were in never so great extremity. And what
charity call you this, when a man chefelye seeks his own avail? And
although he take but little, yet his desire is forbidden, and therefore
synneful. Again, be it that both the borrower, and the le^der are gayners,
shall the act of usury therefore be counted lawful? Now god forbid, for
howsoever they two do speed, the common weal assuredly smarteth, and plain
dealinge men that use no such trades, shall feel want hereby, when they have
need to buy any thing for their own provision and maintenau^ce of their
famely, for by these means, both wares, and all kind of victualles wax
dear. And how can it be otherwise? For the man oftentimes that takes money
up by interest, paiyng after twelve or fifteen upon the hundred, or perhaps
in the hundred, which is more, is an occupier him self, either a victualer, or
artificer, or a merchaunte. Now how can he make up his money again at the
years end, and live to thryue, except he will sell his wares after twenty in
or upon the hundred to him that comes to buy? And then do you not see very
plainly, that the common weal smarteth, and every particular man of what
estate or condition soever he be, is hereby greuouslie wronged and pynched?

Now, if an idle gentleman do happen to pay this usury, his land in the
end, by often using this trade, pays for all, and he and his beg their
bread at last. And is not then the common weal much worse, when a landed
gentleman of an ancient house perhaps is eaten up by an usurer, and so his
house decayed for ever, and his poor tenaunts racked and hayled with incu^bes
and fynes upon the usurers first entrance, and possession taking of the land?
But forsooth, the usurer will still replye and say, that he has done to
others, as he would have others do to him, if he himself had been in like
case. Neither is it a small pleasure (as he says) to save a man's land from
forfeyture, so that he has not offended either god or man, because he has
fulfilled the law of nature, by this his manner of doing. But god knows how
theuishely this usurer speakethe in this behalf. For let him imagyne, that he
him self were very poor in deed, and driven by extremity to borrowe money,
for redeming of land, or else to loose a good lordship, for a small portion of
treasure: would he (think you) having such great need, rather pay usury
for the lone of money to redeem his land, than to have it freely lent him? I
am well assured, he would never do so. For who is he, that would not
rather have it geeuen him, than lent him? or who would not rather travail
without a burden upon his back, then with a burden? or who would not have
the sweet, and avoid the sower? or who would not receive an hundred pounds,
to pay so much and no more at the years end, rather the^ to pay a hundredth
and twenty pou^ds, for a hundredth pounds at the twelve months end, as they
commonly do, either more or less? Then let us leave these dissemblinge
speeches hereafter, and away on gods name with all gain taking for time,
because it is both hurtful to a common weal, uncharitable to our
neighbors, and also forbidden by gods word, as you have heard at large,
unto whose sharp voice and severe commandment we ought to geeue good ear,
and to be always obedient, even because he only has said it, although there
were none other matter in it. And let not the usurer say, that he saves the
gentleman's land, for it is he, and none other, that causes him to make his
la^d away almost for naught, who if he had not dealte, with such
cutthrotes, he had never been so great an unthrift, nor so wastefull in his
expenses, nor so ready to mortgage his right of enheritaunce, which he shall
never be hable to redeem, being once fast lapte in the usurers bands. But
the usurer will not be answered, for any thing that can be said against him,
standinge still in this opinion with himself, that he deserves great thanks,
because he does forbear his money for a year or two, till the borrower be
hable to make better shifte, for redemynge his land. Unto whom I do answer
still, because he is so importune, that he does no good to ye borrower, but
increases his harm, making him every day less and less hable to pay his
debtes. In deed I must say, and cannot deny, but that the usurer forbeareth
his money, sometimes for two or three years, but that is to his great gain,
and to the borrowers bitter pain. For in the end, y^ usurer has done no more
than this, that he has only respited ye debtours certain undoing, for a
year, two or three, and then, be he well assured, he shall be undone,
without all remedy. As the cat, that plays with a mouse a while, to eat her
up in ye end: or like as if a prince should say to an offender, he is
contented to pardon him life for a monethe, but at the months end, he will
that he shall then dye assuredly, and live no longer. Even so the unmerciful
usurer, will forbear for a year or two, to cut the borrowers throat at last,
for when these two years are ones paste, he will not fail to do his feate.
A gentle dishe of favor, god knows, such as I am well assured, they would
be loath to have the like themselves. Repent therefore, O ye usurers, for gods
anger against sin, although it be slow, yet it is certain, and the slownes
oftentimes is recompensed, with the heavy weighte and greatness of pain when it
comes. And if this be not true which I do say, touching gods anger
against time sellers, then is the word of god, both false and untrue, which
were horrible blasphemye to say. In which word of god, these straighte
prohibitions are enacted and made, threatening laws against all usury, that
men should the rather use charity one to an other. But I think, there is
none of you all, that denies ye scriptures, or thinks them to be false, for
so you shall deny god, and renounce utterly the knowledge of him. For by them
he is known, as which do give testimony of him. And surely I do wonder,
that the world should so much choke men, that they will so far forgeate
god, as that they contempne his holy laws. For whereas in all other offenses
men are thought, through frayltie to break the law, It seems, yt in this
matter of usury, they stand wc god in it, that it is none offense at al,
although ye word of god be most plain against the^. Senaeca de beneficijs.
lib. 3.
Seneca says, Pudore^ rei, tollit multitudo peccantium, and desinit esse loco
peccati, commune malefactu^. Et alibi. Cessere publica iura peccatis, et caepit
licitum esse, quod publicum est.

The multitude of sinners, has taken away the shame of sin, and common
evil doing, is not taken for any private offense. And in an other place.
Public laws have given place to common offenses, and that is accounted for
lawful, which is commonly used. Whereby it appears how needful it is for all men to enure themselves with ye best things, least by evil custom, theye
have no sense in sin, but through error walow in all wickedness. It is an old
proverb, sit by the good, and by the good arise. And happy are they, yt
seek the company of the godly, and acquaint themselves with the word of god.

And in this matter, what can be more plain then yt which Christ says in
S. Luke. Lend one to an other, hopinge for nothing over and above that you did
lend: whereby not only al contractes and vsuries upon lone, in respect of time
are forbidden, but the very hope also to look for a good turn again, or any
thing else over and above the principal is utterly barred and clean taken
away. Neither is your exposicion sound master Ciuilia^ in this behalf, that
would have Christ's meaning to be, that men should never look for their
principal again. For the^ Christ might have said, geeue freelye, whereby is
included a clear renou^cing to ask back a gift geeuen, whereas in lending,
it was never so mente in common reason, that a man should never hope to have
his own again. Neither will men leese their principal, except some great
matter move them, as thextreme poverty of the party, or some other like
thing. For although goods lent be not his that did lend them for the time
they were borrowed, yet when the day of the return commethe, for repayment:
he may with good conscience, ask his own again. And therefore such gloses
are vain, and to noe purpose, and yet be it that your exposicion were true,
thus then I reason. If god requires such perfectyon in man, not to ask his
principal again, when he has once lent it out of his hands: much more then
does god forbid all manner of overplus in taking for lone more then the very
pryncipall. So that expound this text as you will, it is rather against you,
then with you, and requyrethe in all constructyons a free lendynge. Again, in
Ezechiel among other things, god sayethe there, as you have heard before,
he that has not lent for usury, and has not taken any thing over and
above, that he did lend, the same person is a just manne, he shall live
the life sayethe the lord. Whereas on the contrary part it is said in the
same chapter.

He that does let out his money or goods for vsurye and takes more, or
an overplus, shall than man live sayethe the lord? Noe, he shall not live,
but shall dye the death, and his blood shall be upon him, whereby it
appearethe that any thing taken over, is dampnable as well as excess.

Yea, any thing above ye pri^cipal is excess, because it is an injury or wrong
don to an other man, by usurying his goods, and so a dedly sin. Neither did
those tra^slators Leo, Judas, Oecolampadius, and others understand this text
otherwise then I have said, although you master Ciuilia^, do not so take the^,
who i^ their other writings, did utterly condemn al manner of vsurye. And
Luther (amongst others) is so vehement against al vsurye whatsoever, as he was
never more vehement against the Pope himself, and al his counterfeit holiness.
And let not this imagynacion hinder you, to think as many do, that no usury
is committed but upon the poor, because the scripture says, thou shall not
put out thy money to thy poor brother for usury. For it is also said in
Deuteronomie. Exodus 22
Thou shall not lend money to thy brother for usury, Deuterono. 23
without addicion of any pouertye at all, so yt al lending to any Christian be he
never so rich, is utterly forbidden, except a brother simply be no Christian in
verytie. Then seeing the scripture is so plain, and so understood by the
ancient fathers, and by many good men of this time, what mean you to seek
such out leaps of liberty, by wreasting of gods word, to your wilful lust
and sensual pleasure? Those other learned men whom you named Calvin and
Bucer, did somewhat enlarge this law by a charitable exposicio^, for the
hardness of men's hearts void from mercy, and also for very necessity sake, to
help the needye banyshed men then dwelling amongst them, not but yt they
would have al men lend freely, as god has commanded. And yet what warrantie
have they for so expoundynge the scriptures of god? But go we on. The lord god
says in his x. commandementes. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods, his
ox, his ass, or any thing else that is thy neighbors. And what other thing I
pray you, do these usurers that take overplus, but covet their neighbors goods?
for theirs it is not, because they did lend it, and more then they did lend,
they should not have in right, so yt theye break ye law Non concupisces, thou
shall not covet. Now lord in heaven. Who hearing these speeches, and having ye
fear of god before his eyes, will of set purpose and wilful madness beco^e an
usurer? For as I ca^ perceive, ye greatest harm in this of fence, is yt men
have not y^ sense or feling of this heinous fault, with in their hearts, but
think they may lend their money and goods for gayn, without committing sin, or
offending god at all, whereas of other sins they are ashamed, although
thorough fraylty they do offend. For no man durst ever stand in yt defense of
theft, aduowterie, or murder, and yet vsurye is as great and as horrible before
god, as any of them al, according to the opinion of al good and learned men in
all ages. yea, so horrible is this sin, yt amongst al other sins, it makes
men to forget god, or rather to think there is no god. Mars^lius ficinus in
his book de Christiana religione, the.xi. chapter sayethe thus. Soli
faeneratores auaritiae mancipati, de diuinis recte sentire non possunt. Only
usurers amongst al others (says he) being bond slaves to covetousness cannot
think well of heavenly things of god: and the reason is, for yt they are
worldly, and makes the world their god. And truly as a christian, is no
Ethnik, painim, nor Jew, so is he no usurer, and this will I boldlye say, that
Turks, Tartarians, and Ethniks in deed are pure Angels in comparison of these
worldly usurers, and less harm do they to christians, then usurers do, and
are less cruel or unmerciful. For y^ Painim sometimes shows mercy, but ye
usurer never shows mercy at all, but would be lord of yt whole world
himself alone, if he might. So y^ Cerberus in hell, and al those monsters yt
Hercules subdued, are inferiors in evil to these wicked usurers upon earth. And
therefore as Lucifer for pride fell down from heaven: so usurers for covetousness
will fall down from earth, to the dark dungeo^ of hell. And mark this ever
whatsoever he be yt is a great usurer, is of a vile and base nature, and
nothing of value in him: one says, yt usury upon usury, is vilain vsurye, and
no doubt they are no better then vileins or slaves, whosoever they be yt are
great usurers, let them set never so good a cou^tena^ce upon ye matter. All this
notwtstanding, these wise worldly rich men (to cloak their sin) and to bear
out the matter, as though their doings were lawful) do devise policies against
god, and seeking to mitigate offenses, teach god what he has to do. So
were the stews devised as a common sink to scower cities, and maynetained as
tolerable, to avoid farther evil, being never punished in other countries,
and much merueled by strangers resorting hither, that simple fornycacio^ is so
severely punished here in England. But such devises are wicked policies and
fetches directly against al godliness. For Saint Paul says, Paulus ad Ephesians.
5. ad Hebr. cap. 12
that no fornicatour, no whoremonger, or unclean person, shall inherit the
kingdom of heaven. And as it is said for whoremongers, so says the holy
prophet king David, Psalm. 15
that no usurer, who takes overplus for his money, or goods, for the very
lone thereof: shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. To geeue alms, and to
lend freelye, are the fruits of charity, and twoe especial precepts of god,
and plain tokens to know a faithful christian from an infidel. But he that
will do neither of these two things, as god has commanded, can never be
thought a good christian. For they yt are of god, do those things both gladly
and faithfully, which god has commanded them to do. For as love is
commanded, so is love and gift, which is the fruit of love, commanded
likewise. Then what shall I say to those men of the world, that handle gods
doings, so as they make no sin to seem where great and horrible sin is:
seeking by turns and twines of texts to cloak and excuse sin. I speak to you
master temporal Lawier, who for yt you seem learned, do seek to infecte ye
corrupt natures of others, as amongst mo, this worshipful mercha^t here, and
diverse besides, rocking them a sleep, with the cradel theye best like. I think
if you would put into some of their heads, that custom and tribute were not
due to the prince, there be that would geeue ear unto you: for all the world
is geeuen to harken after their own profit. And badde is that counsel which
they will refuse to follow, when gain may rise thereof, without danger or
hazard of temporal law to punyshe them, let gods law be never so strong
against them. And you, master Ciuilia^, although you have said much and very
well, but especially out of the Canon law: Yet I doubt of your constant
abiding, in the very practice and true the of this cause, that is to say,
simply to give your ear to gods word, if the matter should be determined
by your judgment. For I fear me, you will bear with gloses, and wink at these
worldly and politic devises, which are inuencyons of the devil to destroy
man, and to bring him to everlasting dampnacion. And yet god forbid, that
any man should seem to make him self wyser then the holy ghost, in abusing
or counterfeiting his word. You did allege certain learned Lawyers of this
time, and with them, some godly divines, that thynkes it were good to have
some tolleracion to avoid farther mischief, and to bridle the great
greedines of certain covetous wretches, as that which you account to rise of
a good mind and zeal. Well, I wylnot stand upon their meaninges, but I am
sure the same is not grounded upon gods word, for intentes imagined without
gods warraunt: are deeds accursed, although in appearaunce theye seem most
godly.

For god says. Hoc tantum facies, Deute to. 12.
Thou shall not do that which is good in thine own eyes, but do thou that
only which I command thee. Upon this place Saint Ihon Chrysostom in his
oration against ye Jews, says thus in English. Of a truth that which is
done according to the will of god, although it seem to be wicked: yet it is
altogether plesaunt and acceptable before god. Contrarywyse, whatsoever is don
besides the word of god, and otherwise then he will have it done, though it
be esteemed as a thing acceptable to god, yet it is of al others the worst,
and most wicked. We have a notable example against good intentes in the
first book of the kings, Reg. 1. cap. 15
and fyfteene Chapter, to warn al men not to deal upon any devotion or
good intent whatsoever more or less in gods cause, then they are expreslye
commaundid to do. For Samuel the prophet was sent to king Saul, as messenger
from god, who said in this manner. Thus says the lord of hosts. I have
called that to thy remembrance which Amelech did to Israel, how they lay in
wait for the^, in the way as they came out of Egypt. Now therefore go and
smite ye Amelechites, and destroy ye all that pertains to them, and see you
have no compassyo^ on them: but slaye both man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass. Now when Saul had this commandment, he
set forth with.200000. footmen, and.20000. men of Judah. But he did not
fulfill the lords commandment. For after he had slain the Amelechites, he
took Agag their king alive, and left of the sheep and of the oxen, and fat
things, and the lambs, and all that was good and would not destroy them.
Whereupon the word of the lord came unto Samuel saying. It repents me, yt
I have made Saul king, for he is turned from me,and has not performed my
commandments, so yt he lost his kingdom by this means, for that he of a good
intent, spared the king, and saved the fat oxen and sheep, to offer
sacrifice unto ye lord, unto who^ Samuel said. Has the lord as great
pleasure in burnt sacrifices and offerings, as he has, that thou should
obey his voice? Behold, to obey is better then offering, and to give heed, is
better then the fat of Rambes, for to be rebellious is as the sin of
witchcrafte, and dysobedience is wickedness and Idolatrye. Because therefore
thou haste cast away the word of the lord, therefore has the lord cast
away thee also, from being king. Thus you se men must not fancy to them
selves a certain manner of dealing for respect or pity, or to mitygate
offenses, and so to despice gods commandment with their devised Imagynacions,
but rather to do neither more nor less, then that only which god has
commanded to be done. And therefore in your judgments and sentences of law,
I pray you master Ciuilian, have god and his word always before your eyes,
that you lawyers, may say and do the truth according to his word.

And you master merchant unto whom god has le^t great treasure of this world
(for I tell you, you are but his steward) call to god that he will lend you
grace in the midst of your wealth to learn and know him aright: let not
wealth choke your judgment and cloye your understanding. Beware how you cloak
with god, do not under color of bargayne and sale, practice usury as most me^
do. There be plain ways for men to take, which are and has been ever allowed.
And this I say, he that lives in his vocacion truly and iustlye, is an honest
man. That Grocer who sellethe wholesome wares we good conscience, is to be well
esteemed. The Draper that deals lawfullye, deserves credit. The true
Tailor, is an honest man in his calling. The Goldesmith, the Mercer, and the
Haberdasher are all to be well liked, and so all others of any occupacio^, yt
live justly i^ their trade. A mercha^t of whatsoever calling he is, is to be
accounted for honest, if he live with good fame and name, by his lawful trafik,
or occupacion. But I pray you, of what occupacion is goodman usurer, or who
would gladly be called one of ye usurers occupacion? Or of what company or
several hawle or elsewhere, are theye in London. God grant al mercha^ts to be
otherwise occupied, and every one to follow his lawful vocacion, rather the^ to
trade by this lewd craft or kind of living. Some learned fathers, yea, and
some great philosophers also, thi^ks it a thing almost i^possible, for a great
rich mercha^t, yt is a mighty occupier to be a good christian. But I am not
altogether of yt mind, especially if ye mercha^ts yt are great occupiers do
live in any fere of god. Chrisostomns Plato de legibus.
For I think there be of mercha^ts, as there be of other sorts, and surely al
such as dele lawfully in their allowed trades, as I have said, are honest,
just, upright, and worshipful, and not inferiors to other men of any calling.
True it is, were are al sinners more and less, and therefore every one of us
had need to call to god for mercy.

And assured we are that god being the searcher of our hearts, will take an
account of al our doings. We have but a time and a course to run, let us
take that right way for our race, which god has made plain and open for us by
his word and testament. Let us be charytable, loving, and liberal one to an
other, and ready always to give some porcyon of that bountifulnes, which god
daily and infinitely of his free mercy pours upon us. And as reasonable men
let us consider, that ryghteousnes establishes kingdoms, and charitable
dealings maynteineth states: whereas vsurye the daughter of covetousness, the
mother of mischief, and the very hell of evil, overthrows trades, decaieth
merchandises, undoes tillage, destroyethe crafts men, defaceth chiualries,
beats down nobility, brings dearth and famine, hyndereth ye prince in her
custom and welfaire, and last of al, causes destruction and confusion
universally. For if the merchant may be allowed to make gain of his money, he
will rather use yt certain and assured way, that dangerously adventure the
seas, and so the Queen shall lose her gayn and right of enheritance, and the
state shall be undone. The plough man will no more turn up the ground for
uncertain gain, when he may make an assured profit of his money, that
lies by him. The artificer will leave his woorkynge. The clothier will cease his
making of clothes, because these trades are paynefull and chargeable: yea all
men will give themselves wholly to live an idle life by there money, if they
have any. And although al can not have money, yet if al those yt have money will
live by ye lone thereof, all will be marred in ye end. And amongst others, the
gentelman will no more profess arms nor chiualrye, to advance his welfare,
but selling his lands will have double gain by his money, and so geeue over
howsekepinge all together, taking a chamber in London or else where in stead
of a house in his own country, as we see they do now commonly, the more is
the pity, and the greater is their shame, yea the noble man will no more
defend the widow and fatherles, nor yet do judgment and justice, but live by
his filthye gain, and lose thereby his dignity and estimacion, as all those
that do live by corrupt usury, for none in right should be a knight, yt is a
known usurer, Bar. in l. i. C. de digni. tex. in l. quoties. de dignit. lib.
12. l duo Mar. C. de quest.
and such a hurt to his country. And thus by these usurers great dearthe will
ensue of all things, as you see, and misery will fall upon us universally, for
yt few men will work, and most will play, and men living without labor and
doing nothing, will loyter and wallow in the ease of usury, and enriche
themselves by this most vile assured trade of the Epicures occupacion. And
what good I pray you will money do then, when we have neither meat to eat, nor
clothe wherewith to cover us, nor house to shrowde us in, nor man to defend us
in our right. For not so much as the butcher, the baker, or the tailor on
gods name, or any other whatsoever, having never so little money, but they
will all togethers be usurers, as many already are, if this might be
suffered. And what should let, why they should not all be usurers, as well
as others, if the same may once be liked or holde^ for lawful. For a surer
and easyer, and a more gaynefull trade cannot be upon earth, then to get
money, with the lone of monye only. And who does not love ease and gain, if
they may be had both together? So that I say, if this geere take place
universally, as why may it not? the^ may ye worthiest me^ say, farewell world,
yea farewell life for ever may all men say in general.

The trademade to yt Indians, does not so much benefit y^ Spaniards, as
usury has done the^ harm, for they trading with the Genowayes, and others to
pay so much usury as they do for wares upon their return from the
Indianes, do lose all their gain that they make in the voyage, and wax
beggars at the last, with all their trauaill, and pains they take: as who
should say, they labor for the use of others, that do nothing themselves but
loyter, and with ease make money of money. An alcumye found out by the devil,
to distroy all trade in the world when none have any thing but themselves.
But their reward in the end shall be death everlasting, except they do
amend. It is written in Solinus, de mirabilibus mundi, that in the islande
Sardinia, there is a well, whereof if a true man do drink, his eye sight
straight way waxethe clear, but if a false harlot do but supp of it, he
waxes stark blind out of hand, although he did see never so well before.
Now happy were England, if all the conduites in London did run with such
water. And yet what did I say, I would think London then, and England also
would be most unhappy. For if it were so, we should have so many blind
men in the City and country, that there would scante be found guydes
sufficient to lead them in the streates, and high ways, when theye should
seek to go abroad. The moral of this saiynge is, that good men have the
grace of god, and see him in his glory, whereas evil men are stark staring
blind, through their folly and wickedness. And of this sort are there many
companies blind in this land, as the clergy with simonye, merchauntes with
vsurye, judges with bryberye, great men with extorcion, and the common sort
with micherie. God be merciful unto us, and send us of his grace. But says
the covetous man, seeing you go hard to work with us, and will not suffer us
to make any gain at all of our money, but restrain us utterly from
aduansynge our welfare, we will not lend at all hereafter, because we will
not offend. Evil said of you, say I, when god commaundethe the contrary,
and by your words you bewraye what you are, men graceles no doubt, without
affection or charytye, and people void of all love. Saint Paul says,
unthankful, hard hearted and unmerciful, and so the children of perdicion.
If you would have said, you would not lend to all them that would borowe of
you, I would have holden well with that saying. For I promise you, it is an
offense to lend to some, and a maintenance of their folly. And therefore,
they do well, that are not over hasty, or rather over gredy to lend without
great cause and good consideracion had before. For indeed men should rather
lend to help others, then seek gredelye to enriche themselves, because it is
properly the nature of lendinge, (being a certain kind of almese) to help
the necessity of our neighbors, with part of our plentye, as occasion does
serve. Whereas lending for gain without good cause had of an others need:
makes wanton princes to seek needelesse war, noble men riotous to spend
without reason, young gentlemen unthrifty to bring all to naught, after they
are newly come to their lands, and so to take the very high way to undo
themselves for ever: as every day if does appear, not only in gentelmen, but
in some great states and Lords of this land, the more is the pitye. And
suerly, he is far from thrifte, whatsoever he be, that boroweth upon usury
without great cause, and rather would he seem to be that which he is not,
tha^ to be in deed and in outward show, that which he is. And no doubt,
wantonness brought in this follye at the first, that men with their maskynge
manners and great braueries, should seem for a time to be ioly fellows, where
as at length they discover themselfes, and are become worse than naught. And
therefore they do evil, that make a certain gain of lending, to the undoing
of others, whereas lendinge should be for charity sake, and not to mainteyne
the outragiouse excess and foolish riot of many adeuise used more here in
England, than in any place else, that I know in Christendom. For if money might
not so sone be had of those covetous usurers most men would live within
their bounds, and leave their wanton apparel, their vnnecessarye
feastynge, their fond gamnynge, and their lewd hazarding of great wealth and
revenues without all wit, upon a main chance at dyce, or upon a card or
two at primero, and other vain diuelishe games. For so these unthrifts may
have money to serve their lusts, and to hazard their chance, they care not
what to pay. And thus they being over laden with a main loss, and most
certain debte to the usurer before hand, do set upon blind fortune
afterward all that they have, and are undone before they are a ware, only
by the usurers dealinges, although they be no great losers, neither at dyce,
nor yet at cards. But you will say, and prove it to, that many have been made
with paiynge usury, gettinge great wealth into their hands, and at the least
have saved themselves from imprisonement, and utter undoing. Unto this I do
aunsweare, as he that came into a church, and saw it full of Images made of
wax, asked the cause of such a sight. Unto whom one answered, that these
people, whom these waxen images did represente, were saved from drowninge, by
calling upon our lady: Nay then (quod he again) where be the images of those
I pray you, that called upon our lady, and were drowned notwithstanding And
so say I, if some one man have got good by usury, and has been made
thereby, how many thousands have had mischief, and been utterly undone by
usury. Well, well, say you still, and reply as you please, if the world go so
with us yt le^ding for gain must clerelye be restrained, and that upon pain
of death, as we would have it: farewell then all hope to borrowe any money
herafter. Unto this I answer, and I think clean contrary, especially if
men will conform themselves to the law of nature, and live as they ought to
do vprightelie in their vocation, and remember there is a god. For then
plenty will follow, and good cheap will be of all things, when every man
lives vprightelye in his calling and profession as god has appointed, and
forsake these unlawful shyftes, and so charity will abound, and no man can
want, that being honest has any need, say you what you will. Mary
unthrifts, and suspected men, may perhaps fail by these means, and be
driven to trust to their own, when none will lend unto them. And suerlye I
would wyshe that lending were chefely to the needy and thryftie parson that
will truly get his living with the sweat of his brows, and pay that again
faithfullye, which he has ones borrowed. But to say you will not lend to any
body at al, because you cannot be suffered to make gain of your money, and so
to do as much as in you lies to destroy occupiyng: that I say, is an
unmerciful saiynge, and directlye against god. And yet say what you will, if the
laws of god in this behalf were straightelye executed against usury, there
would be for all this lending enough, such lendinge I mean as is
needful, and in charity ought to be used. Yea, I will say more, rather
then men will suffer their wares to lie dead by them, and their goods not to
bring forth any increase at all: they will hazard their wealth into
cheapmens hands, and young occupiers, and be contented, as well to adventure
the loss or peril of their ware, as to assure themselves of currante gain,
and certain profit. And so doing they may boldly put forth their
substance for others to occupy, upon such charitable dealing. And although
few perhaps will trade in this sort, that is as well to hazard loss, as to
assure themselfes of gain: yet the world wilbee the better, wares will wax
more cheap, dealinges wilbee more upright, and fewer men will break, when
such christian charity is commonly used, both in moderate taking of gain,
upon charitable forbearing for a time, till men may make money, and friendly
bearing with losses, when any such do happen. And amongst honest and godly
men, I know there will never be want of charity. And happy were England, if
all men were honest, for then laws were needelesse, and such evil as this
had, never need to be feared: as for evil men, it were good to rid the
world of them, if it were possible, and to devise by laws that none should
live, much less come to wealth by such unlawful ways, for that they only
and none others, are the cause of all dearthe and want in this world. Thus
when every man lived vpryghtely within his bounds and calling, using such
trade as he ought to do, plenty would soon appear in all places, and god
would bless the world also with increase much. And do not think that you
are to be excused, when you do lend to the rich, where it may seem you have
not oppressed, and so not deal with the poor, for fear he should be
oppressed, for I tell you, you should lend to all that have need, of what
estate condition or living soever they be, poor or rich. And fond is this
argument that you have often used, of which many do take fast hold. It is not
lawful to take usury of the poor, therefore a man may take usury of the
rich, for by the like reason one may this argue: It is not lawful to vex a
poor man by law, therefore it is lawful to vex or to trouble a rich man by
law. None, either rich or poor, young or old, low or bye, should be
troubled or vexed at all, or by any manner of means. Regard always must be
had to the common weal, that no harm do come thereunto, by any unlawful
dealings, and not whether this man, or that man be wronged or no. For so it
may fall out that your neighbor unto whom you have lent money for gain,
fealeth no harm thereby, and yet assure your self, the commonweal smarteth
by such unlawful dealinges, as I have often heretofore said. And therefore
the Ciuilians says, Interest reipub. vt quisque resua recte hoc est, honest
and legitime vtatur. It is for the behoue of the common weal, that every man
do use his own things rightfully, that is (as I take it) honestely and
lawfullye. And this is that aequum and bonum, that eauen hode, and right
balance dealinge, so much commended by all laws, this is, I say, that
christian charity, which seeks nothing of her own, but those things that
are of Jesus Christ. And is it so strange a thing for men to borrowe freely
in this world? I am not very old, and yet I have known many in my days,
that have borrowed freely great masses of money of diverse men, and some
again that have borrowed small sums freely of a great sort, for no penny
usury at all? Good men can no more be without charity, than fire ca^ be
without heat. And therefore, let us pray, that good men chefely may enjoy the
fruits of the earth, yea let us all that be badde, consider this one thing
we our selves, that naught we brought with us into this world, and naught we
shall carry out again, and when we have food and raymente, let us
therewith be content, as Saint Paul says to his disciple Timothee. 1.
Timoth. 6.
Enough (as they say) is as good as a feast, and what should we do with
more? A little with quietness, is better then a great deal with trouble. Yea
happy is that man, whose conscience does not conde^pne himself for evil
gotten goods, evil gotten I may well say, when they bring death and
dampnation with them. Alas do we not see every day how uncertain this life
is? how sodeinely men go away, and that no man has any charter to tarry
here one hour, but as sone goes the rich as the poor, the lord as the
plougheman, the merchant as the crafts man, the wise man as the simple. And
besides this, what a conscience has he (lord god) who wittinglie and
willinglye has been the undoing of many an honest poor man, of many
ancient gentelmen also, yea, and shall I say of some great lords of noble
houses, through his unmerciful usury? Does he think after his wrong
gotten goods, to bleare god with an vnworshipful gluttonous table, with
building of a few almese houses, with geeuinge to his ward after his decease
a little sum of money? Nay, he is deceived, that so thinks. These are
abominable offerings in the sight of god, that are offered of such gain, let
him geeue on gods name his own goods lawfully gotten, and not deal almese
of that which is none of his. His own conscience will tell him an other tale,
when the same shall search him, and accuse him before the majesty of god, and
then will he tremble and quake, call for grace, and can not be heard, weep
and wayle, when none will pity him, and so live in hell, and never dye,
continuynge still in such pains and formentes, as pass men's speech to
utter, and more grievous, than any man's heart can imagine or thought co^ceyue.
Wherefore considering god, nature, reason, all scripture, all law, all
aucthours, all doctors, yea all councels besides, are utterly against
usury: if you love god, and his kingdom my masters, if your natural country
be dear unto you, if you think to have merry days in this world, and to live
in joy, you and your children after you, both now and ever, yea, if you have
care of your own souls: for Christ's sake abhor this ugly usury, and loathe
with all your hearts, this cursed limme of the devil, and lend in deed freelye,
as god has commanded you: and depart with your goods or wares, as freelye
for time, as you would bargayne to be paid for them out of hand, or at sight,
or for redye money, having always a charitable intencion with you to help
your poor neighbors, with part of your plenty, and make no merchandises
hereafter, by the Sun shynyng, and Moon shininge, by years, by months, by
days, and by hours, least god take his light from you, and shorten all your
days, and all your hours. And as you lend freelye as occasion serves to all
men, of what estate or condition soever they be: So give to the miserable folk
willinglye, and help the poor householder franklye. And the^ shall god bless
you and all yours, and geeue you the peace of conscience, which passes al
treasure, and make you inheritors of his kingdom, after this transitory life.
Now god for his mercyes sake open al your eyes, and give you the right
understanding of this his will, for his dear sons sake Jesus Christ our lord
and savior. Amen.


Ciuilian. I have long studied the Roman laws, and I thank god my
understanding is somewhat increased by them. But would god I had more
earnestly studied the very text of the old and new testament, whereby not
only I should the rather have gathered most true knowledge: but also I should
have been more mortified, by a great deal the^ I am. It is unspeakable, what
good they do reap, to their souls health, that do daily and howerly,
meditate the very letter and text of the scriptures.

And I thank you most hartelye master Preacher, for your good zeal and
earnest care, to sifte out the truethe of this matter, which I do think, and
am fully persuaded, that you have found out according to gods most holy will.
And I pray god most heartily, that I may be a true follower, of all that you
have said, and never consent in heart to lend money for gain, nor yet to
allow of them that are known usurers.

I do know certainly, that to lend freely is a natural contracte commanded
by god, and allowed by man, and therefore to be done and used of all men: but
to lend for gain is a suspected kind of dealing, and therefore to be blamed
whatsoever color I do set upon it. And the wise man says, Quae dubitas
ne feceris, never do that, whereof thou do stand in doubt. And therefore by
ye leave of god, I will never deal otherwise hereafter, then plainelye and
truly, as gods word and my conscience shall direct me, assuredly mindi^g to le^d
for gramercie always hereafter to the poor and needy, or to any one that
shall desire to borowe of me, if I be able to lend, and may forbear my
money or goods without any my great hi^dera^ce. The Civil law, is a wise
study, and full of policy, which I have ever well liked because of the
natural and good reasons yt it carries in show. But I must say now, that the
wisdom of man, is folishnesse before god, and vayn are all those speeches,
that are used to blau^ch gods grounded rules, being the only undoubted
trueths chiefly to be followed of al godly and Christian people. And for my
part I am glad that god has touched me thus much to renounce man's reason,
and to follow his most holy will, which I will hereafter embrace, by his
especyall favor and mercy, and prefer the truethe of his word, before all
other learning whatsoever, and confess in heart, that al lending of money or
wares for any gain, whatsoever in respect of time, is a thing abominable and
a da^pnable deed before god and man.


Lawyer. It is evil striuinge against a known truth. And woe be to him that
does any thing against his conscience. I have heard much, and somewhat I
know, and although natural reason and man's policy, have carried me out of
the way, yet I thank god my conscience did never accuse me. For I thought
assuredlye, that whatsoever I did in this behalf, so that charity had been
kept, and no harm in appearance committed, nor offense notoriously known:
that al then had been well. But I do see it is clean contrary, and I confess
my self to have erred, for which I am sorry. And now I perceive yt man must
not seek to seem wyser then god, nor yet devise doings for his own excuse,
according as his fond brain might imagyne. For I do now plainly find,
that even the very sufferance of usury, although it were for a mean rate: is
not only forbidden by god, which is chiefly to be noted, but also hurtful to
a state, and cause of much dearthe and scarcity, which is pitiful to be
seen. Therefore I do wish, that we might all live as god has commanded
us, and not fancy unto our selves, such a kind of dealing and lyuinge as
god and nature have always forbidden. Our law is plain enough against this
sin, if we were as good execucioners thereof as the law gives aucthority.
But our countreye disposicion is rather to make laws, then to keep laws, yea
rather the law is used to enriche lawiers, then to execute the justice of law.

Holy king Edward as they call him, he yt was before William Co^queror, among
other his good laws, did in the.37. law that he made utterly forbid usurers,
and would not that any such should tarry within this Realm. And if any
wear conuycted to have exacted vsurye, he should loose all his goods, and
after that be esteemed as an outlaw. The said king Edward did further say, yt
he did here it reported in ye court of France, when he was there, yt usury was
thought to be the root of all other sin and myschiefe whatsoever. After
this, in Henry the secondes time, I do remember what Glanuill chief. Glanuil.
lib. 7 Cap. 16.
Justyce of England in those days wrytethe, which I think not amiss to
make known for our amendment. In the seventh book where he speaks of
inheritances, of last wills and testamentes, he says amongst other things, in
the sixteeneth chapter of that book, that all the goods of an usurer, whether
he dye making a will, or not making a will, are proper to ye king. And yet no
man so long as he lyuethe was ever wont to be appealed or convicted of
usury. But amongst other enquiries for the king, it is used to be enquired
upon, and proved by twelve law full men that dwell nyghe him, upon their oaths,
that a certain man died an usurer, which thing being proved in open court,
all the moveable goods and chatelles that wear the usurers own, at the time of
his decease, shall be seized for our sovereign lord the king, in whose hands
soever the said goods or chatelles shall be found, and the heir of the same
usurer shall be dysherited for yt self same cause, according to the law of the
Realm, and the land shall return to the lord or lords again, from whence it
came. Al which notwtsta^ding, it is yet thus to be understood, if any man has been an usurer in his life time, and thereof was openly and notoryouslye fames so
to be: and after repented him self before his death, and did penance
therefore, which can not be without restitucion, his goods shall not be within
compass of the law against usurers. And therefore it must be well known by
good and sufficient trial, that one dyed as an usurer, to make the law
determine upon him, as against an usurer, and to dispose of his goods, as upon
ye goods of an usurer. Thus far Glanduil in yt place, who in his x. book and
third chapter, shows plainly what usury is, and thus he says. Things
are due upon lendinge, when any man does trust an other, in those things
that do consist upon number, weight, and measure. Therefore when a man has
lent any such thing, if he that has so lent it, does take any thing over
and above his lone, he commits usury in so doing. And if he depart this
world so offending, he shall be condemned as an usurer, by the law of yt land,
as before more at large has been declared. According unto this law, Mathewe
Paris, makes report in the life of king Richard the first, by these
words. Quicquid laici in vita sua donauerint, vel quocu^que titulo a se
alienauerint, etsi vsurarij fuisse dicuntur, post mortem non reuocabitur. Quae
vero post mortem non alienata fuerint, si cognitum fuerit ipsos tempore mortis
fuisse vsurarios, confiscabuntur. That is to say. Whatsoever lay men have made
away in their life time, by gift, or alyenated from them by any title,
although theye were known in their life time to be usurers, yet the same shall
not be revoked after their death. But whatsoever things are not made away
after their death, if it were known that they at the time of their death were
usurers, the same things shall be confiscated. The statute law also, in ye
fifteen year of king Edward the third, does make this matter plain, where
it is accorded and assented: that the king and his heirs shall have the
conisance of the usurers dead. And that the Ordinaries of holy church have the
conisaunce of usurers on live, as to them appertains, to make compulsion by
yt censures of holy church, but ye statut of 37. of king Henry ye.8. has taken
away ye force of this law. And yet whether ye common law was or is taken away
hereby or no, I do refer yt to my masters ye Lawyers. Nay it is plain, y^ our
law was ever against usury, as in Marto^ ca. 5. it is most evident, Vsurae non
curra^t etc. And touching thexcha^ge, An. 9. Ed. 3. 25. Ed. 3.
you have said well in my judgment. And thus much I know by the statutes of
this land, that king Edward ye third, caused thexcha^ge to be kept at Dover,
and in other places, where it best pleased his grace, as in good towns and
through fares through out England, declaring ye value of al coin, and straitely
chargynge al his subjects, A. 14. Ric. 2*
that none so hardy as to make gain, An. 3. Hen. 7.
of coined money, save only the kings excha^gers, so yt usury by that means
was utterly banyshed from among yt common people. But how the kings
exchangers used the matter, I know not. This I know well, the fewer that use
thexchaunge in manner as it is now used amongst merchauntes, the better it is
for the state and common profit of this la^d. But I for greedy desire of
profit, have forgot all these things, and seeing how loathe men are to lend,
thought it better even against gods law and our law also, according to ye
common maxim, to suffer rather a mischief, then an inconuenie^ce. But I see
now that such proposicyons are wicked and dampnable, Roman. 3.
for no evil must be either done, or suffered to be done, that good may
come thereof, as you master Preacher have very godly said unto us, out of gods
most holy word. I do read that in the.47. year of king Henrye the third,
a riot was committed against the Jews, and five hundred of the^ slain, and
thoccasion of this riot was, for that one Jew would have forced a Christyan man
to have geeuen unto him more then two pence for the vsurye of twenty shillings
by ye weke. For ye Jews had license from the king to take two pence in the
pound, for the weeks lendynge, which is forty pound and more by the year upon
the hundred, a deuelishe usury no doubt, and worthy of all death, without al
peradventure. And great pity that any prince should ever yield to suffer any
such spoil or theft amongst good subjects. These Jews are gone. Would god
the Christyans remayninge, and our country men at this time did not use their
fashyons. I for my part will be from hencefoorthe a most deadly enemy against
all usurers, and willingly I will not eat nor yet drink with any of them. And
I pray you master Merchant, if heretofore you have taken any enboldening to
commit usury through any qualification that I have used, contrary to law which
I profess, and against my conscience: do you from henceforth amend it, and
amend your self by my warning, and bear not your self upon me, nor yet
upon the law that I profess. For both I will discharge my self before god,
and this good company of any such mainetenaunce and declare unto you, that
not only the law which I profess, is against it, but also my conscience
condempneth me of such tolleratinge. For the which I am right heartily sorry,
and do now constantly affirm that al le^ding for gain in respect of time,
is both against gods law, and our law, and is a mischief most hurtful to
all states, and the principal cause of all want and scarcity in any common
weal, wheresoever it has once got a footing and is either allowed or
suffered. And for your good cheer, I thank you most heartily. And now will I
say, this is the best dinner that ever I came at in all my life. And I pray god
it may be so unto you master merchaunt, that are the chief of this feast, and
have been after a sort the cause of this disputacion.


The Merchant or Gromell gayner. I have heard you say master Preacher, and I
have heard it also of others, that god in the scriptures affirms it to be an
easier matter, for a Camel to go through the eye of a nedle, the^ for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Surely I believe it to be true,
except gods goodness be the greater, for we merchaunts are meruelously given
to geat goods without conscience and without all gods forboade. And this world
is a great temptacyon, for man to advance his welfare, and hardly can one
avoid, the sweet entisements thereof.

For what is he now a days that is of any estymacion, if he want wealth?
who makes any account of him, be he never so learned, never so virtuous,
or never so worthy, that has not the goods of this world? Yea, what makes us
merchants to bear authority, and to be taken with ye best, but our goods
that lie by us to serve our own turns with all, and other men's also, as we
list and think meet? But fie of this world, in respect of the world to come.
And I thank you master Preacher, for such your heavenly doctrine. For I
promise you I am now become through ye same (as I trust) a new man praised be
god, and you therefore. And now I do as much abhor to lend money for gain
hereafter, as I do abhor to steal by the high way, or to murder any man
violentlye for his goods, which god forbid that ever I should think or mind
to do. And you master Lawyers both of you, have well put me in remembrance
that my goods are not mine to bestow, after my death, if I should die an usurer.
Lord god, if the prince would take advantage of all such as have offended
in this behalf* many should beg, that how are brave. And yet mark gods
judgment. You shall hardlye see an usurers issue prosper well, but either the
party comes to an evil end, or the goods are lewdlye wasted away. Mercy,
mercy, therefore Lord god, and I trust assuredlye that upon mine unfeigned
repentance, god will be merciful unto me. Restitucyon I had need to make,
and I will so do by gods grace, as I can. Evil is that penye gotten, which
brings dampnation, and unhappy is he, that for greedy desire of this world,
does leese the joys of heaven. It had been my part, having had such wealth, to
have vysited the prisons, where men lie long for small debt, and have been
oppressed with vsurye, to their utter undoing: to have aided ye poor
householders, the fatherless children and the widows. But hereafter I will
vysite Christ more often in his afflicted members, and lend freely by gods
grace, to such and so many, as I shall be able and know to be honest godly men,
and relieve them chieflye, and make also restytucyon unto them whom I have most
oppressed, and get my goods hereafter by lawful means. We all fear the
plague merueilously here in London, and desire god that the City may be
cleared of it, but what a bless wear it, to the City, and realm also (as I
remember you said before master Preacher) if in one year god would take al
usurers away, and clear this land of such unmercifully men. I for my part
knowing that I do know, rather then I will hereafter make gain of my goods
or money, for the very lone thereof, in respect of time, I will suffer a
thousand deaths in this world, to save my soul the rather in the world to
come. Yea, none of mine shall ever have my favor, that will take that way, for
I know this life is but a passage, and stewardes we are all, (as you have
well said master preacher), to make an account of our former lives, and to
show how faithfully we have bestowed those talentes, which god of his goodness
has vouchsafed to bestow upon us. For if we have been evil officers, woe is
our hyer, whereas otherwise having faithfully discharged our duties, god is
just, and will reward the faithful for ever, according to his promise,
through the merits of Jesus Christ, who be praised therefore.


Ockerfoe. Now blessed be the Lord god of Israel, and holy be his name, both
now and always hereafter. I am hartlye glad before god, that I have lived
until this day, to see such a conversion of you my dear brethren, and
greater joy I know there will be in heaven, for the recovering of so few lost
sheep, than of 99. that have not strayed. I pray god that all others may
take example of you, and upon gods good warnyng follow those things in their
conversation of life, that you have now professed to do during your lives. And
this I say, he that lives to dye well, shall dye to live better. Now, god
for his mercyes sake, make us all his seruau^ts. With that, they all took
their leaves, and departed in charity one with an other, like joyful and
spiritual brethren in Christ. God grant all others to do the like. Amen.


Finis.
A conclusion to the loving Reader.
GEntle reader, and dear countrieman, I have in some part laid open (as may
appear) the doings and dealinges of this world. And much speech has
passed diuerselye betwixt parties, and great heat has been uttered, as well in
defense of cloked evil, as in rebuke of known sin, the most and the worst,
liking that always best, which is cheefely for their purpose, be it never so
bad. At the last, an agreement is made (as you see) and all reconciled to god,
as people much ashamed of sin, and men most sorry for their by past folies.
The merchaunt, as it seems, will no more deal unlawfully, but use his trade
in good order, and in such sort, as to good conscience and gods law is
agreeable. The lawiers, as well Ciuilian as temporal, show themselves mortified
persons, and will never geeue occasion (so much as in them lyethe) for any to
offend by their example. And all this goodness comes through ye preachers
godly and zelouse dealing. And is all this true (says one) that we shall
have such a world hereafter, as there wilbee neither evil lawier, nor yet
evil merchaunte? For answer I say, god knows only, what will be hereafter.
I have made but only a rehersall of an assembly, which I will not swear to
be true neither, for all the goods in England, and yet I wish the same had
been true, especially for the latter part of their agreement, let their
former life's be, as they will be, which I think are worse than I have
said. For neither tongue can utter, nor pen express at full, the euii of
this world. And yet I have said so much every way, as I was hable to say, and
as my leisure served. And an easy matter it is, to tell a tale, or to make a
tale of any man, or of any matter either to or fro: but the hardest piece of
work of al is this, for men to be, as they would seem to be. For who
would not seem very honest in outward apparaunce, and yet who is perfectly
honest in very deed? I have concluded of these men, as I would it were, or
had been at the first, and so al things after much talk are lapped up as you
see, with a joyful end, but whether it will fall out so or no hereafter, god
knows, and not I. Therefore I shall tell you a short merry tale, somewhat to
the purpose of this last speech and compounded agreement.

About xvi. years past, at my beeinge in Rome (where I was forth coming
afterward, against my will god knows) there was war betwixt the pope Paulus
quartus, and the Emperor Charles, for the kingdom of Naples, the pope
himself being a noble man by birth, of the house of Carraffa in Naples, and
the chief aucthor and beginner of this war, as one that hated the emperor
most deadly, for putting to death an uncle of the said popes, upon the
rebellion made by the prince of Salerne and others, to restore the Napolitanes
to their ancient liberties, and free government of that kingdom. In this
time of war, duke of Alua being not far of, with a main power, against the
pope, and french king, who took his part, duke Guyse being general then for
the french army, the holy father did set forth in prynte, a certain prayer
for peace, and commanded that all prestes wtin their paroches, should call the
people together, and exhort them to pray for peace. Amongst whom, one pryest
of a certain paroche there, seeing the people assembled, began to declare unto
them the holy fathers will, which was, that they should all pray together for
a spedie peace. And when they were thus denoutelie gathered together, and
warned to pray, the priest said thus, after many speeches past before. Good
brethren, you see I must do as I am commanded, I can not do otherwise, and
therefore I exhort you eftsoon, and I pray you heartily pray for peace. But
this I will say unto you before hand, if you have any peace at all, with all
your prayers, I will geeue my head. For how can it be otherwise, when he yt
is the aucthor, and the only deviser of this war, does require you to pray
for peace, who might have it, when he list, if he would be quiet himself: But
I know he will not, and therefore your prayers will be in vain, and yet pray
sirs for manner sake. A strange speech of a parish pryest in Rome, who was
well punished for his labor, be you well assured.

And now, what if I said, that these merchaunts and lawyers, notwithstanding
their solemn vows, will not be so good, as they seem to have made promise
upon this last agreement? I think if I laid a good round wager of money upon
this matter (for other things I will not hazard) there be thousands in
England, that would be my half. Men be worldely, self lovers, given for ye
most part to evil, full of hypocrisy and dissimulation, and very loath to do
good, when they see no profit follow, and vnwyllynge to be such, as they are
bound and commanded to be. An easy matter it is, to renounce sin by
words or outward promise, and betwixt doing and saiynge, there is great
odds. The world is full of sweet entisyng baytes, and man is made of flesh,
subject ever to all temptacion of this world. And yet shall not I wish and
pray that al things may be well, although it be almost impossible, to have
perfection and soundenes of life in all men, and amongst all states? God
forbid else, and well I know, that the prayer of good men, is of great force
before god. Therefore I desire all the good true servants of god, to join in
prayer with me, that al folk may amend their life's in every vocation, and
that the kingdom of god may come hastelye amongst us, and his glory appear
for the speedye succor of his chosen people, and perfect ending of all
things, with most joyful triumph: which god grant, for the merits of
Christ his son, our only mediator and savior. Amen.

Londini in aedibus Rychardi Tottelli. 1572.


