The last terrible Tempestious winds and weather.

Truly Relating many Lamentable Ship-wracks, with drowning of many people, on
the Coasts of England, Scotland, France and Ireland: with the Isles of Wight,
Garsey and Iarsey.

Showing also, many great misfortunes, that have lately happened on Land, by
reason of the winds and rain, in diverse places of this Kingdom.



Imprinted at London for Ios: Hunt and are to be sold by John Wright, 1613.

To the Reader.
REader, I do here present unto thee, and to thy understanding (if thou have
any) some part of the lamentable losses, and unrecoverable mischances that have
happened by occasion of these late blustering storms of wind, and an
innumerable deal of rain, the which a great many thousands have too true
cause to believe, because they are sharers in the misfortunes that this
outrageous weather has caused. Now if thou have sustained no loss thy self,
perhaps thou will not believe these things to be true that I have written: but
if thou will or do believe, then pray to God that it will please him to give
them patience that are loosers, and humility that are winners, and give God
thanks that he has so blessed thee that thou have no share in these mishaps.
But if thou will not believe, go and look, or else remain still in thy
unbelief.

A BRIEF RELATION of the great losses both by Sea and Land, by reason of the
late great Tempests.
SVch and so great is the innated hereditary peruersenes of miserable mankinds
natural inclination, that though we infallibly know that God is infinite, and
his ways past finding out: yea though we generally confess him to be the
Mighty, Eternal, everlasting, inscrutable, incomprehe^sible Jehovah, in whose
hands are all things past, present and future. Though (I say) we confess and
profess an external belief that God can and will punish obstinate and
stiff-necked sinners in the uprightness of his confounding Justice; yet we
presuming (because it is said his mercy is over all his works) so much upon
his mercy, that we are altogether forgetful of his Justice; So that for all
notwithstanding our knowledge, our confession and profession, we live in
Atheism, Epicurisme, and in so many sundry sorts of hydra-headed scisme, that
if it be rightly understood, we spend our times in this unconscionable world
little better then in brute Barbarism: for I am verily persuaded that God had
never fewer true servants, nor more professors then are in these days, and
surely it is to be feared when God has least, the Devil has most. And we
are so lulled and rockt asleep in the secureles cradle of sensual security, by
the (Prince of this World) the Devil and his two near kinsmen the world and
the flesh, that we (as it were) in spite of the Eternal God, tread and
trample his sacred laws and sanctified Testimonies under our profane,
unhallowed, and rebellious feet, and with a high hand, and an aspiring heart,
with millions of varieties of transgressions, we seem to batter the glorious
frame of Heaven, with thundering shot of our abominable hell hatchd impieties.
These outrageous Enormities daily provoking our most just God to power forth
the consuming vials of his incensed heavy Indignation, upon all the
misgouerned sons of sinful men. For as God is infinite in his mercy, so is
he infinite in his Justice; and as our transgressions are numberles, so are
the several rods and punishments vncountable that God uses to inflict upon us,
sometimes by weak means to accomplish great things, and confound the mighty;
and sometimes by elementall causes, as fire, air, water, and earth, he shows
his universal power in his just confounding offenders; and sometimes by
vnauoyded infections of plagues and pestilencious fevers, and many thousand
miserable maladies. And I think I need not doubt but many there be that knows
and remembers the last mortality of this land, when in one year there died,
one hundred and odd thousands in London. And as concerning what has happened
by fire, Saint Edmundsbury, and Tiberton in Devonshire, and many other places
in England, to their great griefs too truly can testify, and what grievous
deluges. what outrageous inundations, what irresistable ouerflowings of
merciless waters we have had, nor man, nor history recording the like (since
the general flood,) wherein many hundreds of acres of pasture and erable land,
was (in little space as it were) turned into a maine Ocean, that the fishes (the
inhabitants of the sea) floating in their new made regiments, did feed on the
drowned carkases of men, women, children, and beasts. What sterility and
bainenesse of our fruitful mother earth we have had, through the anger of
God, withholding the rain, and shutting the windows of Heaven, (that the
senseless ground has gaped to Heaven for relief, when we our selves have
scarce opened our mouths to desire Gods favor) it is sufficiently known to
all estates and ages. What hurts, damages, and irrecouerable losses and
hindrances men have sustained by tempestuous winds, both on land and sea,
where on the land, steeples, houses, chimneyes, trees, and diverse other things
that were for the necessary use of all sorts of people, has been utterly
subverted and thrown down, to the utter undoing of some, and to the great
impouerishing of many. Besides to leave the land, and to recapitulat what
great and manifold harms has bin upon the sea, the outrageous winds making
it altogether vnnauigable. Of the which to write in every particular were a
world of work: but all these aforesaid grievous calamities, we must all
confess and acknowledge, to be the true tokens that our merciful God is
highly offended with us; and almost the third part of the people in this
kingdom, do and will ever remember some one or other of these precedent
afflictions, some by loss of friends by death, and some by loss of goods, by
fire, water, or other means; so that there is not, nor has not been, (nor I
doubt will not be) any day, night, hour, or minute, wherein God has not, does
not, or will not power down his vengeance by one means or other, in one place
or another upon impenetrable vnrepenting perfidious people.

But leaving this perambulation or tedious travel to demonstrate that which
has been before diuulged to the public view of the world, I do now intend to
show thee, good Reader (if thou be so) what incomparable harms, and never
to be regained loss has happened by occasion of these late tempest ^^^s
winds: and though I have not knowledge of all the hurts that are done, yet I
know too much, and I with with (...) my heart, that this which I mean to write
were nothing but fiction, but yet assure thy self thou had better believe me
then to travel to disprove me (as the proverb says) for I my self am sure
that the most part of what I write is true on mine own knowledge, and the rest
I have gathered by relation from many husbandies widows, fatherless sons,
and souls fathers and mothers, masterlesse servants, and masters that have
lost their servants from many good and substantial Merchants, whose lamentable
losses have too too much impouerisht their former estates, the unconscionable
al-deuowring Sea, being needlessly made rich, with their sometimes hopeful
adue^tures. But to the purpose.

Some certain days before Christmas (by the outrageous blustering tempestuous
wind and weather) a very fair and tall ship, called the Mary of Albrogh,
coming from Burdeux with one hundred and twenty tons of French wine, (...)
master Edmunds being master of her, was by force of weather driven upon the
coast of France, near a place called Saint John's, not far from the famous
and ancient City of Bullen, most miserably cast away, where was a great loss
of ship and goods: but God be praised all the men were saved except one.

About the same time there came a ship of Dartmouth from Marseles, laden with
oils, and cotton wools, which was upon the same coast, and near the same
place cast away, where the ship was torn in pieces, and the goods sunk in the
seas: but God in his mercy saved all the men, to do their country more
fortunate service hereafter (I hope.)

Another ((...)) being called the Patience, who had been here once this ^^^ter
from Burde^x, and was bound thither again, was cast away (...) sunk in the
river of Thames a little below Grauesend, at (...) a place called Shooberie
Nasse, the masters name of her was John Love.

Another great ship of London called the Hermit, of the burden of seuenscore
tuns or thereabouts, being bownd from London into Cornwall for ti^, the owner
of her being in her, whose name was master Goodlad, a man sufficiently known
for his credit and sufficiency in Navigations, and one Master Wolf being with
him as master of the said ship, having certain passengers abord with them; they
were all most miserably drowned in the brinish waves of the merciles sea, and
the ship beaten in pieces against the hard remorceles rocks, where the wind
and seas did drive the liueles corses upon the sands where as it is (...), was
a woman, who with a young child of hers was drowned in the company, who was
taken up on the shore with her child in her arms: for being the natural
living mother of it, the showed being dead (in spite of death) a good pattern
of affectionate and motherly love.

A ship belonging to a town in Cornwall called L^o, of the burden of
threescore run, laden with salt fish, was cast away and shake in the West part
of England at a place called Scilla, or near thereabouts, on the 2^. of
December last, 1612.

A little Bark of Fawmouth of some five and thirty tun, was beaten on the I Will
of Wight and cast away, the same day aforesaid.

And it is reported for certainty, that upon all the shores and sea sands along
the coast of Pickardy in France near Callice, and so along toward the
aforesaid (place of Saint John's) do floate and he (...) ^he s^^^^ innumerable
multitudes of drown carkases, some say more, and some less, but it is
credibly in formed that eleven (...) twelve hundred (...) the least.

Moreover the tide b^ate belonging to Green Hith in Kent, was by force of
weather sunk, and three passengers drowned, and much goods lost on the 30. of
December last.

To speak of the harms in particular that is done amongst poor water men's
boats and (...) (between Grave send and Windsor) were a tedious piece of
work, but this I know, that many of them are much hindered by the loss and
splitting of their boats and all of them generally have had a worser time of
it then the great frost.

I omit to speak in particular of diverse persons; that are reported to lie
scattered and drawned on the coasts of this kingdom in diverse and sundry
places, and all along the coasts of France (...) the L^^ Countries, with
Ireland, Scotland, and the Isles adjacent: all which as soon as I can get true
information of, I will cause to be published. Besides I speak not of
innumerable damages, by the sinking of certain cole-ships, being bound from
Newcastle to London, al which I will hereafter diuulge. And now leaving the sea,
let us treat a little of the la^d harms that are done now of late by these
great winds.

At the old swan in Thames street near London Bridge on Christmas even was
the house of one Master Pyts a silk dier, violently blown down, and in the
fall did break the roof and tiles of another house that was over against it,
and in the same parish in Katherine wheel alley was a chimney blown down of
one Master Baits, which brake down the cop of one Henry Gossons house a
Stationer, and it fell with such a violence in the night, that it beat through
the roof and a garret, and into a middle chamber: but God be praised it hurt
no body.

In Byshopsgate street over against the Kings head, near the gate, was the
top of a bakers house blown down, his wife and he being in bed, and the maine
beam of the house brake, and fell down on the testor of their bed, and it did
no more hurt, but scar them: besides churches, houses, windmils, and diverse
other buildings, some blown down, some much defaced, which will not be
repaired without excessive charges.

And by reason of the great store of rain, which has fallen the highways are
so overflowed, that in many places both horse and men have been forced to
swim in the very rode way, by which means the City of London cannot be
served with such provision of victuals as diverse people were wont to bring in
out of the country.

Then let us consider with our selves, in what dangerous estates we are in
when the Almighty is offended with us, and let us turn to the Lord through
hearty repentance, and earnest desire of amendment, and then (no doubt but God
in his mercy will turn his favorable countenance toward us. For it is never
too late to amend, and therefore in the fear of the Lord, let every one mend
one: and that the fame may be accomplished, I heartily desire of God for Christ's
sake to give all true Christians upright and new hearts, for Newyeeres gifts.

FINIS.
THese things hereafter following were related to me by Certain Sailors and
Country people, since the first were printed: and as for the truth of them I
believe them my self, but I have no authority to enforce other men's faiths,
and therefore I leave them to censure as they please.
AS two men were Riding out in the North Contry together (being both brothers,
which I know and can produce if need require) by a violent blast of wind they
were overthrown, and after they were risen again, (for the space of an hour)
one of them was stricken blind, but afterward his sight came to him again.

At a place called Layton in Kent (two or three miles from Greenewich) by a
furious tempestuous storm of wind and weather, a fair house of one Master
Winters was blown down, and in the fall, a youth of the age of 15. years was
cripled.

These and many other fearful and terrible judgments God has powered down
upon us, as Rods and scourges for our obstinate, wilful, and rebellious
living: for we (like Oxen or brute beasts, fat our selves in sin against the
day of slaughter:) and (like foolish schoole-boyes) never fear the Rod before
we feel it: let us then consider our own miserable estates how we are
altogether wicked, and therefore justly punished by that God who is altogether
good, how though our faults be as countles as the sands of the sea, or the
Stars of Heaven, yet God has as many several sorts of plagues as man has
Crimes to deserve them: but the Lord in the midst of his judgments remembers
mercy, or else we should all be confounded in his heavy displeasure: and
therefore let us thankfully praise God for his mercy, that we are not cast
headlong to the pit of perpetual Perdition, according to our deserts and
merits. From the which, the Lord God of his exceeding and super-abounding
mercy, for his dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ's sake to deliver us. To whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost, three distinct persons, and one Eternal,
invisible, infinite, and Immortal God, be duly rendered (of men and Angels)
all Honor, Glory, praise, power, majesty, might, and dominion, now and for
evermore Amen.

FINIS.

